THE COPY OF A LETER, VVRYTEN BY A MASTER OF ART OF CAMBRIGE, TO HIS FRIEND
IN LONDON, CONcerning some talk past of late between two worshipful and
grave men, about the present state, and some procedinges of the Earl of
Leycester and his friends in England.

CONCEYVED, SPOKEN and publyshed, with most earnest protestation of al
duetyful good will and affection, toward her most excellent Ma. and the
Realm, for whose good only it is made common to many.

Job. Cap. 20. Verse. 27. Reuelabunt coeli iniquitatem eius, and terra consurget
aduersus eum. The heavens shall reueile the wicked man's iniquity, and the
earth shall stand up to bear witness against him.

ANNO M. D. LXXXIIII.

THE EPISTLE DIRECTORIE. TO M. G. M. IN GRACIOUS Street in London.
Dear and loving friend, I received about ten days gone, your letter of the
9. of this present: vvheri^ you demand and solicit again the thing, that I
so flatly denied you, at my late being in your chamber: I mean, to put in
vvriting the relation which then I made unto you, of the speech had this last
Christmas in my presence, betvveen my right vvorshippful good friend and
Patron, and his gest the old lavvier, of some matters in our state and
country. And for that you press me very seriously at this instant, both by
request and many reasons, to yield to your desire herein, and not only this,
but also to give my consent for the publisshing of the same, by such secret
means as you assure me you can there find out: I have thought good to co^fer
the whole matter with the parties them selves, whom principalie it concerns
(who at the receipt of your letter were not far of from me:) And albeit at
the first, I found them auerse and nothing inclined to grant your demand: yet
after upon consideration of your reasons, and assurance of secresy: (especialie
for that there is nothing in the same contained repugnant to charity or to our
bounde^ duty tovvard our most gracious Princess or country, but rather for
the special good of them both, and for the forvvarning of some dangers i^minent
to the same) they have referred over the matter to me, yet with this PROVISO
that they vvil know nothing, nor yet yield consent to the publishing hereof,
for fear of some future flourish of the Ragged Staf to come herafter about
their ears, if their names should break forth: which (I trust) you vvil
provide shall never happen, both for their security, and for your own. And
with this I vvil end, assuring you that within these five or six days, you
shall receive the whole in vvriting by an other way and secret means, neither
shall the bearer suspect what he carries: vvherof also I thought good to
premonyshe you* And this shall suffice for this time.

THE PREFACE OF THE CONFERENCE.
SCHOLAR.

NOt long before the last Christmasse, I was requested by a letter from a
very vvorshypfull and grave gentleman, whose son was then my pupyle in
Cambridge, to repair with my said scholar, to a certain house of his near
London, and there to pass over the holy days in his company: for that it
was determined that in Hyllarye term The occasion of this conference and
meting.
following, his said son should be placed in some Inn of Chauncerie, to
follow the study of the common law, and so to leave the university. This
request was grateful unto me both in respect of the time, as also of the
matter, but especialie of the company. For that, as I love much the young
gentleman, my pupile, for his tovvardlines in religion, learning, and virtue:
so much more do I reverence his father, for the riper possession of the same
orname^tes, and for his great wisdom, experience, and grave judgment in
affairs of the world that do occur: but namlie touching our own country,
vvherin truly I do not remember to have heard any man in my life, discourse
more substantialie, indifferently, and with less passion, more love and
fidelity then I have heard him: Which was the cause that I took singular
delight to be in his company, and refused no occasion to enioie the same.
Which also he perceiving, dealt more openly and confidentlie with me, then
with many other of his friends, as by the relation following may well apeare.

When I came to the forsaid house by London, I found there among other
friends, an ancient man that professed the law, and was come from London
The persons and place of this conference.
to keep his Christmasse in that place, with whom at diverse former times I
had been well acquainted, for that he haunted much the company of the said
gentleman my friend, and was much trusted and used by him in matters of his
profession, and not a little beloved also for his good conversation,
notvvythstanding some difference in religion between us. For albeit, this
lawyer was inclined to be a Papist, yet was it with such moderation and
reservation of his duty toward his Prince and country, and proceedinges
of the same: as he seemed alvvaies to give full satisfaction in this point to us
that were of contrary opinion.

Nether did he let to protest often times with A Temperat Papist
great affection, that as he had many friends and kinsfolk of contrary
religion to him self: so did he love them never the less for their different
conscience, but leaving that to God, was desirous to do them any friendship
or service that he could, with al affection, zeal, and fidelity. Neither
was he willful or obstinat in his opinion, and much less reprochful in speech
(as many of them be) but was content to hear what soever we should say to
the contrary (as often we did:) and to read any book also that we delivered
him, for his instruction.

Which temperat behavior, induced this gentleman and me, to affect the more
his company, and to discourse as freely with him in all occurrentes, as if he
had been of our own religion.

THE ENTRAVNCE TO THE MATTER.
ONE day then of the Christmasse, we three retiring our selves after dinner,
into a large Gallerie, for our recreatio^, (as often we were accustomed to
do, when other went to cards and other pastimes:) this lavvier by chance
had in his hand a little book, then nevvlie set forth, containing A defense of
the public justice The book of justice
done of late in England, upon diverse Pryestes and other Papystes for
treason: Which book, the lawyer had red to him self a little before, and was
now putting it up into his pocket, But the gentleman my friend, who had red
over the same once or twice in my company before, would needs take the same
into his hand again, and asked the lawyer his judgment upon the book,

LAWYER.

The lavvier ansvvered. That it was not evil penned in his opinion, to prove
the guiltines of some persons therein named in particular, as also to persuade
in general, that the Papists both abrod and at home, who meddle so earnestly
with defense and increase of their religion (for these are not al, said he) do
co^sequentlie vvishe and labor some change in the state: but yet whether so
far forth, and in so deep a degree of proper treason, as here in this book both
in general and patticular is presumed and enforced, that (quoth he) is somvvhat
hard (I vvene) for you or me (in respect of some other difference between us)
to judge or discern with indifferency.

GENTLEMAN.

Nay truly said the gentleman, for my part I think not so, for that reason
is reason in what religion so ever. And for my self, I may protest, that I
bear the honest Papist (if there be any) no malice for his deceived
conscience, vvherof among others, your self can be a witness: mary his
Practizes against The Papists practizes against the state.
the state I cannot in any wise disgiest: and much less may the common
wealth bear the same (vvher of we al depend,) being a sin of al other, the
most heinous, and least perdonable. And therefore seeing in this you grant the
Papist both in general abroad, and at home, and in particular such as are
condemned, executed and named in this book to be guilty: how can you
insinuate (as you do) that there is more presumed or enforced upon them by this
book, then there is just cause so to do.

LAWYER.

Good Sir, said the other, I stand not here to examine the doings of my
superiors, or to defend the guilty, but vvish heartily rather their punishment
that have deserved the same. Only this I say, for explication of my former
speech: that men of a different religion from the state vvherin they live, may
Tvvoe s^^tes of dealinge against the state
be said to deal against the same state in two sorts: the one, by dealing
for the increase of their said different religion, which is alvvaies either
directly, or indirectlie against the state. [Directly] when the said religion
contains any point or article directly Directly
impugning the said state, (as perhaps you will say that the Roman
Religion does against the present state of England in the point of Supremacy:)
and [Indirectlie] for that every different Indi^lye.
religion deuideth in a sort and draws from the state, in that there is no
man who in his heart would not vvish to have the chief Governor and state to
be of his religion, if he could: and consequently misl^keth the other in
respect of that: and in this kind, not only those vvho^ you call busy
Papists in England, but also those whom we call hot Puritanes among you,
(whose difference from the state especialie in matters of government is very
well known,) may be called al traitors, in mine opinion: for that every one
of these in deed, do labor i^directlie, (if not more) against the state, in
how much soever each one e^deuoreth to increase his part or faction that
desires a governor of his own religion.

And in this case also are the protestants in France and Flaunders under
Catholic Princes: the Caluinists (as they are called) under the Duke of
Saxony, who is a Lutherane: the Lutherans under Cassimere, The state of al
subjects, in a state of different religion.
that favors Caluinistes: the Grecians and other Christians under the
Emperor of Constantinople, under the Sophie, under the Great Chame of
Tartarie, and under other Princes that agree not with them in religion. Al
which subjects do vvish (no doubt) in their hearts, that they had a Prince
and state of their own religion, in stead of that which now governs them:
and co^sequentlie in this first sense, they may be called altraitors, and
every act they do for advancement of their said different religion (dividing
between the state and them) tends to treason: which their Princes supposing,
do sometimes make diverse of their acts tresonable or punishable for treason.
But yet so long as they break not forth unto the second kind of treason,
which co^teyneth some actual attempt The second kind of treason.
or treaty against the life of the Prince, or state, by rebellion or
otherwise: we do not properly condemn the^ for traitors, though they do
some acts of their religion made treason by the Prince his laws, who is of
a different faith.

And so to apply this to my purpose: I think, Sir, in The application of the
former example.
good sooth, that in the first kind of treason, as well the zealous Papist, as
also the Puritanes in England, may well be called and proved traitors: but in
the second sort (vvherof we speak properlye at this time) it can not be so
precyslye ansvvered, for that there may be both guilty and guiltles in each
religion. And as I cannot excuse al Puritanes in this point: so you cannot
condemn al Papists, as long as you take me and some other to be as we are.

GENTL.

I grant your distinction of treasons to be true, (said the gentleman,) as
also your application thereof to the Papists and Puritans (as you call them,)
not to want reason, if there be any of them that mislike the present state (as
perhaps there be:) albeit for my part, I think these two kinds of treasons,
which you have put down, be rather diverse degrees then diverse kinds: vvherin
I vvil refer me to the judgment of our Cambridge friend here present, whose
skill is more in logical distinctio^s. But yet my reason is this, that indeed
the one is but a step or degree to the other, not differing in nature, but
rather in time, ability or opportunity. For if (as in your former examples you
have shevved) the Grecians under the Turk, and other Christians under other
Princes of a different religion, and as also the Papists and Puritanes (as you
term them) in England (for now this word shall pass between us for
distinction sake,) have such alienation of mind from their present regiment,
and do covet so much a gouuernour and state of their own religion: Two
degrees of treason.
then no doubt but they are also resolved to imploye their forces for
accomplisshing and bringing to pass their desires, if they had opportunity:
and so being now in the first degree or kind of treason, do want but
occasion or ability, to break into the second.

LAW.

True, Sir, said the lavvier, if there be no other cause or circumstance that
may vvythholde them.

GENTL.

And what cause or circumstance may stay them I pray you (said the gentleman)
when they shall have ability and opportunity to do a thing which they so much
desire?

LAW.

Diverse causes (quoth the lawyer) but especialie and above al other (if it be
at home in their own country,) the fear of servitude under forreyn nations,
may restrain them from such attemptes: As we see in Germany that both
Catholics and protestants would join together, against any stranger that
should offer danger to their liberty. And so they did against Charles the
fifth. And in France not long ago, albeit the protestants Fear of forrayne
op^ressio^, makes frie^dship at home.
were up in arms against their king, and could have been content, by the
help of us in England, to have put him down, and placed an other of their own
religion: yet when they savve us once seized of Nevvhauen, and so like to
proced to the recovery of some part of our states ^unce
on that side the sea: they quickly joined with there own Catholics again
to expel us.

In Flaunders likewise, though Mo^sieur were called Flaunders.
thither by the protestants, especialie for defense of their religion, against
the Spaniard: yet we see how dainty diverse chief protesta^tes of Antvvarpe,
Gaunt and Bruges were, in admitting him, and how quick in expelling, so soon
as he put them in the least fear of subjection to the french. And as for
Portugal, Portugal.
I have heard some of the chiefest Catholics among them say, in this late
contention about their kingdom: that rather then they would suffer the
Castilian to come in upon them, they would be content to admyt whatsoever
aides of a contrary religion to them selves, and to adventure whatsoever
alteration in religion or other inconvenience might befall them by that means,
rather then endaunger their subjection to their ambitious neighbor.

The like is reported in diverse histories of the The old harred of east
Grecians toward the west Latins.
Grecia^s at this day, who do hate so much the name and dominion of the
Latins: as they had rather to endure all the miseries which daily they suffer
under the Turk for their religion and otherwise: then by calling for aid from
the west to hazard their subjection to the said Latins. So that by these
examples you see, that fear and horror of external subjection may stay men in all states, and consequently also both Papists and Puritanes in the state of
England, from passing to the second kind or degree of treason, albeit they
were never so deep in the first, and had both ability, time, vvil, and
opportunity for the other.

SCHOL.

Here I presumed to interrupt their speech, and said* that this seemed to me
most clear, and that now I understood what the Lavvier meant before, when
he affirmed, that albeit the most part of Papists in general might be said
to deal against the state of England at this day, in that they deal so
earnestly for the maintenance and increase of their religion, and so to
incur some kind of treason: yet (perhaps) not so farfurth nor in so deep a
degree, of proper treason as in this book is presumed or enforced: though for my
part (said I) I do not se that the book Not all Papists properly traitors.
presumes or inforceth al Papists in general to be properly traitors, but
only such as in particular are therein named, or that are by law attainted,
condemned or executed: and what vvil you say (quoth I) to those in particular.

LAW.

Surely (quoth he) I must say of these, much after the manner which I spak
before: that some here named in this book are openly known to have been in
the second degree or kind of treason: as Westmerland, Norton, Saunders, and
the like. But diverse The Priests and Seminaries that were executed.
others (namely the Priests and Seminaries that of late have suffered,) by so
much as I could see delivered and pleaded at their arraignments, or heard
protested by them at their deaths, or gathered by reason and discourse of my
self, (for that no foreign Prince or wise councellor would ever commit so
great matters of state to such instruments:) I cannot (I say) but think, that
to the wise of our state, that had the doing of this business, the first degree
of treason (vvherin no doubt they were) was sufficient to dispatch and make
them away: especialie in such suspicious times as these are: to the end that
being hanged for the first, they should never be in danger to fall into the
second, nor yet to dravv other men to the same: which perhaps was most of al
misdoubted.

After the lawyer had spoken this, I held my peace, to hear what the
ge^tlema^ vvoulde answer: who vvalked up and down, two whole turns in
the gallerie, vvythout yielding any word again: and then staying upon the
sudden, cast his eyes sadly upon us both, and said.

GENTL.

My masters, how so ever this be, which in deed apperteineth not to us to
judge or discuss, but rather to persuade our selves, that the state has
reason to do as it does, and that it must often times, as well prevent
inconveniences, as remedy the same when they are happened: yet for my own
part I must confess unto you, that upon some considerations which use to
come unto my mind, I take no small grief of these differences among us (which
you term of diverse and different religions) for which we are driven of
necessity, to use discipline toward diverse, who possibly otherwise would
be no great malefactors. I know the cause of this difference Wise
co^sideratio^s
is grounded upon a principle not easy to cure, which is the judgment and
conscience of a man, whereunto obeys at length his vvil and affection, what
soever for a time he may otherwise dissemble outvvardlie. I remember your
speech before of the doubtful and dangerous inclination of such as live
discontented in a state of a different religion, especialie, when either
indeed, or in their own conceit, they are hardly dealt vvythal, and vvher
every man's particular punishment, is taken to reach to the cause of the whole.

I am not ignorant how that misery procures amity, and the opinion of
calamity, moves affection of mercy and compassion, even toward the
Misery moves mercy.
wicked: the better fortune alvvaies is subject to envy, and he that
suffers, is thought to have the better cause, my experience of the diverse
reigns and procedinges of king Edward, Q. Marie, and of this our most
gracious sovereign has taught me not a little, touching the sequel of these
affairs. And finalie, (my good friends) I must tell you plain A good vvishe.
(quoth he: and this he spoke with great asseueration) that I could vvysh
with al my heart, that either these differences were not among us at al, or
else that they were so temperatlie on al parts pursued: as the common state of
our country, the blessed reign of her Ma. and the common cause of true
religion, were not endaungered thereby. But now: and there he brak of, and
turned aside.

LAW.

The lavvier seeing him hold his peace and depart, he stepped after him, and
taking him by the govvne said merylie: Sir, al men are not of your complexion,
some are of quicker and more stirring spirits, and do love to fish in water
that is troubled, for that they do participate the Black moors humor, that
dwell in Guinea (vvherof I suppose you have heard and seen also some in this
land) vvose exercise The nature and practice of the Guineans
at home is (as some write) the one to hunt, catch, and sell the other, and
alvvayes the stronger to make money of the weaker for the time. But now if
in England we should live in peace and unity of the state, as they do in
Germany, notvvithstanding their differences of religion, and that the one
should not pray upon the other: then should the great Favvcons for the field
(I mean the favorites of the time fail whereon to feed, which were an
inconvenience as you know.

GENTL.

Truly Sir, said the gentleman, I think you roue nearer the mark then you
vveene: for if I be not deceived the very ground of much of these broiles
vvherof we talk, is but a very pray: not, in the minds of the Prince or
state (whose intentions no doubt be most just and holy) but in the greedy
imagination and subtle conceit of him, who at this present in respect of our
sins, is petmitted by God, to tyrannize both Prince and state: The Tyrant of
english state.
and being him self of no religion, feeds notvvithstanding upon our
differences in religion, to the fatting of him self and ruin of the realm. For
vvheras by the common distinction now received in speech, there are three
notable differences of religion in the land, the two extremes, vvherof are
the Papist and the puritan, and the religious Protestant Three differences of
religion in England.
obteining the mean: this fellow being of neither, makes his gain of al: and
as he seeks a kingdom by the one extreme, and spoil by the other: so he
uses the authority of the third, to compass the first two, and the
countermine of each one, to the overthrow of al three.

SCHOL.

To this I ansvvered: In good sooth Sir, I see now vvher you are: you are
falen into the common place of al our ordinary talk and conference in the
university: The Earl of Leycester.
for I know that you mean my L. of Leicester who is the subject of al
pleasant discourses at this day throughout the realm.

GENTL.

Not so pleaseaunt as pitiful, ansvvered the gentleman, if al matters and
circumstances were well considered, except any man take pleasure to ^east at
our own miseries, vvihch are like to be greater by his iniquity (if God auert
it not) then by all the wickedness of England besides: he being the man that by all probability, is like to be the bane and fatal destynie of our state, with
the euersion of true religion, vvherof by indirect means, he is the greatest
enemy that the land does nourishe

LAW.

Now verily (quoth the lawyer) if you say thus much for the protestants
opinion of him, what shall I say for his merits toward the Papists? who
for as much as I can perceive, do take them selves little beholding unto him,
albeit for his gain he was some years their secret friend against you: until
by his friends he was persuaded, and chiefly by the L. North by way of
policy, as the said L. The L. Norths policy.
bosteth, in hope, of greater gain, to step over to the puritanes, against us
both, whom notvvythstanding it is probable, that he loves as much, as he does
the rest.

GENTL.

You know the Bears love, said the gentleman, which is al for his own
paunche, and so this Bear-vvhelp, turns al to his own commodity, and for
greedines thereof, vvil ouerturne al if he be not stopped or mouzeled in time.

And surely unto me it is a strange speculation, vvherof I cannot pick out
the reason (out only that I do atribute it to Gods punishment for our sins)
A strange speculation.
that in so wise and vigilant a state as ours is, and in a counrrie so well
acquainted and beaten with such dangers: a man of such a spirit as he is
known to be, of so extreme ambition, pride, falsehood and treachery so borne,
so bred up, so nooseled in treason from his infancy: descended of a tribe of
traitors, and fleshed in conspiracy against the Royal blood of K. Henry's
children in his tender years, and exercised ever since in driftes against the
same, by the blood and ruyn of diverse others: a man so well known to bear
secret malice against her Ma. for causes irreco^cileable, and most de^dlie
ra^cour against the best* and vvisest Counselors of her highness: that such a
one (I say so hateful) to God and man, and so markeable to the simplest subject
of this land by thee public ensygnes of his tyrannous purpose, should be
suffered so many years vvythout check, to aspire to tyranny by most manifest
vvayes, and to possess him self (as now he has done) of Court, Council, and
country, vvythout controlement: so that nothing vva^teth to him but only his
pleasure, and the day alredie conceived in his mind to dispose as he list,
both of Prince, Crown, Realm and religion.

SCHOL.

It is much truly (quoth I) that you say, and it ministers not a little
maruail unto many, vvherof your worship is not the first, nor yet the tenth
person of account which I have heard discourse and complain. But what shall
we say hereunto? there is no man that ascribes not this unto the singular The
Q. Ma most excellent good nature.
benignity and most bountiful good nature of her Ma. who measuring other men
by her own Heroycal and Princely sincerity: cannot easily suspect a man so
much bounden to her grace, as he is, nor remove her confidence from the place,
vvher she has heaped so infinite benefits.

GENTL.

No doubt (said the gentleman) but this gracious and svveet disposition of her
Ma. is the true original cause thereof: which Princely disposition, as in her
highness it deserves al rare commendation, so lies the same open to many
dangers often times, when so benign a nature meets with ingrate and
ambitious persons: which observation perhapes, caused her Ma most noble
Grau^dfather and father (two renoumed wise princes) to withdraw sometime
upon the sudden, their great favor from certain subjects of high estate. And
her Ma. may easily use her own excellent wisdom and memory, to recall to
mind the manyfold examples of perilous happes fallen to diverse Princes, by to
much confidence in obliged proditours: with whom the name of a kingdom, and
one houers Fears that subjects have of my L of Leycester
reign, vveyeth more, then all the duty, obligation, honesty, or nature in
the world. Would God her Ma. could see the continual fears that be in her
faithful subjects hearts, vvhiles that man is about her noble person, so well
able and likely (if the Lord auert it not) to be the calamity, of her
Princely blood and name.

The talk vvil never out of many mou^hes and minds, that diverse ancient men
of this Realm, Sir Fran-VValsing ham.
and once a wise gentleman now a Councellor, had with a certain friend of
his, concerning the presage and deep impression, which her Ma. father had of
the house of Sir John Dudley, to be the ruin K H^n. presage of the house of
Dudle^
in time of his Ma. Royal house and blood, which thing was like to have been
fulfilled soon after (as ^1 the world knovveth) upon the death of K. Edward
by ^he said Dudley this man's father: who at one blovv, procured to dispat^h
from al possession of the Crown, al three children of the said noble king. And
yet in the midst of those bloody practizes against her Ma. that now is and
her sister (vvherin also this felovvs hand was so far, as for his age he could
thrust the same,) vvythin sixetiene days before K. Edvvardes death (he
knovving belike that the king should die) vvrote most flatering Deep
dissimulatio^
letters to the Lady Marie (as I have heard by them who then were with her)
promissing al loyalty and true service to her, after the discease of her
brother, with no less painted words, then this man now does use to Q
Elizabeth.

So dealt he then with the most dear children of his good king and master, by
whom he had been no less exalted and trusted, then this man is by her Ma. And
so deeply dissembled he then when he had in hand the plot to destroy them
both. And what then (alas) may not we fear and doubt of this his son, who
in outrageous ambition and desire of reign, is not inferior to his father, or
to any other aspiring spirit in the world, but far more insolent, cruel,
vindicatiue, expert, potent, subtle, fine, and fox-like then ever he was? I
like well the good Sir Fran. VValsing ham.
motion propounded by the foresaid gentleman, to his friend at the same time,
and do assure my self it would be most pleasant to the Realm, and profitable
to her Ma. to vvyt, that this man's actions might be called publicly to
trial, and liberty given to good subjects, to say what they knevv Edmund
Dudley
against the same, as it was permitted in the first year of K. Henry the
eight against his Graundfather, and in the first of Q. Marie against his
father: Iho^ Dudley.
and then I would not doubt, but if these two his ancestors were found
vvorthie to leese their Robert Dudley.
heads for treason: this man would not be found unworthy to make the third
in kindred, whose trecheries do far surpass them both.

LAW.

After the Gentleman had said this, the Lawyer stood still, somevvhat smyling
to him self, and looking round about him, as though he had been half afeard,
and then said. My masters, do you read over or study the statutes that come
forth? have you not heard of the PROVISO made in the last Parliament for
punishment of those who speak so broad of such men as my L. of Leycester is?

GENTL.

Yes, said the gentleman, I have heard how that my L. of Leycester was very
careful and diligent at that time to have such a law to pass against talkers:
hoping (belike) that his L. under that general The law against talking.
restreint might lie the more quyetlye in harbrough from the tempest of men's
tongues, which tatled busily at that time, of diverse his Lordships actions
and affairs, which perhaps him self would have wished to pass with more
secretsie. As of his discontenteme^t and preparation to rebellion, upon
Monsieurs first coming into the land: of his disgrace and checks received in
court: of the fresh death of the noble Earl of Essex: and of this man's hasty
snatching up of the widow, whom he sent Actions of Leicester vvherof
hevvould have no speech.
up and down the country from house to house by privy vvayes, thereby to
avoid the sight and knowledge of the Q. Ma. And albeit he had not only used
her at his good liking before, for satisfying of his own lust, but also
married and remarried her for contentation of her friends: yet denied he the
same, by solemn oath to her Ma. and received the holy communion thereupon (so
good a conscience he has) and consequently threatened most sharp revenge
toward al subjects which should dare to speak thereof: and so for the
concealing both of this and other his doings, which he desired not to have
publik, no marvel though his Lordship were so diligent a procurer of that
law for silence.

SCHOL.

In deed (said I) it is very probable that his Lordship was in great distres
about that time, when Monsieurs matters were in hand, and that he did many
things and purposed more, vvherof he desired less speech among the people,
especialie afterward, when his said designmentes took not place. I was my
self that year not far from VVarvvike when he came thither from the Coutt a
full Mal-Content, and when it vvvas thought most certainly throughout the
Realm, that he would have taken arms soon after, if the marriage of her Ma.
with Monsieur had gone forvvard. The thing in Ca^bridge and in all the co^trie
as I rode, was in every ma^s mouth: and it was a vvounder to see not only
the contenaunces, but also the behauior, and to hear the bold speeches of al
such as were of his faction.

My Lord him self had given out a little before at Killing vvorth, that the
matter vvoulde cost many Leicester Preparatiues to rebellion upon Mo^sieurs
marriage.
broken heads before Michelmasse day next: and my Lord of VVarvvik had said
openly at his table in Green vviche, Sir Thomas Hennige being by (if I be not
deceived,) that it was not to be suffered (I mean the marriage) which words
of his once coming abroad (albeit misliked by his own Lady the^ also
present) every Seruing-man and common compaignion, took then up in defense of
his Lordships part against the Q. Ma. Such tunning there was, such sending and
posting about the Realm, such amplification of the powers and forces of
Cassimere and other Princes, ready, (as was affirmed) to present them selves
unto his aid, for defense of the Realm and religion against strangers:) for
that was holde^ to be his cause) such numbering of parties and accomplices
vvythin the Realm, (vvherof him self shevved the To Sir Th Layton.
Catalogue to some of his frie^des for their comfort) such debasing of them
that favored the marriage (especialie tvvoe or three Counselors by name, L.
Treasurer. L. Chamber layne. M Co^ptroler.
who were said to be the cause of al and for that were appointed out to be
sharply punished to the terror of al others:) such letters were written and
intercepted of purpose, importing great powers to be ready, and so many other
things done and designed, tending al to manifest and open war: as I began
hartelie to be afeard, and wished my self back at Ca^bridge again, hoping
that being there, my scholars govvne should excuse me from necessity of
fighting, or if not, I was resolved (by my Lords good leave, to follow
Aristotle, who prefers alvvay the Lion before the Bear: assuring my self
vvythal, that his Lordship should have no better success in this (if it came
to trial) the^ his father had in as bad a cause, and so much the more for that
Ivvas privy to the minds of some of his friends, who meant to have deceived
him, if the matter had broken out. And amongst other there was a certain
Vicepreside^t in the world, who being left in Sir Iho. Hibbo^.
the room and absence of an other, to procure frynds: said in a place
secretly not far from Ludlovv, that if the matter came to blovvs, he would
follow his Mistres and leave his Master in the briars.

GENTL.

Marie Sir (quoth the gentleman) and I trow man^e more would have followed
that example. For albeit I know that the Papists were most named and
misdoubted of his part, in that cause, for their open inclination toward
Monsieur, and consequently, for greater discredit of the thing it self, it
was given out every where by this Champion of religion, that her Ma. cause,
was the Papists cause, (even as his father had done in the like enterprise
before him, though al upon dissimulation, as apeared Leicester Father a
trayteious Papist.
at his death, where he professed him self an earnest Papist:) yet was there
no man so simple in the Realm, which discried nor this Vizard at the first:
neither yet any good subject (as I suppose) who seeing her Ma. on the one
part, would not have taken against the other part, what so ever he had
been. And much more the thing it self in controversy (I mean the marriage of
her Royal Ma. vvy^h the brother and heir apparent of France,) being taken and
judged by the best, vvysest and faythfulest protestants of the realm, to be
both honorable, The honor and commodities by the marriage with France.
convenient, profitable and needful. VVherby only, as by a most soueraign,
and present remedy, al our maladies both abroad and at home, had at once been
cured: al foreign enemies, and domestical conspirators, al differences, al
dangers, al fears had ceased together: France had been ours most assured:
Spain would not a little have trembled: Scotland had been quiet: our
competitors in England would have quaked: and for the Pope he might have put
up his pipes. Our differences in religion at home, had been either less, or no
greater then now they are, for that Monsieur being but a moderate Papist, and
nothing vehement in his opinions, was content with very reasonable
conditions, fot him self and his strangers only in use of their conscience,
not vnliklie (truly) but that in time he might by Gods grace, and by the
great Ethelbert King of Kent, converted An. Do. 603.
vvysdom and virtue of her Ma. have been brought also to embrace the gospel,
as king Ethelbert an heathen was, by noble Q. Bertha his wife, the first
Christian of our English Princes.

Unto all which felicity, if the Lord in mercy should have added also some
issue of there royal bodies, (as was not impossible, when first this noble
match was mouued,) we then (doubtless) had been the most fortunate people
under heaven, and might have been (perhaps) the mean to have restored the
Gospel throughout all Europe besides, as our brethren of France well
considered and hoped.

Of al which singular benefits both present and to come, both, in RE and in
SPE, this Tyrant for his own private lucre (fearing lest heerby his ambition
might be restrained, and his treachery reueyled) has bereaved the realm, and
done what in him lies besides, to alienate for ever and make our mortal
enemy this great Prince, who sought the love of her Ma. with so much honor
and confidence as never Prince the like, putting twice his own person to
ieopardie of the sea, and to the peril of his malicious enuiours here in
England, for her Ma sake.

LAW.

When you speak of Mo^sieur (said the lawyer) I cannot but greatly be
mouued, both for these considerations well touched by you, as also for some
other: especialie one vvherin (perhaps) you will think me partial, but
truly I am not: for that I speak it only in respect of the quiet and good of
my country, and that is, that by Mo^sieurs match with our noble Princess,
besides the hope of issue (which was the principal) there vvanted not also
probability, that some union or little tolleration in religion, between you
and us, might have been procured in this state, as we see that in some other
countries is admitted to their great good. Which thing (no doubt) would have
cut of quite Toleration in Religion, with union in defense of our country.
al dangers and dealinges from foreign Princes, and would have stopped many
devises and plotes vvythin the Realm: vvheras now by this breach with
France, we stand alone as me seems vvythout any great unition or
friendship abroad, and our differences at home grovve more vehement and sharp
then ever before. Upon which tvvoe heads, as also upon infinite other causes,
purposes, driftes and pretenses, there do ensue daily more deep, dangerous and
desperate practizes, every man using either the commodity or necessity of the
time and state for his own purpose Especialie now when all men presume that
her Ma. (by the contynual thvvartinges which have been used against al her
marriages) is not like to leave unto the realm, that precious Jewel so much
and long desired of al English hearts, I mean the Royal heirs of her own
body.

GENTL.

Thvvartinges call you the defeating of all her Ma. most honorable offers of
marriage? (said the other) truly in my opinion you should have used an other
word to express the nature of so vviked a fact: vvherby alone, if theit
were no other, this unfortunate man, has done more hurt to his common wealth,
the^ if he had murdered many thovvsandes of her subjects, or betrayed whole
armies to the professed enemy. I can remember vv^l my self, four treatises
to this purpose, undermined by his Diverse marriages of her Ma. defeated.
means. The first with the Svve^hen king: the second with the Archduke of
Austria: the third with Henry K. of France that now reigns: and the
fourth with the brother and heir of the said kingdom. For I let pass many
other secret motions made by great Potentats to her Ma. for the same purpose,
but these four are openly known, and therefore I name them. Which four
are as well known to have been al disturbed by this DAVVS, as they were
earnestly pursued by the other. Leicester de(...) to d(...) away all (...) her
Ma.


And for the first three Suitors, he drove the^ away, by protesting and
swearing that him self was co^tracted unto her Ma. vvherof her highness was
fufficie^tlie advertised by Cardinal Chat^lian in the first treaty for
france, and the Cardinal soon after punished (as is though^) by this man
with poison. But yet this speech he gave out then, every where among his
frie^des both str^ungers and other, that he (forsooth) was assured to her Ma.
and conseque^tlie that al other Princes must give over their suits, for him.
Whereunto notvvythsta^ding, when the Svv^^ then would hardly give ear, this
man conferred with his Priuado to make a most unseemly and disloyal proof
thereof for the others satisfaction, which thing I am enforced by duty to
pass over with silence, for honor to the parttes who are touched therein: as
also I am to co^ceale his said filthy Priuado, though vvorthie otherwise for
his dishonestie to be displayed to the world: but my Lord him self, I am sure,
does well remember both the man and the matter. And d^lbei^ there, was no (...)
man at that time who knovving my L. suspected not the falsehood, and his
arrogant affirmation tovvching this contract with her Ma. yet some both abroad
and at home might doubt thereof perhaps: Leicester conuinceth him self of
impudency
but now of late, by his known marriage with his Minion Dame Lettice of
Essex, he has declared manifestly his own most impudent and disloyal
dealing with his soueraign in this report.

LAW.

For that report (quoth the lavver) I know that it was common and mainteyned
by many, for diverse years: yet did the vviser sort make no account thereof,
seeing it came only from him self, and in his own behalf. Neither was it
credible, that her Ma. who refused so noble knights and Princes as Europe The
baseness of Leicester a^cestors.
has not the like: would make choice of so mean a peer as Robin Dudley is,
noble only in two descentes, and both of them steyned with the Block, from
which also him self, was pardoned but the other day, being condemned
thereunto by law for his deserts, as appears yet in publik Anno 1 R. Marie.
records. And for the vvydovve of Essex, I marvel Sir (quoth he) how you
call her his wife, seeing the canon law stands yet in force tovvching
matters of marriage vvythin the Realm.

GENTL.

Oh (said the gentleman laughing) you mean for that he procured the poisoning
of her husband, in his journey from Ireland. You must think that Doctor Dale
vvil dispense in that matter, as he did D. Dale.
(at his Lordships appointment) with his Italian D. Iulio.
physician Doctor Iulio, to have two wives at once: at the leastvvyse the
matter was permitted, The Archbisshops overthrow for not allowing tvvoe
wives to Leicester his Physician.
and borne out by them both publicly (as all the world knovveth) and that
against no less persons then the Archbisshop of Canturburie him self, whose
overthrow was principalie wrought by this Tyrant for contrarying his vvil,
in so beastly a demand. But for this controversy whether the marriage be
good or no, I leave it to be tried hereafter, between my young L. of Denbighe,
and M. Philippe Sydney, whom the same most concerns. For that it is like to
deprive him of a good. lie inheritance if it take place (as some vvil say that
in no reason it can,) not only in respect of the precedent adultery and
murder between the parties: but also for that my L. was co^tracted, at
least, The Lady Sheffield nov^^ Embass^desse in France.
to an other Lady before, that yet lives, vvherof M. Edward Diar and M.
Edmond Tylney both Courtiars can be vvitnesses, and consumated the same
contract by generation of children. But this (as I said) must be left to be
tried herafter by them which shall have most interest in the case. Only for
the present I must advertise you, that you may not take hold so exactlie of al
my L. doings in vvomens affairs, neither tovvching there marriages, neither yet
their husbands.

For first his Lordship has a special fortune, that when he desires any
vvomans favor, then what person so ever stands in his way, has the luck
to die quickly for the finishing of his desire. As for example: when his
Lorship was in full hope to The death of Leicester first L^die and wife.
marry her Ma. and his own wife stood in his light, as he supposed: he did
but send her a sid, to the house of his servant Forster of Cumner by Oxforde,
where shortly after she had the chance to fall from a pair of stares, and so
to break her neck, but yet vvythout hurting of her hoode that stood upon her
head. But Sir Richard Varney who by Sir Ri^h. Varney*
commaundment remained with her that day alone, with one man only, and had
sent away perforce al her servants from her, to a market two miles of, he
(I say) with his man can tell how she died, which man being taken afterward
for a fellonie in the marches of Wales, and offering to publish the manner of
the said murder, was made away privily in the prison. And Sir Rychard him
self dying about the same time in London, cried pitiouslie, and blasphemed God,
and said to a gentleman of vv^rship of mine acquaintau^ce notlo^g before his
death: that all the devils in hell did tear him in pieces. The wife also of
Balde Buttler kinsman to my B^lde Bu^ler.
L. gave out the whole fact a little before her death. But to return unto my
purpose, this was my Lords good fortune to have his wife die, at that time
when it was like to turn most to his profit.

Long after this, he fell in love with the Lady Sheffield whom I signified
before, and the^ also had he the same fortune to have her husband die quickly
with an extreme reume in his head (as it was given out) ^ut as other say, of
an artificial Ca^a^re The s^^(...)s death of the Lord Sh^sh^ld
that stopped his breath. The like good chance had he in the death of my Lord
of Essex (as I have said before) and that at a time most fortunate for his
purpose: for when he was coming home from Ireland, with intent to revenge
him self upon my L. of Leycester, for begetting his wife with child in his
absence (the child was a daughter and brought up by the La: Shandoies, VV.
Knooles his wife): my L. of Ley. hearing thereof, vvanted not friend or two to
accompany the deputy, as among other, a cople of the Earls own servants,
Cro^pton The poisoning of the Earl of* Essex.
(if I miss not his name) yeoman of his bottels, and LLoide his Secretary,
entertained afterward by my L. of Leycester. And so he died in the way of an
extreme Flux, caused by an Italian Recipe, as al his frie^des are well assured:
the maker vvherof was a Surgia^ (as is believed) that the^ was nevvlie come
to my Lord from Italy. A cunning man and sure in The Shifting of a child in
Dame ^e^tice belly
operation, with whom if the good Lady had been sooner acquainted and used
his help, she should not have needed to have sitten so pensive at home and
fearful of her husbands former return out of the same country, but might
have spared the young child in her belly, which she was enforced to make
away (cruelly and vnnaturalie) for clearing the house against the good* man's
arrival.

Neither must you marueyll though al these died in diverse manners of outvvard
diseases, for this is the excellency of the Italian art, for which this The
diverse operations of Poison.
Surgian and D. Iulio were enterteined so carefully, who can make a man die,
in what manner or show of sycknes you vvil: by whose instructions no doubt
but his Lordship is now cunning, ofpecialye Doctor ^aylye the younger.
adding also to these the counsel of his Doctor Baylie, a man also not a little
studied (as he seems in this art. For I heard him once my self in a public
act in Oxeford (and that in presence of my Lord of Leycester if I be not
deceived) maintein, that poison might so be tempered and given as it should not
apeare presently, and yet should kill the party afterward at what time
should be appoi^t^d. Which argument belike pleased well his Lordship and
therefore was chosen to be discussed in his audience, if I be not deceived of
his being that day present. So though one dye of a Flux, and an other of a
Catarre, yet this imports little to the matter, but shows rather the great
cunning and skill of the Artificer.

So Cardinal Chatilian (as I have said before.) having Death of Cardinal
Chatilia^.
accused my L. of Leycester to the Q. Ma. and after that, passing from London
toward France about the marriage, died by the way at Canturburie of a
burning Fever: and so proved D. Bailies assertion true, that poison may be
given to kill at a day.

SCHOL.

At this the Lawyer cast up his eyes to heaven, and I stood somvvhat musing
and thinking of that which had been spoken of the Earl of Essex, whose case
indeed moved me more then all the rest, for that he was a very noble Gentleman,
a great aduauncer of true religion, a Patron to many preachers and students,
and toward me and some of my friends in particular, he had been in some
things very beneficial: and therefore I said that it grieved me extremlie to
hear or thinck of so unworthy a death co^triued by such means to so
vvorthie a Peer. And so much the more, for that it was my chance, to come to
the understanding of diverse particulars concerning that thing, both from one
Lea, an Iris he-man, Robyn Honnies and other, that were present Lea. Honnies
at Penteneis the merchants house in Deueling upon the kay, vvher the murder
was committed. The matter was wrought especialie by Crompton yeoma^ of the
bottels, by the procureme^t of L Loyde as you have noted before, and there was
poisoned at the same time and withdraw the same cup (as given of courtesy by
the Earl) one Misteris Ales Draykot a goodly Ge^tlevvoman, whom the Earl
affectioned much, who departing thence toward Mesteris Draykot poisoned
with the Earl of Essex.
her own house, (which was 18. miles of, the forsaid Lea accompagning her,
and waiting upon her,) she began to fall syck very grieuouslie upon the way,
and co^tinevved with increase of pains and excessive torments, by vomiting,
until she dyed, which was the Sunday before the Earls death, ensevvinge the
friday after, and when she was dead, her body was svvolen unto a monstrous
bygnes and deformity, vvherof the good Earl hearing the day folovvinge,
lamented the case greatly, and said in the presence of his servants, Ah poor
Ales, the cup was not prepared for the, albeit it were thy hard destiny to
taste thereof.

Young Ho^nies also whose father is Master of the children of her Ma. Chapel,
being at that time Page to the said Earl, and accustomed to take the taste of
his drink (though since enterteyned also among other by my L. of Leycester for
better covering of matter) by his taste that he then took of the compovvnde
cup, (though in very small quantity, as you know the fashion is:) yet was
he like to have lost his life, but escaped in the end, (being young) with the
loss only of his hear: which the Earl perceiving, and taking compassion of
the youth: called for a cup of drynk a little before his death, and dronk to
Honnies, saying: I drynk to the my Robin, and be not a feared, for this The Earl
of Essex speech to his Page Robyn Honnies
is a better cup of drynk then that, vvherof thou tokest the taste when we
were both poisoned, and vvherby thou haste lost thy hear and I must leese my
life. This has young Honnies reported openly in diverse places, and before
diverse Ge^tlemen of worship sythence his coming into England, and the forsaid
Lea Irisheman at his passage this way toward France, after he had been
present at the fornamed Misteris Draykots death, with some other of the Earls
servant, have and do most constantly report the same, where they may do
it without the terror of my L. of Leycesters revenge. Wherefore in this
matter there is no doubt at all, though most extreme vile and intolerable
indignity, that such a man should be so openly murdered without punishment.
What noble man within the Realm may be safe if this be suffered? or what
vvorthie personage vvil adventure his life in her Ma. service if this shall be
his reward? But (Sir) I. pray you pardon me for I am somevvhat perhaps to
vehement in the case of this my Patron and noble peer of our Realm. And
therefore I beseech you to go forwards in your talk vvheras you lefe.

GENTL.

I was recounting unto you others (said the Gentleman) made away by my L. of
Leicester with like art, and the next in order I think was Sir Nicolas Death
of Si^ Nicholas Throgmarton.
Throgmarton, who was a man whom my L. of Leycester used a great while (as
all the world knovveth) to ouer-thvvart and cross the doings of my L.
Treasurer then Sir Will. Cicill, a man specialie misliked alvvayes of
Leycester, both in respect Sir VVil. Cycyll now L. Treasurer.
of his old master the Duke of Somerset, as also for that his great wisdom,
zeal and singular fidelity to the Realm, was like to hinder much this man's
designeme^tes: wherefore understanding after a certain time that these tvvoe
knights were secretly made friends, and that Sir Nicholas was like to
detect his doings (as he imagined,) which might turn to some prejudice of his
purposes: (having conceived also a secret grudge and grief against him, for
that he had vvrite^ to her Ma. at his being Ambassador in France, that he
heard reported at Duke Memora^ces table, that the Q. of England had a meaning
to marrye her horse keeper) he inui^ed the said Sir Nicholas to a supper at his
house in London and at supper time departed to the Court, being called for (as
he said) upon the sudden by her Ma. and so perforce would needs have Sir
Nicolas to sit and occupy his Lordships place, and therein to be served as he
was: and soon after by a surfeit their taken, he died of a sttaunge and
incurable vomit. But the day before his death, he declared to a The poisoning
of Sir Nicholas i^ a Sala^e.
dear friend of his, all the circumstance and cause of his disease, which he
affirmed plainly to be of poison, given him in a Salate at supper, inueyhing
most earnestly against the Earls cruelty and blood die disposition,
affirming, him to be the vvickedest, most perilous, and perfidious man under
heaven. But what auailed this, when he had now received the bayte?

This then is to show the man's good fortune, in seeing them dead, whom for
causes he would not have to live. And for his art of poisoning, it is such
now and reaches so far, as he holds al his foes in England and else vvher,
as also a good many of his friends in fear thereof, and if it were known
how many he has dispatched or assaulted that way, it would be marvelous
to the The Lord Chamber layne*
posterity. The late Earl of Sussex vvanted not a scruple for many years
before his death, of some dram received that made him incurable. And unto
that noble gentleman, Mo^sieur Simiers, Monsieur Symiers.
is was disconuered by great providence of God, that his life was to be
attempted by that art, and that not taking place (as it did not through his
own good circumspection,) it was concluded that the same should be assaulted
by violence, vvherof I shall have occasion to say more herafter.

It has been told me also by some of the servant of the late Lady Lenox,
who was also of the blood Royal by Scotland as all men know, and
co^sequentlie The poisoning of the Lady Lenox.
little lyked by Lecester: that a little before her death or syknes, my L. took
the pains to come and visit her with extraordinary kyndenes, at her house at
Hackeny, bestovvi^g long discourses with her in private: but as soon as he
was departed, the good Lady fell into such a Flux, as by no means could be
stayed so long as she had liffe in her body, whereupon both she her selff, and
all such as were near about her, and savv her disease and ending day, were
fully of opinion, that my Lord had procured her dispatche at his being there.
VVherof let the women that served her be examined as also Fovvler that then
had the chief doings in her affairs, and since has byne enterteined by my
L. of Lecester. Mallet also a stranger borne, that then was about her, a
sober and zealous man in religion, and otherwise well qualified, can say
somevvhat in this point (as I think) if he were demanded. So that this art
and exercise of poisoning, is much more perfect with my Lord then praying and
he seems to take more pleasure therein.

Now for the second point, which I named, touching marriages and contractes
with women: you must not marvel though his Lordship be somvvhat diverse,
variable and inconstant, with him Leycester most variable dealing with
vveme^ in co^tractes and marriages.
self, for that according to his profit or his pleasure, and as his lust and
lyking shall vary (vvherin by the judgment of all men, he surpasses, not
only Sardanapalus and Nero, but even Heliogabalus him self): so his Lordship
also changes vviues and Minions, by killing the one, denying the other, using
the third for a time, and the favvning upon the fourth. And for this cause he
has his terms and pretenses (I vvarrant you) of Contractes, Precontractes,
Postcontractes, Protractes, and Retractes: as for example: after he had killed
his first wife, and so broken that contract, then forsooth co^tractes
would he needs make him self husband to the Q. Ma. and so defeat al other
Princes by virtue of his precontract. But after this, his lust compelling him
Preconts acts. Postcontractes.
to an other place, he would needs make a postco^tract with the Lady
Scheffield, and so he did, begetting two children upon her, the one a boy
called Robin Sheffield now living, some time brought up at Nevvington, and the
other a daughter, borne (as is known) at Dudley Castle. But yet after, his
concupiscence changing again (as it never stays) he resolved to make a
retracte, Retract.
of this postco^tract, (though it were as surely done (as I have said) as Bed
and Bible could make the same) and to make a certain new, protract, (which
Protract.
is a contynuation of using her for a time) with the widow of Essex: But yet
to stop the mouths Leycester two Testame^ts.
of-out-cryars, and to bury the Synagogue with some honor, (for these two
wives of Leycester, were merrily and vvittilie called his old and new
Testamentes, by a person of great excellency within the Realm) he was
content to assign to the former a thousand povvndes in money with other
petie considerations, (the pitifullest abused that ever was poor Lady) and
so betake his lymmes to the later, which later notvvythstanding, he so uses
(as we see) now confessing, now forsvvearing, now dissembling the marriage:
as he will alvvayes yet keep a void place for a new surcontract with any
other, when occasion shall require.

SCHOL.

Now by my truth Sir (quoth I) I never heard nor red the like to this in my
life: yet have I red much in my time, of the carnalitie and lycentiousnes of
diverse outrageous persons, in this kind of sin, as namlie these whom you
have mentioned before: especialie the Emperor Heliogabalus who passed all
other, and was called Varius, of the variety of filth which he used in this
kind of carnalitie, varius Heliogabalus, and his most in famous death.
or carnal beastlines. Whose death was: that being at length odious to al
men, and so slain by his own soldiers, was drawn through the City upon
the ground like a dog, and cast into the common privy, with this Epitaphe.
Hic proiectus An Epitaphe.
est indomitae and rabide, libidinis catulus. Here is thrown in, the VVhelp
of vn^evvlie and raging lust: which epitaphe, may also one day chance to
serve my L. of Lecester (whom you call the Beare-vvhelp,) if he go forwards as
he has begone, and die as he deserves.

But (good Sir) what a commpassion is this, that among us christians, and
namlie in so well governed, A pitteful permissio^
and religious a common wealth as ours is, such a riot should be permitted
upon men's vviues, in a subject: vvheras we read that among the very heathe^s,
less offenses then these, in the same kind, were extremely punished in
Princes them selves, and that not only in the person delmquent alone, but also
by extirpatio^ of the whole family for his The extirpation of the Tarquinians.
sake, as apeareth in the example of the Tarquinians among the Romans. And
here also in our own Realm, we have regestred in Chronicle, how that one
king Edvvin above six hundredth years past was An. Do 959.
deprived of his kingdom, for much less scandalous factes then these.

GENTL.

I remember well the story (quoth the gentleman) and there by do easily make
conjecture, what difference there is betvvyxt those times of old, and our
days now: seeing the^, a Crowned Prince could not pass unpunished with one
or two ontragious acts, vvheras now a subject raised up but yesterday from
the meaner sort, rangeth at his pleasure in all licentiousnes, The into lerable
licentiousnes of Lei. carnalitie
and that with secu^itie, void of fear both of God and man. No man's wife can
be free from him, whom his fiery lust likes to abuse, nor their husbands
able to resist nor save from his violence, if they show dislike, or vvil not
yield their consent to his doings. And if I should discover in particular how
many good husbands he had plagued in this nature, and for such delites, it
were intolerable: for his concupiscence and violence do run jointly
together, as in furious beasts we see they are accustomed. Neither holds he
any rule in his lust besides only the motion and suggestion of his own
sensuality. Kindred, affinity or any other band of consanguinitie: religion,
honor, or honesty takes no place in his outrageous appetit. What he best
likes that he takes as lavvful for the time. So that kinsvvoman, allie,
friends wife, or daughter, or what soever female sort besides does please
his eye: (I leave out of purpose and for honor sake terms of kindred more
near) that must yield to his desire.

The keeping of the mother with two or three of her daughters at once or
successively, is no more with him, then the eating of an hen and her
chicken together. There are not (by report) two noble women about her Ma. (I
speak upon some account of them that know much) whom he has not solicited
by potent vvayes: Neither contented with this place of honor, he has
descended to seek pasture among the waiting Gentlevvomen of her Ma. great
Chamber, offering more for their allurement, then I think Lais did commonly
take in Corinthe, if three hundredth pounds for a night, will make up the
sum: or Money Well spent.
if not, yet will he make it up otherwise: having reported him self (so little
shame he has) that he offered to an other of higher place, an hundredth pound
lands by the year with as many Ievvells Anne Vauiser.
as most women under her Ma. used in England: which was no mean bait to
one that used trafique in such merchandise: she being but the leauinges of an
other man before him, vvherof my L. is nothing squemish, for satisfying of his
lust, but can be content (as they say) to gather up cro^mes when he is
Hungry, even in the very Laundrie it self, or other place of baser quality.

And albeit the Lord of his great mercy, to do him good, no doubt, if he were
reuokeable, has The punishments of God upon Leicester, to do him good.
laid his hand upon him, in some chasticement in this world by giving him a
broken belly on both sides of his bowels vvherby misery and putrifactio^ is
threatened to him daily: and to his yo^gso^ne by the widow of Essex, (being
Filius Peecati) such a strange calamity of the falling sickness in his
infancy, The children of adulterors shall be consumed, and the seed of a
wicked bed shall be roted out, says god Sap. 3.
as well may be a witness of the pare^tes sin and wickedness, and of both
their waste natures in iniquity: yet is this man nothing amended thereby, but
according to the custom of al old adulterers, is more libidinous at this day
then ever before, more given to procure love in others by Co^iuring, Sorcerie,
and other such means. And albeyt for him self, both age, and nature spent, do
somvvhat tame him from the act, yet wants he not vvil, as apeareth by the
Italian ointment, procured not many years paste by his Surgyan or Mountybank
of that country, vvherby (as they say) he is Leicester oyntme^t.
able to move his flesh at al times, for keeping of his credit, howsoever his
inhabilitie be otherwise Leicester bottel.
for performance: as also one of his Physicians reported to an Earl of this
land, that his Lordship had a bottel for his bedehead, of ten Pounds the Pint
to the same effect. But my masters whether are we fallen, unadvised? I am
ashamed to have made mention of so base filthynes.

SCHOL.

Not vvythout good cause (quoth I) but that we are here alone and no man
hears us. Wherefore I pray you let us return vvheras we left: and when you
named my L. of Leycesters daughter borne of the Lady Shefield in Dudley
Castle, there came into my head a pretty story concerning that affair, which
now I will recompt (though somevvhat out of order) thereby to dravv you from
the further stirring of this unsavory pudle, and foul dunghill, whereunto
we are slipped, by following my Lord somvvhat to far in his paths and actions.

Wherefore to tell you the tale as it fell out: I grevv acquainted these
months paste with a certain Minister, that now is dead, and was the same
man that was used at Dudley Castle, for compleme^t of some Sacred ceremonies
at the birth of my Lord of Ley. daughter in that place: and the matter was so
ordained, A pretty devise.
by the vvylie wit of him that had sowed the seed, that for the better
coueri^g of the harvest and secret delivery of the Lady Scheffielde: the good
wife of the Castle also (vvherby Ley. appointed gossippes, might vvythout
other suspicion have access to the place) should feign her self to be with
child, and after long and sore trauail (god vvote) to be delivered of a
qvvyshe^ (as she was indeed) and a little after a fair Coffin was buried
with a bundell of cloutes in show of a child: and the Minister caused to use
al accoustomed prayers and ceremonies for An act of Atheism
the solemn interring thereof for which thing, afterward, before his death he
had great grief and remors of conscience, with no small detestatio^ of the
most irreligious devise of my L. of Ley. in such a case.

LAW.

Here the Law. began to laugh a pace both at the devise and at the Minister,
and said now truly if my L. contractes hold no better, but has so many
infirmities, with subtilties, and by* places besides: I would be loathe that
he were married to my daughter, as mean as she is.

GENT.

But yet (quoth the Gentleman) I had rather of the tvvoe be his wife for the
time then his gest: especialie if the Italia^ Surgia^ or Phisitio^ be at hand.

LAW.

True it is, (said the lawyer) for he does not poison his wives, vvherof I
somvvhat marvel, especialie his first wife, I muse why he chose rather to
make her away by open violence, then by some Italian Confortiue.

GENT.

Hereof (said the Gentleman) may be diverse The First reason why Ley. slew his
wife by violence, ratherthe^ by poyso^.
reasons alleged. First that he was not at that time so skilful in those
Italian vvares, nor had about him so fit Phisitia^s and Surgians for the
purpose: nor yet in truth do I think that his mind was so settled then in
mischief, as it has been sithence. For you know, that men are not desperate
the first day, but do enter into wickedness by degrees, and with some doubt
or staggering of conscience at the beginning. And so he at that time might be
desirous to have his wife made away, for that she let him in his
designeme^tes, but yet not so stony hearted as to appoint out the particular
manner of her death, but rather to leave that, to the discretion of the murderer.

Secondly it is not also vnliklie that he prescribed The second reason.
unto Sir Rich. Varney at his going thither, that he should first attempt to
kill her by poison, and if that took not place then by any other way to
dispatch her, how soever. This I prove by the report of old Doctor Baylye
who then lived in Oxeforde (an Doctor Baylye the elder.
other manner of man then he who now lives about my Lord of the same name)
and was professor of the Physic Lecture in the same university. This learned
grave man reported for most certain, that there was a practice in Cumner
among the conspiratours, to have poisoned the poor Lady a little before she
was killed, which was attempted in this order.

They seeing the good Lady sad and heavy (as one that well knevv by her other
handling that her death was not far of) began to persuade her, that her
disease was abundance of Melancholy and other humors, and therefore vvoulde
needs counsel her to take some potion, which she absolutely refusing, to
do, as suspecting still the vvorst: they A practice for poisoning the la: Dudlei
sent one day, (vnavvares to her) for Doctor Baylie, and desired him to
petsvvade her to take some little Potion at his hands, and they would send to
fetch the same at Oxeforde upon his prescription, meaning to have added also
somvvhat of their own for her comfort, as the Doctor upon just causes
suspected, seeing their great importunity, and the small need which the good
Lady had of Phisike, and therefore he flatly denied their request, misdoubting
(as he after reported) least if they had poisoned her under the name of his
Potion: he might after have been hanged for a cover of their sin. Marie the
said Doctor remained well assured that this way taking no place, she should
not long escape violence as after ensued. And the thing was so beaten into the
heads of the principal me^ of the university of Oxeford, by these and other
means: as for that she was found murdered (as al men said) by the Crovvners
inquest, and for that she being hastily and obscurelie buried at Cumner
(which was condemned above as not advisedly done) my good Lord, to make
plane to the world the great love he bare to her in her life, and what a
gryef the loss of so virtuous a Lady was to his tender heart, would needs
have her taken up again and reburied in the university church at Oxeford,
with great Pomp and solemnity: That Doctor Babington my L. chaplain, making
the public Doctor Babingto^
funeral Sermon at her second buryall, tript once or twice in his speech, by
recommending to there memories that virtuous Lady so pittefullie murdered, in
stead of so pitifully slain.

A third cause of this manner of the Ladies death, A Third reason.
may be the disposition of my Lords nature: which is bold and violent vvher
it fears no resistaunce (as all covvardly natures are by kind) and where
any difficulty or danger apeareth, there, more ready to attempt al by art,
subtlety, treason and treachery. And so for that he doubted no great
resistau^ce in the poor Lady to vvythstand the hands of them which should
offer to break her neck: he durst the bolder attempt the same openly.

But in the men whom he poisoned, for that they were such valiant knights
the most part of them, as he durst as soon have eaten his scabard, as dravve
his svvorde in public against them: he was enforced, (as al vvretched ireful
and dastardly creatures are) to supplant them by fraud and by other men's
hands. As also at other times he has sought to do unto diverse other noble and
valiant personages, when he was a feared to meet them in the field as a
knight should have done.

His treacheries toward the noble late Earl of Sussex in their many
breaches, is notorious to al England. As also the bloody practizes against
diverse others.

But as among many, none were more odious and misliked of all men, then those
against Monsieur Simiers a stranger and Ambassador: whom first he practiced
to have poisoned (as has been touched The intended murder of Mo^sieur Simiers
by sundry means.
before) and when that devise took not place, the^ he appointed that Robin
Tider his man (as after upon his ale bench he confessed) should have slain him
at the black friars at Grenevvich as he went forth at the garden gate: but
missing also of that purpose, for that he found the Gentleman better provided
and guarded then he expected, he dealt with certain Flusshyners and other
Pirates to sink him at sea with the English Gentlemen his favorers, that
accompanied him at his return into France. And though they missed of this
practice also, (as not daring to set upon him for fear of some of her Ma.
ships, who, to break of this designement attended by special commandment,
to vvafte him over in safitie) yet the foresaid English Gentlemen, were holden
four hours in chase at their coming back: as M. Ravvley well knovveth
being then present, and two of the Chacers named Clark and Hatris confessed
afterward the whole designement.

The Earl of Ormond in like wise has often declared, and will auovvch it to
my Lord The intended murder of the Earl of Ormond.
of Leycesters face, when so ever he shall be called to the same, that at such
time as this man had a quarrel with him and thereby was likely to be
enforcede to the field (which he trembled to think of) he first sought by
all means to get him made away by secret murder, offeringe five hundredth
pounds for the doing thereof: and secondly when that devise took no place, he
appointed with him the field, but Secretly suborning his servant VVyllm
Killegre
VVyllm Killegre to lie in the way where Ormonde should pass, and so to
massaker him with a Calliuer, before he came to the place appointed. Which
murder though it took no effect, for that the matter was taken up, before
the day of meetinge: yet was Killigre placed afterward in her Ma. Privy
Chamber by Leycester, for shevving his ready mind, to do for his master so
faithful a service.

SCHOL.

So faithful a service (quoth I?) truly, in my opinion, it was but an unfit
preferment, for so facinorous a fact. And as I vvoulde be loathe that many of
his Italians, or other of that art, should come nighe about her Ma. kitchen:
so much less would I, that many such his bloody Champions, should be
placed by him in her highness chamber. Albeit for this Gentleman in
particulare, it may be, that with change of his place in service, he has
changed also his mind and affection, and received better instruction in the
fear of the Lord.

But yet in general I must needs say, that it cannot be but prejudicial and
exceeding dangerous unto our noble Prince and Realm, that any one man
whatsoever (especialie such a one as the world takes this man to be) should
grow to so absolute authority and commaundrie in the Court, as to place about
the Princess person (the head, the Preocupation of her Ma. person.
heart, the life of the land) what so ever people likes him best, and that not
upon their deserts toward the Prince, but toward him self: whose
fidelity being more obliged to their aduau^cer then to their soueraign, do
serve for watchmen about the same, for the profit of him, by vvhos apointme^t
they were placed. Who by their means casting indeed but Nets and Chains,
and i^uisible ba^des about that person, vvho^ most of al he prete^deth to
serve, he shuts up his Prince in a prison most sure, though svveet and
senseless. An ordinary way of aspiring by preocupation of the Princes person


Neither is this art of aspiring new or strange unto any man that is
experienced in affairs of former time: for that it has been from the
beginning of al government a trodden path of al aspirers. In the stories both
Sacred and Profane, foreign and domestical of al nations, kingdoms,
countries, and states you shall read, that such as meant to mount above other,
and to govern al at their own discretion: did lay this for the first ground
and principle of their purpose: to possess them selves A Comparison.
of al such, as were in place about the principal: eue^ as he who intending
to hold a great City at his own disposition, nor dares make open war
against the same: gets secretly into his hands or at his devotion, all the
Towns, Villages, Castles, Fortresses, Bulvvarkes, Rampires, waters, vvayes,
Ports and passages, about the same, and so with out dravving any svvord
against the said City, he brings the same into bondage to abide his vvil and
pleasure.

This did all these in the Roman Empire, who rose from subjects to be great
Princes, and to put down Emperors. This did al those in France and other
kingdoms, who at sundry times have tyra^nized their Princes. And in our own
country the examples are manifest of Vortiger, Harolde, Henrye of Lancaster,
Richard of VVarvvyk, Richard of Gloucester, John of Nortumberland and diverse
others, who by this mean specialie, have pulled down their Lavvful
sovereigns.

And to speak only a word or two of the last, for that he was this man's
father: does not al England know, that he first ouerthrevv the good The way
of aspiri^g in Duke Dudley.
Duke of Sommerset, by dravving to his devotion the very servants and
friends of the said Duke? And afterward did not he possess him self of the
kings own person, and brought him to the end which is knovve^, and before
that, to the most sha^ful disheriting of his own Royal Sisters: and all this,
by possessing first the principal me^, that were in authority about him?

Wherefore Sir if my Lord of Leycester have the same plot in his head (as most
men think) and that he means one day to give the same pushe at the Crown by
the house of Huntington, against all the race and line of king Henry the
seventh in general. which his father gave bef^ him, by pretense of the house
of Suffolk, against the children of king Henry the eight in particular: he
wants not reason to follow the same means and platform of planting special
persons, for his purpose about the Prince for surely his fathers plot lacked
no witty device or preparation, but only that God ouerthrevv it at the
instant: as happily he may do this man's) also, notvvithstanding any diligence
that humane wisdom can use to the contrary.

GENTL.

To this said the Gentleman: that my Lord of Leicester has a purpose to shoot
one day at the Diadem by the title of Huntington, is not a thing obscure in it
self, and it shall be more plainly proved hereafter But now vv^l I sh^vv unto
you, for your instruction, how well ^his man has followed his fathers
platform (or rather passed the same) in possessing him self of al her Ma.
servant, friends, and forces, to serve his turn at that time for execution,
and in the mean space for preparation.

First in the Privy chamber, next unto her Ma. Leycester power in the pri^y
chamber.
person, the most part are his own creatures (as he calls them) that is,
such as acknowledge their being in that place, from him: and the rest he so
ouer-ruleth either by flattery or fear, as none may dare but to serve his
turn. And his reign is so absolute in this place, (as also in all other parts
of the Court) as nothing can pass but by his admission, nothing can be said,
done, or signified, vvherof he is not particularly advertised: no bill, no
supplication, no complainte, no suit, no speech, can pass from any man to the
Princess (except it be from one of the Council) but by his good lyking: or if
there do: he being admonished thereof (as presently he shall:) the party
delinque^t is sure after to abide the smart thereof. VVherby he holds as it
were a lock upon the ears of his Prince, and the tongues of al her Ma.
servants, so surely chained to his girdle, as no man dares to speak any
one thing that may offend him, though it be never so true or behouefull for her
Ma. to know. Leycester married at vvaensteade when her Ma. was at M.
Stoners house Doctor Culpeper Physician Minister.


As well apeared in his late marriage with Dame Essex, which albeit it was
celebrated twice: first at Killingvvorth, and secondly at VVaensteade (in the
presence of the Earl of vvarvvick, L. North, Sir Fran. Knooles and others) and
this exactly known to the whole Court, with the very day, the place, the
vvitnesses, and the Minister that married them together: yet no man durst open
his mouth to make her Ma. priui^ thereunto, until Monsieur Simiers disclosed the
same, (and thereby incurred his high displeasure) nor yet in many days after
for fear of Leycester. Which is a subjection most dishonorable and dangerous
to any Prince living, to stand at the devotion of his subject, what to hear
or not to hear, of things that pass within his own Realm.

And hereof it follows that no suit can prevail No su^e can pass^ but by
Leycester Read
in Court, be it never so mean, except he first be made acquainted therewith,
and receive not only the thanks, but also be admitted unto a great part of
the gain and commodity thereof. Which, as it is Polidore in the 7. year of K
Rich ^. and you shall find this proced^ng of certain abou^e that K to be put
as a great cause of his oue^throvv
a great injury to the suter: so is it a far more greater to the bou^tie,
honor and security of the Prince, by whose liberality this man feeds
only, and for tifieth him self, depriving his soueraign of al grace, thanks,
and good vvil for the same. For which cause also he gives out o^dinarilie, to
every suter, that her Ma. is nigh and parsimonious of her self, and very
difficile to grant any suit, were it not only upon his incessant
solicitation. VVherby he fills his own purse the more, and emptieth the
hearts of such as receive benefit, from due thanks to their Princess for the
sure obtained.

Hereof also ensues, that no man may be preferred in Court (be he otherwise
never so well a deserving servant to her Ma. except he be one of Leycesters
faction or folovvers: none can be advanced, except he be lyked and prefered by
him: none receive grace, except he stand in his No preferments but by Leycester
to Leycestrians.
good favor, no one may live in countenance, or quiet of life, except he take
it, use it, and acknowledge it from him, so as all the favors, graces,
dignities, prefermentes riches and rewards, which her Ma. bestows, or the
Realm can yield: must serve to purchase this man private friends, and
favorers, only to advance his party, and to fottifie his faction. Which
faction if by these means it be great, (as indeed it is:) you may not marvel,
seeing the riches and wealth, of so vvorthie a common weal, do serve him but
for a price to buy the same.

Which thing him self well knovving, frames his spirit of proceeding
accordingly. And first, upon Leycester anger and insole^cie.
confidence thereof, is become so insolent and impotent of his Ire that no man
may bear the same, how justly or iniustlie so ever it be conceived: for
albeit he begin to hate a man upon bare surmises only (as commonly it falls
out, ambition being always the mother of suspicion) yet he prosecuteth the
same, with such implacable cruelty, as there is no long abiding for the party
in that place. As might be sh^vved by the examples of many whom he has
chased from the Court, upon his only displeasure, vvythout other cause, being
known to be otherwise zealous protestants. As Sir Jerome Bovves, M. George
Scot and others that we could name.

To this insolency is also joined (as by nature it follows) most absolute
and peremptory dealing in all things vvherof it pleases him to dispose,
Leicester peremptory dealing.
vvythout respect either of reason, order, due, right, subordination, custom,
conueniencie, or the like: vvherof notvvythstandinge Princes them selves are
vvount to have regard in disposition of their matters: as for example among
the servants of the Q Ma. household, it is an ancient and most commendable
order and custom, that when a place of higher room falls void, he that by
succession is next, and has made proof of his vvorthynes in an inferior place,
should rise and possess the same, (except it be for some extraordinary cause)
to the end that no man unexperienced or untried, should be placed in the higher
rooms the first day, to the prejudice of others, and disseruice of the Prince.

Which most reasonable custom, this man contemning Breaking of order in her
Majesty hovvsholde.
and breaking at his pleasure, thrusts into higher roumes any person
whatsoever, so he like his inclination or feel his reward: albeit he
neither be fit for the purpose, nor have been so much as clark in any inferior
office before.

The like he uses out of the Court, in all other Leicester. violating of al
order in the country abroad.
places vvher matters should pass by order election or degree: as in the
universities, in election of Scholars and heads of houses, in Ecclesiastical
persons, for dignities of church, in officers, Magistrates, stevvardes of
lands, Shiryues and Knights of the shiers, in Burgesses of the parliament, in
commissioners, judges, justices of the peace, (vvherof many in every shire
must wear his lyuerey) and al other the like: vvher this man's vvil, must
stand for reason, and his Letters for absolute laws, neither is there any
man, magistrate, or communer in the Realm, who dares not sooner deny there
petition of her Ma. letters, upon just causes (for that her highness is
content after to be satisfied with reason) then to resist the commaundment of
this man's letters, who vvil admit no excuse or satisfaction, but only the
execution of his said commandment, be it right or vvrong.

LAW.

To this ansvvered the lawyer, now verelie (Sir) you paynte unto me a
strange pattern of a perfect Potentate in the Court: belike that staunger,
who calls our state in his prynted book Leicestrensem rempublicam, a
Leicestrian common A Leicestryane common wealth.
wealth, or the common wealth of my Lord of Leycester, knovveth much of these
matters. But to hold (Sir) still within the Court: I assure you that by
considerations, which you have laid down, I do begin now to perceive, that
his party must needs be very great and strong vvythin the said Court, seeing
that he has so many vvayes and means to increase, enrich, and encourage the
same, and so strong abilities, to tread down his enemies. The common spech of
many vva^teth not reason I perceive, which caleth him the heart and life of the
Court.

GENTL.

They which call him the heart (said the Gentleman) upon a little occasion more,
would call him Leycester called the heart and life of the Court.
also the head: and then I marvel what should be left for her Ma. when they
take from her both life, heart, and headship in her own Realm? But the truth
is, that he has the Court at this day, in almost the same case, as his father
had it, in king Edward's days, by the same device, (the Lord forbid, that ever
it come fully to the same state, for then we know what ensued to the
principal:) and if you will have an evident demonstration of this man's power
and favor in that place: call you but to mind the times when her Ma. upon
most just and urgent occasions, did vvyth-dravv, but a little her vvounted
favor and contenaunce toward him: did not all the Court as it were, mutiny
presently? A demo^stratio^ of Leyc Tyranny in the Court
did not every man hang the lip? except a fevv, who afterward paid
svvetlie for their mirth. were there not every d^ye new devises sought out,
that some should be on their knees to her Ma. some should vvepe and put finger
in their eyes: other should find out certain covert manner of threatening:
other reasons and persuasions of love: other of profit: other of honor: other
of necessity: and al to get him recalled back to favor again? And had her
Ma. any rest permitted unto her, until she had yielded and granted to the
same?

Consider then (I pray you) that if at that time, in his disgrace, he had his
faction so fast assured to him self: what has he now in his prosperity,
after so many years of fortification? vvherin by all reason he Leyc. provides
never to come in the Q. danger again.
has not been negligent, seeing that in policy the first point of good
fortificatio^ is, to make that fort impregnable, which once has been in
danger to be lost. VVherof you have an example in Rich. Duke of York, in the
time of K. Henry the sixth, who being once in the kings hands by his own
submissio^, and dimissed again (when for his deserts he should have suffered:
provided after, that the king should never be able to ouer-reache him the
second time, or have him in his power to do him hurt, but made him Anno
Regni. 31.
self strong enough to pull down the other with extirpation of his family.

And this of the Court, household and Chamber of her Ma. But now if we shall
pass from Court to Council, we shall find him no less fortyfied but Ley
puissance in the privy Coucell.
rather more: for albeit the providence of God has been such, that in this
most honorable assembly, there has not vvanted some tvvoe or three of the
vvisest, grauest, and most experienced in our state, that have seen and
marked this ma^s perilous proceedinges from the beginning, (vvherof
notvvythstanding two are now disceased, and their places L. Keeper L.
Chamberlain.
supplied to Leycesters good liking:) yet (alas) the wisdom of these vvorthie
me^, has discovered alvvayes more, then their authorities were able to
redress: (the others great power and violence considered) and for the residue
of that benche and table, though I doubt not but there be diverse, who do in
heart detest his doings (as there were also, no doubt among the Counselors of
king Edward, who misliked this man's fathers attemptes, though not so hardy
as to contra^ie the same:) yet for most part of the Council present, they
are known to be so affected in particular, the one for that he is to him a
brother, the other a father, the other a kinsma^, the other an allie, the other
a fast obliged friend the other a fellovv or folovver in faction, as none vvil
stand in the breach against him: none dare resist or encounter his
designements: but every man yielding rather to the force of his flow,
permits him to pearce, and pass at his pleasure, in what soever his vvil
is once settled to obtain.

And hereof (were I not stayed for respect of some whom I may not name) I
could allege strange examples, not so much in affairs belonging to subjects
and to private men, (as were the cases Matters vvherin the Counsel are enforced
to vvink at Leycester
of Snovvden forest, Denbigh, of Killingvvorth, of his fair Pastures fovvlie
procured by Southam, of the Archbishop of Ca^turburie, of the L. Barkley. of
Sir John Throgmarto^, of M. Robinson, and the like,) vvherin those of the
Council that disliked his doings, least dared to oppose them selves to the
same: but also in things that appertain directly to the Crown and dignity,
to the state and common weal, and to the safitie and continuance thereof. It
is not secure for any one Cou^cellor, or other of authority, to take notice
of my Lords errors or misdeedes, but with extreme peril of there own ruin.

As for example: in the beginning of the rebellion in Ireland, when my Lord of
Leycester was in some disgrace, and consequently, as he imagined Leycester
intelligence with the rebellion in Irelande.
but in frail state at home, he thought it not inexpedient, for his better
assurance, to hold some intelligence also that way, for all euentes, and so he
did: vvherof there was so good evidence and testimony found, upon one of the
first of account, that was there slain, (as honorable personages of their
knowledge have assured me) as vvoulde have been sufficient, to touch the life
of aine subject in the land, or in any state Christian, but only my Lord of
Leycester: who is a subject vvythout subjection.

For what think you? durst any man take notice hereof, or auo vvche that he
had seen thus much? durst he that took it in Ireland, deliver the same vvher
especialy he should have done? or they who received it in England, (for it
came to great hands,) use it to the benefit of their Princess and country?
No surely: for if it had been but only suspected, that they had seen such a
thing, it would have been as dangerous unto them, as it was to Acteon to
have seen Diana and her maidens naked: whose Acteons case now come in England
case is so common now in England as nothing more, and so do the examples of
diverse well declare: whose unfortunate knowledge of to many secrets, brought
them quickly to unfortunate ends

For we hear of one Saluatore a stranger, long Saluatore Slain in his bed
used in great Mysteries of base affairs and dishonest actions, who
afterward (upon what demerite I know not) sustained a hard fortune, for
being late with my Lord in his study, (well near until midinght, (if I be
rightly informed) went home to his chamber, and the next morning was found
slain in his bed. We hear also of one Doughtie, hanged in have by Captain
Drake upon Doughty hanged by Drake.
the sea, and that by order (as is thought) before his departure out of
England, for that he was over pryuie to the Secrets of this good Earl.

There was also this last summer past, one, Gates The story of Gates hanged at
Tiborne.
hanged at Tiborne, among others, for robbing of Carriars, which Gates had
been lately clark of my Lords kitchinge, and had laid out much money of his
own, (as he said) for my L. provision, being also otherwise, in so great
favor and grace with his L. as no man living was thought to be more privy of
his secrets the^ this man, vvher upon also it is to be thought, that he
presumed the rather to commit this robbery, (for to such things does my
Lords good favor most extend:) and being apprehended and in danger for the
same, he made his recourse to his honor for, protestio^, (as the fashon is)
and that he might be borne out, as diverse of less merit had been by his
Lordship, in more heinous causes before him.

The good Earl ansvvered his servant and dear Priuado courteously, and assured
him, for his lyffe, how so ever for utter show or complement the form of
law might pass against him. But Gates seeing him self condemned, and nothing
now between his head and the halter, but the word of the Magistrate which
might come in an instante, when it would be to late to send to his Lord:
remembering also the small assurance of his said Lords word by his former
dealinges toward other men, vvherof this man was to much pryuie: he thought
good to solicit his case also by some other of his frindes, though not so
puisant as his L. and master, who dealinge in deed, both diligently and
effectually in his affair, found the matter more difficult a great deal then
either he or they had imagined: for that my Lord of Leycester, was not only
not his fauorer, but a great hastener of his death under hand and that with
such care, diligence, vehemency, and irresistible means, (having the law
also on his side,) that there was no hope at all of escaping: which thing
when Gates heard of, he easelie believed for the experience he had of his
Masters good nature, and said, that he alvvayes mistrusted the same,
considering how much his Lordship was in debt to him, and he made pryuie to
his Lordship foul secrets, which secrets he would, there presentely have
uttered in the face of all the world, but that he feared torments or speedy
death, with some extraordinary cruelty, if he should so have done, and
therefore he disclosed the same only to a Gentleman of vvorshippe, whom he
trusted specially, whose name I may not utter for some causes (but it
begins with H.) and I am in hope ere it be long, by means of a friend of
mine, to have a sight of that discourse and report of Gates, which hitherto I
have not seen nor ever spoke I with the Ge^tleman that keeps it, though I be
well assured that the whole matter passed insubstance as I have here recounted
it.

SCHOL.

Whereunto I ansvvered, that in good faith it were pittye that this relation
should be lost, for that it is very like, that many rare things be declared
This relation of Gates, may serve hereafter for an addition in the second
editio^ of this book
therein, seeing it is done by a man so privy to the affairs them selfs,
vvherin also he had been used an instrument. I will have it (quoth the
Gentleman) or else my friends shall fail me, howbeit not so soon as I would,
for that he is in the west country that should procure it for me, and will
not return for certain months, but after I stall see him again, I will
not leave him vnril he procure it fot me, as he has promissed. well (quoth
I,) but what is become of that evidence found in Ireland under my Lords hand,
which no man dare pursue, auouche, or behold.

GENTL.

Treulie (said the Gentilman) I am informed that it lies safely reserved in
good custody, to be brought forth and auovvched, when so over it shall please
God so to dispose of her Ma. heart, as to lend an indifferent ear, asvvell to
his accusers, as to him self, in judgment.

Neither must you think, that this is strange, nor that the things are fevv,
which are in such sort reserved in deck for the time to come, even among The
deck reserved for Leycester.
great personages, and of high calling, for seeing the present state of his
power to be such, and the tempest of his tyranny to be so strong and
boisterous, as no man may stand in the rage thereof, without peril, for that
even from her Ma. her self, in the lenity of her Princely nature, he
extorteth what he designeth, either by fraud, flattery, false informatio^,
Leycester puyssant vyolence with the Prince her self.
request, pretense, or violent importunity, to the ouer-bearing of al, whom
he means to oppress: No marvel then though many even of the best and
faythfullest subjects of the land, do yield to the present time, and do keep
silence in some matters, that otherwise they would take it for duty to
utter.

And in this kind, it is not long sithence a worshipful and wise friend of
mine told me a testimony in secret, from the mouth of as noble and grave a
Councellor, as England has enjoyed these The Earl of Sussex his speech of the
Erl of Leices.
many hundredth years: I mean the late L. Chamberlayne, with whom my said
friend being alone at his house in London, not twenty days before hsi death,
conferred somvvhat familiarlie about these and like matters, as with a true
father of his country and common wealth: and after many complaints in the
behalf of diverse, who had opened their griefs unto Counselors, and savve
that no notice would be taken thereof: the said noble man, turning him self
somvvhat about from the water (for he satte near his pond side, vvher he
beheld the taking of a pike or carpe) said to my friend: It is no marvel
(Sir) for who dares intermedle him self in my Lords affairs? I vvil tell you
(quoth he) in confidence between you and me, there is as wise a man and as
grave, and as faithful a Councellor, as England breeds, (meaning thereby The
L. B^rghlei.
the L. Treasurer) who has as much in his keeping of Leycesters own hand
vvriting, as is sufficient to hang him, if either he durst present the same to
her Ma. or her Ma. do justice when it should be presented. But indeed (quoth
he) the time permits neither of them both, and therefore it is in vain for
any man to struggle with him.

These were that noble man's words, vvherby you may consider whether my L. of
Leicester be strong this day in Council or no: and whether his fortification
be sufficient in that place.

But now if out of the Council, we vvil turn Leycester power in the
country abrod
but our eye in the country abroad, we shall find as good fortification also
there, as we have perused alredie in Court and Council: and shall well perceive
that this man's plot, is no fond or indiscrete plot, but excellent well
grounded, and such as in all proportions has his due correspondence.

Consider then, the chief and principal parts of this land for martial
affairs, for use and commodity of armoure, for strength, for opportunity,
for liberty of the people, as dwelling farthest of from the presence and
aspect of their Prince, such parts (I say) as are fittest for sudden
entreprises, without danger of interception: as are the North, the West,
the countries of Wales, the Islands round about the land, and sundry other
places vvythin the same: Are they not al at this day at his disposition? are
they not all (by his procurement) in the only hands of his friends and
allies? or of such, as by other matches, have the same complot and purpose
with him? York Earl of Huntington.


In York is president, the man that of al other is fittest for that place, that
is, his nearest in affinity, his dearest in friendship, the head of his
faction, and open competitor of the Scepter. In Barvvik is Captain, Barvvick.
The L. Hunsde^.
his wives uncle, most assured to him self and Huntinghto^, as one who at
convenient time, may as much advance their designementes, as any one man in
England.

In Wales the chief authority from the Prince, Wales. Si^ He^rie Sidney.
The Er. of Pe^brook. The west Earl of Bedford.
is in his own brother in law: bu^ among the people, of natural affection, is
in the Earl of Penbrook: who both by Marriage of his sisters daughter is made
his allie, and by dependence is known to be wholy, at his disposition. The
west part of England is under Bedford, a man wholy devoted to his and the
Puritanes faction. In Ireland was governor of The L. Gray. Her Ma. (as he
says for stricking of M. Fortescue called him lame wretch: that gryeued him
so. (for that he was hurt in her service at Lies) as he said, he would live
to be revenged.
late the principal instrument appointed for their purposes: both in respect
of his heat, and affection tovvard their designementes, as also of some secret
coffeehouse, which he has toward her Ma. and the state present for
certain hard speeches and ingrate recompenses, as he pretends: but indeed
for that he is known to be of nature fyrie, and impatient of stay, from
seeing that common wealth on foot, which the next competitours for their
gain, have painted out to him and such others, more pleasant then the
Terrestrial Paradise it self.

This the^ is the Hector, this is the Ajax, appoi^ted for the enterprise, when
the time shall come. This must be (forsooth) an other Richard of VVar^vik, to
gain the Crown for He^rie the ninth of the house of York: as the other
Richard did put down He^rie the sixth of the house of La^caster, and placed
Edward the fourth, from whom Huntington deriueth his title: therefore this man
is necessarily to be enterteyned from time to time, (as we see now he is) in
some charge and martial action, to the end his experience, power, and credit
may grow the more, and he be able at the time to have soldiers at his
commandment. And for the former charge which held of late in Ireland, as
this man had not been called away, but for execution of some other secret
purpose, In Scotland or else where, a gaynst the next i^heritors or present
possessor.
for advancement of their designeme^ts: so be well assured that for the time to
come, it is to be furnished again with a sure and fast friend to Leycester
and to that faction. Sir Ihon Parotte.


In the I Will of VVyght I grant that Leycester has lost a great friend and a
trusty servant by the death of Captain Horsey, but yet the matter is supplied
Sir Edw. Horsey. Sir Georg Carevv.
by the succession of an other, no less assured unto him, then the former, or
rather more, through the ba^de of affinity by his wife. The two Islands of
Gersey and Gernsey are in the possession of tvvoe Sir Amias Paulet. Sir Thomas
Layton.
friends and most obliged depe^de^tes. The one, by reason he is excedingly
addicted to the Puritan procedi^gs: the other, as now being joined unto him
by the marriage of Mistres Besse his vviues sister, both daughters to Sir
Frauncis, or (at least) to my Lady Knooles, and so become a riuale, companion
and brother, who was before (though trusty) yet but his servant.

And these are the chief Keys, Forteesses, and Bulvvarkes, vvythin, without
and about the realm, which my Lord of Leyces. possessing, (as he does,) he may
be assured of the body vvythin: vvher notvvythstanding (as has been shevved)
he wants no due preparation for strength: having at his disposition (besides
al aids and other helps specified Her Ma. Stable. Her Armor Munitition, and
Artilerye. The Tovver.
before) her Ma. horse, and stables, by interest of his own office: her
Armor, Artilerie and Munitio^, by the office of his brother the Earl of
VVarvvick. The Tovver of London and treasure therein, by the dependence of Sir
Ovvyne Hopton his sworn seruaunt^ as ready to receive and furnish him with
the whole (if occasion served) as one of his predecessors was, to receive his
father in K. Edvvardes days, for the like effect, against her Ma. and her
sister.

And in the City of London it self, what this London. Sir Rovv^and Heivvard,
and Madd* Fleet vvo^
man at a pinche, could do, by the help of some of the principal me^, and
chief leaders, and (as it were) commanders of the commons there, and by the
bestirring of Fleetvvoode his mad Recorder, and other such his instruments:
as also in all other Towns, Ports and Cities of importance, by such of his
own setting up, as he has placed there to serve his designementes, and
justices of peace with other, that in most Shyres do were his liuerey, and
are at his appoyntement: the simplest man vvhithin the Realm does consider.

Whereunto if you add now his own forces and furniture, which he has in
Killingvvorth Castle and other places, as also the forces of Huntington in
particular, with their friends, folovvers, allies, and Compartenours: you
shall find that they are not behind in their preparations.

SCHOL.

For my Lord of Huntingtons forvvardnes in the cause (said I) there is no man, I
think, which makes doubt: marie for his private forces, albeit they may be
very good, for any thing I do know to the contrary, (especially at his
house vvythin 25. miles of My L. of Hu^tingtons preparation at Ashby.
Killingvvorth, where one told me some years paste, that he had furniture
ready for five thousand men:) yet do I not think, but that they are far
inferior to my L. of Leycest. who is taken to have excessive store, and that
in diverse place. And as for the Castle last mentioned by you, there are men of
Killingvvorth Castle.
good intelligence, and of no small judgment, who report, that in the same, he
has well to furnish, ten thousand good souldiars, of al things necessary
both for horse and man, besides al other munition, armor, and artillery,
(vvherof great store was brought thither under pretense of tryumphe, when her
Ma. was there, and never as yet carried back again) and besides the great
abundance of ready Coin, there laid up (as is said) sufficient for any great
exploit to be done vvythin the Realm.

And I know that the estimation of this place was such, among diverse, many
years ago: as when at a time her Ma. lay dangerously syck, and like ^lphe
^ane.
to die, at Hampton Court, a certain gentleman of the Court, came unto my L.
of Huntington, and told him, that for so much as he took his L. to be next in
succession after her Ma. he vvoulde offer hyma mean of great help, for
co^passing of his purpose, after the discease of her Ma. which was, the
possession of Killi^gvvorth Castle (for at that time these two The offer and
acceptance of Killingvvorth Castle.
Earls were not yet very friends, nor confederate together) and that being
had, he shevved to the Earl the great furniture and wealth, which thereby he
should possess for pursuit of his purpose.

The proposition was well liked, and the matter esteemed of great importance,
and consequently received with many thanks. But yet afterward her Ma. by
the good providence of God, recoueri^g again, let the execution of the
bargain: and my L. of Huntington having occasion to join amity with
Leycester, had more respect to his own commodity, the^ to his friends
security, (as commonly in such persons and cases it falls out) and so
discovered the whole device unto him, who forgot not after, from time to
time, to plague the deviser by secret means, until he has brought him to that
poor estate, as all the world sees: though many me^ be not acquainted with
the true cause of this his disgrace and bare fortune.

LAW.

To this ansvvered the Lawyer: In good faith (Gentlemen) you open great
mysteries unto me, which either I knevv not, or considered not so
particularly before, and no marvel, for that my profession and exercise of
law, restrains me from much company keeping: and when I happen to be
among some that could tell me much herein, I dare not either ask, or hear if
any of him self begin to talk, least afterward the speech coming to
light, I be fetched over the coals (as the proverb is) for the same, under
pretense of an other thing. But you (who are not suspected for religion (have
much greater privilege in such matters, both to hear and speak again, which
me^ of mine estate dare not do: Only this I knevv before, that throughout al
England The prerogative of my ^. of Leycester
my L. of Leycester is taken for Dominus sac totum: Whose excellency above
others is infinite, whose authority is absolute, vvhos commandment is
dreadful, vvhos dislike is dangerous, and whose favor is omnipotent.

And for his will, though it be seldom law, yet alvvayes is his power
above law: and therefore we lawyers in all cases brought unto us, have as
great regard to his inclination, as Astronomers have to the Planet dominaunte,
or as sea men have to the North Pole.

For as they that sail, do direct their course, according Leyc. the Star
directorie to Lavvyeres in their Clientes affairs.
to the situation and direction of that star which guides them at the Pole:
and as astronomers who make prognosticatio^s, do fortel things to come,
according to the aspect of the Planet dominaunte, or bearing rule for the time:
so we do guide our Clie^ts bark, and do prognosticate what is like to ensue
of his cause, by the aspecte and inclination of my L. of Ley. And for that
reason, as soon as ever we hear a case proposed, our custom is to ask,
what part my L. of Ley. is like to favor in the matter (for in all matters
lightly of any importance, he has a part) or what may be gathered of his
inclination therein: and according to that we give a guess, more or less,
what end vvil ensue.

But this (my masters) is from the purpose: and therefore returning to your
former speech again, I do say, that albeit I was not privy before to the
particular provisions of my L. and his friends, in such and such places: yet
seeing him accounted L. general over all the whole Realm, and to have at his
commandment, al these several commodities and forces perteyning to her Ma.
which you have mentioned before, and so many more as be in the Realm, and not
mentioned by you (for in fine, he has al:) I could not but account him (as he
is) a porent Prince of our state, for all furniture needful to defense or
offense, or rather the only Monarche of our nobility, who has sufficient of
him self to plunge his Prince, if he should be discontented, especial for his
abundance of money, (which, by the wise, is termed the Sinours of Martial
actions) vvherin by all men's judgments, he is better furnished Ley. furniture
in money*
at this day, tha^ ever any subject of our land, either has been heretofore,
or lightly may be hereafter, both for ba^ks without the realm and stuffed
coffers within. In so much that being my self in the Last Parliament, when
the matter was moved, for the grant of a Subsidy, after that, one for her Ma.
had given very good reasons, why her highness was in vva^t of money, and
consequently needed the assistance of her faithful subjects therein: an other
that sat next me of good account said in mine ear secretly: these reasons I
do well allow, and am contented to give my The sayi^g of a knight of the
shyre touching Leycester money.
parti^ money: but yet, for her Ma. need, I could make answer as one ansvvered
once the Emperor Tiberius in the like case and cause. Abu^de ei pecunia^ fore,
si a liberto suo in societate^ reciperetur. that her Ma. should have money
enough, if one of her seruau^ts would voutchsafe to make her highness
partaker with him: meaning thereby my L. of Leycester, whose treasure must
needs in one respect, be greater, then that of her Ma. for that he lays up
what soever he gets, and his expenses he casts upon the purse of his
Princess.

GENTL.

For that (said the Ge^tlema^) whether he do or no, it imports little to the
matter: seeing both that which he spends, and that he hoordeth, is truly and
properly his Princess treasure: and seeing he has so many and diverse ways
of gaining, what should he make account of his own private expenses? if The
infi^nit vvays of gayning that Leycester has.
he lay out one for a thousand, what can that make him the poorer? he that
has so goodly lands, possessions, Seigniories and rich offices of his own,
as he is known to have: he that has so special favor and authority with
the Prince, as he can obtain Suits.
what soever he lists to demand: he that has his part and portion in all
suits besides, that pass by grace, or else (for the most part) are ended
Lands.
by law: he that may chop and change, what lands he lysteth with her Ma.
dispoile them of al their vvooddes and other commodities, and rack them
afterward to the vttermoste penny, and then return the same, so
tenter-stretched and bare shorn, into her Ma. hands again, by fresh
exchange, rent for rent, for other lands never enhaunsed before: he that
possesses so many gainful licenses to hi^ self alone of Wine, Oils,
Curra^tes, Cloth, veluets, Licenses.
with his new office for License of alienation, most pernicious unto the
common wealth, as he uses the same, with many other the like, which were
sufficient to enriche whole towns, corporations, countries, and common
wealths: he that Fallinge out with her Ma.
has the art, to make gainful to him self every offense, displeasure, and
faling out of her Ma. with him, and every angry coo^tenaunce cast upon him:
he that has his share in all offices of great profit and Offices.
holds an absolute Monopole of the same: he that disposes at his vvil the
Ecclesiastical liuinges of the Realm, makes Bisshoppes, none, but such as
Clergy
vvil do reason, or of his Chaplanes whom he lists, and reteineth to him
self so much of the living as likes hi^ best: he that svveepeth away the
glebe from so many benefices throughout the la^d and co^pou^deth Benefices
with the perso^ne for the rest: he that so schoureth the University and
Colleges vvher he is Chauncelor, University.
and sells both headships and Scholars places, and al other offices, roumes
and dignities, that by art or violence may yield money: he that makes title
to what land or other thing he please, and drives the parties to compound for
the same: he that takes Oppressions.
in whole Forests, Commons, VVooddes and Pastures to him self, compelling the
te^nauntes to pay Rapines.
him new rent, and what he cesseth: he that vexes and oppresses whom so
ever he list, takes from any what he list, and makes his own claim, suit,
Princes favor.
and end as he list: he that sells his favor with the Prince, both abroad
in foreign countries, and at home, and sets the price thereof what him self
vvil demand: he that has and does all this, and besides Presents.
this, has infinite presents daily brought unto him of great value, both in
Jewels, Plate, al kind of Furniture and ready Coin: this man (I say) may
easelie bear his own expe^ces, and yet lay up sufficiently also to vverie
his Prince when needs shall require.

LAW.

You have said much Sir, (quoth the Lawyer) and such matter, as touches
neerlie both her Ma. and the common wealth: and yet in my conscience if I
were to plead at the bar for my Lord: I could not tell which of al these
members to deny. But for that Leycester homegaine by her Ma. favor*
which you mention in the last part, of his gaining by her Ma. favor, both
at home and abroad: Tovvching his home gain it is evident, seeing all that he
has is gote^ only by the opinion of her Ma. favor toward him: and many
me^ do repair unto him, with fat presents, rather for that they suppose,
he may by his favor do them hurt, if he feel not their reward, then for
that they hope he vvil labor any thing in their affairs.

You remember (I doubt not) the story of him, that A pretye story.
offered his Prince a great yearly rent, to have but this favor only, that he
might come every day in open audience, and say in his ear, God save your Ma.
assuring him self, that by the opinion of confidence and secret favor, which
hereby the people would conceive, to be in the Prince toward him* he should
easily get up his rent again double told. Wherefore, my L. of Leycester
receiving daily from her Ma. greater tokens of grace and favor then this, and
him self being no evil merchant, to make his own bargain for the best of his
commodities: cannot but gain excedinglie at home by his favor.

And for his Lucre abroode upon the same cause, Leycester foreign gain by her
Ma. favor.
I leave to other men to conceive, what it may be, sithence the beginning of
her Ma. reign: the times vvherof and condition of al Christendom has been
such, as all the Princes and Potentates round about us, have been constreyned at
one time or other, to sue to her highness for aid, grace, or favor: in all
which suits, men use not to forget (as you know) the parties most able by
their credit, to further or let the same.

In particular only this I ca^ say, that I have heard of sundry french men,
that at such time, as the treaty was between France and England, for the
redeliuerie of Callis unto us again, in the first year of her Ma. reign that
now is, when the french me^ were in great distress and misery, and K.
Philippe refused absolutely to make peace with them, except Callis were
restored to England (whether for that purpose he had now delivered the french
hostages:) Leycester bribe for betrayi^g of Callis.
the french men do report (I say) that my L. of Leycester stood them in great
stead at that necessity, for his revvard, (which you may well imagine was
not small, for a thing of such importance,) and beca^ a suter, that peace might
be concluded, with the release of Callis to the french: which was one of
the most impious factes (to say the truth,) that ever could be devised
against his common wealth.

GENTL.

A small matter in him (said the Gentleman) for in this he did no more, but as
Christ said of the Jews: that they filled up the measure of their fathers
sins. And so if you read the story of K. Edvvardes time, you shall find it
most evident, that this ma^s father before him, sold Bullogne to the french
by Leycester father sold Bullogne.
like treachery. For it was delivered up upon composition, with out necessity
or reason, the. 25. of April, in the fourth year of K. Edward the sixth, when
he (I mean duke Dudley) had now put in the Tovver the L. Protector, and thrust
out of the Council vvho^ Earls of Arundel and Souchampto^ put out of the
Council by D. Dudley.
he listed: as namly the Earls of Arundel and Southa^pton, and so invaded the
whole government him self, to sell, spoil and dispose at his pleasur.
Wherefore this is but natural to my L. of Leycester by descent, to make
merchandise of the state, for his Gra^dfather Edmund also, was such a kind of
Copesman.

LAW.

An evil raze of merchants for the common wealth (quoth the Lawyer) but
yet, Sir, I pray you (said he) expound unto me somvvhat more at large, the
nature of these licenses which you named, as also the changing of lands
with her Ma. if you can set it down any playner: for they seem, to be
things of excessive gain: especialie his way of gayning by offending her Ma.
or by her hyghenes offense toward him, for it seems to be a device above
all skill or reason.

Not so Leycester gain by fallinge out with her Ma.
(quoth the Gentleman for you know that every falling out must have an
atonement again, vvherof he being sure by the many and puisaunt means of his
fryendes in Court, as I have shevved before, who shall not give her Ma. rest
until it be done: then for this atonement, and in perfect reconciliation on
her Ma. part, she must grant my Lord some suit or other, which he vvil
have alvvayes ready provided for that purpose, and this suit shall be well able
to reward his friends, that labored for his reco^cilement, and leave also a
good remaynder for him self. And this is now so ordinary a practice with
him, as all the Realm observes the same, and disdaigneth that her Ma. should
be so vnvvorthelie abused: For if her highness fall not out with him as often
as he desires to gain this way, then he picketh some quarrel or other, to
show him self discontended with her, so that one way or other, this
gaynful reconciliation must be made, and that often for his commodity. The
like art he excerciseth in inuiting her Ma. to his ba^quettes and to his
houses, vvher if she come, she must grant him in suits, ten times so much as
the charges of al amount unto: so that Robin plaieth the broker i^ al his
affairs, and makes the uttermost pe^ny of her Ma. every way.

GENTL.

Now for his change of lands, I think I have been reasonable plain before:
yet for your fuller satisfaction, you shall understand his further dealing
therein, to be in this sort. Besides the good lands and of ancient possession
to the Crown, procured at her Ma. hand, and used as before was declared: he
uses the same trick for his vvurst lands, that he possesses any way,
whether they come to him, by extort means and plain oppression, or through
mai^tenaunce and broken tiltes, or by cosinage of simple Leycester fraudule^t
change of lands with her Maie^t^e vvherby he has notablye enda^maged the
Croune.
Gentlemen, to make him their heir, or by what hard title or dishonest means
so ever, (for he practizeth store of such and thinks little of the reckening:)
after he has tried them likewise, to the uttermost touch, and letten the^
out to such, as shall gain but little by the bargain: then goes he and
chau^geth the same with her Ma. for the best lands he ca^ pick out of the
Crown, to the end that herby he may both enforce her Ma. to the defense of his
bad titles, and him self fill his coffers, with the fines and vttermoste
commodity of both the lands.

His licenses do stand thus: first he got License Leycester Licenses.
for certain great numbers of Clothes, to be transported out of this land,
which might have been an undoing to the merchant subject, if they had not
redeemed the same with great sums of money: so that it redounded to great
damage of all occupied about that kind of commodity. After that he had the
grant for carrying over of barrel stanes and of some other such like vvares.
Then procured he a Monopole, for bringing in of svveet vvines, oils, curra^tes
and the lik: the gain vvherof is inestimable. He had also the forfeit of al
wine that was to be drawn above the old ordinarye price, with license to
give authority to sell above that price: vvherin Captain Horsey was his
instrument, by which means it is incredible what treasure and yearlie rent
was gathered of the Vinteners throughout the Land.

To this add now his license of Silks and Veluettes, Sylkes and Veluetes.
which only were enough to enrich the Mayor and Adermen of London, if they
were al decayed (as often I have heard diverse Merchants affirm). And his
license of alienatio^ of lands, which (as in part I have opened before)
serves him not only to excessive gain, but also for an extreme scourge,
vvhervvith to plague whom he please in the Realm. For seeing that vvythout this
license, no man can buy, sell, pass, or alienate, any land The Tira^nical
License of alienatio^.
that any vvayes may be drawn to that tennure, as holden in chief of the
Prince: as commonly now most la^d may) he calls into question what souer
likes him best, be it never so clear: and under this color, not only
enricheth him self vvythout al measure, but reuengeth him self also, vvher he
vvil, vvythout al order.

LAW.

Hear the lawyer stood still a pretty while, biting his lip, as he were
astonished, and then said. Verily I have not heard so many and so apparaunt
things or so odious, of any man that ever lived in our common wealth. And I
marvel much Edmond Dudley.
of my L. of Leycester, that his graundfathers fortune does not move him much,
who lost his head in the begnining of K. Henry the eightes days, for much
less and fewer offenses, in the same kind, committed in the time of K.
Henry the seventh: for he was thought to be the inuentor of these poolinges
and molestations, vvhervvith the people were burdened, in the later days of
the said king. And yet had he great pretense of reason to aleage for him self:
in that these exactio^s were made to the kings use, and not to his, (albeit no
doubt but his own gain was also there. M. Stovve vvriteth i^ his Chronicle,
that in the time of Ebmund Dudleys bokevvrit ten in the Tovver.
his impriso^ment in the Tovver, he wrote a notable book, entitled The tree of
commonwealth, which book, the said Stovve says, that he has delivered to
my Lord of Leycester many years gone. And if the said book be so notable as
M. Stovve affirms: I marvel, that his L. in so many years, does not
publish the same, for the glory of his ancestors?

GENTL.

It may be (said the Gentleman) that the secrets therein contained, be such, as
it seems good to my Lord, to use them only him self, and to gather the
fruit of that tree into his own house alone. For if the tree of the
commo^vvealth in Edmu^d Dudleys book, be the Prince and his race: and the
fruits to be gathered from that tree* be riches, honors, dignities, and
preferments: then no doubt, but as the writer Edmund was cunning therein: so
have his two folovvers* John and Robert, well studied and practiced the same,
or rather have exceded and far passed the author him self. The one of the^
gathering so egarly, and vvythsuch veheme^cy, as he was like to have broken
down the main boughs for greedines: the other yet plucking and heaping so
fast to him self and his freindes, as it is and may be, most iustlye doubted,
that when they have cropped al they, can, from the tree left them by their
father Edmund (I mean the race The supplanting of the race of Henry the 7.
The inserting of Hu^tingto^
of K. Henry the seue^^h:) then vvil they pluck up the Stem it self by the
roots, as unprofitable: and pitch in his place another Trunk, (that is the
line of Huntington) that may begin to feed a new, with, fresh fruits again,
and so for a time content their appetites, until of gatherers, they may become
trees, (which is their final purpose) to feed them selves at their own
discretion.

And how so ever this be, it cannot be denied, Edmund Dudleys brood more
cunning then him self.
but that Edmund Dudleys brood, have learned by this book, and by other means,
to be more cunning gatherers, the^ ever their first progenitor was, that made
the book. First for that he made profession to gather to his Prince (though
wickedly) and these men make demonstration, that they have gathered for them
selves: and that with much mote iniquity. Secondly for that Edmund Dudley
though he got him self near about the tree, yet was he content to stand on
the ground, and to serve him self from the tree, as commodity was offered:
but his children not esteeming that, safe gathering, will needs mount alofte
upon the tree, to pull, croppe, and rifle at their pleasure. And as in this
second point the son John Dudley was more subtle, then Edmund Northu^* and
Leices will rule their Prince and ^^t be ruled.
the father: so in a third point, the Nephew Robert Dudley is more crafty
then they both* For that, he seeing the evil success of those two that went
before him, he has provided to gather so much in convenient time, and to make
him self thervvyth so fat and strong, (vvherin the other, two failed: as he
vvil never be in danger more, to be called to any account for the same.

LAW.

In good faith Sir (quoth the Lawyer) I thank you hartelie, for this pleasant
discourse upon Edmond Dudleys tree of common wealth. And by your opinion, my
L. of Leicester is the most learned of al his kindred, and a very cunning
Logitioner indeed, that can dravv for him self so commodious conclusio^s, out
of the perilous premises of his progenitors.

GENTL.

No marvel (quoth the Gentleman) for that his L. is Master of Art in
Oxeforde, and Chauncelor besides of the same University, vvher he has store
(as you know) of many fine vvittes and good Leycester master of art and a
cunning Logitioner.
Logitioners at his co^mandme^t: and vvher he learneth not only the rules and
art of cunning gathering: but also the very practice (as I have touched
before: seeing there is no one College, or other thing of commodity vvythin
that place, vvherhence he has not pulled, what so ever was possiblye to be
gathered, either by art or violence.

SCHOL.

Touching Oxeford (said I) for that I am an University man my self, and have
both experience of Cambrige, and good aequaintaunce with diverse students of
the other University: I can tell you ^ey. abusing and spoyli^g of Oxford
enough, but in fine al tends to this conclusion, that by his Chauncelorship,
is cancelled almost al hope of good in that University: and by his protection,
it is like soon to come to destruction. And surely if there were no other
thing, to declare the odds and difference betwixt him, and our Chauncelor,
(whom he cannot bear, for that every The L. treasurer
way he sees him, to pass him in all honor and virtue) it were sufficient
to behold the present state of the two Universities, vvherof they are heads
and governors.

For our own, I vvil not say much, lest I might perhaps Ca^brige.
seem partial: but let the thing speak for it self. Consider the fruit of the
garden, and thereby you may judge of the gardiners diligence. Look upon the
Bisshoprickes, pastorshippes, and pulpits of England, and see whence
principalie they have received their furniture for aduaunceme^t of the Gospel.
And on the contrary side, look upon the Seminaries of Papistrie at Rome and
Rhems, upon the Colleges of Iesuists, and other compagnies of Papystes Beyond
the seas, and see vvher-hence they are, especially, fraught.

The Priests and Iesuists here executed vvythin the land, and other that
remain either in prison, or abroad in corners: are they not al (in a manner) of
that University? I speak not to the disgrace of any good that remain there,
or that have issued out thence into the Lords vyneyard: but for the most part
there, of this our time, have they not either gone beyond the seas, or left
their places for coffeehouse in Religion, or else become serving me^, or
follovved the bare name of law or Physic, vvythout profiting greatly
therein, or furdering the service of Gods Church or their common wealth?

And vvhethence (I pray you) ensues all this, bur by reason that the chief
Governor thereof is an Atheist him self, and uses the place only for gain
and spoil? for herehence it comes, that The disorders of Oreforde by the
wickedness of their Cha^cellour.
al good order and discipline is dissolved in that place: the fervor of study
extinguished: the public lectures abandoned (I mean of the more part:) the
Tauernes and ordinary tables frequented: the apparel of students grown
monstrous: and the statutes and good ordinance, both of the University and of
every College and hall in private, broken and infringed at my Lords good
pleasure, vvythout respect either of oath, custom, or reason to the contrary.
The heads and officers are put in and out at his only discretion: and the
scholars places either sold, or disposed by his letters, or by these of his
servants and folovvers: nothing can be had there, now, vvythout present
money: it is as common buying and selling of places in that University, as of
horses in Smithfeild: vvherby the good and virtuous are kept out, and
compagnions thrust in, fit to serve his L. afterward, in all affairs that shall
occure.

And as for Leases of farms, VVoodes, Pastutes, Leases.
Personages, Benefices or the like, which belong any way to any part of
the University, to let or bestovv, these, his L. and his servants have so
fleesed, shorn, and scraped alredie, that there remains, little to feed upon
hearafter: albeit he want not still his spies and intelligencers in the place,
to advertise him from time to time, when any little new morsel is offered. And
the Principal Leycester instruments.
instruments, which for this purpose, he has had there before this, have
been two Physicians Baylye and Culpeper, both knovve^ Papists a little while
ago, but now just of Galens religion, and so much the fitter for my Lords
humor: for his Lordship does alvvayes covet, to be furnished with certain
chosen men about him, for diverse affairs: as these two Galenistes for agentes
in the University: Dee and Allen (two Atheistes) for Figuring and Coniuring:
Iulio the Italian and Lopas the Jew, for Poisoning, and for the art of
destroying children in vvomens bellies: Verneys for Murdering: Digbyes for At
Digbys house in vvarvvik shire Dame Lettice lay, and some other such pieces,
of pleasure.
Bavvdes: and the like in other occupations which his Lordship exercyseth.

Wherefore to return to the speech where we began: most clear it is, that
my Lord of Leycester has means to gain and gather also by the University,
as well as by the country abrod. VVherin (as I am told) he bears him self
so absolute a Lord, as if he were their king, and not their Chauncelor: Nay
far more then, if he were the general and particular founder of all the
Colleges and other houses of the University: no man daring to contrary or
interrupt the least word or signification of his vvil, but with his extreme
danger: which is a proceeding more fit for Phalaris the Tyrant, or some
Governor in Tartarie, then for a Chauncelor of a learned University.

LAW.

To this ansvvered the Lawyer, for my Lords wrath, toward such as vvil not
stand to his judgment and opinion, I can my self be a sufficient witness:
who having had often occasion to deal for composition of matters, betwixt
his Lordship and others, have seen by experience, that alvvaies they have sped
best, who stood lest in contention with him, what soever their cause were.
For as a great and violent river, the more it is stopped or co^traried, the
more it rises and svvelleth big, and in the end, deiecteth with more force
the thing that made resistaunce: so his Lordship being the great and mighty
Potentate of this Realm, The peril of standing with Leicester in anything.
and accustomed now to have his will in all things, can not bear to be
crossed or resisted by any man, though it were in his own necessary defense.

Hereof I have seen examples, in the causes of Snovvden forest, in Wales, of
Denbighe, of Killingvvorth, of Drayton and others: where the parties that had
interest, or thought them selves vvrounged, had been happy, if they had
yielded at the first to his Lordships pleasure, vvythoutfurther question: for
then had they escaped much trouble, charges, displeasure and vexation, which
by resistau^ce they incurred, to there great ruin.) and Poor men resisti^g
VVarvvikes enclosure at North hal were hanged for his pleasure by Leicesters
authority.
loss of life to some) and in the end were feign also to submit them selves
unto his vvil, with far worse conditions, then in the beginning were offered
unto them: which thing was pitiful indeed to behold, but yet such is my Lords
disposition.

GENTL.

A noble disposition (quoth the Gentleman, that I must give him my Coat if he
demand the same, and that quickly also, for fear least if I staggar or Great
Tyranny.
make doubt thereof, he compel me to yield both Coat and Doublet, in penance of
my stay. I have red of some such Tyranntes abroad in the world: Marie their
end was alvvayes according to their life, as it is very like that it will be
also in this man, for that there is small hope of his amendment, and God passes
not over commonly such matters unpunished in this life, as well as in the life
to come.

But I pray you Sir, seeing mention is now made of the former oppressions, so
much talked of throughout the Realm, that you vvil take the pains, to explain
the substance thereof unto me: for albeit in general, every man does know the
same, and in heart do detest the Tyranny thereof: yet we abroad in the
country, do not understand it so well and distinctlie as you that be Lawyers,
who have seen and understood the whole process of the same.

LAW.

The case of Killingvvorth and Denbighe, (said the Lawyer) are much alike in
matter and manner of proceeding, though different in time place and importance.
For that the Lordship of Denbighe in The Lord sh^ppe of De^bighe and Leyces.
oppression used the^i^
North wales, being given unto him by her Ma. a gteat while ago at the
beginning of his rising, (which is a Lordship of singular greatimportau^ce, in
that country, having (as I have heard) well nere two hundredth worshipful
Gentlemen freeholders to the same:) the tennauntes of the place considering
the present state of things, and having learned, the hungry disposition of
their new Lord: made a common purse of a thousand pounds, to p^esent him
vvythal, at his first entrance. Which though he received (as he refuses
nothing,) yet accounted he the sum of small effect for satisfacction of his
appetit: and therefore applied him self, not only to make the vtermoste that
he could by leases, and such like vvayes of commodity: but also would needs
enforce the Freeholders, to raise their old rent of the Lordship, from two
hundredth and fifty pounds a year or there aboutes (at which rate he had
received the same in gift from her Ma.) unto eight or nine hundredth pounds by
the year. For that he had found out (forsooth) an old record, (as he said)
vvherby he could prove, that in ancient time long past, that Lordship had
yielded so much old rent: and therefore he would now enforce the present
tennauntes, to make up so much again upon their lands, which they thought
was against al reason for them to do: but my L. perforce, would have it so,
and in the end compelled the^ to yield to his vvil, to the impouerishing of all the whole country about, The Manor of Killi^gvvorth and Ley. oppression there.


The like proceeding he used with the tennauntes about Killingvvorth, vvher he
receiving the said Lordship and Castle from the Prince, in guifte of tvve^ty
four pounds yearlie rent or there about, has made it now better then five
hundredth by year: by an old record also, found by great fortune in the hole
of a wal as is given out (for he has, singular good luck alvvayes in finding
out records for his purpose) by virtue vvherof, he has taken from the
tennauntes, rovvnde about, their lands, VVooddes, Pastures, and Commous, to
make him self Parkes, Chaces, and other commodities thervvyth, to the
subversion of many a good family, which was mainteyned there, before this
devourer set foot in that country.

But the matter of Snovvden Forest, does pass all The case of Snovvden forest
most pitiful.
the rest, both for cuning and cruelty: the tragedy vvherof was this. He had
learned by his intelligencers abroad, (vvherof he has great store in every
part of the Realm) that there was a goodly ancient Forest in Northvvalles,
which has al most infinite borderers about the same: for it lies in the
midst of the country, beginning at the hills of Snovvden (vvherof it has his
name) in Carnarvan shite, and reaches every way toward diverse other shires.
When my Lord heard of this, he entered presently into the conceit of a
singular great pray: and going to her Majesty, signified that her highness
was often times abused, by the incroching of such as dwelled upon her Forestes,
which was necessary to be restreined: and therefore beseched her Majesty, to
bestow upon him the incrochementes only, which he should be able to find
out, upon the forest of Snovvden, which was granted:

And there upon he chose out commissioners fit for the purpose, and sent them
into Wales, with the like commission, as a certain Emperor was vvount to
give his Magistrates, when they departed from him to govern, as Suetonius
vvriteth: An old Tyrannical Commission.
Scitis quid velim, and quibus opus habeo. You know what I would have, and
what I have need of. Which recommendation, these commissioners taking to
heart, omitted no diligence in execution of the same: And so going into Wales,
by such means as they used, of setting one man to accuse an other: brought
quickly all the country round about in three or four shires, within the
compass of forest ground: and so entered upon the same, for my L. of Leycester.
VVher upon, when the people were amazed, and expected what order my Lord him
self would take therein: his L. was so far of from refusing any part of
that, which his commisioners had presented and offered him as he would yet
further stretch A ridieulous demonstration of excessive ana^ice.
the Forest beyond the sea, into the I Will of Anglesey, and make that also
within his compass and bou^der.

Which when the commonaltie savve, and that they profited nothing, by their
complaining and crying out of this Tyranny: they appointed to send some
certain number of them selves, to London, to make supplication to the Prince:
and so they did: Choising out for that purpose a dozen Gentlemen, and many
more of the commons of the country of LLyn, to deal for the whole. Who
coming to London and exhibiting a most humble supplication to her Ma. for
redress of their oppression: received an answer, by the procureme^t of my
Lord of Leycester, that they should have justice, if the commonaltie would
return home to their houses, and the Gentlemen remain there, to sollici^e the
cause. Which as soon as they had yielded unto, the Gentlemen were al taken
and cast into prison, and there kept for a great space, and afterward were
sent down to Ludlovve, (as the place most eminent of al these countries) there
to wear papires of perjury, and receive other punishme^tes of of infamy,
for their co^plaining: which punishments notvvithstanding, afterward upon
great su^e of the parties and their friends, were turned into great fynes of
money, which they were constreined to pay, and yet besides to agree A
singular oppression.
also with my L. of Leycester for their own lands, acknovvledging the same
to be his, and so to buy it of him again.

VVherby not only these private Ge^tlemen, but all the whole country there
about, was and is (in a manner) utterly undone. And the participation of this
injury, reaches so far and vvide, and is so general in these parts: as you
shall skarce find a man that comes from that coast, who feels not the
smart thereof: being either impouerished, beggered, or ruinated thereby.

VVherby I assure you that the hatred of all that Leycester extremly hated in
Wales.
country, is so universal and vehement against my Lord: as I think never thing
Created by God, was so odious to that Nation, as the very name of my Lord of
Leycester is. Which his Lordship well knovving, I doubt not, but that he vvil
take heed, how he go thither to dvvell, or send thither his posterity.

GENTL.

For his posterity (quoth the Gentleman) I suppose he has little cause to be
solicitous: for that God him self takes care commonly, that goods and
honors so gotten and maintained, as his be, shall never trouble the third
heir. Marie for him self, I confess (the matter standing as you say) that he
has reason to forbear that country, and to leave of his buildyng begone at
Denhighe, as I hear say he has done. For that the universal hatred of The
end of Tyra^ts
a people, is a perilous matter. And if I were in his Lordships case, I should
often think of the end of Nero: who after al his glory, Nero.
upon fury of the people was adjudged to have his head thrust into a
Pillorie, and so to be beaten to death, with rods and thvvonges.

Ot rarher I should fear the success of Vitellius, Vitellius.
the third Emperor after Nero, who for his wickedness and oppression of the
people, was taken by them at length, when fortune began to fail him, and led
out of his Palace naked, with hooks of Iron fastened in his flesh, and so
drawn through the City with infamy, where, laden in the streets with
filth and ordure cast upon him, and a prick put under his Chinne, to the end he
should not look down or hide his face, was brought to the bank of Tyber,
and there after many hundredth wounds received, was cast into the river. So
implacable a thing is the furor of a multitude, when it is once stirred, and
has place of revenge. And so heavy is the hand of God upon Tyrants in this
world, when it pleases his divine Majesty to take revenge of the same.

I have red in Leander, in his description of Italy, how that in Spoleto (if
I be not deceived) A most terrible revenge take upon a Tyraut.
the chief City of the country of Vmbria, there was a strange Tyrant: who
in the time of his prosperity, contemned al men, and forbear to injury no
man, that came within his clavves: esteming him self sure enough, for ever
being called to render account in this life, and for the next he cared little.
But God upon the sudden turned vpsidedovvn the vvhele of his felicity, and
cast him into the peoples hands: who took him, and bound his naked body
upon a planke, in the marcket place, with a fyar and iron tongues by him: and
then made proclamation, that seeing this man was not otherwise able to make
satisfaction, for the public injuries that he had done: every private person
annoied by him, should come in order, and with the hot burning tongues there
ready, should take of his flesh so much, as was correspondent to the injury
received, as indeed they did until the miserable man gave up the ghost, and
after to: as this author vvriteth.

But to the purpose: seeing my Lord cares little for such examples, and is
become so hardy now, as he makes no account to injury and oppress whole
countries and commonalties together: it shall be bootles to speak of his
procedinges Leye. oppression of particular me^.
toward particular men, who have not so great strength to resist, as a
multitude has. And yet I can assure you, that there are so many and so
pytyful things published daily of his Tyranny in this kind: as do move
great compassion toward the party that do suffer, and horror against him,
who shameth not daily to offer such iniurye.

As for example: whose heart vvoulde not bleed to hear the case before
mentioned, of M. Robinso^ of Staffordshire: a properyong gentleman. M. Robinson.
and well given both in religion and other virtues. Whose father died at
Nevvhaue^ in her Ma. service, under this man's brother the Earl of VVarvvik:
and reco^mended at his death, this his eldest son, to the special protection
of Leycest. and his brother, whose servant also this Robinson has been, from
his youth vpvvard, and spent the most of his living in his service. Yet
notvvythstanding all this, when Robinsons lands were entangled with a
certain Londoner, upon interest for his former mai^tenaunce in their service,
whose title my L. of Leycester (though craftily, yet not covertly) under
Ferris his cloak, had gotten to him self: he ceased not to pursue the poor
Gentleman even to imprisonment, arraignement, and sentence of death, for
greedines of the said living: together with the M. Harcourt.
vexation of his brother in law M. Harcourt and al other his friends, upon
pretense, for sooth, that there was a man slain by Robinsons party, in
defense of his own possession against Leycesters intruders, that would by
violence break into the same.

What shall I speak of others, vvherof there would be no end? as of his
dealing with M. Richard Ric. Lee.
Lee, for his Manor of Hooknorton (if I fail Lodouik Greuill.
not in the name:) with M. Lodourke Griuell, by seeking to bereave him of al
his living at once, if the drifte had taken place? with George VVitney, George
VVitney.
in the behalf of Sir Henry Leigh, for inforci^ng him to for-go the
Cou^trollership of Woodstock, which he holds by patent from K. Henry the
seventh? With my L. Barkley, whom he enforced L. Barkley
to yield up his lands to his brother VVarvvike, which his ancestors had
held quietly for almost two hundredth years to gether?

What shall I say of his intolerable Tyra^nie upon Archbis. of Ca^tur.
the last Archbisshop of Canturburie, for doctor Iulio his sake, and that in so
foul a matter? Upon Sir John Throgmarton.
Sir John Throgmarton, whom he brought pitifully to his grave before his
time, by continual vexations, for a piece of faithful service done by him to
his country, and to all the line of K. Henry, against this ma^s father, in K.
Edward and Q. Mary's days? Upon diverse of the Lanes for one man's sake Lane*
of that name before mentioned, that offered to take Killinvvorth Castle? upon
some of the Giffordes, Gifforde.
and other for Throgmartons sake? (for that is also his L. disposition, for one
man's cause whom he brooketh not, to plague a whole generation, that any
way perteyneth, or is allied to the same:) his endless persecuting of Sir
Drew Drevvrie, and Sir Drevv Drevvry.
many other Courtyers both men and women? Al these (I say) and many others,
who daily suffer injuries, rapines and oppressions at his hands, throughout
the Realm, what should it avail to name the^ in this place: seeing neither his
L. cares any thing for the same, neither the parties agrieued are like to
attain any least release of affliction thereby, but rather double oppressyon
for their complayninge.

Wherefore, to return again vvheras we began, The present state of my L. of
Leices.
you see by this little, who, and how great, and what manner of man, my L. of
Leycester is this day, in the state of England. You see and may gather, in some
part, by that which has been spoken, his wealth, his strength, his cunning,
his disposition. His Wealth is excessive in all kind of riches for a private
man, Leycester Wealth.
and must needs be much more, then any body lightly can imagine, for the
infinite vvayes he has had of gain, so many years to gether. His Strength
Leycester Strength.
and power is absolute and irresistible, as has been shevved, both in
Chamber, Court, Council, and Country. His Cunning in plotting and fortyfying
Leycester Cunning.
the same, both by Force and Fraud, by Mines and Contermines, by Trenches,
Bulvvarkes, Flankers, and Rampires: by Frie^des, Enemies, Allies, Servants,
Creatures, and Depende^tes, or any other that may serve his turn: is very
rare and singular. His Disposition Leycester disposition.
to Cruelty, Murder, Treason, and Tyranny: and by all these to Supreme
Soueraignetie over other: is most euydent and clear. And then judge you
whether her Ma. that now reigns (whose life and prosperity, the Lord in
mercy long preserve,) have not just cause to fear, in respect of these
things only: if there were no other particulars to prove his aspiring intent
besides?

LAW.

No doubt (quoth the lawyer) but these are great matters, in the question of
such a cause as is a Crown. And we have seen by example, that the least of
these, four, which you have here named, or rather some little braunshe
contained in any of the^. Causes of just fear for her Majesty.
has been sufficient to found just suspicion, distrust or jealousy, in the
heads of most wise Princes, toward the proceedinges of more assured
subjects, the^ my L. of Leycester, in reason may be presumed to be. For that
the safitie of a state and Prince, stands not only in the redines and
ability of resisting open attemptes, when they shall fall out: but also (and
that much more as Statistes write) in a certain provident vvatchfulnes, of
preventing al possibilities and likelihoodes of danger or surpression: for
that no Prince commonly, vvil put him self to the courtesy of an other man)
be he never so obliged) whether he shall retain his Crown or no: seeing the
cause of a Kingdom, acknowledges neither kindred, duty, fairh friendship, not
society.

I know not whether I do expound and declare my self well or no, but my
meaning is, that vvheras, every Prince has two points of assurance from his
subject, the one, in that he is faithful and lacks will, to annoie his
souueraigne: the other, for that he is vveake and wants habylytye, to do the
A point of necessary policy for a Prince.
same: the first is alvvayes of more importance then the second, and
consequently more to be eyed and observed in policy: for that our will may
be changed at our pleasure, but not our ability.

Considering then, upon that which has been said and specified before, how
that my Lord of Leycester, has possessed him self of all the strength, powers
and sinovves of the Realm, has drawn al to his own direction, and has made
his patty so strong as it seems not resistable: you have great reason to say,
that her Ma. may justly conceive some doubt, for that if his vvil were
according to his power, most assured it is, that her Ma. were not in safitie.

SCHOL.

Say not so, good Sir, (quoth I) for in such a case truly, I would repose
little upon his vvil, which is so many vvayes apparent, to be most insatiable
of ambition. Rather vvoulde I think that as yet his ability serves not,
either for Time, Place, Force, or some other circumstaunce: then that any
part of good vvil should want in him: seeing that not only his desire of
sovereignty, but also his intent and attempt to aspire to the same, is
sufficiently declared (in my conceit) by the very particulars of his power
and plottes already set down. Which, if you please to have the patience, to
hear a Scholars argument, I vvil prove by a Principle of our Philosophy.

For if it be true which Aristotle says, there is no agent so simple in the
world, which works A Philosophical argument to prove Ley* intent of
sovereignty.
not for some final end, (as the bird builds not her nest but to dwell and
hatche her young ones therein:) and not only this, but also that the same agent,
does alvvayes frame his work according to the proportion of his intended end:
(as when the Fox or Badger makes a vvide earth or den, it is a sign that
he means to dravve thither great store of pray:) then must we also in reason
think, that so wise and polityke an agent, as is my L. of Leycester for him
self, wants not his end in these plottinges and preparations of his: I mean
an end proportionable in greatness to his preparatio^s. Which end, ca^ be no
less nor meaner then Supreme Sovereignty, seeing his provision and furniture
do tend that way, and are in every point fully correspondent to the same.

What means his so diligent beseeging of the The preparatio^s of Leyc.
declare his intended end
Princess person? his taking up the vvayes and passages about her? his
insolency in Court? his singularity in the Council? his violent preparation
of strength abroad? his enriching of his Accomplices? the banding of his faction,
with the abundance of friends every where? what do these things signify
(I say) and so many other, as you have well noted and mentioned before: but
only his intent and purpose of Supreamacie? What did the same things
protend in times past in his father, but even that which now they protend in
the son? or how should we think, that the son has an other meaning in
the very same actions, then had his father before him, whose steps he
follows.

I remember I have heard, often times of diverse How the Duke of Northu^.
disse^bled his end.
ancient and grave men in Cambrige, how that in K. Edward's days the Duke of
Northumberland this man's father, was generaly suspected of al men, to mean
indeed as afterward he shevved, especialie when he had once joined with the
house of Suffolk, and made him self a principal of that faction by marriage. But
yet for that he was potent, and protested every where, and by all occasions
his great love, devvtie, and special care, above al others, that he bare
toward his Prince and country: no man durst accuse him openly, until it
was to late to vvythstand his power: (as commonly it falls out in such
affairs) and the like is evident in my L. of Leycesters actions now (albeit
to her Ma. I doubt not, but that he vvil pretend and protest, as his father did
to her brother), especialy now after his open association with the faction of
Hu^tington: which no less impugneth under this man's protection, the whole
line of Henry the 7. for right of the Crown, then the house of Suffolk did
under his father the particular progeny of K. Henry the eighte.

GENTL.

Nay rather much more (quoth the gentleman) for that I do not read in K.
Edward's reign, (when the matter was in plotting notvvytstanding) that The
boldness of the titlers of Clarence.
the house of Suffolk durst ever make open claim to the next succession. But
now the house of Hastinges is become so confident, upon the strength and
favor of their fautors* as they dare both plot, practice and pretend, al at
once, and fear not to set out their title, in every place, vvher as they come.

LAW.

And do they not fear the statute (said the Lawyer) so rigorous in this
point, as it makes the matter treason to determine of titles?

GENTL.

No, they need not (quoth the Gentleman) seeing The abuse of the statute for
silence in the true succession.
their party is so strong and terrible, as no man dare accuse them: seeing also
they well know, that the procurement of that statute, was only to endaunger
or stop the mouths of the true successors, vvhiles them selves, in the mean
space, vve^t about underhand, to establish their own ambushment.

LAW.

Well, (quoth the Lavver) for the pretense of my L. of Huntington to the
Crown, I vvil not stand with you, for that yt is a matter sufficientlye
knovve^ and seen throughout the Realm. As also that my L. of Leicester is at
this day, a principal favorer and patron of that cause. albeit some years
past, he were an earnest adversary and enemy to the same. But yet I have
heard some friends of his, in reasoning of these matters, deny stoutly a point
or two, which you have touched here, and do seem to believe the same.

And that is, first, that how soever my Lord of Two excuses alleged by
Leycester friends.
Leycester do mean to help his friend, when time shall serve yet prete^deth he
nothing to the Crown him self. The second is, that what soever may be meant
for the title, or compassing the Crown after her Ma. death, yet nothing is
intended during her reign. And of both these points they allege reasons.

As for the first, that my Lord of Leycester is very well known, to have no
title to the Crown him self, either by descent in blood, alliance or
otherways. For the second, that his L. has no cause to be a Mal-Co^tent in
the present government, not hope for more preferment, if my L. of Huntington
wear king to morovve next, then he receaueth now at her Ma. hands: having
all the Realm (as has been shevved) at his own disposition.

GENTL.

For the first (quoth the Gentleman) whether he mean the Crown for him
self, or for his friend, it imports not much: seeing both vvayes it is
evident, Whether Leycester mean the Crovva sincerely for Huntington or for
him self.
that he means to have al at his own disposition. And albeit now for the
avoiding of envy, he give it out, as a craftye fox, that he means not but to
run with other men, and to hunt with Huntington and other hounds in the
same chase: yet is it not unlike, but that he vvil pl^ie the Bear, when he
comes to dividing of the pray, and vvil snatch the best part to him self.
Yea and these self same persons of his train and faction, whom you call his
friends, though in public, to excuse his doings, and to cover the whole
plot, they vvil and must deny the matters to be so mea^t: yet otherwise they
both think, hope and know the contrary, and vvil not stick in secret to speak
it, and among them selves, it is their talk of consolation. The words of
the Lord North, to M. Poolie.


The words of his special Counselor the Lord North, are knovve^, which he
vttred to his rrustie Poolie, upon the receipt of a letrer from Court, of her
Ma. displeasure toward him, for his being a witness at Leycesters second
marriage with Dame Lettice (although I know he was not ignorant of the first)
at VVanstead: of which displeasure, this Lord making fat less account then,
in reason he should, of the just offense of his sovereign, said: that for his
own part he was resolved to sink or svvimme with my L. of Leycester: who
(says he) Poolie told this to Sir Robert Iermine.
if once the Cards may come to shuffli^g (I vvil use but his very own
words) I make no doubt but he alone shall bear away the bucklers.

The words also of Sir Thomas Layton, to Sir The words of ^n Thomas Layton
brother in Law to my Lord.
Henry Neuile, vvalking upon the. Tarresse at Windsor are known, who
told him, after long discourse of their happy conceived kingdom, that he
doubted not, but to see him one day, hold the same office in Windsor, of my
L. of Leicester, which now my L. did hold of the Queen. Meaning thereby the
goodly office of Constableship, vvythal Royalties and honors belonging to the
same, which now the said Sir Henry exercises only as deputy to the
Earl. Which was plainly to signify, that, he douted not but to see my L. of
Leycester one day king, or else his other hope could never possibly take effect
or come to pass.

To the same point, te^ded the words of Mistres The words of Mistres Anne
West Sister unto this holy Countess.
Anne West Dame Lettice sister, unto the Lady Anne Askevve in the great
Chamber, upon a day when her brother Robert Knovvles had daunsed
disgratiouslie and skornefulie before the Q. in presence of the French. Which
thing for that her Ma. took to proceed of vvil in him, as for dislik of the
strangers in presence, and for the quarrel of his sister Essex: it pleased her
highness to check him for the same, with addition of a reprochful word or
two (full well deserved) as though done for dispite of the forced absence, from
that place of honor, of the good old Ge^tlevvoma^ (I mitigate the words) his
sister. Which words, the other younger tvvigge receiving in deep dudgen,
brake forth in great choler to her fornamed companion, and said, that she
nothing doubted, but that one day she should see her sister, upon whom the Q
rayled now so much (for so it pleased her to term her Ma sharp speech) to
sit in her place and throne, being much vvorthier of the same, for her
qualities and rare virtues, the^ was the other. Which vnduetiful speech,
albeit, it were over heard and condemned of diverse that sat about them: yet
none durst ever report the same to her Ma. as I have heard sundry courtiers
affirm, in respect of the revenge which the reporters should abid at my L. of
Leycesters hands, when so ever the matter should come to light.

And this is now concerning the opinion and secret speech of my Lords own
friends, who cannot but utter their conceit and judgment in time and place
convenient, what so ever they are willed to give out publicly to the
contrary, for deceiving of such as vvil believe fair pai^ted words, against
evident and manifest demonstration of reason.

I say reason, for that if none of these signs and Three argume^ces of
Leycesters meaning for him self before Hu^tington.
tokens were, none of these preparations nor an^ of these speeches and
detections, by his friends the know his heart: yet in force of plain reason,
^ could aleadge unto you three arguments only, which to any man of
intelligence, would easily persuade and give satisfaction, that my L. of
Leycester means best and first for him self in this sure* Which three
arguments, for that you seem to be attent, I vvil not stick to run over in all brevity.

And the first, is, the very nature and quality of The first argument the
Nature of ambition
ambition it self, which is such (as you know,) that it never stays* but
passes from degree to degree, and the more it obteyneth, the more it coueteth,
and the more esteems it self, both vvorthie and able to obtain. And in our
matter that now we handle, even as in vvovvyng, he that sueth to a Lady for
an other, and obteineth her good vvil, enters easily into conceit of his
own worthiness thereby, and so commonly into hope of speeding him self while
he speaks for his friend: so much more in kingdoms: he that sees hi^ self
of power to put the Crown of an other ma^s head, vvil quickly step to the
next degree which is, to set it of his own, seeing that alvvaies the charity
of such good men, is vvount to be so orderly, as (according to the precept) it
begins with it self first.

Add to this, that ambition is Ielious, suspicious, and fearful of it self,
especialie when it is joined with a conscience laden with the guilt of
many crimes, vvherof he would be loath to be called to account, or be subject
to any man that might by authority take reuevv of his life and actions, when
it should please him. In which kind, seeing my L. of Leycester has so much to
increase his fear, as before has been shevved* by his wicked dealinges: it
is not like, that ever he vvil put him self to an others ma^s courtesy, for
passing his Audicte in particular reckoninges, which he can no way answer or
satisfy: but rather vvil stand upon the gross Sum, and general Quietus est,
by making him self chief Auditour and Master of al accomptes for his own
parre in this life, how so ever he do in the next: vvherof such humors have
little regard. And this is for the nature of ambition in it self.

The second argument may be taken from my L. The second argument. Leycester
particular disposition.
particulars disposition: which is such, as may give much light also to the
matter in question: Being a disposition so well liking and inclined to a
kingedo^, as it has been tampering about the same, from the first day that he
came in favor. First by seeking openly to marry with the Q. Ma. her self,
and so Leycester disposition to ^a^p^^ for a kingdom.
to dravv he Crown upon his own head, and to his posterity. Secondly, when
that attempt took not place, then he gave it out, as has been shevved before,
how that he was privily contracted to her Majesty (vvherin as I told you
his dealing I mean the noble old Earl of Pe^brooke.
before for satisfaction of a stranger, so let him with shame and dishonor
remember now also, the spectacle he secretly made for the persuading of a
subject and Councellor of great honor in the same cause) to the end that if
her highness should by any way have miscarryed, then he might have entitled
any one of his own brood, (vvherof he has store in many places as is
known) to the lavvful succession of the Crown, under color of that privy
and secret marriage, pretending the same to be by her Majesty: vvherin he vvil
want no vvitnesses to depose what he vvil. Thirdly when The undutiful
devise of* Natural issue, in ^he statu^^ of suc^^ssion.
he savve also that this devise was subject to danger, for that his privy
contract might be denied, more easily, then he able justly to prove the same,
after her Majesty's discease: he had a new fetch to strengthen the matter and
that was to cause these words of (NATURAL ISSVE) to be put into the statute
of succession for the Crown, against all order and custom of our Realm, and
against the known common style of law, accustomed to be used in statutes of
such matter: vvherby he might be able after the death of her Ma. to make
legitimate to the Crown, any one bastard of his own by any of so many
hakneis as he keeps, affirmi^g it to be the Natural issue of her Majesty by
him self. For no other reason can be imagined why the ancient usual words
of, LAVVFVL ISSVE should so cunningly be changed into NATURAL ISSVE Thereby
not only to indaunger our whole Realm with new quarrels of succession but
also to touch (as far as in him lies) the Royal honor of his sovereign,
who has been to him but to bounteful a Princess.

Fourthlie, when after a time these fetches and devises, began to be
discovered, he changed straight his course, and turned to the Papists and
Scottish faction, pretending the marriage of the Q. in prison. But yet after
this again, finding therein not such success as contented him thoroughly, and
having in the mean space a new occasion offered of bait: he betook him self
fiftlie to the, party of Huntington: having therein (no doubt) as good meaning
to him self, as his father had by joining with Suffolk. Marie yet of late, he
has The marriage of Arbella
cast a new about, once again, for him self in secret, by treating the
marriage of young Arbella, with his son entitled the Lord Denbighe.

So that by this we see the disposition of this man bent wholy to a scepter.
And albeit in right, title and descent of blood (as you say) he can justly
claim neither kingdom nor Cotage (considering either the baseness or
disloyalty of his ancestors:) if in respect of his present state and power,
and of his natural pride, ambition, and crafty conueyance received from his
father: he has learned how to put him self first in possession of ch^ef rule,
under other pretenses, and after to devise upon the title at his leisure.

But now to come to the third argument: I say The 3. argument. The nature of
the cause it self.
more and above all this, that the nature and sta^e of the matter it self,
permits not, that my L. of Leycester should mean sincerely the Crown, for
Huntington, especialie seeing there has passed between them so many years of
dislike and enimity: which, albeit, for the time and present commodity, be
covered and pressed down: yet by reason and experience we know, that
afterward when they shall deal together again in matters of importance* and
when jealousy shall be joined to other circumstaunces of their actions: it is
impossible that the former mislike should not break out in far higher degree,
then ever before.

As we savve in the examples of the reconciliation, The nature of old
reconciled enimyty.
made betwixt this man's father and Edward Duke of Somerset, bearing rule
under king Edw. the sixth: and between Richard of York, and Edmund Duke of
Somerset, bearing rule in the time of king Henry the 6. Both which Dukes of
Somerset, after reconciliatio^ with their old, crafty and ambitious enemies*
were brought by the same to their destruction soon after. VVherof I doubt
not, but my L. of Leycester vvil take good heed, in joining by reconciliation
with Huntington, after so long a breach: and vvil not be so improuident, as to
make him his soueraign, who now is but his depende^t. He remembers to well
the success of the L. Sta^ley who helped K. He^rie the 7. to the Crown: of
the Duke of Buckingham, who did ^he same for Richard the 3. of the Earl of
VVarvvick, who set up K. Edward the 4. and of ^he three Percies, who
aduau^ced to the Scepter K. Henry ^he 4. Al which noble men upon occasions
that after fell out: were revvarded with death, by the self same Princes,
whom they had preferred

And that not vvythout reason as Siegnior Machauel The reason of Machauel.
my L. Councellor affirms. For that such Princes, afterward can never give
sufficient satisfaction to such friends, for so great a benefit received. And
consequently, least upon discontentme^t, they may ^haunce do as much for
others against them, as they have done for them against others: the surest way
is, to recompense them, with such a reward, as they shall never after be able
to complain of.

Wherefore I can never think that my L. of Leycester vvil put him self in
danger of the Like success at Huntingtons hands: but rather vvil follow The
meaning of the Duke of Nort^umber. with Suffolk.
the plot of his own father, with ^he Duke of Suffolk, whom no doubt, but he
meant only to use for a pretext and help, vvherby to place him self in
supreme dignity, and afterward what so ever had befallen of the state,
the others head could never have come to other end* the^ it enjoyed. For if Q.
Marie had not cut it of, K. John of Northumberland* would have done the same
in time, and so al men do well know, that were privy to any of his cunning
dealinges.

And what Huntingtons secret opinion of Leycester is (notvvythstanding this
ovvtvvarde show of depe^dence) ^t was my chance to learn, from the South
house.
mouth of a special man of that Hasty king, who was his ledger or agent in
London and at a time faling in talk of his masters title, declared, that he
had heard him diverse times in secret, complain to his Lady, (Leycesters
sister) as greatly fearing that in the end, he would offer him vvrong, and
pretend some title for him self.

LAW.

Well (quoth the Lawyer) it seems by this last point, that these two Lords,
are cunning practisioners in the art of dissimulation: but for the former
vvherof you spoke, in truth, I have heard men of good dicourse affirm, that
the Duke of The meani^g of the D. of No^thu^* toward the D* of Suffolk.
Northumberland had strange devises in his head, for deceauing of Suffolk
(who was nothing so fine as him self,) and for bringing the Crown to his
own family. And among other devises it is thought, that he had most certain
intention to marry the Lady Marie him self, (after once he had brought her
into his own hands) and to have bestovved her Ma. that now is, upon some one
of his children (if it should have been thought best to give her life,) and so
co^sequentlie to have shaken of Suffolk and his pedegre, with condign
punishment, for his bold behavior in that behalf.

SCHOL.

Verily (quoth I) this had been an excellent Stratageme, if it had taken
place. But I pray you (Sir) how could him self have taken the Lady Matie to
wife, seeing he was at that time married to an other?

GENTL.

Oh (quoth the Gentlemen) you question like a Scholar. As though my L. of
Leycester had not a wife a live, when he first began to pretend mariahe to
the Q. Ma. Do not you remember the story of K Richard the third, who at such
time as he thought best for the establishing of his title: The practice of K.
Richard for dispatching his wife.
to marry his own nepce, that afterward was married to king Henry the
seventh, how he caused secretly to be given abroode that his own wife was
dead, whom all the world knevv to be then a live and in good health, but yet
soon afterward she was seen dead indeed. These great personages, in matters
of such weight, as is a kingdom, have privileges to dispose of vvomens bodies,
marriages, lives and deaths, as shall be thought for the time most convenient.

And what do you think (I pray you) of this new A new Triumuirate betvve^
Ley. Talbot and the Countess of Shre^sbury.
TRIVMVIRAT so lately concluded about Arbella? (for so I must call the same,
though one of the three persons be no, Vir, but, Virago,) I mean of the
marriage between young De^bigh and the little daughter of Lenox, vvherby the
father in law, the Grandmother and the uncle of the new designed Queen,
have conceived to them selves a singular tryumphant reign. But what do you
think may ensue hereof? is there nothing of the old plot of duke John of
Northumberland in this?

LAW.

Marie, Sir, (quoth the Lawyer) if this be so: I dare assure you there is
sequel enough pretended hereby. And first no doubt, but there goes a deep
drift, by the wife and son, against old Abraham (the husband and father)
with the well lyned large poutch. And secondly a far deeper by trusty Robert
against his best Mistres: but d^^pest of ^l by the whole Cravv, against the
designememes of the Hasty Earl: who thirsts a kingdom, Huntington.
with great intemperaunce, and seems (if there were plain dealing) to hope
by these good people to quenshe shortly his drought. But either part, in
truth, seeks to deceive other: and therefore it his hard to say vvher the
game in fine vvil rest.

GENTL.

Well how so ever that be (quoth the Ge^tleman) I am of opinion, that my Lord
of Leycester, will use both this practice and many more, for bringing the
scepter finalie to his own head: and that he vvil The sleightes of Le^. for
b^inging al to him self.
not only employ Huntington to defeat Scotland, and Arbella to defea^
Huntington: but also would use the marriage of the Q. imprisoned, to defeat
them both, if she were in his hand: and any one of al three to dispossess
her Ma. that now is: as also the authority, of al four to bring it to him
self: with mainie other fetches, flinges and friscoes besides, which simple
men as yet do not conceive.

And how so ever these two conjoined Earls, Sca^bling between Ley. and
Huntington at the vpshot.
do seem for the time to dravv together, and to play booty: yet am I, of
opinion, that the one will beguile the other at the vpshopt. And Hasti^gs for
ought I see, when he comes to the scambling, is like to have no better luck
by the Bear, then his auncestor had once by the Boar. Who using his help
first in murdering the son and heir of K. Henry the sixth, and after in
destroying the Richard of Gloucester An 1. Edw. 5.
faithful friends and kinsmen of K. Edvvatd the fifth, for his easier way to
usurpation: made an end of him also in the Tovver, at the very same day and
hour, that the other were by his cou^sail destroyed in Pontfract Castle. So
that where the Goal and price of the game is a kingdom: there is neither
faith, neither good fellowship, nor fair play, among the Gamesters. And this
shall be enough for the first point: viz. what good my L. of Leycester means
to him self in respect of Huntington.

Tovvching the second, whether the attempt be 2. That the conpirators mean in
her Ma. days.
purposed in her Ma. days, or no, the matter is much less doubtful, to him
that knovveth or can imagine, what a torment the delay of a kingdom is, to
such a one as suffers hungar thereof, and fears that every hour may breed
some alteration, to the prejudice of his conceived hope. We see often times
that the child is impatient in this matter, to expect the natural end of his
parents life. Whom, notvvythstanding, by nature he is enforced to love: and
who also by nature, is like long to leave this world before him: and after
Four considerations.
vvhos discease, he is assured to obtain his desire: but most certain of
dangerous event, if he attempt to get it, while yet his pare^t lives. Which
four considerations, are (no doubt) of great force to contain a child in
duty, and bridle his desire: albeit some times not sufficient to vvhythstand
the greedy appetit of reigning.

But what shall we think, where none of these four co^sideratio^s do
restreine? where the present possessor is no parent? VVher she is like by
nature, to out-liue the expector? vvhos death must needs bring infinite
difficulties to the enterprise? and in vvhos life time, the matter is most
easy to be atchiued, under color and authority of the present possessor?
shall we think that in such a case the ambitious man, vvil ouerrule his own
passion, and leese his commodity?

As for that, which is alleged before, for my L. in the reason of his
defenders: that his present state is so prosperous, as he cannot expect better
in the next change what soever should be: is of small moment, in the conceit
of an ambitious head, A thing worthy to be noted in ambitious men.
vvhos eye and heart is alvvayes upon that, which he hops for, and enjoys
not: and not upon that which alredie he possesses, be it never so good.
Especialie in matters of honor and authority, it is an infalible rule, that
one degree desired and not obtained, afflicts more, then five degrees alredie
possessed, can give consolation: the story of Duke Aman, confirms this
euidenly, who being the greatest subject in the world under king Assuerus,
Hest. 5.
after he had reconed up all his po^pe, riches, glory and felicity to his
frie^des, yet he said, that all this was nothing unto hi^, until he could
obtain the revenge, which he desired, upon Mardo^haeus his enemy: and hereby
it comes ordinarily to pass, that among highest in authority, are found
the greatest store of Mal-Contents, that most do endanger there Prince and
country.

When the Percies took part with Henry The ^^rcies.
of Bolingbrook, against K. Richard the second their lavvful soueraign: it
was not for lack of preferment: for they were excedinglie advanced by the
said king, and possessed the three Earle^omes of Northumberland, Worcester,
and Staf^rd together, besides many other offices and di^^ies of honor.

(...)ke sort, when the two Neuiles, took upon The Neuiles.
(...)yne with Richard of York, to put (...) most benign Prince king Henry
the sixth: and after again in the other side, to put down king Edward the
fourth: it was not upon want of advancement: they being Earls both of
Salisburie and VVarvvick, and Lords of many notable places besides. But it
was upon a vain imagination of future fortune, vvherby such men are commonly
led: and yet had not they any smell in their nostrells, of gettinge the
kingdom fot themselves, as this man has to prick hi^ forvvard.

If you say that these men hated their soueraign, and that thereby they were led
to procure his destruction: Leycester hatred to ^er Ma.
the same I may answer of my L. lyuinge though of al men he has least cause
so to do. But yet such is the nature of wicked ingratitude, that where it
owes most, and disdeigneth to be bound: The evil nature of ingratitude.
there upon every little discontentement, it turns double obligation into
triple hatred.

This he shevved evidently in the time of his little disgrace, vvherin he not
only did diminish, vilipend, and debase among his friends, the inestimable
benefits he has received from her Ma. Leycester speeches of his Ma. in the
time of his disgrace.
but also used to exprobrate his own good services and merits, and to touch
her highness with ingrat consideration and recompense of the same* which
behavior together with his hasty preparation to rebellion, and assault of
her Ma. Royal person and dignity, upon so small a cause given: did well show
what mind invvardlie he bears to his soueraign, and what her Ma. may
expect, if by offending him, she should once fall vvythin the copasse of his
surious pavves: seeing such a smoke of disdain could not proceed, but from a
fy^^e furnace of hatred vvythin.

And sure he it is a vvou^derful matter to consider what a little check, or
rather the bare imagination of a small ouerth vvart, may work in a proud and
disdeignful Stomach. The remembrance of his The causes of hatred in Leycester
toward her Ma.
marriage missed, that he so much pretended and desired with her Ma. does stick
deeply in his breast and stirs him daily to revenge. As also does the
disdeigne of certain checkes and disgraces received at some times, especialie
that of his last marriage: which irketh him so much the more, by how much
greater fear and danger it brought him into, at that time, and did put his
widow in such open frenzy, as she raged many months after, against her
Ma. and is not cold yet: but remains as it were a sworn enemy, for that
injury, and stands like a fiend or fury at the elbovve of her Amadis, to
stir him forvvard when occasion shall serve. And what effect such female
suggestio^s may The force of female suggestions.
work, when they find an humor proud and pliable to their purpose: you
may remember by the example of the Duches of Somerset, who enforced her
husband to cut of the head, of his only dear brother, to his own evident
destruction, for her contentation.

Wherefore, to conclude this matter vvythout An evident Conclusion that the
execution is meat^ time of her Ma.
further dispute or reason: seeing there is so much discovered in the case as
there is: so great desire of reign, so great impatience of delay, so great hope
and ability of succes, if it be attempted, under the good fortune and present
authority of the competitors: seeing the plattes be so well laid, the
preparation so forwards, the favorers so furnished, the time so propitious,
and so many other causes conuiting together: seeing that by differring, al may
be hazarded, and by hastening, little can be indaungered, the state and
condition of things well vveyed: finding also the bands of duty so broken
alredie in the conspiratours, the causes of mislike and hatred so manifest, and
the solicitours to execution, so potent and diligent, as women, malice, and
ambition, are vvount to be: it is more then probable, that they vvil not leese
their present commodity, especialie seeing they have learned by their Architype
or Protoplote which they follow (I mean the conspiracy of Nortumberland and
Suffolk in An error of the father now to be corrected by the son
king Edward's days) that herein there was some error committed at that time,
which ouerthrevv the whole, land that was, the differring of some things
until after the kings death, which should have been put in execution before.

For if in the time of their plotting, when as yet their desygnementes were
not publyshed to the world, they had under the countenance of the king (as
well they might have done) gotten into their hands the two sisters, and
dispatched some other fevv affairs, before they had caused the young Prince to
die: no doubt, but in man's reason the whole designement had taken place: and
consequently it is to be presupposed, that these men (being no fools in their
own affairs) vvil take heed of falling into the like error by delay: but
rather vvil make al sure, by striking while the iron is hot, as our proverb
vvarneth them.

LAW

It can not be denied in reason (quoth the Lavvier) but that they have many
helps of doing what they list n(...), under the present favor, countenance
and authority of her Ma. which they should not have after her highness
discease: when each man shall remain more at liberty for his supreme
obedience, by reason of the statute ptouided for uncertainty of the next
successor: and therefore I for my part, would rather counsel them, to make
much of her Ma. life: for after that, they little know what may ensue, ot
befall their designementes.

GENTL.

They will make the most thereof (quoth the Ge^tleman) for their own advantage,
but after that, what is like to follow, the examples of Edward and Richard
the second, as also of Henry and Edward the sixth, do sufficiently for
vvarne us: vvhos lives were prolonged, until their deaths were thought more
profitable to the conspirators, and not longer. Her Ma. life and ^eath, to
serve the conspirators turn.
And for the statute you speak of, procured by them selves, for establishing
the incertaintie of the next true sucessor (vvheras al our former statutes
were vvount to be made for the declaration and certentie of the same) it is
with PROVISO, (as you know) that it shall not endure longer, then the life of
her Ma. that now reigns: that is, indeed, no longer then until them selves
be ready to place an other. A proclamation with halters.
For then, no doubt, but we shall see a fair proclamation, that my L. of
Huntington is the only next heir: with a bundle of halters to ha^g al such,
as shall dare once open their mouth for denial of the same.

LAW.

At these words the old Lawyer stepped back, as some what astonished, and
began to make crosses Papistical ^lessing.
in the air, after their fashyon, vvherat we laughed, and then he said:
truly my masters I had thought that no man had conceived so evil imagination
of this statute, as my self: but now I perceive The statute of co^ceali^g the
heir apparent.
that I alone am not malicious. For my own part, I must confess unto you,
that as often as I read over this statute, or think of the same (as by diverse
occasions many times I do) I feel my self much grieved and afflicted in
mind, upon fears which I conceive what may be the end of this statute to
our country, and what privy meaning, the chief procurers thereof might have
for their own driftes, against the Realm and life of her Ma. that now
reigns.

And so much more it makes me to doubt, for Richard going toward Jerusalem
began the custom by parliament, as Polydore notes Anno 10. of Rich. 2. to
declare the next heir.
that in all our records of law, you shall not find (to my remembrance) any
one example of such a devise, for concealing of the true inheritour: but rather
in all ages, states, and times (especially from Richard the first dovvnevvard)
you shall find statutes, ordinances, and provisions, for declaration and
manifestation of the same, as you have well observed and tovvched before. And
therefore this strange and new devise, must needs have some strange and
unaccustomed meaning: and God of his mercy grant, that it have not some
strange and unexpected event.

In sight of al men, this is alredie evident, that The danger of our country
by co^cealing the next heir
never country in the world, was brought into more apparent danger of utter
ruin, then ours is at this day, by pretense of this statute. For vvher as there
is no Gentleman so mean in the Realm, that cannot give a guess more or less,
who shall be his next heir, and his tennauntes soon conjecture, what manner
of person shall be their next Lord: in the title of our noble Crown, vvherof all the rest depends, nether is her Ma. permitted to know or say, who shall be
her next successor, nor her subjects allowed to understand or imagine, who
in right may be their future sovereign: An intolerable injury in a matter of
so singular importance,

For (alas) what should become of this our native country, if God should take
from us her most excellent Ma. (as once he vvil) and so leave us destitute
upon the sudden? what should become of our lives, of our states, and of our
whole Realm or government? can any man promise him self, one Great
inconveniences.
day longer of rest, peace, possession, life or liberty within the land,
then God shall lend us her Ma. to reign over us? Which albeit, we do and are
bound to vvish that it may be long: yet reason tells us, that by course of
Nature, it cannot be of any great continuance, and by a thousand accidents
it may be much shorter. And shall then our most noble common wealth and
kingdom, which is of perpetuity, and must continue to our selves and our
posterity, hang only upon the life of her highness alone, well strocken in
years, and of no great good health or robustious and strong complexion.

I was within hearing some six or seven years Sir Christopher Hattons
oration.
ago, when Sir Christopher Hatton, in a very great assembly, made an
eloquent oration (which after I vvene was put in print) at the pardoning and
delivery of him from the gallouse, that by error (as was thought) had
discharged his piece upon her Ma. Barge, and hurt certain persons in her
hignes presence. And in that oration he declared and described very
effectualie, what inestimable damage had ensued to the Realm, if her Ma. by
that or any other means should have been taken from us. He set forth most
lively before the eyes of al men, what dyuysion, what dissension, what
bloodshed had ensued, and what fatal dangers were most certain to fall upon
us, when so ever that doleful day should happen: vvherin no man should be sure
of his life, of his goods, of his wife, of his children: no man certain
whether to fly, vvho^ to follow, or where to seek repose and protection.

And as all the hearers there present did easily grant that he therein said
troth and far less then might have been said in that behalf, things standing
as they do: so many one (I trovve) that heard these words proceed from a
Councellor, that had good cause to know the state of his own country:
entered into this cogitation, what punishment they might deserve then, at the
whole state and common vvealths hands, who first by letting her Ma. from
Intolerable treasons.
marriage, and the^ by procuring this statute of dissembling the next
inheritour: had brought their Realm into so evident and inevitable dangers?
for every one well considered and weighed with him self, that the thing
which yet only let these dangers and miseries set down by Sir
Christopher, must necessarily one day fail us al, that is, the life of her
Ma. now present: And then (say we) how falls it out, that so general a
calamity as must needs overtake us ere it be long (and may, for any thing
we know to morovv next) is not puided for, as well as foresene.

Is there no remedy, but that we must willingly and vvyttingly ru^ne into
our own ruin? and for the favor or fear of some fevv aspirours, betraye our
country and the blood of so many thousand innocents, as live vvythin the
land?

For tell me (good Sirs) I pray you, if her Ma. should die to morovv next (vvhos
life God long preserve and bless,) but if she should be taken The miseries to
follow upon her May. death.
from us, (as by condition of nature and humane frailty she may) what would
you do? which way would you look? or what head or part, knevv any good
subject in the Realm to follow? I speak not of the co^spiratours, for I know
they will be ready and resolved whom to follow: but I speak of the plain,
simple and well meaning subject, who following now the utter letter of this
fraudulent statute, (fraudule^t I mean in the secret conceit of the cunning
aspirours:) shall be taken at that day upon the sudden, and being put in a maze
by the unexpected co^tentio^ about the Crown, shall be brought into a thousand
dangers, both of body and goods, which now are not thought upon, by them
who are most in danger of the same. And this is, for the common wealth and
country.

But unto her Ma. for vvhos good and safitie, the statute is only pretended to
be made, no doubt, but that it brings far greater dangers, then any The
danger to her Ma. by this statute.
devise that they have used besides. For hereby under color of restrayning
the claymes and titles of true successors, (vvhos endeavors notvvythstanding,
are commonly more calm and moderate then of usurpers,) they make unto them
selves, a mean to forster and set forvvard their own conspiracy vvythout
controlment: seeing no man of might may oppose himself against the^, but with
suspicion, that he means to claim for him self. And so they being armed, on
the one side, with their authority and force of present fortune, and defended,
on the other side, by the pretense of the statute: they may securely work and
plot at their pleasure, as you have well proved before that they do. And when
soever their grounds and foundatio^s shall be ready, it can not be denied, but
that her Ma. life, lies much at their discretion, to take it, or use it, to
their best commodity: (and there is no doubt, but they vvil), as such men are
vvount to do in such affairs. Marie one thing stands not in their powers so
absolutely, and that is, to prolong her Ma. days or favor toward them
selves, at their pleasures: vvherof it is not unlike but they vvil have due
consideration, least perhaps upon any sudden accident, they might be found
vnredie.

GENTL.

They have good care thereof I can assure you, (quoth the gentleman) and mean
not to be prevented by any accident, or other mishappe what soever: they
will be ready for all euentes: and for that cause, they hasten so much their
preparations at this day, The hastnyng of the conspirators
more then ever before: by sending out their spies and solicitours
euerie-vvhere, to prove and confirm their friends: by delivering their common
vvatch-vvord: by co^plaini^g on al hands of our protestant Bishops and
Clergy, and of all the present state of our irreformed religion, (as they call
it:) by amplyfiyng only the danger of Papists and Scottishe faction: by giui^g
out openly that now her Ma. is past hope of childbirh, and consequently seeing
god has given no better succes that way in two vvome^ one after the other:
it were not convenient (say they) that an other of that sex should ensue:
with high commendation of the Law Salick in France, vvherby women are
forbidden, to succeed. Which speech though in show, it be delivered against
the Q. of Scotts and other of K. Henry the 7. his line, that descend of
sisters: yet al men see that it tovvcheth as well the disabling of her Ma. that
is present, as others to come: and so tends directly to Maturatio^ of the
principal purpose, which I have declared before.

SCHOL.

Here said I, for the rest which you speak of, besides the vvatch-vvord, it is
common and every where treated in talk among them: but yet for the
vvatch-vvord it self (for that you name it) I think (Sir) many know it not,
if I were the first that The vvatchvvord of the conspirators
told you the story, as perchance I was. For in truth I came to it by a
rare hap (as then I told you) the thing being uttered and expounded by a
Baron of their own faction, to an other noble man of the same degree and
religion, though not of the same opinion in these affairs. And for that I am
requested not to utter the second, who told it me in secret, I must also
spare the name of the first: which otherwise I would not, nor the time and
place vvher he uttered the same.

LAW.

To this (said the Lawyer) you do well in that: but yet I beseech you, let me
know this vvatchvvord (if there be any such) for mine instruction and help,
when need shall require. For I assure you that this gentleman's former speech of
halters, has so terrified me, as if any should come and ask or feel my
inclination in these matters, I vvoulde answer them fully to their good
contentment, if I knevv the vvatch-vvord, vvherby to know the^. For of al
things, I love not to be hanged for quarrels of kingdoms.

The vvatch-vvorde is, (said I.) WHETHER YOU BE SETTLED OR NO? and if you ARE
YOU SETTLED?
answer yea, and seem to understand the meaning thereof: then are you known
to be of their faction, and so to be accounted and dealt vvythall for things
to come. But if you staggar or doubt in answering, as if you knevv not
perfectly the mystery (as the noble man my good Lord did, imagining that it
had been meant of his religion, which was very well known to be good and
settled in the ghospel:) then are you discried thereby, either not to be of their
side, or else to be but a Punie not well instructed, A great misterye.
and consequently, he that moves you the question, vvil presently break of
that speech, and turn to some other talk, until afterward occasion be given to
persuade you, or else instruct you better in that affair.

Marie the noble man, vvherof I spoke before, perceiving by the demau^ding,
that there was some mystery in covert, under the question: took hold of the
words, and would not suffer the propou^der to slip away (as he endeavored
(but with much entreaty, brought him at length, to expound the full meaning
and purpose of the ridle. And this was the first occasion (as I think) vvherby
this secret came abroad. Albeit afterward at the public communions, which
were made thoughout so many shires, the matter became more common:
especialie, among the strangers that inhabit as you know) in great numbers
with us at this day. Al which (as they say) are made most assured to this
faction, and ready to assist the same with great forces at al occasions.

LAW.

Good Lord (quoth the Lawyer) how many mysteries and secrets be there abroad
in the world, vvherof we simple men know nothing and suspect less. This
vvatch-vvord should I never have imagined: Asse^blyes at Communions.
and for the great and often assemblies under pretense of Communions, though of
them selves and often her own nature, they were unaccustomed, and conseque^tlie
subject to suspicion: yet did I never conceive so far forth as now I do: as
nether of the Strangers vvythin the Land.
lodging and enterteining of so many strangers in the Realm, vvherof our
Artiza^s do complain every where. But now I see the reason thereof, which
(no doubt) is founded upon great policy for the purpose. And by this also I
see, that the house of Huntington, presses far forwards for the game, and
shouldreth near the goal to lay hands upon the same. Which to tell you
plainly, likes me but a little: both in respect of the good vvil I bear to
the whole line of K. Henry, which hereby is like to be dispossessed: as also
for the misery, which I do forsee, must necessarily ensue upon our
country, The peril of our country if Hu^tingtons claim take place.
if once the challenge of Huntington take place in our Realm. Which challenge
being derived from the title of Clarence only, in the house of York, before
the union of the two great houses: rayseth up again the old contention,
between the families of York and Lancaster, vvherin so much English blood was
spilt in times past, and much more like to be poured out now, if the same
contention should be set on foot again. Seeing that to the controversy of
titles, would be added also the controversy of religion, which of al other
differences is most dangerous.

GENTL.

Sir (quoth the Gentleman) now you touch a matter of consequence indeed, and
such as the very naming thereof, makes my heart to shake and tremble. I
remember well, what Philippe Cominus sets down in his history of our
countries calamity, by that contention of those two houses, distingvvished The
read rose and the vvhyt
by the read rose and the white: but yet both in their arms might justly
have borne the color of read with a fiery svvorde in a black field to
signify the abundance of blood and mottalitie, which ensued in our
country, by that most woeful and cruel contention.

I vvil not stand here to set down the particulars, observed and gathered by
the forsaid author, though a stranger, which for the most part he savv him
self, while he lived about the Duke of Burgundy and king Jews of France of
that time: namely the pitiful description of diverse right noble me^ of our
Realm, who besides al other miseries, were driven The misery of England by
the co^tentio^ betvve^ York and La^caster.
to beg openly in foreign countries, and the like. Mine own observation in
reading over our co^trie affairs, is sufficient, to make me abhor the
memory of that time, and to dread al occasion, that may lead us to the like in
time to come: seeing that in my judgment, neither the civil vvarres of Marius
and Sylla, or of Pompey and Caesar among the Romans Guelphians and Gibilines
nor yet the Guelphia^s and Gibilines among the Italia^s, did ever work so
much vvoe, as this did to our poor country. VVherin by reason of the
contention of York and Lancaster were foughten sixtiene or seuentiene pitched
fields, in less then an hundredth years. That is, from the eleventh or
twelfth year of K. Richard the second his reign (when this controversy
first began to bud up) unto the thirtienth year of K. Henry the seventh. At
what time by cutting of the chief titler of Huntingto^s Edward Plantaginet
Earl of vvarvvik.
house, to wit, young Edward Plantaginet Earl of VVarvvik son and heir to
George Duke of Clarence, the contention most happily was que^shed and ended,
vvherin so many fields (as I have said) were foughten, between brethren and
inhabitants of our own nation. And therein, and otherwise only about the
same quarrel, were slain murdered and made away, about 9. or 10. kings and
kings sons, besides above forty Earls, Marquesses, and Dukes of name: but
many mo Lords knights and great Gentlemen and Captains: and of the common
people without number, and by particular conjecture very near two hundredth
thousand* The battle by Tadcaster on palm So^ day An. 1460.
For that in one battle foughten by K. Edward the fourth, there are recorded
to be slain on both parts, five and thirty thousand seven hundredth and
eleven persons, besides other vvounded and taker prisoners, to be put to death
afterward, at the pleasure of the Conqueror: at diverse battails after, ten
thousand slain at a battle. As in those of Barner and Tukesbury, foughten
both in one year.

This suffered our afflicted country in those days, by this infortunat and
deadly contention, which could never be ended, but by the happy conjunction
of those two houses to gether, in Henry the seventh: neither yet so (as
appears by Chronicle) until (as I have said) the state had cut of, the issue
male of the Duke of Clare^ce, who was cause of diverse perils to K. Henry the
seventh, though he were in prison. By vvhos sister the faction of Huntington
at this day, does seek to raise up the same contention again, with far
greater danger, both to the Realm and to her Ma. that now reigns, then ever
before.

And for the Realm it is evident, by that it gives The danger of Hu^tingtons
claim* to the Realm and to her Ma
room to strangers Competitours, of the house of Lancaster: better able to
maintain their own title by svvorde, then ever was any of that lineage before
them. And for her Ma. perril present, it is nothing hard to conjecture: seeing
the same title in the forsaid Earl of VVarvvik, was so dangerous and
troublesome to her graundfather (by vvho^ she holds,) as he was feign twice
to take arms in defense of his right, against the said title: which was in
those days preferred and advanced by the frie^des of Clarence, before that of
He^rie: as also this of Huntington is at this day, by his faction, before that
of her Ma. though never so unjustly.

LAW.

Touching Huntingtons title, before her Ma. (quoth the Lavver) I vvil say
nothing: be cause in reason, I se not by what pretense in the world, he may
thrust him self so far forth: seeing her Ma. is descended, not only of the
house of Lancaster: but also before him most apparentlie, from the house of
How Hu^tington makes his title before her Majesty.
York it self, as from the eldest daughter of king Edward the fourth, being
the eldest brother of that house. VVheras Huntington claims only, by the
daughter of George Duke of Clarence the younger brother. Marie yet I must
confess that if the Earl of VVarvviks title, were better then that of K.
Henry the seventh (which is most false, though many attempted to defend the
same by svvord:) then has Huntington some wrong at this day, by her Ma.
Albeit in very truth, the The most of Hu^tingto^s ancetours by vvho^ he
makes title, attainted of treason.
attaintes of so many of his ancestors by whom he clameth: would answer
him also sufficiently in that behalf, if his title were otherwise allowable.

But I know besides this, they have an other fetch The in famous device of K.
Rich. the third allowed by Huntington.
of K. Richard the third, vvherby he would needs prove, his elder brother
king Edward to be a Bastard: and co^seque^tlie his whole line as well male as
female to be void. Which devise though it be ridiculous, and was at the time
when it was first invented: yet, as Richard found at that time a Doctor
Shavve, that shamed not to publish and defend the same, at Paul's Cross in a
Sermon: and John of Northumberland Anno. 1. Mariae.
my L. of Leycesters father, found out diverse preachers in his time, to set up
the title of Suffolk, and to debase the right of king Henry's daughter, both in
London, Cambridge, Oxeforde and other places, most apparentlie against al
law and reason: so I dout not, but these me^ would find out also, both
Shavves, Sands, and others, to set out the title of Clare^ce, before the
whole interest of K. Henry the seventh and his posterity, if occasion
served. Which is a point of importance to be considered A point to be noted by
her Ma.
by her Ma. albeit for my part, I mean not now to stand thereupon, but only
upon that other of the house of Lancaster, as I have said.

For as that most honorable, lavvful, and happy conjunction of the two
aduetsarie houses, in king Henry the seventh and his wife, made an end of the
shedding of English blood within it The ioyninge of both houses.
self, and brought us rhat most desired peace, which ever sithence we have
enioied, by the reign of their two most noble issue: so the plot that now
is in hand, for the cutting of, the residue of that issue, and for recalling
back of the whole title to the only house of York again: is like to
plunge us deeper, then ever in civil discord, and to make us the bayte of al
foreign Princes: seeing there be among them at this day, some, of no small The
Line of Portugalle.
power (as I have said) who pretend to be the next heirs by the house of
Lancaster: and consequently, are not like to give over or abandone their own
right, if once the door be opened to contention for the same, by disanulling
the Line of K. Henry the seventh: vvherin only the keys of al concord
remain knit together.

And albeit I know well that such as be of my Lord of Huntingtons party, vvil
make small account of the title of Lancaster, as less rightful a great deal
then that of York (and I for my part mean not greatly to auovve the same,
as now it is placed, being my self no favorer of foreign titles:) yet
indifferent men have to consider, how it was taken in times paste, and how
it may again, in time to come, if contention should arise: how many Noble
personnages The old estimation of the house of Lancaster.
of our Realm did offer them selves to die in defense thereof: how many oaths
and laws were given and received throughout the Realm for mai^tenaunce of
the same, against the other house of York for ever: how many worthy kings
were Crowned, and reigned of that house and race, to wit, the four most
noble He^ries, one after an other, the fourth, the fifth, the sixth, and the
seventh: who both in number, Government, Sanctity, Courage, and fears of
arms, were nothing inferior (if not superior) to those of the other house and
line of York, after the division between the families.

It is to be considered also, as a special sign of the favor and affection,
of our whole nation unto that family: that Henry Earl of Richmond though
Henry Earl of Richmo^d
discending but of the last son, and third wife of John of Gaunt Duke of
La^caster, was so respected, for that only by the universal Realm: as they
inclyned wholy, to call him from banishment, and to make him king, with the
deposition of Richard, which then ruled of the house of York, upon condition
only, that the said Henry should take to wife, a daughter of the contrary
family: so great was in those days, the affection of English hearts, toward
the line of Lancaster, for the great vvorthynes of such kings as had reigned
of that race, how good or bad so ever their title were: which I stand not
hear at this time to discus, but only to insinuate, what party the same
found in our Realm in times past, and consequently, how extreme dangerous
the contention for the same may be herafter: especialie, seeing that at this
day, The line of Portugal.
the remander of that title, is pretended to rest wholy in a stranger* vvhos
power is very great. Which we Lawyers are vvount to esteem as a point of
no small importance, for justifying of any man's title to a kingedom.

SCHOL.

You Lawyers want not reason in that Sir (quoth I) how so ever you want
right: for if you vvil examine the succession of gouernmentes, from the
begnining of the world unto this day, either among Gentile, Jew, or
Christian people, you shall find that the svvord has been alvvayes better The
svvord of great force to justify the title of a kingdom.
then half the title, to get, establishe, or mainteyne a kingdom: which makes
me the more apalled to hear you dicourse in such sort of new co^tentio^s,
and foreign titles, acco^pained with such power and strength of the titlers.
Which cannot be but infinitely dangerous and fatal to our Realm, if once it
come to action, both for the division that is like to be at home, and the
variety of parties from abroad. For as the Prince whom you signify, vvil nor
fail (by all likeliehood) to pursue his title with al forces that he can make,
if occasion were offered: so reason of state and policy vvil enforce other
Princes adioyni^g, to let and hinder him therein Great dangers.
what they can: and so by this means shall we become Judah and Israel among
our selves, one killing and vexing the other with the svvord: and to foreign
Princes we shall be, as the Island of Salamina was in old time to the Athenians
and Megarians: and as the Island of Cicilia was afterward to the Grecians,
Carthaginians and Romans: and as in our days the kingdom of Naples has been
to the Spaniards, Frenchemen, Germans and Venetians, That is, a bayte to feed
upon, and a game to fight for.

Wherefore, I beseech the Lord, to auerte from us all occasions of such
miseries. And I pray you Sir, for that we are fallen into the mention of these
matters, to take so much pains as to open unto me the grovvnd of these
controversies, so long now quiet, between York and Lancaster: seeing they are
now like to be raised again. For albeit in general I have heard much thereof,
yet in particular, I either conceive not, or remember not, the foundation of
the same: and much less the state of their several titles at this day, for
that it is a study not properly perteyning unto my profession.

LAW.

The controversy between the houses of York and Lancaster (quoth the Lawyer)
took his actual beginning in the issue of K. Edward the third, The beginning
of the controversy betwixt York and La^caster.
who died somevvhat more then two hundredth years gone: but the occasion,
pretense or cause of that quarrel, began, in the children of K. Henry the
third, who died an hundredth years before that, and left two sons, Edward
who was king after him, by the name of Edward the first, and was
Graundfather to Edward the third: and Edmond, (for his deformity called
Crookback.) Earl of Lancaster and beginner of that house, vvhos inheritance
afterward in the fovverth descent, fell upon a daughter named Blanch, who
was married to the fourth son of king Edward the third, named John of
Gaunt, for that he was Edmond Crookeback begi^ner of the house of La^caster.
borne in the City of Gaunt in Flaunders, and so by this his first wife, he
became Duke of Lancaster and heir of that house. And for that his son Henry
of Bolingbrook (afterward called K. Henry the fourth) pretended among other
things, that Edmond Crookback, great graundfather to Blanch his mother, was
the elder Blanch.
son of K. Henry the third, and iniustelie put by the inheritance of the
Crown, for that John of Gaunt.
he was Crookebacked and deformed: he took by force, the kingdom from Richard
the second, How the kingdom was first brought to the house of Lancaster*
nephew to king Edward the third by his first son, and placed the same in
the house of La^caster, where it remained for three whole disce^tes, until
afterward, Edward Duke of York descended of John of Gauntes younger brother,
making claim to the Crown by title of his graundmother, that was heir to
Lionel Duke of Clarence, John of Gauntes elder brother: took the same by force
from Henry the sixth, of the house of Lancaster, and brought it back again to
the house of Yo^^: vvher it contineued with much trouble in two kings only,
until both houses were joined together in king Henry the seventh and his
noble issue.

Hereby we see how the issue of John of Gaunt Duke of Lancaster, fourth son
to K. Edward the third, pretended right to the Crown by Edmond Crookbacke,
before the issue of all the other three sons of Edward the third, albeit they
were the elder brothers, vvherof we vvil speak The issue of John of Gaunt
more hereafter. Now John of Gaunt though he had many children, yet had he
four only, of whom issue remain, two sons and two daughters. The first
son was Henry of Bolingbrooke Duke of Lancaster, who took the Crown from
K. Richard the second, his uncles son, as has been said, and first of al
planted the same in the house of Lancaster: where it remained in two
discentes after him, that is, in his son Henry the first, and in his nephew
Henry the sixth, who was afterward destroyed together with Henry Prince of
Wales, his only son and heir, and consequelie all that Line of Henry
Bolingbrok extinguished, by Edward the fourth of the house of York.

The other son of John of Gau^t, was John Duke of Somerset by Katherin S
Finsford, his third wife: The pedigree of K Henry the 7.
which John, had issue an other John, and he, Margaret his daughter and heir,
who being married to Edmond Tyder Earl of Richmond, had issue Henry Earl of
Richmond, who after was named K. Henry the seventh, vvhos Line yet endures.

The tvvoe daughters of John of Gaunt, were married to Portugal and Castile:
that is, Philippe The two daughte^s married to Portugal and Castile.
borne of Blanch, heir to Edmond Crookback, as has been said, was married
to John king of Portugal, of whom is descended the king that now possesses
Portugal, and the other Princes which have or may make title to the same: and
Katherin borne of Constance heir of Castile, was married back again to
Hentie king of Castile in Spain, of whom king Philip is also descended. So
that by this, we see, where the remainder of the house of Lancaster rests,
if the Line of K. Henry the seventh were extinguished: and what pretext
foreign Forrayne titles.
Princes may have to subdue us, if my L. of Huntington either now or after her
Ma. days, vvil open to them the door, by shuting out the rest of K. He^ries
Line, and by dravving back the title to the only house of York again: which
he pretends to do, upon this that I vvil now declare.

King Edward the third, albeit he had many children, yet five only vvil we
speak of, at this time. The issue of king Edward the third
VVherof three were elder then John of Gaunt, and one younger. The first of the
elder, was named Edward the Black Prince, who died before his father,
leaving one only son named Richard, who afterward being king and named
Richard the second, was deposed vvythout issue, and put to death by his Cousin
germain, named Henry Bolingbrook Duke of Lancaster, son to John of Gaunt as
has been said, and so there ended the Line of K. Edvvardes first son.

King Edvvardes second son, was William of Hatfield that died vvythout
issue.

His third son, was Leonell Duke of Clacence, vvhos only daughter and
heir called Philippe, was married to Edmond Mortymer Earl of March: and
after that, Anne the daughter and heir of Mortymer, was married to Richard
Plantaginet Tvvoe Edmu^des the tvvoe begi^ners of the tvvoe houses of Lancaster
and York.
Duke of York, son and heir to Edmund of Langley the first Duke of York:
which Edmund was the fifth son of K. Edward the third, and younger brother
to John of Gaunt. And this Edmund of Langley may be called the first beginner
of the house of York: even as Edmund Croocbacke the beginner of the house
Lancaster.

This Edmund Langley then, having a son named Richard, that married An(...)
^ortymer sole heir to Leonel Duke of Clare^ce, joined two Lines and tvvoe
titles in one: I mean the Line of Leonel and of Edmund Langley, who were (as
has been said) the third and the fifth sons to K. Edward the third. And for
this cause, the child that was borne of this marriage, named after his father
Richard Plantaginet Duke of York, seeing him self strong, and the first line of
K. Edward the thirds eldest son, to be extinguished in the death of K.
Richard the second: and seeing William* of Hatfield the second son dead
likewise vvythout issue: made demand of the Crown for the house of York, by
The claim and title of York.
the title of Leonel the third son of K. Edward. And albeit he could not
obtain the same in his days, for that he was slain in a bataille against K.
Henry the 6. at Wakefield: yet his son Edward got the same, and was
called by the name of king Edward the fovverth.

This king at his death left diverse children, as namlie tvvoe sons, Edward
the fifth and his brother, The issue of king. Edward the 4.
who after were both murdered in the Tovver, as shall be shevved: and also five
daughters: to wit Elyzabeth Cicilie, Anne, Katherine, and Briget. VVherof, the
first was married to Henry the 7. The last became a Nu^ne, and the other three,
were bestovved upon diverse other husbands.

He had also two brothers: the first was called George Duke of Clarence, who
afterward upon his deserts (as is to be supposed), was put to death in
Callys, by commandment of the king, and his attaynder The Duk of Clarence
attaynted by parliament.
allowed by parliament. And this man left behind him a son named Edward.
Earl of VVarvvik, put to death afterward vvythout issue, by king Henry the
seventh, and a daughter named Margaret, Countess of Salisburie, who was
married to a mean Gentleman named Richard Poole, by whom she had issue
Cardinal Poole that died vvythout Marriage, and He^rie Poole that was attainted
and execuded in K. Henry the 8. his time (as also her self was) and this
Henry Poole left a daughter married Hunti^gtons title by the Duke of Clare^ce.
afterward to the Earl of Huntingto^, by who this Earl that now is makes
title to the Crown. And this is the effect of my L. of Huntingto^s title.

The second brother of king Edward the fourth, was Richard Duke of Gloucester,
who after the K. K. Rich. the third.
death, caused his two sons to be murdered in the Tovver, and took the
kingedom to him self. And afterward he being slain by king Henry the 7. at
Bosvvorth field, left no issue behind him* Wherefore king Henry the 7.
descending as has been shevved of the house of Lancaster, by Ihon of The
happy co^iu^ctio^ of the tvvoe houses
Gaunts last son and third wife, and taking to wife lady Elizabeth eldest
daughter of K. Edward the fourth of the house of York: joined most happily the
two famylies together, and made an end of al controversies about the title.

Now K. Henry the 7. had issue three children: The issue of king Henry the
seventh.
of whom remains posterity. First Henry the 8. of whom is descended our
sovereign, her Ma. that now happily reigns, and is the last that remains
a live of that first Line. Seco^dlie he had two daughters: vvherof the first
named Margaret, was married twice, first to James king of Scotland from The
Line and title of Scotland by Margar. eldeste daughter to king Henry the
seventh.
whom are directly descended the Q. of Scotland that now lives and her
son: and K. James being dead, Margaret was married again to Archybalde
Douglas Earl of Anguishe: by whom she had a daughter named Margaret, which
was married afterward, to Matthew Steward Earl of Lenox, vvhos son
Charles Steward, was married to Elizabeth Ca^dishe daughter to the present
Countess of of Shrevvsburie, and by her has left his only heir, Arbella.
a little daughter named Arbella, of whom you have heard some speech before.
And this is tovvching the Line of Scotland, descending from the first and
eldest daughter of K. Henry the seventh.

The second daughter of K. Henry the seventh The Line and title of Suffolk by
Marie second daughter to king Henry 7.
called Marie, was twice married also: first to the kig of Frannce b^ whom
she had no issue: and after his death to Charles Brandon Duke of Suffolk, by
whom she had two daughters, that is, Frau^cis, of which the children of my
L. of Hartford do make their claim: and Elenore by whom the issue of the
Earl of Darbie prete^deth right, as shall be declared. For that Frau^cis the
first daughter of Charles Brandon by the Queen of France, was married to the
Marquis of Dorset, who after Charles Brandons death was made Duke of Suffolk
in right of his wife, and was beheaded in Q Mary's time, for his conspiracy
vvvth my L of Leycesters father. And she had by this man three daughters: that
is, Jane, The issue of Frau^cis eldest daughter to Charles Brando^ Duke of
Suffolk.
that was married to my L. of Leycesters brother, and proclaimed Queen after
king Edward's death, for which both she and her husband were executed:
Katherine the second daughter, who had tvvoe sons, yet living, by the Earl
of Hartford: and Marie the third daughter, which left no children.

The other daughter of Charles Brandon by the Q. of France caled Elenor, was
married to George Clifford Earl of Cumberla^d, who left a daughter The issue
of ^lenor second daughter to Charles Brando^.
by her named Margaret, married to the Earl of Darbye, which yet lives and
has issue. And this is the title of all the house of Suffolk* descended from
the second daughter of K. Henry the seventh, married (as has been shevved) to
Charles Brandon Duke of Suffolk. And by this, you see also how many their be,
who do thinck there titles to be far before that of my Lord of Huntingtons, if
either right, Law, reason, or consideration of home affairs may take place in
our Realm: or if not, yet you cannot but imagine how many great Princes and
potentates abroad, are like to join and buckle with Huntingtons Line for the
preeminence: if once the matter fall again to contention by excluding the Line
of K. Henry the 7. which God forbid.

SCHOL.

Truly Sir (quoth I) I well perceive that my Lords turn is not so nighe as I
had thought, whether he exclude the Line of king Henry, or Hu^ti^g^o^ behind
many other titles.
no. For if he exclude that, then must he enter the Cumbat with foreign
titlers of the house of Lancaster: and if he exclude it not, then in all
appearance of reason and in Law to (as you have said) the succession of the
tvvoe daughters of king Henry the seventh (which you distingvvishe by the
tvvoe names of Scotland and Suffolk) must needs be as clearlie before him
and his Line, that descends only from Edward the fourth his brother: as the
Q. title that now reigns is before him. For that both Scotland, Suffolk, and
her Ma. do hold al by one foundation, which is, the union of both houses and
titles together, in K. Henry the seventh her Ma. Graundfather.

GENTL.

That is true (quoth the Gentleman) and evident enough in every man's eye: and
therefore no doubt, but that as much is meant against her Majesty if occasion
serve, as against the rest that hold by the same title. Albeit her Majesty's
state (the Lord be praised) be such at this time, as it is not safitie to
pretend so much against her, as against the rest, what soever be meant. And
that in truth, more should be meante against her highness, then against all the
rest, there is this reason: for that her Majesty by her present possession
lets more their desires, then all the rest together with there future
pretenses. But as I have said, it is not The policy of the Conspirators for
the deceyuing of her Majesty.
safitie for them, nor yet good policy to declare openly, what they mean
against her majesty: It is the best way for the present, to hevve down the
rest, and to leave her Majesty, for the last blow and vpshoote to their
game. For which cause, they will seem to make great difference at this day,
between her Majesty's title, and the rest, that descend in likewise, from
king Henry the seventh: auovving the one, and disalovving the other. Albeit,
my Lord of Leycesters father, preferred that of Suffolk, when time was,
before this of her Ma. and compelled the whole Realm to swear thereunto. Such
is the variable policy of men, that serve the time, or rather, that serve them
selves, of al times, for their purposes.

SCHOL.

I remember (quoth I) that time of the Duke, and was present my self, at some
of his proclamatio^s for that purpose. VVherin my L. his son that now
lives, being the^ a doer, (as I can tell he was:) I marvel how he can deal
so contrary now: Leycester variabilitie.
preferring not only her Ma. title before that of Suffolk (vvherof I vvonder
less because it is more gainful to him,) but also an other much further of. But
you have signified the cause, in that the times are changed, and other
bargains are in hand of more importance for him. Wherefore leaving this to be
considered by others, vvho^ it concerns, I beseech you, Sir, (for that I
know, your worship has been much conversant among their friends and
favorers) to tell me what are the bars and lettes which they do aleadge,
why the house of Scotland and Suffolk descending of K. Henry the seventh his
daughters, should not succed in the Crown of England after her Ma. who ends
the Line of the same K. by his son: for in my sight the matter appears
very plain.

GENTL.

They want not pretenses of bars and lettes against them al (quoth the
Gentleman) which I vvil lay down in order, as I have heard the^ aleaged.
Bars pretended against the claim of Scotland and Suffolk
First in the Line of Scotland their are three persons as you know that may
pretend right: that is, the Queen and her son by the first marriage of
Margaret, and Arbella by the second. And against the first marriage I hear
nothing affirmed: but against the tvvoe persons proceeding thereof, I hear
them aleage three stops: one, for that they are strangers Against the Queen
of Scotland and her son.
borne out of the land, and consequently incapable of inheritance vvythin the
same: an other, for that by a special testament of K. He^rie the eight,
authorized by tvvoe several Parliamentes they are excluded: the third, for that
they are enemies to the religion now received among us, and therefore to be
debarred.

Against the second marriage of Margaret Against Arbella.
with Archibalde Douglas, vvherof Arbella is descended, they aleage, that the
said Archibalde had a former wife at the time of that marriage, which lived
long after: and so neither that marage lavvful, nor the issue thereof legitimate.

The same bar they have against all the house and Line of Suffolk: for first
they say, that Charles Brandon Duke of Suffolk, had a known wife a live
when he married Marie Queen of France, and co^sequentlie, that neither the
Lady Fraunces nor Elenore, borne of that marriage, can be lavvfulie borne. And
these is al, I can hear them say against the succession Against Darbye.
of the Countess of Darby, descended of Elenore. But against my Lord of
Hartfords children, that come from Frau^ces the eldest daughter, I hear them
aleage two or three bastardies more, besides Against the children of Har^ford
this of the first marriage. For first, they affirm that He^rie Marquis Dorset,
when he married the Lady Fraunces, had to wife the old Earl of Arundels
sister, who lived both then and many years after, and had a provision out of
his living, to her dying day: vvherby that marriage could no way be good.
Secondly, that the Lady Katherin daughter to the said Lady Fraunces, by the
Marquis (by whom the Earl of Hartford had his children) was lavvfulie married
to the Earl of Penbrook that now lives, and consequently, could have no
lavvful issue by any other during his life. Thirdly, that the said Katherin
was never lavvfulie married to the said Earl of Hartford, but bare him those
children as his Concubine. Which (as they say) is defined and regestred in the
Archbisshop or Ca^turburies Court, upon due examination taken by order of her
Ma. that now reigns, and this is in effect so much as I have heard them
aleage, about these affairs.

SCHOL.

It is much (quoth I) that you have said, if it may be al proved. Marie yet by
the way, I cannot but smile, to hear my Lord of Leycester alovve of so many
bastardies now upon the issue of Lady Fraunces, whom in time paste, when
lane her Leicester dealing with the house of Suffolk.
eldest daughter was married to his brother, he advanced in legitimation
before both the daughters of K. Henry the eight. But to the purpose: I would
gladie know what grounds of verity these alegations have, and how, far in
truth they may stop from inheritance: for indeed I never heard them so
distinctlie aleaged before.

GENTL.

Whereto ansvvered the Gentleman, that our friend the Lavvier could best
resolve that, if it pleased him to speak vvythout his fee: though in some
points aleaged, every other man (quoth he) that knovveth the state and common
government of England, may easily give his judgment also. As in the case of
Bastardie, if the matter may be proved, Bastardy.
there is no difficulty, but that no right to inheritance can justly be
pretended: as also (perhaps) Forreyne birth.
in the case of foreign birth, though in this I am not so cunning: but yet I
see by experience, that forreiners borne in other lands, can hardly come and
claim inheritance in England, albeit, to the contrary, I have heard great
and long disputes, but such as indeed passed my capacity. And if it might
please our friend here present, to expound the thing unto us more clearly: I
for my part would gladly bestovv the hearing, and that with attention.

LAW.

To this ansvvered the Lawyer. I vvil gladie, Sir, tell you my mind in any
thing that it shall please you demand: and much more in this matter vvherin by
occasion of often conference, I am somevvhat perfect.

The impedime^tes which these men aleage against the succession of K. Henry
the 8. his sisters, are of two kinds, as you see: The one known and alovved
in our law, as you have well said, if it may be proved: and that is bastardie:
vvherby they seck Bastardies, lauful stops.
to disable all the whole Line and race of Suffolk: as also Arbella, of the
second and later house of Scotland. VVherof, it is to small purpose to speak any
thing here: seeing the whole controversy stands upon a matter of fact only,
to be proved or improued by records and vvitnesses. Only this I vvil say,
that some of these bastardies, before named, are rife in many men's mouths, and
auovved by diverse that yet live: but let other men look to this, who have
most interest therein, and may be most damnified by them, if they fall out
true. The impedimentes against Scotland three in number.


The other impedimentes, which are aleaged only against the Q of Scotts and
her son, are in number three, as you recite them: that is, foreign birth, K
Henry's Testament, and religion: vvherof I am content to say somevvhat, seeing
you desire it: albeit there be so much published already in books of diverse
languages beyond the sea, as I am informed, concerning this matter, as more
cannot be said. But yet so much as I have heard pass among Lawyers* my
betters, in conference of these affairs: I vvil not let to recite unto you,
with this Prouiso A protestation.
and protestation alvvayes, that what I speak, I speak by way of recital of
other men's opinions: not meaning my self to incur the statute of affirming or
auovving any persons title to the Crown, whatsoever.

First then touching foreign birth, there be some Touchi^g the first impediment
of f(...)yue by(...)
men in the world that vvil say, that it is a common and general rule of our
law, that no stranger at al, may inherit any thing, by any means, within
the la^d: which in truth I take to be spoken without ground, in that general
sense. For I could never yet come to the sight of any such common or universal
rule: and I know, that diverse examples may be alleged in sundry cases to the
contrary: and by that, which is expreslie set down in the seventh and
ninthe years of K. Edward the fouerth, and in the eleventh and fouertienth of
Henry the fourth, it appears plainly that a An Alien may purchasse.
stranger may purchase lands in England, as also inherit by his wife, if he
marry an inheritrix. Wherefore this common rule is to be restreined from that
generality, unto proper inheritance only: in which sense I do easily
grant, The true Maxima against Aliens.
that our common law has been of ancient, and is at this day, that no
person borne out of the aleagiaunce of the king of England, vvhos father and
mother were not of the same aleagiaunce at the time of his birthe, shall be able
to have or demand any heretage within the The statute of K. Edward whence
the Maxima is gathered
same aleagiaunce, as heir to any person. And this rule of our common law
is gathered in these self same words of a statute made in the 25. year of K.
Edward the third, which in deed is the only place of effect, that can be
aleaged out of our law against the inheritance of strangers in such sense
and cases, as we now treat of. Reasons why the Scottish title is not leted
by the Maxima Against Aliens.


And albeit now the common law of our country, do run thus in general, yet
vvil the friends of the Scottishe claim affirm, that hereby that title is
nothing let or hindered at al toward the Crown: and that for diverse manifest
and weighty reasons: vvherof the principal are these which ensue.

First it is common, and a general rule of our The first reason.
English laws, that no rule, Axiom, or Maxima of law (be it never so
general) can touch or bind the Crown, except express mention be made
thereof, in the same: for that the king and Crown have great preuiledge and
prerogative, above the state and affairs of subjects, and great differences
alovved in points of law.

As for example, it is a general and common The rule of thirds.
rule of law, that the wife after the decease of her husband, shall enjoy the
third of his lands* but yet the Queen shall not enjoy the third part of the
Crown, after the kings death: as well appears by experience, and is to be
seen by law, Anno. 5. and 21. of Edward the third: and Tennant by courtisie.
Anno. 9. and 28. of Henry the sixte. Also it is a common rule, that the
husband shall hold his wives lands after her death, as tennaunt by courtisie
duringe his life, but yet it holds not in a kingdom.

In like manner, it is a general and common rule, Division among daughters.
that if a man die seized of la^d in fee simple, having daughters and no son:
his lands shall be divided by equal portions among his daughters: which holds
not in the Crown: but rather the eldest daughter inheriteth the whole, as if
she were the issue male. So also it is a common rule of our law, Executours.
that the executour shall have all the goods and chattels of the testatour, but
yet not in the Crown. And so in many other cases which might be recited, it
is evident that the Crown has privilege above others, and can be subject to
no rule, be it never so general, except express mention be made thereof in the
same law: as it is not in the former place and a statute alleged: but rather
to the contrary, (as after shall be shevved) there is express exception, for the
prerogative of such as descend of Royal blood.

Their second reason is, for that the demand or The second reason.
title of a Crown, cannot in true sense be comprehended under the words of
the former statute, forbidding Aliens to demand heritage within The Crown no
such inheritance as is meant in the statute*
the alegiaunce of England: and that for tvvoe respects. The one, for that the
Crown it self cannot be called an heritage of alegiaunce or within
alegiaunce, for that it is holden of no superior upon earth, but immediately
from God him self: the second, for that this statute treats only and
means of inheritance by disce^t, as heir to the same, (for I have shevved
before that Aliens may hold lands by pourchase within our dominion) and then
say they, the Crown is a thing incorporat and desce^deth not according to the
common course of other private inheritaunces: but goes by succession, as other
incorporations do. In sign vvherof, it is evident, The Crown a corporation.
that albeit, the king be more favored in all his doings then any common
person shall be: yet cannot he avoid by law his grauntes and letters patentes
by reason of his nonage (as other infantes and common heirs under age may do,)
but alvvayes be said to be of full age in respect of his Crown: even as a
Prior, Person, Vicare, Deane, or other person incorporat shall be, which cannot
by any means in law be said, to be within age, in respect of their
incorporations.

Which thing makes an evident difference in our case, from the meaning of the
former statute: for that a Prior, Deane, or Person, being aliens and no
denizens: might alvvayes in time of peace, demand lands in England in respect
of their corporations, notvvythstanding the said statute or common law against
aliens, as apeateth by many book cases yet extant: as also by the statute made
in the time of K. Richard the second, which was after the foresaid statute of
king Edward the third.

The third reason is* for that in the former statute The third reason.
it self, of K. Edward, there are excepted expreslie from this general rule
INFANTES DV ROY, that is, the The Ki^gs issue excepted by name.
kings offspring or issue, as the word INFANT does signify both in France,
Portugale, Spain, and other countries: and as the latin word liberi (which
answers the same) is taken commonly in the L. liberorum F. de verb sign.
Civil law. Neither may we restreine the french words of that statute
INFANTES DV ROY, to the kings children only of the first degree (as some do,
for that the barraynnes of our language, does yield us no other word for the
same*) but rather, that thereby are understood, as well the nephevves and other
discendantes of the king or blood Royal, as his immediate children. For it
were both unreasonable and ridiculous to imagine, that K. Edvvar^ by this
statute, would go about to disinherit hi^ own nephevves, if he should have
any borne ou^ of his own aleagiaunce (as easily he might a^ that time, his
sons being much abroad from England, and the black Prince his eldest son
having tvvoe children borne beyond the seas: and consequently, it is
apparent, that this rule o^ Maxima set down against Aliens is no way to be
stretched against the descendantes of the king or of the blood Royal.

Their fourth reason is, that the meaning of king The fovvrth reason. The ki^gs
meaning
Edward and his children (living at such time as this statute was made) could
not be, that any of their lineage or issue might be excluded in law, from
inheritance of their right to the Crown, by their foreign birth wheresoever.
For otherwise, it is not credible that they would so much have dispersed
their own blood in other countries, as they did: by giving their daughters to
strangers, and other means. As Leonel the The matches of England with
forreyners.
kings third son was married in Millan: and John of Gaunte the fourth son
gave his tvvoe daughters Phylippe and Katherine to Portugal and Castile: and
his neipce Joan to the king of Scotts: as Thomas of Woodstock also the
youngest brother, married his tvvoe davvghters, the one, to the king of Spain,
and the other, to the Duke of Brytane. Which no doubt (they being wise
Princes and so near of the blood Royal) would never have done: if they had
imagined that herebie their issue should have lost al claim and title to the
Crown of England: and therefore it is most evident, that no such bar was
then extante or imagined.

Their fifth reason is, that diverse persons borne out The fifte reason. Examples
of forreiners. admitted
of al English dominion and aleagiaunce, both before the conquest and sithence,
have been admitted to the succession of our Crown, as lavvful inheritours,
vvythoute any exception against them for their forreyne birth. As before the
conquest is evident in young Edgar Etheling borne in Hungary, and thence called
home to inherit the Crown, by his great uncle king Edward the Confessor,
with full consent of the whole Realm, the Bishop of Worcester being sent as
Ambassador to Flores hist. An. 1066.
fetch him home, with his father named Edward the ovvtlavve.

And since the conquest, it appears plainly in king Stephen and king
Henry the second, both of them borne out of English dominions, and of
Parents, that at their birth, were not of the English alleagiaunce: and yet
were they both admitted to the Crown. Young Arthure also Duke of Bretaigne by
his mother Constance that matched with Geffray K. Henry the secondes son,
was declared by K. Richard his Pol. lib. 15 Flor. hist. 1208.
uncle, at his departure toward Jerusalem, and by the whole Realm, for
lavvfull heir apparent to the Crown of England, though he were borne in
Bretaigne out of English alleagiaunce, and so he was taken and adjudged by all
the world at that day: albeit after king Richards death, his King John a
Tyrant.
other uncle John, most Tyrannouslie took both his kingdom and his life from
him. For which notable injustice he was detested of all men both abroad and
at home: and most apparentlie scourged by God, with grievous and manifold
plagues, both upon him self and upon the Realm which yielded to his
usurpation. So that by this also it appears, what the practice of our
country has been from time to time in this case of foreign birth: which
practice is the best interpretor of our common English law: which depends
especialie and most of al upon custom: nor can the adversary aleage any one
example to the contrary.

Their sixth, is of the judgment and sentence of K. The sixth reason. The
judgment and sentence of K Henry the seventh.
Henry the seventh, and of his Council: who being together in consulation,
at a certain time, about the marriage of Margaret his eldest daughter into
Scotland: some of his Council moved this doubt, what should ensue, if by
chance the kings issue male should fail, and so the succession deuolue to
the heirs of the said Margaret as now it does? Whereunto that wise and most
prudent Prince made answer: that if any such event should be, it could not
be prejudicial to England, being the bigger part, but rather beneficial: for
that it should dravve Scotland to England: that is, the lesser to the more:
even as in times paste it hapened in Nor mandie, Aquitane, and some other
Provinces. Which answer apeased all doubts, and gave singular contention to
these of his Council, as Polidore vvriteth that lived at that time, and vvrote
the special matters of that reign, by the kings own instruction. So that
hereby we see no question made of K. Henry or his Councillors tovvching
foreign birth, to let the succession of Lady Margarets issue: which no doubt
would never have been omitted in that learned assembly, if any law at that
time had been esteemed or imagined to bar the same

And these are six of their principalest reasons, to prove, that neither by the
words nor meaning of our common laws, nor yet by custom or practice of our
Realm, an Alien may be debarred from claim of his interest to the Crown,
when it falls to him by rightful descent in blood and succession. But in the
particular case of the Q. of Scotts and her The seventh reason. The Q of Scot.
and her son no Aliens.
son, they do ad another reason or two: thereby to prove the^ in very deed
to be no Aliens. Not only in respect of their often and continual mixture with
English blood from the beginning (and especialie of late, the Q* Grau^dmother
and husband being English, and so her son begoten of an English father) but
also for two other causes and reasons, which seem in truth of very good
importance.

The first is, for that Scotland by all English men (how so ever the Scotts
deny the same) is taken and holde^ as subject to England by way of Homage:
which many of their kings, at diverse times have acknowledged: and
co^seque^tlie, the Q. and her son being borne in Scotland, are not borne out
of the aleagiaunce of England, and so no forreyners.

The second cause or reason is, for that the forenamed statute of forreyners in
the five and twenty year of K. Edward the third, is entitled of those that
are borne beyond the seas. And in the body of the same statute, the doubt is
moved of children borne out of English aleagiaunce beyond the seas: vvherby
cannot be understood Scotland, for that it is a piece of the co^tinent land
within the seas. And al our old records in England, that talk of service to
be done within these two countries: have vsualy these latin words infra
quatuor Maria, or in frensh, deins lez quatre mers, that is, within the four
seas: vvherby must needs be understood as well Scotland as England, and that
perhapes for the reason before mentioned, of the subjection of Scotland by way
of Homage to the Crown of England. In respect vvherof it may be, that it was
accounted of old, but one dominion or aleagiaunce. And consequently, no man
borne therein can be accounted an Alien to England. And this shall suffice for
the first point, touching foreign Nativity.

For the second impediment objected, which is the The second impediment
against the Q. of Scot. and her son which is K. He^rie the eight his
Testament.
Testament of K. He^rie the eight, authorized by parliament, vvherby they
affirm the succession of Scotland to be excluded: it is not precisely true
that they are excluded, but only that they are put back behi^d the succession
of the house of Suffolk. For in that pretended Testament (which after shall be
proved to be none indeed) king Henry so disposes, that after his own
children (if they should chance to die without issue) the Crown shall pass
to the heirs of Fraunces, and of Elenore his neipces by his younger sister Marie
Q. of France: and after them (deceasing also without issue) ^he succession to
return to the next heirs again. VVherby it is evident that the succession of
Margaret Q. of Scotland his eldest sister, is not excluded: but thrust back
only from their due place and order, to expect the remainder, which may in
time be left by the younger. VVherof in mine opinion do ensue some
considerations Foreign birth: no impediment in the judgment of K. Henry the
eight
against the present pretenders them selves.

First, that in K. Henry's judgment, the former pretended rule of foreign
birth, was no sufficient impediment against Scotland: for if it had been, no
doubt but that he would have named the same in his aleaged Testament, and
thereby have utterly excluded that succession. But there is no such thing in
the Testament.

Secondly, if they admit this Testament, which The succession of Scotland
next by the judgment of the co^petitours.
alloteth the Crown to Scotland next after Suffolk: then, seeing that all the
house of Suffolk,) by these men's assertion) is cexcluded by Bastardie: it must
needs follow, that Scotland by their own judgment is next, and so this
testament vvil make against them, as indeed it does in all points most
apparentlie, but only that it prefers the house of Suffolk, before that of
Scotland. And therefore I think (Sir) that you mistake somvvhat about their
opinion in aleaging this Testament. For I suppose, that no man of my Lord of
Huntingtons faction, vvil aleage or urge the testimony of this Testament: but
rather some friend of the house of Suffolk in vvhos favor, I take it, that it
was first of al forged.

GENTL.

It may be (quoth the Gentleman) nor vvil I stand obstinatlie in the contrary:
for that it is hard, sometime, to judge of what faction each one is, who
discourses of these affairs. But yet I maruail (if it were as you say) why
Leycesters father after king Edvvardes death, made no mention thereof in the
favor of Suffolk, in the other Testament which then he proclaimed, as made by
K. Edward deceased, for preferme^t of Suffolk before his own sisters?

LAW.

The cause of this is evident (quoth the Lawyer) The Duk of Northumbe^landes
drift.
for that it made not sufficiently for his purpose: which was to disinherit
the two daughters of K. Henry him self, and advance the house of Suffolk
before them both.

GENTL.

A notable change (quoth the Gentleman) that a title, so much exalted of late
by the father, above al order, right, rank, and degree: should now be so much
debased by the son, as though it were not vvorthie to hold any degree, but
rather to be trode^ under foot for plain bastardie. And you see by this, how
true it is which I told you before: The mutable dealig of the house of Dudley.
that the race of Dudleys are most cunning Marchantes, to make their gain of
al things, men, and times. And as we have seen now two testame^tes
aleaged, the one of the king father, and the other of the king son, and both
of them in prejudice of the testators true successors: so, many good
subjects begin greatly to fear, that we may chance to see shortly a third
testament of her Ma. for the intituling of Huntington and extirpation of K.
Henry's, blood, and that before her Ma. can think of sickness: vvherin I beseech
the Lord I be no Prophet. But now (Sir) to the forsaid vvil and testament of
K. Henry, I have often heard in truth, that the thing was counterfeit, or at
the least not able to be proved: and that it was discovered, rejected and
defaced in Q. Mary's time: but I would gladly understand what you Lawyers
esteem or judge thereof.

LAW.

Touching this matter (quoth the Lawyer) it cannot be denied, but that in the
twenty and eight and thirty and sixth years of king Henry's reign, upon
consideration of some doubt and irresolution, The authority, and occasion of
K. Henry's testame^^*
which the king him self had shevved, to have about the order of succession
in his own children, as also for taking away al occasions of controversies in
those of the next blood: the whole parliament gave authority unto the said
king, to debate and determine those matters him self together with his learned
council, who best knevv the laws of the Realm, and titles that any man
might have thereby: and that what soever succession his Ma. should declare as
most right and lavvful under his letters patentes sealed, or by his last vvil
and testament rightfullie made and signed with his own hand: that the same
should be received for good and lavvful.

Upon pretense vvherof, soon after K. Henry's death, there was shevved a vvil
with the kings stamp at the same, and the names of diverse vvytnesses, vvherin
(as has been been said) the succession of the Crown, after the kings own
children, is assigned to the heirs of Fraunces and of Elenore, neipces to the
king, by his younger sister. Which assignatio^ of the Crown, being as it were
a mere guifte in prejudice of the elder sisters right (as also of the right of
Fraunces and Elenore them selves, who were omitted in the same assignation,
and their heirs entitled only) was esteemed to be against al reason, law,
and nature, and consequently not thought to proceed from so wise and sage a
The ki^gs Testament forged.
Prince, as K. Henry was knovve^ to be: but rather, either the whole forged,
or at Leastvvyse that clause inserted by other, and the kings stamp set unto
it, after his death, or when his Ma. lay now past understanding. And hereof
there wants not diverse most evident reasons and proofs.

For first, it is not probable or credible that K. The first reason.
Henry would ever go about, against law and reason, to disinherit the line
of his eldest sister, vvythout Injustice and improbabilitie.
any profit or interest to him self: and thereby, give most evident occasion
of Civil war and discord vvyrhin the Realm, seeing, that in such a case of
manifest and apparent vvrong, in so great a matter, the authority of
parliament, takes little effect, against the true and lavvful inheritour: as
well apeared in the former times and conte^tions of Henry the sixth, Edward
the fourth, and Richard the third: in whose reigns, the diverse and contrary
parliamentes made and holden, against the next inheritour, held no longer with
any man, then until the other was able to make his own party good.

So Likewise, in the case of king Edward the The example of France.
third his succession to France, in the right of his mother, though he were
excluded by the general assembly and consent of their parliamentes: yet he
esteemed not his right extinguished thereby: as neither did other kings of our
country that ensued after him. And for our present case, if nothing else
should have restreyned king Henry, from such open injustice toward his
eldest sister: yet this cogitation, atleast, would have stayed him: that by
giving example of supplanting his elder Sisters Line by virtue of a testament
or pretense of parliament: some other might take occasion to displace his
children by like pretense: as we see that Duke Dudley did soon after, by a
forged testament of K. Edward the sixth. So ready Scholars there are to be
found, which easily vvil learn such The second reason. Inco^gruities and
indignities.
Lessons of iniquity.

Secondlye, there be to many incongruyties and indignities in the said
pretended Will to proceed from such a Prince and learned Council as king
He^ries was. For first what can be more ridiculous, then to give the Crown
unto the heirs of Fraunces and Elenore, and not to any of them selves? or
what had they offended that their heirs should enjoy the Crown in their
right, and not they them selves? What if king Henry's children should have
died, vvhiles Lady Fraunces had been yet a live? who should have possessed
the kingdom before her, seeing her Line was next? and yet by this testament she
could not pretend her self to obtain Adrian Stokes.
it. But rather having married Adrain Stokes her horskeper, she must have
suffered her son by him (if she had any) to enjoy the Crown: and so Adria^
of a seruing-man and master of horses, should have become the Great Master and
Protector of England. Of like absurdity is that other clause also, vvherin the
king binds his own daughters to marry, by consent and direction of his
counsel, or otherwise to leese the benefit of their succession: but yet
binds not his neipces daughters, to wit, the daughters of Frauncis and
Elenor (if that they had any) to any such condition.

Thirdly there may be diverse causes and arguments The third reason. The
presupposed vvil is not Authentical.
aleaged in law, why this pretended vvil is not authentical: if otherwise,
it were certain that king Henry had meant it: First, for that it is not
agreeable to the mind and meaning of the Parliament, which intended only to
give authority, for declaration and explication of the true title: and not for
donation or intricating of the same, to the ruin of the Realm. Secondly, for
that there is no lavvful and Authentical Copy extant thereof, but only a bare
inrolment in the Chauncerie, which is not sufficient in so weighty an
affair: no witness of the Privy Council or of Nobility to the same: which
had been convenient in so great a case (for the best of the vvitnesses therein
named, is Sir John Gates, vvhos miserable death is well knovve^:) no public
Notarie: no Probation of the vvil before any Bishop, or any lavvful Court for
that purpose: no examination of the vvitnesses, or other thing orderly done,
for lavvful authorizing of the matter. The disprouing of the vvil by
vvitnesses. The Lord Pagett.


But of al other things this is most of importance: that the king never set
his own hand to the foresaid vvil, but his stamp was put thereunto by others,
either after his death, or when he was paste remembrance: as the late L.
Paget in the beginning of Queen Mary's days, being of the privy Council, first
of al other discovered the same, of his own accord, and upon mere motion of
conscience, confessing before the whole Council, and afterward also before
the whole parliament, how that him self was privy thereunto, and partly
also culpable, (being drawn thereunto, by the instigation and forcible
authority of others:) but yet afterward upon other more godly motions
detested the device: and so of his own free vvil, very honorably went and
offered the discovery thereof to Sir Edw. Mo^tague
the Council. As also did Sir Edward Montague, Lord chief justice, that had
been privy and present VVillm. Clarcke.
at the said doings, and one VVillm. Clark, that was the man who put the
stamp unto the paper, and is ascribed among the other pretensed vvitnesses,
confessed the whole premises to be true, and purchased his pardon for his
offense therein. VVher upon Q. Marie and her Council, caused presently the said
inrolment, lying in the Chauncerie, to be canceled, defaced and abolished,

And sithence that time in her Ma. days that now lives about the 11. or 12.
year of her reign, (if I count not amiss) by occasion of a certain little book
spread abroad at that time, very secretly, for aduauncing of the house of
Suffolk, by pretense of A meting together about this matter of the nobility.
this testament: I remember well the place where the late Duke of Norfolk,
the Marquis of Winchester (which then was Treasurer) the old Earls of
Arundell and Penbrooke that now are dead, with my L. of Penbrooke that yet
lives, (as also my L. of Leicester himself if I be not deceived) with diverse
others, met together upon this matter: and after long conference about the
foresaid prete^sed vvil, and many proffes and reasons laid down, why it
could not betrue or authe^tical: the old Earl of Pe^brook protesting that he
was with the K. in his Cha^bet from the first day of his sickness unto his
last hour, and thereby could well assure the falsificatio^ thereof: at length it
was moved, that from that place they should go, with the rest of the
nobility, and proclaim the Q of Scotland heir aparent in Cheapside. My L. of
Leycester again plays double.
VVherin my L. of Leycester (as I tak it) was the^ as forvvard as any man
else: how be it, now, for his profit, he be turned aside, and would turn
back again to morovv next, for a greater commodity.

And albeit, for some causes to them selves best knovve^, they proceeded not in
the open publishi^g of their determination at that time: yet my Lord of
Penbrook now living, can bear witness that thus much is true: and that his
father the old Earl The old Earl of Pe^broks admonition, to the Earl his
son yet liui^g.
at that time, told him openly before the other noble men, that he had
brought him to that assembly and place, to instruct him in that truth, and to
charge him, to witness the same, and to defend it also, with his svvorde (if
need required) after his death. And I know that his Lordship is of that
honor and nobility, as he can not leave of easily the remembrance or due
regard of so vvorthie an admonition. And this shall suffice for the second
impediment, imagined to proceed of this supposed testament of king Henry the
eight.

As for the third impediment, of religion, it is not The third impediment of
Religion.
general to al: for that only one person (if I be not deceived) of all the
Competitours in K. He^rys line, can be touched with suspicion of different
religion, from the present state of England. Which person notvvythstanding (as
is well known) while she was in government in her own Realm of Scotland,
permitted al liberty of conscience, and free exercise of religion, to those of
the contrary profession and opinion, vvythout restreynt. And if she had not:
yet do I not see, either by prescript of law, or practice of these our times,
that diversity of religion, may stay just inheritours from enjoying their due
possessions, in any state or degree of private men: and much less in the
claim of a kingdom: which alvvayes in this behalf (as has been said before)
is preferred in privilege.

This we see by experience, in diverse countries Princes of Germanye.
and parts of the world at this day: as in Germany, where among so many
Princes, and so de in religion as they be: yet every one succedeth to the
state, whereto he has right, vvythout resistaunce for his religion. The
examples also of her Ma. that now is, and of her sister before, is evident: Q*
Mary. Q Elizabeth.
who being known to be of two different inclinations in religion, and the
whole Realm divided in opinion for the same cause: yet both of them at their
several times with general consent of al, were admitted to their lavvful
inheritance: excepting only a fevv The Dudleys. Mo^sieur.
traitors against the former, who vvythstood her right as also in her, the
right of her Ma. that is present, and that not for religion (as appeared by
their own confession after) but for ambition and desire of reign. Monsieur,
the kings brother and heir of France, as all the world knovveth* is well
accepted, favored and admitted for successoure of that Crown, by all the
protestants at this day of that Country, not vvythstanding his opinion in
religion known to be diffeferent. And I doubt not, but the king of Navarre or
Prince of Condie, in the contrary part, would King of Navarre* Prince of
Condye.
think them selves greatly iniuried by the state of France, which is
different from them in religion at this day, if after the death of the king
that now is and his brother without issue, (if God so dispose) they should be
barred from inheriting the Crown, under pretense only of their religion. My
Lord of Huntingto^ him self also, is he not knovve^ to be of My L. of
Huntingtons religion.
a different religion from the present state of England? and that, if he were
king to morovve next, he would alter the whole government, order, condition,
and state of religion, now used and estblished, vvythin the Realm?

But as I said in the beginning, if one of a whole family, or of diverse
families* be culpable, or to be The title of those which ensevve the Q. of
Scotts.
touched herein: what have the rest offended thereby? vvil you exclude al, for
the mislike of one? And to descend in order: if the first in K. Henry's line,
after her Ma. may be touched in this point, yet, why should the rest be
damnified thereby? The king of Scotland her son, that next ensues (to speak
in equity) why should he be shut out for his religion? And are not all the
other in like manner protestants, vvhos descent is consequent, by nature, order
and degree?

SCHOL.

For the young king of Scotland (quoth I) the truth is, that alvvayes for mine
own part, I have had great hope and expectation of him, not only The yo^g
king of Scotland
for the conceit which commonly men have of such Orient youths, borne to
kingdoms: but especialie for that I understood from time to time, that his
educatio^ was in allearning, pri^celie exercises and instruction of true
religion, under rare and virtuous men for that purpose. VVherby I conceived
hope, that he might not only become in time, an honorable and profitable
neighbor unto us, for assurance of the ghospel in these parts of the world:
but also (if God should deprive us of her Majesty vvhithout issue) might be a
mean by his suc^ssion to unite in Concord and Government, the tvvoe Realms
together, which heretofore has been sought, by the price of many a thousand
men's blood, and not obtained.

Marie yet now of late (I know not by what means) there is begone in men's
hearts a certain mislike or grudge against him, for that it is given ou^
every where, that he is inclyned to be a Papist, and an enemy to her Ma.
proceedinges. Which argues him verelie, of singular ingratitude, if it be
true, considering the great helps and protection which he has received from
her highness ever sithence he was borne.

GENTL.

And are you so simple (quoth the Genleman) as to believe every report that
you hear of this matter? know you not, that it is expedient for my L. of
Leycester and his faction, that this youth, above al other, be held in
perpetual disgrace with her Ma. and with this Realm? You know, that Richard
The device to set out her Ma with the young king of Scotland.
of Gloucester had never been able to have usurped as he did, if he had not
first persuaded king Edward the fovverth to hate his own brother the Duke of
Clarence, which Duke stood in the way, between Richard and the thing,
which he most of al things coueted. That is, the possibility to the Crown,
and so in this case is there the like device to be observed.

For truly, for the young king of Scotlands religion, it is evident to as
many as have reason, that it ca^ be no other of it self but inclined to the
best: both in respect of his education, instruction, and conversation, with
those of true religion: as also by hi^ former Actions, Edictes, Government, and
priuat^ behavior, he has declared. Marie these men vvhos profit is nothing
less, then that he or any other of that race should do well: do not cease
daily by all secret vvayes, driftes, and molestations possible, to drive him
either to mislke of our religion, or else to incur the suspision thereof, with
such of our Realm, as otherwise would be his best friends: or if not this:
yet for very need and fear of his own life, to make recourse to such other
Princes abroad, as may most offend or mislik this state.

And for this cause, they suborne certain busy fellows of their own crew
and faction, perteyning to the ministry of Scotland, (but unworthy of so
vvorthie a cali^g) to use such insole^cy toward The intolerable procedinges
of certain Ministers in Scotland against they^ kig. by s^bornation of ^ys
^^ymyes in England.
their king and Prince, as is not only indecent, but intolerable. For he may
do no thing, but they vvil examine and discuss the same in pulpit. If he go but
on hunting, when it pleases them to call him to their preaching: if he make
but a dinner or supper, when, or where, or with whom they like not: if he
receive but a coople of horses or other present from his friends or kinsmen
beyond the seas: if he salute or use courteously any man or messiger which
comes from them* (as you know Princes of their nobility and courtesy are
accustomed, though they come from their enemies, as often has been seen and
highly commended in her Ma. of England:) if he deal familiarlie with any
Ambassador which likes not them: or finalie if he do say, or signify, any
one thing whatsoever, that pleases not their humor: they vvil presently, as
seditious tribunes of the people, exclame in public, and stepping to the
pulpit vvher the word of the Lord only ought to be preached: vvil excite the
commonaltie to discontentation, inveying against their souerain with such
bitterness of speech, irreverent terms, and insole^t controlmentes, as is not
to be spoken, Now imagine what her Ma. and her grave counsel would do in
England, if such procedinges should be used* by the clergy against them.

STHOL.

No doubt (quoth I) but that such unquiet spirits should be punished in our
Realm. And so I said of late to their most Reverend and vvorthie Prelat and
Primat the Archbisshop of S. Andrews, with whom it was my Luck to come
acquainted Sir Patrik Adamson Archbishop of S. Andrews.
in London, whether he was come by his kings apointment (as he said) to
treat certain affairs with our Queen and Council. And talking with him of
this disorder of his Ministry, he confessed the same with much grief of
mind, and told me, that he had preached thereof before the king him self,
detesting and accusing diverse heads thereof, for which cause, he was become
very odious to them and other of their faction, both in Scotland and England.
But he said, that as he had given the reasons of his doings unto our Queen: so
means he shortly to do the same unto Monsieur Beza and to the whole church
of Geneua, by sending thither the articles of his and their doings, Protesting
unto me that the procedinges and attemptes of those factious and corrupt men,
was most scandalous, seditious and perilous, both to the kings person, and
to the Realm: being sufficient indeed, to alienate wholy the young Prince from
al affection to our religion, when he shall see the chief professors thereof,
to behave them selves so vnduetifulie toward him.

GENTL.

That is the thing which these men, his competitours, most desire (quoth the
Gentleman) hoping thereby, to procure him most evil vvil and danger, Treasons
Plotted Against the K. of Scotts.
both at home and from England. For which cause also, they have practiced so
many plotes and treacheries with his own subjects against him: hoping by
that means, to bring the one in distrust and hatred of the other, and
consequently the king in danger of destruction by his own. And in this
machination, they have behaved them selves so dexterouslie, so covertly used
the manage and co^triuing hereof, and so cunninglye conveyed the execution of
many things: as it might, indeed, seem aparent unto the young king, that the
whole plot of treasons against his Realm and person, does come from England,
thereby to drive him into jealousy of our state, and our state of him: and all this for their own profit.

Neither is this any new device of my Lord of Leycester, to dravv men for his
own gain, into danger and hatred with the state, under other pretenses. For
I could tell you diverse stories and stratagemes of his cunning in this kind,
and the one far different from the other in device: but yet al to one end. I
have a friend yet living, that was toward the old Earl of Arundel, in
good credit, and by that means had occasion to deal with the late Duke of
Norfolk in his chiefest affairs before his troubles. This man is vvount to
report strange things from the Dukes own mouth, of my Lord Leycester cunning
device for ouerthrovvi^g the Duke of Norforke.
of Leycesters most treacherous dealing toward him for gayning of his
blood, as after apeared: albeit the Duke when he reported the same, mistrusted
not so much my Lords malice therein. But the sum of al, is this in effect:
that Leycester having a secret desire, to pull down the said Duke, to the end
that he might have no man above him self, to hinder him in that which he
most desires: by a thousand cunning devises drevv in the Duke to the
cogitation of that marriage with the Q. of Scotland, which afterward was the
cause or occasion of his ruin. And he behaved him self so dexterouslie in this
drift, by setting on the Duke on the The impudency of Judas.
one side, and intrapping him on the other: as Judas him self never played his
part more cunningly, when he supped with his master, and set him self so
nere, as he dipped his spoone in the same dishe, and durst before others ask,
who should betraye him? meaning that night, to do it him self, as he shevved
soon after supper, when he came as a Captain with a band of conspiratours,
and with a courteous kiss delivered his person, into the hands of the^,
vvho^ he well knevv to thirst after his blood

The very like did the Earl of Leycester with the Duke of Norfolk for the art
of treason, though in the parties betrayed there were great difference of
innoce^cie. Namely at one time, when her Ma. was at Basing in Hampshire, and
the Duke atte^ded their lo have audience, with great indifferency in him
self, to follow or leave of, his suit for marriage: (for The speeches of Leices
to the D. of Norfolk.
that now he began to suspect, her Ma. liked not greatly thereof:) my Lord of
Leicester came to him, and counsayled him in any case to persevere and not to
relent, assuring him with many oaths and protestations, that her Ma. must and
should be brought to alovv thereof, whether she would or no, and that him self
would scale that purpose with his blood. Neither was it to be suffered that
her Ma. should have her vvil herein: with many other like speeches to this
purpose: which the Duke repeated again then presently to my said friend:
with often laying his hand upon his bosom and saing: I have here which
assures me sufficiently of the fidelity of my L. of Leycester: meaning not
only the foresaid speeches, but also diverse letters which he had written to
the Duke of that effect, Ley. cousynage of the Queen.
as likewise he had done to some other person of more importance in the
Realm: which matter coming afterward to light, he cousyned most notably her
Ma. by shevving her a reformed copy of the said letter, for the letter it self.

But now how well he performed his promis, in dealing with her Ma. for the
Duke, or against the Duke in this matter, her highness can best tell, and the
event it self shevved. For the Duke being admitted soon after to her Ma.
speech, at an other place, and receiving a far other answer then he had in
hope conceived upon Leycester promises: retired him self to London, where the
same night following he received letters both from Leycester, The Duke of
Norfolks flyi^g into Norfolk.
and Sir Nicholas Throgmarton, upon Leycesters instigation (for they were at
that time both frie^des and of a faction,) that he should presently flee into
Norfolk as he did, which was the last and final complement of al Leycesters
former devices, vvherby to plunge his friend over the ears in suspicion and
disgrace, in such sort, as he should never be able to dravv him self out of
the ditch again, as indeed he was not, but died in the same.

And herein you see also the same subbtile and Machauilian Machauellian
Sleyghtes
slight, which Imentioned before, of driving men to attempt somevvhat,
vvherby they may incur danger or remain in perpetual suspicion or disgrace.
And this practice he has long used, and does daily, against such as he has
vvil to destroy. As for example: What say you to the Leycester devises for
the overthrow of Sir Christopher Hatton.
device he had, of late, to entrap his well deserving friend Sir Christopher
Hatton, in the matter of Hall his Priest, whom he would have had Sir
Christopher to send away and hide, being touched and detected in the case of
Ardent, thereby to have drawn in Sir Christopher him self, as Sir Charles
Candis he can well declare, if it please him, being accessarie to this plot,
for the overthrow of Sir Christopher. To which intent and most diuelishe
drift perteyned (I doubt not) if the matter were duly examined, the late
interception of letters in Paris from one Aldred of Lions then in Rome, to
Henry Vmpton, servant to Sir Christopher, in which letters, Sir Christopher
is reported to be of such credit and special favor in Rome, as if he were the
greatest Papist in England.

What means also these pernicious late deali^ges Leycester devises against
the Earl of Shrevvsburie.
against the Earl of Shrevvsburie, a man of the most ancient and worthiest
nobility of our Realm? what mean the practizes with his nearest both in bed
and blood against him? what mean these most false and slanderous rumors
cast abroad of late of his disloyal demeanure toward her Ma. and his
country, with the great prisoner committed to his charge? Is all this to any
other end, but only to drive him to some impatience, and thereby to commit or
say some thing which may open the gate unto his ruyn? Diverse other things
could I recite of his behavior toward other noble men of the Realm, who
live abroad in their countries much iniuried and malcontented by his
insolency: albeit in respect of his present power they dare not complain.
And surely it is strange to see, how little account he makes Ley contempt of
the ancient Nobility of England
of all the ancient nobility of our Realm: how he contemns, derideth and
debaseth them: which is the fashion of al such as mean to vsurp, to the end
they may have none who shall not acknovvledge their first begi^ning and
aduanceme^t from the^ selves.

LAW.

Not only usurpers (quoth the Lavvier) but al others who rise and mou^te
aloft from base lynage, be ordinarily most co^temptuous contumelious, and
insole^t against others of more antiquity. And this was evident in this man's
father, who being a New me^ most co^te^ptuous.
Buck of the first head (as you know) was intolerable in contempt of others:
as appears, by those whom he trod down of the nobility in his time: as also
by his ordinary ieastes against the Duke of Somerset and others. But among
other times, sitting one day at his own table (as a Councellor told me that
was present,) he took occasion to talk of the Earl of Arundel whom he then
had D. Dudleys ieste at the Erl. of Aru^del
not only removed from the Council, but also put into the Tovver of London,
being (as is well known) the first and chiefest Earl of the Realm. And for
that the said Earl, shevved him self somevvhat sad and afflicted with his
present state (as I marvel not, seeing him self in prison and vvythin the
compass of so fearce a Bears pavves) it pleased this goodly Duke, to vaunt upon
this Earls misery, at his own table (as I have said,) and asked the noble men
and Gentlemen there present, what Creste or Cognizau^ce my Lord of Arundel did
give? and when every one ansvvered that he gave the white horse: I thought
so (quoth the Duke,) and not vvythout great cause: for as the white Paulfrey
when he stands in the stable, and is well prouendred, is proud and fearce,
and ready to leap upon every other horses back, still neying and praunsing, and
troubling all that stand about him: but when he is once out of his hot
stable, and deprived a little of his ease and fat feeding, every boy may ride
and master him, at his pleasure: so is it (quoth he) with my Lord of Arundel:
VVherat many maruailed that were present, to hear so insolent speech pass
from a man of judgment, against a Peer of the Realm, cast into calamity.

GENTL.

But you would more have maruailed (quoth the Gentleman,) if you had seen
that, which I did afterward, which was the most base and abject behavior,
of the same Duke, to the same Earl of The most abiecte behauior of Duke Dudley
in adverse fortune
Arundel at Cambrige, and upon the way toward London: when this Earl was
sent to apprehend and bring him up, as prisoner. If I should tell you how he
fell down on his knees, how he wept, how he besought the said Earl, to be
good Lord unto him, whom a little before, he had so much contemned and
reproched: you would have said, that him self might as well be compared to
this his white Paulfrey, as the other. Albeit in this, I vvil excuse neither
of them both, neither almost any other of these great men, who are so proud
and insolent in their prosperous fortune, as they are easily led to contemn
any man, albeit them selves be most contemptible of al others, when soever
their fortune begi^neth to change: and so vvil my L. of Leycester be also, no
doubt at that day, though now in his wealth, he triumph over al, and cares
not whom or how many he offend and injury.

STHOL.

Sir therein I believe you (quoth I) for we have had sufficient trial alredie
of my Lords fortitude in adversity. His base and abject behavior in Leycester
base behavior in adversity.
his last disgrace about his marriage, well declared what he would do, in a
matter of more importance. His favvning and flattering of them, whom he hated
most: his servile speeches, his feigned and dissembled tears, are al very
well known: Then Sir Christopher Hatton, must needs be enforced, to receive
at his hands the honorable and great office of Chamberlanship of Chester, for
that he Leycester deceyui^g of Sir Christopher Hatton.
would by any means resign the same unto him, whether he vvoulde or no:
and made him provide (not without his charge) to receive the same, though his
Lordship never meant it, as after well appeared. For that the present pangue
being past, it liked my Lord to fulfill the Italian proverb, of such as in
dangers make vows to saints: Scampato il pericolo, gabbato il Santo, the
danger escaped, the saint is deceived.

Then, and in that necessity, no men of the Realm were so much honored,
commended and served by him, as the noble Chamberlane deceased, and the good L.
Treasurer yet living: to vvho^, at a certain time, he vvrote a letter, in all
fraud and base dissimulation, and caused the same, to be delivered A pretty
shifte of my Lord of Leyc.
with great cunning in the sight of her Ma. and yet so, as to show a purpose
that it should not be seen: to the end, her highness might the rather take
occasion to call for the same and read it, as she did. For Mistres Fraunces
Havvard (to vvho^ the stratageme was committed) playing her part
dexterouslie, offered to deliver the same to the L. Treasurer, nere the door of
the vvithdravving chamber, he the^ cumming from her Ma. And to dravv the eye
and attentio^ of her highness, the more unto it, she let fall the paper, before
it touched the Treasurers hand, and by that occasion, brought her Majesty to
call for the same: Which after she had red and considered the style together
with the metal and constitution of him that vvrote it, and to vvho^ it was
sent: her highness could not but break for^h in laughter* vvy^h detestation of
such absurd and abject dissimulation: saying unto my L. Treasurer, there
present: my L. believe Her Ma speech of Leyce. to the Treasurer.
hi^ not, for if he had you in like case he would play the Bear with you,
though, at this present he favvne upon you never so fast.

But now, Sir, I pray you go forvvard in your speech of Scotland, for there, I
remember you left of, when by occasion we fell into these digressions.

Well then, (quoth the Gentleman) to return again to Scotland, (as you move)
from whence we have digressed: most certain and evident it is to all the
world, that all the broils, troubles, and dangers The danger of her Ma by
oppression of the favorers of the Scottishe title.
procured to the Prince in that country, as also the vexations of them, who
any way are thought to favor that title in our own Realm, do proceed from
the drift and complot of these conspirarours. Which besides the great dangers
mentioned before, both domestical and foreign, temporal and of religion, must
needs infer great ieopardie also to her Ma. person and present reign, that
now governs* through the hope and heat of the aspirors ambition, inflamed
and increased so much the more, by the nearnes of their desired pray.

For as souldiars entered into hope of a rich and well furnished City, are
more fearce and furious, A Similitude.
when they have gotten and beaten down the Bulvvarks round about: and as the
greedy Burglarer that has pearsed and broken d^vvn many wales to come to a
treasure, is less patient of stay, stop and delay, when he cummeth in sight
of that which he desires, or perceyueth only some partition of vvaneskot or
the like, betwixt his fingers and the cofers or money bags: so these men,
when they shall see the succession of Scotland extinguished, together with al
friends and favorers thereof, (which now are to her Majesty as Bulvvarkes
and Wales, and great obstacles to the aspirours) and when they shall see only
her Ma. life and person, to stand betwixt them and their fiery desires, (for
they make little account of al other co^peritours by K. He^ries line:) no doubt,
but it will be to them a great prick and spur, to dispatch her Ma* also: the
nature of both Earls being well considered, vvherof the one killed his own
wife (as has been shevved before) only upon a little vain Earl of Leicester
hope of marriage with a Queen and the other being so far blinded and borne
away, with the same furious Earl of Hu^tingt.
fume, and most impotent itching humor of ambition: as his own mother, when
she was a live, seemed greatly to fear his fingers, if once the matter
should come so near, as her life had only stood in his way. For which
cause, the good old Countess, was vvou^t to pray god, (as I have heard The
old Countess. of Huntingtons speech of her son
diverse say) that she might die before her Majesty, (which hapilie was
granted unto her) to the end that by standing in her sons way (vvho^ she
savve to her grief, furiously bent to wear a Crown:) their might not some
dangerous extremity grow to her, by that nearnes: And if his own mother
feared this mischaunce, what may her Ma. doubt, at his and his companyons
hands, when she only shall be the obstacle of al their unbridled and impatient
desires?

LAW.

Clear it is (quoth the Lawyer) that the nearnes of aspirours to the Crown,
endaungereth greatly the present possessors, as you have well proved Nearnes
in co^petitors does incite the^ to adventure.
by reason, and I could show by diverse examples, if it were need. For when
He^rie Bollingbrook Duke of Lancaster savve, not only Richard the second to be
vvythout issue, but also Roger Mortymer Earl of March, that should have
succeeded in the Crown, to be slain in Ireland: though before (as is Henrye
Bolingbrooke after K. Henry the fourth.
thought) he meant not to vsurp, yet seeing the possibility and nere cut that
he had: was invited thervvyth, to lay hands of his soueraines blood and
dignity, as he did. The like is thought of Richard Duke of Gloucester, that he
never mea^t the murder Richard Duke of Glocest. after K. Richard the third.
of his nephevves, until he savve their father dead, and them selves in his
own hands: his brother also Duke of Clare^ce dispatched, and his only son
and heir Earl of VVarvvick, vvythi^ his own power.

Wherefore, seeing, it has not pleased almighty God, for causes to him self
best known, to leave unto this noble Realm, any issue by her most excellent
The great wisdom of her Ma. in co^serui^g the next heirs of Scotland.
Ma. it has been a point of great wisdom in mine opinion, and of great
safitie to her highness person, state, and dignity: to preserve hitherto, the
line of the next inheritours by the house of Scolad (I mean both the mother
and the son,) vvhos deaths has been so dilige^gly sought, by the other
competitours, and had been long ere this atchiued, if her Ma. own wisdom and
Royal clemency (as is thought,) had not placed special eye upon the
conservation thereof, from time to time. Which Princely providence, so long as
it shall endure, must needs be a great safitie and fortress to her Ma. not
only against the claims, aids, or annoiaunce of forr^ine Princes, who vvil
not be so forvvard to advance strange titles, while so manifest heirs
remain at home, nor yet so vvilling (in respect of policy) to help that line
to possession of the whole Island: but also against ptactises of domestical
aspirours (as you have shevved,) in vvhos affairs no doubt but these two
braunshes of Scotland are great blocks, as also special Bulvvarkes to her Ma.
life and person: seeing (as you say) these comparteners, make so little account
of all the other of that Line, who should ensue by order of succession. The K.
of Scotlands destruction of more importance to the co^spirators, then his
mothers.


Marie yet of the two, I think the youth of Scotland be of much more
importance, for their purpose, to be made away, both for that he may have
issue, and is like in time to be of more ability, for defense of his own
inheritance: as also for that he being once dispatched, his mother should
soon ensue, by one slight or other, which they would devise vnvvitting to
her Ma. albeit, I must needs confess, that her highness has used most
singular prudence for prevention thereof: in placing her restreint The Earl of
Shreusburie disgraced by the co^petitoures.
with so Noble, stroung, and vvorthie a Peer of our Realm, as the Earl of
Shrevvsburie is: vvhos fidelity and co^stancy being nothing pliable to the
others faction, gives the^ little co^tentatio^. And for that cause, the world
sees, how many sundry and diverse devises they have used, and do use daily
to slander and disgrace him, and thereby to pull from him his charge committed.

To this the Gentleman ansvvered nothing at al, but stood still musing with him
self, as though he had conceived some deep matter in his head: and after a
little pause he began to say as follows.

GENTL.

I cannot truly but much marvel, when I do compare some things of this
time and government, with the doings of former Princes progenitors The
vigilant eye that her Ma. ancestors had to the collaterallyne
to her Ma. Namely of He^rie the seventh and Henry the eight: who had so
vigilant an eye to the lateral line of K. Edward the fourth by his brother of
Clarence, as they thought it necessary, not only to prevent al evident
dangers, that might ensue that way, but even the possibilities of al peril:
as may well appear by the execution of Edward Earl of VVarvvike before
named, son and heir to the said Duke of Clarence, and of Margaret his sister
Countess of Salisburie, with the Lord Henry Montague her son, by vvhos
daughter the Earl Persons executed of the house of Clare^ce.
of Huntington now claims. Al which were executed for avoiding of
inconveniences, and that at such times, when no imminent danger could be much
doubted, by that Line* especialie by the later. And yet now when one of the
same house and line, of more ability and ambition, then ever any of his
ancestors were, makes open title and claim to the Crown, with plotes,
packes, and preparations to most manifest usurpation, against al order, al
law, and al rightful succession: and against a special statute provided in
that behalf: yet is he permitted, borne out, favored, and friended therein: and
no man so hardy, as in defense of her Ma. and Realm, to control him for the
same.

It may be, that her Ma. is brought into the same opinion of my L. of
Huntingtons fidelity, as Julius The example of Julius Caesar's destruction.
Caesar was of Marcus Brutus, his dearest obliged friend: of vvhos ambitious
practices, and aspiring, when Caesar was advertised, by his careful frie^des:
he ansvvered, that he well knevv Brutus to be ambitious, but I am sure (quoth
he) that my Brutus vvil never attempt any thing for the Empire, while Caesar
lives: and after my death, let him shift for the same among others, as he can.
But what ensued? Surely I am loath to tell the event, for ominations sake, but
yet all the world knovveth, that ere many months passed, this most Noble
and Clement Emperor, was pitifulie murdered by the same Brutus and his
parteners, in the public Senate, when least of al he expected such treason.
So dangerous a thing it is, to be secure in a matter of so great sequel, or
to trust them with a man's life, who may pretend preferment or interest, by
his death.

Wherefore, would God her Ma. in this case, might be induced, to have such due
care and regard of her own estate and Royal person, as the weighty moment of
the matter requires: which co^teineth the bliss and calamity of so Noble
and vvorthie a kingdom, as this is.

I know right well, that most excellent natures To much confidence very
perilous in a Prince.
are alvvayes furdest of, from diffidence in such people, as profes love, and
are most bounden by devvtie: and so it is evident in her Ma. But yet surely,
this confidence so commendable in other men, is scarce alovvable often times in
the person of a Prince: for that it goes accompanied with so great peril, as
is inevitable to him that vvil not suspect: principally when dangers are
fortolde or presaged, (as commonly by Gods appointment they are, for the
special hand he holds over Princes affairs,) or when there is probable
conjecture, or just surmise of the same.

We know that the forenamed Emperor Caesar, had not only the vvatning given
him of the inclination and intent of Brutus to usurpation, but even the very
day when he was going toward the place of his appointed destiny, there
was given up into his hands a detection of the whole treason, with request
to read the same presently, which he upon confidence omitted to do. We read
also of Alexander the great, how he was not The example of Alexander the
great how he was for told his danger.
only forbidden by a learned man, to enter into Babylon (whether he was
then going) for that there was treason meant against him, in the place: but
also that he was foretold of Antipaters mischievous meaning against him, in
particular. But the young Prince having so well deserved of Antipater, could not
be brought to mistrust the man that was so dear unto him: and by that means
was poisoned in a ba^quet, by three sons of Antipater, which were of most
credit and confidence in the kings Chamber.

SCHOL.

Here, truly, my heart did somevvhat tremble with fear, horror, and
detestation of such euentes. And I said unto the Gentleman. I beseech you, Sir,
to talk no more of these matters, for I cannot well abide to hear them named:
hoping in the Lord, that there is no cause, nor ever shall be, to doubt the like
in Endland: specialie from these men who are so much bounden to her Ma. and
Late execution^.
so forvvard in seeking out and pursueing al such, as may be thought to be
dangerous to her Ma. person, as by the sundry late executions we have seen,
and by the punishments every way of Papists, we may perceive.

GENTL.

Truth it is (quoth the Gentleman) that justice has been done upon diverse of
late, which co^tenteth me greatly, for the terror and restreint of others,
of what sect or religion so ever they be: And it is most necessary
(doubtless) for the compressing of parties, that great vigilance be used in that
behalf. But when I consider, that only one kind of men are touched herein:
and that al speech, regard, doubt, distrust, and watch, is of them alone,
vvythout reflection of eye upon any other men's doings or designementes: when
I see the double diligence, and vehemency of certain instruments, which I
like not, bent wholy to raise vvounder and admiration of the people: fear,
terror, and attention, to the doeinges, sayings, and meaninges Fraud to be
feared in putsueing one part o^ faction only.
of one part or faction alone, and of that namlie and only, which these
co^spiratours esteem for most dangerous and opposite to them selves: I am
(believe me) often tempted to suspect fraud and false measure: and that these
men deal, as wolves by nature in other countries are vvount to do: Which
going together in great numbers to assail a flock of sheep by night, do set
some one or two of their company upon the vvinde side of the fold a far of,
who partly by their sent and other bruteling* which of purpose they make, may
dravv the dogs and shepheardes to pursue them alone, vvhiles the The
comparison of wolves and Rebels.
other do enter and slay the whole flock. Or as rebels that meaning to
surprise a town, to turn away the inhabitants from consideration of the
danger, and from defense of that place, where they intend to enter: do set on
fire some other parts of the town further of, and do sound a false al'arme at
some gate, vvher is meant least danger.

Which art, was used cunningly by Richard Rychard Duke of York.
Duke of York in the time of K. Henry the sixth, when he to cover his own
intent, brought all the Realm in doubt of the doings of Edmond Duke of
Sometset, his enemy. But John of Northumberland, father to my Lord of
Leycester, used the same Duke Dudley.
art much more skilfulie, when he put al England in a maze and musing of the
Protector and of his frie^des: as though nothing could be safe about the young
king, until they were suppressed: and consequently, al brought into his own
authority, vvythout obstacle. I speak not this, to excuse Papists, or to
vvyshe them any way spared vvherin they offend: but only to signify that
in a country, A good rule of policy.
vvher so potent factions be, it is not safe, to suffer the one to make it
self so puissant by pursuit of the other: as afterward the Prince must
remain at the devotion of the stronger: but rather as in a body molested and
troubled with contrary humors, if al cannot be purged, the best Physic is,
vvythout al doubt, to reduce and hold them at such an equality: as
destruction may not be feared of the predominante.

LAW.

To this said the Lawyer laughing, yea Marie Sir, I would to God, your
opinion might prevail in this matter: for then should we be in other terms,
then now we are. I was not long since, in company of a certain honorable
Lady of the Court, who, after some speech passed by Gentlemen that were
present, of some aprehended, and some executed, and such like affairs: brak
into a great complaint of the present time, and thervvyth (I assure you) moved
all the hearers to grief (as women you know are pote^t in styrring of
affections,) and caused them al to vvyshe that her Majesty, had been nigh to
have heard her words.

I do well remember (quoth she) the first douzen The spech of a certain Lady
of the Court.
years of her highness reign, how happy, pleasant and quiet they were, with
al manner of comfort and consolation. There was no mention then of factions in
religion, neither was any man much noted or rejected for that cause: so other
wise his conversation were civil and courteous. No suspicion of treason, no
talk of bloodshed, no complaint of troubles, miseries or vexations. Al was
peace, al was love, al was joy, al was delight. Her Ma. (I am sure) took
more recreation at that time, in one day, then she does now in a whole week:
and we that served her highness, enjoyed more contentation in a week, then we
can now in diverse years. For now, there are so many suspicions, every
where, for this thing and for that: as we cannot tell whom to trust. So many
melancholique in the Court, that seem malcontented: so many complaining or
sueing for their friends that are in trouble: other slip over the sea, or
retire them selves upon the sudden: so many tales brought us of this or that
danger, of this man suspected, of that man sent for up, and such like
unpleasant and unsavory stuff: as we can never almost be merry one whole
day together.

Wherefore (quoth this Lady) we that are of her Ma. train and special
service, and do not only feel these things in our selves, but much more in the
grief of her most excellent Ma. whom we see daily molested herevvith
(being one of the best natures, I am sure, that ever noble Princess was
endued with al:) we cannot but moan, to behold More moderation vvisshed in
matters of faction.
contentions advanced so far forth as they are: and we could vvish most
heartily that for the time to come, these matters might pass with such peace,
friendship and tranquillity, as they do in other countries: vvher difference in
religion breaks not the band of good fellowship or fidelity. And with this
in a similing manner, she brake of: asking pardon of the company, if she had
spoken her opinion, over boldly, like a woman.

To whom, ansvvered a Courtier, that sat next The speech of a Courtier.
her: Madame, your Ladyship has said nothing in this behalf, that is not
daily debated among us, in our common speech in Court, as you know. Your
desire also herein is a public desire, if it might be brought to pass: for
there is no man so simple, that sees not, how perilous these co^tentions and
deuisions among us, may be in the end. And I have heard diverse Ge^tlemen, that
be learned, discourse at large upon this argument: aleaging old examples of
the Athenians, Lacedaemonians, Carthagenians, and Romans, who received notable
damages, and destruction also, in the end, by their divisions and factions
among them selves: and specialie from the^ of their own Cities and Countries,
who upon The peril of divisions and factions in a common wealth.
factio^s lived abroode with forreyners: and thereby were alvvayes as
fire-brandes to carry home the flambe of war, upon their country.

The like, they also shevved by the long experience of all the great Cities and
states of Italy: which by their factious and foruscites, were in continual
garboile, bloodshed and misery. VVherof our own country has tasted also her
part, by the odious contention between the houses of Lancaster and York:
vvherin it is merueilous to consider, what trouble a fevv men often times,
departing out of the Realm, were able to work, by the part of their faction
remaining at home (which commo^lie increases toward them that are absent,)
and by the redines of foreign Princes, to receive alvvaies, and comfort such,
as are discontented in an other state: to the end, that by their means, they
might hold an ore in their neighbors bote: Which, Princes that are nigh
borderers, do alvvayes above al other things most covet and desire.

This was that courtyers speech and reason, vvherby I perceived, that as well
among them in Court, as among us in the Realm and country abroad, the The
dangerous sequel of dissentio^ in our Realm.
present inconuenie^ce and dangerous sequel of this our home dissension, is
espied: and consequently most English hearts inclined to vvishe the remedy or
prevention thereof, by some reasonable moderation, or reunion among our selves.
For that the prosecution of these differences to extremity, can not but after
many vvou^des and exulceratio^s bring matters finalie to rage, fury and most
deadly desperation.

VVheras on the other side, if any svveet qualification or small tolleration
among us, were admitted: there is no doubt, but that affairs would pass in
our Realm, with more quietness, safitie and public weal of the same, then
it is like it vvil do long: and men would easily be brought, that have
English bovvells, to join in the preservation of their country, from ruing,
bloodshed, and foreign oppression, which desperation of factions is vvou^t to
procure.

GENTL.

I am of your opinion (quoth the Gentleman) in that, for I have seen the
experience thereof, and all the world beholds the same at this day, in all the
Examples of tolleration in matters of Reliligion.
countries of Germany, Polonia, Boemland, and Hungary: vvher a little bearing
of the one with the other, has wrought them much ease, and continued them a
peace, vvherof al Europe besides, has admiration and envy. The first douzen
years Germany
also of her Ma. reign, vvherof your Lady of the Court discoursed before, can
well be a witness of the same: VVherin the commiseration and lenity that
was used toward those of the weaker sort, with a certain svvet diligence
for their gaining, by good means: was the cause of much peace, co^tentation,
and other benefit to the whole body,

We see in France, that by over much pressing The breach and reunion again
in France.
of one part only, a fire was in kindled not many years since, like to
have consumed and destroyed the whole: had not a necessary mollification been
thought upon, by the vvisest of that kings Council, full contrary to the
vvil and inclination of some great personnages, who meant perhapes to have
gained more by the other. And since that time, we see what peace, wealth and
revnio^, has insued in that country, that was so broken, disseuered and
waste before. And all this, by yeeldi^g a little in that thing, which no force
can master, but exculcerat rather, and make worse: I mean the conscience and
judgment of men in matters of religion.

The like also I could name you in Flanders, vvher Flanders.
after al these broils and miseries, of so many years vvarres (caused
principaly by to much streyning in such affairs at the beginning) albeit, the
king be never so strycte-laced, in yielding to publyque lybertye, and free
exercise on both parts: yet is he descended to this at length, (and that upon
force of reason,) to abstain from the pursuit and search of men's consciences,
not only in the towns which upon co^positio^ he receives, but also where
he has recovered by force, as in Tornay, and other places: vvher I am informed
that no man is searched, demanded, or molested for his opinion or conscience,
nor any act of Papistry or contrary religion required at their hands: but
are permitted to live quietly to God and them selves, at home in their own
houses: so they perform otherwise, their outvvard obedience and duties to
their Prince and country. Which only qualification, tollerance, and
moderation in our Realm (if I be not deceived, with many more that be of my
opinion) would content al divisions, factio^s, and parties among us, for their
continuance in peace: be they Papists, Puritanes, Familians, or of what
soever nyce difference or section besides, and would be sufficient to reteyne
al parties, vvythin a temperat obedience to the magistrate and government, for
conseruatio^ of their country: which were of no small importance to the
conte^tation of her Ma. and weal public of the whole kingdom

But what should I talk of this thing, which Moderation impugned bythe
co^spirators. Cicero. Cateline.
is so contrary to the desires and designementes of our puisant co^spiratours?
What should Cicero the Senator use persuasions to Captain Cateline and his
crew, that quietness and order, were better the^ hurleburlies? Is it possible
that our aspirours, vvil ever permit any such thing, cause, or matter, to be
treated in our state, as may tend to the stabilitie of her Ma. present
government. No surely: it stands nothing with their vvisdo^ or policy:
especialie at this instant, when they have such opportunity of following their
own actions in her Majesty's name, under the vizarde and pretext, of her
defense The conspirarors oportunytie.
and safitie: having sowed in every man's head, so many imaginations of the
dangers present, both abroad and at home: from Scotland, Flaunders, Spain,
and Irela^de: so many conspiracies, so many intended murders, and others so
many co^triued or conceived mishyeues: as my L. of Leycester assures him
self, that the troubled water cannot be cleared again, in short space, not
his baits and lines laid therein, easily espied: but rather, that hereby ere
long, he vvil catch the fish he gapeth so gredilie after: and in the mean
time, for the pursuit of these crimes, and other that daily he vvil find out,
him self must remain perpetual dictator.

But what means this so much inculcating of troubles, treasons, murders and
invasions? I like not surely these omnious speeches. And as I am out of doubt,
that Leycester the caster of these shadows, does look to play his part first
in these troublesome affairs: so do I hartelie fear that onles the tyranny of
this Leycestriane fury be spedilie stopped, that such misery to Prince, and
people (which the Lord for his mercies sake turn from us) as never greater
fell before to our miserable country: is far nearer hand then is expected or
suspected.

And therefore, for prevention of these calamities, to tell you plainly mine
opinion (good Sirs) and thervvyth to dravv to an end of this our conference
(for it waxes late:) I would think it the most necessary point of al for her
Ma. to call his Lordship to account among other, and to see what other
Leycester to be called to account.
men could say against him, at le^gthe, after so many years of his sole
accusing and pursueing of others. I know and am very well assured, that no
one act which her Ma. has done since her coming to the Crown (as she has
done right many most highly to be commended.) nor any, that lightly her
Ma. may do her after, can be of more utility to her self, and to the Realm, or
more grateful unto her faithful and zealous subjects: then this noble act of
justice would be, for trial of this man's deserts toward his country.

I say it would be profitable to her Ma. and to the Realm, not only in
respect of the many dangers before mentioned, hereby to be avoided, which
are like to ensue most certenlie, if his courses be still permitted: but also,
for that her Majesty shall by this, deliver her self, from that general grudge
and grief of mind, with great dislike, which many subjects, otherwise
most faithful, have conceived against the excessive favor shevved to this
man, so many years, without desert or reason. Which favor, he having used
to the hurt annoyance and oppression both of infinite several persons, and the
whole common wealth (as has been said:) the grief and resentime^t thereof,
does redound commonly in such cases, not only upon the person delinquent
alone, but also upon the sovereign, by vvhos favor and authority he offers
such injuries, though never so much against the others intent, vvil, desire, or
meaning.

And hereof we have examples of sundry Princes, in all ages and countries:
vvhos exorbitant favor to some wicked subject that abused the same: has been
the cause of great danger and ruyn: the sins of the fauorit, being returned,
and revenged, upon the favorer. As in the history of the Grecians is
declared, by occasion of the pitiful The death of K. Philip of Macedonie and
cause thereof.
murder of that wise and victorious Prince Philip of Macedonie, who albeit,
that he were well assured to have given no offense of him self to any of his
subjects, and consequently feared nothing, but conuersed openly and
confidentlie among them: yet, for that he had favored to much one Duke Attalus
a proud and insolent Courtyer, and had borne him out in certain of his
wickedness, or at least, not punished the same after it was detected and
complained upon: the parties grieved, accompting the crime more proper and
heinous on the part of him, who by office should do justice, and protect
other, then of the perpetrator, who follows but his own passion and
sensuality: let pass Attalus, and made their revenge upon the blood and life
of the king him self, by one Pausanias, Pausanias.
suborned for that purpose, in the marriage day of the kings own daughter.

Great store of like examples might be repeated, out of the stories of other
countries, nothing being more usual or frequent among al nations, then the
afflictions of Realms and kingedomes, and the overthrow of Princes and great
potentates them selves, by their to much affection, toward some unworthy
particular persons: a thing inded so common and ordinary, as it may well seem
to be the specialest rock of al other, vvherat kings and Princes do make their
shipvvrackes.

For if we look into the states and Monarchies of al Christendom, and
consider, the ruins that have been of any Prince or ruler within the same:
we shall find this point, to have been a great and principal part of the
cause thereof: and in our own state and country, the matter is toto evident.
For vvheras, Kings of England over thrown by to much favoring of some
particular men.
since the conquest, we number principalie, three just and lavvful kings, to
have come to confusion, by alienation of their subjects: that is, Edward the
second, Richard the second, and Henry the sixth, this only point of to much
favor toward wicked persons, was the chiefest cause of destruction, in all
three. As in the first, the excessive favor toward Peter Gauesten and two
of the Spencers. In the second, the like extraordinary, and indiscrete
affection K. Edward. 2.
toward Robert Vere Earl of Oxeford, and Marquis of Dubline, and Thomas
Movvbray, two K. Richard. 2.
most turbulent and wicked men, that set the king against his own uncles
and the nobility.

In the third, (being a simple and holy man) albeit, no great exorbitant
affection was seen toward K. Henry. 6.
any, yet his wife Queen Margarets to much favor and credit (by him not
controled) toward the Marquis of Suffolk, that after was made Duke, by
vvhos instinct and wicked Counsel, she made away first the noble Duke of
Gloucester, and afterward committed other things in great prejudice of the
Realm, and suffered the said most impious and sinful Duke, to range and make
hauock of al sort of subjects, at his pleasure, (much after the fashion of
the Earl of Leycester now, though yet not in so high and extreme a degree:)
this I say was the principal and original cause, both before God and man, (as
Polidore well notes) of all the Pol. lib. 23. hist. Angl.
calamity and extreme desolation, which after ensued both to the king,
Queen, and their only child, with the utter extirpation of their family.

And so likevvyse now to speak in our particular case, if there be any grudge
or grief at this day, any mislike, repining, complaint or murmr, against
her Ma. government, in the hearts of her true and faithful subjects, who
vvish amendme^t of that which is amiss, and not the overthrow of that which
is well: (as I trow it were no wisdom to imagine there were none at al:) I
dare avouch upon conscience, that either al, or the greatest part thereof,
proceeds from this man: who by the favor of her Ma. so afflicts her
people, as never did before him, either Gauesto^, or Spe^cer, or Vere, or
Movvbray, or any other mischievous Tyrant, that abused most his Princes
favor within our Realm of England. VVherby it is evident how profitable a
thing it should be to the whole Realm, how honorable to her Ma. and how
grateful to al her subjects, if this man at length might be called to his
account.

LAW.

Sir (quoth the Lawyer) you aleage great reason, and verily I am of opinion,
that if her Ma. knevv but the tenth part of this, which you have here spoken,
as also her good subjects desires and complaint in this behalf: she would
well show, that her highness fears not to permit justice to pass upon
Leycester, or any other within her Realm, for satisfaction of her people,
what soever some men may think and report to the contrary, or how soever
otherwise of her own mylde disposition, or good affection toward the
person, she have borne with him hitherto. For so we see, that wise Princes
can do at times convenient, for peace, tranquillity, and public weal:
though contrary to their own particular and peculiar inclination.

As to go no further, then to the last example named and aleaged by your self
before: though Queen Margaret the wife of K. Henry the sixth, The punisheme^t
of VVillia^ Duke of Suffolk.
had favored most vnfortunatlie many years together VVillm. Duke of
Suffolk, (as has been said) vvherby he committed manifold outrages, and
afflicted the Realm by sundry means: yet she being a woman of great
prudence, when she savv the whole communaltie demand justice upon him for
his demerites, albeit she liked and loved the man still: yet for satisfaction
of the people, upon so general a complaint: she was content, An. 30. of King^
He^rie. 6.
first to commit him to prison, and afterward to banish him the Realm: but the
providence of God would not permit him so to escape: for that he being
incountred, and taken upon the sea in his passage, he was beheaded in the
ship, and so received some part of condign punishment for his most wicked,
loose, and licentious life.

And to seek no more examples in this case, we know into what favor and
special grace Sir Edmond Dudley my Lord of Leycesters good Graundfather was
crept, with king Henry the seventh, in the later end of his reign: and what
intolerable wickedness and mischief he wrought against the whole Realm,
and against infinite particular persons of the same, by the poolinges and
oppressions which he practiced: vvherby though the king received great
temporal commodity at that time, (as her Ma. does nothing at al, by the
present extorsions of his nephew:) yet for justice sake, and for mere
compassion toward The punishment of Edmond Dudley.
his afflicted subjects, that complained greuouslie of this iniquity: that
most virtuous and wise Prince K. Henry, was content to put from him, this
lewd instrument, and deuillishe suggestour of new exactions: whom his son
Henry, that insued in the Crown, caused presently before al other business,
to be called publicly to account, and for his deserts to leese his head. So
as where the interest of a whole Realm, or common cause of many, takes
place: the private favor of any one, cannot stay a wise and godly Prince,
(such as all the world knovveth her Ma. to be) from permitting justice to have
her free passage.

GENTL.

Truly it should not (quoth the Gentleman) for to that end were Princes
first elected, and upon that consideration do subjects pay them both tribute
and obedience: to be defended by them The causes why Princes were chosen and
do receive obedience.
from injuries and oppressions, and to see laws executed, and justice
excercised, upon and toward al men, with indifferency. And as for our
particular case of my Lord of Leycester, I do not see in right and equity,
how her Ma. may deny this lavvful desire and petition of her people. For if
her highness do permit and commau^d the laws daily to pass upon thieues and
murderers, vvythout exception, and that for one fact only, as by experience
we see: how then can it be denied in this man, who in both kinds has
committed more enormous acts, then may be well recompted.

As in the first, of theft, not only by spoiling Leycest. Theftes.
and oppressing almost infinite private men: but also whole towns, villages,
corporations, and countries, by robbing the Realm with inordinate licenses,
by deceyuing the Crown with racking, changing and imbezeling the lands, by
abusing his Prince and sovereign in selling his favor both at home and abroad:
with taking bribes for matter of justice, grace, request, supplication, or
what soever suit else may depend upon the Court or of the Princes authority:
with setting at sail and making open market, of what soever her Ma. can
give, do, or procure, be it spiritual or temporal. In which sort of trafique,
he commits more theft, often times in one day: then all the vvayekeepers,
cutpurses, cousiners, pirates, burglares, or other of that art in a whole
year, vvythin the Realm.

And as for the second, which is murder, you Leycest. murders.
have heard before somevvhat said and proved: but yet nothing, to that
which is thought to have been in secret committed upon diverse occasions at
diverse times, in sundry persons, of different calling in both sexes, by most
variable means of killing, poisoning, charming, inchaunting, coniuring and the
like: according to the diversity of men, places, opportunities and
instruments for the same. By all which means, I think, he has more blood
lying upon his head at this day, crying vengeance against him at Gods hands
and her Ma. then ever had private man in our country before, were he never so
wicked.

Whereto now, if we ad his other good behavior, A heap of Leices.
enormities that would be ready at the day of his trial
as his intolerable licenciousnes in all filthy kind and manner of carnalitie,
with al sort of vviues, friends and kinsvvomen: if we ad his injuries and
dis honors, done hereby to infinite: if we ad his treasons, treacheries and
conspiracies about the Crown: his disloyal behavior and hatred against her
Ma. his ordinary lying, and common periuring him self, in all matters for his
gain, both great and small: his rapes and most violent extorsions upon the
poor: his abusing of the Parliament and other places of justice, with the
Nobylytie and whole communaltie besides: if we ad also his open injuries
which he offers daily to religion, and the Ministers thereof, by tything
them, and turning all to his own gain: together with his manifest and
known tyranny practiced toward al estates abroad, throughout al Shires of
the kingdom: his dispoylinge of both the universities, and discouraging of
infinite notable vvittes there, from seeking perfection of knowledge and
learning, (which otherwise were like to become notable) especialy in Gods
word (which gives life unto the soul,) by defrauding them of the price and
reward proposed for their travail in that kind, through his insatiable
Simoniacal contractes: if, I say, we should lay together al these enormities
before her Majesty, and thovvsandes more in particular, which might and
vvoulde be gathered, if his day of trial were but in hope to be granted. I d^
not see in equity and reason, how her highness sitting in throne, and at the
Royal Stern, as she does, could deny her subjects this most lavvful
request: considering, that every one of these crimes aparte, requires justice
of his own nature: and much more al together ought to obtain the same, at the
hands of any good and godly Magistrate in the world.

SCHOL.

No doubt (quoth I) but that these considerations, must needs weigh much with
any zealous Prince, and much more with her most excellent Majesty: vvhos
tender hatt toward her Her Ma. tender heart toward the Realm
Realm and subjects, is very well known of al me^. It is not to be thought
also but that her highness has intelligence of diverse of these matters aleaged,
though not perhaps of al. But what would you have her Ma. to do? perhaps the
consultation of this affayre, is not, what were convenient, but what is
expedyent: not, what ought to be done in justice, but what may be done in
safety. You have described my Lord before to be a great man, strongly
furnished and fortyfyed for all euentes. What if it be not secure to barck at
the Bear that is so well I brytched? I speak unto you but that which I hear
in Cambrige and other places, vvher I have passed: where every man's opinion
is, that her Majesty stands not in free choice to do what her self best
lyketh in that case, at this day.

GENTL.

I know (said the Gentleman) that Leycesters friends give it out every
where, that her Ma. now, is their good Lords prisoner, and that she either
vvil or must be directed by him for the time to Lei. desire that men should
think her Ma. to stand in fear of him.
come, except she vvil do worse: Which thing his Lordship is well contented
should be spread abroad, and believed, for two causes: the one to hold the
people thereby more in awe of him self, then of their sovereign, and secondly
to dravv her Ma. in deed, by degrees to fear him. For considering with him
self what he has done: and that it is impossible in truth that ever her
Majesty should love him again, or trust him after so many treacheries, as he
well knovveth are come to her highness understanding: he thinks that he has
no way of sure standing, but by terror, and opinion of his puissaunt
greatness: vvherby he would hold her Majesty, and the Realm in thraldom, as
his father did in his time before him: And then for that he well remembers the
true saing, Malus custos Cicero in Officio.
diuturnitatis, metus: he must provide shortly that those which fear him, be
not able to hurt him: and consequently you know, what A rule of Machiuel
observed by the Dudleys.
must follow, by the example of K. Edward, who feared Duke Dudley extremely,
for that he had cut of his two uncles heads, and the Duke took order that he
should never live to revenge the same: For it is a settled rule of Machiuel,
which the Dudleys do observe: That, where you have once done a great injury,
there m^st you never forgive.

But I vvil tell you (my friends) and I vvil tell Lei strong only by her Ma.
favor.
you no untruth, for that I know what I speak herein, and am privy to the
state of my Lord in this behalf, and of men's opinions and affections toward
him within the Realm. Most certain it is, that he is strong by the present
favor of the Prince, (as has been shevved before) in respect vvherof, he is
admitted also as chief patron of the Huntington faction, though neither loved
nor greatly trusted of the same: but let her Majesty once turn her
countenance a side from him, in good earnest, and speak but the word only,
that justice shall take place against him: and I vvil undertake with gadging of
both my life and little lands that God has given me, that without stir or
trouble, or any danger in the world, the Bear An offer made for taking and
tyeig the Bear.
shall be taken to her Majesty's hand, and fast chained to a stake, with mouzele
cord, collar and ring, and al other things necessary: so that her Majesty
shall bate him at her pleasure, without al danger of bytyng, breaking loose,
or any other inconvenience what soever.

For (Syrs) you must not think, that this man holds any thing abroad in the
Realm, but by violence, and that only upon her Majesty's favor and
countenance toward him. He has not any thing of his own, either from his
ancestoures, or of him self, to stay upon, in men's hearts or conceiptes: h^
has not ancient nobility, as other of our Realm have, vvherby men's
affections are Lei. what he recey ueth f^o^ his ancestors.
greatly moved. His father John Dudley was the first noble of his line: who
raised and made him self bygge by supplanting of other, and by setting debate
among the nobility: as also his Grandfather Edmond, a most wicked promotor,
and vvretched petifogar, enriched him self by other men's ruynes: both of them
condemned traitors, though different in quality, the one being a Cousiner,
and the other a Tyrant, and both of their vices conjoined, colected, and
comprised (with many more additions) in this man (or beast rather) which is
Robert, the third of their kin and kind. So that, from his ancestors, this
Lord receives neither honor nor honesty, but only succession of treason and
infamy.

And yet in him self has he much less of good, vvhervvith to procure him self
love or credit among men, then these ancestoures of his had: he being a man
wholy abandonned of humane virtue, and devoted to wickedness, which makes
men odible both to God and man. In his father (no doubt) there were to be seen
many excellent good parts, if they had been joined with faith, honesty, The
compary son of Leices. with his father.
moderation, and loyalty. For all the world knovveth, that he was very wise,
valyant, magnammous, liberal, and assured friendly vvher he once promised: of
al which virtues, my Lord his son, has neither show nor shadovv, but only
a certain false representation of the first, being crafty and subtle to
deceive, and ingenious to wickedness. For as for val^ur, he has as much as
has a mouse: his magnanimity, is base sordiditi^ his liberality, rapine: his
friendship, plain fraud, holding only for his gain and no otherwise,
though it were bound with a thousand oaths: of which he makes as great
account, as hens do of cackling, but only for his commodity: using them
specialie and in greatest number, when most he means to deceive. Namely if
he swear solemnlie, by his George, or by the eternal God, then be sure it is
a false lie: for these are observations in the Court: and some times in his own
lodging, in like case his manner is to take up and swear by the Bible, vvherby
a Ge^tleman of good account, and one that seems to follow him, (as many do
that like him but a little) protested to me of his knowledge, that in a very
short space, he observed him, vvittingly and willingly, to be forsvvorne
sixtiene times. The weakness of Ley. if her Ma. ^urne but her countenance from
him.


This man therefore, so contemptible by his ancestors, so odible of him self,
so plunged, overwhelmed, and defamed in all vice, so envied in the Court, so
detested in the country, and not trusted of his own and dearest friends:
nay, (which I am privy to) so misliked and hated of his own servants about
him, for his beastly life, nigardye, and Atheism, (being never seen yet, to
say one private prayer vvythin his chamber in his life) as they desire nothing
in this world so much as his ruyn, and that they may be the first, to lay
hands upon him, for revenge. This man (I say) so broken both vvythin and
vvythout, is it possible that her Ma. and her wise Council should fear? I
can never believe it: or if it be so: it is Gods pe^^ission vvythout al cause,
for punishment of our sins: for that this man, if he once perceive indeed,
that they fear him, vvil handle them accordingly and play the Bear indeed:
which inconvenience I hope they vvil have care to prevent, and so I leave it
to God and them: craving pardon of my Lord of Leycester for my boldness, if I
have been to plain with him. And so I pray you let us go to supper, for I see
my servant expecting, yonder, at the Gallerie door, to call us down.

LAW.

To that, said the lawyer, I am content with The end and departure from the
Gallerie.
al my heart: and I would it had been sooner, for that I am a feared, lest any
by chance have ouerheard us here since night. For my own part, I must say,
that I have not been at such a conference this seven years, nor mean to be
hereafter, if I may escape well with this: vvherof I am sure I shall dream
this foruthnight, and think oftener of my Lord of Leycester, then ever I had
intended: God amend him and me both. But if ever I hear at other hands of
these matters hereafter, I shall surely be quake-britch, and think every bushe
a thyefe. And with that, came up the Mystres of the house, to fetch us down
to supper, and so al was vvhusht, saving that at supper a Gentlemanor two
began again to speak of my Lord, and that so conformable to some of our
former speech (as indeed it is the common talk at tables every where) that
the old Lawyer began to shrink and be appaled, and to cast dry looks upon
the Gentleman our friend: doubting least something had been discovered of our
conference. But in deed, it was not so.

FINIS.
PIA ET VTILIS MEDITATIO, DEsumpta ex libro Iobi. CAP. 20.
HOC scio a principio, ex quo positus est homo super terram, quod laus
impiorum, breuis sit ex gaudiu^ hipocritae ad instar pu^cti. Si asce^derit
vsque ad coelu^ superbta eius, and caput cius nubes tetigerit: quasi
sterquiliniu^ in fine perdetur, and qui eu^ videra^t, dice^t, vbi est? velut
somniu^ auola^s no^ inuentetur, tra^siet sicut visio noctur na. Oculus qui eu
viderat, no^ videbit, neque vltra intuebitur eu^ locus suus. Filij eius
attere^tur egestate, and manus illius redde^t ei labore^ suu^. Ossa eius
implebu^tur vitijs adolesce^tiae eius, and cum eo in puluere dermient. Panis
eius in vtero illius; vertetur in fell aspidum intrinsecus. Diuitias quas
deuorauit, euomet, and de ventre illius extrahet eas Deus. Caput aspidum
surget, and occidet eum linguam viperae, ^uet quae fecit omnia, nec tamen
co^sumetur. luxta multitudinem adinuentionum suarum, sic and susiinebit.
Quoniam co^fringens nudauit pauperes: domu^ rapuit, and non aedificauit came:
nec est satiatus venture eius, and cum habuerit quae concupierit, possidere non
peterit. Non rema^sit de cibo eius, and propterea non permanebit de bonis eius.
Cum satiatus fuerit, arctabitur, aestuabit, and omnis dolor irruet super eum.
Vtina^ impleatur venture eius, vt immittat in eum (Deus) ^ram furori^ sui, and
pluat super illum bellu^ suum. Fugiet arma ferrea, and irruet in arcu^ aereum.
Gladius eductus and egredie^s de vagina sua, and fulgura^s in amaritudine sua:
Omnes tenebrae absconditae sunt in occultis eius. Deuorabit eum ignis qui non
succenditur, affligetur relictus in tabernaculo suo. Apertum erit germen domus
illtus, detrahetur in die furoris Dei. Haec est pars hominis impij, a Deo, and
haereditas verborum eius a Domino.

A GODLY AND PROfitable meditation taken out of the 20. Chapter of the Book
of Job.
THIS I know from the first that man was The wicked man's pomp. His joy.
His pride. His fall.
placed upon earth, that the praise (or applause) given to wicked men,
endures but a little, and the joy of an hypocrite, is but for a moment.
Though his pride were so great as to mount to heaven, and his head should
touch^ the skies: yet in the end shall he come to perdition as a dunghill, and
they who beheld him (in glory before) shall say, vvher is he? he shall be
found as a flying dream, and as a fantasy by night shall fade away. The eye
that beheld him before, shall no more see him, nor yet shall his place (of
honor) His children. His old age. His bread.
ever more behold him. His children shall be worn out with beggarie and his
own hands shall return upon him his sorrovv. His (old) bones shall be
reple^ished, with the vices of his youth, and they shall sleep with him in
his grave. His bread in his belly, shall be turned invvardely into the gaul of
serpents. The riches which he has devoured, he shall vomit forth again, and
god His restitution.
shall pull them forth of his belly. He shall suck the head of Cocatrices, and
the (venomous) tongues of adders shall slay him. He shall sustain due
punisheme^t for all the wickedness His punisheme^t
that he has committed, nor yet shall he have end or consumation thereof. He shall
suffer according to the multitude of al his wicked inventions. For that by
violence His wickedness.
he has spoiled the poor, made hauock of his house, and not builded the same.
His womb is never satisfied, and yet when he has that which he desired, he
shall not be able to possess the same. There remains no part of his meat
(for the poor:) and therefore there shall His grief
remain nothing of his goods. When his belly is full, then shall he begin to
be straytened, then shall he svvear, and al kind of sorrovv shall rush upon him.
I would his belly were once full, that God might send forth upon His
affliction.
him the rage of his fury, and rain upon him his war. He shall fly away
from y^on weapons, and run upon abovve of brass. A drawn svvorde coming
out of his skabarde shall flashe as lightni^g in his bitterness. Al darkness His
damnation.
lie hydden for him in secret: the fiar that needs no kindling shall devour
him, and he shall be tormented alone in his tabernacle. The offspring of his house
His posterity.
shall be made open and pulled down in the day of Gods fury. This is the
portion of a wicked man from God, and this is the inheritance of his
substance from the Lord.


