(...) OR A most Heavenly and Fruitful Sermon, Preached the sixth of August.
1615.

At the Translation of the right Reverend Father in God, the Archbishop of St.
Andrews to the Sea thereof.

By Mr. WILLIAM COVVPER B. of Galloway.

DAN. 12. 3. They that turn many to righteousness, shall shine as the stars
for ever and ever.



Imprinted at London by G. P. for John Budge, and are to be sold at his shop,
at the great South-doore of Paul's, and at Britains Bursse. 1616.

TO THE RIGHT Honorable, my Lord SANCHAR.
MY LORD:
THere is one Star, (...).
which from diverse Offices, receives sudry names (says Pisida
Constantinopol.) It is (...) a nunce of the night, and therefore called (...).
It returns again, and declares the approaching of the day, then is it (...),
and therefore called (...). Such a one have I been at this time. The funeral
of the late Archbishop of S t Andrews, the new function of his successor gave
occasion of both. I was invited unlooked for to the interring of the one, that
I might speak to the living for the dead, and from him. There Hesperus
ouershadowed us, with dark and doleful countenance. Enjoined again to preach
at the entry of the other, there Phosphorus proclaimed the coming of a bright
and joyful day, which I pray God may long continue.

Blessed be the Lord, who still conserues a Ministry in his Church! One
generation passes, and another Eccles. 1. 4
comes, but the earth remains; much more, he who formed Iam. 1. 17
it, for in him falls no shadow of change. Before the Ruler of the world
stand these Olives, Zach. 4.
which furnish oil to his Candlestick. In his hand are the seven Revel. 1.
12.
stars: no smoke of the bottomless pit can utterly quench their light. If
one of them go down from our Horizon, another ascends. Elijah may be taken
away; but one comes after him in the Spirit, and power of Elijah. Moses dyed,
but The God of the Spirits of all flesh raised up Joshua, with whom he wrought
no less powerfully, then with Moses. By Moses he brought Israel out of Egypt,
by Joshua he entered them in Canaan. By Moses he destroyed one Nation of the
Egyptians, by Joshua he discomfited seven Nations of the Cananites. Moses
divided the red Sea, and Joshua parted Jordan into two. Moses darkened the Sun
that it shined not, Joshua detained it, that it went not down, according to
the ordinary course. Nimrod for all his might cannot build up, where IEHOVA
will cast down. Neither can Sennacherib for all his pride, prevail against the
City which God will protect. They are fools who fight against heaven.
Sidonians in their treaty Act. 12. 20
with Blastus for Herod his peace, might learn them more wisdom: they imagine
to quench the light of Israel, by cutting away comfortable instruments from the
Church: but they are deceived; for the Church is like a tree, whose branches
hang down to the earth, and may be cut off, though not without divine
permission, but the root is in heaven, which still sends out others in their
room. I have penned this Sermon, to stop the mouths of misreporters, as I
preached it, without paring or adding any thing, except a little discourse of
the Religion of our Antipodes: And do now dedicate it to your Lordship, as one
who being a present Auditor thereof, can best bear witness to the truth of my
relation. And I trust, your Lordship will also accept it as a testimony of that
love, which I owe unto you, for your constant profession of God his eternal
truth, in this declining age, and your most sincere affection, in all your
speeches ever auowed to his Majesty's service: whereunto as your Lordship
acknowledges your self to be bounden beyond others of your rank; So I pray
GOD your Lordship may continue faithful, in both unto the death.

Your Lordships own in Christ, W. B. of Galloway.

A Most Heavenly and fruitful Sermon, Preached the sixth of August, 1615.
TIT. 2. 7, 8. In all things show thy self an ensample of good works, with
vncorrupt doctrine, with gravity and integrity.

And with the wholesome word, unreprovable, that he which withstandeth may be
ashamed, having nothing concerning you to speak evil of.


My help is in the name of the LORD.
THese words read in Two parts of this Text.
your honorable, and Christian audience (beloved in our Lord and Savior
Christ Jesus) contain two things. First, the duty of a good 1. Duty of Pastors.
Bishop or Pastor toward his people. This is plainly set down: he should be
an ensample, in word, in work, in doctrine, in life. Next, the duty of
Christian 2. Duty of people.
people toward their Bishop, or Pastor: and this is closely set down, or (as
we say) by way of consequence, for this same precept, which binds the one to
be an exemplar, binds the other to be conformable to the exemplar.

In the entry, we are to warn Warning in the entry.
you that we come not here this day to ordain a new Bishop in the Church, but
to enter an old and approved Bishop unto a new charge in the Church. Neither
have I chosen this Text, so much for him, as for the edification of us all, who
are in this holy calling. I wish unto all the rest the like wisdom in
government, dextetity in doing, and fervent zeal against the common enemy,
that has been evident in him. I bless them, as the Elders of Israel blessed
Ruth the wife of Booz, and mother of our Lord. God make them like Ruth. 4. 11.
Rahel, and like Leah, which twain did build the house of Israel; and I pray
for the performance of that promise in them, which God has made to his Church
by Zachary, that the meanest servant in the house of GOD this day may become
like David, and they who now in light and grace are like unto David, may
increase, Zach. 12. Col. 2. 19.
with the increasings of God, till they become like an Angel of God. Titus,
stablished by S. Paul, Bishop of Creta, having charge of all Churches in that
I Will.


This Epistle was written by St. Paul from Nicopolis in Macedonia, to Titus,
whom the Apostle had taken from an other charge in the Church, for he was his
companion in his peregrinations, and fellow-helper in the work of the Lord,
and now had bound him, and burdened him with a particular care of the Churches
of Creta, and set him down Bishop there. Creta is an I Will in the Mediterranean
sea, famous for this, that it had in it an hundredth Cities. The charge not of
one, but all of them, is committed to Titus, to teach and govern them, and to
plant Preachers in every one of them: the subscription of the Epistle so styles
him; Titus, the first elect Bishop of the Cretians. Some of the
contrary-minded, as namely, Mr. Cartwright, confess this subscription to be
taken from the Greek Scholiast. Of this same judgment are the ancient
Fathers. For the Greek church, it contents me to name Chrysostom: for the
Latin church Ambrose. Many more might be alleged, who compass this
assertion, like a Cloud of witnesses, and warrant it to be true by their
testimony. Eusebius affirms the Eusebius. lib. 3. cap. 4.
same, and cites Sophronius, as consonant unto him: with them agree many of
the Recents, such as Bucerus, Bullengerus, Hemmingius, Pellicanus, and others,
to whom none will deny the testimony of godly, sound, and learned Divines. But
howsoever this Epistle was written to Titus by name; yet does it appertain to
all that succeed him in the like calling, teaching the^ what to do in
government of the house of God, and so we come to the words

In all things, (...). Mark The threefold duty of a Bishop.
what the Apostle says, in all things, not in one thing, but in all be an
ensample* Some things thou have to do as a Christian, some things as a Pastor;
and some as a Bishop. As a christian, 1. To live as a good Christian.
be holy in thy self, and teach others holiness by thy ensample. As a Pastor,
Preach the word of God in season, and out of season. As a Bishop, counsel and
admonish 2. To teach as a good Pastor.
in wisdom, correct with compassion, ordain with discretion, rebuke; and (if
need be) cut off with aurhority. Episcopi prima Nazian. Orat. 21. Apologet.
fugae.
cura vt Ecclesia dignus sit, deinde vt Sacrario, atque it a demum praefectura.
The first care of a Bishop should be to live like a good Christian and member
of the Church: Next, like a good Churchman serving in the 3. To rule as a good
President in the Church.
Sanctuary: thirdly, like a good President, or ouerseer of others in the
Church. Many not marking this distinction of the Apostolic precepts, in these
Epistles unto Timothy and Titus, are miscarried in their judgment, not
considering that the precepts given to them as to Christians, are common to all
Christians, and the precepts given them as Pastors, appertain to all Pastors;
but should not be extended to all Christians: and the precepts given to them
as Bishops, appertain only to such as are Bishops.

In all things. All things are How a Bishop should behave himself in things
good, evil and indifferent.
either simply good, or simply evil, or the indifferent (...): that which is
good, the Apostle wills him to do it, with diligence, and devotion; that
which is evil, he would have him abhor it with hatred, and detestation: Do
I not hate them, O Psalm. 1 39. 21
Lord, that hate thee? do I not contend with them that rise up against thee?
I hate them as if they were mine utter enemies. It is the great praise of the
Angel of Ephesus, I know thou can not forbear Revel. 2. 2
them which are evil. That which is indifferent, he will have him use with
discretion, that so, in all things he may show himself an ensample.

The rule of discretion in the The rule of things indifferent.
use of things indifferent, is to consider expedience; All things are lawful,
but all things are not 1. Cor. 10. 23
expedient. Expedience again requires two conditions, whereof the one respects
thy self, the other thy neighbor. The condition respecting thy self, is set
down by the Apostle: I may do all things, but I will not 1. Cor. 6. 12
come under the power of any thing; for it is dangerous, when indifferent
things, by custom become necessary, and keep the heart of man under such
commandment, that he cannot be without them; this is to come under the power
of them. The other condition of expedience respects thy neighbor, shortly
set down by the Apostle, (...), 1. Cor. 14. 26
let all be done to edification, Let us follow those things which concern
peace, and wherewith one Rom 14. 19
may edify another: and again, Let every man please his neighbor Romans 15. 2
in that which is good to edification. And thus much for the first word of our
Text. In all things. A good Bishop or Pastor is the Stamp, or Signet of the
Lord.


An ensample. The word (...), derived from the common verb (...), signifies a
form made by ingrauing impressio^, or any kind of beating, such as as we see
are stampes, seals, or signets, which at the pleasure of the maker receive
such form in themselves, as by them they would have imprinted in an other. In
this sense the word it self is called, (...), a form of doctrine, and the
Romans are praised, that Romans 6. 17
they had obeyed from the heart unto the form of doctrine, whereunto they were
delivered. Even as mollified wax receives such a print or form, when it is
applied to the stamp, as is in the stamp it self.

Such stampes and ensamples Themselves should be sta^ped with Gods image, that
they may imprint it in others. 1. Pet. 5. 3
also should al good Bishops and Pastors be. Saint Peter exhorts them to be
ensamples to the flock (...). Such an example did S. Paul show himself, look
on them, who so walk as ye have us for an ensample (...): Philip. 3. 17
there he uses the same word, requiring nothing of Titus, but that which in his
own person he had practiced before him. It stands then for a warning to us
all, that we should take heed with what form we are engraven our selves,
whose Image, and Superscription do we carry: for as a signet can make no
impression in the wax, but such as it has in it self; so if Christ be not
formed in thy heart, how can thou form him into the heart of another? Or at
An admonition to Church-me^, that it is a fearful laesae Maiestatis, to
falsify the seal of the great King.
lest, if God of his great mercy imprint that form in another, which is not in
thy self, and make others Christians by thy ministry, thou not being a good
Christian thy self, if he communicate that form to an other; which thou have
vitiat and corrupted in thy self, Is not thy judgment the greater? Again, I
say, let us remember we are the signets of the everliving God, and should
carry the similitude of God in ourselves, that we may communicate it unto
others. It is a point of high treason to falsify the seal of the great King,
or to stamp his people with any other Image then his own. The Lord preserve
us, that we be not guilty of this fearful laesae Maiestatis.

It is not then left free to any Bishop, or Pastor of whatsoever It is not free
to Bishops, or Pastors to live as they list: they should be examples unto
others.
dignity, or place in the Church, to live as he pleases, and then think that
he should be followed in all that likes him. Let this pride be left to
Antichristian Prelates and their Pope. Caracalla that bloody and incestuous
Emperor, learned it from his Stepmother Iulia, and they have received it from
him; Imperatoris esse leges dare, non accipere, their liberty they esteem a
law, and their authority an argument good enough. No, thou art otherwise bound
by the law of God: thou must first be formed by him thy self, and according
to that form, and none other, must thou conform his people. S. Paul exhorts
the Corinthians 1. Cor. 4. 16
to be followers of him, but expounds himself in another place; Be ye
followers of me, as I 1. Cor. 11. 1
am of Christ: Ye are the light of the world, take heed that the light Math.
5. 14 Luke 11. 35
which is in you be not turned into darkness: they who walk not according
to this rule, are blind Mat. 15. 14 Acts 9. 15 Such an ensample was S. PAVL,
who carried the message of Christ in his mouth, the image of Christ in his
life, the marks of Christ in his body.
and pernicious guides of the people; For where the blind leads the blind,
both must fall into the ditch.

A worrhy ensample was Saint Paul, A chosen Vessel to bear the name of his
Lord, for he carries the message of CHRIST in his mouth, the image of Christ
in his life, the marks of Christ in his body (...), and such an ensample
wills he Titus and all other Bishops and Pastors to be; first in themselves,
and then to show it out unto the others: Show thy self an ensample, or as the
word in the original more significantly imports, (...), exhibit thy self an
ensample: for the show of a good that is not, ends in shame, Cum nihl
simulatum sit diuturnum.

All Christians are bound to All Christians are bound to be ensamples, shevving
out Gods image to others.
be good ensamples unto others; for as no King will admit in his treasury
counterfeit money, nor suffer it to go for current in merchandise among his
people, (...) Macar. hom. 30.
(...), even so a soul unless it have in it the image of Christ by secret
light engraven, is not meet to be gathered into the heavenly treasure; and the
holy Apostles Merchants of the kingdom, reject it as counterfeit money, not
rightly stamped, which should not be receined among Saints.

But howsoever this be a common But they are most bound who come nee: rest the
Lord by a holy calling.
duty required of all Christians; certain it is, the nearer men come to the
Lord in a holy calling, the more are they bound to be ensamples of holiness
unto others. In the order of Nature, we see the elements seated one above
another, and according to their place they excel one another in purity: the
earth is the lowest element, most remote from heaven, and it is the grossest,
the water naturally compasses the earth, and is purer then the earth; the air
is above the water, and purer then the water; the fire again is above the
air, and a purer element then the air; the Spheres of Heaven compass all,
and are purer then the rest.

As the world, so the Church How the whole Church is a circle, the center and
circumference, whereof is the Lord.
is a circle, the Center and Circumference whereof is the Lord: he is the
Center which draws al to himself, and in whom all his Saints shall meet in
one at the last; he is the Circumference which compasses us about to keep in
his Saints, that none of them go from him. Let it be supposed, that there are
many circles between the Center and the Circumference, but these which are
nearest the Center, are likest unto it. I will be sanctified Leuit. 10. 3
(says the Lord) in all that comes near me: the nearer by place and calling
thou come to the Lord, the more requires he to be sanctified in thee. When the
Army of Israel camped in the Wilderness, they were cast in a quadrant, three
of their Tribes on the West, three on the East, three on the South, and three
on the North: in the midst of them was the Arc, they were all bound to be
holy; but these Levites who came nearest the Ark, and carried it, were bound to
be more holy then others. In the Revel. 4. 4
new Testament the Church is cast in form of a circle, in the midst whereof
God has his throne: all enjoy his presence, for they are round about him; but
as ye may see figured by S. John in the type thereof, they who are nearest the
Throne, excel others in holiness.

When the Lord proclaimed A fearful example of judgment, on such as corrupt
their ways in a high and holy calling.
his Law upon Mount Sinai, the people were parted in 3. ranks: some stood in
the valley, and might not touch the Mount under pain of death: others, were
permitted to go up to the Mount, as Aaron, Nadab Abihu, Exodus 24. 11.
with the Nobles of Israel, these saw the glory of God. Joshua was there also,
yet none but Moses Verse 18.
went up to the Mount, and entered in the cloud. That fearful example of Nadab
and Abihu, consumed with strange fire from heaven, because they became profane
and presumptuous, to offer strange fire to the Lord, even after that God had
preferred them to such high dignity and place above their brethren: it should
be an aw-band to all those whom GOD has set near to himself by a holy
calling, that they corrupt not their ways before him, but as they are warned
by MALACHY, They keep themselves in the Spirit, lest the like strange wrath
from GOD should suddenly overtake them.

Of good works. By this same Three ranks of good works. Tit. 2. 12
Apostle in this Chapter good works are divided into three ranks, for they
are either works of Piety toward God, or of Equity toward our neighbor, or
Sobriety toward our selves: and these bring out a threefold fruit most sweet
and excellent: for by them first God is glorified: secondly thy neighbor is
edified: thirdly, thy own conscience comforted, and confirmed in the assurance
of thy salvation. Of the first speaks the Apostle: Let Servants show all
faithfulness, that they may adorn Tit. 2. 10
the doctrine of God our Savior in all things, there we see that our The
threefold fruit of them.
good works are an ornament to the Gospel. Of the second, and first also,
speaks our Savior: Let your works so shine before men, that they seeing them,
may glorify Math. 5. 16
your Father that is in heaven: there we see that God is glorified by our godly
life, and men thereby are edified and moved to do it. Of the third speaks S.
Peter, Make sure your calling and election 2. Pet. 1. 10
by well doing. As every tree is known by the fruit, so works of grace prove
those that have them, to be a tree planted by predestination in the Paradise of
God, Psalm. 1.
by that river of the water of life, and that therefore thy leaf shall not
fade, and thy root shall not perish, because thou art rooted and grounded in
Christ Jesus, and growest in him, who shall for ever conserve the sap of
grace in thy soul.

The adversaries calumniate We are no enemies to good works, but to the
opinion of meriting by them.
us and call us enemies to good works; but God forbid we were so. We
condemn no good works, only we condemn their presumptuous opinion of the
merit of good works. Meriting causes of salvation they are not, yet are they
witnessing effects thereof, without which a man cannot be saved; not that we
are saved by them, but because that justifying faith which whereby we are
saved cannot be without them; for Faith works by love. In the act Our works
have no place in Justification, but have all place in sanctification.
of justification we affirm good works have no place; for a man must first be
justified before he do any good, Nam sequuntur iustificatum, in the work
again of Sanctification they want no place: this doctrine they challenge of
novelty, but indeed it is Apostolic, consonant also to the doctrine of the
ancient, and primitive Church.

For that assertion of the Apostle, This doctrine is warranted by the Apostle.
Romans 3. 28
we conclude that a man is justified by faith without the works of the Law,
is equivalent to this, that a man is justified by faith only. And from the
Apostle the ancient Fathers have drawn this position, Sola fide iustificamur.
Basil. de Confess. fidei. And Apostolic doctors of the Church.
Basil in his Treatise, De Confessione fidei has it: Nos non habemus vnde
quicquam gloriemur de iustitia, cum ex sola fide in Christum iustificemur. We
have not whereof to glory of righteousness, seeing we are justified by faith
only in Christ Jesus; and more notable is that testimony of Ambrose, Ambros.
in Epist. ad Romans cap. 3.
Iustifica^tur gratis quia nihil operantes; neque vicem redde^tes sola fide
iustificati sunt, dono Dei; by this one sentence he cuts away from
justification their works both of congruitie, and condignity, and annulleth
their vain distinction of a first and second justification; and in plain
terms, he ascribes our justification to faith only in Christ. With these
concurres Augustine, Quod autem sequitur, propterea vos non auditis Aug. in
Joan. cap. 8. Tract. 42.
quia ex Deo non estis, jis dictum est, qui non fuerant credituri ea fide, qua
sola possent a peccatorum obligatione liberari. And passing by many others we
add only the testimony of Bernard, Quisquis Ber. in Cant, ser. 22.
pro peccatis compunctus esurit and sitit iustitiam, credat in te qui
iustificas impium, and solam iustificatus per fidem pacem habebit ad Deum.
Whosoever he be that is pricked in his heart with sorrow for his sins, and
hungers and thirsts Justification by faith only is the ancient doctrine of the
Church.
for righteousness, let him believe in thee who iustifiest sinners, and so
being justified by faith only he shall have peace with God. Let them now
cease to glory of antiquity, let them think shame to charge us with nouelty,
if they be not past all bounds of shame, for it is manifest to the indifferent
reader that we teach no other way now, then the Apostles and approved Doctors
of elder times have taught before us.

But leaving this, I wish disputing Good works are witnesses of our faith and
seals of our salvation.
about good works were turned into doing: we have all learned in this age to
put good works out of the chair of merit, and justly, for none should sit in
that chair but Christ Jesus; but we have not all learned to give them their
own place in the matter of salvation: though they be not as I said meriting
causes, yet are they witnesses of thy faith and seals of thy salvation: thou
art not now justified by them, yet shall thou be judged by them, and tried
whether if or not thou were justified in CHRIST JESUS Oh that our A just
reproof of fruitless professors.
fruitless professors would consider this! Tell me, I pray you, what have ye
to witness with you that ye are Christians? your word says ye are so; but
all your works witness against you: your unclean eyes, your dissolute speech,
your vain apparel, your polluted hands, your wandering feet: all these
proclaim Chrysostom. in Math. hom. 4.
you to be Pagans; only with your tongues ye say ye are Christians: ye feed
not the hungry, ye cloth not the naked, ye visit not the sick, these are the
works, and such like that will be brought out as witnesses, either with us and
for us, or then against us. Be not then deceived to think that thy naked word
will prove thee a Christian, when none of the works of Christ can be seen in
thee.

But it seems, many Professors These have not learned to show their faith by
works.
are feared for the curse of the Pharisees on whom Christ pronounced a woe,
because they did their works to be seen of men; they say they do good, but
never man saw it: they have not learned that lesson of S. James, to Iam. 2. 18.
show their faith out of their works; for whom it were better that they
should be afraid lest they be cursed with that figgetree, which a far off
seemed fruitful, but when our Lord came near and looked into it, longing for
some fruit, he found none at all, and therefore cursed it.

It was well observed by Augustine, A good work sincerely done the more
public it be, is the more profitable.
that a good work if it be done in sincerity, the more puhlicke it be, the more
profitable it is: as namely, when alms out of a good heart is given in
public; not only is he benefited that gets it, but such as see it are edified
thereby. Seeing it is so, that our works must be our witnesses, let us all
endeavor to be more abundant in them. To move us hereunto, I conclude this
point with this twofold consideration. First when thy soul shall be sundred
from thy body, the good thou have done in thy body shall never be sundred from
thy self, but shall go with thee. Blessed Revel. 19 A twofold comfortable
fruit of good works
are the dead that dye in the Lord, for they rest from their labor, and their
works follow them. Secondly, when thou art dead in thy body and sundred from
men; yet shall thou still live in thy works, and have thy memory conserved
among men. Therefore so long as we have time, let us do good.

In Doctrine. The construction The construction of the words cleared.
of the Text following, is somewhat more difficult; first because of the defect
or concealing of some word, for either the preceding word (...) must be
repeated, or some other equivalent to it understood; next for the change of the
case, (...): and thirdly, for mutation of the change of speech; for the Apostle
speaks here in Abstracto, not content to say, show thy self an upright, A
good Pastor is a vocal and working virtue.
and a grave man in concreto: but which is much more significant, show thy
self uprightness, gravity and integrity it self: thus in effect will the
Apostle have a Bishop or Pastor, to be a working, and a vocal virtue,
breathing, working, showing out nothing in all the parts of his conversation
but Virtue it self.

This word in Doctrine, some Then is doctrine a precious pearl, when good
works go before, and follow after it.
interpreters refer ad Antecedentia, and read them this way, Show thy self
an exemplar of good works in doctrine, that is, agreeable to the doctrine; so
does the judicious Calvin; others refer it ad Consequentia, and read it
with the words following: In doctrine, show integrity, gravity, and wholesome
speech but the matter is all one. Then is doctrine a bright shining pearl,
when it has good works going before it, and following after it: and therefore
the Apostle here wisely pleaceth doctrine in the midst of good works.

Aaron in his pectorall Ornament This is like Aaron his Vrim and Thummim.
had not Vrim without Thummim: light of knowledge is comely when it has with
it perfection, and integrity of holiness. To a Preacher good doctrine without
a good life procures double shame and iudgemenr. Dicta namque factis
deficientibus erubescunt. Words may move, but works move more, Validior vox
operis quam oris. And on the other hand a good life is not sufficient in him
without good doctrine. A Bishop should be (...) one that is apt to teach, and
as he should have the gift, so is he bound to bestow it on others: yea, to
put his Masters Talent to the uttermost profit. A necessity lies upon him to
preach, and woe will be unto him if he preach not. Certainly if thou loose this
glory, To Preach the Euangell of glory, all other thy glory He will never be a
good Doctor of the Church, who is not a good Disciple of Christ. Act. 1. 1
shall be turned into shame (...), we are the servants of that Lord, of whom
it is said, he began to do and to to teach. Let us learn of our Lord, he
shall never be a good Doctor of the Church, who is not first a good disciple of
Jesus: in these two is comprised our whole duty, to do and to teach, it is not
enough to do if we teach not; far less to teach, if we do not: let no man
separate these things which God has conjoined together.

And yet we must consider, An unrebukable life may be in Heretics without
wholesome doctrine.
that sometime a good life, at least unrebukable in the eyes of man, may be
where the wholesome doctrine is not, that we suffer not our selves to be so
far deceived; as to embrace deadly and poisoned doctrine for the appearing
show of an holy life. This was wisely observed by Chrysostom, (...), that
oftentimes among Heretics a good life may be found, of whom notwithstanding
the way to eternal life cannot be learned. I mark this for these simple ones,
who deceived with a show of sanctity in the Popes Church, This is necessary to
be marked, that simple ones be not deceived with show of sanctity.
are thereby induced to embrace their damnable doctrine, and so become a prey to
the Devil, snared with the net of religion. A dangerous evil, when devouring
Wolves come in Sheep clothing. The Devil hates Christ Jesus deadly, and is
never so much to be feared, as when he speaks most in favor of his cause: and
then are his instruments most pernicious, when they transform themselves into
2. Cor. 11. 14
Angels of light, and look like Ministers of righteousness; that is, when
under color of a holy life: they present to poor people a cup of deadly
poison. Many have fallen by this tentation. For strengthening therefore others
against it, I will insist a little to discover it.

Josephus in his Antiquities records, Joseph. Antiq. lib. 13. cap. 18. The
Pharisees of old lived a most strait life.
that the Pharisees Nundinaria quadam sanctitate animos hominum ita sibi
conciliabant, vt quod ipsi dicerent, vel facerent, ius and fas ab omnibus
crederetur, by a certain nundinarie or mercat-meete sanctity, they used to
make merchandise of men, and did in such sort co^ciliat or steal their hearts
unto themselves, that whatsoever they did or said was credited and believed of
al men to be right and lawful. The straitness of their life is recorded by
Epiphanius, Virginitati and Epiphan.
continentiae studebant, frequenter orabant, durissimis stratis cubabant, bis
in Sabbato ieiunabant, secunda and quinta die, that they professed Virginity
and continency, and studied to keep themselves every way unspotted, they prayed
frequently, they lay upon hard and uneasy beds, they fasted twice every week,
to wit, the second day, and the fifth: and such was their zeal to propagate
their Pharisaisme, that as our Savior says, they spared not to compass Sea
and land, to make one of their own profession. What more, I pray you, is done
by any of these pretended religious Orders in the Roman Church, then is here
recorded of Pharisees? yet are they both, the one and the other, deceived, and
deceiving heretics.

Bastard worshippers have ever The Priests of Baal, and idolatrous Israelites
did so in like manner.
made a greater show of piety in external things, then the true either could
or would do: Truth must not be measured by zeal, but zeal must be judged by
Truth. The Priests of Baal in not sparing their flesh, were much more severe
then the Poenitentiars of Rome, for they launced their flesh with sharp knives.

The Oblation of Idolatrous Israelites exceeded far in value the donation of
lands, or rents, which Papists make out of their blind zeal; for they
sacrificed their own children, and burnt them quick, esteeming that in so
doing, they did imitate the example of their father Abraham, but when they
thought they were wise, they were foolish, their fact could not be like
Abraham's, because they wanted the warrant which Abraham had.

The Pharisees of this time The Pharisees of our time make a mustering of their
merits also.
make a great mustering of their meritorious deeds: their hospitals, their
alms, their fasting, their multiplying of prayers upon beads and such like,
are brought to the simpler sort, as arguments to prove the verity of their
religion, and allurements to induce them to embrace it; but in this, as they
are not unlike to that young man who said unto our Lord, All these
Commandments have I kept from my youth, esteeming themselves much Mar. 10. 21
more perfect then indeed they are; yet let them be content with his answer.
Any good that they do, we love it: yea for the love of good, we do even love
the appearance of it, as by the contrary, we are taught not only to hate
evil, but to abstain But no good work can be, where wholesome doctrine is not.
from appearance of evil. And thus far let them be loved with that young
man, but here-withall let them know that one thing yet is lacking unto them,
and such an one thing, as without which all other things are nothing: for true
holiness cannot be where wholesome doctrine is not.

If they would consider this All will worship is abomination to the Lord.
matter, and lay by a little their own preiudicate and forestalled opinions,
the similitude that Heretics have with them in these chiefest points, wherein
they place their greatest sanctity, they might easily see that all their (...)
which in their darkened judgment is the true worship of God, is nothing else but
the birth of man's brain, the fruit of his own invention, whereunto corrupt
nature has led others who were never illuminate with the true light of God,
but is not piety which flows from faith, and is warranted by the word, and
acceptable to God in Christ Jesus.

For I pray you what is there Nothing this day concerning austere life among
Romans Eremits, which was not of old among Jewish Essaei.
to be found this day, even among their Separate and Solitary men, which was
not of old in the corrupt Church of the Jews among the Haeretiques called
Essaei, resembling very nearly their Monks and religious Hermits? Of whom
Philo the learned Jew writes in this manner. In Palaestina sunt quidam nomine
Philo. lib. quem inscribit omnes bonos esse liberos.
Essaei numero vltra 400. a voce graeca Essaei, quasi (...) sancti vocati,
quoniam dei cultores praecipui sant, nulla ammalia sacrificantes, sed mentes
sacras deo offerentes, hi vicatim habitant, vrbes vitantes, perpetuam
castitatem adhibent, ius iurandum, and mendacium non dicunt, pecuniam and
gloriam negligunt, aurum and argentum non recondunt, neque latos agros parant,
cupiditate reddituu^ sed necessitate victus, vna omnibus est domus, vna vestis,
denique communis victus and vita. In Palestina (says he) A description of the
religious manners of Essaei.
are a sort of men called Essaei, as much as to say, holy men, they are more in
number then four hundredth, they sacrifice no beasts but holy minds to the
Lord, they come not in Cities nor Towns, they profess Chastity, they will
neither swear nor lie, they despise gold, and glory, craving no more then may
serve their necessity, they have all one house, one kind of garment, they have
all the same food, and the same manner of life. Josephus adds thus much more
of them. Quod nupti^s respuant, bonasua cum sociis communicent, nec vestitum,
Joseph. Antiquit.
nec calceum nouum misi veteribus attritis sumant, and inter vescendum summum
silentium adhibeant: that they despise marriage, How these are revived again by
the Monks and Eremits of our time.
all good things are common among them, they take no new garment nor new shoes
till the old be worn; and when they are at dinner or supper there is great
silence among them. In a word, if a man would diligently consider every thing
written of them, and compare their time with this, he would verily think that
the very image of these Heretics were revived and quickened again by Monks
and Hermites of our time.

Among many reasons alleged by a certain Jesuit, Christianus Franken, which
induced him to The consideration that Papistrie is but a natural religion,
has moved Jesuits to revolt from it.
convert to the true, ancient, Catholic and Apostolic religion professed by
us, this was one: by the similitude which natural men, not illuminated with
the light of the Euangel, have with the Romish religion, he was moved to
think it was not divine but humane, seeing they by natures light only had
attained unto it. He makes mention of a certain letter written to their
society, from one of their own Order traveled among our Antipodes, called
Iaponii, wherein is declared, that among them there is a religious sort of men,
named Iamambuxae, that is, milites conuallium, who have a religion formed out
of Natures light, very like to Romish Religion.

For first to purchase to themselves the name of sanctity, they Our Antipodes
Iaponij by natures darkened light, have framed a religion very like the Papistick
greatly punish their own bodies they are much given to watching and long
fasting, their exercise is in certain meditations composed by themselves,
wherein they profit so far, that oftentimes they are thought inspired with a
heavenly Spirit, to pour out divine Oracles, and are esteemed to be holy and
perfect men. This is one point, the just similitude whereof is clear in the
Church of Rome, for they have their own superstitious Saints whom they worship
for holy and perfect men: whose Enthusiasmes, dreams, visions, and pretented
revelations, are in stead of divine Oracles unto their poor blinded people.

These have over them a certain Under the two poles are two Popes, a Iaponian
and an Italian.
head, whom they worship almost as a God: his people reputes him and styles him
to be most holy, they suffer him not to touch the earth with his feet, he has
large dominions and ofttimes makes battle with profane Kings. What can a man
think when he reads this, but as our Antipodes have a pole against our pole,
so have they a Iaponian Pope over against an Italian Pope, who when he shall
hear of Peter's keys, will think he has as good right to the one key, for
government of the Churches under the South pole, as the Italian Pope has to
the other, These two will not agree that one of them should have both the keys
of S. Peter.
whereby he pretends a power over Churches under the North pole. And verily I
think the Italian Pope contending for both may happily loose both. And for my
own part I have no doubt, seeing I am warranted by the Word, that before the
Lord move the poles and fold up the heavens like a garment, he will first
remove this Beast out of his throne, and consume him like snow that melts
before the Sun. His greatest defenders, the most learned of the Jesuits,
Blas-viega. Fran. Ribera in Apocal.
say it: yea they plainly confess it. The Lord hasten the time, wherein his
Majesty will perform it.

This head under him again Under the Iaponian Pope, are chief Church men
answerable to Romish Cardinals.
has Tundos, honorable and chief men in the Clergy, created and confirmed by
himself; those have power to give Priesthood unto others, they appoint
fastings to the people when upon religious days they go in pilgrimage: these
properly resemble Cardinals, and Antichristian Prelates, who receive such power
from the Beast, as he pleases to impart unto them.

Next under them are Bontu: Under them again inferior Clergy men, such as
Monks etc. with
these are Iaponian Monks, and have no authority, unless their supreme head
confirm them by his Bull and letters testimonial; these have ample Abbacies,
Coenobia Abbacies.
(says he) like unto ours: they have an Altar in the midst of their Temple,
wherein the image of Amida carved in timber Images.
work, is set upon a rose curiously carved also of timber work very pleasant
to behold; they have great Bibliothees, and Bibliothees.
a common house wherein they eat al together, they have sounding Buildings.
instruments of brass, whereby Bells.
they are wakened to their hours of prayer from midnight to morning: before
their Altar in the Temple, they sit in seats of their Queere opposite one to
another, rehearsing their matine prayers. At the break of Matutine songs.
day every one of them spends an hour in private meditation: when their
nobles have mo children then they can provide for, they enter them into the
Order of Brontii. Many mo like these In these and many other have the Iaponian
great similitude with the Italian.
records he, which were long to recite now; but all of them as clearly
resembling the manner of the superstitious Roman worship, as one egg is like
to another. And yet, says he, these Brontii under pretext of chastity and
holiness, are in life and manners most profane and filthy, they are of all men
most greedy, and have innumerable ways to empty the purses of people, and make
gain to themselves; they sell unto the simpler sort, multa Chirographa, many
hand-writs, by which (the common Namely in the comfortless comfort they give
their people in the hour of death.
people sufficiently fenced against evil spirits) they borrow silver which in
the life to come they promise to repay with double vantage, and for surety,
they give their hand-writ to him from whom they got, that when he dies he may
carry it with him ad inferos; a very image of that vile nundination, whereby
our popish Priests make merchandise Revel.
of the souls of men, and steal from them their goods by Masses, Pardons,
Indulgences, and such like trumpery, whereby the poor blinded people believe
to be eased of the pains of Purgatory.

This I say among many other How the Jesuit Franke^ was moved by this
consideration.
arguments moved that Jesuit to a certain iealosie and suspicion of the
Romish religion, that it was but carnal; which will best appear by his own
words.

Haec and multa eiusmodi alia, cum ex literis illis a nostri ordinis hominibus
scriptis, cognouissem, obstupui scilicet, tamque cohorrui quam si ex astris in
terram relapsus fuissem. Occurrebat enim menti meae subito, nihil nostrae
inueniri posse religioni similius, quare vehementer timendum esse, ne omnis
haec nostra spiritualis viuendi ratio, non diuina sit, sed humana tantum and
Philosophica, quod eam vel idololatrae, and ethnici homines Euangelij luce
carentes assequantur, and quidem tales Ethnici qui natura, moribus, ingenio,
nostris Europaeis ingeniosioribus (Italis puta and Hispanis) persimiles
dicuntur, quiuis tam vt intelligat, a similibus naturis and ingenijs,
simillimas inuentas and constitutas esse religiones.

These, and many more like these, when I understood by certain To think that
the Jesuitical devotion was not divine but humane.
letters written from some of our own society, I was astonished; yea, I quaked
and trembled as if I had fallen from heaven to the earth: for, it suddenly
struck in my mind that nothing could be found in the world liker our religion;
wherefore, it is greatly to be feared, lest all this kind of spiritual life
which we live be not divine, but humane only and philosophicke, because the
very idolaters and Ethnicke men, wanting the light of the Euangel, have
attained unto it; and such Ethnicks who in nature, manners, and ingenie, are
said to be very like our more ingenious Europaeans, Italians namely and
Spaniards, so that any man may easily understand that of the like natures and
ingenies, the like religions have been invented, and established. And he adds
yet more.

Quid? quod apud eosdem Iaponios non nostra tantum religio, sed Yea, not the
Iesuitical only, but the whole Religion Roman is from an Ethnicke Spirit.
tota ferme Ecclesia Romana Ethnico spiritu fundata, constitutaque cernatur:
nam and aquam habent lustralem: multas, and magnas indulgentias Brontii populo
in con cionibus perseueranti, and Caenobia ipsorum ditanti proponunt: globulos
etiam habe^t precarios, quos permulti Iaponii non solum priuatos inter
parietes, sed in publico, totaque vrbe, fere semper manu percurrunt. But which
is more (says he) not our religion only, namely Jesuitical, but almost the
whole Roman religion may be seen among these Iaponians, founded Holy water,
Indulgences, prayers on beads, and such like, used among people who know no
God.
and established by an Ethnic Spirit: for they have their holy water; they
propose great indulgences to such as persevere in their religion, and enrich
their Abbacies: they have beads for prayer, which many of the Iapoponians use,
not only within their private houses, but in public, throughout the whole
Town, they are almost always turning them over with their hands.

But to leave this digression, Best remedy against such, is the light of Gods
word, if it be followed.
and return again to our purpose, let us remember that the soul, and life of
all true religion is the wholesome word of God, and that no shadow of whatsoever
sanctity, or severe life, should move us to embrace any religion which cannot
be warranted by the word: Let no man spoil you through Philosophy Col. 2. 8
Verse 21, 22, 23
and vain deceit, through the traditions of men: As touch not, taste not,
handle not, which are after the commandment and doctrines of men, which things
have indeed a show of wisdom in voluntary religion, They are neither
successors to S. Paul nor Peter, who follow not this light.
and humbleness of mind, and in not sparing the body; neither have they in
ones estimation to satisfy the flesh, and to the end we be not diuerted from
true religion with the show of religion; let us keep in mind that warning of
S. Peter, we have a most sure word of prophecy, whereunto ye do well that ye
take heed, as unto a light, that shines in a 2. Per 1 19
dark place, until the day dawne, and the Day Star arise in our hearts. For
where men reject the word of the Lord, and will not make it the rule of their
religion, as Jeremy says, What wisdom can be Jeremy.
in them? there is no fable so false, no error so gross, which their foolish
hearts shall not embrace for a truth.

Integrity, with doctrine. As Two ornaments of whole some doctrine. 1.
Integrity. 2. Gravity.
the Apostle generally before it, requires good works; so now more specially
he requires these three notable graces, integrity, gravity, sincerity. In the
judgment of the learned Beza, the third seems to redound, and ex margin in
textum irrepsisse: truth it is, both the words (...) and (...) in strength of
signification are one, and both of them come from one and the self same Theme
(...), neither is it unaccustomed to the Apostle to express one thing under
more names then one; and therefore shall it content us, to speak of them both
under one.

(...) Integrity is a grace Integrity an excellent virtue.
which contains a man constant in uprightness, not diuertible from it, and
whereby he abides in himself one and the same, for so the word imports one
that is free from corruption, qui nec minis, nec muneribus flectitur, and
cannot be bowed, neither with boastes, nor with buddes. This virtue is properly
resembled by the Adamant, a precious pearl, meeter for the forehead, then the
finger of a Preacher: such a forehead God gave his servant Ezechiel; As an
Adamant harder the^ flint have I made Ezech. 3. 9.
thy forhead. Scaliger records, that the lodestone Magnes has a virtue to
draw iron unto it, unless the Adamant be present, for then the Lodestone
restraines the virtue thereof, but the Adamant never loses the virtue, nor
changes the nature for the presence of any, called therefore (...) quasi (...)
qui domari It preserves a man inflexible in tentation.
non potest, that cannot be daunted. Nothing mollifies the Adamant, but the
blood of the Goat: and the upright man, endued with the grace of integrity is
only subdued, and made flexible by the virtue of the Lamb his blood, he
gives place to none, but in Christ Jesus and for him. He is not moved with
the multitude of examples: put him in what company ye please, his integrity
preserues him uncorrupted, either with the evil speeches, or evil manners of
others.

Nazianzene in his Monody, writing Nazian. vita Basi.
the life of Basil, makes mention of the river Alpheus which runs from
Arcadia of Peloponnesus, And maks him like river Alpheus, which in salt water,
keeps a fresh taste.
through the salt sea unto Arethusa, a fountain in Sicilia, and yet loses
not its own sweetness, and freshnes. A wonderful thing indeed, and that might
seem almost incredible, if it were not reported by one so worthy of credit:
and he brings it in to express how Basil and he lived in Athens, not
corrupted, neither with the dissolute manners, nor fond superstitions of such
as were their companions in learning: and indeed it properly resembles the
grace of integrity, which in most corrupt times and places, preserues him that
has it vncorrupt, and makes him, like the water of Alpheus, which remains
fresh in the midst of the salt Sea.

There are three men in holy Examples of rare integrity.
Scripture greatly commended, Noah, Job, Daniel. Noah lived in a time when all
flesh had corrupted their way, then God gave him this testimony: Thee only
have I found righteous in this generation. Job of Abraham's posterity, living
among Gentiles; and Daniel of Isreal's seed, living among the profane
Persians; by their integrity were kept from the common corruptions of others.
And this same is the Prayer of the Angel of Pergamus: I know where Reu. 2. 13
thou dwell, even where Satan has his throne, and thou have kept my name
and have not denied my faith, even in those days, when Antipas my faithful
Martyr was slain among you.

And as this grace of integrity, Integrity makes a man to be feared eue^ of
such as persecute him.
preserves a man upright, and inflexible by tentation, making him this way
gracious and acceptable to his God, so does it make him fearful and terrible
to his enemies. Among many examples I might bring for this purpose, I content
with one: when Modestus the deputy of Valens an Arrian Emperor caused to bring
Nazian. vita Basil.
Basilius before him, of mind to tempt him to embrace the Arrian heresy,
which his Master Valens, and almost all the Bishops of the East had done before
him; he first allured him with fair promises, by which when he saw he could
not A notable example hereof ^n Basilius.
prevail, he fell to him with threatenings, Ac exilium, tormenta, mortem
denique ipsam minitatur: but as a rock in the sea is not moved with the
turbulent waves which the stormy wind raises against it; no more was Basile
with these words of Modestus, his integrity vpheld him as ye may perceive by
his answers.

I care for none of those things, Whose integrity made him strong to despise
banishment, torments and death threatened by Modestus.
says he, that thou have spoken, boast me not with banishment I fear it not;
Vnam hominum cognoscens esse patriam Paradisum, omne^ autem terram commune
aspicimus naturae exilium; for I know no home but heaven, no native place but
Paradise: the whole earth I behold a common banishment of mankind. And as for
your torments I defy them, quid enim haec in me poterunt, cum corpus prope
nullum, and ossa sine carnibus sint inuentura: for what can they do to me,
whose body is so worn, that there is nothing but bones without flesh for rhem
to work upon? Death in like manner I regard not: Mortem quomodo formidabo, quae
me meo redditura sit Creatori? Why shall I fear it which can do nothing to
me, but restore me to my Maker?

Modestus, astonished with these Wherewith Modestus was not only astonished:
words, said unto him. No man hitherto has dealt with me with such boldness
and liberty as now you have done, to who^ the man of God answered, Quod forte
in Episcopum non incidisti, alioqui sic ille pro pietate certans tecum
disseruisset: It may very well be, because ye have not happened on a Bishop,
which if you had done, he would have answered you in the same manner. For in
all other things we are more humble then any other men. But where the question
is of faith and godliness, we dare not be fearful nor base-minded, so
should we be injurious to God, if we would derogate any thing from his
dignity for the pleasure of man. In a word, says he, do with me what you
please, and after your manner: use such power, as you have against me; but
assure your self you shall never be able to persuade me, nor yet co^pel me to
adhere to your impiety. Modestus perceiving that no manner of way he could
prevail dismissed him, not with threatenings any more, but with a fear and
reverence But forced to break out in a great commendation of Modestus.
of him. And coming back to his Master the Emperor, he counseled him to
assay his strength against another: for as to Basilius, firm^or est quam vt
verbis, praestantior quam vt minis, fortior quam vt blanditiis vinci possit:
He is so solid that words cannot overcome him, so resolute that threatenings
cannot move him, and so strong that allurements cannot alter him. A notable
example showing to us what a worthy Jewel this grace of integrity is in the
servant of God, which makes him to be feared and reverenced, even of such as
are his enemies.

There are two evils sore enemies 2. Great evils enemies to integrity. 2. Tim.
5. 21.
to this grace of integrity: the Apostle charge Timothy by a grave
obtestation to beware of them both. The first is (...), the second is (...)
signifies prejudice, or hasty judgment, whereby sentence is given out before
sufficient trial: a dangerous evil in any Judge, but most of all in an
Ecclesiastical. The Lord The first is (...) whereby judgment is given of a
person or matter before trial.
our God, the righteous Judge of all the world, gave no sentence against Adam
and Euah, nay nor against the Serpent, til first cognition of their fault went
before, neither powered he out judgment against Sodom and Gomorrha, till first
he came down and saw, that their sins were according to their cry: which
doubtless the Lord did, to give instruction unto al Judges that they should
not judge beforehand. This sin diuerted David from his integrity, when he
gave sentence against innocent Mephibosheth, upon the false narration made unto
him by Ziba. Beware then of (...), for it is a sore enemy to integrity.

The other evil is (...); forbidden The other is, (...) whereby a man either
of self propension, or others persuasion, is made partial.
also by the Apostle (...), partiality, or a propension to the one side more
then to the other. The word may be read either with I or H: if it be read with
IOTA, as the most part, and best learned do, then it signifies partiality,
which comes of a man's own voluntary inclination to one more then to another,
proceeding either of love, or of hatred, of fear or of some cupiditie. If
otherwise it be read with ETA, as Theophilactus does, then it signifies that
partial inclination, which is procured by the request, intercession or
aduocation of others, and this is a very forcible and yet common tentation,
against which a Bishop has need Against this all in authority, specially
Bishops have need to be confirmed.
to be confirmed; that fot the pleasure of men he incline neither to the right
hand nor unto the left, but still may keep his integrity.

It was a notable answer which Vitellius the Emperor gave unto one of his
friends, who being refused A notable answer, of the Emperor Vitellius to this
purpose.
of a certain unreasonable request, had said unto him with indignation: What
auailes your friendship to me, or what better are we that you are preferred to
be Emperor, seeing I cannot obtain that which I crave? to whom the Emperor
replied, and what auailes thy friendship to me, if for thy sake I must do
that which is dishonest and becomes me not?

Nazianzene compares men advanced A comparison of Nazianz. serving this purpose
also.
unto high places in the Church, to those actors, commonly called funambuli,
who walk upon a cord stretched out from one part to an other high above the
earth: all their safety stands in their upright walking: if they decline but a
little, either to the right hand or the left, they become a destruction to
themselves. And thus much for the grace of integrity, expressed here, under the
words, (...), and (...): which grace that it may be distinguished from that
which follows, we do chiefly refer unto that inward disposition of the
heart, whereby the man of God, walks with God as Henoch did, and follows him
in all his ways, as Elisha followed Eliiah, and would not suffer himself to
be divided from him.

Gravity. The other grace required With integrity, gravity is required.
here is (...). It impors such a moderate carriage as may procure reverence to
a Bishop of all that behold him. This virtue composes the man of God in all his
outward behavior, whereunto it is to be rereferred. The word (...) sometime is
taken in an evil part, pro tumido, qui affabilis non est, for a man swelling
with such conceit of himself This gravity composeth all the parts of a Bishop
or Pastors outward conversation. 2. Tim. 2. 24.
as makes him strange and difficil toward others, not accessible, nor courteous,
nor humane to speak unto. Such stateliness the Apostle will have far from
the man of God, (...), the servant of the Lord should be gentle toward all
men, he should be (...), courteous, affable, despising no man, yet so that he
still keep this gravity in all his outward actions; yea even in his countenance
and gesture of his body. Corporis Ambr. offic. lib. 1. cap. 18.
enim motus, vox quaedam est animi, the motion of the body is a certain
language of the mind. Dissolute laughter, Cachinnus, was taxed by the Fathers
of the Primitive Church in their sermons for a foul fault, and such as was not
tolerable in any Christian. And Ambrose in the place before cited records, that
he debarred one from the Ministry, who otherway could have done good offices in
the Church, only because his behavior was light and indecent, and such as
became not the gravity of a Preacher.

We have here then three notable Three graces required to make a complete
Pastor.
parts which make the man of God complete; Sincerity within, Gravity without,
and with these the grace of powerful preaching. Oh how seldom do these
concur together! how many shall we find can make a fair show without, of
that which is not within! or if he have both yet wants the third, and is not
able to put his talent to profit, uttering the grace which he has received
with (...), to the edification of others. The Century Wrirers make mention of
one Androneus Episcopus Rotomage^sis, that he was humilis cord, grauis vultu,
sapiens Cent. 7. It is rare to find these graces concur in one.
in colloquio, prudens in consilio, veheme^s in arguendo, ardens in dilige^do,
patiens in aduersis; humble in heart, grave in countenance, wise in speech,
prudent in counsel, vehement in rebuking, fervent in loving, patient in
suffering. Oh what a seemly, and comfortable sight is it to see these graces
concur in the servant of God! Many such laborers, the Lord send forth into
his vineyard.

(...), Wholesome word. Into the Not only in pulpit, but in all his speech the
words of a Preacher should be medicinal, ministering grace.
third room the Apostle gives rules to his tongue: he will have no speech
coming from him, but that which is wholesome, good for edifying, and that
cannot be reproved. And this is not only to be referred unto his speech in
pulpit: that point has been treated already in the wotd (...), but even his
daily speech the Apostle will have unrebukable, that there may be a consonancy
and harmony between his speech in public, and his speech in private; that his
mouth be not like a fountain out of which proceeds Iam. 3. 10.
both sweet water and bitter. The lips Pro. 15. 7.
of the wise should spread abroad knowledge, and his mouth should be a
welspring Pro. 10. 11
of life: he should carry in his mouth the tongue of the learned; that he may
minister a word in season Esaias 50. 4 Eccles. 10
to the weary: he should utter the words of grace, that the comfort of his lips
may Pro. 10. 21
assuage the sorrow of the afflicted. Job. 16. 5


In a word, that rule which is here generally given for government of Preachers
resembled by the white horse, whereupon Christ rides. Colos. 4. 6.
his tongue, is more particularly explained by this same Apostle in that
notable exhortation: Let no corrupt communication proceed out of your mouth,
but that which is good to the use of edifying, that it may minister grace to
the hearers; your speech being gracious always, and poudred with salt. Preachers
are resembled by that white horse; whereupon Christ the Conqueror rides
through the world; and their tongues are compared properly by one, to that Colt
Or by the colt whereupon our Savior rode, their tongues should not be loosed
but at Christ's command.
of the Ass, whereupon CHRIST JESUS came riding to Jerusalem, and never one
had ridden before him. It is time to loose our tongue when our Lord bids us,
then none should ride upon it but himself. We should remember, that we are
(...), men separate unto God, vessels to serve in his sanctuary, which
(without sacrilege) cannot be employed to another use. We should not pollute
not so much as our lips, with strange speech, not agreeable to our message we
have received from the Lord. This is Many abuse their mouth, and make it like
the mouth of the Serpent.
one of the great sins of our time, inordinate and unchristian talk. The
bridled mouth is rare to be found: and now most part of men have made their
mouth like the mouth of the Serpent, spewing out words, either of vanity or
wickedness, like a deluge of waters, to drown themselves and carry others away
with them in the stream of their iniquity. For as one wave or circle in the
water raises many: so one wanton or vain word, flowing from the mouth of one,
specially if he have authority, prouokes many unto the like.

That he who withstandeth, may be Let not Bishops of most unrebukable life,
look to want contradiction.
etc. (...), that is, he who is of the contrary part and will speak against
thee, may be ashamed: here then is the end of all, thou must be an ensample to
edisie such as are good; as likewise to stop the mouths of such as are
contrary minded. And herewithall Titus is both forewarned and armed against the
tentation of the tongue, whereby Satan labors to obscure the name of most
excellent men, and chiefly them whom he cannot corrupt in their conscience.
Think not then, will the Apostle say unto Titus, that thou shall want some to
speak evil of thee; but let thy care be to live so, that they who speak
evil of thee may be ashamed, and their conscience may say unto their tongue, it
is a lie; for oftentimes the servants of God are approved of the conscience of
them, whose tongues are loose to speak most falsely against them.

Abraham was the father of the Abraham, Moses, yea Jesus the just wanted it not.
faithful, yet yet wanted not he some to curse him, being themselves cursed of
God. Moses the meekest man upon earth, yet were they many who murmured against
him. Jesus that Just and holy one, sustained great contradiction of sinners.
John the Baptist lived a very austere kind of life, he came neither eating nor
drinking they rejoiced for a time in his light, but a little after rejected
him. Herod delighted to hear him, but at length beheaded him. The Son of man
lived a more social life, like a Physician in familiar manner visiting the
sick; yet they said he had a devil, and kept company with Publicanes and
sinners.

There is nothing can guard a A godly man cannot escape the scourg of the
tongue.
man against the scourge of the tongue, no distance of place, it is like an
arrow shot out against them, who are far off, no innocence of life; for the
tongue of the wicked is like the Juniper coal, the sparkles whereof Psalm.
fly upon them that have not touched it: such is the humor of wicked men: if
they know any evil, it is their pleasure to diuulgate it, like Genesis
cursed Cham, making sport of the nakedness of his father, and if they know
none, they sit down, and muse how to forge it. With this rod Psalm.
of unrighteousness Satan beats every child of God, but the more eminent
place they have, the more liberally does Satan loose the tongs of the wicked
against them, that so (if he can) he may disgrace among men, those whom God
has many ways graced for the good of his Church.

Nazianzene saw this in his time But the higher his place i^, the greater wind
of contradiction blows upon him. Nazian. vita Basil.
and lamented it, Facilius aliis maxima, quam nobis minima condonabunt: such is
the iniquity of men (says he) that they will sooner forgive great faults in
others, then light offenses in us: Quod si etiam fuerint imperitiores, citius
nos impietatis, quam seip sos modicae ignorationis condemnabunt; and if they be
of the rude and more unlearned sort, they will rather condemn us of great
impiety, then themselves of small ignorance. As it was then, so is now. The
world is still like it self, and we should the more patiently bear with it.

Three sorts of contradicents Three ranks of contradicents to Bishops and
Pastors, Heretics, Schismatics, Atheists.
may a good Bishop or Pastor look for; if he keep truth he shall have
Heretics, if he keep love he shall have Schismatics, and if he keep
holiness he shall have Atheists to speak against him. The first we want not,
men blinded with the spirit of error, boldly withstanding the truth, as Iannes
and Iambres resisted Moses: the third sort we want not, Exodus
profane and carnal men, these are dogs who turn back to rent them that cast
the pearls of the kingdom of God unto them; when they are rebuked by the Word,
they rebuke it, yea open their mouths wickedly to blaspheme it. The second I
hope we have not, at least I know no conscientious Preacher, laborious in his
calling, will come under the compass of this name, or guiltiness of that
crime which is noted by it.

There may be difference of opinion, Difference of opinions may be among good
men. Schismatic distraction of affections should not be. Act. 15. 39
where there is a concordance and uniform agreement of al points of faith.
There fell a dissension between Paul and Barnabas, both of them the faithful
servants of God; S. Luke calls (...) a stir, or as the word imports, a
sharper dealing of the one with the other, then became Christian meeknes and
modesty; they departed one from another, but neither of them departed from the
Lord Jesus, and whersoeuer they went, the care of both was to advance the
Kingdom of Christ by preaching of his Euangel.

It is an unseemly thing to hear Moses drew the people into parties but it was
for idolatry.
of a contrary party, of sides, or factions among them, who do all preach one
Christ Jesus. I never read that any man of God in holy Scripture drew his
people into parties, but once when Israel had polluted themselves with
idolatry, worshipping the golden Calfe; Moses then cried for a party, he stood
in the door of the camp, and cried, Who pertains to the Lord, let him come
unto me, and all the Levites came down unto him, and spared not to dip their
swords in the blood of their brethren, and dearest kinsmen, who had defiled
themselves with idolatry. There was a division, but it was for idolatry, which
cause (blessed be God) is not among us.

Let such as have polluted the It is a good division to divide our selves from
Idolaters.
land with false worship be a contrary party to us both, as they are indeed,
but let no man make parties among brethren, they have departed from the Lord,
and we should depart from them. Oh that all our zeal, our hearts, our tongues,
and our pens, were turned against the common enemy. But far be from us that
Contradiction of Chore, Dathan, and Abiram who contended with Numb. 16.
their brethren of their own family for the government: Ye take too much upon
you (said they unto Moses and But the contradiction of Chore should not be
among Levites.
Aaron) seeing all the Congregation of the Lord is holy every one of them, and
the Lord is among them, wherefore then lift ye up your selves above the
Congregation of the Lord? These were indeed sore criminations; why take ye
this upon you? why lift ye your selves above your brethren, no less holy to
the Lord then ye are? but iniustly imputed to Moses, Heb, 5. 4
for he took not this honor to himself, but was called thereunto of God.
Woe be to these men of whom the Lord may say: They have run, and I sent them
not; how can these men look for a blessing to whom it cannot be said: Take
heed to the Act. 20.
Flock over which the Holy Ghost has made you overseers? I do freely think
it from my heart that he shall never be a good Ruler in the Church, who could
not be content all his days to be ruled, and to give obedience unto others in
the Lord.

There are two evils which disturb the peace of the Church, would Two evils
which disturb the peace of the church
God we were quit of them both. Usurpation, by which men hunt after places and
preferments in the Church, not awaiting on the Lords call. Again, orping or
male-contentment for want of preferment stirs up many to disquiet themselves
and others also. The first is an evil that should not be suffered in a
reformed Church. Crimen Ambitus, a just cause to debar a man from 1. The one is
usurpation, whereby men hunt after preferment.
the holy Ministry. I read of many who have fled such dignity, and some have
done that which they should not to make themselves incapable for it, they
refused the burden, and were loath to take it on: but seldom or never heard
tell of one that contended for it, who^ God made a comfortable instrument to
his Church. Reprobate Saul, though in an other calling, may condemn such men,
he was higher by the shoulders then any of the people; yet when they sought to
make him King he hid himself among the stuff: but these men show themselves
in most public places; being less the^ their brethren, they will seem bigger
then they are, they shame not to cry with the voice of the Lochleach, give me
it, give me it. Such men are worthy A meet answer for such men.
of that answer, which Archclaus king of Macedon gave to an vnmannered Poet:
having with him at supper diverse learned men; the Poet desired of him a sum
of money, which he caused to be brought and gave it to Euripides who did not
ask it, saying: Thou art worthy to have it, and he to seek it; thereby
declaring, that none are less worthy to have, then they who are most
shameless to seek. On the other hand, what evils 2. The other is
malecontentment, which stirs up me^ to disquiet themselves and others
arising of a misliking that their state is no better.
have bin bred in the church by the orping and miscontentment of some, who not
content with the places which they had, aspiring to higher, whereunto they
could not attain, have filled the Church with broiles and perturbations; the
contradiction of Core for the elder time, and Apostasy of Arrius for the
latter among mo, may stand for examples. Let no man miscarry my speech toward
these unto whom I have not directed it. It is only for those who out of this
or some other like passion maintain their private opinion with public railing
and contention, to the disturbance of the common peace. There are others, whom
notwithstanding their diverse opinion, we acknowledge to be the dear servants
of Christ, worthy to be loved for that grace of GOD which is manifest in
them, wishing both unto them and us further grace whereby defects of judgment
in us all may be supplied. Let them think of us as they do of themselves in A
loving admonitinn to brethren.
that which is good, since this is agreeable to Christian modesty, and may
happily prepare a way unto better. If they think, they have knowledge, we
have some also: if they think they have conscience, we have reason also not to
be ignorant of the exercises thereof, being by Gods mercy so long acquainted
with the^. And if they rejoice in this that they love the Lord Jesus, we will
also rejoice with them: we dare not say we love our Lord as we should; nor as
we would, yet in weakness we will say with Peter Lord thou know that we love
thee, and for all the kingdoms of the earth would not wittingly and willingly
walk in that course, which might import dishonor to the name of our Lord
Jesus, or prejudice to his kingdom.

Now to conclude, having spoken The transplanting of a Bishop, is but the
changing of a watch-ma^ from one tower of Ierusalems wall to another.
thus much of the duty of a good Bishop, the other point of the duty of people
I will touch in a word; if first I remember you of that I spoke in the
beginning. We are not come here to ordain a new Bishop, but to confirm an old
Bishop in a new charge. It is but the changing of a watchman from one Tower of
Ierusalems walls (wherein were eightscore and four towers) to place him in an
other, as one would say from the Turret Psephina in the West, and set him down
in turri Angulari, that is in the Corner or angular Tower in the east part of
the wall, not far from the Tower of Hananeel: this Angular Tower being ten
cubits higher then the other, the watchman is set into it, that he may see
further off, and prevent more early the machinations of Ierusalems enemies.

It is the transplanting of a tree, Or the removing of a tree from one part of
the Vineyard to another.
from one part of the Lords Vineyard to another. This tree has proved many
ways fruitful in the soil, wherein it stood before. I would be more plain if
modesty permitted me; yet this one I cannot pretermit, that many a hungry soul
who never had heard of JESUS CHRIST, feeds this day with great contentment
upon the fruit thereof, and if it be not as fruitful in the soil, wherein this
day we are to plant it, to who^ I pray you shall the fault be imputed? But I
change this speech, persuading our selves the best things of you: for howsoever
this ground in many places be stansby that will not suffer to be labored, and
can A warning arising of this consideration.
hardly be subdued by the plough, yet is there other as pleasant, and
fruitful as any parts of our land. Here are Nobles and Barons of great place,
here are learned Doctors and Masters of a famous University, here is an
ancient City of civil and Christian Burgesses, who will think it (I doubt not)
their own honor to see this tree as fruitful among them for the glory of God
and good of his Church, as ever it was in any place of the Lords husbandry
before.

So your duty I absolve in one Duty of people to those who are over them in
the Lord absolved in one word. 2. Cor. 8. 5.
word, praying for that unto you for which the Apostle praised the Corinthians
in these words; They gave their own selves first unto the Lord, and after unto
us by the will of God. Let your first care, all of you in your several
callings be, to give your selves unto the Lord, and then his grace shall
direct every one of you, how ye should behave your selves in your several
places, to them who are over you in the Lord. Which blessing God bestow upon
you for Christ's sake: to whom with the Father and holy Spirit be all praise,
and honor, and glory for ever.

FINIS.

