A FIG FOR Fortune. Recta Securus. A. C.

LONDON Printed by Richard Iohnes for C. A. 1596.

To the Right Honorable Anthony Brown, L. Vic^mpt Mont-ague, everlasting
glory to his virtues.
Fly vale-bred Muse to heauen-high Mont-ague
Honoring thy playnesse with so quaint aspire:
It is a baggard Hawke that never knew
The Fawlkoners fist; It is a drowsic fire
That yields nor flame nor fume; It is an idle voice
That ^ere was hard to tune nor sound, nor note nor noise.
Great Mont-ague; thrice great in Virtues glory
And therefore duly great in my affections,
Whom not a Pick-thanke spirit of flattery
But well advised zeal to your perfections
Mooues to instile you so: Though likewise so you be
In the sublimitie of your blood and Vicomptie.
Daigne in your grace the spirit of a man
Disastred for virtue; if at least it be
Disaster to be winnowed out Fortunes Fan
Into the Fan of Grace and Sionrie
Wherein repurify'd to Gods eternal glory
The Devil rues in man old Adams injury.
Though mean and merit-lesse the Muse may seem
To your advice; as not from Helicon,
Yet well I hope the matter will redeem
That frail default, as spirited from Sion:
If Sions holy name be gracious to your ear
Hold it in gree; else for the zeal to you I bear,
At least your happy Names fair liuerie let it wear.
Your Lordsh. humbly at commandment. Anthony Copley.

The Argument to the Reader.
AN Elizian outcast of Fortune, ranging on his Jade Melancholy through the
Desert of his affliction, in hope to find out some where either ease or end of
the same, happens first upon Catoes ghost a spirit of Despair and self-misdoom
which persuades him to kill himself: But, for she ended her Oratory with a
Sulphur vanish from out his sight, he misdoubted both her and her tale. Then
posting onward through the residue of the night; he next chances on the spirit
of Revenge: She persuades him blood and treachery against all his enemies, as
th'onlie means to remount to pristin bless in despite of Fortune: But she
likewise manifesting in the end the treason of her tale by a sudden whip-away
from his eye at the sight of break of day in the East, left him also conceipted
of her danger. Thirdly, rapt from off his Melancholy (which now began to
faint under him at the light of a new day of Grace) he was suddenly mounted
upon the Steed of Good Desire, and by him brought to Mount- Sion the Temple of
Peace; where by Catechtysius an Hermit (who greatly woondred to see a
distressed Elizian in those parts under so happy days of Eliza) he was by
him in the house of Devotion catechized, and there also celestially armed by an
Angel, and within a while after in-denized by the high Sacrificator a Champion
of that Temple against the insults of Fortune; whom I have titled by the name
of Doblessa in respect of the double danger both of her luring and lowering
inconstancy: She, whiles the Sionttes were all in peaceful adoration of
Almighty God in the Temple, came with her Babellonian-rout to assault the
place, but was eftsoons by the valor of those Templers shamefullie repulsed:
Feast and thanks was made to God therefore throughout all the Region; in which
solemnity the Grace of God houering over the multitude in the Procession time
like a virgin attended upon with all the Court of heaven, showered down Roses
amongst them, leaving them there a scambling for the same. The Elizian was one
that scambled his lap-full among the rest: and for he thought it was his
sovereign Lady Eliza, and those Roses hers, he was suddenly in joy thereof
rapt home again to Elysium.

Faults escaped in printing.
Page 5. Lin 18 It shuts it self and as read Do shut themselves and are.

P. 8 l 3. to give thy self read. to give thy flesh.

P. 16. l. to aw^like read. aulike.

P 64. l. 1. Peacefully advance. read. pace-fully advance.

A Fig for Fortune:
VEsted in sable vale, exild from Joy,
I ranged to seek out a propitious place,
Where I might sit and descant of annoy
And of fair Fortune, astered to disgrace,
At last, even in the confines of the night
I did discern aloof a sparkling light.
Then set I spurs unto my Melancholy,
A Jade whereon I had ridden many a mile,
Which less then in the twinkling of an eye,
Brought me unto that fatal lights beguile:
Where I might see an agonizing beast,
Bleeding his venym blood out at his breast.
His upper shape was faire-Angelicall,
The rest below, all wholly Serpentine,
Cole black incroching upon his pectorall,
And rudely inrowlled in a Gorgon-twine,
His eyes like Goblins stared here and there,
In fell disdain of such disfigured gear.
At last he spied me, and staring on my face,
He reared his mongrel-lumpe up toward me,
Fainting and falling in his Deaths-disgrace,
And yet enforcing still more stabbes to die,
Then thus he vauntingly began to tell me
Of such his fortitude in adversity.
Welcome deer guest (quoth he) to Catoes Ghost,
Welcome true witness of my fortitude,
See thou not how this hell-blacke shape almost
Has quite subdued my vpper-albitude?
It is adversity upon my state,
Which see how I revenge it desperate.
With that, as with a new supplied flood
The angry stream bears quite adowne the river
All obstacle with unappeased mood:
So his enraged hand did fierce deliver
Fresh death-stabbes to his loathed mortality
Even at the naming of adversity.
And then in fourfold misconsorted voice
Of Life and Death: Rage and Disdain, he added:
Whilom I was a man of Romes rejoice
Whiles happy Fortune my estate vppropped:
But once when Caesar ouer-topped all,
Then (lo) this midnight shape did me befall.
Then began I to conceit my Censure-ship,
My Senatorie-pomp, and liberty
All base-subjected to his Tyrant-whip:
My mind was mighty against such misery,
And rather would I die magnanimous
Then live to see a Caesar over us.
It was enough that the Thessalian fields
Sucked up the mutual bloodshed of our men,
That Pompey dies, and all the Empire yeeldes
To Caesar's dancing Fortune, and Omen:
Cato must die as free from servitude
As he disdaineth Caesar's altitude.
Yet for my Country is a part of me,
And it is all subjected to disgrace,
Lo, that is my serpentine obscurity
For which I spite, and spit on Caesar's face,
And stab me with a quaint disdain and ange^
Because I will not live in Caesar's danger.
Thou therefore that do seem a doleful wight,
View me the president of Cares redress,
And if that Fortune be above thy might
Yet death is in thy power and readiness:
Disdain Misfortune then t'insult upon thee
Seeing that to die is all so fair and easy.
Death is misfortunes monarchizing foe,
Prime Nature of Almighty fortitud,
Eternal Sanctuary from unrest and woe,
Fames Arc and all our frailties Period:
Our ly^es true tuchstone, natures offertory,
And bridge to sweet Eliziums eternity.
And as for base Adversity, what is it?
But Gloryes grave, a coward minds ingalley,
The carrion of our life, suppress of spirit,
Shadow of Jove's hate: Disdaines obloquie,
Helles ongate, an Owlish conversation,
All Joys deprife, and sorrows inundation.
Look not so down aghast at what I say,
But with a generous erected front,
Number these willing wounds (my bartes defray)
To Glory sole land-ladie of this account:
They are the Tithes I pay to eternal Fame:
There is not any one of them profane.
Be not injayld to base Adversity,
Rather slip out thy life at gloryes windoe,
One stab will send thee to eternity,
And rid thee quite and clean of all thy woe.
Then there lies life-lesse all Calamity,
Thy name and Spirit fair amountes to glory.
It is not as vulgaritie esteems
Sincere worth to be beblest of Fortune,
A fickle Dame that commonly misdeemes
Those that her favors most of all importune.
Bless thou thy self, and if that Fortune curse thee,
Die in despite of her, and her discourt'sie.
Oh what a base ingenerous sight it is,
To see men crooch and pewle at her vain Altars,
Offering their presents to her peevishness
And therewithal, their necks unto her haltars:
Be thou subsistant of thy self alonely,
And if thou can not live, yet die with glory.
Fie on those lowtish growt-head lobbernowlles
That slander Nature with their Modicums,
I tell thee Natur's like to Marygowldes,
Largely displayed to twenty thousand Suns,
Which if they cease to shine in Majesty,
It shuttes it self, and is content to die.
Thy Spirit is a particle of Jove,
It scorns indignity and mean suffize,
Like as a flame, or oil, it mounts above,
And take but Glory from it, and it dies:
Yet dies it not, but to indignity,
Mounting by Death, to Fames eternity.
There is no hell like to declined glory,
Nor is Prometheus Vulture half so fell
As the sad memory of a happy story
To him, that in adversity does dwell:
Ah, let him die that is not as he was,
With ending bless break he the houre-glasse.
What booteh it to live in base contempt
In ever melancholie-adumbred mood?
A fable to the vulgar babblement,
A muddie ebb after a Crystal flood?
Out with thy candle, let it burn no more,
When once thou art become the worlds eyesore.
And tell not me of duty unto life;
Nature is as indifferent to death,
Life led in joys abandon and deprife
Is Natures deeper grave, then earth beneath:
It is not death, that which the world calls dying,
But that is death, which is all joys denying.
Nature disdaines all gross encountering meat
Fore-fed with Nectar, and Ambrosian sweetes,
And Night that is the merry days defeat
We see how Nature gives it drowsy greetes:
Now: Sleep by night is but a silent sign
How sweet it is to die in Joys decline.
And then as is the morrowe-dawning day
A fresh re-blesse to Natures next awake;
So to the wretch that dies disgrace away
Elysium is his second life's partake:
Where he shall triumph in eternity,
And Fame the Chanteclere of such his glory.
Lo, I a president before thine eyes;
This gore imports the glory of my Ghost,
Who but fore-weening Caesar's tyrannies
Fore-doom'd my self in care-preuenting post:
Then thou that art a very wretch indeed,
Oh, why deferrest thou so long to bleed?
Out with that Iayle-bird of adversity,
Disdain to live at Natures joylesse leisure:
Bale drowned in gore and magnanimity
Is an vpdiue to all eternal pleasure:
Think what a Fame-renowned thing it is
In crimson floods to warfare base de-blisse.
Defer no longer then thy doom of death,
But Champion-like confound Calamity,
Prosperities Satrap fears not to vnsheath
His kil-care blade against fleshes fearful frailty:
Flesh of it self will one day turn to dust,
Then doom it thou thy self since so it must.
Thou would not gladly eat an Abricocke,
Or Peache vnpar'd, because their rind is bitter,
And fear thou then to give thy self the stock,
That so unkindly bittereth all thy better?
Oh, off with it, and yield thy sweetes to Jove,
And he will counter-sweete thee with his love.
He will imbosome thee in his embrace,
And Ioye-embalme thee in his Heauen-delights,
Thy skarres and gashes he will fair deface,
And sanctify thee with alhallowed rytes:
Thou shall be as a Meteor ouershining
All mortal glory in her dust declining.
There will we meet thee in Vermilion vest,
I, Otho, Anniball, and all the rest,
Fames choicest Martyrs, who in Fates detest,
Doomed all our selves to everlasting rest*
There will we magnify thy happy wounds,
And high applaud the^ with Crownets and Crowns.
With that I drew out my emboldened blade,
Resolved to massacre my loathed life:
When (lo) the Ghost from out my sight did vade,
As though to tell his Jove of my arife:
But such a Sulphur stench he left behind him
That I in dread thereof shook every lim.
And therwithall my sword fell to the ground
And I misdoubted some illusion:
Such was the safety that then I found
In drowsy dread, and deaths confusion;
Profanely spoken: it was no frailties deed,
But God alonlie stood thee then in steed.
So then remounted on my Sable jade,
I ranged ore craggy cliffes and desert dales
In way-lesse wander, and in Horrors shade,
One while conceipting Catoes death-auailes,
And then anon reflecting on his stink,
Thus strayd I most in dread and deaths instinct.
Thrice drew I out my dagger for to stab me
And then so often I mused why Cato stunke so,
Me thought there should no such disglory be
In sacred Ghosts, freed from the filth of woe:
So was my moody minds perplexed wander
Partial on life's behalf against deadly danger.
Then on I rode, and riding through a dale
Hell-like adumbred with a duskie gloome,
A sudden fatal blast did me assail
And drove me to a second damned doom,
Where I might see a more then hell-black finger
That pointed me, and said: Lo yonder, yonder.
With that my Melancholy star'd round about
And like a whirlwind posted to the place,
Where I might hear a voice that roared out
Revenge, revenge, thy dollorous disgrace:
And then eftsoons all in a Sulphur-flame
Appeared unto my sight a shape of shame.
Her face was Skowl-regarding on the ground,
Her eyes like Heclas euer-sparkling fires,
Her finger on her mouth was a dumb bound
Of her Cyclopian frets and fell desires:
In the other hand she bare a fiery sheafe,
And all her body was as pale as death.
Her hair was Snake-incurl'd Medusa-like,
Having the power t'instone me where I stood:
So was I senseless all but in dislike
And deadly horror of so dread a Bug:
At last she fretted out an angry noise
And thus inspeeched it into a voice.
Fear not my wan and moody misproportion,
For (I confess) I am no fondlings joy,
Nor am I of a wanton disposition
As is the God of Love that idle boy,
Yet am I a joy in another kind
To such as in vn-ioy most joy do find.
I am Revenge, the doom of injuries:
The Misers refuge, and revive to bless
Occasions Argus, pith of Tragedies
The sum of policy in all distress:
Wrathes thunderbolt, and triumph over those
That in their jollitie work others woes.
Th'injurious Gallant in his Commick-braue
I agonize with unexpected bale,
Because he shall not think that in the grave
Lies naught but impotence and deaths avail;
I Will show him that the worm has power to move,
And none so low but may amount above.
There is a Phoenix of Adversity
That fair results from her incinderment,
And dares to brave with an undaunted eye
Prosperities shine, and brightest blandishments
It is Revenge, it is I can stare it out,
And make it by disgrace the Misers flout.
I reared Corelian from his exile state
To triumph over Romes ingratitude,
And Caesar I did wholly animate
To down with Pompeys scornful altitude,
His suit denied him by the Senate House,
Did cause me make him Rome-Emperious.
Of latter days a Bourbon in disgrace
I armed against his Lieges injury,
And gave him victory at Pauia-chace
Where he beheld him in captivity:
What though he were a Traitor in so doing,
It Is stately done to ouer-top a King.
To be fair Fortunes ever Carpet-darling
Is femall glory: But Revenged disgrace
That Is truly Masculine, and rich triumphing:
Al peace-content is too too cheap and base:
What manhood is it still to feed on Chickins
Like infant nurse-boys in nice Fortunes kitchins?
Give me the man that with undaunted sperit
Dares give occasion of a Tragedy:
And be content for his more after-merit
To be down beaten from felicity:
To the end that with a fierce amount he may
Re-blesse himself in spite of Fortunes nay.
It Is brave to plunge adowne into the deep
And so vp-bound again above the wave,
To be continually a mountain-sheep
Is Cockrell-like, it is a dunghill brave:
The crauin Cock is hartlesse from his hill,
Shame to be so that have a manly will.
To be deposed from bliss by injury,
Is double glory to remount to it,
Nor is thy title lost to dignity
Unless suppress of spirit forfeit it:
Misfortunes power cannot foil thy right,
Do thou but bear a mind in her despite.
We cannot say that man is overcome
That still bears up his arm against his foe,
Nor that he is sincerely outrun
Whom the Corriuals trip does overthrow:
What ere is lost with fore-wits vnpreuention,
Win it again with after-wits contention.
This humane fate, sometime to slip and fall,
But to ingrouell in dirt is beastly base:
To rise again, oh that is Iouiall,
Or else revenge to death the downe-disgrace:
Therefore, thou have a spirit of despite,
As well as in good hap to take delight.
The gallant man unhorsed amidst his foes
Fightes to the death his latest wrath away,
And when he can no more: with mops and mowes
He floutes both them, and Death, and Destiny:
So if not Victor, yet vnvanquished
He dies to everlasting liuelihed.
Be not as is the coward Scorpion
That rounded all about with ashie embers
Dispaires and dies in self-destruction
Renting with fierce enrage his venym members:
But if that Jove nill aid thy fortitude
Down to all Acharon, and the Fury brood.
Hell holds in honor the brave minded man
That knows the price and value of his head,
That measures not Renown by inch or span,
But by th'eternitie of Jove's Godhead,
That skornes to brook base infelicitie,
Or pocket up degraded dignity.
And happily Jove himself supplants thy state
To see how thou can scamble up again,
And scuffle manly with malignant fate
To a redoubled glories rich attain:
Then cheerly (man) inhearten all thy sperites
And dead Revenge thy miseries demerites.
Lo, I thy Advocate unto the Hagges
Will still importune thy Prosperity,
And be at hand with poison, and with dagges
To execute each plotted tragedy:
Misfortune ^^all not scoff at thy confusion,
If hell and I befriend thee in conjunction.
Lay but thy hand upon thy conscience,
And fair in-vow me in an earnest spirit,
So shall thou compass Tragic consequence
On all thy foes that now so frollick it.
They shall no longer feast upon thy frets
Nor register thy woes in their banquets.
Thou shall eniowle them one against another
With hostill jealousy, and dead debate:
I tell thee (man) all friendship is unsure
Founded upon another down estate:
Nor joys he long against Reuenges doom,
That wrong in-states him in another room.
Heaven is the Arbiter, and wills it so,
I and the Furies are the instruments
To act that justice in all tragic woe,
Now is it in this case our good intents
To join with us thy manual act heerin
That more then pristin glory thou may win.
But say thou win not pristin glory by it
Yet shall thou see thy foes in down disgrace,
Thy self shall act it, such shall be thy merit,
And such thy glory in a higher place:
What greater glory can betide the vale
Then force the Mountain-top adowne to fall?
So shall thy glory not be lost, but left,
Yea loss to them that all so dearly buy it,
When thou shall Phoenix-like of bliss berest
R^se from thy ruins to a higher merit:
Degraded from a puppit Commicke-stage
To act the stately Tragic personage.
Changed to a fair enfiered Salamander
Breathing Reuenges bright and sacred flames,
Which high inspirits men to lofty matter
In quaint disdain of aulicke infant games;
Games of the body, follies of the mind,
Oh, how it is base to live so like a Hind.
Nature has given you male and female wills,
The one wherewith to covet meriments,
The other to detest all adverse ils,
Now is almighty Jove's great woonderments
More in his Thunder-boltes then in his sweetes,
To show Revenge more worth then Pleasures greets.
Then arm thy self Reuenges Champion,
To bandie away thy foes, and all disgrace
With polliticke dissimulation
Of contrary language, and contrary face:
As the Camelion changes still his hue
With every object cullor: so change thou.
So may thou close Camelion-like conceal
Thy tragic shape of Horror and Revenge,
Whiles they misdoubting not thy false reveal
Are caught unawares like Woodcocks in a sprenge,
Such is the honor of Adversity,
With sleightes to undermine Prosperity.
Be to thy oath, as the Ape is to his block,
Sometimes stick to it, sometimes flit from it
As pregnant policy may thee provoke:
It Is foole-sincerity, and want of wit
To make a pot to break thy head withal,
Or rather not to break it first of all.
Use Friend and Foe, and Neuter all alike,
Only as isntrumental implements
To thy design; thy aimed stroke to strike:
And fee them but with ayery complements:
That done, and thy affair effected,
Destroy them all for fear thou be detected.
Dead dogs bark not, nor stands it with thy honor
To be vpbrayded with a courtesy;
Much less to be employed in like deuoir
According Quid pro Quoes seruilitie:
Such is the sum of perfect policy
To work securely with Vulgaritie.
Be close, and jealous in each action
For that close dealing is good Speeds assurance;
And Iealousie's the Sentinel of Caution;
And bear thou still in mind this circumstance;
If all good fortune, and advise should fail thee
To have a starring hole for after safety.
It Was meger Prudence in the antique Sages
That but with Goodness could recure an Evil:
Give me the man that with wits pollices
Can Saint a Devil with another Devil:
That can so shift, and s^uffle the cards in fist,
As turn up whatsoever Trump he lift.
It Is Heavens attain to send thy foes to Hell
With mutual murders in Seditions field:
The upper Buckets fall into the well
The lowers fair amount we see does yield:
Such is the merit of Reuenges deed,
With others wrack to work thine own good speed.
At least to die in well appeased wrath
And in survive of all thine enemies
Is stately dying: it is fair lie down and laugh,
And an vp-rise to Jove's benignities,
^lizium and Fame in after ages,
Reuenges blessed Rightes and Appennages.
Then come, embrace me with a firm assent
And think no idle voice sollicits thee;
I tell thee (man) in thy arbitrament
Lies all thy glory, and felicity:
I Will be thy handmaid here in earth below,
The rest above great Jove he will bestow.
So said, she reared her skowle down-looke on
And vagrantlie regarding round about
In Period-pawse; At last as one bestraught
She star'd, and trembled, and began to powt
And suddenly she vanished out of sight
Because now in the East it dawned daylight.
Even so (quoth I) is it Reuenges guize
To be in force by Night, be gone by Day?
Such is not the instinct of Paradize,
God grant it be no Plutonicke affray:
Oh what it is to be a mortal man
Subject to all the guiles and sleights of Satan.
Yet for her speech was consonant to Nature,
I wished sh'had been an Oracle of truth;
So credulous is Angers moodie vigure
When once it is in-Caelared in youth:
And hand in-handed with a quaint Disdain
Injurious disglorie to sustain.
Yea what is not the miser apt to do,
What not believe to mittigate his evil?
Well may he feign a patient outward hue,
But not exile his inward damned devil,
The Vultu^e of despite that never dies
But rents and tears his heart in rauin-wise.
Now Chanteclere the vigill of the night
Crew broad day light: when Titan in the East
Peece-meale appearing in his pristin bright
Broad-waked every creature, man and beast,
Each musick-bird be blessing his amount
Both in the humble vale and haughty mount.
When (lo) my jade vnsprighted, and vnnighted,
Raged and engaged himself to all adventure
Ore hedge, and ditch, and flood, so fell affrighted
He was to see the Sun, so shone a creature:
All as the Tench in waterles despair
Beats himself to death in spite of ay^e.
So on I hasted at my jades behest,
As whilom Phaeton in his skyey carte,
Weak (God he knows) to rule so fierce a beast,
Deadly feare-frighted both in heart and art:
But whom our Lords safe providence bespeedeth,
No human power of heart or art he needs.
At last in process of an ouer-tire
My moody beast stood still in palsie-wise,
Trembling and fainting in a daunted ire,
(Such is the end of Rages ryotize:)
Then had I leisure for to look about me,
And (lo) I spide a Rock in shining glory.
I hy'd me to it with a pleasing pace,
And yet not pleasant, for it was all to slow:
So flight is Melancholy to dark disgrace
And deadly drowsy to a bright good morrow;
Yet on I marched, and marueil'd at the sight,
I never in all my life saw thing so bright:
As more and more I neer'd unto the place
So by degrees my Melancholy fainted,
When (lo) anon with a religious pace
A snow-white I ennet toward me advanced:
His name was Good desire, his saddle green
Was Reverend Solace of a godly spleen.
Whereat my jade affrighted and despighted
Sped all to naught as mist before the Son:
When I eftsoons internallie delighted
Was rapt by Good desire unto Devotion:
A penal place, yet parcel of the rock,
And brighter then the Noony Zodiac.
There kneeled a reverend Sophie all in tears
With needle-pointed Discipline correcting
His Fleshes frailty: Oh how he besmears
The place with penal blood, and blubbering:
His heart was wholly fixed on Christ his Passion,
So showed his Crucifixe-contemplation.
Before him was a Deaths-head full of worms,
The picture of a Grave, and an Hower-glasse,
A map of Doomsday, and Hell in fearful forms,
And Heaven figured all in Saintlie sollace:
His pale and megre countenance areeded
His spare poor fare, and how hard he bedded.
Standing behind him, he was in a trance,
And I betook my Eye to a steddie gaze,
My Mind to an amaze at so great suffrance,
So penal suffrance in so bright a place,
And now I see (said I) there is a bliss
Even in Adversity what ere it is.
And thus aside I argued the case:
In place so bright what mean these drearements?
A heavy case deserves a doleful place
Since bale and bless are adverse Complements:
And yet the Glowe-worme in the darkest night
Though black it be, shines forth a starry bright.
Cato and Revenge were black, and both to blame
The one in sulphur stenche, the other in Lights abhor,
And Melancholye was the Jade of shame
That darkeling brought me to that dubble dorr;
A better horse I hope has brought me hither
For both the place is bright, and it is fair weather.
Long have I ranged to find a place of ease
Whear I may pass away my pensive playntes,
And happly if this be now that place of peace
Here rest I ever in my woes attayntes:
Here in this Cave, and in this sable shrowde
Dye I a Caytiffe under Fortunes clowd.
This aged man and I will both together
Complain in common our calamytie;
That happily whiles we strive t'outplaine each other
Such our ambition may swage our misery,
Or both at once, may crack as ouerstrained,
Ambitious dying is a glory gained.
But (well I wot) thou wrong'st this holy place
By mis-constructing it to care and bale,
It Is puddle sacrilege so to disgrace
The grace of God, through errors rude misprisall^
What though the man do seem disconsolate,
Somewhat it is does thee exhilerate.
For why, I felt my spirit all possessed,
With a revived hope to happiness;
It was the Grace of God in my unrest
That in-lie cheered me up to future bless,
Deer gift of God, the Character of life
And heavenly make-peace of our ghostly strife.
It is the Raye, and Speech of heaven to man,
The Rainbowe-pledge of Gods benevolence,
The Limbecke of our justice, and the Fan
That winnoweth sin away from innocence:
Prime moo^er, and efficient cause of good
To all that are redeemed with Christ his blood.
Whiles thus with infant zeal I did applaud
The in-come grace of God into my heart
In full detest of fore-affected fraud,
Lo, now this penal Sage began to start
From out his trance, and with a heavenly voice*
And arms a cross, he bid his soul rejoice.
Rejoice (quoth he) at this eternal truth,
The man is blessed that for Gods justice sake
Sustaines with Patience reproach and ruth,
Our Lord has promised that he will partake
His heaven to him: His name be praised therefore,
And so he kissed the Cross, and said no more.
With that my heart exulted in my breast,
As fair presaging weal unto my woe;
For why I was not vulgarly distressed
But, for a cause that bore an honest show,
Yet for my frailty was impatient
I longed for speedy death or solagement.
Then stepped I to that man of Mysteries
With careful Complement least to offend,
When he eftsoons with reverend arise
Did recomplie me like a perfect friend:
The tears of joy that trill'd adowne his chin
Did swear what true affection was within.
And lastly he thus embracingly bespake me,
Welcome ( Elizian-man) a thousand-fold
More dear and shone to Catechrysius eye
Then all the pleasant pride of Pearl or Gold:
Rare, yea all too rare are now adays
Elizas subjectes seen to pass this ways.
Belike ye are a Paradized people
That so contain your selfs in home-delights,
As though that only under your steeple
And no where else were all May-mery Rights:
A blessed people ye are, if it be so
And yet me thinks thou seem a man of woe.
Whereto I answered all with humble thanks:
First, that I was the man he took me for
Bred and brought up on fair Elizas banks,
Next, did I largely show him furthermore
How blessedly we live, as he had heard
Under Elizas peaceful power and guard.
And as for my peculiar distress,
I told him so I seemed, and so I was
The Rag of Fortune: Badge of base deblesse,
The Sponge of care, a broken Hower-glasse:
The Finger-man of shame, and Obloquie
Downly degraded from Felicity.
I told him of my dreary iournement
On moodie Melancholy; and how I sped
With Cato, and Reuenges babblement,
And how, along the Desert as I fled
I met with Good Desire a goodly Steed
That brought me thither in my ghostly need.
I would have told him more of my arange
Even all the very conscience of my case,
The cause of such my reprobate exchange
From bless to bale: and how from place to place
Bownd^esse in care, I ranged to bownd my Fate,
Content to die: but not die desperate.
But he eftsoons prevented me, and said:
Oh happy thou, if so thou knew'st thy hap,
I tell thee (man) thou art right ^aire apaid
Exiled from Mammon into Jesus lap:
Come sit we down, and I will show thee how
In this distress, thou may nor break, nor bow.
So down we sat: my heart was festival
My care was eager-liquorish to embaite
Good Catechrysius his Cordial:
Who then with eyes to heaven eleuate
And crosse-laid arms did vow syncerely
All love, and truth in what he meant to show me.
And then (quoth he) dear Englishman, suppose
Me not uncivil t'interrupt thy tale,
For in our Lord I well aread thy woes
And Charity hies me to recure them all:
Now all is but the action of the Mind,
That rectified, the rest is all but wind.
Know then, thou art no better then a man
Natured indifferently, to weal or woe,
Who ere he be that is borne of a woman
Is first just nothing, next an Embrio,
Then borne into the world in impotence
Poor interest to future Excellence.
Nay borne in sable sin to Gods offense,
Nipt in the blossom by the blast of Hell,
Spur-gall'd of Adam both in soul and sense
And hodge podged between a man and Deuel,
A fardle of frailties doomed unto damnation
So sore we have incurred Gods indignation.
If these be titles of felicity,
Ah, poor felicity, unpleasant Pride:
Rooted in hell, brancht in mortality
And round embarked with sin on every side:
Nor are we thus disgraced but of our selfs
For first we eat the Apple of all these helles.
We might have chosen in Adams Liberty
Whether to have eat that Apple yea or no,
But needs we would adventure: And wot you why?
Forsooth of Pride both good and bad to know:
So slunke from us the glory and grace of God
Leaving us quite to our self breeching-rod
Heerhence we covet counterfeit content,
Sublime mundanitie, and our Fleshes ease,
Rating the trash of earth true solagement
And every toy of price our sense to please:
Such is our frailty, and yet we see it not
So to subject us to so servile Lot.
And such the matter of thy discontent,
Because thou ouer-prizest Fleshes sense,
Rating the world at all too high a rent
Whereas it is but dust and Gods offense:
The Mammon of iniquity in Scripture phrase
And but a mere Crocadyle-amaze.
Conceit thy self no better then thou art,
A sorry Iourney-man from birth to death
And all this world but matter of vndesart
And a mere momentarie trash-bequeath:
Death doomes all Flesh at last, and Flesh-affaires
Be it Fleshes joys, or Fleshes servile cares.
Bless being the perfect Counterpane of good
This world is not of worth to correspond it
It being but trash ore-flowne with Frailties flood
And deep indown'd from heavens fellowship:
Then up to heaven amount thy true ambition
And as for earth out-care it in contrition.
Not to despair and die as Cato told thee,
For that is base Pusillanimitie
And Natures most unhallowed infamy,
Treason to God, and fell disloyalty
So to betray his Fort and Character
To selfe-misdoome, and drearie disaster.
We ought not cancel Gods eternal doom
Vn-labelling our life from his fair Charter,
For such is diffidence in his holidoome
And proud in-officing us in his affair:
Nor can we kill Calamity by death
For he is just in earth, and hell beneath.
Thou can not flit from his almighty doom
He being the Arbiter of all, and nothing:
Who gave thee Essence out of Vacuum
Can pain thy ashes all in earth reposing:
Well may thou shift his anger into grace
But not deprive thee from his heavenly face.
As vain it is to think Reuenges deed
Can counter-doome thy bale to blessedness,
The power of Flesh being but a rotten reed
And selfely inclined unto all distress:
Then since we are so wretched of our selfs
Add worse to ill does but increase our helles.
Such is Revenge: It is a haggard ill,
A Luciferiall rank vncharitie:
The venym, and black- Santus of our will
Vnreasons rage; spawne of Impiety,
Breath of Despair, Prime-brat of Enuies brood,
And all good Natures Satyr- Antipode.
Reuenges arm reared up against the Foe
Aims to defeat God of his interest
Who clausually reserved that work of woe
Unto his own judicial behest;
Thou art a man, and once did suck thy mother,
Thou can not judge thy self, much less another.
And what know thou whether happily for thine own
Or for thy Predecessors sins thou suffer,
God often transfers his indignation
From the offending East to th'ending West.
Or whether it be to try thy patience,
And flush the more thy good obedience.
If it be for thy sins, oh happy thou
That art so temporally corrected:
Such is Gods mercy, not his Iustice-blow,
A worser doom is to thy evil indebted:
For God being good in all infinity
Such is thy sins, and hels affinity.
And if for thy forefathers trespasses,
It Is brave to be so good a Sacrifice,
God erst to expiate thy amisses
Being a president before thine eyes
Of willing death; we are not borne only
Unto our selfs: Such is vncharitie.
The feeble Nature even of Flesh and Blood
Has been so kind to die for Ancestrie,
Gentility records Eneas good
In that he bore his aged fathers frailty
Through Troyes flames: much more ought Charity
Bear patiently another penalty.
But shall I say that happily in this case
Our Lord is pleased to try thy patience,
Thy valor, and obedience in disgrace?
Oh, that were all-too glorious a pretense:
For (well ye wot) that Soldier is a King
That choycelie is employed in warfaring.
It Is Scowndrell-glorie still to sit at ease
In gawdie satisfaction of thy sense:
Nay, it is no glory at all, but a disease
That Canker-like consumes thine Innocence.
Now God being pleased to cure thee thereof
Does thus confound it all into a scoff.
And yet confounds it so, as thou may see
His Justice and his Mercy ioind together,
Thy ill contrould to future dignity,
So does the goodness of thy cause auerre:
If God did mean thy eternal infamy,
Worse passive cause had foul befallen thee.
Thou can not have a more assured pavvne
Of Gods benignity then a good cause,
It being unto thy soul a sacred dawne
Of heavens day; and an especial clause
Or Charter-warrant of Salvation
By a secure Conscience-attestation.
Not all the glory of this world is worth
The minnim- Emphosis of a good Conscience:
The very penal tears it sends forth
Are more then pearls of Indie-excellence:
Much more are they Imperial dignities
Her inward Joys and Iocundities.
Say that the Corpse of such a Conscience
Lie all in mange before the Misers door,
His name as hell held in the worlds offense,
Yet is he not unfortunate therefore;
For heaven and he being still in good conjunction
All that is but vapor, and no sound confusion.
Nay it is to thee a haughty merit-matter
If brookt with patient valor to the end;
Which easily thou may do, if thou consider
That Jesus tempts thy patience as a friend,
Not in his rage above thy power and strength,
Whom he reprooues at first, he saues at length.
And sooth to say, what is Prosperity
That so should make thee abhor Adversity?
Even Caesar's lofty pomp, and soucraigntie
Is not by ods sincere felicity;
Subject to Care and Alteration
Through Envy, Error, and Adulation.
How much ado is done ere men attain
To wealth and glory by Ambition?
Still carke and care shares half the servile gain,
The rest remains to Deaths confusion:
It Is well if tart Synderisie and Hell
Triumver not to towlle the passing bell.
Care in attaining, and care in attain
Care is the lower and the upper staire:
Such careful glory is but glorious pain,
Yea care, or care-lesse either, all is but air:
Feast it in care, or feast it carelessly
Death is the latter Harpie of all glory.
Besides, how many Villains are advanced
To such theatricall, and stagie-state
Whilst Virtue lies obliuiously entranced,
Neglected, and disdained as out of date:
Besides the multiplicitie of abuse
That is in such mundanities mis-use.
Whereas the patient S^rapin distress
Behonesteth his guikie suffrance:
And if he suffer for Gods righteousness,
Lo, there the sumine of all true valliance:
Heavens Machabe he is that so downe-dies
Guilty of all glory, and Gods dear dainties.
Who hears his name a thousand years hence
Will give it glory, praise, and reverence
As to a Temples ruin-Monuments
Rased in Sacrilege, and Gods offense:
He will be-villaine those that did the deed
As Scowndrell-Agents of Hells black areed.
We are not borne to Fortunes complements,
As sovereign dainties; but as Virtues tools
Wherewith to shape us perfect lineaments
Of honorable Manhood: And not as Fools
To dote upon the Pensill in our hand
And not depaint us like to Gods command.
Virtue's the Lady of our Humanity,
And Fortune but the handmaid of our merit,
Now, were it homelied one to magnify
The mean above the maine: It Were petty sperit
To slip our nets into the Sea for water
And pardon Fish, as no part of the matter.
This life is but a warfare against sin
And either Fortune is but sins Coate-armour,
Be it bright or black, great danger lies therein
If thou resist not with a haughty valor:
It Is witless yielding to her gawdements,
And cowardi^e unto her orearements.
What skils it whether we fight with black or white
If black and white be both our enemies,
The one in guile, tho'other in flat despite?
The Goblin-Bugs, and Faery Hiedegies
Are both the shades of hell, and night-affrayes
Encounter, not assent quelles their dismayes.
And why are we the image of our God
The Monarchs over all Elementaries?
But to controwll with Reasons righteous rod
All flesh and bloods frail sensualities;
It Is sensuality, and petty power
To mal-content thee for a fading flower.
Stand thou on Reasons haughty Promontorie
Superior and secure over all disgrace,
Rage wind, and wave, and horror round about thee
Yet all is glory and peace in that bright place:
Nor Death, nor Hell can damnifie thy honer
So long as Reasons arm bears up thy banner.
Oh generous minded men that can esteem
All state inferior to their minds degree,
And not abandon it to base misdeeme
Of any Fortunes power above her glee
But can out-stare it with a quaint regard
In reference to merit, and Gods grand reward.
That can conceit all Fortune as a Fog
Be It black or bright, all but a matter of air,
If bright, oh then it does but flatter and cog,
If black, it drowns thee with a flood of care,
Unless thy mind be as a Sun above it
Fair ouer-shining all her mist-demerit.
Fair Fortune is a Bog, a dancing danger,
And Temperance must foot it with a modest pace;
Her frown, a gulf that drownes the hartlesse stranger
That cannot wend with Patience his disgrace;
Both that and it are mortuarie matter
If fed upon in Indiscretions platter.
Submit not then thy sacred Substantive
To Fortunes hestes: but as thou art of Nature,
So still continue thy prerogative
Above her blandishing and spightfull power,
So shone a Patrimony as thy Mind
Let never Fortune wast it out of kind.
Thou art no part of Fortune, but thine own:
Virtue thy fore-guide, Heaven thy attain,
Good death, not lofty life thy best Renown,
Contented mind thy glories after-gaine:
Without content all glory is but gall,
And with content disgrace is festival.
Content's the Sponge of true felicity,
The Cordial against degraded bless,
Corriuall to the highest Empirie,
The badge of Innocence and Righteousness,
Virtues enthrone, Rent of a manly mind
To God for whatsoever state assigned.
It is the Phaenix of fore-glories Embers:
Patience her wing, Heaven is her amount,
It is the Christopher whose manly members
Wastes the miser-man through all affrount,
It is the true and perfect Salamander,
Breathing vitalitie in flames of fire.
Not so the Skowndrell in his greatest glory,
For there is no Content in guilt of evil,
A skowll down-looke, and swart synderisie
Betokening him a member of the Devil:
He cannot with a fair erected front
Be- Abba God: nor yield him good account.
His glory in guilt of ill is as a flower
Begnawne with an accursed Caterpiller,
Or as an Apple perished in the coure
Though faining outwardly a faithful fair;
Oh fatal incense, oh accursed fume
That so choaks up the wretch does it assume.
Whereas the others conscientiall-content
Does feast his Fates, and ciuillize their rage,
Turning their gall to glee and solagement
And fair be-heauening hell with her asswages
He Is as a Bwoy above the bosterous wave
Dancing to scorn the Seas ybillowy-braue.
So strong in power is his sincere incline
To Gods ordain and holy providence,
Resting therein as in a sacred shrine
Or Sanctuary against all hels offense:
The Devils eager-gripe cannot confound
Him whom our Lords protection does bound.
There is no hell but in our Gods offense:
Please him, and boldly plunge adowne the deep
Of all accurse: his holy Providence
Being the Argus which does never sleep,
Will on the wings of safe Protection
Still bear the just man up from all perdition.
What hap can hap amiss to Gods beblest?
What wave can surge above his providence?
The Hagges of hell are chained to his behest
Hell gates obey his high omnipotence:
Diue down to Hell, if he bear up thy chin
Well may thou sink a while, nere drown therein.
If once thy hope be anchored in God
No wave, no bluster can endanger thee,
Thy foot from falling is securely shod
He corresponding thy fidelity:
If God thy Center be and thy defense
Be Hell, be Devil thy Circumference.
The Tyrants steel, the Hang-mans Axeltree,
His strangles, mangles, and his fiery doomes
Cannot confound true magnanimity
Founded on Gods true love and hollidoomes;
His life in gore, his Ghost in shades of hell
Are more at ease than any tongue can tell.
The earthen minded man cannot conceive
So haughty glory in disglorie and dole:
His groueling appetite does so bereave
His wit, impelling it to another gole;
He Is so befotted in his Leprosy
That it alonlie he esteems true glory.
But time will come when at a just Tribunal
The just man's misery, and the misers glee
Will come in Coram, and be doomed for all:
Then mourning good shall mount to Majesty,
And sin-polluted glory down descend
T'irreparable dollour without end.
Then vae to guilty glory, glorious guilt,
Vae to suppress of virtue, advance of vice;
The Rascals tower on Virtues tuines built
Must then adowne, and he repent the price:
Oh, far more happy then disgraced good,
Then Vice advanced to skowndrell altitud.
But thou will say it is Detraction,
It is thy name defamed among the just
Thy life belied through misconstruction
That more then all thy glory in the dust
Be-hels and tortureth thy manly mind,
It being a mischief of a woorser kind.
Be It so ( Elizian-man) I do confess
Detraction is indeed a monstrous evil,
Foul Harpie of honor, Night of righteousness
And the uncivil tongues most venym-driuell,
Much more I do confess it is a spite
To be of honest men a villain hight.
But on the other side, when thou consider
The sand-blind errors even of justest men,
How much from Gods intuitie they differ
And often when most they judge, are most mistaken;
Despair not at their doomes, but in thy heart
Bless God who sees thee inly what thou art.
Oft-times the good man credits with his ears
Not with his eyes: Therhence if injury
Redownd to thee; the fault being wholly theirs,
Far be it from thy hearts synderisie:
Yea rather with a bolt-vp countenance
Give it the Lie, and hardy sufferance.
Much more the Villains obloquie disdain it
As currish crauin against thy Innocence,
His Viper-language cannot crack thy credit
A blush-lesse conscience pleading thy defense;
His tongue against thy Souls secure estate
Fares as a reed against a brazen gate.
But if his obloquie be a true Echo
Of thy mis-gouernance and guilty life,
Then well I do aread it is a woe
Unto thy honor, and a slaughter-knife;
Whereas contrarie-wise if thou be sound
It Is but an ayrie, and an idle sownd.
Fair then aguize thee with a trim transcent
Above al flesh and hells indignity,
Embost with gentle Patience, and Content
Lamb-like repinelesse at adversity,
For, sooth I say, and heaven will witness it
The just man's misery is a haughty merit.
And first please God in his commandments,
Next, with a true Satrapick-sufferance
Grace me that face of thine, those lineaments
Against Detraction and hells mis-valiance,
Show that thou art the image of thy God
In patient portage of his penal rod.
So, nor despair, nor yet revenge thy woe
But with the prudent Serpent in distress
Safe-garde thy head; let die the rest beloe:
Thy head in heaven, thy heel in heaviness
Is merry matter, if thou well consider
That death rejoynes them both in bless together.
Have thou not noted this effect in Nature.
How chill-cold winter calefies the water
Anteperistezing her powers together
Whereby it fair resists her y^ie ire?
So, in thy winter of Adversity
Create thy self a sommer-Iubilie.
Give place to fury as the humble Snaile
Retreating in his horns against misaduenture,
In time all violence will selfelie quail
If vnprouok'd with currish misdemeanure:
The chillest winter and the darkest night
Redound at last to Summer, and broad daylight.
See how the Marigold against the Son
Displayes and shuts it self at his dominion
Lessening at night her spread proportion
But nere disculloring her gold-complexion,
So to the sovereignty of God above
With Fortunes night deminish not thy love.
But think misfortune is the flayle of grace,
The clarifying Furnace of thy soul
Wherewith God strips away thy chaffe-disgrace
And makes thee pure mettle with such controwlle
It Is honorable manhood to obey thy God,
Be It in his mercy, or his justice-rod.
Will thou submit thy mind to Fortunes Impostes
Faithless of Gods benignity and care?
Ah, rather do disdain her bales and bostes
As Crocadyle-deceipts, and crabbed ware^
And to thy God alonly plie thy hest
For such is pure duty, and the pure best.
So doing, better boones then Fortunes baubles
Will Spaniell-like attend upon thy merit,
Good death, and after death th'immo^uables
Of glory, and fame, and an in heauened spirit
In everlasting lubilie and bless
Far more then heart can think, or tongue express.
So shall thou swim away in Ver^^es flood,
A happy burden to a happy Maine,
Gods flowerie-eter^itie garlanding thy good
And his embrace lullabying all thy pain:
Oh, happy thou when such adoption
Shall fair befall thy tribulation.
When all thy Crosses shall appear in heaven
As euer-memorable Annalles of thy merit,
Oras bright Trophies to thy Virtue given
The Saints of glory all applauding it;
When God with his serenest countenance
Shall ever bright be-boone thy sufferance.
Then will thou nere repent the of thy woe
But wish it had been twenty fold as much
For Jesus sake, who even in earth beloe
Can frollick thy incinder with his tutch
And fair be-heauen thy bones in drearie grave,
Above the glory and ease that Caesar's have.
And sooth to say, wherein has Jesus erred
Or not deserved such suffrance at thy hands?
Has he not always in his life preferred
Disgrace and dole to rid thee out of bands?
Oh, was not he the man, the Lamb that died
To show thee heaven in woe, and not in pride?
He was Almighty to have saved his head
If he had pleased; But for a president
Of passive Fortitude, and Lamblihead
He condiscended unto woe and torment,
And did erect the Cross a capital
Ensign of honor, and renown to all.
And since, what Saint did ever amount to bless
That has not more or less been crucified?
Either with self zeale-doome, or by oppress
Of tyranny by villains hands inflicted?
The seed that must to flowery growth redound
Must first lie dead, and withered in the ground.
Besides; oh what a monstrous thing it is
To live delitious under a thorney head;
Thy God to daigne to die for thy amiss
And thou repine to be dishonored
For Virtues sake; Oh fond ingratitude
So to permit thy Sense thy Soul delude.
If so the flesh, the world, the devil could do
More spite unto thy state then God can quayle,
Or that his grace could not transcend thy woe
Be-cheering it with happy counteruayle,
Then might thou with a just repine detest.
To be by any fate of flesh oppressed.
But God both can and will relieve his Plaintiff
That does with just petitions inuoke him,
Selfe-louelesse and repinelesle at the grief
That from his sovereign doom betides him;
The loving mothers teat is not so prone
Unto her Babe, as Christ to his dear one.
So showed his Pellican-content to die
To give thee life, the gore adowne his breast
To wash away thy sin-impuritie;
His dolor was thy everlasting rest,
His bitter wounds the ever open gates
Of grace, and glory to thy rankest fates.
Lo, he thy paines-appease, true charter-warrant
Of glory after gall: The bonnie bright
Whose crimson rays can fair propulse and daunt
The dreadest Goblin of thy darkest night:
Be thou the man of duty to thy dole,
The rest let him alone for to control.
Inshrine thy Patience in his Passion
Thy Hope, thy Constance in his after-boones
To his entire irradiation
Submit thy night-shades and decreased Moons,
He is the Son of Right, and will appay
All virtues anguor with a Hollie-day.
Behold his image yonder on the Cross,
See how he droops and dies and damnes Revenge
Yielding his whole humanity in gross
A pendular reproach on wooden henge:
Yea even his Deity he does deject
Unto a seeming shadowed defect,
Be not a beast of desperation,
A moodie torment, traitor to thy self,
It Is gross conceit and imperfection
To ground thy Bark upon thy own shores shelfe:
Suffice it that extrinsecall aggriefe
Abound, sans that thou give it home-reliefe.
Think that thy sins are greater then thy woe,
Thy worldly griefs but Graces happy rescue
From greater helles that to thy soul do grow;
Or happily to enforce to manly virtue
Thy youngling hestes of grace; or to contain
Thy present good from proouing after vain.
Time and thy grave did first salute thy Nature
Even in her infancy and cradle-Rightes
Inuiting it to dustie Deaths defeature,
And therewithal thy Fortunes fierce despights:
Death is the gulf of all: and then I say
Thou art as good as Caesar in his clay.
Death is the drearie Dad, and dust the Dame
Of all flesh-frailtie, woe or majesty;
All sinkes to earth that surgeth from the same,
Nature and Fortune must together die:
Only fair Virtue skales eternity
Above Earths all-abating tyranny.
Read in my front the ruin of my nature
And therwithall perpend thy miseries,
I do confess I were a cursed creature
Were not Gods grace above m'infirmities,
So, thou in Faith to after-retribution
Assuage thy woe and tribulation.
Die in thy Saviors wounds, and there an end,
There prick the Period of thy moody wander,
To him thy woe, and the revenge commend
As to thy sovereign Liege and high commander,
And think no error whispereth in thine ear
For what I say is true, and that I swear.
So said: the tears of zeal trill'd down his cheeks
Attesting truth unto his Catechism,
When (lo) e^t soons unto the Crucifixe
Crooching adowne, he said; Oh sacred Chrisme,
Oh sweet assuage of infelicitie
Witness that what I say is verity.
Say, art not thou the image of our Lord
The true Character of his sufferance?
Was he not crowned, deluded, and abhord
Misuail'd, and scourged with vile mis-valiance?
Oh, was not he the holy Paschall-lambe
That di'd repinelesse for the sins of man?
Sweet (Jesus) give me leave to kiss thy figure
With thankful zeal to thy benignity,
And let me pray thee by so great disfigure
T'inspire this man of woe thy passiue-glorie:
That not all like a beast he droop and die
Heart-lesse and impious in his misery.
Defend thy image from so black a blurre
With thy in-shine; Let not temptation foil
So much thy Passions price all like a Curre,
But as thou art a President of toil
To after-glorie; so let thy grace fore-goe
And fair accompany this man of woe.
Without thy grace my speech is all but air
And barraine Marle; it batteneth not the ground:
It is thy grace that foysoneth all affair
That holy grace that flows from thy wound;
I speak in flesh, invested in my bryer;
There is no flame at all but from thy fire.
Make it appear how good a God thou art
And how thy wounds were not in vain inflicted,
What Nature cannot do, let Grace impart
To strengthen and inhearten the afflicted,
Show that thy mercy is above the bound
Of Fortunes topsie-turuie to confound.
Let not the fancies of a lofty style
And vain mundanitie transport thy creature
As though alonlie Fortunes lowre or smile
Were sovereign Glories gift and dread defeature,
As though thy power were worn out of date
And could no longer signiorize our fate.
Disperse the terrors of his moodie night
That he may see thy shone Jerusalem
And in this holy City Sions light
Abide, and faithfully believe this Theme
Happy they all that suffer for our Lord,
For he to such his heaven will afford.
With that he kissed the Crucifixe again
And with a strict embrace thereof he sounded;
His Ghost amounted up to heavens domaine,
His corpse lay trunke-like seeming dead confounded;
Whiles I mean while internallie infiered
Did feel the woonders of Gods grace inspired.
Then began I credit Catechrysius
And hatefullie abhor my former mood,
Base Melancholy, black and impious
That so distrayd me from eternal good:
My heart exulted, and in zeal I swore,
Now by our Lord, I Will be a beast no more.
I will no longer grudge at virtues toil,
But gladly will be crucified with Jesus;
No yron-fate shall hereafter foil
My constancy unto the Christ-crosse rue:
I will account all dollour and mishap
More dear then sweetest Lullaby in Fortunes lap.
No longer will I wander up and down
The desert of Revenge, and dread Despair,
But here will stint me against misfortunes frown
A land-man of this soil and happy air:
From hence I will reuine to pristin bless
Or else die here with Jesus in distress.
No sooner said I so, and gave consent
To Graces in-come, and our Lords attaint,
But (lo) eftsoons from heavens high regiment
Music resounded, and appeased my plaint.
It was so sweet above my feeble frayltie
That down I fell as one content to die.
Dying in so sweet sollace and in-heauen
I was no more the man of earthly nature,
Gods Graces holy relish, and sweet leaven
Had altered my flesh to a new transfigure:
Figure of zeal to be in Jesus arms,
Condition to endure ten thousand harms.
But God who saw and wrought this alteration,
Fair interdicted Death his date-most deed,
And sent an Angel from his holy region
To cheer my frailty up to future speed:
Whom when I saw and smelt his heavenly hue,
It did eftsoons my death to life renew.
He then out-stepping from his siluer-cloud
Made toward me with a reverend peaceful pace,
And as he marched ever and anon he bowed
Unto the Crucifixe was there in place,
Whereto at last down humbled, he kissed it,
And gave it me in hand, and thus inspeecht it.
Hold here ( Elizian-man) thy Saviors image
The typick Trophee of thy souls redeem,
Be it thy life's eternal Appennage
Thy hearts dear dainty, and thy choice-esteeme,
Inconscience it within thy in-most hest
For In hoc sign vinces is expressed.
Be it thy Standard against all affrount,
Under her shade tire out Misfortunes weather,
Be true to it, and make a sure account
Heaven is thine own as sure as God lives ever:
God lives for ever to protect and pay
His Champion with a ioy-eternall day.
And hither I come, sent from his Tabernacle
To certify so much to thy poor frailty,
And here have brought thee heauen-inchanted tackle
To warfare flesh and bloods calamity:
Lo I thy Angel of protection
Against whatsoere foul and fell affection.
With that he armed my Head with Reasons Helm,
The Crest was Vigilance; the Plumes were twain
Temprance against fair Fortunes ouerwhelme,
And Patience against her angry vain:
The Gorget was Content, and either Pouldron
Was humble Prayer and Meditation.
The Corslet, it was Zeal of Gods true honor,
The Back piece, Hope to after-retribution,
The Gauntlets, tackles to Charities endeavor,
The Vant-braces, Faiths deck and decoration,
The Martch, he did injoyne was Penitence,
The Combat, Courage against all sins offense.
Then gave he me in hand a Shield of Gold
All ouer-grauen with Christ's Passion,
And round about in-amill'd I might behold
Death-heads, and latter Resurrection
To heaven or hell: The Cross in the other hand
Was all my Spear against whatsoere withstand.
Thus armed; the Angel bright again in-clouded
Vpbounded from mine eye toward heaven away
Leaving the place with spiced sweetes suffused
And all bestrew'd with Crowns and wreathes of Bay,
Spelles and demonstrances of future glory
To well atchiued war and victory.
I then there all alone vn-Angelled,
Began to view and glee me in mine Arms
Woondring to see me so be-Championed
Against the assaults of sin and Fortunes harms:
And thus I said: Oh shone Jerusalem
What woonders are in thee to welfare men.
I bless the God and Spirit of thy bounds,
I bless thy Concord, and thy Monarchy,
I bless the streams that tril from Jesus wounds
Into thy seuen-fold Cesternes; and from thee
Are vitally imparted unto all
That live within thy Rampire and thy wall.
Lo, I with Graces furniture fair armed
Within thy confines, humbly beseech thee
Admit my Souldiour-ship as yet vnharm'd
With any adverse wars, into thy city:
And daigne me there a stand against all evil,
The flesh, the world, and fierce insulting devil.
In thee I see how much I went amiss
Ranging the desert of mundanitie,
And in thy wisdom now I learn this
That not in Fortunes false malignitie
But in sins guilt, and grimme captivity
Is only wrack, and black calamity.
I see my miss in thy fair Phisnomie,
My way-lesse errors in thy unity,
I feel the ardure of true Chivalry
Inspired in me from thy Nobility:
Here live I then the remnant of my age
Under thy haughty worth and Patronage.
So said; a silver bell from high resounded
Sommoning that Region round about to sacring,
When (lo) eftsoons Catechrysius vn-swounded
His souls return did give him new reviving,
Oh sacred sommon, sweet enchanting peale
That so from heaven to earth could souls repeal.
His face like Phoebus in his Noony-shine
Daunted my feeble eye at prime aspect,
His souls regresse had made it so divine,
Bebrightning clean away all frail defect,
As had not zeal in heartened my frayltie,
I had not had the power to abide such glory.
He then vp-rising toward me advanced
And kissed the Crucifix I had in hand,
So done; he said: Sweet Jesus be thou thanked
That have vouchsau'd my prayer to understand;
Confirm him in thy grace for now and ever
That from thy love and laud he vary never.
With that he embraced me with a frount of glee
And called me brother, and Coparcener
Of Christ's Domaine, and therwithall he gave me
A golden ring; the poesy was Persevere:
So, forth we went unto the Temple-ward
It Was sacring time, and music much we heard.
Along as up the Rock we footed it
He did congratulate my shone in-armor
And did expound unto me every whit
How I might use it to Gods greatest honor
And then concluded: O Elizian
See what it is to be a Christian.
Would thou have thought in thy mundanitie
That ever Fortunes heel had had the might
To spurn the away to such an after-glorie?
Or that thy sorry iourneyment all night
Would ever have brought thee to sweet repose
As now thou feel far above thy woes?
The ball out-banded from the court of game,
Falls not of force into the durtie kennell,
But mark, and often shall thou see the same
Fly in at Pallace-windowes, and there revel
Upon the royal Mattes, and rich embroader;
Such grace of God has blown thy frailty hither.
Not all the flush of thy fore-frollicke state,
The worship of thy birth, thy rich revenue,
Thy countries high applaud and estimate
And all that fair Elyzium can yield you,
Is of the worth to countervayle this hap
Fallen from fair Fortune into Graces lap.
Say that Eliza is the Lords dear dainty,
The Phaenix of true Principality
The feast of peace and sweet saturitie
Unto the people of her Emperie;
Say that she is both Grace and Natures nonesuch
I bend my knee; and say and think as much.
For I have heard the woonders of her name
Our coast is full of great Elizabeth,
Yea, all the world is fertile of the same;
Sweet Name that all men's tongues and pens inableth,
Sweet Sound that all men's senses lullabieth,
Sweet Marle that all the world imbatteneth.
But such her glories are but eare-delightes
And lip-sweets only to our far awayes,
For we are no Elizium-bred wightes
Nor have we any such like merry days;
We have our joys in another kind
Ghostly innated in our soul and mind.
Whom angour of mishap or guilt of ill
Drives to despair, and self misdoomfull deed,
Lo, here th'vnfraught of his woe-loaden will
And reverend riches to his ghostly need;
Lo, here the Arc against the inundation
Of Sin and Fortunes funerall-temptation.
Here (lo) the amity of men and Angels
In uniform adore of one true God,
Here Peace and Piety together dwells,
Here Scisme, and Discords clouen-foot nere trod,
Here sacred Ceremonies are in ure
As wedlocke-rightes twixt Faith and Souls insure.
Here chantes the Nightingale incessant praise
And prayer unto the Orient son of God,
Here Grace our uncouth Adamisme allayes
Stepping her golden foot where guilt erst trod,
Here Sacrifice and Sacrificer both
Gods bless and good acceptance still fore-goeth.
Hewould have told me more to this pourport,
But that his vp-hill pace out-tyr'd his speech
And now were also near the Temple port
Where every sight I saw was so heavenly rich
As had he uttered more mine eyes delight
Had quite undone mine ears to do him right.
Ah, now I want the Muse of Solomon
To tell you a Temple-tale, a tale of truth
All of the Architect and frame of Sion:
To tell you of her age and of her youth
And of her reverend reign and regiment
And how Doblessa rues her high atchiuement.
The grownd was Faith; the meane-worke Charity
The Top, a Hopeful apprehension
Of heavens attain: All was of Unity
A sollid mettle heawn out of Christ his Passion:
Yea Christ himself was fundamental stone,
And all the Sowder was Devotion.
There shined the Rubie and the Chrysolite
The sparkling Diamond, and the Emeraud green,
Each Saphyre in their several delight:
There was the happy Iacent to be seen
The Topasse, Onyx, and many a fair gem,
Corrall, Amber, and Aggats were trash among the^.
Which such bright rough-cast over all incrusted
It Was heaven to see what Rain-bowe rays it yielded
Whiles every gem ambitiously contended
T'out-stare each others starry neighbourhed:
It was enough t'illumine all the world
But for the mysts that false Doblessa hurld.
Roses and flowers of all cullored kinds,
The Marie-bush and pleasant Eglantine
The Honey-suckle in her twisted twines
Immixt with Yuie, and the Grape-full Vine,
Did all grow up that starrie spanglement
Spousing her splendure with their spiced sent.
Below these heauen-amounting swauities
Grew over all the Temple-greene beside
Sweet Gilliflowers and Primroses
The Pink, and Gerisole (the Suns deer bride;)
The Molie, Violet, and the pleasant Dasie
Balm, Margerum, and sweet Coast-marie.
There grew the lofty Cedar, and the Pine,
The peaceful Oliffe, and the martial Fur
The verdant Laurel in her shadie-shine,
The patient Palm, and penitential Mirrhe:
The Elm, the Poplar, and the Cipresse tree
And all trees else that pleasant are to see.
All kinds of fruits were there perpetual
The Date, the Almond, and the sauceful Citron,
The Fig, the Orange, and Pomgranet royal,
The Quince, the Abricock, and the musk-Mellon
The Plumme, the Cherie, and the pleasant Pear
The Filberd and the Mulberie grew there.
Amid these trees, these fruits, these flowerie sweetes
Ran in a Maze-like wile a crystal stream
Of heavenly Nectar; in whose sweet floods and fleets
Swom sholes of fishes, every fishes gleame
Brighter then Tytan in his Southern stage:
This stream was strong against prime guiltes enrage.
Her silent murmur was so musical
As it dissolved the Rock to sand and gravel
Whereby it might more in especial
With multiplicitie of ears incell
Her musick-sweets: yea even the earth beloe
Did open, and eruct her bowels thereto.
There sat the Mauis and the Nightingale
Carrolling their Lays unto the eternal spring
The little Lark high houering over all:
There every bird did either play or sing,
The Parrat for his plumes did most excel
But Phaenix bare away the triumph-bell.
There was no savage shape, no Laruall hue
No Bug, no bale, nor horrid Owlerie
But all that there was, was sincere and true,
Her sweets, her spendure, and her musick-glee;
Yea even the Angels of Divinity
Were of that league, and Confraternitie.
Whiles thus with sacred follace I suruayd
The Temples outward majesty, and heaven,
So long on that imparadize I stayed
That now the Temple-clocke did strike eleven:
It was the instant time of high Oblation
We might no longer linger, but begone.
Estsoons we did so peacefully advance
That to the Temple-dore we straight arrived,
Ore which was graven, Vna, Militans
Astile from Unity, and War derived;
The gate was all of pure beaten gold,
The Portch a sunnie Zodiac to behold.
Then in we entered, (oh, we entered in)
Please God I never may come forth again:
What saw I there? Oh my eyes were dim
My soul, my substance all was poor, and vain
To comprehend so high magnificence;
Yet what I can I will you it dispense.
I Spanield after Catechrysius foot
A happy shadow to good a substance:
All like a flower as yet but in thee root
Tending to future growth, and shone advance:
The Temple-porter was a reverend man
And was t'admit in no Elizian.
Then asked he Catechrisius who I was
Who answered a Catecumen he,
With that he greeted me, and let me pass,
Such was my entry to felicity:
The Temple gates were four and this was it
Which none but Europe-spirits might admit.
There on my knees my heart was full of fire,
Fire of the grace of God (dear grace of God)
Which strong bemettled my zeales aspire
To view the glory of that shone abod:
It was a Pigion from the Temple-top
Which all that frame, and glory did up prop.
A Pigeon whiter then the whitest Pigion
Solie subsistant of his own pure Esse,
His Posse was Sanctification,
And Graces bounteous liberality;
What Jesus erst had planted with his blood
This Pigion gave it grace-full liuelihood.
The beams which issued from his brightsome brist
Were such as none but Sion ever saw
Nor ever could Doblessas dreary mist
Indarken, or resemble, or withdraw;
Love, Peace, and Magnanimity in good
Patience, and Prudence above all flesh and blood.
Justice, and Temperance, and Benignity,
Zeal, and internal Consolation,
Pity, and hopeful Longanimitie,
Obedience, and brotherly Correction,
Devotion, and Mortification
And firm affiance in our Lords Salvation.
Such were the Pigions rays from Temple-top
Which like a heaven of light illumined all,
It being thereto a more secure vpprop
Then any lime and stone, or brazen wall:
Oh Sion, Sion happy City thou
So holie-ghosted against all overthrow.
Then looking down unto the residue
I might discern a reverend ministry
Of men and Angels chanting unto Jesus
Incessant Hymns of praise and Jubilee;
The high Sacrificator at the Altar
Victiming with holy rites his makar.
What shall I say of all the majesty
Of all the reverend rites and ceremonies
The rich adorn, the heavenly melody,
The luster, and the precious swauities
That there I saw, felt, heard, and understood?
Oh, they transcended far poor flesh and blood.
For, what the goodness and the power of God
In their immensitie could jointlie do
Was there in force sans bound or period,
His grace and glory both did tend thereto:
The meanest object there unto my sense
Was more then all the worlds magnificence.
There saw I sacred imposition
Of hands; and grace abundantly imparted,
Chrisme, and autentique Sanctification
And Exorcisme of such as were possessed:
Their credence and their language was alike
All Babell-Biblers they did dead dislike.
There was no scambling for the Ghospels bread
But what a public Unity diliured
The same a prompt Credulity received;
Their humbleness was so beholie-ghosted
As Pride had not the power to entice
The wisest of them all to a new device.
Casting my eye aside, I might discrie
Selected troops of people from the rest
Dooming themselves with great austeritie
Both men and women in discullored vest;
They were the people of vows, and high aspire
Endu'd with Graces more especial fire.
On no hand could I cast my liquorish eye
From heavenly miracles and mysteries;
Some schooled their Pupils frail infirmity
Dispencing them Gods sacramental graces,
Some raised the dead, and some expulst the devil,
Yet naught could make Doblessa see her evil.
How many Sionits of choice esteem
Brave men of woonders have been sent from thence
To teach Doblessa (Errors dreary Queen)
Their Temples sanctimonie and innocence?
How many worthies have dispenst their blood
To do th'vnkind Doblessa so much good.
But she, oh she accursed Sorceresse
Would never yet believe, nor gree their grace
But still persisteth in her wretchedness
Warfaring with bloody broile this happy place,
Yea, had she might according to her malice
Sion had been a ruin long ere this.
She was a Witch, and Queen of all the Desert
From Babell-mount unto the pit of Hell,
She forced nor God, nor any good desert,
She could do any thing save doing well:
Her law was Liberty, her lust was Pride
And all good awe and order she defied.
Erst ere this Temple was established
She had no being at all above the earth
But ever lay in deepest hell abyssed;
Why did not God confound her in her birth?
Oh, it was because his Temple might attain
Through her assaults to be more sovereign.
Gods Lamb was now both bred and dead outright
To ransom all the world from sins inthrall,
And to secure it in more happy plight
Had built this Sanctuary sacramental:
It shined so shone unto Gentilitie
That it began to see, and gree her glory.
And as the merry river to the Maine
Or the in-ayred stone down to his Center
Fleets and descends as to their due domaine,
So it to Sion confluently bent her:
Yea, had this hag not been so timely bred
The world had all ere this been Sioned.
For she could quaintly mask in Sions guize
And suck out venym from the Flower of life.
And so retayle it with her subtilties
For purest honey: Such was her deed of strife;
Her woluish nature in a lamblie hue
She could disguize, and seem of Sions crew.
Like Ensigns she opposed to Sions Ensigns,
Like her pretense of grace, and Gods high honor,
Like Grapes she did contend grew up her Vines,
And as good Gold as Sions seemed her Coppor;
It was but seeming so, not so indeed,
Her seeming-flower was a very weed.
For why, the spirit which she did pretend
Was not autentique from the holy Ghost,
On no authority she did depend
Not had she certain being in any coast;
Her own behest she did Idolatrize,
And Hydra-like renu'd her Fallacies.
She had no Altar, nor no Sacrament
No Ceremony, nor Oblation,
Her school was Cavil, and truthlesse babblement
Riot her Reign, her end damnation;
This was the haggard whore of Babylon
Whose cup inuenym'd all that drunk thereon.
And this was she which now this holie-day
Whiles all the Temple was in deep devotions
And high adore of Christ's nativity
Came with her barbarous Babellonians
To bid it battle, and assault the place;
But (oh the fool) she came against Gods grace.
She came with peace-full Oliffe in her hand
Pretending mutual honor of that feast:
And all her rabble-rout she did command
As much in outward fayning to protest,
But underneath their plausible attire
They all bare balls of venym and wildfire.
She was more crafty then Gentilitie
Which thought of yore with massacre to quell
The propagation of Sionrie:
For well she wist that Sion was as a bell
And Persecution but as a clapper
That made her siluer-sound more far to scatter.
She therefore to beguile with friendly seeming
Came thus addressed; and privily intempled
Her special Bout-fieux to prepare her coming
With seeds and weeds of jealosie and falshed:
Mean while she stood without the Temple gate
Protesting zeal and duty to her state.
But God whose spirit ever Argus eyed
The weal of Sion as the apple of his eye,
Saw from his high enthrone, and did deride
The Harlots complot; and did by and by
Inspire his Templers pregnant jealosie
And valor against her sly hostility.
Efts might you hear a battle-bell peale out
Religious Larums over all the Region
And see a solemn confluence about
The high Sacrificators holy Oblation:
Each one was on his knees for Confirmation
In grace against so vile prevarication.
Amongst the rest was I a Catecumen
As yet vngrac'd with his alhallowed hand,
Until such time as Catechrysius then
Presented me, and gave him t'vnderstand
My Name, my Nation, and Conversion
And how I craved to be a man of Sion.
Then took he me by the hand, and did applaud
Such my Primitiae toward so high resolve,
Blessing my on-gate from Doblessas fraud
And sanctifying me with a holy salve;
He wept for joy that an Elizian
Would come to be of his Metropolitan.
And for he saw me absolutely armed
Already to the wars; he said no more
But only blessed me, and with his breath becharm'd
My Constancy against the Babell-whore:
And for I was an English-Ilander
He pricked me down under Saint Georges banner.
Then Catechrysius took me by the hand
And led me to my Colors; and as we went
He briefly told me and gave me t'vnderstand
How all Doblessas dorrs I might prevent,
And then concluded. Oh, that Eliza were
A Sionite to day to see this geere.
By this Doblessa seeing all her guile
Detected and Alarmed over all,
Was in a pelting chafe, and began revile
The name of Sion, and to scale the wall:
Lo, thus began the holy wars of Sion
Against the rampant Hagg and whore of Babylon.
Then might you see whole Legions of Angels
Descend adowne in amity of war
To Sion, against Doblessa and her deuels:
The war was like as when proud Lucifar
Tumulting all the Court of heaven was thrown
He, and his accomplices to hell adowne.
Est soones the high Sacrificator seeing
The vp-shot brunt of all Doblessas broyle
Came personally himself unto the bickering
To cheer his men of war in all their toil:
And thus bespake them from the holy Tower,
His speech and gest was full of grace and power.
Oh men of Sion, happy Machabies,
Whom Temples honor in your souls ingrafted
Highly demeanes to Gods benignities;
Dismay not at the number of the dead
But thinking who he is for whom you fight
Redouble your prowess, and your manly might.
You combat for the high Jerusalem
A region of Peace and Immortality
Fore-spell'd, and promised only unto them
That strain in her behalf their vp-shot constancy:
Nor fear ye any wounds or any dying
So good a death tends to a better reviving.
See, how confusedly Doblessa fightes
Without all discipline or good array,
Her Camp abandoned to intestine spightes
And every one contending to bear sway;
Their own disorder will confound their power
The frame of Discord dures not an hour.
On then like gallants of the Holy Ghost
Fighting in Unity, and for a Crown
Against a rascal and tumultuous Host:
Nere let the strumpet pull the Temple down,
No, never shall the strumpet pull it down
For God is God, and it is all his own.
Rememorate the glory of her Age,
And of her Reign, and of her pristin Wars
How often has she quelled Doblessas rage
Attempting to assail her holy Rampiars?
Has she not been a Nurse unto ye all
A Shelter, and a feast most festival?
Besides, has God not promised of yore
That hell shall nere prevail against her gates?
And has not he vouchsau'd to die therefore
Establishing her glory against all Fates?
Yea, is not he her fundamental stone
Her daily Sacrifice and high Oblation?
What will ye more? Oh Sionites no more,
But to your tacklings stand like men of honor
Like men of Sion, one to twenty score
Such Babell-hildings; mortify their rancor
With constant and imperious resistance,
God and his Angels are in your assistance.
So said, he blessed them, and dismissed them all;
Who straight in troops unto the Rampires ran
And happy he could get upon the wall:
There then a second skirmish fresh began,
Doblessa still persisting in the assault
And Sion fierce supplying all default.
It was a heaven to see the good array
And unity of Sion in this conflict,
How every one was willing to obey
His Officers encharge though nere so strict,
The Holy Ghost was in and over all
Cheering their combat with his cordial.
Mean while the high Sacrificator, he
Attended to the Temples Sacrifice
Offering it up for peace and victory,
He chanted Hymns, and Lauds, and Letanies,
And in Pontifical Procession
He and his Clergy made their intercession.
Some in their studdies commented the Text
Conferring place with place, and with traditions
Ov'ring the fraud wherewith Doblessa vexed
Their Ghospels peace; some others in her stations
Boldly adventured their lives to tell
The Babellonians of all her hell.
Some they persuaded, those were very few
And of those few not one of ten persisted,
But still as fear and fraud their frailties drew
They started back again like men agasted:
Oh, what it is to be too secular,
It was self-love that all their weal did mar.
And of such brave aduenturous Sionites
As Doblessa could by hook or crook entrap
They di'd the death, and suffered all the spights
That rage and rascal wit could jointly rap,
Subject they were to dreadful persecution
By public edict, and false brethrens treason.
What sacring, and what sacramenting was
In Sion all this while for Sions safety
Was more then all the strength of stone and brass
In her defense; God not in enmity
But for her greater glories sake permitting
Doblessa thus to bid it bale and bickring.
Contrarie-wise, Doblessa ru'd the fate
Of her attempt; her mood began to quail,
For God now seeing the prefixed date
Of Sions patience in her last avail
Did on the sudden so enlarge his grace
That th'whoore retired, and gave back apace.
And then to show her latest trumperie
(Now that our Lords permission faild her power)
She began with Magicke-spels and sorcerie
Fair Virgin-like to falsify her figure,
Thereby to seem as gracious as she could
To Sions eye; such was her guize of old.
But when she saw that all her fallaces
And fierce assaults to Sion were in vain,
And feeling now withal Gods heavy furies
Shower down upon her like a flood of rain,
She could no longer bide the brunt of Sion
But back she reeled to hell and Babylon.
And fearing least her daunted enterprise
Might happily alien her peoples hearts
From her obeisance: She so bewitched their eyes
With mystes of falsed glory, and high deserts,
That they besotted in their disaster
Betook them to their heels, and fled with her.
And as they fled, Oh, mark their vanity,
They did so crauin-cockadoodle it
As though they had run away victory
And left fair Sion in her dying fit,
Such hoopes, such clangor, and such symphonie
And all was but Doblessas policy.
She nusled them in so proud Peacockrie
To the end they might not see their damned state,
But still persevere as the Bumble-Bee
Repine-lesse in their dung, and desperate:
Oh, cursed and unkind captivity
To be so willing drudge to Falsitie.
Yet some whom Sions more especial beam
Had bright appaid to see her dignity
Fled from the witch, as waked from out a dream
Of Faery, and Chimericall Imagerie,
Such Sion intromitted in her gate
Applauding them with dear congratulate.
Contrarie-wise whatsoever Sionite
Doblessa could with slight or fight enthrall
She led away into eternal night
Blind-folding their eyes to make them fall
Into a thousand helles and offendickles,
Thrice fatal lapse from Grace into such pickles.
Nor was the holy Temple thus acquitted
For ever after from her hostill trouble
But still as Hydra-like she had renewed
One head upon the others stump and stubble
She came again, and made a braggard-show,
But still she bare away the Palsie-blow.
Such being the ancient league of God to Sion
Necessiting her Peace to such temptation
And yet withal protesting his protection
Thereto: against all hell and Babylon:
What greater safety then so good assurance?
The word of God is of eternal durance.
Thus Sion triumphed over mood and tumult
Cabaging her Peace in perfect unity
Against whatsoever future-Scismes insult:
And seeing now no more hostility
But all the Region clear: She fell arifling
Doblessas spoils, the Honors of her fighting.
And in her warlike wardrop there she plast them
Amongst a world of former pillages
And spoils of Babell: high Jerusalem
Sisterlie applauding such her victories,
And thinking long the day to honor her
With her embrace, and everlasting cheer.
Then (to conclude) the high Sacrificator
Came forth in place, and blessed the Combatants,
Bidding them give to God the eternal honor
Of so high hap: And thereupon he descants
A large discourse of Gods protection
How prompt he always was to succor Sion.
So done: he efts dismissed the multitude
To Attend unto the burial of their brethren
Whom Sions honor had that day endu'd
With zeal to die for her like valiant men;
Their graves resented Immortality
Sweeter then all the sents of Arabi^.
And for it was a special victory
Archiu'd even on the very walls of Sion,
There was proclaimed a general Jubilee
To be sollemniz'd throughout all the region
The Octaue after: in feast-full reference
And thanks to God for such his high defense.
In which mean while the holy Sacrificer
Progressing the Province, visited his flock
And with his pastoral care, and Crozier
Out-weeded and retrenched from the stock
Whatsoever venym weed, or graft of Error
Doblessa had sown, or set with guile, or terror.
Namelie^ he did especially dispose
To careful cure the wownded Combatantes;
And such as brunt of war had slain; all those
H'Incallendred to Fames rememberance:
Lastly, he did repair and fortify
Each ruin against all future enemy.
By this the Octaue-day of victory
Was come; when (lo) the Temples silver belles
Selfely out-pealed to festiuitie;
Then might you see both Sionits and Angels
Troop to the Temple-ward like swarms of Bees
And hand in hand down falling on their knees.
You may imagine, no you are to frail
To comprehend so high magnificence:
There saw I heaven and earth in ioynt-entayle
Homaging to Gods benevolence
A world of praise and Alleluy^es,
Hallowing the air with so thankful phrase.
I saw the high Procession pass along
In intermixed ranks of men and Angels
The holie-Ghost ouer-hov'ring their song:
There sounded Musick-instruments and Belles;
Yea, birds consorted with their warbling lays
T'enter-common also in this days praise.
Along as thus we marched about the Temple
In rich array, in sweetes, and mellodie,
A sudden Zephire-gale blew from the steeple
Soliciting our eyes supernally,
And what it was; Oh, there I bend my knee
It was a Virgin in bright majesty.
The sky did open, and adowne descended
Upon a siluer-cloud this sollempne sight
A Mayden-Nymph most shone-satellited
With all the Angell-court of heaven outright.
She was invested in as Orient splender
As Gods omnipotence and Love could lend her.
She was the Genium of high Jerusalem
The Patroness of Sion, and the Advocate
Of grace and mercy unto mortal men;
Her coming was for to congratulate
This triumph-day and grateful Jubilee
Of Sion unto God for victory.
Which such her presence stinted our Procession
Rapting us all into a sweet admire
Of so shone figure: her irradiation
Flaming our spirits with a mighty fire
Of Seraphin-affection and zeal
To die in vision of her sweet reveal.
I may not be so impious and profane
As to compare this heavenly spectacle
To any earthly pomp, or jollie vain
Of Caesar's Bride: whose pride is but a cackle
Or as a shadow in comparison
Of so triumphant and most Virgin-vision.
There on the Temple-pinacle she rested
Gracing, and doubling our sollempne feast
With her in-heauen; And all the while she attested
Both with her glee-full countenance and gest
Gods everlasting love unto the place
And eke her own against Doblessas race.
At last she began to wave and wend about
Our sollempne multitude with all her train
Suspending us in a delitious doubt
Of some sweet sequel: Our doubt was not in vain,
For on the sudden houering over us
She showered down Roses most odoriferous.
Roses both red and white adowne she shewred
From out her virgin-lap, so sweet resenting
As all our senses into sent adjured:
So done; she vanished, leaving us a scambling
For such her sweets; I for my part was one
That never would give over till all had done.
And still I called upon Elizas name
Thinking those Roses hers, that figure hers,
Until such time as Catechrysius came
And pointing me unto his faithful tears
(Tears of the zeal he bare to Elizas name)
He told me No; she was an Esterne Dame.
With that I cast mine eye into the East
Where yet I might discern the region bright,
Much like as when the Sun down in the West
Newly descended, leaves us of his light
Some Rubie-rellickes after: Oh, deer God
Why made she not with us more long abod.
Rapt with these woonders, wrapped in virgin-Roses
And fair be-Sioned against misfortune,
I suddenly was gone from these reposes
Solicited with an especial importune
Of home-ward zeal, and of Elizas name,
Whereto I bend, and say; God bless the same.
FINIS.

