THE WONDERFVLL MYSTERY OF SPIRITVALL GROWTH.

Describing the Necessity, Nature, Manner, Measure, and Marks thereof.

AS ALSO, Laying down necessary Rules for the wise discerning of the same.

And resolving many special Cases of Conscience incident hereunto, tending to
the comfort of distressed Spirits, and so to the attaining of perfect Holiness.

Divided into two Books.

LONDON, Printed by Bernard Alsop, and are to be sold at his house in Distaffe
Lane, at the sign of the Dolphin. 1622.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE MY very good Lord, the Lord Cranfield; L. high
Treasurer of England, Master of his Majesty's Wards and Liueries, and one of
his Privy Council: All increase of Honor and true Happiness.
RIGHT HONORABLE:
AS the Soul is far more ^ excellent then the Body; this being but of the
Earth earthly, but the other of the Heaven heavenly: so whatsoever concerns
the adorning of the precious Soul, is far preferred before all bodily
furniture and complement whatsoever. And seeing our wise God, though he has
conjoined the Soul and Body to either, to make one perfect Creature, yet he
has subjected the Body to the Soul, for the perfection thereof: therefore
herein does consist the perfection of the Creature, when the body and the
things concerning the same, performs it due homage to the soul, and
imployeth it best means for the adorning thereof, which as it cannot do
without the information and actuating of the soul, by which it is enliued, and
therefore ought in all duty and th^nkefulnesse to return it streams to the
fountain, and honor the soul with that power which it received from the
same: so hereby does it procure true honor to it self, when it in all things
furthers the soul to that end to which it was created. Now as the Soul is the
life of the Body, so God is the life of the Soul. And as the maine use, and
end of the Body, is to do homage to the Soul: so the end of both soul and
body, is to glorify God. And by how much the body more furthers the soul
herein, by so much more does it attain the end of it Creation, and so aspires
to that glorious estate, that this corruptible may put on incorruption, and
this mortal may be swallowed up of immortality. And this is that true
happiness to which man was created: as of nothing of himself, because he was
a creature, so by nothing in and of himself effectual to this happiness:
because hereunto he must become a new creature in Jesus Christ. Indeed the
Lord made man righteous at the first, and so capable of this happiness: but he
sought many inventions, and took the forbidden way, and so lost the true
substance of happiness, while he hunted after the shadow thereof. And so it
was good for him to be lost in himself, that he might be found in Christ: who
is made unto him Righteousness, and Sanctification, and Redemption: that he
which reioiceth, might rejoice in the Lord.

Behold the end of our Creation, God made all things for his glory. Behold the
Means to accomplish this end: Man must be stripped of all glory in himself, by
his fall, that being Redeemed by the precious blood of Jesus Christ, he might
wholly consecrate himself in all holiness and righteousness, to the glory
of his Redeemer, as being wholly enabled by the power of Christ hereunto, and
perfectly accepted by the righteousness of his Christ imputed unto him; and
led forward by the free grace of God in Jesus Christ to the finishing of his
salvation in the fear of God, as having all things working together to the
best unto him, and being kept by the mighty power of God through faith unto
salvation.

This is the subject of this Treatise. This the maine use thereof: even to
teach a Christian wherein consists his true happiness, namely in Christ, and
not in himself, and to inform him how to try himself, whether he be in
Christ or no: namely, if he grow up in Christ which is his Head, unto a perfect
stature. And this also is an undoubted trial, that all outward increase is
sanctified unto us: namely, if it further our Spiritual Growth in Christ, that
we may lay up a good foundation thereby, against the life to come. The reasons
why I have consecrated these Meditations to your Honors Protection; Are,
first: Because the Lord having advanced your Honor marueliously by the great
favor of our Sovereign, to most high and eminent Place and Honor; you may
hereby lay up a good foundation against the life to come, by honoring the Lord
with your greatness, and kissing his glorious Son Jesus, in countenancing
his Word, and patronizing his servants, and worthily opposing the Enemies of
the Gospel: which through our security and remissness have renewed and
increased their hopes in this day of their abasing. Surely, as it is strange
that darkness should en^rease in the midst of so glorious a light: so it is
more then time to labor the speedy dispelling thereof, least it obscure more
and more our glorious light, and in the end banish the same.

And who more fit to encounter this darkness, then such glorious stars that
are advanced in the Firmament of our state? May it not be said unto such as
Mardokey said to Hester, being advanced in such times: who knows whether thou
art come to the kingdom for such a time: I hope I shall not need to add what
Mardokey premiseth. If thou hold thy Peace at this time, comfort and
deliverance shall appear to the Jews, out of another place: The Lord knows
how to deliver his in the day of Tentation, and to catch the wicked in their
own snares. Blessed be God, that as he has suckled your Honor, even from the
cradle, with the sincere milk of the Word: so no doubt, by this time, he has
made you a strong man in Jesus Christ: and as he has furnished you with all
outward means for the maintenance of the Truth; so he will enable you by his
grace to improve your Place and Authority more and more hereunto: that so you
may grow up more and more as well in favor with God, as with men, and stablish
your outward greatness, by increase in goodness and care to advance the
Kingdom of our Lord Jesus. And this I shall not cease daily to pray unto our
good God for: humbly entreating your Honor to accept of my poor endeavors
hereunto: who as heretofore for many favors, so now especially much more shall
rest bound unto your Honor for this Protection. And so commending your good
Lordship to the everlasting tuition of the Almighty; I rest ever in him

At your Honors and the Churches service Th. Cooper.

An Introduction hereunto, To the Christian Reader.
IT is more then high time (Beloved in our Lord Jesus) that we should in these
evil days provide against a storm, by casting up our accounts, and clearing
our evidences in the favor of God: seeing we have had such tender thereof a
long time, in so great Measure and variety; and by the symptoms of the
season: our general unprofitableness therein, and refusal of the same;
accompanied with many warnings, summoning us thereto, and yet so desperately
rejected by our security and profaneness: we are not unlikely to be called
shortly to account for the same. And therefore as one borne out of due time,
and having spent the most part of my best days in the ways of death; seeing
it has pleased God to respite me hitherto and renew my spiritual life, by
offering yet more gracious opportunity and means to improve the same: I have
thought it high wisdom now at length to endeavor the Redeeming thereof, by
establishing my self and others in the work of Grace, to the daily increase,
and building up of the body of Christ; that so we may all grow up to a perfect
stature, even to a perfect man in Christ Jesus.

To this end, because words are but wind, and preaching without sealing and
confirming thereof by Practice and Experience, is of small or no moment to build
up forward to perfection; I have therefore endeavored to join with my public
Ministry* my private experiments in the work of Grace: that so I might not
be as sounding Brass, or as a tinckling Cymball; partly for the approving and
improuing of the work of Grace in my self, and also for the trial and
increase thereof in others.

And this has been the cause of my Publishing diverse Treatises in their
places, as my experience and occasions have ripened the same.

As First, The Lord having renewed our life and means by that wonderful
deliverance from the Gunpowder Treason, I have therefore labored to commend
that great Mercy unto Posterity in diverse Treatises both Latin and English,
upon the 64. Psalm, and upon the History of H^ster unto the Church of God:
That this being written for the Generations to come, the People so wonderfully
new born and renewed may praise the Lord, yea, Posterity might magnify God for
the great things he has done for us.

Next, that we might be truly thankful unto our God, in offering unto him our
souls and Bodies as a reasonable sacrifice all the days of our life.

To this end I published the Christians daily Sacrifice: as being a lively
Image of this Spiritual Sacrifice: and a gracious direction, how to offer the
same daily up unto God in truth and righteousness.

Thirdly, because contraries are best known by their contraries: in that our
Profession and practice of sincerity is reproached and hindered by the fair
show of Hypocrisy, so nearly resembling, and so iustling out the same;
therefore have I labored to discover the differences between sincerity and
hypocrisy, that so by the wise discerning of things that differ: we may
wisely decline the Counterfeit, and more carefully entertain the true Pattern.

Fourthly, Because the outward prosperity of the time, has been much abused
to security and spiritual Pride: and so has been a means of much decay in
zeal and courage for the truth; therefore I have supplied hereto a
Preservative against Apostasi^, that so we might strengthen the things that are
ready to die, and remembering from whence we are fallen, might repent, and do
the first works; least our Candlestick be justly taken from us.

Fifthly, Because it has pleased God to exercise me with many Buffetings of
Satan, to prevent these Spiritual evils: and so thereby has acquainted me in
some measure with his sleights and methods; yea, has called me by the
Magistrate to communicate my Experience herein, upon occasion of the practice
of Witchcraft, questioned by some in these Atheistical days: Could I do less
then publish my Experience herein? have I not given some light hereunto, in The
discovery of the Mystery of Witchcraft?

Sixthly, Seeing the fullness of the Gentiles is well-neere come in, as a plain
evidence of some great alteration, both by some grievous Judgment for our
contempt of the Gospel, as also by some great Mercy, ensuing thereupon, in
the calling of the Jews for the perfecting of the Churches Glory in this
life. Therefore have I given warning also heretofore: In the blessing of
Iaphet, wherein the calling of the Gentiles, and fulfilling thereof, is
avouched as a Presage of some great storm hanging over our heads, even by the
Gentiles abusing and rejecting the Gospel, and also a comfort of some gracious
calm after that heavy storm, by calling in of the Iew^s to make up the
breach, and repair the old waste places to dwell in.

And that we Gentiles that are with them to make up one sheepfold under Christ,
our only sh^pheard, may be better fitted to that glorious Union.

To this end have I labored to make sure the foundation, by discovering on
the contrary the hop^lesse and fearful estate of the worldling in his
desperate adventure, by losing his precious soul for the gaining of this
transitory world, that so we may not run with ^he present stream: and also by
laying down the maine evidence of our sound building upon the Rock, in that
sacred mystery of the Government of the Thoughts; being the surest and most
comfortable evidence of our true estate in Grace.

And now behold that we may yet minister a word in due season: when was there
ever more need of Growing in Grace; when generally there is deceit thereof in
the most, and decay therein even of the Best? when ever more need of fighting
the good fight of Faith, and laying hold of eternal life, by laboring and
following hard after perfection; when we are summoned by Rumors of wars, nay by
our own unprofitableness, To give account of our stewardship?

This is the end and use of this Treatise.

Which I am bold to call a wonderful Mystery: not only by the warrant of the
Holy Ghost, That great is the Mystery of Godliness: but also in regard of the
Means effecting the same; Christ Preached in a Mystery: yea in regard of the
entertainment thereof in the world, esteeming it as a Mystery, because it is
sealed up thereto, but specially in that, even to us, that are acquainted
therewith: It is yet a wonderful Mystery, not being able to conceive the
measure thereof, not being able to express, what thereof we do conceive.

And I call it a Mystery of growing in grace: because it pleases the Spirit
to resemble it unto us by Mysteries: And the way to discern the truth and
manner thereof, and so to attain the measure of the same, is still in and by a
Mystery: By the Mystery of the Word Preached, as only effectual thereto
ordinarily: and in a Mystery not discernable by sense, no not always by
Faith, that still we may live by Faith in the judging thereof, and by the power
of Faith be led forward to perfection therein.

And therefore if I speak of this great Mystery unto thee in a Mystery: I
advise thee in the Fear of God, to get that spiritual Eie-salue by prayer and
repentance with thy God, that so thou may so far discern the same, as that
still finding somewhat herein, whereat carnal wisdom may stumble; thou do
further help me with thy prayers, to give thee yet further light; (for still I
profess my self to be growing, and shall not fail, God willing, to give thee
further testimony thereof, as occasion and grace shall be ministered) that so
thou may yet more clearly discern this wonderful Mystery. Mean time I
desire thy patience, to bear with such faylings: as either for want of
exactness, which neither my leisure will afford nor weak measure can
compass; or for failing in circumstance, which I profess my self not
curiously to stand upon, may be offered unto thee. Requiring thy wisdom to
compare spiritual things together, and so still craving thy further Patience,
till God offer further leisure and measure of Grace, and thy renewed Prayers,
for both: I commend this to thy Christian view and charitable censure, and thee
and thine holy endeavors in this or in any thing whatsoever may further thy
reckoning in Christ, to the gracious Protection and Blessing of our Wonderful
Councellor. In whom

I rest thine and the Churches servant Th. Cooper.

The Contents of this Book.
1 THe entrance to the Treatise. 2 That we must grow in Grace. Proved, 1 By the
command of God. 2 By the grounds of the New Birth. 3 By the means of our
Calling. 4 By the Condition of the New Birth. 5 By the Resemblances thereof. 6
By the Metaphors expressing the same. 7 By the use and b^nefit^ thereof. 8 By
the Prayers of the Saints. 9 By the contrary condition of the wicked. 10 By
the continual malice of Satan against the New Birth. 11 By the continuance of
the Means hereto. 12 By the end of Sanctification. Use. To convince the
Papists of Merit, and falling from Grace. To confound the carnal Christian. To
reprove the weak Christian. Instruction to grow in Grace. Trial hereof.
Comfort herein.

Chap. 2.
What this Spiritual Growth is. 1 The description thereof. 2 The explication
of it. 3 Justification and use thereof.

Chap. 3.
Of the Causes, and Means, and Helps of this spiritual Growth. And these.
Either Within, 1 Principal. 2 Isntrumental, and these Principal, the Word.
Conscience.
1 Isntrumental, as saving knowledge. 1 Of the power of Corruption. 2 Of the
Measure of Grace attained, with the use thereof.
2 Isntrumental cause. Experience, both 1 Of former failings, and 2 Of former
thriuing. 3 Of the combat between the Flesh and the Spirit, with the uses
thereof.
2 Causes without. Direct. 1 Use of Gods ordinances. The Word. Sacraments.
Prayer public. Examples of the Saints. Indirect.
Afflictions, with the use thereof.

3 Helps hereto, are 1 Soundness of Judgment, and why. 2 Synceritie, and
how. 3 Daily Repentance. 4 Daily Thankfulness. 5 Private Prayers. 6 Conversion
of others. 7 Watching over our hearts, and examination thereof: how this to be
done. 8 Daily increase in knowledge, and how. 9 Contentedness, and why. 10
Watching in our Christian liberty, and how. 11 Daily growth in Faith, and how.
12 Putting on the spiritual Armor daily, and how. 13 By Patience, and 14
Continual supplication. 15 Conscience of the Sabbath. 16 Constant keeping of
the daily sacrifice. 17 Daily preparation to Afflictions. 18 Nourishing
tenderness of Conscience. 19 Having the fear of God always before our eyes.
20 And so to maintain an holy jealousy over our selves. 21 Not resting in any
measure received. 22 Daily Preparation to Death. 23 Daily Resignation into the
hands of God. 24 Spiritual wisdom, in Redeeming the time, In avoiding
troubles, etc. and how. 25 Maintaining spiritual Joy, and how.



Chap. 4.
Of the manner how we grow in Grace, expressed by the Metaphors and
Resemblances of the New Birth. As that it is like 1 A New Creature, with the
sense and use thereof. ^ To seed, with the sense and use thereof. 3 To Light,
with the sense and use thereof. 4 To the Wind; where, of the sense and
application thereof. 5 To a combat, with the sense and use thereof. 6 To a
Mystery, with the sense and use thereof, both general and particular.

Chap. 5.
Of diverse Rules for the better discerning and trial of the Manner of our
Growth and comfort therein, whereof the First is, That we must live by Faith
and not by sense: where 1 What this means. 2 Conclusions hence, to encounter
diverse tentations concerning the manner of our Growth, and to satisfy us
herein. 2 Rule herein is, to compare spiritual things with spiritual things.
Where 1. What this means. 2 The Application thereof for Discerning, and
Comfort.
3 Rule for discerning hereof, is according to those several callings imposed
on us, with the sense and use thereof. 4 Rule is, That we must bring forth
fruit in due season. Where 1. What is meant thereby. 2 The application thereof
for trial and comfort.
5 Rule, That God accepts the will for the deed: where 1 The sense thereof. 2
The use, for the trial and comfort.
6 Rule, That by the manner of the Mortification of the Flesh, the manner also
of spiritual Growth may be discerned: where 1 How the Flesh is mortified. 2
Grace accordingly is increased, with the uses thereof.


Chap. 6.
Of the measure of Spiritual Growth: where 1 Of the measure propounded. 1 By
the Law. 2 By the perfect pattern. 3 By the end of Holiness.
2 The trial of this Measure. 1 By particular Gifts, and the improuement of
them. 2 By Spiritual experience. 3 By several callings. 4 Variety of
seasons. 5 Increase of Means.
3 More particular Examination thereof. 1 General. 2 Particular, as 1 By the
Law. 2 By the Gospel, as 1 Faith. 2 Repentance.




Chap. 7.
Of certain Rules for the discerning and judging of the true scantling and
Measure of our Spiritual Growth. 1 Rule, That God requires acc^rding to the
Means he vouchsafes, with the sense and use thereof. 2 That his Grace shall
be sufficient for us, with the sense and use thereof. 3 That the spirit works
freely, as in the Manner, so in the Measure thereof, with the sense and use
thereof. 4 That the power of God is seen in weakness, with the sense and use
hereof. 5 That as there are diverse measures of Glory, so also of Grace, and
yet in each sufficient, with the sense and use thereof. 6 Rule, by our enduring
Afflictions, with the sense and use thereof. 7 That all things shall work
together for the best, with the sense and use thereof.
Chap. 8.
Of the Marks of Spiritual Growth and Trial thereof: where 1 Of such as
Generally respect our our selves, as 1 Knowledge, and that 1 Of the power of
Corruption. 2 Deceitfulness of the Heart. 3 Satan's sleights. 4 The Mystrie of
Christ.
Where, of the trial of Faith.
2 Sanctification. 3 Of the measure of sanctification attained. Or others, as
also

2 Of the special Marks.
Chap. 9.
Cases of Conscience concerning spiritual Growth. 1 Case, how we can justify
our growing in Grace, when we daily fall into many evils, and decay sometimes
in some special gifts. Resolution hereof.

By considering 1. Gods wisdom, and that 1 In bringing light out of
darkness, and showing his power in weakness. 2 Gods Promise. 3 Estate of
Sanctification. A Combat what it is. 1 In the understanding, how the Saints
differ from Hypocrites. 2 In the conscience, where the difference is laid down
between the Elect and Reprobate. 3 Difference in the will and affections. 4
Difference in their Resolution. 5 In their Endeavor.



Errata.
Page 17. li. 5. for answer r. as answer. p. 33. l. 20. r. thrift for thirst.
p. 49. l. 11. r Fruit for truth. p 49. l. 17, for us r. them. p. 57. l. 13. for
with r. with them p. 57. l. 23. for least r. best. p. 59. l. 7 for the measure
r. the full measure. p. 96. l. 1. for to r. do. p 101. l. 25. for suppressing
r. expressing. p. 149. l. vlt. for enuies r entends. p 172. l. last for deny r.
derive p. 176. l. 1. for sin r. simply. p. 205. l. 9. for accessorie r
necessary. p. 206. l. 21. for one r. our. p. 212. l 16. for drawing r.
drowning. l. 25. r. as lights. p. 220. l. 24. for let r. Lot. p. 221. l. 4. for
Spirits r. speeches. p. 222. l. 23. for ties r. duties. p. 245. l 25. for men
r. even. p. 258 l. 14. for want r. not want. Ibid. l. 22. for ends r. evils. p.
264. l. 21. for having r. hearing p. 265. l. 15. for relying r. retiring. p.
268. l. 11. for outward. r. inward. p. 269. l. 13. for warring r. warnings. p.
275 l. 25. for aimed r. armed. p. 288. l. 22. for blame r. blaine. p. 302. l.
5. for eiffecting r. effecting Ibid. l 13. for receives r. renueth. p. 303. l.
14 for it rests r. it rests not. p. 306. l. 5. for we not r. we may not. p.
307. l 25. add of which in the Cases, and before in the Helps. p. 234. l. 24
for sincertie r. sincerely. p. 335. l 12. for that him r. in him. p. 336. l 15.
r. for there r. thereto. p. 338. l. 23. for mere act r. marvel. p. 341. l.
18. for wary r. vain p. 349. l. 25. for gnawmes r. qualmes. p. 353. l. ^. for
come nigh r. account. p 364. l. 12. extent r intent. p. 371. l. 23. for
Elaborate r. celebrate. p. 394. l. 17. for conservation r. consternation. p.
400. l. 11. for hunting r. limiting.

THE CONTENTS of the first Chapter.
WHerein is proved that we must grow in grace. 1 By the Command of God. 2 By
the Grounds of our new birth. 3 By the Means of our calling. 4 By the
Condition of the new birth. 5 By the Resemblances thereof. 6 By such Metaphors
as express the same. 7 By the Use and benefits thereof. 8 By the Prayers of
the Saints. 9 By the contrary Condition of the wicked. 10 By the continual
malice of Satan against the new birth. 11 By the continuance of the means
hereof. 12 By the End, which is salvation. 13 Danger of the contrary. The uses
hereof. Generally to convince the Papists in their heresy of Merit, and
falling from Grace. To confound the carnal Christian. To reprove the weak
Christian. For instruction how to grow in grace. For trial thereof, and For
comfort therein.



A TREATISE OF GROWING in Grace. CHAP. I.
WHerein is proved by many infallible Arguments, that we must grow in Grace.

Together with the several uses thereof, both of

1 Conviction of Papists.

2 Reproof of Carnal and weak Christians.

2 Of instruction.

3 Of Comfort.

That we must grow in grace is apparent.

1. By the Commandment and will of God. As that we must not stick in the
beginnings of Christ, but go on to perfection. Heb. 6.1. That we must be
holy as God is holy; Which is daily to labor to perfection of holiness like unto
God, though not in measure, yet in truth, and so far as the means enables
us, and our condition will endure. 1. Pet. 1.16.

3 We must grrow in grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ, where both the thing is commanded, and the means propounded whereby we
must grow. 2. Pet. 3.15.

4 And we must as newborn Babes desire the sincere Milk of the Word, that we
may grow thereby. 1. Pet. 2.2. 1. These. 4.3, 4.5. Heb. 6.12. 2. Cor. 7.1.
Secondly, we are commanded to imitate our Savior Christ in the work of
sanctification. Phil. 2.6
And therefore as he grew in grace, etc. so also must we. 1. John 6.2. He that
says he abides in him, must himself also walk even as he walked. Heb. 12.2.

Thirdly, Phil. 3.17:18.
we are also to imitate the Saints who grow in grace, increased in strengh.
Psalm. 84.7. Who bring forth more fruit in their old age. Psalm. 92.14. Yea, we
are to follow them as they followed Christ. 1. Cor. 11.1. That is growing as
he did, to perfect holiness, and to fulfill all righteousness. Mat. 3.25.

4. We are commanded to be perfect; that is, not only to be sincere, without
guile. Psalm. 32.2. Pro. 14.2. but to be perfect and entire, wanting no grace,
neither any measure thereof. Iam. 1.3. Phil. 3.12, 13. which cannot be without
continual growing and increasing in grace. Ephe. 4.9, 10.

5. The ground and foundation of our new birth necessarily emplyeth the same.
Namely our election from the good pleasure of God. 2. Tim. 2.19. Ephesians 1.4,
5. which is, that we should grow in holiness, and perfect the same in love.
Verse 5.6.

6 Our calling to holiness does e^ince as much, we are not called to
vncleanea but to holiness. 1 Thessalonians. 4.7. yea to such holiness, as wherein we must
abound more and more, ver. 1. that you would abound more and more in pleasing
of God.

7 And this is also justified from the means of our Calling. And that both
inward, namely the spirit of God, which leads us into all truth, and daily
increases in us all saving grace Ephesians. 3.15.16. Col. 1.19.

And also outward, namely the word preached; which then is effectual, when
being begotten thereby to a lively hope, we grow up thereby to perfect holiness 1
Pet. 2.2. 1. Pet. 1.3. Ephe. 4.8. It being both seed to beget milk for babes,
and bread to nourish.

8 The very nature and condition of our new birth implies and testifies the
same, which being like that of children newborn, does thereby infer, that,
as newborn babes, we should desire the sincere milk of the word, that we may
grow up thereby. 1. Pet. 2.1.

9 Hitherto serve also those lively resemblances, whereby this new birth is
shadowed out and illustrated in the word. As first, that as by this new birth,
we are now ingrafted into Christ, and become members of his body, so we grow
up in him which is the head, even Christ, and that as members. From Christ, as
from who^ the whole body fitly joined together and co^pacted by that which
every joint supplyeth according to the effectual working in the measure of
every part, makes increase of the body to the edifying thereof in love. Ephe.
4.15.16. Col. 2.19.

10 Our new birth is resembled to a Vine and trees. Ioh. 15.1.2. and Psalm. 1 3.
and 92.11.12. which imply a growing and increasing daily.

So in particular, is it resembled to a grain of Mustard Seed, which from the
least beginning increases to a great tree. Mat. 13. So to Cedars, to Bay
trees, for that end, so is it resembled by Light, yea by the morning light,
which shines more and more unto the perfect day. Proverbs 4.19. So also to
Seed which is cast into the ground, and by degrees grows up to ripeness.
Psalm. 97.17.

So to a Treasure hid in the field, which first must be dug, then refined,
then framed to a Vessel then used. Mat. 13.

Hitherto also serve such Metaphors as are used to express our spiritual
life, as that it is called a Walk, implying a daily motion and hastening to
our iournies end. 2. Colosians 7.

2. A Race to a Goal, implying a dayling, running and hastening for the prize
of our high calling in Jesus Christ. 1. Cor. 9.20.21. Heb. 12.1. Phi. 3.13.

Romans 7.18.19.
3. A Combat wherein the flesh is daily weakened, and the spirit waxes.

4. A Pilgrimage to our Country above, which infers a continual proceeding
and preparing thereto, Hebrews 11.10. Psalm 84.6, 7.

And thus also does the Word express our different measure of grace by such
metaphors as do necessarily infer a growing therein: As that first we are
infants and babes in Christ, implying our entrance and beginnings in grace.
Secondly that we are strong and perfect men in Christ, inferring our growth and
proceeding therein. Heb. 11.12:13.

As also the wisdom of our God is admirable herein, as by these different
degrees to continue a propagation of his Church: that the stronger may confirm
the weaker, and so daily increase the Church. That they may exercise their
compassion in raising them up with the spirit of meekness if they be fallen.
Gal. 6.1. That they may discern of their estates by comparing them with the
weak, and so be daily enlarged with thankfulness for their greater measure,
and exercised with humility, to remember from what weak beginnings they have
risen. And so may be provoked to perfection out of former experience.

2 That the weaker may submit to the spirits of the Prophets, following such as
are before, as they follow Christ, as knowing seeing that such have so gained,
therefore they also may in time obtain the like measure.

Lastly, that by these mutual differences of growth, love on either side may
be continued in bearing one another burden, and walking by the same rule,
whereunto they are come, which is the bond of perfection, Col. 3.14. that so
they may grow up in the unity of the spirit, to the full measure of the age of
Christ. Ephesians. 4.13. By edifying of each other in love. ver. 16.

Hereunto serve the continual prayers of the Saints, for the increase of grace
in themselves and others: for themselves. Psalm. 51.11.12.

For others, for general Churches, as Ephesians 1.8.16. and 3.15. Colossians
1.12.13. 1 Thessalonians. 5.23. Heb. 13.20.21.

For particular Christians, as for Timothy. 2. Tim. 1.7.8 etc.

And so such testimonies as do evidence their increase of faith, and so of all
other graces, as 2. Thessalonians 1.3.

The contrary condition of the wicked, who grow worse and worse 2. Tim. 3.13.
implies also, that we must grow, if we be sound. 1. Ioh. 2.19

As also the danger of this Apostasy, that it were better never to have known
the way to salvation: 2. Pet. 2.21.
that there is no hope of recovery. Heb. 6.4.5.

That it is the high way to the sin against the holy Ghost, if not the same
Heb. 10.27.28.

The continual malice and policy of Satan against Christians euinceth this
growth: who not so much labors to hinder our entrance, as our proceeding in
grace. While we are his, he is quiet: but when the stronger man has cast him
out, then he uses all force and policy to reenter again, or at least to
hinder our proceeding, either by casting in floods of persecution. Revel. 12.8.
or by sowing Tares. Math. 13.

The different dispensation of Gods graces even in this growth: who gives not
to all alike, nor to all at once here a like measure, and therefore according
as he gives, so he requires, and enables to perform. To. 12. 1. Cor. 12.

The benefits that arise from our growing in grace, do also necessarily
convince the same. Which are,

1 That hereby we are sure of sound entrance. 2. Pet. 18.9.

2 And so make sure our election, gain particular knowledge thereof, and so
reap much joy in the spirit, much comfort in afflictions. 2. Tim. 1.12. Great
encouragement to perfection, gain more glory to our God John. 15.2. Math. 5.16.

3 Encourage others to holiness. 1. Pet. 5.9.10.

4 Have hereby an entrance to eternal life, 2. Pet. 1.11.

5 Are confirmed in the hope of our glorification. 1. John 3.3.

6 And make our selves meet for that glorious inheritance. Col. 1.11.12.

As being interessed in the promises of God hereby. 2. Cor. 7.1.

and hereby made like unto him, that we may see him as he is. 1. John. 3.2, 3.

Lastly, the continuance of the Ordinances of God, as the word, Sacraments,
what use especially should they have in the Church, if that we should not grow
up thereby: seeing there is more need of increase then begetting to the faith,
there being more temptations to hinder our growth in Christ then our first
receiving of him. 1. Pet. 2.12.

To conclude, if we consider the End of our sanctification, which is to be made
meet to the enjoying of the promises of life and salvation, this also
necessarily infers our spiritual growth. 2. Cor. 7.1. 1. John 3.3. Hebr.
12.1.

Because, seeing our beginnings in Christ, are in much imperfection and
corruption, no way competent and suitable with the glory that is set before us:
therefore we must daily cleanse our selves of all wickedness of the spirit and
the flesh, that we may grow up to perfect holiness in the fe^^e of God, 1.
Cor. 7.1.
therefore we must cast away euerything that presses down, and the sin that
hangs so fast upon us that we may run with joy the Race that is set before
us. Heb. 12.1.2
Heb. 12.1.

Therefore we must work out our salvation in fear and tre^bling. Ph. 2.13

Lastly, consider we the danger of not growing, as 1. That we never soundly
entered. 1. John 2.1.15.16.

2. That we are certain to fall away. Luke 8.

3 That the case is desperate: better never to have known the way of
righteousness: better never to have been borne. 2. Pet. 2.22. Mat. 26

4 Falling into the sin against the holy Ghost. Heb. 10.26.

5 And so condemnation assured and vengeance increased. Luke 12.47 4 This
conuinceth that Popish opinion of merit, as if we could deserve salvation of
our selves; were wholly purged from sin at our baptism, and so enabled to
fulfill the law perfectly, seeing our state in grace, is a growing from
weakness to strength from infirmity to perfection, which is not attained in
this life, but only aimed at, and labored to. Phil. 3.13.

Whereas this doctrine of merit overthrows it self: in that they which
plead merit, acknowledge also such a falling in those that are truly
justified, as that they may be so far from going forward, or perseuering to
the end, that they shall fall away without recovery.

2 This also refuteth their opinion of final Apostasy. Whereas the state of a
Christian is always growing, though not sensible to us, yet wrought secretly
by the spirit, though we know not sometime whence it came, nor whither it goes.
Ioh. 3.8.

3 This reproues such as flatter themselves in the state of Grace, when yet
they grow not: but either

1 Have only some sudden flashes and tastes of goodness to their further
condemnation. Heb. 6.4.

2 Or have only slight meanings and purposes like the morning dew, which
vanishes away, either altogether without fruit, or else if any fruit appear,
it is but summer fruit lasting only in time of prosperity, but when
affliction comes it withers. Luke 11.8.

3 Or, their fruit is not of any growth to perfectlon, as measured by the
false balance of the Time* Custom Example, and such like carnal rules, as if
they could be too holy, might be more precise then wise.

4 Or, such, as are always at a stay in Religion, contenting themselves with
such and such a measure as may serve the present occasions of this life not
being able to see a far of within the veil into the hope of glory.

5 Or, lastly such, as remit of their former sincerity, and zeal out of
wisdom and policy, as if the times would not bear such strictness, as if
lesser would serve the turn then heretofore.

6 And so such as fall away from that they seemed to have, ending in the flesh
though they seem to have begun in the spirit, as Demas. Galat. 3.2.3.

4. This also reproves such weak Christians, answer not these courses. 1.
Either by sticking in the beginnings of Christ, and not laboring still to grow
in knowledge and all spiritual wisdom. Heb. 6.1.

2 Or not keeping a daily and constant course of holiness, that they may still
grow in grace. 1 Thessalonians. 5.15.16.

3 Or that have left their first love, and so buy their decays deerly with
many a bitter pang of conscience, make their life uncomfortable, and prove a
reproach to the Gospel, and offense to their brethren. Revel 2.34.

Or, that because they cannot always discern the work of the spirit, in
leading them forward, do therefore fear that they have either never soundly
begun, or that they are fallen away without recovery. Psa. 77.11 12.

Or, that through Ignorance and want of spiritual wisdom, esteem the
te^pering of their zeal with patience and discretion, to be a decay; and so
condemn themselves and others, as decliners, whereas this is a gracious
proceeding in grace, as arguing more wisdom, more humility, more ability to
do good to others, more readiness to work out our own salvation.

A second general use of this doctrine of growing, is for instruction: and
that both to teach us how to grow in grace and so to discern this growth, of
which hereafter.

As also to make trial of our growth in grace by such infallible endeauours as
may euince the same: of which also in it special place.

The last use of this doctrine, is for comfort. And that many ways:

As first, to refresh the weak Christian, both in those soundings and decays
which he is subject to; as also in that want of feeling of the work of grace,
how it is led forward, of which also in the Conclusion.

THE CONTENTS of the second Chapter.
WHat spiritual Growth is. Where. 1 The description hereof. 2 The explication
of this description. 3 The justification thereof. 4 The use of the same.

CHAP. II.
WHat spiritual growth is.

Namely, First, A fruit of the holy Ghost. Secondly, Given unto us freely by
Christ our head.

Thirdly, Whereby receiving life and virtue from Christ into every part and
faculty of soul and body in some true measure, by the assistance of the same
spirit, we improve this spiritual gift of sanctification according to the
means afforded unto us in the increase of every part, 1 The. 5.23
and so do make increase of the whole unto the edifying of the same in love.
Ephesians. 4.16. till the whole come up in the unity of the faith and of the
knowledge of the Son of God unto a perfect man, Ephe. 4.13.
unto the measure of the stature of the fulness of Christ, Ephesians. 3.19.
that we may be filled with all the fulness of God, and so being made perfect and
entire wanting nothing, coming behind in no gift. 1. Cor. 1.7. Our hearts may
be established unblameable before God even our father, at the coming of our
Lord Jesus with all his Saints. 1 Thessalonians. 3.13. being hereby made meet for
that glorious inheritance with the Saints in light. Col. 1.12. and so waiting
for the coming of our Lord Jesus. 1. Cor. ^7. that he may change these vile
bodies, that they may be fashioned like unto his glorious body, according to
the working whereby he is able to subdue all things unto himself. Phil. 3.21.
That we may be for ever with the Lord. 1. The. 4.18. To reign with him for
ever in that kingdom which cannot be shaken. Heb. 12.28. Which is immortal and
undefiled and fades not, Mat. 25.
prepared for us before the beginning of the world, and reserved for us in the
heavens, to triumphy with and praise our God wholly and continually for evermore.

Thus I take our spiritual growth may be described.

And this description may be thus explained, Namely:

First (I say) it is a fruit of the holy Ghost: Sect. 2.
implying that Christ Jesus having merited salvation for us, as acquitting us
in Gods Justice by the virtue of his sacrifice, from the penalty of the Law,
by satisfying the same for us, and enabling us through his power to such a
measure of holiness, whereby we shall be made fit for eternal happiness, for
the revealing and bestowing of these benefits upon us, gives us his spirit to
seal up unto us the truth hereof: and by working faith in us, enables us
thereby to apply the same unto our selves, for our increase in grace, and so
leads us forward by his special assistance in the work of grace, that we
may attain to the full measure of the age of Christ.

2. I add, that this grace of spiritual Growth is a free gift from Jesus
Christ: who being given for us by God our Father to be our redemption, does
also give himself to us by his spirit, both to apply that work of our
redemption to our selves in particular by faith, and also by the power of faith
in grafting us in him, we grow up in him which is our head, daily receiving new
sap and virtue from this root, to increase in all power and virtue of
holiness, till at length we attain to the full stature of the age of Christ,
being perfect and entire in him, wanting nothing, and all this of free gift,
he that has begun the work, leading it forward by his mighty power unto
salvation: that he may have the only glory thereof. Philippians 2.12.13. 1.
Pet. 1.5. And so leading it forward, that still both for the Manner and Measure
thereof, it is free and independent in regard of us.

3 I make manifest the manner of the working of Christ in us, by his spirit,
whereby we are enabled to grow up in him in soundness to perfection. Namely,
that by the virtue of Christ not some one, or Jew faculties of the soul, are
inclined and renewed by him, but that every part, and faculty of the soul, yea
each member of the body receive life and nourishment from the head, as to it
gracious enabling to the work of entire obedience, so to it further growing
and increase unto perfection therein. Ephesians. 4.16. And to the acceptance of
both persons and service in the merit of Christ.

4 I proceed to discover the manner of this spiritual growth: namely, that as
it is by continual supply of the means both inward, the blessed Spirit
discovering daily our failings, and leading to the outward means for recovery
and enabling in the use thereof, both for recovery out of failing and supply of
such graces as may further perfection. As also outward, the word to build us up
in knowledge and faith, and so in obedience: The sacrament to minister
spiritual nourishment, and such like; so herein also setting down a lively
trial of our Growth by the use of these means, that it is both according to
them, they must be the Rule and Tuchstone thereof, as also Answerable to the
Means in proportion, that where more means, there a greater measure of Growth
to be expected, where less, there if our Growth be less, we may have some
comfort that we are not altogerher barren; how soever if this want of means be
not from our selves, in making scarcity where there is plenty, but from the
divine dispensation in chastising his people with scarcity for the abuse of
plenty here we may comfort our selves, either, that what is affoorded shall be
sufficient, because God will require no more then he gives, or what is wanting
in the outward means, our God will supply by his Anointing, to refresh us
inwardly, if we have not bin despisers of the public and ordinary means. 1.
Ioh. 2.19.

5. Lastly the final cause, and ends of this spiritual growth, are propounded
and auerred, tending to the perfiting of the work of grace in us, and so
preparing of us to the life of glory, which are in respect of us.

1. Our perseverance. 2. Our perfection hereupon. 3. Our glorification.
2. In respect of God.

1. The accomplishment of his promises.

2. That he might have the glory of the perfecting of his work.

3. That our perfection may be wholly employed in setting forth his great name
and glory.

THE CONTENTS of the third chapter.
OF the causes, means, and helps of spiritual growth. 1 Causes both internal
and principal. 1 The power of Christ. 2 The inhabitation of the spirit.
2 Isntrumental general. 3 The renewed heart. Specially therein. 1 Sound
knowledge, and that 1 Of the power of corruption. 2 Of the measure of grace
attained.
2 Spiritual experience, and that 1 Of the deceitfulness of the heart in
misleading either way. 2 Of the sleights of Satan. 3 Of the power of God in
preventing and disappointing these, or turning them to good.



2 Outward means and causes And these isntrumental. Namely, 1 Constant use of
Gods ordinances, As first, Hearing the word preached. 2 Receiving the
Sacrament. 3 Prayer. 4 Meditation. 5 Conference. Accessarie, as 1 Afflictions.
2 Examples of the Saints.
Helps hereto, are 1 Soundness of judgment and wherein. 2 Sincerity, and
how. 3 Daily renewed repentance, and why. 4 Propounding the example of Christ
and why. 5 Looking to the reward in heaven. 6 Daily thankfulness, and how. 7
Laboring daily the conversion of others. 8 Constant watch over our hearts and
how. 9 Daily increase in saving knowledge, and how. 10 Contentedness in our
estates. 11 Sobriety in the use of Christian liberty. 12 Daily increase of
faith, and how. 13 Putting on daily the spiritual armor. 14 Patience. 15
Continual prayer. 16 Conscience of the Sabbath. 17 Daily constant holiness.
18 Daily preparation to afflictions, and how. 19 To nourish tenderness of
conscience in all things and how. 20 To have the fear of God always before
us. 21 To be continually jealous of our selves. 22 To nourish spiritual
poverty, and hunger after the best graces. 23 Daily preparation to our death,
and how. 24 Daily resigning of our selves into the hands of God. 25 Spiritual
wisdom, why and how 26 Maintaining spiritual joy, why and how.



CHAP. III. Of the causes of spiritual growth.
IT appears hitherto that we must grow in grace, as also what spiritual
growth is.

Now we are further to consider the causes of this growth,

These are,

1. Internal, that is, within us. And these are meritorious, and effectual of
themselves, Such are

1. The power of Christ dwelling in us. 1. Col. 19. which is both, the
meritorious cause of our growth, as whereby we obtain grace from God to enable
us to grow: as also the principal efficient cause thereof. As by it virtue
subduing mightily in us the remaindures of corruption, and body of sin; and
supplying such graces as may further our spiritual growth, as also enabling us
in the use and improuement of them, to that end, especially presenting them in
the perfection of his merit, that above their worth they may be acceptable unto
God his Father, and so by virtue of our union with him daily, leading us
forward to perfection.

A second effectual cause of this growth, is, the holy Ghost, which being
given unto us by Christ, and dwelling in us, does work effectually in us to a
daily discovery and subduing of corruption, by reproving for sin, yea for
righteousness, conuincing all natural ability, and remaindure of goodness in
us, all conceited righteousness in the law, or any thing save in Christ: yea
still conuincing the imperfection of all inherent righteousness attained, and so
still interessing in Christ, and so by it power increasing grace.

The inward isntrumental means, it,

The renewed heart, which being now quickened and actuated by the spirit becomes
ministerially a fellow worker therewith in all such works, as may any way
further our spiritual Growth. 1. Cor. 3.

More particularly these Graces in the heart are special isntrumental causes
of our Growth in Grace.

1 A saving knowledge: and that

1. Of our particular estates, and this twofold.

1. Both of the power of corruption that remains and cleaues unto us, and also
of that truth and measure of grace whereto we have attained. For as the true
discerning of corruption, and the power and measure thereof in us is a means
daily to work in us a denial of our selves, and renouncing all ability in us,
as of our selves to go forward: so the sight of our inabilitie sends us daily
to renew our strength in Christ, in whom we shall be enabled to grow in grace.
Now we shall discern the power of corruption generally by a daily view of our
hearts in the Law. Romans 7.8.

2. By daily observing of the pulse of the conscience, answering the same more
particularly, we may discern the power of corruption.

1. By observing the inward temper of the heart, and continual boiling and
raging thereof, with that infinite swarm of all sorts of blasphemous, vain,
filthy, absurd, and impossible thoughts and imaginations.

2. By a wise discerning of our desperate rebellion against the strict rule of
the word. And

3 Most prone and greedy attempting and persecuting of our own devices and
voluntary conceits besides, and contrary thereunto.

4. By an impartial observing of those sins, to which either we are, or have
been most addicted, still to revive or prosecute the same.

5 By those violent and desperate oppositions of our thoughts and imaginations
intruding into, and polluting our best actions and purest endeauours.

6. By discerning the subtilty of Satan inueighling us to the abuse of our
Christian liberty in things that are lawful; for where sin has a cloak and
color to defend it self by lawful means, or else to creep in therewith,
there will appear most lively the power of corruption in devising pretenses,
either on the right hand or on the left, to abuse those lawful means for the
effecting of what is unlawful.

7 And so whereas to commit sin is natural, but to continue therein, is
devilish: the power of coruption is not so much seen in doing evil, as in
the applying of such shifts and pretenses for the hiding or excusing of sin,
that so we may with some pretense of security, continue therein, and so defeat
and exclude true repentance-

8 And so herein the power of corruption is specially discerned, by deceiving
the heart with a false imagination of true happiness in these earthly things,
that so it may settle hereon, and so renounce the happiness of the life to
come.

Thus may we discern the power of corruption, and this will graciously further
our growth in grace. As first,

The spiritual Law discovering the inward corruption, and conuincing the
conscience therewith, proves hereby a means so to abase us in our selves, as
that hereby we are sent unto the righteousness of Christ, and thereby enabled to
a further measure of holiness.

2. Hereby our unruly and rebellious thoughts and affections being discerned,
do prove also a gracious means to humble us under the hand of God to labor
the purging of that corrupt fountain more and more in the blood of Christ, to
prevent hypocrisy, spiritual pride and security, which are many hindrances
to this spiritual increase.

3 By discerning our rebellion against the prescript of the word, we are also
still more abased in our selves and so cast upon the free grace of God.

4 The apprehension of our pronenesse to will worship and self conceits, proves
a gracious means to confound the wisdom of the flesh, as the greatest enmity
against God and so to interesse us in the free goodness of God.

5 By discerning our most inward and bosom sins, self love the bane of
spiritual thriuing is graciously renounced; presumption is revealed the mother
of security, and so an enemy to this growth; and sincerity is avouched and
confirmed, which is the spur to spiritual growth and touchstone thereof.

6 By discerning our abuse of Christian liberty, we grow to sob^ietie and
watchfulness over our hearts and occasions, more wise to redeem the time, for
spiritual theft; more skillful to take the advantage of our occasions, and so
to grow in all heavenly means.

7 And so when we can observe the subtilty of Satan detayning us in sin: we
shall hereby labor to hasten our repentance by aggravating and judging sin;
grow more wise to arm our selves against new surprizalls, by taking unto our
selves the whole armor of God; become more jealous of our selves in avoiding
the occasions of evil, be more diligent in the practice of contrary graces;
more groan for our dissolution, and prepare thereto: all which are good means
and trials of our spiritual growth.

Lastly, whereas hereby we discern the power of corruption, in that for the
maintenance thereof, it labors to fancy to it self present constant
happiness, that so it may be deprived of that which is to come: this also
proves a gracious means to further our spiritual growth. As provoking us
hereby to make cleerer unto our selves the evidences of our salvation, to
become more spiritual in the use of all earthly things, and so to live by
faith in the use of all comforts; to renounce not only all hold in present
fading comforts, but even in all spiritual graces, as to be justified by
them: or to rest in the measure of them: to wayt daily for the appearance of
Christ; 1. Cor. 1.7.
and in that hope daily to purge our selves of all wickedness of the spirit
and of the flesh, that we may be pure as he is pure. 2. Cor. 7.1. 1. Ioh. 3.3.

Thus does the knowledge of our corruption, further our Growth in grace.

A second part of saving knowledge available hereunto is the knowledge of our
present estate in grace, which will also much further our growing therein.

Now we may take notice of the present measure attained by these marks.

1 By the scantling of knowledge we have attained in heavenly things, as that,
Phil. 1.10.


1 Whether we can discern the stronger meat of the Gospel, that we may
distinguish of things that differ, 1^ These. 5.1
that we can try all things, and hold that which is good: or rather, that we
stick in the beginnings of Christ. Heb. 6.1. not being rooted in these grounds
by experimental knowledge, Col. 2.6.
but staggering in judgment and resolution concerning the same. Because

1. Without this knowlede, we shall not only not be able to grow forward, but
are like to fall backward; and loose all.

2 Hereby we shall discern the truth of our estate, and so out of the
shortness of our knowledge shall be still sent unto the means, whereby we may
grow. 2. Pet. 3.18.

2 By our ability to practice according to our knowledge.

And that both in the mortification of the old man. And that first in regard of
the root of corruption: As our hearts are less pestered with noisome and vile
thoughts, in all occasions; specially, that the motions to such as we have bin
most addicted unto, are more rare and seldom.

2 That if they do assault us, yet they are more deeply taken to heart, and
more speedily suppressed.

3 That we are less troubled in holy duties, with worldly and profane
thoughts.

4 And specially find our selves less tickled herein with thoughts of vain
glory, customarines, formalitie, wilworship, etc.

5 That in our civil callings we are less swayed with thoughts of
covetousness, distracting cares, fears and such like.

2 In respect of the truth thereof, as that we have got the better of such
sins as we were formerly most addicted to. Specially

That we have prevailed against unbelief, and the bitter fruits thereof,
hardness of heart, and blindness of mind.

That we have cast out that cursed leaven of hypocrisy in our conuersing with
God.

And have also renounced deceit and fraud in dealing with men.

That we are deeply grieved with such sins as we cannot shake off: And
strive more earnestly against them, by how much we have been more foiled
thereby.

That we be more wary to avoid the occasion of sin.

And more compassionate and charitable in respect of our brethrens falls. And
groan more earnestly after our final deliverance.

These are good endeauours of our spiritual growth, these are gracious means
to further to perfection.

2 Our ability to practice is seen in the quickening of the new man, And that,

First, in respect of the root of grace: as that, generally,

1. Our hearts are more fraught with holy and heavenly thoughts.

Specially, that our thoughts are more frequent concerning the beauty and
holiness, the majesty and goodness of our blessed God and his word.

2. That they are more entire without interruption upon these blessed objects.

3. That they are more constant and fervent, rauishing the heart with the
apprehension thereof, from all earthly objects, and fixing the same more
ccrtainely thereupon.

4. That they are more pure and sincere, separated from all respect to our
selves, and wholly employed upon those heavenly objects.

5. That they are more familiar, easy, and delightful, giving the mind sound
contentment therein. And yet

6. Are ordered and limited with more wisdom to their special objects, to
prevent distraction, and customarinesse therein.

7 And so furthered, not only by kindling the affections to what we have in
hand, that we may be quickened to practice; but also by accomplishing what is
desired, by seasonable practice.

And this is a second means of our growth in grace, and it is discerned
generally in the performance of such duties as belong to our callings,
specially of

Such as concern our general calling. As that

We perform duties to God, as with more zeal and power, so with more
humility and reverence in the denial of our selves.

2 That we perform them in singleness of heart, not as unto men but unto
God. And therefore

3 Are as careful to perform them in secret as openly.

4 And grow more constant and familiar therein.

5 And yet discern most of our faylings and corruptions therein.

More particularly.

1 That we are more powerful and frequent in meditation, as being the life of
all holy means and duties.

2 And are more frequent and fervent in prayer, to sanctify our persons and
actions before God. Yet

3 Making more conscience of the public ordinances of God, whereby faith may
be daily quickened and increased.

4 Adding withal a daily examination of our hearts and ways. And specially

5 Making conscience of the Sabbath

6 Renewing our repentance daily for all known sins. And still

7 Casting our selves upon the free grace of God in Jesus Christ. Still

8 Endeavoring to practice more then we can do. And yet

9 Comforting our selves from the purpose of our hearts in our particular
faylings. Rom 7.19.20.

Thus for our general calling.

Concerning our civil calling, observe

1 That dependence on the providence of God with it. 1. Pet. 5.6.


2 A special reference of our endeauours to his holy wisdom for the issue
thereof. And

3 Co^tentednes in whatsoeuet it pleases him to dispose as being best for us

4 Using diligence in the meanest, Phil. 4.12.
which our God has allotted us.

5 And waiting with patience the success of our labors.

6 Seasoning our worldly occasions with the meditation of Gods providence. And

7 Being faithful in the measure the Lord has disposed, by

8 Referring our labors to the public good, and

9. Dispensing liberally to the necessities of the Saints.

10 Bearing patiently what crosses befall herein: and

11 Laboring to supply them with the inward thirst.

These are good evidences of our growth in grace, and shall also prove happy
means to attain perfection.

A second general cause of spiritual growth, is spiritual experience.

And that specially of these things, First, of the deceitfulness of the hear^,
either bearing us in hand that our case is better then it is, or that is worse;
the deceit of the hearts in conceiting our estates to be better then indeed
they are, may be discerned by these particulars.

1 If we conceive our selves converted: either, because

1. We have assented to and delighted in the word, and done some things
answerable to the letter thereof. Math. 6.20.

2. We are humbled and abased with the sense of sin, which may be for fear
of punishment, and not in hatred of sin, or love unto God: and may be but a
flash and taste quickly salued by some carnal remedy.

3. If we continue in the course of profession so long as wind and tide serve
us, as we are vpheld by prosperity and outward means.

4. If our carriage pass current in the world, and be free from such gross
evils as are obuious to men, howsoever our hearts may be corrupt and rotten. And

5. If our consciences be secure, and so seem clear from sin, and to have
obtained true peace; whereas this may be the effect either of a drowsy or
seduced heart, either senseless of it estate, or judging the same by false
rules, as the letter of the law, opinion of the world, it own ignorance, or
perverse application of the word, or comparison with others.

6. Generally, if the compass of our practice look not higher then our selves
and present respects, to Gods glory, and reach not further then this life to
that which is invisible. And

7 If we carry our obedience current, resting in any measure thereof, and
stinting our selves therein, as if we had done enough; or doting on the beauty
of the same, as if it were without blemish not discerning corruption in our
best actions, and so denying even our greatest perfections, that still we may
be found in Christ.

By these we may be deceived in the judgment of a conversion, in judging our
estates to be better then they are.

So also may we be deceived on the other side, in deeming our estates to be
worse then they are.

As that we are no better then hypocrites, because our practice answers not our
profession, seeing hypocrisy is not so much in what we cannot do, as in what
we would seem to do, and mean it not, or do it not with the inward integrity
of the heart, and by making show of well doing intend the contrary.

2 That we are cast-awayes, because our consciences speak fearfully, as in
tentation, and the world accounts us no better, seeing we must not judge of our
selves by tentation, neither esteem what the world judges of us in this
secret, belonging only unto God.

3 That we arc decayed in grace, and left our true love, because we are grown
more moderate in our affections, more sober in our judgments, concerning
indifferent things; more charitable in judging others, more wise in providing
necessary things and avoiding unnecessary troubles and such like seeing all
this may be the fruit of the spirit of meeknes, and wisdom, and so an evidence
of our spiritual growth.

4 Because we are more sensible of corruption, and humbled therewith, this
howsoever with the world may seem either hypocrisy, or guilt of conscience yet
indeed it is the power of grace that gives this light; and it seems to
provoke in us a greater hatred against sin and watchfulness against the
same, and makes us more jealous, and lowly in our best actions.

By these and such like may we be provoked to esteem worse of our selves then
indeed there is cause, and so had need of spiritual experience to discern of
things that differ, that so knowing the true scantling of our estates, we may
provide accordingly.

A second experience necessarily furthering our growth in grace, is concerning
the manifold sleights and methods of Satan.

Which we shall attain unto.

1. By daily viewing and searching of our hearts, as being the sink wherein he
wallowes, and the matter whereupon he works.

2. By a serious meditation on the word, whereby we shall be enabled to
discern his deepnesse.

3. By fervent prayer unto our God to reveal these sleights unto us.

4. By a wise observation of his deepnesse, and two maine policies; either in
lulling us a sleep, or affrighting us with false fears, or rackeing true
causes upon the tenters of extremity, especially.

If we be acquainted with the trouble of conscience, for therein he vtters all
his ways.

2 If we take notice of his dealings on the bed of sickness and summons to
death, for now he will bestirre himself on all hands, as being his last
opportunity.

3 If we observe such accidents as do usually mingle themselves with our
sweetest co^forts; for here we may discern him most dangerous to poison these
sweets unto us. And so to this end shall be often conversant in the cases of
our brethren: in whose several tentations we shall discern the rather the
deepnesse of Satan, because now God calls us to relieve us, and we have a
promise of good success.

By these means we may attain much gracious experience.

Among other these especially will steed us for our spiritual growth. As that
it is his maine policy,

1 To sever the end from the means, whereby he nourish in hypocrisy,
formalitie, profaneness, security, and so excludes all hope of conversion,
persuading that we may be saved, though we use not the means thereto.

Or else he seuers the end from the means, suggesting that though we use the
means never so effectually, yet we may miss of the end, seeing our means are
no way proportionable thereto. Whereby he either drives to despair, or else at
least hinders and discourageth in practice.

A second maine Policy, is, to join those things which are contrary in the
work of salvation, or else to disioyne those that are to be joined.

1 To join nature with grace, our own will and ability with the mercy of God.

2 To mingle the wisdom of man with the word of God, to further salvation.

2 To disioine those things which must concur and agree together: as

1 The word and the spirit.

2 Power and weakness.

3 Faith and doubting.

4 Perfection with imperfection, as being both in one subject, and both serving
to testify the truth of grace, and further proceeding therein.

These and such like policies, as they are the grounds of all the rest, so the
experience of them serves very graciously to further our spiritual growth, of
which more particularly in the Treatise of Delusions.

A third kind of experience, is, of the power and wisdom of God in preventing
or turning about these tentations and sleights of Satan to our good, of which
also in that prepared discourse.

Besides these causes and furtherances to spiritual growth, there are also
many others in their places available hereunto. As 1. the conscionable use of
Gods holy ordinances: the word preached to strengthen faith, to discover inward
corruption, 1. Pet. 2.2.
and subdue the same. 2 The holy participation of the sacrament of the supper,
as that which specially seals up Christ unto us, repaireth our decaies,
nourishes spiritual life, and strengthens to perfection.

3 Holy conference to quicken and supply each others wants.

4 Meditation of all these to incorporate them into our substance.

5 Prayer to sanctify us to the use of these things, and them to us, that we
may benefit thereby, and so commend the issue and success unto God. Accessory
hereunto are,

1 Afflictions to purge out corruption, to weane from the world, to try our
faith, to make us more compassionate to our brethren, to acquaint us with the
power of God. To quicken in holy duties, and recover out of decays, to
increase our Patience that it may bring forth the perfect work, so nourishing
our hope of glory, and thereby provoking to a daily purging of our selves, that
we may be pure as he is pure. 1. Ioh. 3.3. Jacob. 1.2.3. Romans 5.2.3.4.

Examples of the Saints, which are gone before us, which encourage us to go
forward, by shaming us in our childish and cowardly weakness, and directing us
in the means whereby we may increase. Heb. 11. Iam. 5.12.13. 1. Cor. 11.1.

To this end also serve graciously these helps. As

1 Soundness of judgment and understanding concerning the power of
godliness. Phil. 1.9. 1. Tim. 1.7.
As that

1 We cannot be too holy. Psa. 119.82.
That when we have done our best, we are but unprofitable servants. Luke 16.10.
1. Cor. 13:


2 That we must follow after the best graces, and labor to be foremost in
holiness.

3 That God requires of us, according to the means, and therefore we must
abound in all righteousness. Math. 25.28. That we must follow men as they
follow Christ. 1. Cor. 11.1.

4 That only the word must be the rule and square of holiness. Isay 8.20.

5 That whatsoever is not of faith, that is, out of the testimony of the
conscience convinced by the word, is sin. Romans 14.

A second help to grow in Grace, is, that we do all duties in sincerity and
uprightness, that is, as unto God and in his presence, not unto men and for
their sakes.

2 As from God, from warrant of his word. And 3 For God,

That is simply for his glory: and 4. also through God: that is, by all holy
means, that so God may be all in all. And that,

1 As whereby we shall have the testimony of a good conscience in what we do,
and so by the virtue thereof have boldness with God. 1. Ioh. 3.20. And so
enabled by his power to go forward in well doing.

2 Hereby we shall approve the will of God, and so cherish and stir up the
spirit in us, that thereby we may be enabled to increase in holiness. And so:

3 Hereby we shall see the failing of our best actions, and so be cast off from
any confidence in our selves, lest spiritual pride and security over take us,
and so we shall discern still a necessity of proceeding.

4 And so by this sense of our failings we shall be daily cast upon the power
of Christ, by whom we shall obtain acceptance of our persons. Phil. 3.10. and
so of our imperfect service, and so enabled by his righteousness to go on to
perfection. Phil. 3.13.

5 Seeing our best actions are subject to much mixture of our corruption, and
so sufficient to make them and our persons to be rejected of God; and so to
provoke him to leave us to our own councels, either to hypocrisy, as to rest
in the outside or form thereof, and so to justify the same, and boast
therein, and so to rob God of his glory, and so to be given up to profaneness
and gross evils, as to punish our pride, so to confound our hypocrisy, and
provoke to sincerity, therefore here is special use of this sincerity; as to
sever the truth of well doing from the corruption thereof, so to appeal unto
God in the truth of our hearts, and judging our selves for our corruption and
failing, that we may not be judged of the Lord. 3 Seeing love covers a
multitude of sins. Therefore

A third help to grow in Grace, is That all our works be done in love: Ephesians.
1.15.
That is, as out of love unto God above all, which is true sincerity; so out
of love to each other, 1. so respecting our private, that we aim also at the
common good: 2. bearing with one another infirmities, though not to bolster
them therein, yet to prevent despair and win them with meekness, 3. yielding
many times with our private lest we should offend them in outward matters. 1.
Cor. 8.14.15. 4. Esteeming others better then our selves, Romans 12.10
and honoring the weaker by serving them in all tenderness and brotherly
care: 5. straining our selves in our poverty to relieve their necessity: Heb.
6.10. 2 Cor. 8.11. 1. Cor. 13.6.
6. and hoping still the best of them in their greatest failings: 7. and so
raising them up with the spirit of meekness: 8. easily receiving, not ought
against them: 9. or if we know any thing, interpreting it to the best: 10. and
covering their infirmities with compassion and mercy.

11. Not envying their greater measure, and so discouraging of them by
reproaches. And

12 Nor yet despising their less measure in comparison of ours.

13 But rejoicing in their proceeding, and imitating them therein.

14 And believing what we see not, either by sense or faith, what is, or is
likely.

15 Yea suffering with them in their distresses, either spiritual or outward,
Romans 12.12.13. Ephesians. 18.
by mourning for them, and mourning with aduising how to recover, helping them
by all holy means therein, as prayer, etc.

16 Loving still their persons, though we hate their sins.

17 Yea when they do us wrong, forgiving of them, and seeking to overcome evil
with good. Romans 12.16. by feeding them, etc.

18 Yet doing there most good, where we are tied by the lest bond. Gal. 6.10.

19 And all this for the good of their souls. 1. Pet. 1.22.

20 And that accordingly as we have received the gift withal chearefulnes
and a large heart. 2. Cor. 9.11.12.

And this is a special means to grow in grace.

1 Because every member as it receives life and growth from Christ, so from
him, each is knit and so joined together, as that it so receives life from him
that it communicates it jointly to each other, as being one in him, and one in
another: so that one member cannot thrive without another, and the helping of
one is the helping of another. Even as the soul of man so animateth every part
in it place and order, as hereby each part is serviceable to another, and so
furthereth the increase of the whole hereby: so is it in the body of Christ,
which being animated by his spirit, and thereby knit together fitly, and
compacted by that which every joint supplyeth according to the effectual
working in the measure of every part, makes increase of the body to the
edifying of it self in love. Ephesians. 4.16. Col. 2.19. So that no knitting
together, no holding of the head. Col. 2.19. No growing up severally, because
no growing together.

And the reason hereof is, the wisdom of God in communicating his graces
diversely, not to every member all, nor to any the measure of any at the first.
That so hereby there might be an increase of love in communicating this
variety of gifts, and so by this communication of their diverse gifts to each
other, there might be a supply to each of what is wanting and thereby as an
increase of the whole body, so an increase also of every several member
thereof; so that as without this mutual supply each particular member cannot
grow at all, so neither shall any be perfected without the other, seeing there
is a general Resurrection to perfect the whole. Hebrews 11.36.37.

4 Seeing we are subject to much distraction, both in what we should do, and
how to do it: as also to much self love in over prizing our estates and
beginning in grace: therefore that we may grow herein. It is necessary that we
still propound unto our selves the most perfect pattern, even looking unto
Jesus the author and finisher of our faith. Heb. 12.2. That so having that
pattern always in our eye to prevent distraction, and also to humble us in
the sense of any present measure, that so still we may deny our selves, and
labor to be found in Christ, not having our own righteousness, that so in
him we may be enabled to further growth.

5 And seeing at the beginning of our calling we are for the most part
carnal, more flesh then spirit, and so apt to abuse our holy liberty, as an
occasion to the flesh very prone to look into things present, and to affect our
wages here before we have done our work: Therefore a good help to spiritual
growth is not to pore on things present, but to look forward unto things to
come; Heb. 11.26.
even to that great recompense of reward which is set before, to follow hard
after the mark for the price of our high calling in Christ: that so now
considering how short our scantling of holiness is to that mark, though
happily these earthly things may be short thereof, we may wisely in the
apprehension thereof, cast away every thing that presses down, even all
byrespects to these base things, and so run with joy the race that is set
before us: leuelling all our actions at that sovereign end, and in that hope
daily laboring to be pure as God is pure, that so we may be made meet for that
glorious inheritance with the Saints in light.

6 Seeing every good and perfect gift proceeds from the father of lights, in
whom there is no variableness nor shadow of change. Jacob. 1.12. Therefore
howsoever we have daily cause of repentance for the imperfection of our well
doing, yet seeing without the help of our God we are able to do nothing (and
it is by the grace of God that we are what are) we can do nothing at all.
Therefore let us adioyne daily to our repentance, thankfulness unto our God
for what we have received, that so thereby giving him the glory of what we
have already, we may receive more grace to proceed in well doing.

And let the spirit of supplication be daily joined with our praises unto God,
that he which has begun the work may perfect it in us. Philippians 1.6.
being in nothing careful for what we want, let our requests be made known to
God for what we want, by prayer and supplication with thanksgiving. Phil. 4.6.
that so asking we may receive, that our joy may be full. John 16.24.

5 Seeing without others we shall not be perfected. Heb. 11.40. As the
evidence of our conversion is to strengthen the brethren, so that we may be
confirmed and strengthened in grace let us also labor to convert and
strengthen others. Luke 22.32. Psalm. 51.13.

6 Whereas the deceitfulness of the heart is a maine occasion, to flatter us
in the judgment of our estates, either that we are not grown so far as we
imagine, or that we have attained more, then in truth is cause; therefore that
we may grow in grace, keep we a continual and narrow watch over our hearts.

1 By daily laying them open unto God, and submitting them to the search of his
spirit. Psalm. 26.1.

2 By a daily trial and abasing them by the word.

3 By a more private and inward practice of secret duties of Prayer,
meditation, and calling to mind former occasions.

4 By a more careful ordering and suppressing of our inward thoughts.

And quickening the good that they may grow to practice.

7 Seeing we cannot grow in grace unless we grow in knowledge, therefore
labor we to increase daily in all saving knowledge by meditation in the word
and works of God, 2. Pet. 3.18.
and make we conscience to practice faithfully what we know, Math. 25.
that so to him which has may be given: he that is faithful in a little, may
be entrusted with more.

8 Being wise to avoid all curiosity of vain speculations and contentious
questions^, lest while we are entangled with these, we are carried through
pride of conquest to contentions and strife, and so neglect what concerns us
necessarily. 2. Tim. 2.23. 1. Tim. 4.5.6.

9 Seeing the love of the world is a maine hinderance to our spiritual growth,
either because if we want what we desire, we are pestred with distracting cares
for the obtaining thereof: or if we have it, we are much more subject to be
ensnared with too much do^ting and confidence therein: therefore labor we for
contentedness in our estates, and cast we our care upon God who cares for us,
weane we our hearts from the love of the world, by discerning the frailty and
uncertainty, the deceitfulness of all earthly things: by setting our
affections on things above, and submitting to afflictions hereunto, that so
casting away whatsoever presses us down, we may run with joy the race that
is set before us. Hebrews 12.1.

10 And seeing besides our failings in what we should do, or have done, we are
also subject daily to many evils, which we should not do, whereof some may be
open, besides many secret: therefore make we daily our peace with God by
repentance, that so we may still walk in the light of his countenance, and
thereby be encouraged, and strengthened to grow to perfection.

11 Especially seeing the saints are most overtaken, concerning the judgment
and use of their Christian liberty, and so ensnared with many abuses, either
by committing what is unlawful under pretense of that liberty; or exceeding
in the use of what is lawful, and so hindering themselves in better things,
and thereby grieve the spirit and grow to dis-use thereof, or carelessness
therein: therefore labor we especially,

First, to judge wisely of our Christian liberty how far it extends, and
wherein it is conversant. And so, to moderate the use thereof by such holy
Bounds, wherein it is confined: of both, which at large in the Daily Sacrifice
extant, and the Treatise of the Redemption of time, which (God willing) expect
shortly.

12 Seeing Faith, as it is the beginning of Inherent grace, by purifying the
heart, Acts 15.9. so it is also the means of our increase therein, by renewing
our estate daily in Christ. Therefore, that we may grow in Grace, we must labor
to grow in Faith. And that by daily increase of knowledge, in the Mystery of
Christ, attained by constant hearing of the Word, and conscionable receiving of
the Sacrament, by looking back into former experience of Gods mercies; and so
gathering from the Truth of God evidences of proceeding.

Especially by looking forward within the veil into those precious Promises,
that are there laid up for us, Hebrews 6.19. 2. Cor. 7.1. That so we may in
that hope daily purge our selves more and more, 2. Pet. 3.22.
1. John 3.3. and so profit and hasten to holiness in the fear of God,
looking for the appearance of Christ.

13 And seeing we shall be sure to be encountered with many enemies, that either
by inward or outward tentations, either on the right hand or on the left, will
labor to hinder our Spiritual growth; therefore put we on daily the whole
Armor of God, Ephesians. 6.11, 12, etc.

That so we may resist in the evil day: of which also at large in the Daily
Sacrifice, together with the parts and use thereof.

14 Seeing it is Patience that brings forth the perfect work, 1. Iam. 3.
therefore, that we may grow in Grace, we have need of Patience both to
encounter and bear such oppositions as hinder our growth, and also to sustain
us by experience of former goodness in the sense of our wants, to cast us upon
the sufficiency of our God, who will supply all our necessities, to uphold us
in the present want of what recompense we expect and yet seem to be
disappointed of, that so, when we have done the will of God, we may receive
the reward in due season. Hebrews 10.36. Galathians 6. If through impaciency
we faint not.

15 Above all, pray we continually. 1. These. 5.17. with all prayer and
supplication of the spirit, and watching thereunto with all perseverance. Ephe.
6 18. That our God may supply what is wanting to our faith, and so to all
necessary graces, that we may not be destitute of any grace which for the
present may be fit, and interessed in whatsoever may further our reckoning unto
the day of Christ.

16. Seeing the Lord has set apart unto us the Sabbath, as wherein, we are
more plentifully furnished with means of growth, and so have opportunity to
try and increase our spiritual strength, therefore make we conscience,
especially to sanctify this day glorious to the Lord, that so we may be
furnished with means daily to thrive in grace, and by our care on this day,
may be the better enabled to serve him sincerely and constantly in all other
occasions.

17 And though the Lord has specially separated this day for his more public
and entire worship: yet he has redeemed us that we might serve him in
holiness and righteousness all the days of our life. Luke 2.49
Therefore that we may grow in grace make we conscience of constant holiness
daily, by daily examining our hearts, renewing our repentance, increasing our
knowledge, our faith, by meditation in the word, prayer, relying on Gods
blessings in our civil callings, and watching therein against covetousness,
discontent, worldly wisdom, earthly mindedness, deceit and such like: least
our neglecting or slubbering of daily duties grieve the spirit; procure a
remissness, and formalitie therein; and so in sted of having more, that which
we have may be taken from us, at least for the present use and comfort thereof.

18 Seeing security is a maine hinderance to our Spiritual growth, and it is
the mercy of our God to exercise us daily with some afflictions in diverse
kinds, to prevent the same therefore, that we may daily grow in grace, let us
prepare our souls daily to afflictions; submitting to whatsoever our gracious
Father shall lay upon us, making them glasses to see our daily failing, and
purgations to empty us of them; using them as spurs to provoke us daily to
perfection, by weaning from the love of the world, and giving daily experience
of the power of Christ in us.

19 Whereas it much furthers our growth in grace to have a good conscience in
whatsoever we do: therefore labor we to maintain tenderness of conscience
in all things; as well to convince us of secret evils, and so to prevent gross
offenses, as also to humble us in well-doing, and cast us upon Christ, as to
prepare us more conscionably to all holy duties, to carry us more uprightly and
constantly through out the same, and still to provoke us out of the sense of
our daily failings, to renew our strength in Christ, and so in him to grow up
to perfection.

20 To this end also have we always the fear of God before our eyes, to
prevent hypocrisy and security, and 2 Cor. 7.1.

21 Nourish we daily an holy fear and jealousy over our selves; yea, Pro.
28.13.
when we do our best and feel greatest comforts, least Spiritual pride beget
security and confidence in the flesh, and so produce luke-warmnesse, and
falling into gross evils, Revelations 3.17.

22 Above all, take we heed of contenting our selves with any measure of
holiness already attained; but that we may grow in grace, grow we in humility
and daily denial of our selves, forgetting what is behind, that we may hasten
to that which is before, even for the price of our high calling in Christ
Jesus. Phil. 3.13.

23. And seeing our lives are uncertain, and our master may come in an hour
we know not of, therefore that we may grow in grace, prepare we daily for our
death and so for indgement, adding daily to our Christian stature, and
abounding in the work of the Lord, that so we may be found in peace at our
masters coming. 1. Cor. 15.58.

24 Resign our selves daily into the hands of our gracious father, committing
our selves in well doing continually unto his faithful keeping, that so he may
quiet our hearts in what we have received, by enabling us to a conscionable use
thereof, and so furnish us with whatsoever may yet further our perfection unto
the day of Christ.

25 Seeing our want of spiritual wisdom is a maine hinderance to our growth
in grace, as, casting us ofttimes into many unnecessary troubles and so to much
distraction and horror thereby; and casting us upon many doubtful and
intricate occasions, both of matters of knowledge, concerning things vain and
curious, as also upon many a rash and indiscreet practice, to wound the
conscience and hinder our peace, and so our proceeding in grace: therefore
labor we to attain the Spiritual wisdom. First, by cleaving fast to the
Word: And secondly, experience of Gods former dealings: Thirdly, by comparing
Spiritual things with Spiritual things: Fourthly, and looking as well to the
end, as the beginning thereof; that so we may still make choice of the most
familiar and excellent, decline doubtful and unnecessary occasions, submit our
spirits to the spirits of the wisest, and so maintain love, which is the bond
of perfection, Col. 3.15.

26 Lastly, seeing though fullness of joy be expected in another life, and yet
here also the Saints may enjoy some comfortable measure thereof, Psalm. 4.4, 5.
in all occasions, and the more they partake thereof, the more they are
encouraged in holy duties, and enabled to go forward therein: Therefore labor
we to maintain this Spiritual joy. First, by entertaining the motions of the
Spirit: And secondly, the occasions of well-doing: Thirdly, by walking
constantly with our God: And fourthly, comforting others: Fifthly, by daily
repentance for sin: And sixthly, renouncing our best righteousness:
Seventhly, daily clearing the evidences of our election; That so, we may daily
grow in grace, and follow after perfection.

And thus of the causes and helps to grow in grace.

It remains yet to consider the manner of our growth in grace.

CHAP. 4. Of the manner of our Spiritual growth, with diverse comfortable
observations therein, and uses thereof.
HItherto of the Necessity, Nature, and Causes of this Spiritual growth.

It now follows that we discover the Manner thereof, as being a part of the
revealing of this great mystery, and very necessary for the trial of the
truth thereof; and also to resist such tentations as do oppose the same, or
hinder the increase thereof.

To this end it shall be necessary to enter into the Sanctuary of the Lord,
and thereinto observe such Mysteries, wherein this wonderful Mystery is
wisely infolded to stumble carnal wisdom; and yet graciously unfolded, to
satisfy the humble spirit.

The first Mystery wherein this sacred Truth is infolded, is the New Creature,
2. Cor. 5.17.

The Spirit vouchsafing to resemble our Spiritual renewing in the second Adam,
by our Natural beginning in the Old.

1. Both because there is very great and near similitude between them; and
also,

2. That this of Nature being familiar to each capacity, the other of grace
may be better discerned thereby; and yet

3. Might stumble here in carnal wisdom, either in stretching the
similitude to square every way to the establishing of Natures ability and
help to grace; or to confound carnal wisdom in the discerning thereof, if
it look with no other spectacles then those of Nature.

Labor we then in the fear of God, to search the secrets of this Mystery by
the power of the Spirit, that so we may hereby discern the Manner of this
Spiritual growth.

To this end consider we first, that as the New birth in regard of the better
part, is immediately created a New of God: and infused into the body, and so
animates and quickens the whole: so is it in the New Man, it is wholly created
of God a new, in righteousness and holiness, Col. 3.10.
without any help of Nature; nay, contrary thereto.

Whence it follows:

1. That seeing as is the beginning, so is also the leading forward of the
work, merely by the free power and goodness of God. As Nature was a mere
Patient in the beginning of the work, so though now being renewed by grace, it
becomes in part an Agent; yet this is not, of it self, but merely by the
power of Grace, enabling it to every action and degree of increase, both for
the matter and manner thereof.

2. So that hereby we may discern the Manner of our growth, If we find the
Spirit daily quickening, and furthering the work; both stirring up the good
motion as the ground thereof, and enabling to put the motion into practice, and
giving comfort in the practice, by the acceptance thereof in Christ, above the
worth thereof.

And hence arise these comfortable rules to meet with diverse tentations
incident to the New birth, both for our trial and comfort therein.

That whereas we find our selves though truly converted; yet sometimes to be
unapt to holy duties, find little comfort in them; less power to resist
corruption, and so may think the work to be not only interrupted, but quite
undone. Yet if we consider that it is a creation, not only in the beginning,
but in the proceeding too, Psalm. 51.10. though we may despair in regard of our
selves, yet must we now by faith still rely on our God, who calls things that
are not, as if they were, Romans 4.

And yet seeing this Creation is by means, though in themselves most unlikely,
yet effectual by the power of God: hereto, therefore for our recovery, and
proceeding, we must wait upon God in the means, for the renewing of his work
in due season.

Secondly, hence it follows, That as in Nature, though there be a quickening
of every part at once, yet it is in this order, that first the faculties are
first created, whereby we are enabled to action, and then the actions follow
from those faculties in their order, and time, as the organs are created and
fitted thereto: so is it in the work of Grace, the faculties are created in
every part at the first; in the Understanding, Conscience, Will, Affections,
etc. yet do not these faculties execute their several operations at the
first, by reason that the organs of those faculties are either yet not created,
or not fitted for use.

Whence follow these conclusions, for the trial of the Manner of growth and
comfort therein.

1. For trial, that seeing the faculty must lead to and enliue the action:
and of all faculties, though the Will be predominate, yet the Understanding
must begin to discern what is to be done or undone: and Knowledge must
inform, and bind the conscience to the doing thereof; and so the Will
consequently is attempted, and subdued to the performance or leaving thereof.
Therefore if we find this order in our growth, we may undoubtedly conclude a
truth of the work: whereas in the Natural man, and hypocrite, this order is
perverted and depraved oftimes. Many things are done, not so much out of
knowledge, or conscience, but by example of others, or sudden motions,
sometimes of Satan; and our corrupt wills, upon outward respects; and so on the
contrary.

2. For comfort, that if we find this order, that knowledge leads conscience,
and conscience attempts the will, and this by Grace is subdued thereto, though
by reason of tentation, or defect of other means or ability the work be not
done, yet this is a good evidence of growing in grace. If the will be still
more constant thereto, and desirous thereof, in the disappointment of the good
act, and more auerse to the evil committed, hating what we do evil, and
loving more the good undone; using and renewing the means for the
accomplishment of the one, and declining the means for the renewing of evil.

A second condition of the Natural creature is, that it grows up even from
the first in every part; as being quickened by the soul, which is the whole in
the whole, and whole in every part, enliuing and so increasing the same. And so
it is in the New creature: Every part and faculty is lively quickened by Grace
at first, though it execute not presently, the operations thereof: In regard of
the defect of the instrument, and so every part grows up together according to
the measure thereof: As we grow in knowledge, so in conscience of obedience, so
in humility, for it imperfection, so in patience, etc.

Whence arise these comfortable rules both for the trial and comfort of the
manner of our Growth.

1 For trial, that if we find a genenerall affecting of every part, as well an
hatred of sin in the will, as a conviction of conscience for the same; as
well a love unto goodness as an hatred of sin; as well a purpose of heart to
leave it, and do the contrary, as a sight of it in the understanding: and then
we may be sure of the truth of the work, seeing that the Hypocrite may by the
power of Conscience, naturally, especially being Illightned by the spirit,
discern sin, and so be conumced of it; but yet his heart being not renewed by
grace, neither can he hate it unfeignedly, or is willing to part with it upon
the best terms; neither is able in any measure to forsake the same upon the
true ground, in obedience and love unto God; but only upon by-respects, out of
love to himself, he may so leave some sin, as to enchange it for a more
sweet and profitable; or else he must leave it, because ability and
opportunity serve not thereto; or else he leaves with condition to resume it
again upon a better opportunity and advantage: And so as he wills no good
at all, so if he do any, it is not from the power of grace, but from outward
respects: neither does he continue therein, otherwise then may serve his
carnal ends, making hereby amends for some grievous sins, or seeking to
further and cloak them more dangerously hereby.

3. As in the New birth, though there be a faculty of every quality and power,
yet there is not a present execution and use thereof: As there is in the first
borne a faculty of speaking, going, reason, etc. yet no present use thereof:
so is it in the New creature. Though by the spirit, all graces are begun in us,
in regard of the faculty of them; yet for the use of them, we must expect in
those seasons, when they may best serve for Gods glory, and our building
forward in Christ. Reasons hereof are.

1. Because some graces arise out of other: As first, Faith is the ground of
all other graces, all other proceed from it.

Patience arises out of experience, and so hope from thence.

2. Some graces are only fittest for diverse seasons, as Patience in the time of
affliction, which the New birth is spared of for a time, etc. though some are
useful in all occasions.

3. All graces as they proceed ordinarily from the outward means, which are
in time offered; so they are wrought in us by the means for the use of them
diversely; as we increase in knowledge so thereby we attain to many graces, in
their several place and use.

And hence arise these conclusions for our comfort in the manner of our Growth.

1 That there may be the seed of all graces in us, though for the present we
have no use of them.

2 That God requires no further the use of any grace in the regenerate, then we
have knowledge thereof.

3 That as our knowledge is like the light shining more and more unto the
perfect day, so though our practice according to that knowledge in some graces
as yet be none, because we know not the use of them, or have no occasion
thereto; yea though our practice be weak, in any that we know, because our
knowledge is weak, yet this does not deny the truth thereof, but rather
evidence the same, because Gods power must be seen in our weakness; but
rather is a means to interesse us in the power of God, to enable to a further
measure.

4 As in the New birth though there be a truth and beginning of all graces and
faculties in us, yet we attain the perfection of them not at once, but al our
life long: so is it in the New creature,

We are not at the first, perfect in every grace, but are growing by degrees to
perfection, even to our dissolution.

3. Whence these comfortable conclusions follow: first,

That imperfection in grace does not argue a nullitie thereof, but rather
establishes the truth of the same.

2. That truth of grace infers, necessarily perfection of grace, because it
is of God; who will perfect the work, because he works perfectly, as may
best serve for his glory, and the maine good of the Creature, though not at
once: for then we should not have that daily experience of Gods mercy; but in
due season, that he may have the glory.

3. That imperfection of grace furthereth the perfection thereof: because it
daily works a denial of our selves, and a casting of us upon the Mercy of
God in Christ Jesus.

A fourth circumstance in the New birth is, that even when the senses are bound
and some inferior faculties suspended* yet it grows constantly, and without
intermission to the full stature: so is it in the New birth, though the sense
of faith be bound for a time; yea, though some inferior, and accessarie graces
be suspended in their particular use, happily all our life long, as joy in
believing, and such like; yet still there is a thriuing of the New man
continually, because the spirit is constantly operative.

Whence it follows for our comfort, that we must not judge of the manner of
our growth by feeling, but by says; we may and do still grow, though we do
not discern it.

2. Yea, though we happly discern^ the contrary, in that some inferior powers
being suspended, we slip backward in particular, and slack of former measure,
yet still we grow in the general.

Fifthly, it is obseruable in the Natural birth, that there is not only a
growth thereof in sleep, even when the senses are suspended, but also that in
sickness^s very dangerous, and tedious, it notwithstanding grows and thriueth
more, then otherwise ordinarily, in a state of health; by reason that such
sicknesses resolve such desperate obstructions, as bound and hindered nature
from thriuing and also dissolve and consume such pestilent humors, as poisoned
the Spirits, and restrained nature from doing it office.

And surely in like manner fares it with the New birth, that it not only
thriues even insensibly, and in times of intermission and suspending of some
operations of the spirit, whose suspension proves the means of enlarging and
supply of such other, as more immediately, and effectually further the maine
growth: But also in a wonderful manner, even proves and grows by contraries,
even by such evils and faylings of the soul, which may seem to threaten utter
dissolution; so that the more it has been cast behind, the faster it hies to
it iournies end, making inward advantage of it outward faylings, and purging
out secret sins, by falling in- grosser evils.

Which as it may instruct us wisely to judge of our spiritual growth, not to
challenge the truth thereof, though it be not sensible at all times: much less
to esteem that a decay therein, which proves the means of further increase:
so it comforts exceedingly in our greatest slips, that they shall turn about
graciously to our greatest advantage.

Lastly (to conclude this first resemblance) may we not observe in the natural
birth, that in the coldest season the inward heat is more powerful: in the
least burden of flesh, the spirits are more active and forcible. Nay, that in
the greatest soundings and faintings caused by the suffocating of the spirits,
or some sudden and violent outward accident: yet then the blood and spirits
retire to the most noble and principal part the heart, not only to preserve
themselves, but there with all to fortify it, that it may withstand and
overcome the extremity, and so again are enlarged to the better quickening of
the body.

And surely so it falls out in our spiritual birth. That not only outward
afflictions prove means of our spiritual courage; but usually in the less
supply of Nature, there appears a greater measure of grace.

Yea, when by reason of Divine desertion, at least in part, the spirit seems
to fail us outwardly, yet then does it more inwardly sustain us in the most
necessary and maine work, sending us to the trial and search of our hearts,
and so confirming us in the evidence thereof. Yea, hereby increasing the zeal
thereof against all sin: by experience of particular faylings, and making us
more wise and eager to prevent or expel the same. Whereby we are taught to
judge wisely of our selves and others in such accidents, that seem so
contrary to flesh: and to live by Faith in the issues thereof: Comforting our
selves, that as this more aduanceth the free mercy, power, and wisdom of our
God: so it shall also much further and encourage our spiritual growth.

Thus of the first Mystery, whereunto our Spiritual birth is resembled:
whereby we may discern the manner of our growth therein.

And this also may be further confirmed, by that other Mystery resembling the
same: namely, in that it is likened unto seed, 1. John 3.8.

As in respect of the means whereby it is wrought: 1 James.
namely, the immortal seed of the Word: 1 Pet. 1.
so in respect of the work it self. 1. John 3.8. Which is therefore resembled
by seed, John 12. cast into the ground.

1. Because, as the seed comes not to ripeness at the first, but in due
season, though it have in it the faculty and power of fruit, as being perfect
it self: Verse. 10.12.
so is it with the grace of God; which though it be perfect seed, yet being
cast into the fallow and plowed ground of our hearts in regard of the
unaptness of the ground and season, it yields not fruit presently, but in due
season, according to the providence and blessing of God, fittest for his glory
and the good of the ground.

2. As the seed is not discerned in growing at the first, and yet it grows;
so neither can the work of grace be discerned in the beginning, no not in the
infancy thereof and weaker proceedings of the same.

3. As the seed in it growing up, is rotted first in the ground, John 12. and
dead, yea appearing past hope: so is it with the work of grace; so far from
being discerned sometimes to grow, as that rather contrarily, to sense it
dies: the old Man must be daily mortified, that the new Man may increase; yea
the new Man must be abased in the sense of it own attained measure, that still
it may grow up in Christ, to attain perfection. And that by reason of the
mixture of the Old man with the New, challenging the imperfection and stain of
any goodness attained, and the prevailing of the flesh sometimes, in some
degrees, over the Spirit, drawing us contrary to our maine purposes, to many
evils: and yet furthering hereby our growth, in nourishing more necessary
graces of humility, and denial of our selves, of Faith in Christ, contrary
to sense; of spiritual poverty, and hungring after Christ, of holy thirsting
after the comforts of the life to come.

And this affords also diverse gracious consequences for our better discerning
of the Manner of our growth.

As first, that we may not expect perfection at the first, nay, we must not be
discouraged though as the seed dies and rots before it come up and yield
fruit: so it is with us, even after the seed of Grace is sown in us: for this
does tend to the more glorious trial of our faith and patience, and to the
greater advancement of the power of God, in sustaining us in these kinds of
desertions; of his wisdom and mercy, in turning them about to the best unto
us.

2. Though we discern not the work of grace at the first, no not for some
time, yet is the seed sown, and will come up at length, and he that believes
makes not haste, Isay 8.

Thirdly and lastly, seeing the seed comes up by contraries, by dying, etc.
therefore, as we must not be discouraged in those particular blasts, and
oppositions, those desertions and contradictions which do occur herein: so
neither for the general, must we live by sense in any measure, when we are at
the hight, as we think to rest herein; but still we must live by Faith,
denying our selves, and relying only upon Christ in the means, that so by him
we may be lead along to perfection.

Thirdly, A third Mystery shadowing out the New birth, is that it is resembled
unto Light, Prou. 4.18, 19. Heb. 10.34.

1. Which as it receives it power from the Body of the Son, and this from
the ordinance of God: so our conversion is a spark of the light of Christ the
Son of righteousness, and this from the good pleasure and Fountain of Gods
eternal love.

And therefore:

Howsoever it may seem to be as the light, subject to many Ecclypses, and
vicissitudes, yet in Gods purpose and practice of his grace, it is constant and
eternal.

2. As the light shines more and more unto the perfect day; so is it in our
Conversion. At the first, our light is dim and weak, but still in growing.
The longer we live in the School of Christ; the more we shine in holiness,
the nearer we attain to the life of glory, And therefore, as

There is a continual work of proceeding, though not always discernable; as
the Sun shines always, though not apparent in our Horizon.

Nay, though the light be not discernable always in that measure, yet as the
withdrawing of the light and heat of the Sun is very necessary and useful,
least it extreme heat always continuing, should burn the earth: so the
absence of this sense and feeling of the work, proves very profitable to
humble and try our faith, to make it express it self in other more
necessary fruits of Patience, Repentance, Compassion, etc.

Yea, as the Sun when it sets in one Circumference, yet it shines in another,
so that when it is night with us, it is day with others, and yet we and they
make but one Universe: so is it in the work of the Spirit: Though it be
with-drawne from one part, yet it shines in another; it failing in some graces,
is the means to express it in others that are more necessary: And therefore,
though it shine not in one Climate, yet it shines in another; and so while it
is absent from one part, it supplieth elsewhere; and so by this dispensation,
by times and degrees, illustrateth the whole: and so though we daily grow, yet
it is not without some interruptions and intermissions to our sense, for the
present, by reason of such tentations which ouercast and trouble the same, of
such open sins: as to grieve the spirit, and so suspend it working in
somethings, and degrees for the present; or that we grow careless and formal
in holy duties, and so for the present want the comfort of them: yet as the
light shines more and more, until the perfect day, so is it with the New
birth.

4. The work of the Spirit is compared unto Wind, John 3.8. Now as the wind
blows where it lists: and though we hear the sound thereof, yet we cannot
discern whence it comes, and whither it goes: so is it in the work of the
Spirit. It is always free in working; and therefore neither can any goodness
in us, move the same to work otherwise then it pleases; neither can the evil
that is in us, hinder the same from working otherwise, then that still may
stand with the liberty and purpose thereof, for our maine good; howsoever in
some subordinate graces, it may seem to fail and cease it working.

And hence arise many comfortable conclusions, both to discern the manner of
our growth, and also to comfort us therein.

As first, in that no goodness in us can move it to work further then it
pleases, because it motion is the cause of our goodness, and disposes the
same as it pleases, for it own sake. Therefore, though the best we do, be in
great weakness; yet may not this challenge the work of the Spirit, who
shows his power in our weakness, and by our corruptions, raises daily
matter to abase the flesh, and reserve the Glory intierly unto God; and
thereby also provoke us daily to renew our strength in Christ, that in him we
may grow up to perfection; that so the work of Gods free grace may be daily
led forward by the power of Christ which dwells in us, Col. 1.19.

2. Seeing the Spirit works freely; therefore howsoever, when we have done
our best, we yet find not our labors answered with that success and comfort
for the present, as we do desire and expect; yet may not this challenge the
work of the Spirit; as if it were not effectual in enabling us to well-doing,
and crowning the same. Though we pray with conscience, and are not heard, in
what we prayed for: Though we hear, and little profit by it, because our
hearts are not melted, our affections inflamed with love, and zeal at all
times; we rather find contrarily, corruption increased, hardness of heart
discerned, etc. Though we desire to repent, and labor to abase our hearts
before our God, yet we cannot do it with tears, we cannot forsake such evils
as we are grieved for, and hate unfeignedly: All these notwithstanding, I say,
we may not therefore conclude, that the Spirit has not assisted us, or approues
not of our labors: Because still the Spirit is a free worker. Both free, to
afford us what measure of grace it pleases, in doing these things; which
though it be far from perfection, yet it is such, as for the present is
fittest; both that God may still have the Glory, and we may be cast upon his
power, for the enabling of us in our weakness, and also cast merely upon his
free grace for the acceptance, and crowning thereof: And therefore, if now we
ask, and are not answered in our particular desires for the present; yet if we
are supplied with what may be better for us, namely, with Patience to wait on
our God; with Faith to rest on God, though we feel no present answer for our
comfort, with more zeal to continue in Prayer; with more watchfulness and
earnestness therein. Is not this the free work of the Spirit, which grants
us what best pleases the same, as to gain glory unto God in letting us hereby
see our failings, and enabling us to bring forth more fruit, so thereby to lead
us a long by the Power of God far beyond our ability, to perfection? If now
the Lord deals more abundantly with us, then we could think or desire; Is
not the wisdom and free mercy of our God admirable herein? Are not his ways
though past finding out, yet free and faithful to perfect his work in us?
Thus though we hear, and find not comfort and joy therein, but rather are
more abased in the sense of our Corruption: herein also appears the liberty
of the Spirit, who is not tied to recompense us at all, if we consider our
deserts, much less to answer us in one particular, as if it had no other way
to work. But if in sted of yielding us joy and comfort in hearing, it afford
us that which may best further our reckoning unto the day of Christ, by
discovering daily corruption yet more and more, and preventing those Spiritual
evils of Pride, Vainglory, Security, etc. which may be occasioned by what we
desire, which might rob God of his Glory, and our selves of the comfort of
present well-doing, and so of power to increase. As these are the works of the
Spirit to discover corruption, to prevent these evils; so are they fitter for
us in this state of our Imperfection, to increase humility. May we not reap
comfort in this, that we can still renounce our selves, and be abased in our
own eyes? And does not the Lord now in a wonderful manner, not only answer
our general end, which is to go forward to perfection, but therein also
supplies us even with that particular which we did desire, though not for the
present, yet in due season; though not after the same manner which we expected
it, yet by such a manner, as may still justify the free working of the spirit,
and so thereby confirm unto us the faithfulness of our God, who will perfect
the work which he has begun in us, that he may have the glory of all his
mercies?

And so though we cannot mourn for our sins with such plenty of tears, yet
if by the work of the Spirit, this is discerned of us, and we are more humbled
for the same, though not expressed outwardly, yet inwardly with groaning and
bleedings of the heart; does not this evidence the free work of the Spirit, in
suppressing our Repentance in that manner as^ best pleases himself, and yet
in such a manner, as happily, though it cross our particular desire of
expressing our sorrow by tears, which may savor of the flesh, and tend to the
satisfaction thereof, as being subject to vainglory, hypocrisy, etc. yet it
furthers our maine desire to approve the sincerity of our hearts unto God; to
be vile still in our own eyes, that God only may have the glory to interesse
thereby in the Power of God, that thereby we may be lead along to perfection?

And therefore though we cannot forsake what particular sins we are grieved
for, and heartily detest, yet does not this challenge the work of the Spirit,
as if it were ineffectuall altogether; but rather euidenceth the liberty of
the Spirit, who works in us according to his good pleasure; though not what
we desire in particular, yet what we ought to desire principally: namely the
casting away of such maine evils as hang fast upon us, and most hinder our
growth in grace; and the furnishing us with the most necessary graces which
may further our perfection.

And therefore howsoever, though we heartily desire and endeavor to be rid of
some infirmities which do daily encomber us, and seem to abase us daily in
our own eyes, and yet cannot attain the same; yet is the work of the Spirit
hereby more free and glorious, both increasing hereby our desires, and hatred
thereof, and also accepting the same as sufficient for the present: And
withal, using in it singular wisdom the Remaindure of such corruptions as
sovereign Antidots to purge out and prevent the increase of more dangerous
evils of Spiritual Pride, Vainglory, Security, 2 Cor. 12.8, 9.
and such like: and so by the purging out of these roots of bitterness,
graciously weakens the power of such infirmities, as we carry about us, and
prouokes us to a greater watchfulness over them, and to a more earnest desire
to put off this body of sin, that we may be wholly rid of them, Romans 7.24.
that so God may be all in all. And withal Recompencing graciously the
remainder of corruption in us, with such necessary graces of sincerity,
humility, patience, and the like, that so hereby, we may be better enabled to
subdue them, and so grow up to perfect holiness in the fear of God, that God
may have the only glory of all his goodness. Thus does our wise God bring
light out of darkness, raising out of the remaindure of Corruption more sight
and hatred thereof, more det^rall of our selves, more repose in God, more
affiance and resting in Christ, more patience to bear affliction^, more
charity and compassion to ^akers, more alienation from the World, more
humility and abasing in our own eyes, more hungring after perfection, and
more hastening thereto.

Thus does the spirit lead forward the manner of our growth to justify the
freedom, and so the wisdom and faithfulness thereof.

And this shall further appear unto us by the second property of the Wind,
that though we hear the sound thereof, yet we know not whence it comes, nor
whither it goes, which, as it euidenceth still the free work of the Spirit;
so it also discovers graciously the manner of our growth thereby.

As first, In that we may hear the sound thereof, though we cannot discern
the substance of the same; so is it with the Spirit, we may take notice of it
working, both by it enabling of us in well-doing, and also by the effect
thereof, quieting our hearts therein, by the testimony of our conscience, and
scaling up the approbation thereof, by the fruit thereof; assurance of our
salvation and joy in the spirit from the same: yet least we should imagine the
Spirit tied only to this effect, or that we deserve the same out of the worth
of our well-doing; and so incroach upon the worthiness of our head: therefore,
we shall but hear, not see fully, for that remains for another life: some
notice we shall have of the truth of it working, though we cannot fully
discern the Mystery thereof: And we shall but hear the sound thereof: some
such feeling thereof we shall have, as may assure us that the grace of God is
not in vain; though we may want of such evidences, which may euince the
perfection of Grace, as are most fit for this state of growing: our faith shall
be mingled with some doubting, our graces with some mixture of Corruption,
that, as we may discern the truth thereof, so we may also discern the
imperfection of the same: that so we may daily hasten to perfection by daily
denying of our selves, and laboring to be found in Christ, not having our own
righteousness.

And therefore

Howsoever we have not the perfect sight and feeling of our growing in Grace,
neither enjoy sensible comfort in the same at all times alike: yet is this so
far from challenging the truth of Gods grace in us, as that rather it does
evidence undoubtedly the power thereof: seeing in regard of the combat
between the flesh and the Spirit, there must necessarily fall out such
differences of the working of the Spirit, and also of our apprehension thereof.
Whereas if it were always in one key and temper, it is a plain argument, that
there is no such combat, and so no true conversion.

Only here let it suffice us, that our God knows what is best for us, and will
work as it pleases him, that his grace may still be free. And if ever we had
any true feeling of the work, It is an evidence that we shall have it again,
or else, that which shall be better for us, knowing that here we live by Faith
and not by sight, 2. Cor. 5.7. and that the power of God must be perfected in
our weakness, 2. Cor. 12.8.

Remembering now what is added, in the third place, as a lively evidence of the
working of the Spirit, that we know not whence it came, nor whether it goes:
Therein giving us to understand, that though we shall know so much of the
working of the Spirit, as shall be sufficient for the present, yet is it still
a free worker; we may be to seek if we will walk by sense, of any work that
is past, as if that all our former measure were but in hypocrisy, and we may
be to seek of what shall follow after, if we tie God to any particular way,
subject to our apprehension, and do not see a far off by faith, resting upon
the promises of our God, above our worthiness, yea above our capacity
thereof, because we must still grow in knowledge, and so grow in grace; yea,
though we do live by faith, both in discerning, whereunto we are come, and
whither we may go in general; yet seeing we know but in part, 1. Cor. 13.9.
and so at the best so far can believe, as that still we must desire the Lord
to help our unbelief: Math. 8.
therefore neither can we discern all the particular ways of God, whereby he
has led us hitherto; neither shall we be able to follow God in all his ways:
whereby he wonderfully brings light out of darkness; and by his secret power
sustains and enables us in our growth, above all that we can think or desire,
that he may have the only glory of all his mercies, Ephesians. 3.20.21.

Thus does this Metaphor of the wind evidence the manner of our growing in
grace: that even above our apprehension, yea contrary to sense and ordinary
courses, as the ship many times sails by side and contrary winds, toward the
Port, and is feign sometimes to forgo her Burden, yea her Anchor to, that so
she may escape the storm and ride safely to the haven; so are we led along in
this work of Grace.

To this end, consider we further, that our New birth and growth in grace is
compared to a combat, expressing therein, as the manner of it growth, which is
by a continual bickering and cont^ntion, between the Spirit and the Flesh; so
thereby also giving us some direction how to discern the manner thereof, even
by a continual fight and wrestling within us; whence arise these conclusions.

That as the spirit preuailes two ways; either by strengthening us to overcome
the present; tentation, or else by leaving us to the particular tentation for
the present; thereby either to arm us better against the same hereafter, that
so we may after a foil attain a more glorious victory, or though it leave
us to be foiled by the particular tentation, yet it does by that foil prevent
and overcome that which might be more dangerous.

Therefore, 1. that we then grow in grace, when we make advantage of our foiles
to prevent after falling, or are recompensed in our foiles with more humility,
and Repentance to be prepared to further trials.

2. That whatsoever duty we perform, if there be not both a struggling before
hand by the flesh to hinder the act thereof, and a combat after by the spirit,
to purge the same of hypocrisy, formalitie, etc. we have little comfort,
either of the truth thereof, or of our growth therein.

3. That the discerning of the manner of our growth is rather by the issue and
success of the combat, then by the present wrestling: Because for the present
through violence of tentation, and heat of affections striving there against,
our Faith being now exercised, is so intentive in the encounter, that it has
enough to do, to keep it own therein, and therefore no marvel if as it need
not, so it cannot discern for the present, sensible growth therein.

4. Seeing our greatest valor in this life, is rather to discern more deeply
our corruption, and to be humbled for the same: therefore we shall best
discern the manner of our growth, rather by a more lively sense and hatred of
the bodies corruption, which we cannot be rid of in this life, then by any
perfect conquest over any particular evil which we desire to be rid of.

To conclude this point, If we shall but consider why the work of Grace is
called a Mystery, Matthew. 13. Ephesians. 3.7, 8 1 Timothy 3.16.
not only because it was hidden to the former Ages in regard of the Revelation
of the foundation thereof Jesus Christ, Romans 16.27.
not then exhibited in the flesh; and in respect of the manner of the
Revelation to our forefathers, even by types and shadows, that so they might
more earnestly desire the substance it self, and might by them be led
thereunto: But especially, In that even now to us that enjoy the substance, It
is also a mysteris, 1. Cor. 2.7.
both in that it is hidden to those whom the God of this World has blinded, 2.
Cor. 4. And also even to whom it is revealed, yet unto them also it is still a
mystery, as not being able to discern the hight and breadth, Ephesians. 3.17, 18.
and depth and length thereof: howsoever they may apprehend so much as for the
present shall suffice. These things, I say, if we well consider, we may hereby
discern and judge of the manner of our growth, that still it is in a mystery.
As not to be discerned by the work, but by the effect thereof; and yet no
otherwise by the effect, but that still it leaves occasion of further doubting,
and so of further search. Our wise God reserving hereby unto himself the only
glory of leading forward the Work, by still abasing us of all confidence
therein, and so sending us daily to the fountain of this Mystery, God
manifested in the flesh, that so in him we may grow up to perfection.

The sum is,

This Mystery can better be discerned by the Spirit, that searches all
things, and so reuealeth it unto our spirits, as that somethings are reserved
to it unsearchable wisdom, that cannot be expressed or fadomed by any
understanding of mortal man. And therefore if I speak this wisdom of God in
a mystery, 1. Cor. 2.7. As I acknowledge I can do it no otherwise, so I do
confess my self herein but a grower in Grace, that have not yet attained in
understanding, what I am short of in practice; and so therein do interesse my
self in the power of Christ, in whom we must daily grow up together unto
perfection. Only this is my comfort, that as in revealing what I know, I do
therein interesse my self in the promise, that to him that has shall be
given: as I must needs confess to the glory of my God, that much light has
herein been supplied, in digging this Treasure, and wading further therein: so
also for the comfort of others that may light their candle hence, they may know
that if they Plow with my Hayser, and make use of this spark, their light
shall be hereby much increased, and experience more confirmed, to discern the
manner of their spiritual growth, and so to attain to a greater measure
thereof. Somewhat I confess my self to feel herein, which I cannot
express: and what I express, if it be still in a mystery: Remember we that
great is the mystery of Godliness. And labor we in prayer to our gracious
God, that he may daily more and more reveal his secrets to them that fear
him, and that out of our more mature and comfortable experience thereof in our
selves, we may be better able to communicate the same unto others; or at the
least may comfort our selves, that we have that new Name, which no man knows
but he which has it: blessing our gracious Father, that has revealed that
unto us, which he has hidden from the wise and mighty of the world, Matthew
11.24.

And laboring daily to increase in knowledge and conscience of obedience so
far as we know, that we may discern yet further into the Mystery of Christ,
and so thereby of our growing in grace.

Who so is wise, let him understand these things, and to whom the arm of the
Lord shall reveal them: for the ways of God are plain and equal, and the
Just shall walk therein; but the wicked shall stumble at, and fall in the same.

And thus of the manner of our Spiritual growth.

And hereof we may make these General and Particular uses.

1. General: 1. Uses General.
That seeing all these Mysteries discovering the manner of our spiritual
growth, do plainly evidence, that it cannot be discerned by sense, no not by
any present degree or manner thereof, so that we may rest precisely in any
particular therein. Does not this teach us to live by faith in the discerning
and judging of these Mysteries, or our selves by them?

And is not the mercy of God wonderful herein, that, amidst so many
uncertainties in leading forward the work, if sense may be the Judge, we have
now a sure rule to guide our selves thoroughly, both in the use of the means,
whereby this growth is led forward; as also in our trial of prefiting by them:
howsoever if we judge by sense, we may be challenged as non proficients, not
only not to have gone forward, but even to decay in grace?

And may we not here behold the singular virtue and power of Christ, in thus
leading forward his work, even beyond, and contrary to means; that so we may
give him the glory of his free mercy in crowning his own work so
wonderfully in us?

Is not hereby just matter daily offered unto us, to the abasing of ourselves in
our best knowledge of Gods favor, or our own standing therein; seeing we do
but at the best, hear but the sound thereof and are many times so to seek,
that we know not whence it comes, nor whither it goes? Is not the mercy of
God admirable herein, still to prevent us of resting in any measure we have
attained? still to provoke us to deny our best righteousness, that we may be
found in Christ; still to hunger after the fullness in heaven, and all this
even by faith in the Son of God. Whereby as we discern the insufficiency
of our best righteousness, as apprehending by faith the perfection of Christ's
obedience, and so still renounce our selves and lay further hold upon the merit
of Christ: So it is faith alone that prouokes a Spiritual appetite to hunger
after the eternal perfection, by enabling to see beyond things present, into
the things to come, 2. Corinthians. 4.18. Yea by faith we are enabled to see within
the veil, where-into Christ the forerunner is entered for us, that so we also
may be drawn up to him, and be for ever with him. Behold the life of a
Christian, Gal. 2.20.
even to live by faith in the Son of God; behold the Progress in this
spiritual life, we walk by faith, 2. Cor. 5.7.
and not by sense; observe the perfection and approaching unto glory, we still
sight the good fight of faith, 1. Tim. 6.12.
and lay hold of eternal life: so sure is the estate of a Christian, as not
living in and of himself, but in and through the Son of God, by faith: so
comfortable is our Christian life by faith, as having such daily experience
hereby of the wonderful wisdom, and power, and goodness of God, and so
thereby having gracious fellowship and meruellous familiarity with our
glorious God; so sweet is our experience hereby, Romans 8.29.
in finding all things to work together for the best, even because through
Faith we can measure them by the issues thereof: so comely and convenient is
this life of faith, in that hereby we preserve entirely the Prerogative unto
God, that he may have the only glory of the work; and yet by faith are
graciously quickened and enabled to follow hard after the mark, Phil. 3.13.
and lay hold of eternal life. As having by faith received already the earnest
of our Inheritance, and so provoked by faith to pursue the same with more
eagerness, yea enabled by faith to the daily purifying of the conscience from
evil works, that so we may draw near by faith with boldness unto the Throne
of Grace, and thereby by claim the performance of Gods Promise, that he that
has begun the work, Phil. 3.6.
would perfect the same; yea, by faith we daily proceed from faith to faith,
from one degree thereof to another, till at length we attain the end of our
faith, 1. Pet. 1.5.
which is the salvation of our souls.

Thus is the life of a Christian the life of Faith, even from the beginning to
the very end thereof. And this should teach us: First,

To labor more and more the knowledge of this great Mystery of Christ, that
so our faith hereby may be confirmed and increased.

And so according to our enlarged Knowledge of this great Mystery, to inflame
our hearts with more holy admiration at this wonderful secret, that thereby
our hearts may be more ravished with the love of Christ; and our love may be
expressed in more glorious reioycings and thanksgiuings for this unspeakable
gift.

2. This may lessen us to endeavor more and more an holy conformity unto
Christ, in all Active and Passive obedience; as both euidencing hereby the
power of faith, and so enabling hereby still to grow from faith to faith, to
more assurance of faith, by the evidence of this glorious image: To more
victory of faith, in ouercomming all oppositions; to more cleerenesse of
faith, in seeing a far off into the things to come, and so hastening by Faith
for the enjoying of them. And thus of Instruction.

A second use is of Reproof.

For, 1. Does not this challenge their presumption, this take upon them to
judge not only of their own, but of the growth and proceeding of others, by
such carnal rules, as sense affords; as by outward profession, flashes of
zeal, vain boasting of themselves?

2. Does it not convince their arrogancy, that boast of perfection in this
life, seeing our best measure here, is but thriuing in grace, and herein also
we are not only subject to many flawes and interruptions; but at the best, can
apprehend no further thereof, then that still we are to seek, and so happy,
that we may still seek, that so we may still find; that we cannot further
comprehend, but that still we must be comprehended; either that which we
do, must be accepted above the worth thereof: or else we are like to lose our
labor for the present, and let go our hold for the time to come?

3. Does not this condemn their folly, that measure their estate by one
constant gate and tenor thereof; as if either it were a set station, not to be
moved, or else such a motion, as had not it stoppes and interruptions? they
never doubted, they were never of other belief, they are holy enough; and
seeing, either they must grow and go on, or else they were never in the right
way, and it is their evidence that they are in the right, that their pace is
broken, and different at the best.

4. And are not they justly then to be reproved, that being in the right, do
yet notwithstanding question their estate, because they find some faintness
in the journey, meet with some rubs, and catch some falls; yea sometimes miss
their way. Is not this the case of the best proficients? are not the best
wrastlers and soldiers subject to these adventures? Is not this an evidence of
the combat between the Flesh and the Spirit? must not the power of God be
seen in weakness, and his glory perfected through infirmities.

5. Does not this convince their security, that say in their hearts, they
shall see no evil, nor meet with disasters; that imagine they can hold the
Wind in their fist, and tie the spirit to one manner and measure of working,
as if they could not fall, or smart for their folly? Does not the spirit blow
where and how it lists? Is not our portion here, in tears, in much
weakness, and manifold contradictions? Must not the light of the righteous
shine more and more unto the perfect day? Is it not subject to many changes and
vicissitudes, that so it may fit us to that unchangeable glory and perfection.

Thirdly, 3. Use of Comfort.
Herein also may be gathered many sweet and unspeakable comforts, in
whatsoever distractions and pressures the Saints of God may be subject unto. As
that seeing our growth in grace is in such a manner; and such a mystery:
Therefore, as even there is a natural growth in sleep; so the Spiritual man
may grow in grace, though he discern it not.

Nay, as usually in sickness there is a greater measure of growth then at
other times; so even in those distempers and strange distresses, which may
seem to threaten dissolution and utter wrack, yet such is the singular
wisdom and mercy of God, that even by these contraries he increases the
spiritual thirst, purging thereby the soul of such pestering humors, as
hinder Spiritual concoction and digestion, and so quickening the appetite and
stomach to spiritual nourishment, and so clearing and thinning the vital
blood for better distribution into each parts; whereby the flesh is not only
renewed as a young child, but also enlarged and extended to further growth.

Special comfort herein.
More particularly, hence ensue many special Cordials in some such maine and
desperate extremities, which do most appall and deiect afflicted spirits: As

1. In Spiritual desertions of sin.
First, In the case of Spiritual desertion, and that

Either when the Lord leaves us to be overtaken with some gross or fretting
sin.

Which howsoever it may seem to challenge us of quenching the spirit, that so
all may seem to be lost; yet since this may fall out, rather through our own
negligence, rather then wilfulnes; and rather by the violence of tentation then
our own purpose, and delight therein, howsoever we may grieve the spirit, by
our carelessenesse, and scandal following thereupon, and so deprive our selves
of the comfort thereof, which now is not seasonable, least it may harden in
sin; yet shall we find such a work of the Spirit, as may convince for
sin, and provoke just revenge for the same; which shall now yield seasonable
joy for the mastering of such an enemy, and so enable to walk more warily
against future encounters, and more tenderly and wisely also in judging and
recovering others: so gracious is the Lord to bring light out of darkness,
that though by our carelessenesse, we have grieved the spirit, and so are
bereft of that assistance as might keep us from some such grievous sin,
which may awaken out of security; yet the sense of this sin, procuring
hearty sorrow, and judging thereof, shall thereby prove the means to subdue
the same.

And this mastery of corruption, though it be bitter to the flesh, and so may
be cause of further sorrow; yet withal it shall prove most comfortable to the
spirit, as having quieted the conscience graciously hereby, and so recovered
boldness in the presence of God, that so in his favor, we may recover that
unspeakable joy, which shall never be taken from us.

The like may be applied in that other fearful case of relapse into the same
sins again.

2. Comfort in Relapse into the same sins.
Which seeing it has been the lot of the dearest servants of God, that Moses
shall fail again in infidelity, and Abraham lie again concerning his wife;
therefore, as notwithstanding these sins they recovered the favor of God: so
may we also hope for the like mercy, though we fall again into the same
infirmities. For who shall restrain the spirit to blow as often as it lists,
seeing the ground of it breath is in it self, and not from us; seeing it Power
is illimited, and it breath most free and absolute; seeing it wisdom is
infinite to turn daily failings to the best, and his faithfulness
everlasting, to perfect his own work; shall not this provoke us to love the
more? Luke 7.
by how much more is forgiven us, shall it not more tend to the glory of Gods
mercy? the more he forgiues, shall we not hereby prove more comfortable
examples to raise up great sinners? shall we not have better experience to
accomplish the same?

A second desertion follows upon the former; namely, 3. Comfort in desertions
of corrections.
that by reason of such grievous sins, the Lord withdrawes himself from us,
as a chasticement thereof; and so we are overtaken not only with outward
afflictions that may bring us to the knowledge of sin, but also with inward
anguish and horror of spirit, to scourge us soundly for the same.

Which though it proves an occasion to challenge our estate, as being forsaken
of God, and so many times plungeth into the very jaws of despair; yet why may
not this prove soueraign and profitable unto us, as well as Physic compounded
even of poison recouers desperate diseases? Is not the wisdom of God more
admirable herein to cure contraries by contraries? Is not the power of God more
glorious in sustaining in these extremities? Is not his mercy more glorious in
releeuing us by an invisible hand, and intermingling such sparks of hope, with
these flames of despair; as that though our selves cannot discern the same,
yet others that stand on the shore, and have passed through such hellish
storms, may both sensibly discover the same, and apply it to our sustaining
and recovery in due time? And does not the spirit herein work wonderfully for
the trial of our faith, Job 13.15.
that though the Lord kill us, yet we shall trust in him? Is not our love unto
God wonderfully confirmed, that now will follow him, though he seem to forsake
us; that now fasten upon him, when he seems to shake us off?

Is not our sincerity graciously approved, that though we find no comfort in
his service, nothing but thunder and lightning from his ordinance, yet we shall
rest on his own ordinances, though they increase our maladies; we dare not but
obey God, nay we must use these means, even because he has commanded them.

Surely, as of all afflictions, this is most grievous; so above all other, the
issues hereof are most glorious and comfortable: and the longer we are in cure,
the soundlier shall we be healed, and being healed, shall be more thoroughly
comforted.

The like may be said concerning all such other desertions and afflictions of
the mind. 1. As decay in grace. 2. Deadness in holy duties. 3. Not answering
our best endeavors for the present, and such like, as shall be made manifest in
my Treatise of The Cure of a wounded Spirit, which shall shortly follow for the
public good.

And thus of the Manner of Spiritual growth, together with some such uses, as
arise thereout both for reproof, instruction, and comfort.

THE CONTENTS OF THE FIFTH CHAPTER.
1. Concerning our life by faith, and not by sense. 2. To compare Spiritual
things with Spiritual. 3. That we must bring forth fruit in due season,
according to our callings. 4. That God accepts the will for the deed. 5.
That by the manner of the mortification of the flesh, the manner also of
Spiritual Growth may be discerned.
CHAP. 5. OF CERTAIN Rules very necessary to discern the Manner of our
Spiritual Growth, and to comfort us therein.
HItherto of the Manner of our Spiritual growing in grace.

Whereby as we may in part be satisfied, in regard of such cauils which carnal
reason may object against the same. So for our further instruction and
satisfaction herein,

Observe we further these Rules.

First, That we must live by faith, and not by sense, 2. Cor. 5.7. that is, to
discern the Manner of our Growth: not so much by what we presently discern,
or by the present effect of such means as we have used thereto, for this may
deceive us many ways; as by the power of God, 1. Pet. 1.5.
in blessing the means above what we can think, Romans 4.21.
much more feel for the present. And so by the power of faith being able to
discern a far off what is fittest for Gods glory, and what is prepared for
us, to be capable of glory, we shall be so far satisfied in the manner of
our growth, as, so to be thankful for any work we find, though it answer
not the means, or our expectation for the present, as still to be humbled for
what we discern not, or what we do discern not correspondent thereto; and so
still to hunger after the righteousness of Christ by whom we may be satisfied,
both in the present measure, that it shall be accepted in the Covenant, and so
enabled thereby to a daily further measure, that so at length we may attain
to perfection.

And this both by comparing what is past with what is present, that so we may
discern whereto we are come, and by thankfulness make way for further
supply; as also by things past and present looking to what is to come, that so
we may not stick in any measure received, but rather hasten to that which is
before, Phil. 3.13.
and that still looking to Jesus the Author and finisher of our faith, that so
we may endeavor to perfect holiness.

Thus we must live by faith in discerning the manner of our growth. And this
will afford us many Comfortable conclusions to settle us against diverse
tentations, which are incident hereto.

As first,

Whereas it much distracts the Saints, that because they cannot sensibly
discern for the present, the manner of their Spiritual growth, no more then
they can their natural: therefore they question oftimes the truth thereof. If
now they shall know, that in the discerning thereof, they must live by faith,
and not by sense; this distraction will easily be remedied.

For now, seeing that may be believed by Faith, which is not apprehended; nay,
is contrary to sense: therefore though our growing be not discernable to sense;
nay sense apprehends somewhat, that may be contrary to our growth, therefore
notwithstanding these, we may still grow in grace. Nay, seeing we grow by faith
and not by sense, therefore is this unto us a true evidence that we do grow
indeed, when we do not sensibly discern it for the present, when we find
somewhat in appearance, and opposition contrary thereto: if we yield not
hereunto, but rather live by faith in the power and wisdom of our God,
bringing light out of darkness, and showing his power in our weakness, this
indeed is a true token, that we grow in spiritual knowledge, and heavenly
wisdom, to discern things that differ: and so also that we grow in grace,
and so do hereby fight the good fight of Faith.

2. Whereas to live by Faith, is not only to have some feeling of what we
believe by the seal of the spirit in general, as that thereby we are
persuaded of the truth of the work in us: But to live by faith, is further to
rely upon the free power and goodness of God, above what presently we feel;
Romans 4.17, 18.
lest our present feeling causing spiritual Pride, and so security, and so
hardness of heart, and remissness in well-doing, do thereby hinder our
spiritual growth: therefore, howsoever we may have some such sense of the
work of grace, as that we may justify the truth of it for the present in the
means, at least in humbling us for our failing and imperfection therein: that
so it may not be in vain. Yet still we must live by faith, above any such
present feeling, both to have the comfort of the acceptance of what we have
done, above the worth thereof, as also to look forward and lay hold upon the
fullness of Christ, in whom our imperfections shall be helped, and our wants
daily supplied unto the perfecting of the work of grace in us.

And therefore,

Though we feel but so much for the present, as may keep us from sincking in
despair; yet still we must live by faith above all present feeling or desire,
that we may be kept from presumpt^on, and kept in a continual hunger after the
best graces. And this meets with a second tentation arising from present
feeling of the work of grace, teaching us to avoid Spiritual Pride,
Presumption, etc. by living still by faith above and beyond all present feeling.

And secondly though in our best performance of holy duties, we find not that
present answer as we expect; but rather meet with what is contrary thereunto;
yet if now we can live by faith, we shall be fully satisfied. For faith will
now teach us to perform obedience unto God simply, because he commands, and
not so much for what is promised; and so to measure our Spiritual growth
rather by increase of our obedience, then return of the issue thereof.

Yea, though we have not our particular answer for the present, yet the trial
of our faith will bring forth Patience, Iam. 1.3.
and Patience will perfect the work by pe^seuerance therein; yea faith, Heb.
11.1.
which is of things not seen, will enable us to see a far off into that
great Reward, Heb. 11.26.
which will sufficiently supply and recompense all our present disappointments
and waitings.

Nay, though we meet with contrary blasts, and issues to our desires; yet
Faith that purifieth the heart, Acts 15.9.
will reveal unto us some inward cause of these contrary effects: and so will
enable us to purge out such secret evils of Spiritual pride, vainglory, and
such like, which undoubtedly have stayed Gods hands from giving us our desires:
yea, such herein is the power of Faith, that resting us upon the power and good
pleasure of God, it will thereby pacify the mind in what God pleases to
dispense, and satisfy also the same, that this is best for us, though for the
present we cannot discern it, through impatience, pride, or such like; yea the
power of faith will dispell these fogs, and make manifest to the advised
Spirit, what may be best for it.

Yea, herein also appears the wonderful virtue of faith, that it will keep
the work a foot more earnestly, the more it seems to be crossed; and continue
the same more eagerly, in hope at length to prevail, and never give over till
it has overcome the Lord.

Oh that we could wisely consider thereof. Indeed we have a Promise, that if
we believe, we shall obtain whatsoever we ask; so that it may seem, that
if we do not obtain, we do not believe. But if we remember withal, that we
must ask according to Gods will, and that Beggars must be no choosers, and
that we may not indent with God, either for the time, or particular; for so we
live by Faith, we may undoubtedly obtain what is best for us; if not the
particular for the present, yet what meane-while shall be better, and the
particular, if necessary, in the time most convenient. Only let us pray in
Faith, Iam. 1.6.
and so wait with Patience, apprehending him which is invisible, and in him,
the glory to be revealed; and so shall we obtain whatsoever may further
thereunto in that time and manner and measure as may be most available.

To conclude this Point,

The necessity of this life by Faith arises from these two considerations:

1. From that admirable and wise manner of Gods dealing with us, in leading
forward to perfection.

2. From our weak and diverse manner of apprehending the same. i. Gods dealing
herein is discerned.

First, by bringing light out of darkness, that is, by producing contraries
out of contraries; good out of evil; grace out of sin. And this the Lord does
diverse ways.

First, Generally working out of every sin. 1. Sense of our own inabilitie,
and corruption. 2. So sorrow for the same, and so repentance, and so more
humility and warines against future assaults, and greater tentations; so that
of necessity here we must live by Faith, that by this peircing and clear
light, we may be able to discern through the thick cloud of voluntary
sinning, notwithstanding an unwillingness to commit the same, that in the
sweet of sin, we may discern the bitterness thereof, and a loathing of evil,
even in the tickling delight of the same, and so may be brought to true
humiliation for the same, that in the bitterness of sin, we may discern the
mercy of God, in correcting us in this life, And by the mercy of God may be
brought to such a kindly sense of corruption, as that though it do above sense
abase us, in regard of our deserts, yet it may not sink us in despair, in
respect of Christ's merit; so that our sorrow for sin may not unfit us to use
the means for the conquest thereof; that in our combat and wrestling against
corruption, which we shall never be rid of here, we may rely upon the power of
God, to sustain us above our ability; upon the promise of God, to give the
issue, though we discern no likelihood thereof. Especially, that we may rely
upon the free goodness of God, to accept our weak measure of repentance,
above the worth thereof.

A second ground of this necessity of our life by says is, the consideration
of Gods special dealing with us, in bringing light out of darkness: and this
also diversely.

As 1. By turning about our failings in well-doing, to be a means to empty us
of all confidence in our own righteousness, Gal. 2.20.
or measure of grace we have attained, that so we may be cast upon the merit
of Christ by faith, for the acceptance of our persons above the sense of our
own worth; and so also by faith may daily receive new sap and nourishment from
Christ our head, to bring forth more fruit, and so in him to grow up to
perfection.

A second work of God in bringing light out of darkness, implying the
necessity of our life by faith, is, that for the discovery and purging out of
the root of our inbred corruption, and natural concupiscence, he leaves us
to be overtaken with some bitter fruits thereof, as not only to be pestered
with many fearful and blasphemous thoughts and imaginations; but sometimes to
break out to some unseemly actions, that so we may take further notice of the
power of that contagion, and defection, and so laboring to cleanse the
fountain, may make the streams more pure and gracious.

And hereto we have special use of living by Faith, and not by sense. As, That
in our present failings, we rely not so much upon our actions, as upon our
purposes in faith, not so much upon what we are for the present, as what we
have been formerly, nay, what we shall be; not so much upon our impotencie, as
the power and wisdom of our God, in bringing light out of darkness; not so
much unto the present desertion, as the issue thereof: above all to plead our
right in Christ, and to rely upon his righteousness; All which are gracious
works of Faith, above, and contrary to sense.

A third work of God in bringing light out of darkness is; that whereas the
Saints are subject to many Spiritual evils, as Vainglory, Spiritual pride,
hypocrisy, self-love, security, etc. It pleases our wise God, for the
purging out, or preventing the extremity of these Master sins to leave us
many times to outward and gross evils; whereby our corruption being thoroughly
abased, and selfe-abilitie confounded, whereby the Pride of our profession,
being disgraced, and carnal confidence rejected, we are hereby led by Faith
to a more through denial of our selves; and so a more careful search and
purging of the Inward-man; being sustained by Faith in these evils, to prevent
despair and security, and so graciously enabled to lay hold on Christ for the
perfection of the work of sanctification begun in us.

And so this first manner of working, in bringing light out of darkness, does
evidence the necessity of our living by faith.

A second manner of Gods working, in leading forward to perfection, is by
manifesting his power in weakness, that howsoever, there be somewhat begun in
us, yet it is in that weakness, and infirmity, that of necessity there must
be a mighty power of God, manifested in bringing forward the work; and this
weakness does much serve to the advancement of Gods wonderful power. And to
both these, there is necessary use of living by faith, both to discern and
apprehend the power of God in weakness, as also to give him the glory of his
power and admirable working in us, so weak and unworthy subjects.

Now it pleases the wise Lord thus to begin and lead forward the work of
grace, in much weakness, by it several degrees and interruptions, at length
to perfection, for these reasons: First in respect of the subject and vessel,
wherein this treasure is reposed; namely, the corrupt nature of Man, and such
conditions as hereby it is subject unto; namely, to be a stranger both in the
world from that Country which is above, and yet a pilgrim and trauailer
thereto.

Concerning our corrupt Nature, howsoever upon our first ingraffing into Christ
by Faith, we receive a double benefit, not only that the guilt and punishment
of sin is utterly abolished, but also that our Persons are accepted perfectly
righteous, by the imputation of Christ's perfect obedience, whereby being
clothed upon, we are accepted also as pure and perfect in the sight of God,
which is the benefit of our Justification; so also do we receive from this
root another gracious blessing: namely, that our corrupt Nature is also begun
truly to be cleansed and renewed in every part, Ephesians. 4.16.
and in these first fruits of the Spirit, has a certain pledge and assurance
of it perfect holiness in due time. I say in the due time we shall have use
thereof, even when we shall attain to the estate of perfect happiness; which
because it is expected only in another life, therefore as we have no need of
such Perfection here, seeing our Head has satisfied the Law for us; so it is
very necessary and convenient in respect of our condition in this life: this is
twofold.

First inward, namely, the state of corruption, and that our sanctification
should be imperfect.

2. The consequent thereof, which inferres a double condition.

First, that we are Pilgrims and strangers in regard of the world.

Secondly, that we are strangers, as from our Country, so trauailers also to
the City which is above.

Concerning the state of corruption, that this in part shall abide with us in
this life, even to the last period thereof, and so our sanctification must
needs be here imperfect; this is so ordained, in the special wisdom of
God, both in respect of himself, and also in regard of us, and so consequently
in consideration of the wicked.

First, I say, the Lord herein intends himself: and that

1. To advance the Al sufficient merit of his Son, in satisfying daily for
sin, and by his daily intercession, making peace with God, by the virtue of
his death, daily mortifying sin, and by the power of his Resurrection, daily
quickening and increasing new obedience.

2. To magnify his free mercy, in the daily pardon of sin.

3. To advance his power, in sustaining us in our infirmities.

4. To glorify his wisdom, in turning them about to our good.

5. To manifest his justice, in chastizing corruption.

6. And so reserve the glory of all these unto him self, by conuincing our
unworthiness in and by them all.

Secondly, in this state of imperfection, the Lord respects his children
wonderfully. As

1. Hereby confirming our salvation unto us graciously, by the daily experience
of his mercy in the pardon of sin, and giving us victory over the same.

2. And so in this hope provoking us daily, by experience of our sailings, to a
greater watchfulness over sin, and wisdom to prevent or subdue the same.
And so

3. By this means keeping from Apostasy and desperate evils, which the
wicfall into.

4. And so provoking out of the sense of our slips and backsliding, to make
more have to our iournies end.

5. Yea, increasing hereby our groans and sighs after our dissolution, that
we may be rid of sin, Romans 7.24.

6. Comforting us in the experience of tentations and infirmities* that still
as we have need, so we have interest in Christ.

7. And so sending us daily out of our selves, in the denial of our best
righteousness, to labor the acceptance of our persons, in the merit of
Christ. And so

8. Being refreshed in him, to hasten on to perfection.

9. Making us thereby more compassionate of our brethren, that so by gayning
and converting others we may profit our selves. And so

10. Weaning us from the love of the World, and such baits of sin as arise
from thence.

11. And so humbling daily under the mighty hand of God, in enduring patiently
whatsoever chastisements he lays upon us; that so corruption being purged out,
we may be refined daily, and prepared to glory.

12. Hereby we are daily acquainted with the deepnesse of Satan, and so have
more comfortable experience of the power and wisdom of God, in subduing his
malice, and turning it about to our good.

13. And may also have comfortable experience of the Spirit, in leading through
all oppositions, and making us more then conquerors.

14. That we may discern the singular mercy of our God, in making us as it
were fellow-workers with him, in so glorious a work of our salvation. These
and such like benefits redound unto us by this condition of infirmity, and
imperfect sanctification: which in a continual state of perfection, we should
never have compassed. Besides that, this state is not convenient for strangers
and Pilgrims, such as know not what we shall be, 1. Ioh. 3.1.2.
and yet by Faith are travailing homeward. And this above all other, is the
ground of our imperfect estate, that we may not rest therein, as if we had
attained; but still live by Faith in the Son of God, and so still by faith
see a far off into the life to come: that so the excellency and power of
Faith, may be advanced in leading forward the work, and the Scriptures may be
fulfilled, that the just must live by Faith. And surely as herein the Lord
enuies our own good principally, so also does he aim at the condition of
others, with whom we cannot but be conversant in this militant estate.

Surely, the wisdom of God is admirable in this dispensation of weakness and
imperfection; whether we respect generally the whole mixture of good and bad,
or else consider them severally.

If we regard them together. Does not the conscience of our wants, necessarily
bind us to communion, as having need of others help, having matter daily to
exercise our love to others, and so preuents singularity and separation, the
very bane of true comfort; and so proves a gracious means to preserve unity
even by this difference, in supplying each others wants, and thereby to
maintain love, which is the bond of perfection? Is not the Church the
communion of Saints? and is not our different and several wants, the means of
maintaining the fellowship? And is not this the means to prepare us to the
heavenly Communion, Romans 12. 1. Cor. 12.

2. Consider we them severally.

Are they such as belong to God? How does the conscience of our wants provoke
us to tender their case? Are they yet without? how does this inflame us to
bring them in, that they may be one with us? Are they within, and yet behind
us? how does this enable us cut of our own experience, to hold them up and put
them forward? how does their ensample further us, if they be before us, to
attain unto them?

Are they fallen? how does this warn us to stand the faster, how does this
move us, out of our experience, to raise them up with all meeknes, Gal. 6.1?
How does this exercise our wisdom in not adding affliction to affliction, by
condemning them? how does it provoke our thankfulness, that yet we stand? how
does it nourish fear that we may fall?

Again, are they such as do not belong to God? yet how does the conscience of
our failings prevent peremptory judging of them, but to leave them to the Lord?

How do our infirmities prove means to stumble and harden them in their sins?
Yet how do our graces shining even in infirmity, make them inexcusable, and
justly condemn them? especially in that they fare the better for us, the worse
we fare by them; enjoying what they have for our sakes* and yet envying us the
crumbes, that fall from their table: how do our infirmities provoke them to
hasten us to heaven, by doing their worst? how do we by doing our best hasten
them to destruction? Yet how does our weak measure of grace bridle them
sometimes in their wickedness? how do they flatter themselves in their
counterfeit holiness, seeing in outward things they seem to equal and go
beyond us? how do our infirmities become an occasion to excuse them in their
profane wickedness, seeing we are in semblance as bad as they? These are
some of the effects, which arise from our Imperfect state, in regard of the
wicked.

If we shall consider the consequents of this state of weakness, that in
regard hereof, we are strangers in the world, and travelers to our country
which is above: does not this imperfect condition fitly sort hereunto? does it
not graciously further us both in the one and other?

Concerning our former condition, that we are strangers in the world, has not
our wise God so disposed, that generally though we are adopted into the Church;
yet we shall have our abode sometime in Mesech, and converse in the world, as
part of our dowry and ioynture recovered for us by Christ; and yet so use it
as if we used it not, that we might approve our repose in, and pursuit of a
better inheritance by laying up a good foundation hereby against the life to
come. And can we do this, unless we be strangers in the world? not only
strangers in affection, not to set our hearts thereon, but also strangers in
action to, as using it but for our Inn to lodge for a night and away, and
taking sparingly thereof, as the dog laps the water of Nilus, and so hies away,
for fear of a snatch; yea being used as strangers in the world, which loves
her own. And does not this estate of infirmity effect or occasion all these?
is not the power of God seen in our infirmities, to sustain us in all these?
Consider I pray you, does not the daily sense of our weakness and affections,
partly carnal, give us woeful experience of the insufficiency and
deceitfulness of these earthly things, and so schools us by our harms, not to
set our hearts upon them? does not the earnest and first fruits of the Spirit,
though but in weakness, yet lead us to an higher pitch then these base and
earthly things, as no way suitable thereunto; and so teaches us to renounce
them in comparison of what is before us, what already is begun in us?

Consider again, what makes us so jealous and dainty in the use of these
earthly things, but the conscience of our weakness, being so apt to abuse
them, or to be ouer-set with them? what makes us so sparingly to drink of
these broken Cesterns, that though they be sweet in the mouth, yet they are
bitter in the belly? what makes us to take them with a kind of fullness and
loathing, but that we have tasted how sweet the Lord Jesus is; and so find
no relish in any thing else but with him, account all other things as dung in
comparison of him? Surely if to the hungry, bitter things are sweet: how is
it, that we so hunger after Christ, though he be bitter to the flesh; but
that we are not yet fully satisfied with him, and yet have tasted much sweet
in that bitterness? And seeing the soul that is full, despises the honey
comb; how can we but despise these bitter sweetes, seeing we have found sound
contentment in Jesus Christ?

Consider yet once more, what is it that makes us to be accounted strangers in
the world: Is it not that New name we have received, which no man knows, but
he which has it? Is it not the earnest of the Spirit, which the world knows
not of?

What makes us to be entertained as strangers, of the world? is it not because
we are signs and wonders among them, novelties, singularities, and so
seditious and vile persons, not worthy to live? What makes us still to walk as
strangers in the world? is it not because it is not our rest, we look for a
city, which is above?

Thus are we also travelers and pilgrims to our native Country. And so we
are Growing in Grace, that still we may come nearer home; so we hasten to
perfection, that we may come to our iourneys end. If we were perfect, we
should neither be strangers nor pilgrims; and because we are strangers and
pilgrims, therefore we are subject to fleshly lusts, that we may overcome
them: therefore our condition is imperfect, that by these means we may be
perfected. Thus do these conditions evidence our state of infirmities and
corruption, as being necessary consequences thereof, and yet gracious means
to free us from the same, and to have their happy issue in this glorious
liberty. And could we be sustained in this state of infirmity, but by the
mighty power of God? Could we manage wisely these estates without the
special assistance of the Almighty; and could we apprehend and rest upon
this power of God, so far above and contrary to sense, but by the power of
Faith? could we ascribe unto the Lord the glory of his power, but only by
Faith in the denial of our selves, and all carnal wisdom whatsoever?

Observe I pray you.

Is our state in weakness and much imperfection? what must sustain it in
that weakness, but the power of God? Is it not his only and mighty arm,
that brings forth the birth, which has no strength of Nature thereto: nay, to
which the power of Nature in it wisdom opposes it self.

When the Man-child is borne in a manner dead, and ready to be swallowed up
of the Dragon; what now can musle the mouth of this roaring Lion, but the
mighty power of the Lion of Judah?

When the child must flee into the Wilderness, when there is no means of
preservation, all dangers are appar^nt; what can preserve it there, but the
great power of God?

When it faints and swounes through Spiritual desertion; what must sustain
inward life, and recover it again, but the power of God?

When the stranger misseth his way; what can bring him in again, but the
mighty hand of God?

When the Trauailer is surbated with over have, and tedious travail; what must
heal him by rest and repentance, but the power of God? What must lead him in
these fogs and mists, and sometimes also in the darkness, for there also he
must travel, but the power of God, like a pillar of fire?

What must secure him against the scorching heat of the day, but the power of
God in the cloudie pillar?

And how can he discern or apprehend this Power of God in these manifold
weaknesses, but by the eye and hand of Faith?

Is it not faith, that gives a being to those things that are not, and so
breeds hopes even of things not s^ene, and so in hope of that which we see
not, breeds patience to wait for it: and so Patience brings forth the perfect
work, that so we may be perfected to enjoy what we did believe? And what
sustaines and eleuates our Faith against hope to believe in hope, and so
apprehend what is impossible? Can it be any other then the Power of God, unto
whom all things are possible, who calls those things which are not, as if
they were? Was not this Abraham's ground of Faith, that he was persuaded that
God was able to perform it, Romans 4 21.
yea able to do that which was impossible in Nature, even able to raise up
Isaac from the dead? Behold the power of God is the ground of our Faith, Heb.
11.19.
and can we then apprehend this power of God in our weakness, unless we
live by faith in apprehending things invisible and impossible? Unless we rely
upon the power of God: How can we discern this spiritual growth, being thus
managed by the power of God in such weakness; unless we pl^w with this
Heifer, even live by faith and not by sense? Nay does not the spirit add, that
by this strength of Faith in believing against hope, as resting upon the power
of God, Abraham gave glory unto God: Romans 4.22.
ascribed unto the Lord the glory of his power, in the denial of himself, as
confounding all carnal wisdom, by believing against hope? Thus must we live
by faith, to discern the power of God, in our weakness, and so to ascribe
unto the Lord the glory of this wonderful providence.

To conclude this point, that we may see a necessity of faith, in discerning
the manner of our growth: consider we those resemblances, which have been
formerly laid down to shadow out the same: all which do necessarily infer
our living by faith, as has been manifested before, in the use of that point
concerning the manner of our spiritual growth. Above all be we skillful in
observing these special ways of God in bringing light out of darkness, and
showing his power in our weakness. And therein we shall discern the
necessity and excellency (...) the golden rule, that we must walk by faith,
and not by sight.

Thus as by the consideration of Gods manner of working in us, by bringing
light out of darkness, we see a necessity of living by faith, even beyond and
contrary to sense: So also if we consider on the other side, our weakness in
apprehending this wisdom of our God, our difference in applying Christ, we
may yet further see a greater necessity of this rule, even still to live by
faith, and not by sense, both for our trial and comfort herein. As first for
Trial.

Whereas the manner of our growth is in general in a mystery, had we not need
of faith to discern the same? if we walk by sense, and not by faith, shall
we not miss in the discerning and judging thereof?

2 Whereas the mystery of this growth though it be in part discerned of us,
not so much as we have knowledge thereof, as we find the practice and
experience of the same; yet in regard our knowledge (...) imperfect, even in
what we do apprehend; much more to seek of what is not yet revealed, and our
best experienced practice, is generally subject to infirmity, and so to
distraction and error; how can we be sustained in hope of what is yet in
expectation, unless we live by faith to make it present unto us, that so in
patience we may wait for the same? Explain we yet I pray you a little these
particulars.

Surely as is our sanctification, so is our apprehension of the end thereof,
even everlasting glory, and such is our faith and feeling of the present
earnest of that glory, even so long as we are strangers in this world, and
travelers to that city which is above.

For as by faith we are ingrafted into Christ, and so as living members of that
mystical body, do bring forth fruit in holiness and righteousness: so hereby an
entrance is ministered unto us abundantly into the everlasting kingdom of our
Lord and Savior Christ Jesus, 2. Pet. 1.11.
as being sealed with the spirit of promise apprehended by faith: whereby we are
assured of our interest in that happiness. Ephesians. 1.13.
And this full assurance making that present unto us, which is yet to come, and
so in this hope we daily renew our hold in Christ by faith, to a further
purging and preparing of our selves to perfect holiness, that so we may be
pure as he is pure: 1. Ioh. 3.3.
and so being at length thoroughly purified by faith in the son of God, and
perfected in due time, we receive the end of our Faith, which it the salvation
of our souls: 1. Pet. 1.5.
so that as there is not an end of faith, which is of things not seen, till we
see God as he is, even face to face, 1. Ioh. 3.2.
and so remain for ever with him: so as long as we are absent from the Lord,
we must needs live by faith in the apprehending of him, we must needs walk
by faith, and not by sight: that so we may see him which is invisible, Heb.
11.28.
we must of necessity still fight the good fight of faith, that we may lay
hold on eternal life. 1. Tim. 6.12
And seeing the reason that we are absent from the Lord, is because we are not
yet pure as he is pure, because yet we have not attained to perfection, but so
long as we live, are subject to infirmities, more or less: therefore also is
our faith subject to much weakness and difference in apprehe^ding our interest
in Christ, that so still his power may appear more glorious in sustaining us
in this weakness, and his free mercy may be more advanced in accepting our
weak hold above it worth, and by it weakness wonderfully occasioning the
increase thereof: For as it is the greater trial of our Faith, though it hold
be but weak and sometimes staggering: yet not to let go it hold, because the
virtue of faith consists not so much in it own ability or worth in
apprehending Christ, for so it had wherein to beast in it self, and not in
God; but in the worthiness of what it apprehends, which is the more
advanced, by how much our work is debased, so by so much the more does it
thrive and increase, as it ascribes the glory in it weakness, to it head
Christ Jesus, as hereby receiving new power from Christ, whereby it may yet get
faster hold; and so prevail more victoriously even with God himself, by how
much it has more ouermastred the wisdom of the flesh. And therefore, seeing
as long as we live in the flesh, we are and shall be subject eftsoons to
this weakness of faith more or less, may we not hereby discern a necessity
of living by faith? that so we may be sustained by the mighty power of God in
present weakness; and so may be abased in all present measure there of, by
renouncing the worth of the work, as if thereby it might challenge it interest
in Christ: And so we may proceed from faith to faith, from present weakness
to further strength by the power of Christ, co^forming us more and more to his
Image, whereby being made meeter for that glorious inheritance laid up for us
with him in the heavens, we may more clearly discern by faith within the
veil and so by faith lay hold of eternal life.

The sum of all is, that Christ is as well the finisher as the author of our
faith, Heb. 12.2.
and that both, of whatsoever we do believe, concerning the end, eternal life,
from the first ground of our election, to the very end, even our glorification;
as also of the means whereby faith is wrought, even the preaching of faith by
the operation of the holy Ghost. And so of that instrument and special gift of
the spirit, whereby we do believe, as both opening our understanding to
discern this great mystery of Christ, and also opening our hearts, and
enclining our wills and affections to assent to, and embrace the same: seeing it
is, Col. 1, 21.
I say, the power of Christ, which works in us all these mightily, both for
enabling of the work in truth, and also for the accepting thereof above it
worth. This does plainly euince a necessity of living by faith. First, I say,
it is faith only whereby we receive power daily from Christ, being thereby
united and ingrafted in him, to begin and proceed in the truth of holiness;
and

2. By Faith alone we apprehend in Christ the Acceptance of our persons, above
all worth of our service, and so are abased in our selves, to give God the
glory of his free mercy, and so enabled daily to live by Faith in the Son of
God, Gal. 2.20.
that so in him we may grow up to perfection. And seeing we grow to
perfection, by the daily sense and striving against corruption. Therefore also
by Faith we daily discern our weakness, as presenting us still the perfect
Glass of the righteousness of Christ, by which comparing our selves, we
truly discern how far short we are of that perfect Pattern. And lest the
sense of our failing might quite discourage and cast us off from well-doing,
therefore also are we sustained by Faith in Christ, as to be humbled for
corruption, so to make benefit thereby, eue^ to send us unto Christ, and shroud
us under his perfection, and so withal to receive new strength therefrom, to
subdue corruption, and grow in grace: yea that we may not sit down in any
measure, howsoever exceeding others or our selves: therefore do we look by
faith unto Jesus our champion, Heb. 12.1.2.
and casting away every thing that presses down, we run with joy the race
that is set before us, and finish our course with joy.

A second Rule for the discerning of the manner of our growth, is, To compare
spiritual things with spiritual things.

That is,

Whereas the Natural man conceiues not the things of God effectually to
salvation, ^ Cor. 2.13.
Romans 8.7.
because he is wholly flesh, which is enmity against God. And the regenerate
man being partly composed of flesh, and partly of spirit, though he can judge
rightly of heavenly things, because the spirit has revealed the same unto him:
yet seeing he is not all spirit, but partly flesh, therefore by the flesh may
be misled to judge unwisely of the ways of God in leading on this work of
grace; therefore to prevent this Deceit, The Rule is, to compare spiritual
things, with spiritual things, that is,

1. Whereas the Law is Spiritual: As the Gospel. 1. The Spiritual meaning of
the Law must be compared with the Spirit of the Gospel, the exactness of it
ought to lead us to the perfection of Christ's obedience, and this will serve
to discover the manner of our growth; That we daily are more confounded in our
exactest well-doing by the strictness of the Spiritual Law, and so cast upon
the Spirit of Christ for acceptance and further growth. This I take to be the
right manner of our Spiritual growth, to see a necessity of Christ in all our
actions, both to begin, and also to accept and perfect the same, Phil. 2.13.

2. Whereby as having received the Spirit of Christ, we are now lead by that
free-worker, who is not tied to one means or manner of working, but as it
pleases him, works diversely, and yet all Spiritually.

Therefore for the further trial of the manner of our growth, we must now
compare the works of the spirit together, not comparing the ways of the
spirit with the ways of the flesh, nor measuring the work of the one, by the
tentation and oppositions of the other, for so we shall be always to seek.

But wisely comparing the former works in our beginnings of grace, with the
present operatio^s in our proceedings hitherto

2 And the principal and necessary works of the spirit with the accessory and
subordinate: that is, such as simply concern our being in Christ, with such as
tend to our well being and bettering, or comforting therein.

3 The secret works of the spirit in the heart, cherishing inward life to our
own sense, with those that break out to the expressing thereof to others.

4 The motions of the spirit, with the effects thereof, the power of the spirit
prevailing against particular tentations with the desertions, and withdrawing
thereof, for the present measure of assistance, and yet sustaining to bear the
burden, and make advantage thereof.

5 The work of the spirit in quickening and strengthening faith contrary to
sens^^^ And the work of the same spirit, in expressing that power by seeling
and assurance: and lastly, The passive fruit of the spirit enabling us to
suffer for Christ with the active work thereof, in doing his will. In a word,
if together with these, we can compare the purposes of the spirit, with the
practice thereof, and the promise of the spirit, with the performance of the
same, laying together both how far we are come thereto, and what by faith we
apprehend: these if we can rightly discern and compare together, we shall
gain great light to discern the manner of our spiritual growth.

For hereby we shall discern it to be the mere work of the spirit, in that
it can be scanned by no other but the spirit: and so though we know not how to
pray, or how we grow, and increase in this, or that grace, yet seeing the
spirit helps our infirmities, even above what we ask or think; Rom 8.26.
Ephesians. 3.21.
therefore we then most certainly grow; when we are led by the spirit above
any ability in our selves, and yet may be to seek of the spirit, when we
have done our best, for comfort and present issue. And hereby also may we
wisely discern the manner of our spiritual growth. That whereas we must
compare and fit spiritual things to spiritual things, as both hereby to
discern for our selves, and express them for the information of others.
Therefore hereby may we discern the manner of our spiritual growth.

First, that it is begun and led forward as by the spirit, which only is able
to effect the same, and is specially destinated and appropriated to this work,
as both illightning our understandings to conceive what naturally we are
ignorant of, and also inclining our affections to the embracing thereof, to
which they are naturally auerse: so seeing the spirit works by it own
means, even by the spiritual word, as being ordained, and only effectual
hereunto. Therefore if as our beginning of grace has been from the word, so
we are led forward by the power thereof in our proceeding therein, being able to
deny all our actions from this ground, to square them al to this rule, and to
aim them all to the maine ends thereof, hereby shall we wisely discover the
manner of our growth.

Esp^cially if we can discern the Mystery of this word, specially laboring,
the inward purging of the heart, and for the effecting thereof, tolerating some
outward failings, though seemingly contrary to the strict rule thereof, yet
being subordinate to the maine end, to procure and try inward soundness, do
therefore fall in very fitly therewith, and furthers the same. And in all these
working so secretly, that neither can we at all times discern the same for
the present, neither at all shall we be able to fadome the depth thereof, no
more then our own hearts, because both are still a mystery. By these
considerations may we comfortably discern the manner of our spiritual growth.

As that, First, we discern as a special work of the word in conuincing our
hearts of sin, and subduing and enclining the same to hunger after Christ and
rest in him, though yet we find little conformity to him in our lives:
because the seed must first be sown inwardly in the heart, and there even r^t
and die as it were, to our appeara^ce, by reason of the strange working
thereof, therein confounding, and casting the same out of it self: So we find
also our proceeding in this spiritual life, rather by the inward motion of the
heart desirous to do what it cannot, then expressing any thorough ability
answerable to it desire, to the practice thereof. Yea though it many times do
the contrary, yet seeing the spirit and word works by contraries, even
bringing light out of darkness; yet we find this contrary work in leaving
us to some particular evils, to sort with, and further the maine end, Even to
cause more inward abasing of the heart, and quickening thereof, to lay hold on
Christ. This is a gracious rule to discern this manner of our growth: yea
though we be many times to seek of the inward bent of our hearts, yet as hereby
we are more humbled in our selves, and so sent to live by faith in the Son
of God: so may we hereby also discern the manner of our growth: that sometimes
it is insensible to our spirits, howsoever discernable by the spirit which
searches all things, yea sometimes must be discerned by contraries, that still
we may live by faith and not by sense.

And seeing the word, though it work diversely, yet most wisely to further the
maine end, and to avouch the freedom of the spirit, therefore also by this
diversity of working, may we discern the manner of our growth, and so still
live by faith in our discerning thereof, and proceeding therein.

For our better satisfaction in this point, both to discern more clearly the
manner of our growth, as also to apprehend it more co^fortably by this rule of
comparing spiritual things with spiritual; have we also in readiness these
special Caueats and Directions.

1. Caveat. First, that we measure not simply our estate in Christ, by any
present measure of grace we have received. That is,

Though the least grace in us in truth be an evidence of our ingrafting into
Christ, yet seeing our measure here at the best is imperfect, yea sometimes such
as we know not how to discern or rightly judge of, and so our interest in
Christ as it is perfect, so it is also a deep mystery, such as our shallow
knowledge cannot fadome: therefore our imperfect and short mete-wand can no way
fitly fadome so great a depth. Only herein is our comfort, that as our
acceptance in Christ, makes us gracious by some measure and fruits of his
spirit, with him; so our conformity hereby to his image, shall own us unto
him, howsoever it may be short of the perfect pattern.

A 2. Caveat herein is, that seeing there are diverse kinds of the graces of
the spirit, some original, and simply necessary to life, as faith, repentance,
etc. Others consequent and furthering the comfort and beauty thereof, as full
assurance, joy, etc.

Therefore we must not measure our growing in grace by these later, which are
not always visible, nor simply necessary, but by the former. But of this more
fully (God willing) in the Cases.

A third Rule of discerning the manner of our Growth, is according to those
several Callings wherein God has placed us, that so we may bring forth Fruit
in due season.

That is, whereas every Christian has two callings.

First, his General calling to the Faith, as he is a Member of Christ, and

Secondly, his Particular calling for the Public and Private good, as he is a
Member thereof.

Both these, as they are limited in themselves, so also are they limited and
subordinate to each other.

I say first they are limited in themselves.

As that the General calling of each Christian is first limited to the Place
and Rank he enioyes in the Church: wherein he is either a public Parson, to
teach others, and so also is limited to those Degrees of Prioritie and Order,
which God has there placed, Ephesians. 4.6, 7, 8. Romans 12. that the Spirits of the
Prophets may be subject to the Prophets; that confusion may be avoided, and
unity preserved: As some to rule, and some to teach; some for Doctrine, and
some for Discipline; some for Exhortation, and some for Relief, etc.

Or else he is a Private person, fit only to be taught in the public, and
not to teach; and yet not debarred from Teaching his Family in private the
Fear of God. 1. Cor. 11.
Genes. 18.

And both these limited, by the several gifts bestowed on them; the Lord
requiring no more then he gives: and limited, as also in some sort measured
by the Opportunities and Success therein. And so also the Civil calling has
it bounds in it self. Both according to the different Degrees and Ranks of
Men, the wise Lord has disposed in the World; as some to rule, and some to
obey: As also answerable to the diverse gifts and uses of Men in the
Commonwealth, according to which they are restrained from intermedling with
other Callings. And so also according to their ability in such callings, that
none may presume above what is meet.

Yea also according to the several occasion; of the Weal public, which in
case of necessity may dispense with particular callings, and restrain men
from their private dealing, to prevent a public storm: as the blood and
spirits in some violent accident, may fail the outward and inferior parts, and
so cause some soundings, while they retire for mutual succor to the heart and
nobler parts. And

Thus are both these Callings limited in themselves. And so are they also
limited and subordinate to each other.

As first, the Christian calling subordinates the Civil, and that both in the
Matter and Manner, and Ends thereof: As both sanctifying the Matter unto us,
that we may lawfully employ the same, because to the impure all things are
impure; and so also directing and bounding in the Manner thereof, even so to
use these things, as from an heavenly right, so with spiritual affections, and
honest means; and so also restraining us herein to spiritual Ends, even the
glory of God, 1. Cor. 10.31. and the edification of the Church, the common and
peculiar salvation, 1. Tim. 6.19.

Secondly, the General calling subordinates in some special cases the Civil
thereunto.

As first, in case of General Humiliation, though the Civil be lawful on the
six days, yet upon such extraordinary occasion it must give way, and
surcease, to signify the truth of our unworthiness, as not fit to live, and
so to prepare us the better to spiritual duties. So also the Civil calling
bounds the General.

Secondly, in case of invincible necessity, for prevention of some deadly
harm, by Fire, or Sickness; here the General calling must give way to the
Civil, because God will have mercy, and not sacrifice.

Thirdly, and so also in case of Charity, or for the relief of a Brother in
sickness, or such like distress.

Thus are these Callings subordinate too, and limited by each other.

And so do give us some Light, hereby to discern of the Manner of our growth.

Namely, If our improuement of Grace be suitable to this Subordination, and
Limitation of these Callings to each other.

This is an undoubted evidence of our Spiritual Growth: Hereby we may
discern the Manner thereof. As that,

First each Calling be so fitted with such common gifts, which concern the
well managing thereof: generally, as understanding therein, and wisdom and
sincerity, to improve the same; so also be suited with such particular gifts,
as necessarily are appropriated to each in particular.

As first, the Public calling of the Magistrate, with courage and integrity
fearing God and hating Covetousness.

Secondly, the Minister also, as with understanding in the Word, and power to
dispense the same, so also with utterance to convey it more effectually, and
patience to wait the success thereof, 1. Cor. 19.
wisely becoming all to all, that so he may win some, and suffering
afflictions chearefully, 2. Tim. 2.
for the justifying thereof. Thus does the Cri^r in the Wilderness measure out
to each several Calling his special gift, for the approving and managing
thereof, Matthew. 3. And so does the Apostle also fitly suit the same severally,
1. Cor. 12. Romans 12.3. 1. Pet. 4.10, 11. both implying a diversity of gifts,
1. Cor. 12.
according to the diverse callings, Verse 4.
and also differences of administration of those gifts, Verse 5.
according to the several persons and occasions, Verse 6.
yea differences of operation and success of those gifts, according to the
free goodness and wisdom of God, both in regard of the diversity of
subjects, and ends agreeable thereto, and also in respect of the diverse
disposition of the same subject, and diverse manner of the working of Gods
Spirit therein. And yet all these, both in regard of the diverse gifts
themselves, as also the diverse administration and different operation thereof,
proceeding from the same God, who disposes and works thus diversely,
according to the Council of his Will, that by this liberty of working, he
may reserve the Glory entirely to himself: And also tending to the general
and maine good of the Church. Verse 7. As thereby to maintain the Unity
thereof, and so to serve in their places and occasions, the several
necessities of the same.

Whence we may gather these conclusions, for the wise discerning of the Manner
of our spiritual growth.

First, that as we are fitted with special gifts according to our several
callings, so we also improve them so, to the managing of the particular
calling, as thereby also they may be useful for the common good, by a wise
subordination to each other, in their places, and so maintaining the General
Peace, and thereby also serving wisely each others necessities.

And yet so, as seeing secondly there is a difference of administration of the
same gifts in the same calling, according to the difference of the Object and
Season.

As the Magistrate sometimes to reward the Well-doer, sometimes to punish the
Malefactor: So the Minister to comfort the Abject, and confound the Obstinate.

Yea the same subject in the same particular condition, yet must be differently
observed, according to the diverse seasons: As David cannot do what he would and
ought, because yet the sons of Zeruiah though deserving to bu punished, yet
are too strong for him.

And Shimei though he be pardoned by David, yet he may be justly met withal
by Solomon.

So Abigail must take her time to convince Nabal of his folly, and the tongue
of the learned must minister a word in due season to him that is weary. Isa.
50.6.

Thus I say, there being a different administration of the same calling
according to the diverse subject and season thereof, affords us also another
profitable Rule for the discerning and trial of the manner of our growth.

Namely, that our gifts be employed fitly to the diversity of the object, and
the several seasons thereof, and so wait upon the Lord in the issues of the
same.

And this is that which in the third place follows to be considered, that as
there are diverse gifts, and different administrations thereof, so there are
also diverse operations and effects of our administration therein. And that both
in respect of the absolute power and wisdom of God, who suspends and alters
the success according to his good pleasure, that man's industry may be abased,
and Gods free grace advanced.

As also that the sincerity and patience of his servants may be tried, the
elect may be provoked to more thankfulness, and humility, in that it fares
with them herein above their desert, and the reprobate may be more confounded,
in stumbling at such means whereby the Saints are gathered.

And the Lord may hereby serve his own ends, even the saving of the elect, and
condemnation of the wicked.

These are the grounds of this different operation of the manifold graces of
God in our several callings. And this affoordeth us also a third rule for the
better trying and approving of our spiritual growth.

That seeing the success merely depends on the goodness of God, beyond our
ability or kenning, but the labor belongs unto us, this is that we must do,
and leave the blessing to God: therefore if we be neither puffed up with the
good success of our labors, as to grow cold and careless therein: neither
be so diuerted with contrary issue* as to give over the same, but still on
either hand shall be more diligent and constant, so long as opportunity is
offered: yea, even taking such seasons as the world reiects, to wait the
blessing of God; finding our labor to return specially into our bosoms,
because he that scatters, shall have plenty: Hereby we may truly discern
the work of grace, and also avouch our improuement thereof.

For our further encouragement and comfort herein, observe we yet another Rule.

A 4. Rule is to discern the manner of spiritual growth, that God accepts
the will for the deed, and esteems our desire and purpose in particular
duties, though we fail therein, as if we did them fully.

That is, though the work of grace, howsoever in regard of any external
practice, it be imperfect, both in regard of the incapacitie of the subject,
not yet fit for any further measure; as also in respect of our inabilitie to
perform what we are capable of, by reason of such mixture of inward infirmity
and obliquitie defiling the same, and also of such outward tentation, hindering
the act thereof: yet both in the purpose of God, as perfection is intended so
in the purpose of the heart, no less then perfection is propounded: and so
even that which we do imperfectly, is accepted of God, as perfect, in regard of
his purpose, and our endeavor therein, as covering our imperfection with the
perfect rule of Christ's righteousness, and accepting our true endeauours in the
absoluteness of his sacrifice.

And this serves graciously to discern the manner of our spiritual growth.

As first, that seeing the Lord loves truth in the inward parts, and accepts
the will for the deed; therefore if still we purpose more then we have done,
though we have done our best, as hereby we challenge the imperfection thereof,
and yet improve a truth thereof: so thereby we renew our strength in Christ,
in whom we may be enabled to grow on to perfection.

Secondly, seeing the will is accepted for the deed, though we be prevented
of the act by tentation, or want of opportunity and means, yet if still we
desire and affect well-doing more earnestly, and use the means to actuate
same, hereby we shall discern and approve the manner of our growth.

And therefore, that we so grow in grace, as we thrive in the inward man,
specially in holy and heavenly affections, and constant endeauours to all
goodness.

A fifth rule to discern the manner of our spiritual growth, is a wise
observation of the mortifying of the flesh, and the manner thereof.

First, because of contraries, the same reason may be given: and the same
Spirit works both by the same Power of Christ's Sacrifice effectual, as well
for the one as for the other.

Consider we therefore, that the slesh is mortified, not at once, but by
degrees; so is it with the manner of our Growth: we are not perfect at the
first, but by degrees, even growing and increasing all our life long.

Secondly, the flesh is mortified in every part and faculty of soul and body
at the first in truth, though not in perfection; so is it in our spiritual
growth: we grow in every part, soul, body, and spirit, though not to
perfection at the first, yet in truth and sincerity.

Thirdly, the flesh is mortified continually, without intermission, because the
virtue of Christ in us is constantly operative, though sometimes we discern
not the same: so do we continually grow in grace, though we do not sensibly
discern it; even as in sleep, and such like particular bindings of bodily
sense, we yet continually grow naturally, though we discern not the same.

Fourthly, as the flesh is subdued in the maine by the abasing of the flesh, in
particular faylings our particular slips proving means to discern and take
vengeance more effectually upon the body of sin and original corruption,
outward faylings proving effectual to purge out spiritual evils, yea
available also further to recover graces decayed, and supply such as are yet
wanting; above all, procuring a greater loathing of corruption, and more
earnest longing to put off this body of sin: such also is the manner of our
spiritual growth.

1. As that decay of s^bordinate, and less necessary graces, proves a means
to stablish and increase those that are prime and simply necessary, as Faith,
Repentance, and secondly, Failing in particular duties, proves the means to
further the more constant practice of the general, as daily humiliation,
wahtcsulnesse, sobriety, etc.

3. Conscience of daily infirmities, daily casts us out of our selves upon the
free mercy of God in Jesus Christ.

4. Sense of particular slips, daily provoke to labor, and approve
sincerity and truth of heart.

5. Yea the more we are cast behind in any particular duty, the more we
hasten forward to the maine price of our high calling in Christ Jesus.

6. Yea by how much we find defects in all outward duties, which are apparent
unto men, the more we shall endeavor the inward conformity of our thoughts
and spiritual affections to the will of our God.

7. And look how far we discern failing in any duty, by so much the more
shall we discern the ob^iquitie of nature; not yet perfectly mortified, and
so be more abased in our selves, and cast upon the free grace of God, that so
Christ may dwell in our hearts by Faith, and by the power of his grace we may
attain to perfection, Gal. 2.20.

8. Look how Corruption is mortified, not by any absolute casting out thereof,
that it may not be at all in us, but by a suppressing of and keeping under the
same, that it may not reign over us, Romans 6.
as that we are more unwillingly led captive thereby, or less patiently
endure the tyranny thereof: that with more cheerfulness and indignation we
resist the same, and with more facility and delight subdue the tentation; that
with more watchfulness and jealousy we stand pressed against future assaults,
and so grow more acquainted with the deceitfulness of sin, and thereby more
experienced to undo the snares thereof. So is it in our spiritual growth:
Though we may not look for such perfection of Grace in this life, as to be
wholly spiritual, fulfilled with all measure of every Grace; yet if we labor
not to be destitute of any necessary Grace that may be fit for the present
occasion, and so find more ability and delight in the practice thereof,
abounding therein with thankfulness and constancy, finding less
tediousness and interruption therein, and still endeavoring the increase and
freedom thereof; and to this end watching over such lets, especially pride and
hypocrisy, which may infatuate the same, and aiming mainly at truth and
sincerity therein; above all laboring the acceptance of our well-doing by
faith in the Son of God, and so still denying our best righteousness, that
we may be found in him. Thus may we discern our spiritual growth, thus may
we justify and approve the same.

9. As the subduing of corruption is rather in endeavor what we would do,
then what we can do in this life: and this endeavor is specially approved in
cleaving constantly to the means, enabling us herein, and also in renewing our
combat more eagerly after greater foyles: So is it in our spiritual growth,
it is rather what we desire, then what we can do for the present, that must
comfort us herein. And our desire of these must be continually quickened by the
conscionable use of the means, and more enflamed and increased by sense of
failing and opposition therein. These are comfortable evidences of this
spiritual growth, thus may we approve the true manner thereof.

THE CONTENTS OF THE SIXTH CHAPTER.
Of the Measure of Spiritual Growth: where, First, of the Measure we must
propound 1. By the Law. 2. By the perfect Pattern. 3. By the end of Holiness.
Secondly, the Trial of this Measure. 1. By particular Gifts, and improuement
of them. 2. By special Experiments. 3. By several Callings. 4. Variety of
Seasons. 5. Increase of Means.
More particular Examination thereof by the Commandments, in General,
Particular.
Of the Law, Of the Gospel, as Faith, Repentance.

CHAP. 6. Of the Measure of our Spiritual Growth, and the Trial thereof.
ACcordingly as is the Manner, so is also the Measure of our Growth. A very
Mystery, not discernable by Sense always, no not by Faith: so only
comprehended, as that still we shall be to seek in the Measure thereof. The
best Grounds therefore of the Measure of our growth, is according to the
pattern and rule by which we must grow, and according to the end to which we
aim at; that so we may rather know what we should be, to be humbled in our
present failing, and yet provoked hereby to perfection, in that the grace of
God is not in vain, the means are effectual to perfect the work.

Considering therefore what we should be, we may hence take a scantling of the
measure of grace.

First, if we observe the rule of our Growth, which is the perfect Law of
liberty, whereby we are not only enjoined, to grow up to the full measure of
the age of Christ. Ephesians. 4.13. but also thereby enabled to perfection, even
that we may be made absolute and perfect to every good work. 2. Tim. 3.15.16.
So that though we cannot attain to the measure at the first, yet if we
justify the law. 1. By approving the equity thereof. And 2. be convinced
thereby of our failings therein. 3. And submit daily thereto, that we may grow
up thereby. 4. Not disclaiming the rule, though we are short of the extent
thereof. 5. Not declining to false rules, to measure and justify our imperfect
and deceitful holiness, we do grow in some good measure, though yet we have
not attained, and so shall in the end attain the same.

For our further trial and comfort herein; know we, that we have true
interest in the rule, and improve our spiritual growth hereby, and according
thereunto, by these marks.

First, if we grow more able to discern the Mystery thereof, aiming rather to
adorn the hidden man in the heart, and subdue and rectify the imaginations,
and secret thoughts, then to carry us smothely in a fair outside of
conversation.

2 That in this General Mystery, we be able to discern the maine and
principal Mystery of Christ, both to know the fellowship of his sufferings,
Phil. 3 12.13.
and also the power of his Resurrection, that so we may attain to the fulness
of the first resurrection.

3. And that yet seeing all this is still in a Mystery, concealing somewhat,
what either cannot at all in this life be revealed, as not fit to be known, or
else shall be revealed in it time, Phil. 3.16. Therefore, as in humility we
most adore what yet is hidden, and with patience wait the opening thereof, by a
wise fitting of our selves thereunto; so, in that which is revealed, we must
walk in love, not rejecting such as are short of our measure, nor deiecting
our selves concerning what we know not, and have not yet attained unto, but
wisely improuing what we know according to the Rule, and so communicating
thereof to others: that so, to him which has, may be given; being faithful in
a little, we may be entrusted with more.

4. In all things renouncing our own wisdom in the understanding of this
Mystery, and our own ability in improuing the same.

5. And so plying the means, with all diligence and wisdom, first, taking
that which concerns our selves, Note.
and secondly, present occasions, leaving future things to their several
times, and thirdly, taking that for the present which is most plain and
familiar: as for obscure and intricate points, referring them to more mature
occasions: Hereby shall we faithfully improve the Means, and so thereby
attain to a good measure of Grace.

Secondly, If we consider the Pattern to which we must grow, must we not
still look unto Christ, the Author and Finisher of our Faith? Heb. 12.2. Must
we follow men any otherwise, then they follow Christ? 1. Cor. 11.1. And do
we not then rest on this Pattern, first, when we daily deny our own
righteousness, Phil. 3.10.
and labor to be found in him, not having our own righteousness, that so
we may be enabled by his power to perfection: secondly, when we rest not on
any Carnal or Spiritual Pattern, either of word or action, that is not
suitable thereunto?

Is there any other measure to be aimed at, then the full measure of the age
of Christ? and ought we not daily to be emptied in our selves, that we may be
partakers of his fullness: and can we be emptied in our selves, but by daily
denying our own righteousness; and can we deny our righteousness, but by
discerning the imperfection thereof; and can we discern this but in the glass
of that fullness which is in Christ? Thus by the pattern to which we must grow
we may discern the measure of our growth, even to perfection: and so by how
much we come nearer to this pattern, by so much we may approve our spiritual
growth.

And this we shall yet further discern, if we consider the end to which we
grow, namely, everlasting glory, and happiness in the life to come.

Which seeing it is perfect without mixture of our acry corruption, constant
without any intermission, eternal without any end, therefore the measure of
our Growth must be suitable hereunto.

1 We must labor such perfection as is without such mixture, and the purer we
grow, the nearer we draw to the life of glory.

2 We must labor to holiness with as little interruption as we may: and so
the more we are constant in holy duties, the less we find our vain hearts
within, or the world without, to affect and interrupt us therein, the more we
may be sure that we grow in grace.

3 Seeing eternity is our end, and goal we aim at, therefore as we must
not propound any temporary end, in our spiritual course, so we must not set
up our rest in any measure attained in this life; neither must we propound
these outward things as motives to provoke us to well-doing: But still we must
be laboring, though we cannot attain, and so resemble eternity in our
unwearied and renewed stiriuing, though after many falls and interruption, that
so hereby we may have our conversation in Heaven, and attain at the length the
perfect measure.

Behold here then the true Measure of our Growth in general, which is to have
no Measure in what we have attained, to make the Law our Rule to guide us to
perfection, to make Christ our Pattern, to enable us therein, and eternal
Glory our end, to encourage us thereto.

If we desire yet further some particulars to euidcnce and enable our measure
of Growth, that though we cannot attain to that perfection in this life, as
to be quite free from sin, yet we may have some marks how far we may and
must grow: Take we in the fear of God to this purpose these rules and
experiments.

1 That we must increase in the knowledge of the mystery of Christ, so far,
that we may be able to be teachers of others, for so every one is bound to, as
a King and Priest and Prophet in his calling; and therefore so we must labor
unto. Heb. 5.11. And therefore neither the ignorant Christian, nor he that
sticks in the Elements of Religion, was ever taught by the spirit, neither does
grow in grace.

2 That we increase in all spiritual wisdom and understanding, that we may
be able to discern of things that differ. 1. Between things accessarie and
circumstantiall, in necessary things between what is most necessary,
subordinating others thereto. 2. Between actions of our general and civil
calling, subiecting each to other, and limiting one by the other. 3. Things
present and to come, to measure these by the other. 4. Between faith and sense
thereof. 5. Between Satan's tentation, and our corruptions, to reject the one,
though we acknowledge the other. 6. Between the old man and the new, so
justifying the one, as that we disdain the other.

7 Between justification imputed and inherent, to approve this by the other.
These differences well observed will much further our growth in grace
euidencing the truth thereof promote the spiritual part by abasing the oath
and furthering in every part by relying on Christ. Phil. 1.9 10.

3 That we are more wise in redeeming the time, by entertaining occasions of
well-doing, and declining the contrary: yea though they be but occasions or
appearances of evil. Ephesians 5.16.

4 And so may prevent many unnecessary troubles, and obtain a gracious issue
out of such as necessarily do befall us.

5 That we can watch over our unruly affections of impatience, anger,
discontent, frowardness, covetousness, etc.

6 And so can be free from scandalous and gross offenses. Psalm. 19.12.

7 That we know no man after the flesh, that is, use one fellowship in all
ordinary recreations of good and bad conference: and first, to spiritual ends,
and in a spiritual manner; not to the satisfying of the flesh, but to the
humbling and weakening of the lusts thereof. Secondly, To weane us from the
world, and provoke us to hunger more earnestly after our dissolution. 2. Cor.
4.13.14. Gal 5.11.

8 That we can make conscience of least evils, yea of the very first motions
and thoughts to sin; being wise to discern them, and speedy to suppress
them, or turn them to good; for this will prevent consent and act of sin,
and lying in the custom thereof; nourish tenderness of conscience, and
soundness of judgment; increase fear, and abasing of our selves; and cast us
upon the eye and bosom of our God, by whom we shall be kept from the great
offense, and quickened to all power and cheerfulness of well-doing

9 That we can keep a constant course in the practice of holy duties,
especially in the family and more private, as prayer, meditation examination of
the heart. For these will nourish our familiarity with God, and so make us
more confident in well-doing and constant therein.

10 And so can be more careful and intentive to the conversion of others. Luke
22 32.


11 That we can be more patient in bearing with the evils of the time, and yet
more wise in avoiding contagion from them, more zealous to reform them in our
places.

12 That we can be most severe in our own matters concerning sin, and yet
most gentle and meek toward others: and yet

13 Can be most mild and indifferent in our own cause, when it concerns
matter of profit, or private good, either way, and yet more zealous in Gods
affairs.

14 Maintaining peace and love withal, so far as it is possible, and yet to
affect most, where we see the best gifts or most need.

15 Watching over our speech, avoiding many words, plentiful in exhorting,
spare in reproving, meek in the manner, wise and sober in the carriage, and
thankful howsoever, referring in humility the issue to God by prayer and
subjection to his will, and comforting our selves with the return thereby into
our own bosom.

Thus far must we proceed and grow in grace, these are gracious evidences that
we have attained a great measure thereof. Hereunto serve these experiments.

1 That we are grown more sober and exact in the use of our Christian
liberty, both in judging rightly of the true compass thereof, and also
walking more perfectly according to the strict rule thereof. For herein weak
Christians do much fail, as being puffed up with their renewed estate, and so
through ignorance, presuming of their liberty in Christ, turn it often times as
an occasion to the flesh: so that not to be brought in bondage thereby, not to
exceed the compass thereof, but rather by our wisdom and experience to be a
law thereto, not doing all we may, but what may best fit us to the best ends;
is a gracious mark of a great measure of grace.

2 That we are grown rich in heavenly experience, both of our own secret
corruptions, and also of Gods special providence in preventing us of many
evils, and turning our infirmities to good, storing up wisely such experiments
against the needful time.

3 And so from this experience can more speedily resist tentation, and more
courageously encounter the malice of Satan, and put to flight the enticings of
the world, more narrowly watch over our hearts and ways, and wisely avoid the
occasions of evil, and entertain the good; this is a gracious evidence of a
great measure of grace.

4 As also, that out of our experience of our own failings, we can grow more
charitable in judging of others, Gal. 6.1.
and more compassionate of their weakness; yet so, as that still we can
mourn for the evils of the time, and so keep our selves undefiled of the
maine pollutions thereof.

5 And so are grown more moderate in our zeal, being able to temper the same
with discretion and meekness, that so if we cannot benefit others, yet we may
less hurt our selves.

7 Yet so, as that still we grow more courageous for the truth revealed, not
sparing our dearest life for the justifying thereof.

8 Yea, can be so far abased for the glory of our God, that in comparison
thereof, our precious souls are not dear unto us. Romans 9.2. Exodus 32.

These are comfortable signs of a great measure of grace.

9 As also, that we are grown more lowly in our own eyes, and humble in the
greatest measure of grace, still complaining of our wants, though we cease not
to be thankful for what we have received, and esteeming others better then
our selves, because we know our selves best, and the more we have received, the
more we have abused: if God should enter into judgment with us, the more we
are indebted to our Christ for his unspeakable gifts.

10 And that in regard of the body of sin hanging so fast upon us, we groan
still under the burden thereof, desiring and preparing to our dissolution.
Romans 7.24.

11 And yet still while we are in the flesh, hungring after a greater measure
of grace, being more diligent in the means, as this spiritual hunger the more
it is, the more grace it implies, so working thus in us, does argue a greater
measure thereof, because to him that has shall be given, if he so discern,
and use his talent. Math. 25.32.

12 And yet out of experience of Gods wonted and continual favors, we can
grow to more constant assurance of our election. And so, Romans 5.4.5.

13 As a fruit thereof can more abound with joy in the holy Ghost, and
cheerfulness in all occasions. Yet Romans 15.13.

14 Living by faith, even when we have no feeling of comfort, as drowning all
sense of present comfort, in regard of our earnest longing after everlasting
joys, and apprehension thereof. And so

15 Can be abased of confidence in our greatest abundance, that we may abound
with hope in our greatest abasings. Romans 15.13.

16 Laboring still to have our conversation in heaven, by shining light in a
crooked generation.

To conclude the point of the measure of grace. And

As there are diverse circumstances which do require a greater measure of
grace, so may we also discern and further a greater measure hereof by our
wise employment therein.

1 The first whereof is our callings, which as they are of more use, either for
ourseluas, or others; so do they require a greater measure of grace, though
all exact a public truth thereof. As the callings both of Magistrate and
Ministry is regard of their pre-eminence and more use, require greater gifts,
and greater measure of the spirit in improuing of them. So that if we find our
gifts suitable, Note.
and improued according to these callings we may conclude a greater measure of
grace. And seeing

2 Also the diversity of seasons may put us to a greater trial and exercise
of our callings. As the time of prosperity especially tries and exercises
our humility and diligence therein, because we have then best opportunity and
means to puff us up. And the time of adversity calls upon to suffering for
our callings, and giving account thereof, and so tries the same, and therefore
both requires our greater courage and patience therein. If now then we find
our selves suited with gifts according to these diverse seasons, and especially
find the improuement of such gifts, as serve particularly for the redeeming
thereof, this is an undoubted evidence of a greater measure of Grace.

3 Seeing, as we grow in Age, so we grow in Grace, and yet to our seuer^ll
Ages in grace, there are appropriated diverse and several gifts, for the better
discerning and managing of the occasions thereof: As to Nouices in grace, and
younglings, spiritual heat and vigor usually appertains; to experienced and
old soldiers therein, W^sedome and Patience. If now then we find our
several Ages in grace, expressing these several gifts, and so proceeding from
the one to the other, that the gifts concerning our old age in Christ, though
they do not extinguish the other, pertaining to our youth, yet they do temper
and qualify the same, and so have the predominancie over them. This is also an
apparent evidence of a greater Measure of Grace.

4 Lastly, seeing God requires accordingly as he gives, therefore if our
improuement of Grace answer the Means, it is a plain evidence of a greater
Measure of Growth.

By these things we may discern the Measure of Grace, how far we may and
ought to labor in this life, how we may attain what is competent for this
life.

And so hereby we may make trial, whether we grow in Grace, and hasten to
perfection.

If we have attained to such conscience in the duties of the first Table, as
that we cannot only prefer the performance thereof above any duties of the
second, unless it be in such cases of necessity and charity, whereby we
preserve the bond of Love, which is the fulfilling of the Law, though we
exchange some particular duties of the first Table, in such cases with some
duties of the second, as the occasion requires: But also we can so preserve
the holy Order which that Table requires, as to do all things out of a sound
knowledge of our God, and hearty affiance in him, aiming therein at his glory
above all, and so therein at our own and others salvation. 1. Com.

And that after the prescript manner he has enjoined in his Word. 2. Com.

And that with an holy purpose and intention of the heart, to sanctify his
Blessed Name. 3. Com.

And especially in those fit seasons which he has commanded, and so can make
conscience, especially of the Sabbath, as being the Day wherein we may try
and increase our spiritual strength. And yet so, that we neglect not to keep
every day a spiritual Sabbath unto the Lord, by constant performing of Private
and Family Duties, to build up our selves and others in knowledge and grace.
And,

In all these not so much to be comforted in what we have done well, as to
be humbled both for what we have omitted, which we should have done, as also
for that evil which has accompanied our best actions; that so still we may
be cast upon the righteousness of Christ, and give our God the Glory of all
his goodness. These are Good Evidences, that we have thriuen in grace, by
examining our selves in general from the scope and duties of the first Table.

More particularly we may make trial of our growing in grace, by examining
our selves severally by each particular Branch of that Table, and so by the
Duties therein required of us.

As by the first Commandment,

1 That we so love our God, as that our lives are not dear unto us, in regard
of his Glory; no, not our Souls, in comparison of advancing his great Name,
Act. 20. Matthew. 5. Romans 9. and for his sake can love our enemies.

2 That we can so fear God, as to do all things in his presence: To fear to
displease him, because we love him; not to fear men, in comparison of him; to
endure any afflictions with joy and patience, Romans 5.4. and so can trust in
him, though he kill us, Job. 13.15.

3 Can so rejoice in him, as that we can rejoice in all other things for his
sake, and for his sake also can be humbled and abased in all other things, lest
they should hinder our sweet fellowship with him, and steal away our hearts
from him. And so can abound in thanksgiuings and praises unto our God, giving
thanks to him for all, and in all things, even in our greatest crosses: yea,
rejoicing in this especially, that we can grieve for sin; not only our
own, but the sins of others.

4 And so can be more fervent in Prayer and Supplication, with Tears and
Gronings of the Spirit, for the General as well as our Particular good.

5 Laboring in all things sincerely, and in uprightness of heart.

Thus of the first Commandment.

For the second Commandment.

1 That we are more spiritual in all holy duties, laboring more for the
preparation of the heart, then the outward action, and yet doing all things out
of knowledge and conscience, in obedience to Gods will, and not for man's sake.

2 That we be constant and zealous in Gods matters, doing all things with
courage and wisdom, redeeming the time from unnecessary Pleasur^s, yea
lawful Recreations, to employ it in the best things.

3 That we can avoid all will worship and lippe-labour, all formalitie and
temporising, all vainglory and spiritual pride in Gods matters, keeping our
selves close to the Rule of the Word, and hating all apparances of evil, yea
the very garment that is spotted with the flesh. And in all, using all outward
helps, as Fasting, Vows, etc.

4 That we can renounce our selves, and best Righteousness, and so labor to
be found in Christ.

Thus of the second Commandment.

For the third Commandment.

1 That in all things we aim at Gods glory.

2 That we are grown more skillful in the Attributes of God, being able to
understand the power and proper use of them, by particular application thereof
to our special occasions, Deuteronomy. 28.58. Romans 9.5.

3 That we take not the Name of God in our mouths, but very sparingly, and
that not without great preparation, and reverent intention of the heart
thereon, and to most weighty and necessary occasions, specially in an Oath.

4 That we can avoid all Recreations, wherein lies any let, depending on the
providence of God, as Carding, Dicing. etc.

5 That we can wish well, and pray for our enemies, because they bear the
Image of God.

6 That we give no liberty to idle and rotten spirits.

7 That we can use the Creatures with all holiness, sobriety, and reverence,
sanctifying them unto us, and be provoked by them still to seek and adore the
Creator.

8 And meditate with reverence and admiration upon the works of God.

9 That we can reverence God in his Judgments, making still some holy use of
them to our selves and others.

10 That we are zealous of the glory of God, seeking as our places and
occasions require, to justify and avenge the same: The more spiritual and
zealous we grow in any of these, the more have we thriuen in grace.

Thus of the third Commandment.

The fourth Commandment.

Especially our measure of grace may be tried by the fourth Commandment which
includes all the other, and expresses our conscionable performance of them
all. And here we may have these experiments. First, that we are stablished in
our judgments touching the morality of the second Sabbath.

2 That we are more careful in preparing to the Sabbath in deeper humiliation
for our sin, cleerer sense of our wants, more earnest hungring after
spispirituall refreshings, more entire disburthening of our hearts of worldly
thoughts and cares.

3 And so are more conscionable in keeping of it.

1 By a more high esteem and serious entertainment of the public Means.

2 By a more spare and sober use of outward comforts.

3 By a greater conscience of priuateties.

4 And deeper sense of, and humiliation for our failing therein.

5 With more unfeigned renewing of our vows against the next Lords day.

6 And more earnest longing after the eternal Sabbath.

7 Finding more joy and spiritual assurance, in the use of Gods ordinances.
And yet more,

8 Watching against spiritual pride and hypocrisy, which now will intrude
upon us.

9 And so by our familiarity with God, can grow more tender and compassionate
in judging and raising up others.

10 More quick-sighted to discern inward corruption, and Satan's sleights, more
ready to encounter, more able to prevail against them.

11 Can be more wise in managing worldly occasions with retired hearts, and yet
in sincerity and faithfulness.

12 And so more weaned from the love of the world.

Thus of the fourth Commandment touching our love to God, and so of trial by
the first Table.

For the Second, touching the love of our Neighbor.

Hereby try we our selves concerning our measure of grace:

Generally,

1. If we esteeeme him our neighbor which is of our flesh. Isay. 58.7.

2 If we love him as our selves. Mat. 22.

Particularly,

To reverence our superiors. First, By outward gesture, and speech. Secondly,
By inward affection and fear.

Genesis 31.38.
Specially in obedience to the command of the Magistrate, though it may tend to
our great loss, yea though they be evil that command, and that with all
diligence and faithfulness. Genes. 24.10.12.33.56. 1. Pet. 2.18.

In undergoing punishments inflicted by them patiently. Genesis 16.6.9. yea though
unjust. 1. Pet. 2.19.

In daily thankfulness for them, both by prayer for them. 1. Tim. 2.1.2. 1.
Tim. 5.7. And also maintaining them bountifully. Genes. 45.9. And honoring
their persons.

So also to the Minister, both outwardly in all reverence toward him, and
maintenance of him.

As also inwardly.

1 Receiving his Message, as from God.

2 Praying, that he may do it faithfully.

3 Enduring his reproof with all patience.

4 Not respecting the Vessel, but the Treasure.

5 Yet wisely trying the Spirits.

6 And waiting the Blessing of God.

3 So, to such as excel us in gifts: whosoever; not to envy them, but rather
to acknowledge and applaud the same, 1. Cor. 8.22, 2.3.

4 To our Equals.

1 Thinking reverently of them, Phil. 2.3.

2 Striving rather to give, then to receive honor, Romans 12.10.

3 Holy salutations and greetings in gesture and words, 1. Pet. 5.14. Exo. 18.7.

5 To our Inferiors: as,

1 Yielding to them in good things, Deuteronomy. 17.20. Job. 31.13.

2 Giving good example to them, in an holy life, Tit. 2.2.

3 Guiding such as are under us in the Lord. Col. 4.1. Deuteronomy. 17.19.

4 Providing necessary things for them, both for body and soul. Romans 13.4.
Isay 49.13.

5 And not to spare punishment, in meekness and sincerity, as occasion
serves.

6 To our selves, maintayning the Dignity and Safety of our Persons and
Callings in all things. Phil. 4.8.
The more we attain to the conscience and practice of these things, the more
we grow in Grace.

Thus of the fifth Commandment.

Touching the sixth, tending to preserve life, our Trial herein is,

1 If we be of like affection with our neighbor: as first, rejoicing with
him, Mark. 10.20
Romans 12.15. secondly, grieuing with him, Romans 12.15. Isay 24.16.

2 If we further him, in what we may to good, and hinder him in evil, Job.
29. 2. Cor. 8.3. Leuit. 19.17.

3 If we endure wrongs patiently from him: If the occasion be small, not to
be angry, Proverb. 19.10. Numb. 12.3. If great, yet not to revenge, nay, to be
slow to anger, Prou. 14 29. Mark. 3.5. but freely to forgive, Ephesians. 4.32.

4 Concerning his Infirmities:

1. Not to provoke and discover them, Genesis 13.8. Genesis 27.44.

2. Yea, though we depart with our own right, Matthew. 17.25, 26.

3. To pacify his anger, kindled 1. By ouercomming evil with good, Romans
12.21. 2. Seeking after Peace, 1. Pet. 3.11. 3. By courteous Answers, Proverb.
15.1. 4. Passing by his Infirmities, Prou. 19.11. 5. Covering them with
silence, 1. Pet. 4.8. 6. Taking every thing at the best, 1. Cor. 13.5. 7. To
this end making Covenants for peace, not only with Believers, but even with
Infidels, Genesis 21.22, 23. and 31.44.


So also concerning his Body: first, to provide for it living, Matthew. 25.41,
42. secondly, to prevent, and succor in any Danger, 1. John 3.16.

2 To care for it dead, by honest Burial, Act. 8.2. Genes. 25.19. Genes. 58.12.

Specially concerning his Soul.

1 Above all, to win him to Christ, 1. Cor. 10.33. Heb. 10 24.

2 To give them no offense, 1. Cor. 10.32. 1. Cor. 8.13.

3 To provoke him by our good example, Act. 24.14.

4 To reclayme him, if he err, 1 Thessalonians. 5.14.

5 And encourage in well doing.

So for our selves.

1 In affording and seeking means for our Souls, as the Word, Sacraments, and

2 Also for our Bodies, as convenient Food, Raiment, Recreation, Physic,
avoiding Injuries by Law, lawful defense, etc.

Thus may we improve our spiritual Growth hereby.

So also by the seventh Commandment, which serves to preserve Chastity.

This we shall do,

1 By Modesty, as keeping an holy comeliness in all things.

Both in our outward Man. As,

1 In our Eyes, Job. 31. Genes. 24.65. Prou. 7.13.

2 In words, first, decent, Genes. 4. 1. Psalm. 51.1. secondly, slow, and
sparing, Matthew. 12.19. Prou. 10.19. Prou. 7.11.

3 In Apparel, 2. Tit. 3.

4 In Diet, that it be ordinary, and sparing, according to the Place, and
Calling, Season, and state of Body.

5 In Recreations, that they be of good report, used sparingly and seasonably.

6 In Necessities of Nature, Deuteronomy. 23.14. 1. Sam. 24.4.

The second thing furthering our Measure of Grace by this Commandment, is
Sobriety, and that

1 In spiritual things: as,

1. In knowledge thereof, that it be according, first, to the Word; secondly,
our Callings; thirdly, our Occasions; fourthly, to Gods glory, and our
salvation.

2. In practice, that it exceed not our knowledge, or be not seasonable and
suitable to our Callings, but bounded thereby.

2 In Temporal things, as before Diet, Apparel, first, specially sanctifying
them to our use, 1. Sam. 9.13. secondly, and sanctifying God, in returning the
strength to his glory, 1. Cor. 10.31. though having liberty for the plenty and
variety of them, Luke 5.29. Psalm. 104.15. Thirdly, yet not affecting highest
Places, Luke 14.7. Fourthly, nor unseasonable times, Eccl. 10.16. Fifthly, nor
unnecessary means, to increase Appetite, and satisfy Gluttony, and breed
Security, as Sauces, Music, etc. Isay 5.9, 10. Sixthly, but furthering hereby
inward and outward strength, and avoiding Excess, and delight herein, Prou.
23.24. Luke 21.34. Seventhly, specially at great men's Tables. Eighthly, using
speech such as may edify, Luke 14.12. Ninthly, leaving and reserving the
remnant for the poor, Ioh. 6.12.

3 In single life: first, watching more narrowly over Affections: secondly,
abasing the flesh, by submitting to Afflictions: thirdly, afflicting it
voluntarily, by Fasting, 1. Cor. 9.27. and lastly, by preventing the inordinate
fire of Lust, 1. Cor. 7.9.

4 In Wedlock, Heb. 13.4. And this,

1. By an holy Entrance, as within the Covenant with the Faithful, and by
faithful Prayer, 1. Cor. 7.9. Malach. 2.11.

2. Abstinence from the Marriage Rites in the time of Purgings, and set
Humiliations, Ezech. 18.6. 1. Cor. 7.5.

3. Use of this liberty sparingly, rather to prevent, then increase sin,
Romans 13.14.

4. And not without Prayer and Thankfulness, 1. Tim. 4.3, 4.

Thus of the seventh Commandment.

Concerning the eight Commandment, requiring the preservation and increase of
our Neighbors goods, and so our own.

Hereunto are required,

1 A Calling, to employ the gifts of God, 1. Cor. 7.24. Ephesians. 4.28. 1. Pet.
4.10. Gal. 5.13.

2 Contentation with the estate the Lord has placed us in, 1. Tim. 6.6, 7.
Phil. 4.11. Heb. 13.5.

3 Thriftinesse or frugalitie, in preserving and husbanding what the Lord has
given us, to the right Ends, Prou. 5.15. Reu. 21 5. and 12.27. Ioh. 6.12.

4 Sincerity of speech, and harmless simplicity, in all our ways, Psalm.
15.2. Genes. 23.15. 1 Thessalonians. 4.6.

5 Just dealing, first, in Buying and selling, setting, etc. and to keep a
just price in equality, both to Buyer and Seller.

1. As well to the profit of the Buyer, as charge of the Seller, Leuit. 25.14.

2. Doing that to others, which we would have done to our selves.

3. Making recompense of our gain above the principal, if God has blessed us
extraordinarily.

4. And yet so easing others, that we do not grieve our selves, 2. Cor. 8.9.
unless it be in a case of invincible necessity, on their part, and glorious
trial of our Faith, on our own part, Luke 18.

The second point in just dealing, is, that the thing we sell, be
substantial and profitable, Amos 8.3, 4.

3 The means whereby we sell, must be just, as Weights and Measures, Deuteronomy.
25.13. Ezech. 45.10. Exodus 22.14, 15.

4 To make good what we hire, as well as pay the price for it, Exodus 22.14, 15.

5 To redeem the Pledge: or, if it be of important necessity, to restore it,
Exodus 22.16. and yet take what is offered, De^teron. 24.10.

6 To be surety only for honest men, and that with much deliberation, Prou.
11.15. and 22.26. and to seek release, Prou. 61.

7 To keep all just promises, though it be to our hinderance, Psalm. 15.4.
Judge. 1.24, 25.

8 To lend freely, Luke 6.35.

9 To restore what we borrow, though with the sale of our goods, 2. King. 4.2,
3, 4.

10 To restore what we are entrusted withal, Matthew. 21.41. unless it be
lost by casualtie, or some violence, not by our default, Exodus 22.7.

11 To keep what we find, if it be not demanded, or the true Owner cannot
be heard of, Deuteronomy. 22.1, 2, 3.

12 To recover our own, if not otherwise, by Law, so it prejudice not our
profession, 1. Cor. 6.1.
and be used as the last Remedy, 1. Corinthians. 6.7. and tending rather to the
good of our Brother, then our own Satisfaction.

Thus of the eight Commandment, concerning the goods of our Neighbor.

The ninth follows, concerning his good Name.

Whereby we shall approve the measure of our spiritual growth, if we study
by all means to preserve the same, in our selves, and others, Eccl. 7.3.

This we shall do,

1 If we rejoice at his credit, Gal. 5.22. Romans 1.6.

2 And willingly acknowledge what we see in him, and only to speak thereof,
Tit. 3.2.

3 Delighting to hear all good reports hereof, Act. 16.1. yet not allowing the
vices of men, 2. Chron. 25.2.

4 Interpreting doubtful things to the better part, 1. Cor. 13.5. verse. 7.
Genes. 37.21.

5 Not to believe evil reports, Psalm. 15.3. Ierem. 40.14. but to be angry
with them, Proverb. 25.23.

6 Keeping secret his offense, unless it necessarily must be revealed, either
to prevent public danger, or further private good, Prou. 10.12. Matthew. 1.19.
and yet now, if it may be, rather with admonition to himself in private, then
reproaching publicly, Genes. 37. 1. Cor. 1.11. Matthew. 18.16.

7 To procure a good Name among men, and keep it, Phil. 4.8. And this,

First, by seeking Gods Glory, though with our disgrace, 2. Sam. 6.26, 27.

Secondly, by shaming our selves, by repentance for our sins.

Thirdly, by following after righteousness, Prou. 10.7. Mark. 14.9.

Fourthly, to judge and speak well of others, Matthew. 7.2. Eccles. 7.23, 24

Fifthly, abstaining from all gross evils, Eccl. 1.10.

Sixthly, Yea, from secret wickedness, lest God purge out the same with open
scandals.

Seventhly, Rejoicing in the Testimony, redounding unto us from others, for
well-doing, as being from the Lord, and for his sake, 1. Cor. 1.31. 2. Cor.
1.12. and 10.13.

Eighthly, Yea, glorying in any ill Report befalls us for well-doing; as having
hereby the true Reputation with God and good men, howsoever the wicked do
blaspheme, 1. Pet. 4.14.

Thus of the ninth Commandment.

Lastly, concerning the tenth Commandment, aiming at the highest perfection,
and meeting with the deepest cousenage, and deceit of our hearts; yea, casting
down our highest Imaginations, and utterly abasing the pride and confidence of
the Flesh.

This also will further mainely the trial of our spiritual Growth.

1 As meeting not only with the Mass of corruption, as being infectious to
others, Iam. 1.14. as our selves.

2 But also with the very first thoughts and sudden corrupt passions of the
heart, as being actual transgressions of the Righteous Law, Romans 7.9.

3 And whatsoever suggestions of Satan, being never so little dallyed with, or
entertained in the heart.

4 Much more, if the heart delight, and be tickled therewith; as foolish
wishes, dreams, etc.

But also inioyning both a sincere heart to our neighbor, 1. Tim. 1.5. as also
holy thoughts and motions of the Spirit in our selves, 1 Thessalonians. 5.23. Ephesians.
4.23.

And still commanding us to strive against all Lusts and evil Motions, Romans
7.22. 2. Cor. 12.7, 8, 9.

And so approving sincerity in the Inward man, and thereby graciously
furthering perfection.

Thus may we try, and further increase in grace, by the strict Rule of the
Law.

Lastly, because the Gospel both commands, and enables to perfection;
therefore specially by the Law thereof, we may try and further the Measure of
our Growth.

Now the Law of the Gospel is twofold:

First, Faith, 1. Ioh. 3.23. And

Secondly, Repentance, Matthew. 3.14.

So that as we believe, so we increase in Grace, Romans 15.13.

As we increase in the power of repentance, so we increase in the practice of
well-doing.

But of these, more fully afterward in the Rules.

Thus we have discerned, what Measure of Grace we may attain unto in this
life; that so we may be emptied in our selves, to give the Lord the only
Glory of his Mercies, and daily hold of our Head Christ Jesus, and not of our
selves; and so be still striving and hastening forward to perfection. Which
that we may the rather do, consider we in the next place, some special
Rules and Directions, for our further Trial and Comfort herein.

THE CONTENTS OF THE SEVENTH CHAPTER.
1. That God requires of us according to the Means he gives. 2. That the
Grace of God shall be sufficient for us. 3. That there are diverse Measures of
Grace, and yet each has that which is sufficient. 4. That the power of God is
seen in our weakness. 5. That the Spirit is a free worker in the Measure of
our Growth. 6. That our enduring of Afflictions, much serves hereto. 7. That
Gods power must be seen in our weakness. 8. That according to our callings,
so our Measure of Grace must be tried.
CHAP. 7. Of certain Rules for the discerning and judging the true scantling
and Measure of our Growth.
THe first Rule for the Trial of the Measure of our Growth, is, That God
requires of us according to the Means he vouchsafes for our spiritual Growth.

That is,

To him that has received much, much shall be required at his hands, Luke
12.47. To him that has less, God will require no more, Matthew. 25.27, 28, etc.

The ground hereof is threefold:

1 The Difference of the gifts of God in themselves.

As first, that some are general to all, both Elect and Reprobate: as those
which concern the managing of their Personal and Public Occasions, for this
life; as all Civil and Moral Gifts of Skill and Knowledge, concerning
personable Disposition, and common Trades, Vocations, and Sciences: And so such
Gifts of Wisdom, Diligence, etc. for the better execution of either.

Secondly, some are special, concercerning only the Elect, and these also are
either general to All, as simply necessary to salvation, such as Faith, Love,
Repentance, etc. or they are special, respecting their several Callings and
limited occasions therein, which are neither simply required in all, as Gifts
of Tongues, Prophesying, etc. at least not in all, in the like measure, and at
all times; as Assurance of Faith, Joy in the Holy Ghost, suffering constantly
for the Truth, Gift of Miracles, etc.

2 The different Dispensation of the Gifts of God, to several persons
diversely, according to their Callings and Occasions, as suitable thereunto, Romans
12.6, 7, 8. Ephesians. 4.6, 7, 8.

As first, not giving all sorts of Gifts unto any, but unto some one Gift, some
another, as their Calling and use is; and yet none shall be destitute of any
necessary Grace to Salvation.

Secondly, nor giving alike measure of the particular Gift unto All, at any
time, but unto some more, and some less, according to their several Callings
and Employment in the Church, and Commonwealth.

Thirdly, no not giving to any at the first, the full measure of his proper, no
not of his common Gift, but to each in due season, according to their
capacity, for them, and use of them in their several Callings and Turns, to
advance Gods power in their weakness.

A third ground herein is, the several administration of these gifts, which
being diverse, first, both according to the diverse measure, and occasions
thereof, secondly, as also to the different assistance of God, for the present
therein, thirdly, or difference of opposition against the same.

From all these, arise many comfortable Rules for the Trial of the Measure of
our Growth.

As first,

Though the first kind of Gifts are common to all sorts, yet seeing also they
are bestowed upon the Elect, 1. King. 5.6.
therefore hereby also may we discern the Measure of our spiritual Growth.

1. That as we receive these common gifts by our right in Christ, so we daily
improve and renew our right in Christ, by the holy use of them; sanctifying
them unto our selves by the Word and Prayer, as warranting thereto, and
enabling therein, and sanctifying us unto them, by renewing our Repentance, and
Covenant with our God in the Blood of Christ, that so justifying hereby our
right in them, we may both first improve them faithfully, in the right manner,
and true ends thereof, secondly, wait patiently upon our God in the issues of
the same, and thirdly, reap comfort and benefit by whatsoever success; that
if it speed not, according to our endeavor, we may yet have comfort in the
truth of our labor, and much more comfort, that these are not the maine: and so
it may be good for us to be disappointed in these, that we may make sure of
better evidences, and be more faithful in the best gifts. And if our success
be answerable to our endeavor, herein also we may have comfort of the
special blessing, in the common; that if it go well with us in these
inferior, much more then in the principal, as laying up a good foundation by
them against the day of Christ, 1. Tim. 6.19.

Thus by the improuing men of these common and inferior gifts, and different
success thereof, may we wisely discern the measure of our growing in grace,
and graciously increase in perfect holiness. As growing more in grace, the
more we are weaned from the love of these outward things, in the greatest
measure thereof: The more we can be abased in the use thereof, the more we
can improve them to the best ends: by how much the more our minds are
spiritual in these Earthly employments, and more wisely thereby fitted to
spiritual gifts, and use of them; the more we are contented in their wants
and least measure, and can with more patience submit to the will of our God,
both for the Measure and Issue thereof.

Thus even by these meanest and common Gifts, may we make trial of and
improve the Measure of our Growth.

2. As also by the diverse dispensation of them.

As first, that none has the fruition of every Gift; but according to the
diversity of Persons, Callings, and Use, so each has his several Gift,
though all are partakers of the common and special Gifts, necessary to
salvation.

And this serves graciously both to try the measure of our growth, and
further therein.

And that first, seeing our wise and holy God so dispenses his Gifts diversely,
as that yet he fits them graciously to each particular Calling and Occasion:
therefore if we find our selves sorted with such special gifts, as best
agree with our Constitutions, Callings, and Occasions in the Church and
Commonweal; hereby we may discern the truth of Grace, and so gather, by our
faithful employment thereof, an increase therein.

And so secondly, though we are not partakers of the like Gifts with others,
which are disposed to special uses; yet if we want not any necessary Grace,
which may serve for our own present use, hereby also may we try the truth
of the work, and so by faithful improuing such particular Gifts, graciously
thrive therein.

3. That seeing even such graces as are necessary for the finishing of the
work, are not dispensed unto us, in their full measure at the first, but so
enlarged and increased, as our capacity serves, and occasions do require:
Therefore, though we find not the full measure at the first, nay, rather find
a growing therein, according to the wisdom of the disposer, and our special
occasions, and so can improve and apply the same accordingly. Hereby we may
truly discern the Measure of our Growth, and still may further our thriuing
in Grace, and so also may reap sound comfort therein.

Thus of Trial by the diverse dispensation of the graces of God.

A third Rule yet remains, concerning the several administration of them,
both for the Trial of the Measure of our Growth, and comfort therein.

Namely, that seeing the Lord requires no more then he enables unto, and
enables no otherwise, then that still his power may be seen in weakness, and
his glory perfected in infirmity, and turns al things about to the best unto
us. Therefore,

1 As the gift is given, but in it order and measure, not fully once, but by
degrees according to the fit seasons: therefore if it be employed accordingly
thereunto, hereby we may discern the measure of our growth.

2 Seeing the divine assistance even in the use of the same measure of grace
proves usually different; either, because he may suspend, or enlarge as he
pleases, or somewhat may be in us, which may cause the suspension thereof,
either want of preparation, or neglect of repentance or confidence in our own
wisdom, or such like: therefore though now we find not the like success of
our endeauours, or happily find the contrary: yet may we not justly challenge
our thriuing in grace, nor that we have abated of our former measure, but
rather comfort our selves in what formerly we have found: And so relying on
Gods faithfulness, assure our selves of a recompense herein: so labor to
find out and remove the cause of this divine failing, that so we may not fail
of sufficient amends.

3. Seeing we must look for opposition in well doing, and the more we
endeavor, the more we shall be opposed, and so sometimes mainely disappointed
in our best endeauours for the present by the preuailings of tentation.
Therefore hereby shall we discern and approve the measure of our growth, if
we can more particularly descry the tentation, and be more humbled in our
yielding thereto: if we prove more diligent and earnest, even after our foyles,
and watch more seriously against future assaults. This does graciously evidence
the measure of our growth, and much avails to the increase of the same.

And thus of the first rule, that God requires of us according to the measure
he gives, as also of such particular branches thereof as serve to try the
measure of our spiritual growth.

A second comfortable rule hereto is, That the grace of God shall be
sufficient for us. That is,

That the measure which already we have attained by grace, for the present
shall be sufficient for us, to sustain us against tentation, to give us
acceptance with God, through the power of his free grace, that so we shall not
fall desperately backward again. And secondly, that grace whereby we have
come thus far forward, shall still be effectual and sufficient by new
supply to lead us yet further and further till Jesus Christ be perfected in us.

The grounds hereof are these, first, in regard of God,

1. The absolute power of God herein, in giving that measure of grace which
best pleases him. 2. Phil. 15.

2. His singular wisdom in disposing of the measure he gives, as fittest for
our present estate and occasions.

3. His infinite goodness in accepting the measure he bestows, above all
worth thereof, in the merit of his Son.

4. His incompatible glory, who thus disposes of the Measure, and accepts
the same, that he may have the only glory of his Power and Wisdom and
Mercy, in disposing and accepting of his gifts, as may wholly respect the same.

2 In respect of our selves.

1. Our Incapacitie of receiving some gifts, or the measure of them.

2. Our Infidelity and Aptness, to limit our God unto the Gifts, and Issue
thereof.

3. Our different occasions for the use of his gifts, in their several seasons.

Out of which arises these comfortable Conclusions, for the Trial and
furtherance of the Measure of our spiritual Growth.

As first for Trial,

That seeing what we have for the present shall be sufficient, whether we
fail in our endeavors, or succeed well therein, and that through the free
grace of God comforting us in our desires, though we fail in the issue, and
accepting the success far above the worth thereof. Therefore, if now we can
still rely upon the free grace of God, referring our selves to what success
it please him, and yet not neglecting the use of any means, whereby we may
attain the best success, comforting our selves in our faylings, by what we
would do, and ^umbling our selves in what we have done, as being full of
weakness and corruption, and still relying on Gods free grace, for our
further enabling; this is a gracious evidence of the Measure of our Growth.

2 Seeing the Grace of God is free and so constant, as to perfect the work he
has begun in us, and therefore we shall certainly in due time attain
perfection; therefore if in all our endeavors and proceeding, we still rely
on Gods free grace, both for the acceptance of our persons, that we may be
enabled to well doing, as also for the undertaking and prosecuting of the
work, merely held of his free grace, specially in the issue thereof, submit
wholly thereto, and comfort our selves in the acceptance of our persons, above
all worth of our well doing, and in the truth of Gods promises beyond al
present performance of the same, living still by faith in Jesus Christ, and
seeing a far off by faith into the glory which shall be revealed; shall
endeavor still to cast away every thing that presses down, and shake off the
special sin that hangs so fast on us, that so we may run with joy the
race that is set before us. This is a sure evidence of our spiritual growth,
hereby we shall approve and improve daily the measure thereof.

Lastly, seeing whatsoever we are or shall be, is of Gods free bounty, and
superaboundant grace: therefore if in whatsoever we are or do, we ascribe all
to the mere goodness of God, doing all our works for us, and crowning all
our works in us, enabling us to do above what we can desire or think, and
accepting what we do above any ability or worth in, and of our selves.
Hereby we may truly evidence the measure of our spiritual growth, the more
we can depend upon the absolute goodness of God: and so may graciously
improve and further our hastening on to perfection.

A fourth rule hereunto is,

That

As there are diverse measures of glory, so there are also diverse measures of
grace suitable thereunto. And yet each shall have sufficient to make up his
particular measure: and this, according to the free grace of God, who gives to
each as it pleases him And this according to his unspeakable Wisdom, to
reserve the glory of his mercy entirely unto himself: yet so, as that,

1 In the diversity of measure, each shall have sufficient to the end they are
ordained.

2 Each shall hereby be more serviceable to each other, for the present, common
good, and future maine End, even the glory of God.

3 And so each shall hereby provoke other more effectually in their several
measure to their maine End, the glory of God, and their own salvation.

Out of which Ground arise these most comfortable Conclusions.

1 That seeing the wise Lord dispenses severally, according to his pleasure;
therefore we must be contented with what he has disposed, and yet not
neglect the means, whereby we may both confirm what we have, and also
increase it in our several occasions.

2 That seeing in this Diversity yet each shall have sufficient; therefore we
may neither envy the greater measure of others, nor be dejected in our own
less: but rather with thankfulness bless our God, that it is more then we
deserve, and in all cheerfulness and diligence improve the same. finding this
as an evidence of the truth of the Measure, and our good husbandry therein,
that we so rest in the same, as still to hasten forward to the Price that is
set before us; and measure our selves and others, as we follow Christ, and
endeavor to be partakers of his fullness, that God may be be all in all in us.

And hereunto serves a fifth Rule.

That the Spirit works freely, as in the manner, so especially in the measure
thereof.

That is,

Whereas the work of Grace is the only work of Gods Power and Goodness, and
that only for his glory; therefore, seeing nothing in us can further or hinder
him therein, it must needs follow, that as by his Spirit he begins the work
in us freely, when and how he pleases; so also does he most freely lead
forward the same, both by what means and manner seems best to his divine
wisdom: yea, then does most express this admirable liberty, when by reason
of greater oppositions without, and tentations within, his glory may be the
more preserved, or impeached. And this false out in the greater measure of our
Grows. Because now; we shall be subject to more inward buffettings, of
spiritual Pride, vain glory, Hypocrisy, or the like, to hinder our true
judgment thereof, or the further thriuing therein: And now we shall be more
privy to the deceitfullnesse of our hearts and power of corruption, which
without his special grace, may distract and confound us in the same: Yea we
shall want greater oppositions from without, by slanders, persecutions, and to
discourage, and deiect therein. And therefore herein the liberty of the spirit
does appear more wisely and gloriously, either suspending some opperations
thereof, which might cause those spiritual ends, or leaving us to some outward
evils, to purge out those that are inward, and yet sustaining us wonderfully
with secret evidences to control the deceitfulnes of the heart, and satisfy
us graciously against the chalenges thereof: and to comfort us also in the
greatest sense of inward corruption: Yea mightily arming us with inward power
to overcome all outward oppositions, and recompensing the same gloriously with
more inward, unspeakable and glorious joy. And yet in all these working most
freely, both concerning the time, and measure and means, as pleases him. That
he may have the only glory of all his works, and flesh may be confounded in
all confidence therein.

Of which more Particularly in the Cases hereafter.

From whence arise these most comfortable Rules for the Trial of the measure
of our Growth and proceeding therein

As first, that seeing the Spirit works freely, even from the Beginning to
the end of the work, therefore we must discern the Measure of our Growth by
the Free working of the Spirit, both affording what measure of ability it
pleases him in weldoing as also giving such success thereto, as may still
evidence it absolute liberty, and reserve the glory entirely unto God; that
so we may neither be puffed up with good success, to hinder further
proceeding, nor confounded in the contrary, to challenge the truth of the work.

2 That in our greatest measure we still depend upon the liberty of the
Spirit, affording comfort therein, and ability to improve the same aright, and
so still to go forward, and also wisely tempering our best endeavors with many
interruptions and disappointments; that so the flesh may be abased, and all
carnal glory confounded.

But of this before, in the opening of that Resemblance.

A sixth Rule hereto is,

That the Power of God is seen in our weakness, and his glory perfited in
our infirmities.

That is,

Seeing our estate in Grace is imperfect at the best, by reason of inward
Corruption still accompanying the same, and also of outward Tentations
hindering thereof; and all this, that God only may have the glory of all his
mercies: Therefore necessarily must our weakness be daily subdued by the
power of God, which otherwise would prevail to overthrow the Work, or else
wisely turned to the furtherance of the Work, that the glory of both may
only redound to the Lord: Both the glory of his Power, in subduing or more
weakening Corruption daily, which of it self necessarily increases, and of
our selves we are no way able to subdue: As also the glory of his Wisdom, in
weakening and subduing Corruption by such means and in such manner, as in all
likelihood of flesh serves more to enrage and increase the same, as by
Afflictions, Desertions, and such like. Yea, wonderfully turning about the
sense and power of Corruption, not only to the weakening thereof, but also to
further us graciously to a greater increase of Grace.

From whence do arise these comfortable conclusions to discern the Measure of
Grace, and further us therein.

First, that seeing the Power of God is seen in weakness. Therefore as we
may not look for any further Measure of grace in this life, then what is
accompanied with much weakness, so we may hereby discern that to be a
competent and thriuing measure of grace, which s^rues most to discover
corruption, tends most to the ab^sing and subduing thereof. So that the more
we feel the burden of corruption, the more we are sure that we grow in
Grace, the more we discern the deceitfulness of the heart, and perverseness of
our thoughts, the more light and grace we have received. Yea the more we are
abased and emptied of all confidence in our own ability, the more we are
interessed in the power of God. The more we discern our faylings in the best,
and renounce our own righteousness, the more we live by Faith in the
righteousness of Christ, and so thereby shall be more enabled to Perfection.

Secondly seeing the Glory of God is Perfected in Infirmity: Therefore if in
all our actions we aim at Gods glory, subbordinating our chiefest good
thereunto, and still denying our selves and best righteousness; that he only
may be glorified in the beginning and leading forward of the work. This is a
gracious evidence of the Measure of our Growth: hereby we may reap found
comfort in the greatest sense of our infirmities.

But of this more heretofore in that Rule that we must live by Faith and not
by sense.

A seventh Rule hereto is,

That seeing Affliction is a gracious Means and Trial of our spiritual
Growth; therefore hereby we have some light to discern the Measure thereof;
especially in those Afflictions which strip us of rejoicing in the flesh. Which
usually is no mean encouragement, to striving in well-doing, that we may have
praise with men, serve our present turns.

1. Such are Slanders and Reproaches for well-doing, Ill requital when we
have done our best, because happily we have mingled some carnal Ends
therewith.

And,

2. Disappointment of hopes for present occasion, both spiritual and outward.

3. No comfort in Prayer, having the Word, but rather greater sense of
Corruption.

If now in these strange Crossings and Confusions we can so carry our selves,
as though we must be humbled herein, because some cause is in our selves, yet
still we must and can go forward, holding to the testimony of our conscience in
the truth of what we have done, and yet renouncing the verdit thereof, to be
justified thereby, can still in obedience to our God through the power of
Christ wrestle against these confusions, as that still we prove more serious
and spiritual in well doing: not so much to stop the mouth of the wicked, as
to approve the sincerity of our hearts unto our God, and grow more familiar
with him, weaning our selves from popularitie and by-respects, and retyring our
selves into the secrets of the Almighty: this is gracious evidence of our
increase, in a good measure of grace, of our hastening to perfection, and
eternal glory.

Assuring our selves that though in regard of corruption now more discovered,
and opposing, we are like to meet with more affronts, both from within and
without. Yet as these do call for a greater supply of Gods grace to subdue
them: so they argue a greater measure of heavenly light, by discerning and
striving against them, and so shall interesse us in a greater measure of Gods
power to master the same, yea shall be a means to provoke us to a more
earnest stirring up of the spirit in us to assist us in the conquest, enable us
to a more diligent use of our spiritual weapons to encounter the same, and
yield us more experience of the wisdom and power of God enabling us herein,
be more humbled in the sense of our own traitorous heart, daily laboring to
betray us herein and so daily more provoked to the denial of our selves, that
we may still be found in Christ, and by his power enabled to perfection.

And comforting our selves, that as our greater measure of trial argues a
greater measure of Grace, because the Lord will lay no more upon us than what
we shall be able to endure, and will give an issue to the tentation, according
to his grace, and as it shall be best for us: therefore shall his grace be
sufficient for us, to bear the brunt, that we may not be overcome thereof,
and the same grace that sustaines in the combat, will enable us to such a
conquest therein, as that still we may hold of Gods free grace for our
humiliation, and wait upon the same, for our present deliverance, and hunger
after the full measure thereof, for our final deliverance out of all our
troubles.

The last rule for the trial of the measure of our spiritual Growth and
comfort therein, is, that Golden Rule of the blessed Apostle.

Namely.

That all things work together for the best to those that love God, even to
those that are called according to his purpose.

That is,

Seeing the work of our sanctification is of Gods free grace, so leading
forward the same, that as may serve to our maine Good even to attain the Goal
and also the maine end, even the glory of our God. And therefore though we are
like to meet with many interruptions of sin and afflictions to hinder the
work, in regard of our own inward corruption and the malice of Satan, and
outward occasions working their part: yet seeing the Lord promised to perfect
the work he has begun in us, therefore will he herein especially make good
his word, to supply us with such outward means, as may further the same;
namely, the continual operation of his spirit, furnishing ^s, with all helps
hereunto. By the power whereof, even all outward and contrary means shall be
wonderfully turned about to the best unto us, even to further our reckoning
against the day of Christ.

So that if we find this experience in our selves, that we make advantage of
troubles and sins to further us hereunto, we may safely conclude that the
grace of God is not in vain in us. That we have attained to a glorious measure
thereof. Particularly, if we find that our troubles and afflictions more
weary us from the love of the world, and serve more to the emptying of the
flesh of all carnal confidence, if they make us more compassionate and
charitable in iudgeing and relieuing others and prove gracious antidotes to
prevent the breaking out of corruption, more effectual purgations to eat out
the core thereof, if we find that our troubles are still warring to prepare
for further trials, and wise preservatives to keep us from vnnecessaries
dangers: And so thereby grow more watchful against future assaults and the
occasions thereof our sins: And yet can with more patience and cheerfulness
bear them, and so wait upon our God with more thankfulness and contentment
in the issues of the same, quieting our selves in such issue, as though it
cross our present expectation, yet it may serve to our future good, and
affords (if we can see by faith) no small advantage for the present. These
are gracious evidences that they work together for the best unto us, and so
do truly avouch a great measure of Grace.

The like may be said concerning our sins. The same Rules serving truly for
both, of which I spare now further to entreat, because you shall hear hereof
anon more fully in the Cases of Conscience particularly explaining and
resolving the same.

THE CONTENTS of the 9. chapter.
1. Zeal of Gods glory. 2. Constant delight in the Word. 3. Contentation in
Gods providence. 4. Deeper sight of corruption. 5. Greater tenderness of
conscience 6. Mourning for the sins of the time. 7. Retirednes from the
world. 8. Masterie of our affections. 9. Victory over special corruptions.
10. Spiritual wisdom to discern of things that differ. 11. Answering the
Lord according to the means.
CHAP. 8. Of the marks of spiritual Growth and Trial thereof.
FRom this that has been observed concerning the manner and measure of our
spiritual growth, and such Rules as do serve for the trial of both, and
improuement of the same, to our further increase, and also for comfort therein:
we may easily discern the several marks and signs thereof.

These are either general both concerning our selves and others.

Or special also concerning as well others as our selves.

Touching the signs and marks these in respect of our selves generally are:

First, increase of saving knowledge both in the power of corruption and
deceitfulness of our hearts.

2. As also in the sleights and methods of Satan working and prevailing
thereupon. 3. And specially in the great Mystery of Christ, enabling to
prevail against them all. 4. And so of our true scantling and measure of
proceeding herein.

All these are undoubted fruits of saving knowledge: and to the discerning of
our saving knowledge in each of these, we must try the power thereof, by these
several Marks. As first,

Concerning the Power of corruption.

That we then truly discern it, and have gained some good measure of the
knowledge thereof.

First, if we are skillful in the root and fountain thereof; namely,
original sin. 1. Both of the general defilement thereof, polluting each
part of soul and body, that so we may be wholly convinced thereby, of utter
inabilitie to good, and pronenes to all evil; and thereby justify the Lords
just hatred of us, and auersenes toward us, either to do us any good, or free
us from evil, as being holy, and so can have no fellowship with us, as being
just, and so will not any way reli^ue us.

And this knowledge serves,

1 To confound us utterly in any good we do, or can do* seeing it is altogether
infatuated by this pollution.

2 To condemn our selves for any evil we do, because our filthy nature is
the maine cause thereof; it can yield no better fruit, though there may be
outward occasions thereof.

3 And so wholly to submit us to whatsoever chastisements we endure for the
present, and prepare us to whatsoever is to come, because we have deserved
infinitely more.

4 So to cast us utterly out of our selves, and, relying upon our own
ability, either to do good, or avoid evil.

5 And so to prepare us to hunger after the righteousness of Christ alone, by
which we shall only be relieved herein.

A second thing that we must be acquainted withal concerning original
corruption, is, That not only as sour leaven, it has leauened and corrupted
the whole mass of our own bodies and souls, and whatsoever we do, or can
do; but also that as a filthy leprosy it spreads it self, to the infection
of all round about us, and belonging to us, even all the creatures whatsoever,
farther off, or nearer; whatsoever is most dear and near unto us.

And this serves,

1 To justify the providence of God, in turning the creatures, appointed for
our good, either to plague us with their opposition, or to humble us in their
want of subjection, and expected supply unto us.

2 To confound us in our liberty over the creatures, because we have utterly
lost it; and do evidence our loss, by our necessary abuse of them, either in
defect, or excess; and do pay for our abuse, either by being deprived of them,
or being not satisfied with them, either turning the^ to our present confusion,
or hinderance to our present and future good.

3 To subject us wisely, to what we have aimed them to, even whatsoever
punishments are by them inflicted upon us.

4. To be careful daily to sanctify the^ unto us, and watch over our selves
in the use of them, lest our corruption infect them anew; not to desire them
greedily, lest we seek our bane; nor grieve immoderately for the loss of
them, seeing they are our enemies; not to envy others that enjoy them, nor
admire them herein; seeing they are no better then swords to cut their throats.

5. But rather to turn our affections upon our selves, grieuing for our sins
that cause this enmity, and abuse, desiring to be eased of sin, that these
may be no burden unto us, enjoying our happiness therein, if it only consist
in these, and admiring the mercy of our God, that yet we have any use thereof,
fearing our selves most, when we have most share of them, because we are like
to be beaten with more stripes, at most shall find them lets unto us in better
things.

And comforting our selves in the want of them, that we are eased of an heavy
burden, and so may go lightlyer on our iourny; may more depend upon heavenly
supply, and hunger more earnestly after heavens fullness.

6. Laboring above all to be found in Christ, who has slain hatred: In whom
our right is restored to these, by whom grace is supplied to use them aright,
contentment afforded in each measure thereof obtained, and blessing thereupon,
as shall be best for us.

A third thing to be known in original corruption, is, That it not only
defiles our selves, and infecteth others: But also thereby utterly disinables
us to any good, and corrupts all natural and moral good that is in us, and
so provoke us to all evil upon occasion, as being the seed and life thereof;
yea as a filthy harlot, allures Satan and all sorts of tentations, to further
the delight and consummation of all kind of wickedness. And this serves,

1. To our utter abasing in our selves, as having no possibility to good, all
aptnes and readiness to evil. To advance the providence of God, in restrayning
us from such desperate evils, for the more quiet and common government of the
world.

His mercy, in keeping us from such excess as others fall into, that our
condemnation may be the less.

His justice, in leaving us to what our nature so affects, and rest in.

His wisdom, in turning such corruption to so great good, even to send us out
of our selves, unto Christ.

His power, in subduing such a monster of corruption, and taming it
wonderfully, by his mighty and yet easy yoke.

A fourth thing to be known in this original leprosy, is, That it binds by
the guilt thereof, to all sorts of punishments, both of body and soul, state
and all, and that both present and to come.

And this teaches,

1 To justify the Lord in all hi^ judgments, as being righteous.

2 To advance his mercy and admirable wisdom, both in the measure of his
chastisements, as being far less the^ our desert, such as we may endure; and
also in the use and end of them, and serving to kill the Cockatrice that bred
the egg, to save the sinner by the smart of his flesh, which in it self
usually increases sin and punishment.

3. To confound man in himself, as the author of his own woe, and

4. So to send him for relief out of himself, where it may be found.

The last thing to be known concerning original corruption, is, That like a
Gangren it mortifies and makes senseless and liuelesse, wheresoever it
spreads, and it spreads a^l over, until it be healed; s^ that as hereby our
state by nature is vtter^^ incurable of it self: so in this it is incurab^e,
because it has no sense of it rott^n est^t^, b^t to delight therein: and so
rei^cts or corrupts all medicines that may cu e the same.

And this serves,

1. Yet much more to confound all ability or wisdom of the flesh, which is
enmity against God; plots it own destruction greedily, by delight and
prosecuting of sin; is led captive by Satan at his will, and so fast bound by
the chains of his own cursed lusts, to eternal vengeance.

2. To magnify the wonderful power, wisdom, mercy, and justice of the Lord.

His power, in raising from the dead.

His wisdom, in making way hereby for the Messiah to perform the work of
redemption.

His free mercy, in saving such a desperate state.

His justice, in leaving man to what he chooses and delights in, and filling
him with the fruit of his own inventions.

Thus must we be acquainted with the root from whence we sprang, and with
the several branches thereof. And so the more we discern the particulars
thereof, the more we labor against those streams which come more
immediately, and primarily from this fountain. The more we may evidence our
spiritual growth. As that,

1 Seeing our thoughts are the prime and immediate sprouts that issue
therefrom, therefore that we make more conscience of these, being humbled more
for evil, comforted more in good; more careful to nourish and increase these,
and prevent or suppress and diminish the other: Watching hereunto over our
hearts most warily, and keeping a strict government and audite therein:

2 Seeing lesser evils, as vain words etc. as they proceed from that most
dangerous effect of Natural corruption, preuaricating true judgment, and so
mistaking things, as not sensible of them: so herein they are more dangerous,
though not in themselves; because, either they are not discerned, or diminished
and misconceiued, as excluding repentance, and so exposing to greater evils:
Therefore to make conscience of the smallest sins, more to take notice of
them, more to be humbled for them, is an evident mark of a great measure of
Grace.

3 As by reason of natural corruption we affect all sin: So specially we
delight in that, which most agrees with our filthy nature, as to satisfy, so
also approve the same: so that according to our several complections, company,
calling, stream of time, etc. we are more specially addicted to some one
sin, above another. And the danger hereof is this, that the reigning of our
Master sin, does not only challenge the truth of any grace at all: but even
the remay^ing of such beloved Dalila, and preuayling in us, is both a maine
blemish in the face, to disgrace the beauty of profession, and also a sharp
thorn, to pierce the Conscience: Yea, it proves a maine bar to hinder
Repentance, and grieve the Spirit, and so becomes often times the means to lull
Sampson asleep, and thereby to bereave him of his strength, and pluck out his
eyes, and so to expose him to the malice and scorn of his Enemies.

And therefore seeing these Darlings will hardly be cast out, or kept out from
returning again; it is therefore a great portion of grace, either to cast out
these altogether, or else to make them like the Gibeonites, more serviceable to
better use, either to humble us the more, or to cast us daily more entirely on
the free grace of God: And so still trying our strength hereupon, acknowledging
our weakness herein; comforting our selves, that in these we most condemn
our selves; these are always in our eye, these are chief in our chase; these
serve to sharpen our sorrows, to abase our greatest comforts; these further
patience in troubles, and make all pleasures tedious unto us; these specially
weane us from the World, and provoke us to hunger after our dissolution.

4 Seeing natural corruption, as it is mortified, and insensible, so it also
creepes secretly like a Gangrene, not appearing so much or so soon in the
flesh, and outward parts, but inwardly preying upon the most inward and noble
parts, and rotting at the heart, while the outside is not touched: so that
outward duties may be performed even from a rotten heart, and evils may be
left or restrained outwardly, though the heart inwardly be more affected and
enraged therewith. Therefore it is an evidence of a great measure of grace, to
affect and love that good the more, wherein we have failed outwardly; yea
though we have soundly smarted therefore, and to increase our endeavors, for
the performance thereof: And it is no small portion thereof, more to hate the
evil we would not do, and yet cannot choose, more to suspect our own
strength, and avoid the occasions thereof, more especially to watch over our
Christian liberty; as giving way thereto, and excusing the same.

5 And seeing our corruption being inward and deceitful, does therefore give
way more often and willingly to secret evils, as serving more daungerously to
harden the heart, and yet satisfy the lusts thereof, and yet to preserve the
credit of civil honesty, or outward profession, which open and gross sins
would disgrace, and usually hides or excuses the same upon pretense of
necessity, infirmity, etc. Therefore, seeing the power of grace labors
especially to subdue the wisdom of the flesh, it is therefore a sure mark of
a great increase thereof, if it specially takes notice of secret and spiritual
evils, as hypocrisy, security, spiritual Pride, Vain glory, carnal policy
in sinning closely, and hiding it, enabling us as to avoid sin in secret
specially, because the eyes of the Lord are upon the most secret, and to do
good in secret, that we may avoid those spiritual snares of hypocrisy, vain
glory, security, and the like. And procuring in us a more free and particular
confession of sins, though it be to the shaming of our selves, that we may
seek the face of our God in the righteousness of his son, for the pardon
thereof, laying the blame thereof only upon our selves, and renouncing our
selves utterly, for relief herein.

6 Seeing by this inbred corruption we are not only defiled our selves, but
also do infect others thereby. Therefore may we also approve a great measure
of Grace, if we prove more conscionable in the sanctifying, more reverend, and
moderate in the use of the Creatures, not delight in their Enmity procured by
our sin, are more compassionate of them, and yet less affected toward them,
specially seeing hereby we have proved most injurious to our kind, making our
friends enemies; by our sin, our children and servants, neighbors and
strangers all faring the worse hereby. If then we can love our enemies, to
make them friends to God, and mourn for our friends that are enemies to God,
taking to heart the sins of the time, and bearing a part in the afflictions
of the Church abroad, though we are quiet at home, preferring the common good
before our own private; these are gracious evidences of a great Measure of
grace.

7 Whereas this corruption makes us prone to all evil, and backward to all
good: Therefore, the more we find our selves forward to all good, as well as
some; more cheerful in performance thereof, even when there is most general
opposition; more patient in the success thereof, as having deserved nothing:
Hereby we do approve a greater Measure of grace.

8 And so also if we find a greater hatred of all evil; more hearty sorrow
for the doing thereof; more care to admonish others, to beware by our f^lls;
more jealousy of our selves, to prevent Relapse; more wisdom to avoid the
occasions thereof, and to defend our selves more profitably against future
assaults.

9 Seeing by the Chains of this Corruption we are fast bound within and
without, to all present and future plagues; therefore the more peace of
Conscience we find within, more entire fellowship with God, in private Prayer*
Meditation, etc. more joy in his presence, more contentment in his providence:
These are sure evidences of a great Measure of grace.

And so on the other side, if we find more willingness to troubles without,
more cheerfulness in them, more benefit by them, more patience to wait on our
God in the issues of them, more compassion of the troubles of our brethren,
more wisdom to make our peace with God, more care to keep peace with men, more
sorrow for sin, then for our smart, more care to sanctify the trouble, then
to be rid of it. These are sure marks of a good thriuing in grace.

Thus concerning the knowledge of original corruption, and such branches
thereof, whereby we may know whether we have increased in grace generally.

A second thing to be known for the further trial of this increase; is the
deceitfulness of our hearts, arising from that cursed spring, and more
infecting and increasing the same: for as it deceiues the heart, by it
sudden, and secret motion, near and familiar semblance, so agreeing with the
lusts thereof, and cloaking the same, by it fair shows of Free will,
necessity, infirmity, etc. So that the heart conceiues this Original blame,
either not to be evil at all, or not so evil, but that it has some mixture
of, or ability to good, or that its nothing at all, till it come to consent or
Act, or rather that its good; as arguing the free disposition of Nature, and
furthering it to much good: So hereby also the heart deceiues it. As either
giving the reins more freely thereto, and thereby enraging it to greater
confusion; or so only curing it, as that only lopping off the branches, and not
plucking up the root, it both gives it some rest, to it more inward
nourishment, and makes it also more fruitful to put forth any kind of evil,
upon all occasions.

And this is that maine deceitfulness of the heart, which we must especially
take notice of. And hereby we shall easily discern all other deceits thereof,
either in judgment, or practice, whereby it deceiues it self and others, and
so is deceived of it self and others.

It were infinite to run over all these, and indeed impossible to discover
them all, because the heart of man is deceitful above all things: who can know
it? only we will endeavor, according to our poor experience, to point at
some in each kind, as capital above the rest, by the observing and inueagling
whereof, we may the better prevail against any inferior.

First then the heart deceiues it self in the judgment of things, and that
chiefly, when it uses his own blind and false Spectacles therein, and so
necessarily either mistakes good for evil, and evil for good, or else a
lesser or apparent good for a greater, a greater and apparent evil for a
less, or that which only seems so. And so is deceived hereby both in it
choice, as shooting in a broken Bow, that will fly about his ears; or in a
crooked Bow, and so he must needs shoot awry; or in an unfit Bow, and so he
must needs shoot short, or over, if either it be too weak for him, or he for
it: Or else he is deceived in his aim, and so lights over, or under; or else
in his mark, and so loses his labor, and wager too, though he hit the
stake.

And that we may perceive how easily in all these, he may deceive himself,
and be deceived; consider (I pray you) another deceit of the heart: That though
it would gladly trust it self, and no other; yet because it has need of
others, and so is convinced of it own insufficiency: therefore to make a
virtue of necessity, it must range abroad, and finds this it wisest and safest
way to serve himself of others, even by serving their turns, and observing
their ways; abiecting himself basely to their humors and guise, that both
he may supply himself with what good he seeks, and secure himself of what
evil he fears; especially may hereby justify, or at least excuse it own
deceitfulness.

Thus the heart usually deceiues it self, and is deceived thereby, while
taking his shoes at others Lasts and Fashions, he either so pincheth
himself, that he cannot go, or must needs go loosely or daungerously upon
such Pattens, and Stilt-tops; or tire in the midway, because his shoes will
deceive him. So befalls it all such, as see with other men's eyes, and travail
with such false Guides, as Custom, Example, Multitude, etc. Civil honesty,
Profession, Laws of Men, and the like.

Thus does the heart deceive it self in the judgment of things, and so is
deceived thereby.

And so error in judgment (as has been shown) breeds deceit in practice,
either to take a wrong way, or else to fall foul in the right; either by too
slow and late entrance and pace therein, as by late Repentance, or supine
negligence, security, and presumption, etc. or by ouer-hastie running our
selves out of breath, and tyring half way; by blind zeal, selfe-confidence,
carnal wisdom, superstition, vainglory, etc. the foolish heart deceiving
it self herein, and being deceived thereby.

And hence proceeds another deceit of the heart: that as it has been
deceived, by taking his aim from others; so he has no way, either to excuse
it self, and cry quittance with others, then to deceive them again, that all
may go to hell for company. And this it does, even by the same means, whereby
it deceiues it self, and is deceiu^d by them. So that if we can wisely
discern^ this deceitfulness of the heart, in it particular ways, and so the
less trust it, when it most faines, and cries arm with the soonest; the more
build upon it, when it most humbles, and puts us to a Nonplus in our selves:
These are undoubted signs of a great measure of Grace.

Thus of the second evidence, namely, the knowledge of the hearts
deceitfulness.

A third thing to be known to evidence our spiritual growth, is the sl^ights
and stratagems of Satan, working upon our corruption and deceitful hearts.

These we shall know,

1 By better acquaintance with our own wicked hearts, which answers (as face
to face) Satan's entendments, and so by betraying it self to him, prouokes him
to suit his tentations agreeable to it several dispositions.

2 By experimental knowledge of the Word of God, whereby we shall be able to
discern his Methods.

3 By earnest prayer unto our God, and more familiarity with him, who will not
fail hereby to reveal the same unto us.

4 By taking notice of the diverse occasions of others in the Church, who will
not fail in their several ways and sleights to discover Satan in them unto
us.

5 Wisely observing the policy and wisdom of the Time, which has so many
sleigh^s of Satan as mysteries in the managing of it affairs.

6 In viewing the mysteries of the Man of sin, which are so many stratagemes
of the Devil.

7 Specially observing his sleights in our afflictions; and that most of all.
in the affliction of Conscience, wherein each Buffet is no better then an Arrow
from his Quiver.

8 And at the time of departure, wherein he will be sure to leave no stone
vnrouled.

Thus may we be acquainted with Satan's subtilties.

Among the rest, as sure evidences of a great measure of Grace, observe we:
these, besides what have been noted before in the Means.

First, it we can discern Satan transformed into an Angel of Light, that is,

1 If we can discern of Spirits, and discover false Prophets and Hypocrites,
in some good probability, so far as the Word reueales.

2 If we can distinguish between Gifts of Illumination and Sanctification.

3 If we can discern between spiritual wickedness and most spiritual
graces, which they usually accompany; and can watch most against these, in the
greatest comfort of the other.

4 If we can wisely distinguish the abuse from the use of things, not
slumbling on the one, while we have liberty in the other; especially watching
over our Christian liberty herein.

5 And so can wisely confine our selves within the bounds of the Word, not
expecting Revelations, nor relying on Dreams beyond it, nor superstitiously
doting on our Fancies beside it.

6 And so taking heed of presumption, shall still hasten our place to Heaven,
in the sense of our own faylings; and relying wholly on Gods free grace for
enabling and accepting us, shall pass the time of our Pilgrimage in fear:
These are lively tokens of a great measure of grace, as euidencing our skill
and wisdom, to meet with such special sleights of Satan, whereby he
assaults us in an Angell-like shape.

2 If we can discern Christ from the thieves upon the Cross, and lay hold on
him in the dark, and deep of greatest Agonies.

This we may do,

1 By living by faith in Gods Promises, never to fail us.

2 By relying on the power of God, which will now be more exalted.

3. By adoring the wisdom of God in preventing hereby worse evils of
presumption, security, spiritual pride, vainglory, etc.

4. Abasing our selves more before the Lord in the search and judgment of our
hearts.

5. Meditation of his providence, in delivering others from greater brakes.

6. Earnest prayer to our God, to sustain us in the furnace.

7. Remembering former comforts.

8. And meditation of future joys.

And hereby we shall know that we have not labored in vain.

1. If we can rest upon our God with patience, both for the time, means,
manner, and issue of our troubles.

2. If we stick close to the word, for relief, and will not be driven from
it.

3. If we grow more tender in iudgeing, and compassionate in relieuing others
in the like afflictions.

4. If we neglect not the least spark of hope, but can benefit thereby.

5. If we continue faithful in what we have or may, though it be bootelesse as
we think, yea increase our smart

6. If we rest on Gods power, though we find no apprehension of his will.

7. And so can still cry unto him, though he hears not.

And thus of the third thing to be known hereunto.

A fourth thing to be further discovered herein, is, the mystery of Christ,
whereby all the sleights of Satan and Antichrist are dissolved.

This we shall know,

If we not only be acquainted with his incarnation, wonderful union of two
natures in one person, glorious offices, admirable works of Death,
Resurrection, Glorification, Mediation, and such like; for these we may know,
yea believe hystorically and true, yet have no life in him.

But there are two special mysteries in this great Mystery of Christ, which
as non^ can know, but to whom the spirit reueales them, so to know these, is to
be known of Christ, and to have fellowship with him.

The great Mystery of Christ, is, the reconciling of God and man together by
the blood of his Cross, and so, that inseperable union betwixt God and man. 1.
Ioh. 1. Ioh. 17.

The Particulars of this great mystery, are,

1. That we are in Christ. Gal. 2.20

2. That Christ is in us. Col. 1.27.

These are the special Mysteries infolded in that great Mystery of Christ,
which no man can know, but by the spirit of Christ, and who so knows them
knows sufficient to salvation. Examine we therefore our selves whether we
know them as we ought to know.

The former of these, that we are in Christ, is grounded upon a double
Mystery, as the spirit lays it down. Namely, 1. That Christ which knew no
sin, was made sin by God his Father for our sake.

2. That we might be made the righteousness of God in him. 2. Cor. 5.21.

And so is also the later Mystery: so says the Spirit, If Christ be in you,
there is the Mystery. The grounds hereof are these that follow; The body is
dead because of sin, there is one Mysteri^; and the spirit is life because of
righteousness, there is the other. And each of these grounds do afford us
gracious light to discern both these Mysteries severally, as also how they
make up that main Mystery of our atonement and union with God in Christ.

For concerning the former ground, as it specially discouers the works of
justification by Christ, so it also unfolds two wonderful mysteries whereby
our justification is effected, namely one, That Christ which knew no sin, was
made of God sin for us, showing therein: 1. The means and manner whereby he
did justify us: namely, by offering up himself in our stead, as a surety to
pay what we ought, and a sufficient expiation by his blood to the payment
thereof. 2. The necessary effect of this royal payment in us, namely, that we
might be made the righteousness of God in him; that is, that being engrafted in
him by faith, and thereby applying to our selves what he did for us, we might
be esteemed righteous of God, and before him.

And so do we become to be in Christ by faith, being ingrafted in, and so made
one with him: And so being ingrafted into him by the power of his spirit, we
are changed from our barren old stock into his Image and fatness, enabled to
bring forth wholesome fruit, by his spirit which dwells in us, and he by
his spirit, even to die unto sin, as he has dyed for our sin, and to live
unto righteousness. And this is the other ground of the other mystery, namely,
that Christ is in us, expressing the work of our sanctification, necessarily
following on the former in order, though one in time with it, and by the same
means euidencing our being in Christ by his being in us, and making up the
perfect knot of this unspeakable union, he in us, and we in him, and both one.
Behold the mystery of the riches of the glory of this mystery, even of Christ
in us, and we in Christ. Two mysteries, yet both aiming at one, even our
reconciliation to God, and both ending in one, our union with God, and
conformity to him, yet one of them in order being before the other as
affecting it, our being ingrafted into Christ, being the cause of his
transforming into us; and yet both together in time. As we cannot receive
Christ by Faith, but by our ingrafting in him, and so become his; and so no
sooner are we ingrafted in him, but presently he dwells in us by his spirit,
and so receives us thereby to conformity to him; that so we may have fit
communion with our head, as being wholly governed by him. Hereby we may try our
knowledge in the mystery of Christ, whether we have true fellowship with him
or no. And that

First, by our ingrafting in him. And that, 1. By the engraven word, taking us
from the wild Olive, and ingraffing us upon the true Olive. Secondly, by faith,
ingraffing us in him, and quieting us therein. And

This Faith is discerned. First, by this, that it is a mystery working
secretly and by degrees, sometimes inuisibly, sometimes by contraries,
captiuating sense and reason, and confounding the wisdom of the flesh, giving
a being to that which is not, and annibilating that which is.

2. This mystery of faith apprehends Christ only, and wholly eue^ to
resurrection.

3. It gives boldness in Gods presence

4. Ouercomes all oppositions.

5. It neglects not the least means of help

6. It preuailes beyond and contrary to means.

7. It rests in the likeliest or greatest means.

8. It prepares to troubles. And

9. Is more then conqueror over the^.

10. It is not curious concerning it own weakness or Gods wisdom.

11. It makes not haste, but waits upon God, in performing of his word.

12. It purifieth the heart. Act. 15 9.

13. Holds on it course, though with some interruptions.

14. And so co^mits it self in weldoing into the hands of God. Thus for faith.

Whereby we are ingrafted into Christ.

2. For sanctification, whereby Christ dwells in us. This is discerned,

1. By the grounds, that what we do be of faith. 1. Cor. 14.

2. By the manner of it breeding in us by degrees. As

1. In affection, then in action.

2. In weakness, then in strength. Yet all parts truly at first seasoned
therewith.

Though each part do it several duty in it fit times therein.

1. In subduing corruption, and that which is nearest to the root, as evil
thoughts, etc. then in actuating obedience, and this 1. As agrees best with the
pattern. 2. Chiefly in heart and desire. 3. Closely to approve unto God. 4.
Wisely, in it fittest seasons. 5. Sincerely, as in Gods presence. 6. Humbly, in
disclaiming merit. 7. Charitably, to the good of others. 8. Cheerfully, as
from the heart.


3. Our sanctification is tried by the measure thereof.

As first, that is general.

1. Expressing in all faculties of soul and body.

2. Extended to all Gods commandments.

3. Intended in all things, from the entire purpose of the heart.

4. Extended to all times, even to our lives end.

5. And to all persons as well enemies as friends. Gal. 6.10.

6. And in all occasions, as well adversity as prosperity.

4. Our sanctification is freed by the ends thereof.

1 Not present only, but future good.

2 Not for the body, but the soul.

3 Not for our sakes, but for Gods sake 1. Cor. 10.31.

4. Not to merit thereby, but to do our duty in thankfulness to God. Psalm.
116.12, 13.

5. Not for our selves alone, but for the good of our brethren.

6. Not to win heaven, but to prepare thereto. 2. Pet. 1.13, 14.

7. And so hereby to make sure hereof. 2. Pet. 1.10.

8. Remembering that as we live by faith in Christ, and not in our selves, so
Christ lives in us by his holiness, that so we not live unto our selves, but
unto his glory, that has bought us with so precious a ransom.

Thus of sanctification and the evidence thereof, whereby we may avouch our
spiritual growth.

And thus of the fourth thing we must know, to approve our increase in grace;
namely the mystery of Christ.

The last thing we must know to evidence our Growing in Grace, is the measure
of sanctification we have attained, of which before.

Thus of the first General: namely, knowledge, and several objects thereof.

The next general conducing hereunto, is faith, of which even now.

The third general, is, the obedience of faith, of which also before.

And these are general evidences in regard of our selves to evidence our
spiritual growth.

The same also concerns others, excepting faith, which is only proper and
available to our selves. The just must live by his faith, though the same be
common to all; the elect in respect of the means thereof, and end of the same:
yet in regard of the Power and Use thereof in the application of Christ each
must live by his peculiar faith.

Thus of the Generals.

The special Marks concerning our selves, to try our increase in Grace, have
partly been opened before, as included in the generals; only we may add those
other that are before delivered in the Chapter of the measure of this Growth.
All which, or most of them, may also serve for trial hereof, in regard of
others.

Thus concerning the Marks and evidences of Spiritual Growth.

It follows in the next place that we consider of the several lets and
hindrances of Spiritual thriuing, together with such Remedies as are suitable
thereunto.

THE CONTENTS of the 10. chapter. Cases of Conscience concerning Spiritual
Growth.
1. How we can justify our growth in Grace, notwithstanding we daily fall
into many evils. 2. How this Growth in Grace may specially be discerned and
approved, seeing it is a Mystery, and discernable only by faith. 3. How we
may be said to grow constant in Grace, and yet we do and may leave our first
love, and are subject to much hardness of heart, and many spiritual
defections, which seem to imply a going backward rather then forward. 4 How
we may be said to grow in Grace: seeing, as in the Natural birth there is a
decay of the outward instruments of good, as of Light, Memory, Understanding,
Hearing; so these also decaying in the regenerate, which are instruments to
entertain the means of Spiritual Growth: It may therefore seem that there
must needs be a decay of such effects, as do ordinarily arise from those
Means, as of Zeal, Conscience, Courage, which are quickened and enlarged by
the Means. 5 Whether it being apparent that the Saints oft-times, by grieuing
the Spirit do cause a suspension of the operations thereof, so far, as that
the Saints are forced to question the very truth thereof, yet then we may be
said to grow in Grace. 6. whether the Saints necessarily must receive comfort
in these distresses, or shall recover their former feeling and comfort there.
CHAP. X. Cases of Conscience to be resolved concerning growing in Grace.
1 HOw can we be said to grow in grace, when as yet we daily go on in sin,
and so shall do so long as we live?

Answer.

First, these grounds must be laid.

1. In regard of God.

1. His wisdom in bringing light out of darkness, and showing his power in
our weakness. And therefore,

Howsoever there may be a continual failing, and humbling in sin, yet seeing
our God brings light out of darkness, though we may and do sin, yet our
God can, and does turn this to be matter of our Spiritual Growth.

2. And seeing the Lord shows his power in our weakness, therefore does he
by his power not only restrain the corruption of sin committed, but raises
also thereout matter of our Growth.

3 And seeing the Lord all-wise and sufficient perfects his glory by our
infirmities, as thereby,

1. Stripping us of all boasting in our own righteousness. And

2. Sending us daily to be renewed in Christ. And

3. So hasting us out of the daily sense of our corruption, to desire
perfection. And

4. Giving us experience by the sense of our failings to be more watchful
against the same.

5 More justly to hate them. And

6. More earnestly to desire to be rid of them: therefore howsoever there may
be infirmittes in us, yet shall these tend to the perfection of Gods glory,
and so to the enabling us to bring forth more fruit.

2 The promise of God auayles hereto,

Not only general,

That all things shall work together for the best to those that are called
according to his purpose, Romans 8.28. And therefore our afflictions, yea our
sins shall turn to our good, yea, to the best.

But his special promise stands good here, that he will love us to the end,
and therefore perfect his work in us, John 13.1. Phil. 1.6.

3 Ground for the satisfying of the Conscience herein, is, the consideration of
the state of our sanctification in this life; which is not perfection, without
sin at all, but militant, consisting of a daily combat between the flesh
and the spirit.

Which is not only a striving and working of the conscience only against
sin, to which it is moved, or which it has committed, which is in the
wicked, by reason of the remaindures of Natures light, and that knowledge they
have received from the illightning Spirit, affrighting the Conscience either
when sin is moved, or committed, to make them more inexcusable, if they do
commit it; or not repent, yea happily to restrain the Act, or custom thereof,
according to their carnal desire, for worldly ends. But this strife against
sin in the regenerate, consists of these particulars.

1. In the understanding: Which being truly informed by the true light of Gods
sacred Truth, does thereby discern sin not in general only, but in
particular; both what it is they have for the present committed, as also how
heinous and great the offense is: not so much what hurt it does unto them, as
how it has offended the Majesty of God, how dishonored his great Name, how
reproached our holy Profession, how offended and scandalized the weak
Brethren, how opened the mouths of the wicked, to blaspheme the Name of God,
and hardened them in their sin: especially, how grievously they have offended
against the Blood of the Covenant; how they have grieved the Spirit of God, and
deprived themselves justly of the sweet fellowship and favor of their God; how
they have hindered themselves thereby in such Duties of Prayer, hearing the
Word, Meditation, and such like; how they have disarmed themselves hereby, and
so lie open to many other Evils, and Satan's Tentations: yea, how they have
hardened their hearts hereby, and so are exceedingly to seek in the maine
work of Repentance; yea, hereby grown careless of their Watch, and so have
been overtaken with many fearful snares of carnal wisdom, security,
presumption, yea, subject to fall into profaneness, vnder-valuing and less
esteeming of the precious Pearl.

These and such like are the apprehensions of saving knowledge, when any sin
is committed:

Especially,

This is one singular work of this heavenly light, that the more we fail, the
more quick-sighted are we grown in discerning the power of corruption, and
deprauation of the Original stain; the more do we labor to search the
depth of our corrupt hearts, the more skillful do we grow, to discern Satan's
subtilties; more acquainted do we prove, with the wisdom and mercy of our
God, in ordering our corruption to his glory and our maine good; and yet so
become more wise, to prevent future assaults.

Thus fares it with the Saints, in discerning the nature and heynousnesse of
sin.

But with the Hypocrite it is otherwise: Though he be illightened by the Word,
to discern both it general corruption, and particular faylings; yet does it
carnal reason either labor to preuaricate and pervert that light, to the
excusing and extenuating of sin; or else it measures sin by it own false
light, and such deceitful Rules as carnal wisdom affords herein, as
Custom, Example, Letter of Gods Law, Laws of Men, stream of the Time,
Worldly esteem, and Opinion thereof; which calls Light darkness, and
darkness Light: and so thereby peruerteth and by degrees extinguisheth the
true Light, or else subjects it basely to the blind light of Reason and
Sensuality.

Thus as the Hypocrite labors only to discern and judge of sin, either by
false lights, or by perverting the true; so does he fare, in judging thereof
accordingly: not so much weighing, or at all considering, how therein God is
offended, as only how men are scandalized thereby: not so much apprehending
therein, how God has been injured, his Word violated, as being sensible only
what wrong redounds to himself thereby; and that not so much to the Soul, or
for the time to come, as only to the Body and present estate: not laboring so
much to know the heynousnesse of sin in the Glass of Gods righteous Law, as
how to extenuate and excuse the same, by the deceitful Light of carnal
reason, and vain imagination, laboring by all means rather to hide his sin
from the eye of men, though it be apparent unto God, that so they may be more
easily ensnared therewith, or made partakers of the same, by partaking in some
measure thereof, in applying deceitful remedies to what they know.

2. As for the affecting and breaking of their hearts with the sense thereof,
their maine study is, how to harden their hearts the more, either by
smothering sin within, in not acknowledging the same, or else by plaistering
it over with such unfit and deceitful plasters; which though they may give
some ease for the time, or make show of soundness, yet they cause more inward
rottenness and rankling of the sore. And therefore here, through the
perverseness of their judgment concerning the benefit of Christ, they are
marvelous skillful to deceive and harden their hearts, by a false application
of the blood of Christ: as if it served only either to hide their sin, that
they need not take notice thereof; or use to qualify it so, that they may rest
securely therein: as if it were an evidence, that they had right in Christ, who
came to save sinners; or that this were the best evidence of the power of
Christ in them, that they are more senseless thereof, or might more safely
wallow therein: as if they might be more bold in sin, because his merit is
sufficient to expiate whatsoever they can commit; as if the more they
committed, the more they might hope to have benefit by Christ. And therefore,
as they are not sensible of grieuing the Spirit, though by it they may and
shall eftsoons be challenged and affrighted with the horror of their sin;
yet now do they grow more cunning to deceive themselves herein, as esteeming
these Items of the Spirit either to be fits of melancholy, or else some false
alarums of Satan, or their own cowardly hearts; not knowing their liberty, or
being too scrupulous in it; not knowing their worth in Christ, not daring to
improve the same; nay, rather then fail, they will not here stick to fly in
the face of God, when their sin thus stares them in face, as if God envied
their happiness in crossing their lusts, and sawcing them with such
bitterness: or rather that he does it, but to try their courage, if for a
little gnawne or fainting they will give over the chase, and betray their
liberty, upon such false allarums. And therefore now their maine study is;
either to neglect such sharp items, as not concerning them, or else to wipe
them away, by wading deep in sin, that so they may put out the true light
altogether, and thereby become past feeling, that so they may go on securely,
and make up the measure of iniquity, as if therein consisted the maine of
their happiness. Yea though the Lord herein usually fails not to arrest them
with many fearful Sargeants within, and crosses without; yet all these prove
yet further means to the hardening of their hearts, and increase of rebellion,
as enraging the heart more desperately against God, as if he did them great
wrong; and enflaming the heart more vehemently with the desire of sin, the
more they are outwardly restrained in the act thereof. And so provoking more
greedily to the apprehending of such false rules, and occasions, whereby they
may more securely attain their desires; and by limitting others to their
scantling, and drawing them into the same excess with them, may thereby more
safely justify and maintain whatsoever wickedness.

Thus do the wicked differ from the godly in the judgment and knowledge of
sin.

The like may be observed in the second degree of Apprehension; namely, the
conviction of Conscience therewith.

For touching the godly, they indeed, howsoever they may for a time lie in some
slumber, after sin is committed; yet still their heart is awake, in some
notion thereof: some present touch they shall have, by the daunting of their
spirits, that all is not well; yea, their rectified will now will not fail to
snubbe them, that they have done what they should not do; yea, somewhat now
will appear unto them, that love has left undone, to prevent such a snare
whereinto they are fallen, by omitting thereof. Yea, now they find, that even
this slumber imports some withdrawing of the spirit, and presageth some
fearful effect to follow, if it be not speedily prevented; their heart will
now misgiue them, that all is not well: it was much better before with them,
they found more life in Prayer, more boldness in Gods presence, their sleeps
are broken, and troublesome, ending in sicker sits, and their peace is
interrupted, and darkened with thick clouds, threatening some sharp storm:
and therefore they are desirous to be thoroughly awakened, yea, though it be to
their greater confusion, and present terror, that so they may prevent the
storm approaching. This is once, that in their greatest slumber now they grow
more and more sensible of their former state, and so conclude it was better
with them then now, and so grow also more sensible of their present estate, and
labor yet more to be convicted and abased therein, ready to entertain all
holy occasions, which may effect the same.

Thus is it with the Saints in their greatest slumber in sin: But it is far
otherwise with the Hypocrite: As usually he has no remorse for his sin,
because it is the chief joy and delight of his soul; so does he labor by
all means to harden his heart therein, condemning his former abstinence to be
but preciseness, or madness, that lost him the experience of such sweetness
and content, and rejecting all means which may awake him thereunto, or else
perverting them desperately, to cast him into a founder sleep.

And therefore, whereas the Saints willingly entertain such means as serve to
awaken them, and justify God thereby, in submitting thereto, and whatsoever
extremities may befall herein, and so labor to prevent thereby judging of
themselves in the acknowledgement of their sin, and auenging themselves
thereof, by abasing the flesh, and lying down in their confusion, yea laying
their mouth to the dust, if there may be hope, casting themselves wisely into
the arms of Gods free mercy, for the pardon thereof, and pleading his pardon
boldly in the merit of Christ.

Yet with the Hypocrite it is not so: For as he dreams of no other
happiness, then to sleep in sin; so if either his Conscience do any whit
endeavor to awake him at any time, or the Lord by the voice of the Law do
labor to rowse him up, or some sharp affliction follow him, to confound his
security: Yet his maine policy is, to lay his Conscience asleep again by
presumption of Gods mercies, applying unseasonably the balm of the Gospel, to
pluck out the thorn of the Law; and referring his outward crosses either to
chance, or his own negligence, or the malice of others undeservedly; or rather
then fail, to Gods unjust dispensation, or policy, as not deserving it; or
rather to try his courage, and affection to evil. This is certain, the best
he hopes by this little smart, is, that his pain is past, and now he may
more freely lie down and sleep again; and the maine he labors, is so to
charm all means, that they may not awaken him again.

As for the will and affection to good or evil, herein also is a maine
difference between the Elect and Reprobate.

For howsoever the Elect are but in part renewed, and so, as they are subject
to evil, so also are they inclined to all goodness; yet herein do they
mainely differ from the Reprobate.

As that first concerning Evil: though in respect of the remaindure of
corruption, they are liable thereunto, yet do they no ways like thereof; the
evil that they do, they would not do: but both unfeignedly do they dislike
and detest the same, and wisely avoid all means which may draw them to evil,
and constantly intend all gracious helps, which may the better enable them to
resist and overcome the same: And if by neglect of their watch, they be
eftsoons overtaken with any sin, be it never so secret, or small in the eye
of the World, yet do they more suspect and dislike themselves herein, and
prove more wary and skillful to prevent the like assaults: not allowing
themselves beforehand the liberty of any evil, be it never so current and
warrantable to men, suitable to the times, or sorting with their corruption;
much less approving any that by infirmity, or violence, and sleight of
tentation, they happily fall into: but the more condemning themselves herein,
being willing to shame themselves, that God may have the glory; and ready to
avenge themselves hereof, that they may not be judged of the Lord: yea,
submitting themselves chearefully to whatsoever corrections the Lord shall lay
upon them, to purge out their dross, and waiting patiently his wise
providence, in the issue thereof; desiring heartily their dissolution, to be
quite rid of the same.

Thus fares it with the godly concerning their affection to evil.

But with the Reprobate it is far otherwise. As he heartily affects all
sin, and greedily pursues what he is most inclined unto, and may serve for
his present profit and content; so does he warily shun all means which may
hinder him therein, and entertayneth greedily, yea cunningly casts all ways,
whereby he may make up the measure thereof. If he be crossed therein by
impotencie, want of means, opportunity, and the like; he is more enraged and
enflamed thereto, even as a violent flood against all opposition. If he
attain, and become master of his desire, oh how he blesses his Soul, as if
he had gotten great spoils: how does he hug his sin in his bosom as his
chiefest darling; how does he hide it under his tongue, to enjoy the sweetness
thereof the longer; how does he sacrifice to his wit, and make an Idol of his
own wisdom, as having done some rare exploit: nay, he will not fail now to
set his sin as a Brooch in his forehead, or as a Crown upon his head, as if
herein were his chiefest honor and advancement. And if now he be happily
twitted and challenged for the same, how cunning is he to diminish and excuse
his sin; how desperate, to draw others into the same excess with him, that
their mouths may be stopped? nay, such is his cunning impudence, that he
will not stick to justify and applaud his evil, even by the same means
whereby it is convinced. This is once, he cannot forsake it in affection:
though the sweet taste be gone, and though he do leave it, yet it will not
leave him, but leaves such a tang and savor behind it, as makes him to rejoice
in what he has done, though now he be out of date, and prouokes him to wish a
confusion and ouerturning of the frame of nature: Oh that he were young again!
Oh that the night might be turned into day! that he might meet with matter and
occasion to satisfy his lust; that the day might be turned into night, that
he may securely enjoy the pleasure thereof. So insatiable is his appetite to
his darling sin, that he not only labors by music, sawces, filthy
objects, and such like prouocations, to feed his several senses, and to
refresh and strengthen his greedy desire with all variety of allurements; but
further also most unjustly he offers violence to nature, enforcing it to that
to which of it self it has no ability or inclination, and so rather chooses
to humble and oppress nature with surfeits and foul diseases, then that he
will not enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season. Fearful it is to observe
the subtlety of the flesh herein, and more fearful to observe how they are
snared in their own wisdom. And yet through thick and thin they must that
serve such a Master, and on they will whatsoever it cost them, though their
health and good names and estates lie upon it, yea though it hazard the
damnation of their souls: and the further they wade, the more senseless they
grow of any danger ensuing, the more besotted are they with the pleasures of
sin; and so as fools are led to the stocks, and as Oxen to the shambles,
thus is it with the wicked in their affecting and prosecuting of evil.

As for goodness, as he does not affect it all for it self, or as God has
commanded it, but only as it may serve his present turn, and with his
ability, and liberty, either to do it as he may, or to do it as he please;
so neither does he affect all goodness in every kind and measure.

For as he cannot be perfectly good, who is altogether prone to evil; so
because he cannot be what God requires, therefore he counts it folly in
himself to strive against the stream, and esteems it injustice in God, to
require what he cannot do. And seeing nature affords him some remaindures of
the prime good, whereby he is both restrained from much evil he would
otherwise rush into; and provoked also to some goodness, to which he has no
affection: therefore even by natural inclination he affects and prosecuteth
some kind of outward good, that so he might excuse himself from following the
inward and maine goodness: that so he may serve his own occasions thereby,
as to prevent him of such evils of shame and smart, which he most reckon^ of,
so to further thereby his credit, present delight, and profit, which he only
aims at. Hereunto furthers his education and employment in the world and
Church of God: whereby not only his perverse nature is much reformed from many
evils, at least in appearance, and for a time but informed also of the maine
good, which he should aim at: yea enabled in some measure to embrace the
means thereof, with much delight and contentment: yea further led along by the
power of the means to prosecute the outward actions and semblance thereof: yea
therein for a season, to outstip the best in appearance. Whereby it comes to
pass, that having now as he thinks, done his best, at leastwise, that which
best serves his present turn, yea having outrun the best, and left them
behind him, as he scorns to follow them, who seem to be so far short of
him, so also by degrees he falls in dislike with their plain and homely way,
wherein they walk: and so either seeks him out a new and more pleasing way of
implicit faith, revelation, selfe-conceitednesse, etc. as may best magnify
the pride of his holy mountain, and yet satisfy his lusts, when himself, and
not the word, must be the vmpire of his actions: and so forsaking his true
guide in steed of these foolish fires, is necessarily carried unto all gross
wickedness, and yet desperately hardened thereby in impenitency and
profaneness, and so makes up the measure of his sin: or else (which is his
fairest course) he now takes his ease in the midway, and sleeps securely in
the conceit of his forwardness: as if, either he had done enough, and so will
have his reward in hand, or else had done so much, that it may safely excuse
his liberty in sin, or else had done too much, and therefore may justly
abate and reform his former preciseness; may wisely unbend his bow, lest it
break about his ears: whereby as he willingly falls from what he before
gloried in, so now his glory turns to his shame. As not only having that
taken from him, which he seemed to have, because he cease the employment
thereof, but also being justly given up by the Lord to his own lusts, and to
glory in his shame, and thereby to harden his heart that it cannot repent.

Behold how the wicked run counter, and in a whirlepit, and confusion of all
things. Evil they are, and yet they would seem to be good, that they may be
evil more cunningly. Good they seem, and therefore they will entertain the
means of goodness, and for a time sculke into the path thereof: but as
thieves only out of their couerts, take the high way to take their prey, and
then they about again to their old hants, and so greedily swallow the bait,
that they are forced to cast it up again, yea cast away themselves for ever
thereby.

But blessed is the man whom the Lord chooses and teaches his way. Surely as
he affects his God above all, because the Lord has chosen him out of all, so
for his sake he affects all goodness, because it comes from him, and he
commands it so, and most affects that goodness which most resembles him,
that he may be like unto him: yea so affects goodness, as it is affected and
ordered by him, as it may best avail and further him to the full enjoying of
him, that so his desire may be accepted of God, that so his desires may be
perfected by him: and therefore with like affection to his God, he affects all
goodness, sincerity; not the appearance, but the substance thereof, not for his
own ends, but for Gods glory, not from outward occasions, but from the inward
purpose of the heart, not for a season only, but continually, not in a measure
to stop some present gap, but even to be satisfied with the full measure
thereof, and that wisely in the way where it may be found, in whom all the
treasure of wisdom and knowledge are stored above measure, that of his
fullness we might all receive, even grace for grace, renouncing in respect
thereof, all our own goodness whatsoever, and still laboring to be found in
Christ, that him we may attain to the perfect stature.

Thus are the desires of the faithful, sincere, and holy: and so they are
crowned and blessed of the Lord.

For as we desire according to the will of God, so are we furnished with two
excellent graces for the attainment of our desires. Namely, resolution and
endeavor. In both which, as in their desires the Saints far out-strippe the
hypocrite. As first,

Concerning their resolution.

This upon good warrant and sound grounds: namely, the will of God, and their
callings subordinate thereto, and their civil calling therein, subordinate to
their general, and all this grounded on the power of Christ to enable them, on
his merit to accept and bless their resolution.

But in the hypocrite it is otherwise, either his attempts are altogether
without resolution, as being carried thereto by some sudden and violent
passion, or outward allureme^t, admitting no resolution; or if any liberty be
given hereto, then is it only some carnal warrant, either of our own
unbridled will or affection, or some outward command or persuasion of carnal
wisdom, whereby it is enliued, and so confined there, without asking leave of
God, or at least not depending on his assistance, and so either lasts only
like a meteor while it is nourished with outward fuel, or usually falls short
thereof, as presuming to prohibit and limit the same, and so is justly
confounded thereby.

2. The resolution of the Saints as it is grounded upon a sure warrant, so it
is attained by wise, earnest, and holy means, specially,

1. Prayer unto God, who only persuades and resolves the heart.

2. Examination of our own selves, and disposition to what we entend.

3. Debating wisely of the means which may further us therein to make choice
of them.

4. A just valuation of the thing to which we endeavor, as also of it fitnes
for our calling and present occasion.

5. And wisely furnishing our selves in such manner as we may attain our
purposes.

6. Determining upon soonest and fittest opportunity to put our resolution in
practice.

7. And not presuming of the success, but living still by faith in the issue
thereof.

As for the wicked, it is not so with them herein. As their Grounds are
deceitful, so their way is slippery; they sow unto the flesh, and of the flesh
reap corruption. As they resolve without God, so without him their resolution
is presumption, and their best deliberation no better then deceit, either they
sacrifice to their own nets, as if their courage were at their own command,
and so it justly fails them when they have most need thereof to continue, or
else their purposes are barren and filled only with wind, not grounded on the
true means, but puffed up with the blast of vain glory and selfe-desert.

And so they vnder-rate what they aim at, by not considering what it will cost
them.

And so they are unfurnished of such means as may compass the same. And
therefore either neglect their opportunity, til the door be shut, or hold the
wind in their fist, as if they could call back the Dial of Ahaz ten degrees,
or cause the Sun to stand still and wait their leisure, till they have buried
their father, and satisfied their own lusts. And therefore though they fail in
the success, it is no more act, and if they do prevail, it will little
avail them, because they bring forth fruit unto the murderer, and not unto
God.

This is the difference in respect of resolution.

The like may be observed concerning their different endeauours.

1. For though it be common to both to attempt what they resolve on, yet in
their endeavor there is great odds, whether we consider the ground or
means, the manner, measure, or success thereof. For as the elect agree in the
same grounds, both of their desires, resolution, and endeavor, namely, Gods
holy command to bind them, that they may not think it indifferent, and his
gracious promise to quicken and encourage them, in the attempt and success
thereof: so for the wicked, they utterly reject and neglect these grounds, as if
they took away their liberty, and so abated of their courage, and in stead of
these, offer sacrifice to God with the strange fire of their own good meaning
or self conceit, and carnal wisdom, and so kindle their resolutions at this
unholy fire, and blow life to their endeauours by these bellows of death.

2. As the saints lay a sure foundation of their holy endeauours, so they build
them wisely by fair and likely means.

1. Such as are readiest at hand, as being offered by Gods providence, which
they may not question or trauerse.

2. And yet such as are warrantable from the word, though otherwise less
likely in our eyes.

3. Such as our calling allows, whose compass we may not exceed.

4. Such as are safest, not going between the bark and tree, or by the river
brinke, when we may keep the midway.

5. Such as are fairest and of best report, least we turn our liberty as an
occasion to the flesh. And lastly,

Such as may most humble us and confound carnal confidence, that God only may
have the glory.

But with the wicked the means are otherwise.

If they be ready at hand, they are base and ordinary, not fit for his high
spirit, not able to try his valor, and therefore he must have them far off,
that they may cost him dearly, and so loose the bird in hand, while he
follows the other in the bush: either he will be sure, in the choice of what
means he likes, that if he prevail, he may have the glory thereof; or if his
endeavor succeeds not in the means he is tied unto, he has now sufficient
to lay the blame upon the means, yea upon God that limited him thereto: this
is warrant good enough unto him, to take his own way, because he can speed no
worse; nay, because he sees that many speed better thereby.

And therefore as he thinks he has good cause to challenge Gods wisdom, in
prescribing and confining him to such means, as sort no better; so dare he not
trust God any longer therein, but will follow the ways of his own wary
heart, either fastening upon what is not agreeable to his calling, upon
presumption of his liberty in Christ, that all is his; or venturing upon most
dangerous and unlikely means, either to try conclusions, or his own refined
pate, or upon those which have the worst and bitterest savor, as agreeing best
with his distempered palate.

Thus is the difference in regard of the means in the endeavor, and such like
also may be observed in the manner of the execution: cach having his different
manner according to th^^r several ground and means. The elect according to
the certainty of their ground and fitness of means laboring

1. Diligently and chearefully, from such assure^ grounds.

2. Yea seasonably and wisely in taking their fittest occasions, and yet not
do^^ng on the means.

3 Still putting forward constantly according to the power of the means, and
yet waiting patiently the success thereof, by committing themselves and their
endeauours to the blessing of God

But with the reprobate it is far otherwise: if he be bound, he champes the
bitt, and either must be spurred forward by some prick of his own wisdom,
or else he dragges behind, or casts his rider. If he be loose, he quickly
runs himself out of breath and out-runnes his opportunity, not tarrying
Gods leisure, and so tires in the mid way: whether he be bound or loose, he
is quickly weary of his work, because he cannot stay for the blessing, but
will have it in hand before he have done his work.

This is the difference in regard of the manner of the endeavor: the like may
be noted concerning the measure thereof, which in the elect has no measure in
respect of his obedience to God, though he reap to himself no measure of
benefit thereby. But in the reprobate, is measured by it success therein to
himself; if well, he will try again, that so it may be better: if ill, he
gives over, least it may be worse, his affection in no measure being truly set
thereupon, and his appetite quickly surfeiting upon the success thereof, with
pride or security, whereby either he casts up his morsels to the disgrace of
his profession, and so finds leanness in his soul, though he have bin gorged
with quails, or surfets therein to his greater confusion for the abuse of the
means.

Thus is the difference in regard of the Measure.

But the maine difference is in the success.

For as the Lord promises to fulfill the desires of them that fear him, and
fill the hungry with good things, and yet send the rich empty away, so do the
Saints herein graciously find the word made good unto them.

Either they obtain what they desire, if needful for them: or they are
recompensed with what may be more seasonable for the present, as to try their
faith and patience, so to purge out their dross, that they may be fitted for
what they desire, and to increase their longing after the fulness of heaven.
This is certain, if they speed as they desire, they rejoice in God, and not
in themselves; if otherwise, they condemn themselves, and justify God:
howsoever they speed, they know it is best for them; and therefore hitting or
missing, they glorify God.

But with the wicked it is not so: either they must speed well at all times, or
else God loves them not: and therefore if they speed not well from him, they
know another way to the Wood; rather then fail, they will try what Satan can
do; and if he fail, then farewell all. This is once, If they succeed, they
may thank themselves, and not God; if otherwise, they may blame God, and not
themselves: howsoever they speed, the Soul fares the worse, and therefore
hitting or missing they forsake God more and more.

Thus is the difference in regard of the success, more particularly to
discover the success of the spiritual combat in the elect, between the
Flesh and the Spirit, and so to apply the same for the resolving of the present
scruple concerning the falls of Gods children, how they may stand with their
spiritual growth, and further the same. As by these differences hitherto, it
is apparent that the Saints even in their greatest failing are not wholly
destitute of the spirit of Grace to sustain them from utter sinking therein,
but enjoy also some gracious measure thereof, to their recovery thereout: so
more particularly may we find, that herein as there is always some true
wrestling of the spirit against the flesh, so are there not wanting many lively
evidences herein, which do plainly argue a daily weakening of corruption, and
a continual increase of grace, and so an hastening to the life of glory.

That corruption is daily more weakened, is evident,

1. That by their daily faylings they attain to a more clear insight of the
power of original contagion, and so more unfeignedly loath the same, yea more
earnestly desire to be rid thereof, prove more wary against the occasions of
the same, and more skilful to repel the tentations thereto, and grow more
tender and compassionate toward others: yea, by the experience of daily
faylings, those secret and dangerous evils of Pride, Hypocrisy, Security, are
graciously discovered and loathed, and the deceitful heart daily put to it
trial, and cast upon the free goodness of God in Jesus Christ, and so by him
enabled daily more and more to renounce it self, and so still to be found in
Christ, not having it own righteousness, that so in him it may be more then
conqueror, as preuayling through him so far forth, that it so subdues such
sins as directly oppos^ faith, that it never after falls into them again
actually, though it may often be moved thereto, to provoke more earnest
watchfulnes again, and resistance thereof. And for all other sins still it
makes conscience of the least, and allows it self in none, specially labors
against the reigning sins, either of it own corruption, or the times above all,
keeps it judgment sound according to the will of God what it ought to do, and
declines, that so still it may judge and convince it self for the same, to
prevent security and insensible hardness of heart, and so to nourish and quicken
faith in the merit of Christ, to the daily weakening and subduing of the body of
sin.

Thus is corruption daily weakened, and so is Grace also daily increased,
specially such graces as are simply necessary to salvation, and do most
further perfection: As Faith, without present feeling, casting us wholly upon
the power of God, and preventing such rejoicing in the flesh, as might encroach
on Gods glory. And so Humility, in the daily denial of our selves, and
yielding to Gods corrections: so daily Repentance, above all sincerity and
uprightness, laboring to approve our hearts unto God in the dislike of what
we do, and desire of the contrary, approving his righteous will, though it
be to our own confusion, and condemning our selves before him, in what we may
be approved of men, because he knows that in us, which we find not in our
selves, and requires that of us which we are far short of. Thus do the
Saints thrive in grace, even when they fail in sin, and so find the truth of
that gracious promise, that all things shall work together for the best unto
them.

And thus of this first Scruple, concerning the daily faylings of the Saints,
how notwithstanding they grow in Grace.

Case 2.
How the Saints may be said to grow in grace, when by reason of sin they
have so grieved the Spirit, and in a manner quenched the same, as that to their
seeming they have lost all, and so are utterly fallen away from grace.

The resolution hereof consists in these things:

1. In a true confession, that the dear Saints of God have thus far fallen,
and have hence thus conceited of themselves.

2. In a wise discovery of the grounds and causes of these their falls.

3. In explayning how in these dangerous defections they yet differ from
Reprobates.

4. And so thereupon expressing how notwithstanding these desperate gnawnes,
yet still they grow in grace, and hasten on to perfection.

That the Saints have thus far fallen, it is manifest by these examples.

1. By the example of David, who though a man after Gods own heart, yet fell
into most grievous and wilful rebellious, multiplying his transgressions with
such an high hand, as that he proceeded from the sin of adultery (which
happily was of carelessness or weakness, being taken therein on the sudden)
From hence I say, through shame of that sin, or delight to continue in it,
he proceeded to yield to carnal wisdom, for the hiding of that sin under
his tongue, and that by many wilful and advised sleights.

First, by seeking to make Vriah drunk, that so he might hide his sin, by
companying with his wife: which though it might have hid the sin, yet would
thereby have increased it, both in that hereby it was hidden, and so must needs
harden more the heart of David: as also in that hereby Vriah must be made
pertaker of the sin, in sharing in the now-adulterous bed, and so frustrating
the law of God, for the punishment of the adulteress, yea, hereby also
increasing the sin of Bathsheba, by covering the shame thereof, and so
excluding repentance, yea herein also exceedingly increasing the sin, that
the conception of Bathsheba might be destroyed or hindered by this mixture of
seed, and so the murder of the infant might be thereby procured.

Thus many ways was David confounded by this first policy, and yet behold he
hardens his heart more and more, and proceeds in his rebellions against the
Lord.

And now when he could not make Vriah pertaker with him in his sin; behold
how he makes up, as it were, the measure thereof: in resisting these good
motions which were offered from Vriahs refusal, to awaken his conscience and
bring him to repentance, and turning them to the further increase of his sin,
and drawing in others to be pertakers thereof.

Now the last plot must be murder of his faithful servant. It was not enough
to wrong his Bedfellow, but in stead of making her amends, her dear husband
must be murdered, that so all hope of giving him satisfaction might be
prevented, and so her sin hereby increased, and her conscience perplexed.

And mark (I pray you) the particulars in this sin; all, as so many
circumstances, tending to aggrauate the same. First, the notable treachery of
David, herein arguing yet a greater measure of carnal wisdom, and so
aduisednesse in the pursuit thereof. Behold, though Vriahs death be plotted,
yet still must he be entertained with great kindness, and sent away with
favor; yea, a Letter must be sent as in his commendation, to the Camp and
yet including the sentence of his death. And who must carry it, but Vriah
himself? that so the former sin may be further conceited, and the treachery
prove more notorious in the eye of the general.

Thus poor Vriah goes as a sheep to the slaughter, and carries the fire in
his bosom, to consume himself, carries the knife along with him, to cut his
own throat, and yet must come nigh no other herein, but great favor from his
Lord, good success in his message.

And now he comes to the camp, he comes to receive his doom: and will you see
how, and when, he receives it; behold a heap of devilish conspiracies, Ioab
must be the instrument thereof, who should have prevented it, and rather
rewarded him for his former good service: and so he must be pertaker in the
sin, and concealment thereof. Yea Vriah must be then murdered when he is
in his calling, fighting for his Lords life when when his Lord plots his death.
Oh unspeakable treachery! yea he must be murdered in hot blood, when
passion prevailing, his soul might be distracted or endangered; and it must
be done too, under a color to try his valor, by setting him in the foremost
ranks contrary to his place, that so he might be more distracted by this
alteration, and put to some desperate exigent: yea, there must be a recoyle of
his company, he must be left alone to grapple with the enemy, that so the
treachery of his followers might more amate his soul, and plunge him in
despair, and so death suddenly surprising him, he might be swallowed up
thereof; and which makes up the measure, not only Ioab the Captain, but even
the whole host must hereby drink deep of the cup of his iniquity, yea be
also endangered by the fall of so valiant a Captain.

Oh see how costly a thing sin is! how luxurious and spreading; how deceitful
and dangerous: it begins in pleasure, it goes on in subtlety and great
perplexity: it ends not but in blood and extreme cruelty. For mark I pray
you, did not Vriahs blood cry for vengeance, and did not the wrath light
heavily upon the Authors head?

Yea certainly, holy David paid dearly for his sin. The more he hardened
his heart by adding to the measure of his sin, the more need he had of sound
and strong purgations to cleanse him hereof. And had he not his fill of sorrow
for this little dram of pleasure?

Yea certainly, the wise Physician lets him alone for a while, to slumber
herein: that it may appear to be his only arm that can raise us out
thereof. Well may we sink our selves more deeply therein, and sleep in
sin, though it be unto Death, yea till we stink in the Grave: But it must
be the power of God that can only awaken us; it must be only his mercy to
raise us up again, that so he may have the glory of his excellent goodness.
And how I pray does the Lord recover his servant? Is it not by plunging him
deeply into this pit of sorrow?

Indeed he begins with a sweet and gracious promise of pardon thereof, but
not before that David had shamed himself in confessing thereof, that so the
sense of Gods mercy might prevent extremity of despair: now the conscience
was thoroughly awakened by his ordinance, and so might also lead on to a kindly
sorrow for sin, upon hope of further application of that gracious pardon, and
preventing of such judgments, which might further tend to the dishonor of
God: and yet this tender of pardon is not obtained, before there be an inward
sense of sin, and open confession thereof, that so the Lord seconding his
ordinance by the seasonable effect thereof, his servant might be prevented of
presumption, and so led on graciously to wait upon God in his sound healing and
recovery.

And mark I pray how the Lord does herein proceed with him, though he has a
proclamation of pardon, and some hope no doubt thereof: yet how long is it
before it be sealed up unto him; what strange interruptions and spiritual
distresses, come between the proclamation and sealing thereof to his comfort.

First, he that heard the proclamation of the pardon of his sin, yet he
hears it with such bitter preambles and ingredients: it is prepared unto him
with sour herbs, and such heavy news, as might make him see himself
altogether unworthy thereof, and so wait upon God for his sound recovery.

Secondly, he shall be encountered with multitudes of sorrows, as he had
multiplied his sins: The sword shall not depart from his house, who had
smitten with the sword; and he that had abused the wife of his friend, shall
have his own wives abused by his neighbors and children, ver. 10, 11.

And so the Lord will meet with him also in his kind, meating unto him such
measure, as he had wayed to others: that so he might acknowledge the
righteousness of God, and by seeing his sin more clearly in the glass of
his judgments so seasonably proportioned unto him in their several times, in
measure in the branches thereof, hereby he might renew and perfect his
repentance.

Thus roughly does the wise Lord begin with his servant, and yet mercifully
too; denouncing but a temporal judgment to such high handed and desperate
sins, that so his servant might be in hope of eternal mercy, howsoever he
might feel some temporary chastisements.

And thus does this Physic work with his servant. It brings him to an hearty
confession of his sin in thankfulness unto God, for not exacting the
extremity of his justice, and so if it may be, for remitting or qualifying the
temporal judgment: that it might not tend to the dishonor of God.

And yet because howsoever he had carried the matter secretly; yet it could not
but be whispered and bruited to the dishonor of God. Ioab was but an hollow
friend, and might blab it out, the detayning of Bathsheba might proclaim the
same, give ill example to the subject, cause religion to be traduced. Therefore
mark I pray you how the wise Physician tempers his potion.

His sin shall be pardoned and yet chastised too, that so David may see that
there is great difference between the proclamation of the pardon, and applying
thereof, that so his heart may be better fitted by the humiliation of the flesh
and spirit to prize and hunger thereafter, and so in due time to apply the same.

Though his sin against God be pardoned, yet there is a trespass committed
against men, and therefore the child must die for the making up of this breach,
and David must have his heart broken hereby in mourning for the child, and so
making way hereby for a more hearty sorrow for his sin, the cause thereof. And
this sorrow for the child shall be in the end accompanied with rest for the
departure thereof, to confound the wisdom of the flesh therein, and so to
testify his subjection to the will of God, and thereby in the particular
assurance of the welfare of the child, to include his own interest in that
happiness which the child had attained.

And so he that had yet little sensible comfort of the pardon of his sin, yet
makes conscience to add sin unto sin, whereof before he was too lavish,
and therefore he comforts Bathshaba as a pledge that God sanctified his former
sin, and changed his adulterous estate into holy wedlock; and so the Lord
gives a blessing hereunto, by sealing up the same with the fruit of the womb,
and blessing the fruit to sit upon his loins, and the destruction of the
enemies. Thus does the wise Lord mingle his comforts with his chastisements,
that so he might be the better able to endure what was to follow, and to
answer the Lord thereby in the work of repentance.

And was there not great need that he should be prevented with such cordials,
that so he might the better endure such bitter storms that fell thick afterward
upon him, even to the wasting not only of his marrow, but even of his secret
parts and purest quintessence? that he is not only forced to complain that his
bones were dis-iointed, his flesh putrified, his skin parched, but also that
his soul claue unto the dust, and refused comfort; his joy was gone, and
bitter sorrow of spirit overwhelmed him on every side: And that so far forth,
that he was afraid that he was cast off quite; that the spirit of God was
utterly departed from him; that the work of his renewed heart was utterly
abolished, Psalm. 51.10.

What storms here also fell upon his good name, by the raylings of Shimei,
because he had caused the Name of God to be blasphemed? 2. Sam. 16. What heavy
storms fell upon his Estate, when he was not only thrust out of his
Kingdom, but pursued for his life? What treachery of his dearest Counselors,
because he had rejected the council of God? As the Word does plentifully
witness, so does it hereby make it good unto us, that the dear servant of God
so deeply smarted for his sweet sin, that not only in the judgment of
others, but to his own apprehension, he felt himself no better then a
Castaway; as forsaken of men; so also forsaken of God, as one free among the
dead, and quite out of mind, whose hope was perished from the Earth.

Thus is it apparent in David's case, that the Saints have not only fallen into
grievous and desperate sins, but have also thereby been plunged into such
desperate extremities, as that in stead of growing in grace, they may seem to
have lost all; yea, so to have lost them, as that they have never recovered
again, at least not that Measure they formerly had.

The like may be instanced in the case of Solomon; that Iedidiah, beloved of
God, that type of Christ; as also in Samson, another figure of Christ; in
Peter, the Apostle of the Jews; Jonas, and many others.

And yet even out of this darkness arises this light, for our comfort
herein: that seeing these were the dear servants of God, called effectually by
the blessed spirit, and sealed up to be his, not only by the inward work of
the spirit, but also by outward evidences, manifest to the Church of God;
therefore notwithstanding their grievous falls, and faintings, they were still
the same in the inward purposes of God, howsoever they differed in the outward
exhibition thereof; and so did secretly thrive in the general, howsoever they
might fail for a time in particulars.

And so hereupon the Conclusion may be drawn, for the stablishing of all
others that have sinned accordingly; that notwithstanding their desperate falls
and desertions, yet they were and so still are the children of God, and so
shall in time be recovered out of their faylings, shall bring forth yet more
fruit in their old age, though not sensible to the world, which must stumble at
them, yet apparent to the spirit, yea also, in some measure, to their own
hearts.

For the manifestation hereof, a second Conclusion is to be added:

Namely,

That the desertions and fallings of the Saints, both into sin and tentations
thereon, are far different from those of the Hypocrite and Reprobate, and so
such, as are neither total, nor final, but rather tend to their exceeding
good and furtherance in the work of Grace: As may appear by these four
circumstances.

First, by the extent of God, in leaving his children to these desertions.

Secondly, by the causes of these desertions.

Thirdly, by the measure of them, and

Fourthly, by the issue of the same.

Concerning the purpose of God, in exercising his children with these great
abasing and desertions: It is not, as the world imagines, because they are
greater sinners then others, and so, howsoever they made glorious shows in
Religion, yet now are found out in their hypocrisy, and justly confounded
therein, Job 4.5, 6.

Neither is it as the Saints themselves do foolishly imagine, that the Lord in
anger meets with them for their sins, and so has justly forsaken them: for
then, in stead of finite and moderate stripes, they should feel an
unsupportable weight, and be utterly swept away therewith.

But the maine ground of Gods dealing with them, is his free grace and singular
goodness.

1. To reform in them former faylings.

2. And so to prevent them from future, and those most dangerous evils.

3. To manifest his wonderful power, in sustaining them under the burden.

4. And to provoke them to hunger after his everlasting presence.

5. For the more glorious trial of their precious Faith.

6. And to discover unto them the power of their Head Christ Jesus, Col. 3.3.
in whom their life is hid wonderfully, when it seems not to express it self
at all: even as when one is in a swoune, the spirits retire to the head or
heart, and are safely preserved therein, howsoever the body seems to be deuoid
of life or motion.

7. Yea, to enable hereby to deal more effectually and yet tenderly with
others, upon experience of their own tentations and abasing.

8. And so to walk more humbly and closely with their God, in the rest of
their Pilgrimage.

These I take to be some of those gracious purposes which the wise and
merciful God discovers in these grievous abasings of his Children. All
which, as they proceed from his exceeding love, so they tend to his great
glory, and their exceeding good.

For as the reforming of his children from former secret evils, which they have
not happily so thoroughly repented of, must needs tend exceedingly to the glory of
God, in that his Word is hereby justified; in the end of his chastisements his
children are hereby better fitted to glorify him in new obedience; and the
World hereby either instructed to take heed of gross and open sins, which
they make no bones of, seeing the Saints smart so deeply for secret evils; or
else confounded in their false imputations, by the reformation of his children,
and so made inexcusable: so also does this tend to the exceeding good of the
elect themselves.

As that they are not only hereby assured of their interest in Gods favor, in
that they answer his special providence in their corrections; but also
enabled here to walk more chearefully in their calling, as having cast away
that which pressed down and clogged them before: yea, they are hereby better
enabled to reform and comfort others, when themselves walk without just
Imputations; and so gayning hereby more assurance of their own standing, by a
more holy watching over themselves, in regard of new Surprizals.

The like may be said concerning the other ends. For must it not much make to
the glory of God, that his servants being hereby prevented of future evils,
may walk more blamelessely before him in love? And shall not this prove
exceedingly beneficial unto them, that hereby they are not only prevented of
such bitter Physic, but also led on more comfortably to the end of their
Faith, even the salvation of their souls?

And how does the mighty Lord gain unto himself the glory of his power, in
sustaining his children in such extremities, which neither the world nor
themselves can possibly discern any ability to undergo, much less any hope
or issue out of them? How are the Saints hereby strengthened in their faith
upon the power of God, Romans 4.19, 20? How are they confirmed against all other
Oppositions? How prepared against the Terrors of Death? And how enabled to
strengthen and comfort others?

And is not the Lord hereby much glorified, that his servants having now
experience of the deceitfulness of the World, and their own frailty, do
therefore renounce all confidence in the flesh, and so hunger more earnestly
after his glorious presence, that so they may for ever be with him?

Can this choose but make exceedingly for their good? that they may not depend
upon such sandy foundations; that they may follow harder after the mark, for
the price of their high calling in Christ Jesus.

And does not the trial of their precious Faith gain unto the Lord the glory
of his faithfulness, and excellent wisdom, that by so contrary a means,
tries the lively Faith of his children, whereby the dead Faith of the Hypocrite
is discovered and confounded?

And does not this trial of the Faith of the Elect bring forth patience, and
so by patience, experience, and so by experience, hope; that they may not be
ashamed, but even confirmed and enabled to see a far off, even beyond their
troubles within the vale, and so estates them in this life, in the possession
of the life to come?

But above all, the unspeakable goodness of God shines most clearly unto
them; that whereas they live by Faith in the Son of God, as deriuing at the
first their spiritual life from their Head Christ Jesus; so still not living
in and of themselves, but in and by Christ their Head; that so no more they
live, but Christ lives in them, and they live in him, even by Faith, above all
sense and feeling in themselves. Oh how does this advance the singular love of
Christ toward them! that when they are dead in themselves, yet they live in
Christ their Head; that when the operation of the spirit seems wholly to
cease in them, yet so long as it is the spirit of Christ, they have right
therein, though they seem to have no use thereof: yea, so long as there is
life in the Head, the members, though benumbed and senseless, have by their
union with Christ, fellowship in that life. Their spiritual life is not lost,
as they foolishly imagined, but retired to the Head, there to be kept more
safely, and to be renewed in due season more comfortably and powerfully: even
as the sap, retiring to the root of Trees in Winter, is not only therein
preserved, to prevent utter death, but also cherished and maintained, to be
sent up again into the branches, in the seasonable time. Oh how does this
advance the singular love of their Head toward them! that what they have
forfeited, and in a manner put wilfully from them, yet this life is continued
and preserved in their Christ. How does it magnify the power of Christ, in
sustaining them by his own virtue above, and contrary to all sense, in
themselves?

And does not this also eleborate his wonderful wisdom, in resuming hereby
the glory, as of their entrance, so of their proceedings also in grace, wholly
to himself?

As for the good which the Saints reap hereby, it is also most glorious and
comfortable.

What assurance have they hereby of the truth of their being in Christ? Seeing
it is now apparent, that they live in him, and not of themselves. Yea, how are
they hereby confirmed in the assurance of their standing, even in their
greatest desertions, seeing it depends not upon their mutablenesse, but upon
the faithfulness and constancy of their Head? How is their hope hereby
maintained, in a gracious issue out of these ecclipses and soundings, seeing
the power of their Head can and will recover them again? Yea, what a sure
ground is hence gathered, for the perfitting of the work in them, seeing he
that has begun the work, will perfect it for his glory?

And that they may hasten their own perfection, how does this experience of
their own faylings kindle their love and compassion to their Brethren? how do
their extremities cast them upon such experienced Captains, as are able to
minister a word in due season to them that are weary? how is Love hereby
mutually enflamed and increased? how is the pride of flesh abased, and the
power of grace increased, by this mutual raising up and refreshing each other?

And is not the Lord hereby wonderfully glorified on either side, both in those
that minister, and those that receive comfort?

Are not both hereby provoked to stick closely unto God, and so to gain him
more glory in the beauty of Godliness, and so hereby to make sure and hasten
their own salvation?

Thus by the extent of God in these desertions, it is more then manifest, that
they are exceeding beneficial in the issue to the Saints, and gain much glory
unto God, and so can no way proceed from his fierce wrath against sin, but
do evidence his exceeding love and mercy toward them.

Which that it may appear yet more clearly unto us, observe we further in
the second place, the causes why the Lord does thus ^base his children, and
leave them to be buffetted with such bitter distresses.

These as they may be partly gathered by that which before has been observed
concerning the several ends and purposes of God therein, as being so many
special causes thereof; so more particularly to discover the wisdom of God
herein, if we consider the condition of our Regeneration, which is subject to
falling, in regard of it mixture with the flesh, as also fitted to increase,
and perfection, in respect of the predominancie and daily preuayling of the
spirit: These will afford us both some light to discover the causes of these
faylings, as also minister some grounds of comfort for our sustaining therein,
and recovery out of the same.

That we are subject to failing, in respect of the mixture of corruption, so
it is the wisdom of God, to ordain and dispose of these faylings, for the
further abasing and confounding of the flesh.

And as it necessarily falls out, that being left unto our selves, we must
needs be relapsed into manifold evils; so it is the wisdom of our God
(sometimes, in part) to leave us to our selves, for the advancement of his free
grace, both in manifesting hereby, that he is not bound unto us, so in making
good herein his faithfulness toward us, in sustaining us by his power, where
he seems to have utterly forsaken us, and contrary to our expectation,
relieuing us by his mercy, though not according to our apprehension, and
desire in the particular, yet answerable to his most gracious wisdom, in
reserving the glory thereof entirely to himself, and also answerable to our
maine desire, to fit us for him, and provoke us to hunger after him.

And therefore, though we may not challenge our God, for leaving us to our
selves, seeing it is our corruption, that immediately and directly causes our
fall; so much less have we any just occasion to condemn his mercy, in
leaving us to our selves, seeing he does so only leave us, as that still he
vpholds us by his power, and will no further leave us, but that still he
keeps us within the bounds of his grace, and so by the power thereof will
recover us again, and turn our faylings to our greater increase: yea even in
the very failing, so works in us by his Spirit, as to effect an increase of
grace, even in and by the very act of sin. For though he never forsake us,
till we forsake him, and so he is just in leaving us; yet is his mercy
wonderful, in so leaving us for a while, that we may forsake our selves, and
so labor yet more and more to be found in Christ, that we may grow up in him
to perfection.

For the further clearing and manifestation hereof, know we, that our God both
commands us to be holy, as he is holy, to be perfect as our heavenly Father
is perfect; and so also changes and renueth us in the spirit of our minds and
wills, by the spirit of his Son, which he gives us in our first conversion,
that whereas before we were darkness, now we are become light in the Lord,
that we may walk before him as children of the light, in all holy and
constant obedience, not living any longer unto our selves, in the service of
our lusts, but living only unto our God, that has bought us with so dear a
price, that we might glorify him in body and soul, and spirit, for they are
his, in all manner of conversation, continuing and abounding therein by the
power of his spirit, that works mightily in us, even to the perfecting of the
work of his glorious grace in us, that we may be made perfect and entire,
wanting nothing, even to the coming of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

Thus has the Lord renewed us to the image of his Son, ingrafting us by faith
in him, to be accepted through his righteousness, and enabling us by faith to
live and grow up in him, even to a perfect stature, to the full measure of the
age of the Son of God. And thus did Enoch and Job, Zachary and Eliza both,
and so have many other even to this day walked with God, in a constant course
of holiness, though not without infirmities, yet free from gross and
scandalous sins, unrebukable hereof in respect of men, howsoever, not
without corruption, and manifold imperfections in the pure and righteous eye of
God; before whom, though they knew nothing by themselves, yet they were not
justified by their own righteousness* that they might be freely justified by
the righteousness of Christ, and so daily grow up in him to perfect further
holiness. If we would know the reason hereof, the Apostle answers us: That the
power of God may be seen in our weakness, and his glory perfected in our
infirmities. If we yet demand why all the Saints have not walked alike in the
same constant course of unblameable holiness: but that some above other, have
fallen into foul and gross offenses; as Noah, David, Peter, and the like.
There may be these reasons given hereof.

First, in regard of God. And that,

1. His free working in us by his spirit, who works not in all alike, lest he
should seem to be bound to us; or to one manner of working in us, lest we
might imagine, that the righteousness in us, and not imputed to us, gave us
acceptance with our God, but works diversely according to the council of his
will for the manifestation of his power and free mercy, not in converting all
at one time, nor in the same manner, nor leading forward all in the same
particular current: but converting some at one time, others at another, and
that diversely, according to their several conditions before their conversion,
and special uses in the Church of God afterward.

yet both by the same means, the power of his spirit in his ordinances, and
also to the same maine end, even the salvation of their souls, such is the
conversion of the Saints different, and so is also their leading on to
perfection: both in regard of the different dispensation of the divine power,
as also in regard of such different tentations whereto they are subject, as
their uses are diverse in the Church of God: and yet all to the same end, even
the glory of God and their salvation. For as there is a different use of men
in the Church, some to more public and weighty occasions, others to private
and inferior ends; so also in regard hereof, as they are furnished with great
gifts, so are they subject to greater tentations, both from themselves in
wardly, of Hypocrisy, Pride, vain Glory, Security, etc. as also from
without, as from the World, Ambition, Worldliness, Covetousness, etc. and
from Satan, especially, now more envying such as most labor the overthrow of
his kingdom, and seeking by all means to hinder the work of God by them:
whence it comes to pass, that as greater gifts are subject to more
spiritual evils of Pride, Hypocrisy, Security, etc. so it pleases the wise
Lord for the preventing or purging out hereof, to leave his children oftentimes
to outward and gross evils, as Noah to drunkenness, Peter to the denial of
his Master, David to Adultery, etc. As for their greater humiliation, so for
the advancement of his greater mercy in their recovery, and for the better
information and comfort of the Saints, that may fall into the like evils, as
also to their own exceeding advantage. As

1. Being hereby better experienced both in the power of God, and malice of
Satan, and so more confirmed in their precious faith, and stablished in Christ,
and so in him more enlarged to the common good.

1. In releiuing and confirming their brethren.

2. In discharging their callings with more faithfulness and profit.

3. As weaned hereby from the world, more graciously.

4. And provoked to hunger after their perfection: and so all this to the maine
end even their salvation: and yet in all these failings, not wanting such
special assistance of the spirit, to sustain them in their falls and recovery
out of them. And so far different herein from the wicked, and so thriuing and
benefiting even in and by their falls.

That the Saints in their greatest falls do much differ from the wicked,
appears by these things.

First, by their different entrance into them.

2. By their diverse carriage in them.

3. And thirdly, by the different issues thereof.

Concerning their entrance into gross evils: the difference is,

1. That the Saints as they altogether ^ath and decline such evils, and by no
means are willing to entertain the same with deliberation or purpose before
hand: so if they be overtaken with any; it is against their maine purpose,
either being carried thereto by some sudden alluring object or violent
tentation, as neglecting their watch* and careless of the means which should
preserve them therefrom: whereas the wicked advisedly purpose before hand to
commit them, seek occasions thereto, and wilfully reject such means as may
hinder them therein, esteeming it their greatest cross to be impeached
herein, and accounting it their chief happiness to attain their desires
therein. Thus they differ in the entrance, so also in their proceeding and
lying therein. The wicked laboring continuance and increase therein by all
kind of hiding and nourishing the same, by excusing, diminishing, denying,
cloaking, and such like, that they may sleep securely therein. But the Saints,
as they are sensible of their Fall, by power of their renewed conscience, so do
they labor by all means to recover speedily again, submittting to the means
hereunto, though bitter to the flesh, and never giving over, till they have
reclaimed themselves, as being sustained inwardly by the spirit, from security
and despair therein, and enabled thereby in the use of the means, to a
gracious recovery.

And this shall appear by the third difference: Namely, the issues of these
tentations. As that, Though the wicked are still more enflamed with the love of
sin, whether they continue therein, or by age, or other invincible accidents,
are debarred the act thereof, and so are justly punished with endless torments
for their insatiable desire of sin: and so use all means to lengthen out and
increase their darling sin, though it be with leaving others, or leaving all
good means which may hinder them therein, and so their bones are full of the
sins of their youth, and they go down with them to hell, yet with the
saints it is far otherwise.

As they desire by all means to forsake all sin, so specially do they
labor against their master corruptions, such as by custom or callings they
are most subject to, and so by the grace of God not only weaken the power of
inward corruption daily, but also get the masterie of such special evils, and
never fall into them again, at least not in that measure and degrees as
formerly, but with more loathing, and less content; with more humiliation, and
greater contention; more groaning under the burden, more shaming of
themselves, more hungring after their dissolution.

This is once,

As they by experience of outward failings grow more acquainted with inward
corruption, and groan more earnestly under the body of sin, their native
pollution and original shame; so hereby do they make more conscience of
inward purity, and uprightness before God, and so get the better of those
secret evils, of Pride, Security, Hypocrisy, etc. And thereby gain more
power to resist outward evils, and so are provoked to a more conscionable use
of the means to arm them against the same; prove more careful in the maine
duties, whereby peace of conscience may be performed: Above all, are more
quickened in their most precious faith to rely wholly upon Christ, and so
provoked to hasten by all means after the mark for the price of their high
calling: laboring to be comprehended in Christ, that from him they may
attain to the resurrection of the dead.

Thus do the Saints differ from the wicked in the issues of their falls. By
which it is apparent, that even in, and by them, they thrive in Grace, and so
notwithstanding their greatest failings do both differ from the wicked, and
also are preserved and kept by the power of faith unto salvation.

And thus of the second Case concerning these dangerous falls of the Elect.

Case 3.
Whether all that are truly converted are necessarily subject to these terrors
of Conscience in the extremity thereof.

The meaning is,

That whereas the Law is necessarily the Schoolmaster unto Christ, none can
hunger after Christ but they which feel their want of him; and none can feel
this, but by the power of the Law, discovering unto them their fearful estate,
that so finding no hope in themselves, they may be forced to fly unto Christ.
Whether therefore it be not necessary to true conversion, that every one be
thus cast down by the power of the Law, and so cast out of himself, may be
cast upon Christ.

The occasion of this Quere.
First, Because we find in the Scripture that though some were converted not
without some such precedent terrors in the deepest measure, as the Iayler, Act.
16. Those three thousand in the 2. of the Acts, and yet again we hear of
others, as of Lydia the Eunuch, and whose hearts God only opened and so brought
in subjection to the obedience of Christ.

2. Many of Gods children cannot tell of the time of their conversion, and so
it seems were not thus dejected, which they could not likely forget. Nay they
have not been observed by others, neither felt in themselves such
extraordinary terrors, and yet yield manifest fruits of a sound conversion.

3. The wonderful wisdom of God seems to euince a difference in the manner
of conversion, least it should be tied to one way which in each is so diverse.

4. Lastly, the different state of such as are converted seems also to imply a
difference in their conversion.

For some have led a civil life before their conversion, free from notorious
and fretting sins. It may seem that these needed not so great humiliation,
as such, who have had their estate in sin stained with foul and gross
offenses, who both in regard of themselves, had need of some deep humiliation
to bring them to a just horror of such wickedness; as also in regard of
others, that they might be terrified from committing the like, seeing they have
cost their brethren so dear.

5 If we consider the diverse uses and employments of Gods children after their
conversion, that some are to be exercised in more public and weighty
callings for the good of the Church, and others not so: this also may imply a
difference in the manner of their conversion, that these need not so much
humiliation as the other, or at least are not like to be so put to it.

First, because Satan will be sure to oppose more strongly the conversion of
those, that are likely to be greater enemies of his kingdom then the other.
And,

2. The Lord in wisdom so disposes, that theirs shall be the greater
humiliation, whom he has more noble employment for, that so being delivered
from greater terrors, they may be more bound unto the Lord, and so prove more
serviceable unto him, as having experience of his mighty power to secure them
against all oppositions, in the execution of their callings; and by these
greater Humiliations might be graciously prevented of Spiritual Pride and
Security, which of all other will prove the greatest impediments to the most
difficult and glorious employments.

Thus Saint Austin confesses, that his friend Alipius received his new birth
with little or no struggling, but as for himself, he obtained not his quietus
est without extreme terrors and conflicts. The reason is apparent which has
been formerly observed.

And so as it is in the Natural birth some mothers are delivered with less
pangs, some with more, so why may it not be in the spiritual?

These and some such like may be the occasions of this Quere.

For Resolution whereof these grounds must be laid.

First, That there is no true conversion of any, without some Measure and
degrees of anguish and trouble of conscience.

The reasons are,

1. From the Nature of Conversion, which is from darkness to light, from the
power of Satan, to the obedience of God, from one contrary to another: which
that it may appear to be so in us, as being justified by faith, we have
peace with God, and so are translated into his marvelous light; so must we
discern our contrary state, yea feel in some measure the haynousnesse and
danger thereof, that so we may the better discern the power of Christ in
delivering us from the same.

2. Nay indeed how can we discern the want of Christ, but by the sense of
our Misery? how can we prize the worth of Christ; but by discerning our own
worthless and desperate state?

3. And will not the strong man now use all his power to keep his hold and
hinder the entry of the stronger? will he not for his part labor to enforce
our unworthiness to the uttermost; that nature seeing no reason why it should
hope for mercy in Christ, might thereby be more beholding to the free goodness
of God, in saving so unworthy, so desperate sinners? Rom 4.11.

4. Does not our God hereby vindicate the glory of our conversion only to
himself, seeing he brings light out of darkness, and heaven out of hell,
working not only without, but even contrary to all means on our part, which
is the maine end of our conversion, that he which rejoices may rejoice in the
Lord? 1. Cor. 1.31.

Whence it follows,

1. That whosoever dreams of a conversion without some sense of this former
estate, when he awakes he shall prove an hungry. Isa. 29.7. Twofold more the
child of perdition then he was before, deceived in a false birth, and hardened
to destruction.

2. That all that are truly converted, must hereby try themselves, that there
has been sorrow in the evening, before there is joy in the morning; that they
must sow in tears, that they may reap in joy.

A second Ground herein is, That howsoever all must have this passage from
sorrow to joy; yet all have it not in the same measure, nor all at the same
time altogether.

To this end we must consider, that as there are two principal faculties of
the soul, concurring to produce these agonies, namely, the Understanding, to
apprehend the cause thereof, and the Conscience, to be convinced with desert
thereof, by application of the cause to our selves; whereupon follows
necessarily the captiuating of the affections, to receive the impression
thereof, and so to produce these bitter agonies: so it pleases our good God
wisely to dispose of these diverse instruments, that in some, one only shall be
sufficient to this work of humiliation, in others, all shall concur to
increase and aggrauate the same, according to the several conditions of the
persons, and his diverse ends and employments he has for them,

As that for some, it shall be sufficient to be convinced in judgment, with
their desperate estate, that in themselves there is no hope or possibility of
salvation, that so they may discern the necessity of Faith in Christ, and
apprehension of his Righteousness, for their Justification, though their
consciences be not so far bound with the guilt thereof, as that it may work
this extreme conservation and wounding of the heart and inward affections: it
not being necessary, that always such a fearful distraction of the
conscience and affection should follow the conviction of the judgment; and it
being sufficient for the denial of our selves, to discern our damnable
estate, that so we may discern the necessity of applying Christ.

And surely, if we consider herein the policy of Satan, who by these extreme
abasings of the mind, in the work of conversion, may happily breed this
conceit hereby, that by these bitter agonies we may as it were be avenged of
our selves for our former courses, and so (as the Papists conceive) may do
somewhat ex congruo by this humiliation as a work of preparation, to fit our
selves the better to the entertaining of Christ; nay, in some sort may deserve
by this revenge on our selves, that Christ should the rather bind up our wounds.

Is not the wisdom of our God admirable herein, to prevent this conceit of
merit, and encroaching on the glory of our Savior, by preventing in many
these extremities of abasing; that so discerning only what they have deserved,
and not feeling the smart of it, they may be more beholding to Christ, for
preventing them of that which they feared, and so walk more humbly before him
all the days of their life, as having been so gracious and favorable unto
them?

And that they may the rather be provoked hereunto, behold the singular
wisdom of God, in leaving many of their brethren to the extreme smart of that
guilt, which they have escaped; that so they may acknowledge the free work of
God in their conversion, seeing it is otherwise with their brethren then with
them therein; that so they may in silence admire the wisdom of their God, and
also may be more wise, to judge of their brethren in such extremities, though
the like has not befallen them, seeing the ways of God are free and
unsearchable: especially may walk more warily in their renewed estate; seeing
what they have escaped at their entrance, they may meet withal in their
journey, to the present confusion of all their hopes, and disappointment for
the time of their greatest comforts.

For so it usually falls out by the wise hand of our God, that those which
have not felt these pangs in extremity, in the travel of the new birth, they
usually are overtaken with them, in the growing up thereof, lest they should
insult over their brethren, and because they may through spiritual Pride and
security fall into such evils, that may of necessity require such bitter
physic.

Whence we may conclude,

1. That though all have not the like measure of humiliation, at their
conversion; yet may we not hereby conclude, that those that have had none, or
less then others, are not truly converted; no more, then it follows, that
those which have had deep measure of humiliation, are truly converted.

For as it falls out in false conceptions and abortiues, that though the mother
be put to intolerable pains, yet she miscarries in the birth: so it fares
with many hypocrites, who though they have been exceedingly abased by the Law,
even to extremity of despair; yet either have they been swallowed up in that
fearful pit, and so prevented of the work of grace; or else if it has fallen
out, that by means, either spiritual or carnal, they have received some
relief and ease of their pangs for the present, and so have bin given up to
hardness of heart, to sleep in that senseless estate; howsoever they may
imagine this security to be true peace of conscience, and so thereupon dream
of a conversion; yet are they so far from the truth of this work, as that
this their estate excludes them from all possibility thereof, yea, exposes
them to sudden and unavoidable vengeance. 1 Thessalonians. 5.3.

And yet on the other side, as we see many Mothers to have speedy and easy
deliverance, so fares it with others in the new birth, that they are called
with less ado, and receive their birthright with much ease and comfort.

Which as it does not hinder, but that others must pass through the
extremities of this humiliation, that the power of God may more mightily
appear in sustaining them in these agonies, and his free grace may be more
advanced in their more glorious deliverance, as having happily a further
purpose in these for the raising up of others, by their own experience out of
the like extremities, etc. so for such other reasons as have bin laid down
before, the wise consideration hereof may teach us these lessons, both in
regard of our selves and others. Concerning our selves, 1. That though in
regard of our hatred of sin, we may imagine that we cannot be too much
humbled in the sense thereof, to prevent hypocrisy, and relapses thereinto:
yet that in this case we wisely submit to our God, for the measure of our
humiliation; not indenting with him, to be humbled as such and such, because
happily we have observed their deep humiliation to be recompensed in due
season with extraordinary comforts; lest it befall contrary to us then unto
them, seeing the case is different. For though they, by dispensation of the
Almighty, being so dejected, as if they might have had their choice, would by
any means have declined it (for who indeed would willingly thrust himself into
such a consuming fire?) have by the mercy of God found a comfortable issue
thereout, and so bin counteruailed with extraordinary comforts, to assure them
of their full deliverance, and make them fit for their callings. Yet know thou
that thy Case is otherwise, and therefore must justly expect another issue:
Namely, That whereas, in that thou do thus prescribe the wisdom of thy God
in this indention with him, for such extreme humiliation; thou do herein no
better then tempt thy God, and exalt thy self above him, in hunting his ways,
and teaching him what he should do with thee; and so do justly expose thy
self to the extremity of his wrath, and yet depriuest thy self of thy hope,
to be recompensed with greater comforts. Has it not been observed, that some
such as have limited the Lord in this kind, have been so satisfied with their
desire, that some have not found comfort all their life long after, others not
in twenty years or more after?

Take heed therefore, in the name of God, that thou temptest not the Lord thy
God, thou shall find troubles enough to meet thee, when thou art borne, and so
better able to bear them: and will thou then desire such extreme troubles,
when there is no strength to bring forth? Submit thy self wisely therefore
unto the wisdom of thy God for the measure of thy humiliation, I say even when
thou art converted, and so happily desire to be avenged more deeply of thy
self, for some offense against thy God, by this denouncing of thy spirit. Thy
God is merciful, and knows what thou art able to bear; he delights not
in the torturing and consuming of his creature: It is all one with him, to
bring us home with the shaking of the Rod, as with the smart of it. If he
bring thee home with more ease, thou art more beholding to his goodness, that
has hereby made thee fitter for thy calling, and serviceable to him and his
Church: and see that this bind thee to more faithfulness and contentedness
in thy formal ways. If it please him to let loose upon thee, and tri^ thee to
the Branne; remember it is thy gracious Father, that will sustain thee with
one hand, while he breaks thee in pieces with the other, that so he may
purge out thy dross thoroughly, and prepare thee to be more pure Gold, to make
a Vessel of Honor.

Yet herein also be thou wise on the other hand, that though some may be
converted without great sense of these terrors, thou therefore fall to
prescribe the Ordinances of God, as if the Preaching of the Law were needless;
we must hear nothing but the Gospel, that so we may go in a Dream to
Heaven: For this is to run from one extreme into another, and herein also to
tempt the Lord thy God. For know this for a certainetie, that none can be
fitted to entertain the promise of life, but those that are convinced by the
Law of their deadness in sin.

And therefore, as it falls out among Malefactors, that though all are
condemned by the Law to die, yet all are not punished, but some repriued, and
some pardoned; so is it in the conversion of sinners: All must necessarily be
convinced of their damnable estate, before they can be fit for mercy: But it is
not necessary, that all should have the like sense and feeling of their
punishment, seeing their conviction may be sufficient to prepare them to
Christ, though others, of another spirit, either hardened in sin, or puffed up
with conceit of natural and civil righteousness, had need of more battering
and abasing, to make them yield to God.

And therefore the Law must have his place in all, though not in the same
measure of working.

For as it falls out among diseased ones, all that seek to the Physician, are
not in a like measure distressed: some only have some grudgings of sickness,
and yet for fear of further extremity, seek help to prevent it; others are
fallen into some sits, before they seek help; others are dangerously sick,
before they use the means. So is it with Christians in their conversion: some
have only some grudgings, and yet in wisdom run to Christ, to prevent
extremities; others again are forced to fly unto him, upon sense of some
pangs, though not in extremity. Whereas some are put even to the plunge of
life, with the extremities of despair, before they seek unto him. So that all
are not alike distressed, and yet all seek to the true means of comfort; and
so are relieved, according to their several necessities and occasions. And
thus of the third Case.

As for the other Cases of the insensible work of the Spirit, whereby it may
seem that we grow not, because we discern it not, and such like; these have
been sufficiently answered before.

Another maine Case there is, concerning the supposition of falling into the
sin against the Holy Ghost, which the Saints are often troubled withal. This
we shall by Gods grace satisfy elsewhere in our next Endeavors, concerning
the cure of a wounded spirit.

There remains yet one special case to be resolved:

Namely,

That whereas some of the Saints have walked so constantly with God, as that
they have been not only freed from such gross evils as others have fallen
into, but also shined most gloriously in an holy and constant course of
obedience, to the great glory of God, and good example of others; seeing every
one should shine, to glorify God, in most powerful and constant obedience,
and the chief causes of the failing of others in both these, proceed from
themselves, by grieuing the spirit, and so suspending some operations thereof:
What course therefore is to be taken, to prevent these fearful falls, and to
keep a constant gate of the Spirit, to preserve us from falling, in a fair
and constant practice of universal obedience?

For resolution hereof, know we, That as the maine courses of our broken and
interrupted courses proceed from our selves; so the only ground of our
standing, is from our gracious God, who has supplied us with such means, for
preservation and constant obedience, that if we be not wanting to our selves,
we may and shall certainly continue a most sweet and comfortable course of
holiness.

Consider we therefore first, that the way to keep us in a constant course of
obedience, and so of continual feeling of the comforts of the spirit, is,

First, a constant attending upon the means: both publicly, as

1. The powerful Word preached.

2. The receiving of the Sacraments often, with due preparation.

3. Often exhorting and stirring up each other to holy duties.

4. Specially conscionable keeping of the Sabbath: and so

5. Walking in our evil callings with all faithfulness and dilig^nce, and yet
with contentment, and retired affections; weaning our souls from the love of
these earthly things, by the experience of such distractions, and want of
satisfaction therein. Thus for the Public.

For Private Courses.

First, for Resolution.

1. Resolve we in all things to cleave fast unto the Word, to do all things
according to the spiritual sense and scope thereof, not to attempt any thing
besides or contrary thereunto.

2. Seeing the Word commands perfect holiness, and in Christ enableth
thereunto, and yet corruption remaining, daily hinders therein: therefore
secondly, resolve we, that though we are not nor cannot be perfect in this
life, yet we must labor thereto, in the use of all means constantly; not
thinking, that we have already attained, much less, that we may be too
holy, but still laboring to go on to perfection, and daily conuincing our
imperfect righteousness, that still we may deny our selves, in the
acknowledgement of our imperfections, and labor to be accepted in the
righteousness of Christ, and daily grow up in him to perf^ction.

3. Seeing by the power of Christ enabling us, we shall certainly attain to
the full and perfect measure; therefore resolve we still to follow men as they
follow Christ: not to stick in the beginnings of Christ, no not in any measure
attained, but still to follow hard after the mark, for the price of our high
calling in Jesus Christ. Thus for Resolution.

Now for Endeavor and Practice, let our care be daily, for constant endeavor in
these things.

First, in awaking with and to the Lord in thankfulness for nightly
occasions, and meditation thereof, affecting the heart with the goodness of
God, and rowsing up the same with renewing the Covenant.

2. In seasonable renewing our Rep^ntance, for what has passed formerly,
especially our bosom sin, which will now plead for continuance; watching
against the occasions thereof, and arming our selves with Faith, and resolution
against the same.

3. In a serious watching over our thoughts and first motions to evil, to
prevent delight therein, and so practice thereof.

4. In fervent Prayer to God for acceptance of our persons, and pardon of our
sins, and so for strength to walk before him in all constant obedience.

5. In a sober attempting of our callings with fear and yet diligence, and
simplicity, as therein serving God and not men.

6. In a wise use of our liberty, both in diet and recreations, carrying our
selves therein with spiritual affections, and aiming at spiritual ends.

7. Entertaining in all occasions such sweet motions of the spirit which may
draw us apart to our God, and humble us in our estranging from him, may put us
to the search of our estates, and send us daily to approve our hearts unto God,
and draw nearer unto him in truth and boldness.

8. Laboring still to clear the evidences of our salvation by quickening our
faith in the promises, renew our experience of former comforts, and stirring up
any present experiment, that either in our selves, or others has happened for
the present, to confirm faith, or humble for sin, or warn against future
storms.

9. Wisely entertaining all occurrents, which may put us either upon the
admiration of Gods wonderful, power and wisdom, in turning things about to
his glory, by confounding the policies of men, and securing his Church by them,
or else may bind us to more thankfulness and confidence in our God by our
particular preseruations from many evils which others have fallen into, or
supply of such secret comfort which the world cannot be partaker of.

10. Not neglecting to store up such particular sound assurances as are offered
in Prayer, hearing the Word, Meditation, Conference, etc.

11. And mourning seriously for the want of comfort herein, and so waiting on
our God for the issue in his time; laboring more intention and entireness,
when we come before him.

12. Being wise to recover with all speed out of any slip and slight failing.

13. Watching over our speech, with all fear and reverence, speaking always
as in Gods presence, as unto God, with all uprightness and faithfulness.

14. Being careful of our society, that we make choice thereof, and seek to
better the same, or be bettered by them, that we may not return to them, if
they will not return to us.

15. Meditating by our experience of the vanity of earthly things, and yet not
neglecting such special work of God, which may confirm our faith, and raise
us to the hope of more durable riches.

16. Entertaining wisely all occasions to do good, by all holy means,
especially to the household of Faith.

17. And laboring to have a fellow feeling of the troubles of others, iudgeing
wisely of the cause, studying carefully the issue thereof. And preparing by
their afflictions for our own, and by our own, carrying our selves more
tenderly toward them.

18. Above all, striving to increase and maintain the assurance of Gods favor
by prayer, meditation, spiritual experience, daily clearing of the heart of
all carnal joys.

19. And so endeavoring to make all even betwixt God and the soul, by
examination, and judging of the heart, and renewing the covenant.

20. And so lying down in this assurance, as to be prepared for the grave,
and judgment: of this look more in the Daily Sacrifice in the last Chapter
concerning our lying down with God in the account of the day.

Thus if we walk daily, we shall be sure to be kept from all fretting evils
in a comfortable stay with God, and joy of his spirit.

Avoiding carefully herein, specially those sins that do rob God of his
glory, as Hypocrisy, spiritual Pride, vain Glory, which are the causes that
we are given up to gross evils. And still keeping our selves in the fear of
God, and daily laboring to clear the evidences of our salvation.

Striving to have more familiarity and entire fellowship with the Lord, that
we may be more and more knit unto him and kept by him in peace.

Above all, learning still to live by faith and not by sense, and so preparing
against the coming of Christ Jesus.

And thus of this fourth Case.

The Conclusion of the Treatise, with promise of further light.
Thus have thou (beloved in Christ) some further fruit of Gods patience and
mercy toward me his unworthy and unprofitable servant concerning this
wonderful Mystery of spiritual Growth: My humble request is, that thou
would seriously consider of the strange distractions and confusions of the
time, wherein he that refraines himself, makes himself a prey. And then I
hope as thou have great cause to bless God for any light that shines in so
great darkness, so thou will patiently bear with whatsoever obscurities and
defects may appear in these meditations, and so further me with thy prayers
unto the throne of Grace, that these fogges being dispelled, and dark clouds
passed over, we may see more clearly into the great mystery of Christ, and so
therein, of our spiritual Growth in him. Promising thee shortly some further
light to direct thee herein, as God shall minister leisure and ability.

And so I commend thee to the power of Gods Grace, whereby thou may be kept
from falling away with this present evil world, and so preserved blameless in
the midst of a froward generation, to shine as a light in a dark place, and to
continue constant and immovable in the work of the Lord, watching for the
conversion of the Jews, and utter downfall of Antichrist, and so may be
prepared as a Bride unto the Bridegroom, even to the glorious appearance of
our Lord Jesus. And even so come Lord Jesus, come quickly, In whom I rest

The poor brother ready in all things to further thy reckoning. Th. Cooper.

FINIS.

