THE COPY OF A LETTER Sent from an English Gentleman, lately become a Catholic
beyond the seas, to his Protestant friend in England. In answer to some
points, wherein his opinion was required, concerning the present business of the
Palatinate, and marriage with Spain: And also declaring his reasons for the
change of his Religion.

M.DC.XXII.

VERY WORTHY AND VVELVVISHED FRIEND.
Whereas in your letter which I last received, you desire to be by me informed
of the present state of things touching the Palsgraue, or Prince Palatine: As
also what opinion we have in these parts of the Match between England and
Spain; I must answer you that I dare not presume to exte^d my own ignorance
so far, as to penetrate into the depth of such important matter, or so to
deliver you my conceyt, as that thereon you might settle a resolved opinion, of
the future event. But if you will be pleased to understand what I hear in
these parts, where speech has more freedom then in England, and that
thereunto I may a little add my private opinion, I can be content to enthrall
unto you my thoughts from their privileged liberty, seeing you can so much
command me.

First then as touching the Prince Palatine, it should seem by that I hear,
and the sequel of things thereunto also according, that he is more inclined
to harken unto the directions of the Hollanders, then unto the grave advice of
our King his Father-in Law, unto whom besides obligation of affinity, he ought
both in regard of Majesty, as also of Counsel more worthy to be followed, to
have harkned. For at the very time that his Majesty was so provident and
careful for him as to send his Ambassador Sir Richard Weston to treat with
the Archduchesse at Bruxells, about some agreement in his behalf, then did the
Hollanders as more powerful over him, post him away into Germany, there to set
on foot actions of hostility: whereunto he obeyed, as not seeming to regard the
prudent course intended by his Father-in-Law to his greater good, but
endeavoring to satisfy the desires of those who care not whose house be on
fire, so they may warm the^ by the coals.

Also, whereas his Majesty, being regardfull of justice and equity, has showed
his dislike of this Prince his great error, in accepting at the hands of
Rebels the Bohemian Crown, which appertayned unto his own soueraygne Lord
the Emperor, unto whom he being a subject, it makes the case so much the
more dishonorable and unjust; and notwithstanding that he is driven out of the
said Kingdom, and has less reason to retain the title, then when he was in
it: yet the Hollanders still giving it him (upon hope that some other Crown
may befall him, and that therefore the title of Kingly dignity shall not in the
mean time leave him) his ambitious blindness is pleased to retain it, and
perhaps to make it the cause of his total Ruin.

And lastly, whereas it seems that ear is given unto his Maiestyes desire
about a Truce, or perhaps an absolute Peace and Reconciliation, between the
said Prince and the Imperial Majesty, to the accomplishment whereof there
ought in all reason to follow a submission from the inferior and offending
side; yet appears it not that this Prince is willing to relinquish the
aforesaid Title, and to yield unto due submission, by humbly asking pardon and
acknowledging his offense, but rather to remain obstinate, and follow the
counsel of the baggage Hollanders, who only dispose of him to their own ends
and purposes, not caring at all to what calamityes they expose him, so their
own turns be served, nor whether in the end he sink or swim.

Me thinks, I can compare the state of the Hollanders as now it stands, unto
the state of a Merchant inclyning unto Banke-breaking. They do owe as I have
been given to understand by such as seem well to know it, about eight millio^s
of florins, for which they pay interest. Their trade and trafike is exceedingly
decayed. Their charges so great with their Exercito, and Presidies etc. that
they are forced to disburse every day, some hundreds of pounds more then their
comings in do extend unto. Their good carriage has been such, that they have
almost out-liued all their friends that were ablest to have helped them. The
means they have to continue the wars, they are constrained to press out of
the hearts of their subjects, by most grievous exactions; and being driven unto
desperate terms themselves, they have drawn this Prince into action, in as
bad a cause as their own, and in such a dependence with theirs, that if the
one of these fall, both may fall together for company: for it cannot be
otherwise when the one draws down the other with him, while he is falling,
and no wonder it is that this may happen, where good counsel is despised, and
that men will needs be left to their own folly, and to bake as they have
brewed.

You must also understand that the Hollanders posting away the Palatine into
Germany, was not upon assurance of preferring him to the recovery of that which
he had forfayted and lost, but only to keep the forces of the King of Spain
there occupied, to the end they might not return to the Netherlandes against
them. But how ever it be, it is in the mean time sufficient for the honor of
his Majesty, to have let all the world see that he has done his endeavors to
have ended these broils with peaceful security, for the sparing of much
blood, and avoiding the danger of depending in war upon the good will of
fortune, which now is not like to fall out so happily.

As for the willingness of the Puritans and Puritanly affected in England, to
contribute (as in your letter you signify) toward the maintenance of some
thousands of men, to the assistance of this Prince, they do without all doubt
reckon without their host, little imagining what a charge it is to maintain an
army so far of, and what a burden the continuance thereof would prove to be
unto the Realm; for it could not but prove a war of long continuance, whereof
the sequel would be the impouerishing of the people, by drawing away the wealth
of the Realm by so long lasting transportes of money, which would never come
in again, nor ever bring the Realm any benefit, to recompense it: all which
his Majesty as a most provident Prince wisely foreseeing, besides the great
effusion of blood, it moved him to resolve upon a sweeter and more convenient
course, if the enemies of peace and quietness had not interrupted it. And if so
be his Majesty shall now leave this Prince unto himself, seeing he has
followed his own self will, and the sinister counsel of turbule^t spirits,
that account their fishing best in a troubled water, who cannot but think that
his Majesty has served him right? And this is all I can deliver unto you of
the opinions of such as I have discoursed withal, about this matter.

Touching the Match with Spain, whereof there is now great speech and good
appearance, we must resolve that it rests most in the disposition of God, in
whose power is the disposing of all things. For mine own part I dare
confidently say that I do not think there can a more Great or Honorable Match
be found for that Prince, in all the world. And let passionate men say what
they will, certain it is, that the continuance of peace and friendship with
Spain, is as commodious to England as the keeping of peace and friendship with
any Country whatsoever. And this the prudent King Henry the seventh his
Maiestyes Ancestour, well saw, when he matched his son and the heir of his
crown Prince Arthur, with the Lady Catharine, the Kings daughter of Castilia,
when there was no such greatness added unto it as now there is. And the said
Prince failing, for he was sickly when he married, and dyed before the marriage
in all respects was consumate, the said King Henry neglected not to procure by
dispensation the match to be made with his Son Henry, who now was become his
heir instead of the other, and reigned after him by the name of King Henry the
eight: and albeit this King did put this his married wife and most virtuous
Queen from him, after he had had her about twenty and two years, for the love
of Anne Bullen; yet was it without any just cause, and his match with Anne
Bullen proved not honorable unto him; for he caused her to be beheaded for her
abominable adultery; of the truth whereof if any doubt, there is among other
testimonies yet a letter extant of the Lord Cromwells, wherein so much is
signified.

I know the Puritans and Puritanly affected have no liking of this new match
with Spain, and that their friends the Hollanders can in no case endure to
hear of it, the one in regard of reason of State, the other in regard of a
long wished Puritanicall discipline, according to the Holland Reformation.

Concerning the Hollanders, who can think his Majesty obliged to forbear this
match for the giving of them satisfaction, whose greatest desire indeed is,
that the Prince should not match at all, for their more assurance of bringing
the House of Nassow to Domineere in England, seeing the Prince Palatine by his
mothers side being of that House, and coming in the right of his wife to that
Crown, England should then become Hollandes buckler against Spain: and then
might come with this Prince into that Realm I know not how many land-lesse
Lords of the same House, and he bringing also with him, as a Puritan Messiah,
their long desired Reformation; how fit would Bishops livings fall for his
Kinsmen, and perhapps they would be as well also contented to bear the names of
Bishops or Administrators, as the Lutheran Lord that has gotten by his
demeanor, the Reverend title, of the mad Bishop of Halberstat; and as other
the like do in Germany, that gallantly ride upon their great horses, in their
apparel of all colors of the raynbow, with their rapiers by their sides, and
huge feathers in their hattes, and look as like Bishops, as Owls look like
Apes; which goodly Ecclesiastical state and dignity, English Puritans for
Reformation sake would perhaps be very well content to commend, (as well as
their Puritan brethren in Scotland have liked and allowed such like state and
title to Lords and Gentlemen there) and especially when they meddled with no
more but only with the displaced Bishops livings, and leave all businesses
belonging to the Word, wholly in the hands of Puritan-Ministers, and Consistory
discipline.

But as the Hollanders and their correspondent-brethren our English Puritanes,
do for their several designs, desire nothing more then the not going forward
of this Match, and in very deed, no match at all for this Prince, as before I
have noted; so to the contrary, all true and loving subjects to his Majesty,
and bearers of dutiful affection to the Prince and country, ought to desire
it; and to desire, that upon the accomplishment thereof, issue may speedily
follow, because heerin consists both his Maiestyes, and the Princes safety.
And this is all I can say unto you fore present, concerning the match with
Spain.

As concerning your objection about difference of Religion. The Lady being, as
you say a Papist, and to have the free exercise of her Religion, and
consequently, the use of her Chapel and Mass in the Court, which you say
will be an ey-sore to the professors of the Gospel etc. Upon these your words
I shall be occasioned to open my self further then else I should have been willing
to do, because of giving you some unexpected disgust, when in making answer
unto your speeches I shall be brought (if I must deal directly and plainly as
with a friend) to declare this eyesore to be but a misco^ceaued sorenes: for
heerupon I know you will straightways censure me to be turned Papist, and
condemn me of leuity for being so soon swarued from the light of your
Gospel, to the liking of a Religion so generally misliked in England, whereby
I may stand in danger to loose your love, which very loath I would be to do,
considering how sincere I have always found it, and what reciprocal
correspondence I have used for conservation of the same. The esteem whereof
being indeed the greatest cause that moves me to be so careful to endeavor
so to excuse myself, that you may think me the less blameworthy, and
consequently the less breach may be made in your good affection toward me,
seeing in mine toward you (notwithstanding difference of judgment in
Religion-matters) there is none at all; for I can see no reason to the
contrary, but that men may bear themselves in amity and Civil conversation
with one another, though the one be inclyned in conscience to serve God in a
different manner from the other, seeing every man owes his honest behavior
unto men.

Well then, good Sir, upon hope of reservation of your love, and that when you
shall have understood how things have passed, you will consider before you
condemn me of leuity, whether I had any sufficient motives or no, to bethink
my self in matter of Religion, more then I did, before I knew there was so
great cause why I should, I will here endeavor to be accomptable unto you how
things have passed with me in this matter, since my coming out of England.

Whiles I lived in England I was, as you know, as fervent in our Protestant
religion (wherein I was brought up) as either your self or any in the Country
can be. I was a great reader of Scripture, a great frequenter of Sermons, and a
great hater of Papists. I often heard our preachers tell, that the Church of
Rome was a lienated from her first purity, that it had entertained many gross
errors and corruptions, and that forsooth the preachers of their Gospel did
restore and teach the very same doctrine, that was taught in the time of the
Apostles and primitive Church of Christ. This upon their mere saying so, I
confidently believed, without ever making doubt thereof, or further enquiry for
any proof. But coming into Germany, whither my journey was, as you know
intended, for the service of the Prince Palatine, who we then called King of
Bohemia, and there beholding the Lutheran preachers to stand swaggering in
their pulpits, with their mouths as full of Scripture, as any of our
Pulpit-mens in England might possibly be, and there to see them so to contemn,
scorn and deride our English preachers pretension of restoring Apostolical
religion, as the most ridiculous jest in the world, I stood not a little amazed
at the matter. Travailing from Germany into Bohemia, there did I hear the
Hussite-preachers as I had heard the Lutherans before, condemn our doctrine of
England, laugh and scof at our preachers pretension of primitive truth, as a
jest only to make sport withal, not containing, nor carrying therewith, so much
as any show of truth; which to my consideration proved no jest at all.

Lighting after this, in the company of Anabaptists, with which albeit England
be little acquainted, yet in these parts they will also be some body as well as
the rest, seeing they hold themselves to be as flush in Scripture as the
proudest of their Competitors, they protested by yea, and by nay, that our
Protestant Religion of England, was not consonant, but contrary to the truth of
the Gospel of the Lord.

What might I think of the great boast which our Pulpit-masters in England
make of the light of their Gospel (who seem where they are there alone, to
be the only men at it, in the world) when here in Germany I heard the Lutheran
Preachers (whose Patriarch Martin Luther we in England so much commend,) extol
the light of their own Gospel above the brightness of the Sun, and make our
Gospel of England more dimmer then a lantern.

How might I marvel, think you, when I heard the Hussite-preachers so much to
scorn our Gods Word of England, as if it were but the Word of Robin-hood.

And what might I imagine when the Anabaptists, that speak nothing but
Scripture, durst challenge all our Rabins at no other weapon, but at the only
Word, and will always be ready to continue the combat as long as they have
fingers to turn over leaves in the Bible.

But what labyrinth may you think me to have lighted in, why in my trauails I
happened into an Inn where I had about mine ears all these at once; where I
found my self enuyroned about, with different Words of God, and different
Lights of the Ghospel; where when I went about to defend our Gospel of
England, I had Bibles so fast drawn out upon me, that I knew not which way to
turn me, but was feign to stand as an Owl among other birds, and with much
impatience, patiently hear our Gods Word of England made the veriest
hotch-potch and Olla-podrida of the world. They became so pleasant and
sportfull with me, as to ask me whether God had banished his truest Religion
into an I Will, and hembd it about with the sea, to the end it should dwell no
where but there; intending thereby, that our Religion of England, both in faith
and in form, was different from all other Religions that now are extant: which
when I would have gaynsayed, they strayghtwayes came upon me with Temporal,
and Feminine Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, and with pageants of little Popes,
as though they had their instructions from Puritans and Brownists.

Lord, how heartily did I wish that but some one of our great Pulpit-thunderers
had been here, that can talk so bravely in England before those that believe
in him, to have seen how these different kinds of Scripture-followes would
have Bible-bastonaded him, and put him down like a poor Snake: for verily
there did never squirrell skip more nimbly from one bowgh unto another in a
tree, then do these fellows from one text to another, in the old and new
Testament.

Of all which, when I had well considered, there was nothing whereat I more
stood amazed, then at my own ignorance, whylst I was in England; because I did
not apprehend any opposition to any purpose to be made against the Religion;
there allowed, then that which was made against it by those of the Church of
Rome; and because our Preachers could smoothly dissemble these other opposites,
and but little meddle with them, crying Crucifige lowdest of all against those
of the Church of Rome. But finding now a far other matter, to wit, these
several sects so full of Scripture as none in England could be fuller, and
these so contemptibly to despise, scorn and hold most ridiculous our English
protestant religion, as a very mock-religion; and in most serious asseueration
of their souls, to declare it to be the damnation of al their souls that
follow it, what might I now imagine.

Finding them also to have as much sense and understanding, as great
acquaintance, as far to have trauayled in the Word, and as ready in their
language to speak and defend their causes, as any in England, how Text-fast
soever he be, is able to do; and in fine, to protest with all zeal and
vehemence of spirit, his resolution for the offering of his body, to the
torments, and pains of death, and his soul to the sentence of salvation or
damnation thereon; what could I find any of our professing people in England to
say more; and what reason had I now to reject these, and not to hear them
speak, as well as I had I heard our Pulpit-people in England, unless it
should only have been for their not being Englishmen, which were too poor a
reason to be yielded unto.

All this also considered, what I pray you, might I think, whether I were now
in a perplexity or no I leave your self to judge? what reason did there now
remain to oblige me unto our English Protestant Religion, other then because
it was the Religion of England? and whether the following thereof, because it so
was, could be a sufficient warrant for the proof of it to be true Religion,
and consequently for the salvation of my soul, lying and dying therein?

Whylst I stood in this amazement, hearing the Hussites most resolute in
mayntayning the Real Presence of Christ in the Sacrament, and the Lutherans
also; the former by transubstantiation, the later by consubstantiation, yet
either affirming no sign, but the very same body that was borne of the Blessed
Virgin Mary to be there; I was by this means brought to look back unto the
Christian world of former ages, and to think with my self that if so be the
ancient Church of Rome from which also these new congregations had deryued
their Christianity, was in process of time become alienated from her first
purity, by having, as these pretend, nourished and entertained many
corruptions; and that God would vouchsafe to benefit the world with a
restoration or reformation of Religion according to her first purity, that it
was not then like he would send so many together into the world about a
restoration, wherein they should be so opposite one unto the other, that they
should go about the setting it forward in sundry different fashions, each
according to his own manner; and each condemning the endeauours of all the
others, should prefer his own for the sole and only truth. And seeing there
can be but one fort of true Reformers, (if there be work for them) and that
all these pretenders themselves do confess so much, and each of them (as no
doubt our sort in England does in like sort) pretend themselves to be those
only true reformers, and consequently to be directly sent from God into the
world, with the privilege and commission of restoration of true Religion, I
thought my self bound in all right and conscience to seek to discover by the
best way, which thereunto I could possibly imagine to be most requisite, which
of all others this might be; wherein I also with my prayers beseeched Almighty
God his favor and direction, relying upon his promise, when he says: He that
seeks, shall find.

Hereupon came a resolution to my mind, to demand of these different sorts
of Reformers, of each a part and in particular what they could allege for
themselves, to declare and prove unto me, why their interpretation and
understanding of Scripture was better, and ought to be followed more then that
of any of the others that differed from it. And of this I desired to be
certified, by some proofs and reasons, as that sort to whom I made the
demand could only allege for it self, and none of the rest for themselves:
but when all came to all, and that I had most seriously dealt with each of these
apart, the satisfaction I got of the one was as good, as that I had of the
other, albeit their understandings were never so different and contrary: for
always I found that after many circu^loqutions before I could bring them to
the matter (for every sort sought by shifts and exasions to slip from giving
direct answer to the question) in conclusion the proof and assurance of
having the true understanding and interpretation of Scripture, was no other,
then that they had it each of them, within it self, delivered unto them by a
certain inward illumination of spirit. But when upon this I told them, that I
was now as far to seek as before, because each sort pretended his inward
illumination of spirit; and that I desired then to know, how I might be assured
that any one of these illuminations of spirit was from God, and which it was;
they told me I might know that, by that doctrine that was most consonant unto
the Word of God. I demanded which that was? None but ours, quoth the Hussite:
None but ours, quoth the Lutheran: None but ours quoth the Anabaptist, and so
in like sort any of our English Protestant Preachers would also have said, if
he had been here among the rest. But who shall judge this, quoth I? Gods word
quoth the one: Gods word quoth the other: and Gods word, quoth the third. But
who shall show me, quoth I, out of Gods word which it is, that Gods word so
judges. That will I, quoth the Hussyte: no, that will I, quoth the Lutheran:
no, that will I, quoth the Anabaptist, and so would as many and as more have
said, if they had all been here. In fine it came to no other conclusion but
that each would have his truth, and true illumination of spirit, tried by Gods
word, but just according as himself would be the interpreter thereof: and
heerby was I brought at last to be as far to seek as at the first.

Consider now I pray you, how well and wisely I was adrest. Trust me if wishes
might have wrought their effects, I desired nothing more then that you had been
present, with some two or three of the principal of your Paules-crosse
Preachers, to see what victory they could here have gotten above the rest,
that fight there so valia^tly against the air, and make their auditory believe
that the dwelling place of Gods word is only in their mouths. My experience in
this business, has emboldned me to deliver it thus plainly unto you, as it was,
and further to tell you, that not long after I had left this discordant
company, I met with one of our English Rabbis, who held himself for no small
fool neither, and I proposed unto him the same question: and I assure you he
dealt so honestly and plainly with me, that he gave me just the same answer;
and so left me as much beholding unto him, for good satisfaction, as had done
the others before him.

Trust me, good Sir, I had never thought that our pretense and brag of our
Ghospells light in England, had stood upon so weak a foundation, as now I have
been taught to discern it, and yet by no Papist neither. A man heerby may see
what it is to be nuzled up in deceyt and foolery, and himself not to know it.

You may see, by that which here I have said, I have not been careless but
curious in the seeking of such satisfaction as is most requisite and
reasonablee but you would have wondered, if you had been present to see with what
tricks and shifts each of these sought to divert and put of his answering to the
question, of giving me assured knowledge of his illumination of spirit; howbeit
I lost not all my labor, for all of them in the end gave me assured knowledge,
that this their inward illumination, that every one is assured of, as well as the
other, is but a mere babble to beguile fools. Whereof having so clearly
discovered the vanity and folly, I must desire you to give me leave, no longer
to make a fool of my self.

And albeit I had continued until now, my auersion from the Church of Rome;
yet considering that Hussytes, Lutherans, Anabaptists, and Caluinists, (for by
the name of Caluinists our Protestants in England are of all these others
called, as well as of the Catholics) had al played the run-awayes from the said
Roman Church, and were now become the accusers thereof, but with different
accusations, I considered with my self that if the accusers of Susanna were
proved false, and she innocent upon the disagreeme^t of two witnesses in their
accusation, how much the more may the Church of Rome be deemed innocent, when
there is so great a disagreement found in four of her principal accusers.
Upon this motive I resolved to seek to have conference with some sufficient
learned man of that Religion, which by the means that I used I attained unto,
but bearing my self still as an earnest Protestant; and I found myself so
confuted in my alleging of the Protestants reasons and arguments, that I never
imagined them to have been so weak; nor did I ever think that so much could be
said of so great force for the contrary.

I found also very manifestly that diverse points which our preachers in
England make us believe they hold, are very calumnies and slanders, and that
they hold them not at all. But it is a matter of state for English Ministers to
make Catholics and Catholic religion odious to the people; matter of state I
mean for themselves, because their own estate depends upon their Protestant
Religion, that Religion being their trade they live by.

But as touching the Mass, and such points as they do hold, I have had such
proofs and reasons showed me that I do not now marvel that the greatest, and
most potent part of Christendom still remains in that Religion; and that
diverse in France, Germany, and the Netherlandes as well as in England, do
forsake Protestancy, and other late and new risen opinions, and return unto
this ancient and universal faith of the Christian world.

Me thinks I now hear you ask me, where the Mass is found in Scripture? But
to this, I may ask you and all the Protestants in the world, where they can
show me out of the Scripture, after what manner the Apostles themselves did
celebrate this Sacrament? Christ instituted it at night, and after supper in
the same paued Parlour, and at the same table whereat he had supped, occasioned
thereunto by reason of the little time he had, being from thence to go into the
garden of Gethsemani, to make his prayers and preparation to his passion. That
the Apostles celebrated also in paued Parlours, at supping tables, at night,
after they had supped, and not in the morning, and being fasting; that they had
no women present at it, seeing Christ had none, no not his own Mother,
notwithstanding her great worthynes. In what manner they took the bread and
blessed it, what speeches, action, or ceremony heerin was used; whether they
used the same hymn that was said before Christ his rising up from the table;
what hymn that was, or what other prayers, hymns, or by what speeches or
ceremonies they showed our Lords death, where can they deliver us notice of all
this? Was there no form or order set down, and used by the Apostles, and left
by them unto succeeding Christians to follow? Or was it left so raw and
unordered that they knew not of any form, or manner of celebration thereof at
all? Who can imagine the Apostles to have been so careless and improuident? S.
Paul tells us the contrary, when having spoken of Christ his institution of
this Sacrament, he promises to set the rest (thereunto belonging) in order, at
his coming unto those, to whom he wrote of the same.

When the Hussites began their pretended reformation of Religion, according as
they said to the time of the Apostles, they took away no Altars out of
Churches, but left them standing, and said Mass at them, as yet they continue
to do.

When Luther an hundredth years after this, began his pretended Reformation,
which he also said was according the the time of the Apostles, he took away no
Altars neither, but celebrated at them, as do those of his sect in Germany at
this day, calling the Sacrament thereon celebrated, by no other name, then the
Sacrament of the Altar. But the first that began to celebrate upon House-tables
were the Anabaptists, who began some years after Luther. And after these came
the Caluinists, or disciples of Calvin, whose doctrine we in England for the
most part do follow, and these brake down the Altars in Churches, and brought
house-tables and set them in their places, and thereon celebrated their
Communion, affirming this be a reformation according to the time of the
Apostles, and primitive Church of Christ.

Here falls now to be considered, whether the first Christians that had the
use of Churches, had in their Churches Altars or House-tables. If they used
first tables, then the question is, when, by what order, and upon what
occasion, were these tables carried out, and Altars builded in their steeds, as
also what question or dispute happened about this alteration, or what memory or
notice is there left unto the world of it, in any Ecclesiastical Annals or
other History. When Altars were by Caluinists broken down in Churches and
co^munion-tables set in their places, all the world took notice thereof; and
even as much notice must there also have been taken, if at the first
House-tables had bin used in Churches, and that afterward they had been taken
out, and Altars there erected.

Franciscus Aluares, who lived six years in Aethiopia among the Abissines,
writes, that their Ecclesiastical Annals do testify, that they had a Church
built in their Country to the honor of Christ, within ten years of his
Ascension, which Church there yet remains, and bears the name as always it
has done, of The Church of our Lady of mount Sion: and the reason why it is so
called, is because the stone whereof the Altar was builded, was brought thither
from Mount Sion.

Such testimony of the ancient use of Altars in Churches, is not only found
among these so ancient Christians, but among all other ancient Christians of
the world, besides those of the Church of Rome, as among those of the Greek
Church, those of Cangranor, and Malabar in the east Indies that were converted
by S. Thomas the Apostle, and by all other ancient Christians of the world,
albeit they depend not upon the Church of Rome. And further can I tell you,
that I have seen a discourse, which as yet is not printed, wherein is clearly
and manifestly showed, by most great and good arguments that in all those
Countries wherein the Apostles themselves preached, and planted the Christian
faith, they did leave behind them the Mass, which has from their time
remained among those Christians, and their successors unto this day.

As touching the faith and belief of the Real presence of Christ in the said
Sacrament, it never appeared that ever any one man in the Greek Church did
deny it, and in this faith and believe all the other most ancient and remote
Christians of the world are most confident, seeing they have had it ab initio,
and that it is deryued from the very mouth of Christ.

That Christ said at his last supper, taking bread and blessing it, This is my
body, no man can deny, That it is his body, but only Anabaptists and
Caluinists (two late risen Sects) who do deny it: if they speak truly, then
is not Christ to be believed; if they say he meant not as he said, they make
him a double dealer: but if he meant not as he said, then are they to show
where it stands written in Gods word, that he meant it not; and not meaning
it, where it is then written how he would have his words understood. But who
shall show us this? Or where, or when shall we find it?

That Christ was able when he took bread, blessed it and said it was his body,
to make it so to be, who can make doubt, that doubts him not to be Christ,
and consequently God? and why is he not as well able to do this as to do with
the same his own natural body sundry other miracles above the course of
nature.

When he said that it was as easy for a camel to go through the eye of a
needle, as for a rich man to enter into the Kingdom of heaven, whereupon his
disciples asked him who could then be saved? he answered that with God all
things were possible. If then it be possible for a Camel or for a cable-rope
to go through the eye of a needle, it is possible for the body of Christ to be
in the Sacrament, and the more possible when he that is God himself has said
it.

When he had said, that with God all things were possible, the Apostles were
silent, and believed it, for they replied not to the contrary, or by asking how
it might be. So believed they him also, when taking the bread at his last
supper and blessing it, he said it was his body, else had they also asked him,
as they did of the Camels going through the eye of the needle, how it was
possible.

Manifest also it is, that all the ancient Christians of the world, besides
those of the Church of Rome, have eue^ from the original of their Christianity
believed this. If now Anabaptists and Caluinists, that are but risen up in our
days, must be believed in the denial thereof, not only against their
precedent competitours in Reformation, Husse and Luther, but against the Church
of Rome, the Church of Greece, and all other ancient Christians, resyding in
the far and remote parts of Asia and Africa; who can believe when he has
well reflected upon these things, and above all, upon the foundation of this
faith, which stands upon the very words of Christ his own mouth, and from
no where else is derived, that he can heerin be deceived? Seeing Christ in no
justice or equity, can condemn any man of misbeliefe, for believing that which
himself tells him so to be (yea albeit it were not so: which cannot be,
seeing himself is all truth, and that unto him being also God, there is
nothing impossible) and seeing also that none of his Apostles did ever after
declare unto the world, that he meant not as he said, and that notwithstanding
he speak those words, it was but the figure or sign of his body, and not his
very body indeed, as Caluinists and Anabaptists now more then fifteen hundred
years after do teach us. I am no Divine as you know, yet could I not here
conteyne within the compass of a Letter, if I should enlarge my self with so
much more as I could say concerning this matter, and with proofs of
Scriptures, Fathers, and the successiue universal faith and practice of
Chtistians throughout the world, ever since the time of Christ.

This have I done to let you see whether I had reason or no, coming to so much
knowledge and understanding of differences among so many late pretenders of
reformation of Religion (and truly to understand what the Catholic religion
holds and professes indeed) to remain still a protestant, seeing if so I
had done, it must have been for fashions sake only, and to run in cry among
the rest, as some do that will know no better, and others that can discern no
better, because they come not where may they, or are idiots and want capacity
to apprehend it.

Judge now I pray you, having well considered of the premises, whether there
appears reason for my excuse or not, and whether Protestants may have reason
to be so picquant and hateful unto Catholics as they are, and not quietly to
let them live among them, and enjoy their Civil conversation, seeing
Catholics are no intruders upon protestants, or bringers in of any novelties
among them, but the imbracers only of that faith from which Protestants are
fallen, and all the rest of their competitors in pretending discordant
reformations, and wherein unto this day the majesty of Christendom in fight of
all the world yet remains, I mean the greater and the better part thereof.
Whereas Caluinisme (for by that Name our Protestant Religion of England passes
throughout all Christendom among all Religions, except themselves) being but
new begone, is already splitted, and divided into four parts within it self,
to wit, Protestants, Puritans, Brownistes, and Arminians declining to decay,
and chiefly supported by rebellion. Be not offended with me I beseech you, I
only speak this in regard of truth, because the truth is so, as the whole
world can heerin bear me witness, and not because I would in speaking thus, go
about to vex you.

And to let you see my indifferency in speaking as impartially of the rest, you
shall please also to understand: That the Hussytes, and the others want not
their diuisio^s among them, as well as ours: for there are the old and the new
Hussytes; the rigide, and the soft, or myld Lutherans. And the Anabaptists
being fullest of all the others of Scriptures, are also fullest of all of
divisions, for I have counted among them fifteen several sorts my self, and
how many more there are, I know not.

But as sor the Hussytes and the Lutherans, I have exceedingly meruayled at the
cogging of M. Fox our English Martyrologian, and of our Preachers in England,
who for their Ghospells poverty, have so much extold John Husse for a blessed
martyr, and Martin Luther for a blessed confessor, (the one disliking the
doctrine of the other, and both being contrary unto theirs) and to dissemble
and hyde from the knowledge of their audience, what the Hussytes, and the
Lutherans do preach and write of them; and how far they are from fynding any
Gospel affinity between them, but contemn and scorn their society to the
full, and have no other esteem of them, then of a company of cocks crowing on
their own dunghills.

In Conclusion I must say unto you, that if it please God, the Match with
Spain do succeed, I trust it will prove to the great good and tranquillity of
our country, and will make England continually participant of the wealth of
Spain, and the Countries thereon depending, which seeing the rebellious
Hollanders cannot enjoy, they envy that our Nation should.

If the Match with Spain succeed not) yet seeing Englishmen cannot live penned
in within the compass of their country, as those of China, between the sea
and a huge wall, but must travail and traffic abroad in so many flourishing
Countries and places of Christendom as are Catholic, they must needs be
hateful and odious to those Nations, if it be known unto them that they do
hate and persecute Catholics at home, they being members with them of one same
body, to wit of one same Catholic faith, and Church, which is sole and
entiere, and consists not in splitted parts and divisions; and has lasted
and continued in the world, when the world was unacquainted with Protestants;
and will remain in it when Protestants may happen to return again to
inuisibility, from whence they pretend, with as much reason to be assured, as
either Hussytes, Lutherans, or Anabaptists may do the like, and may also find
as good allowance to be believed without being laughed at, as any of these, how
late or sooner before they crept out of the like obscurity. Here will I make
an end of this letter, which I leave unto your good consideration, and myself
in all the duties of affection at your command.

From the place of my abode this 25. of July 1622. You know the Hand, and the
loving Heart of the Writer.

AFTER I had ended this letter there came unto my hands a few verses from a
friend of mine, which (because they somewhat concern the purpose whereof I have
spoken) I here send you also.

Upon the hopeful Match between Prince Charles his Highness, of Wales, and the
Princess Mary Infant of Spain.
ON fames report, Hope has fixed expectation,
That in good time, the great match may succeed
Whereof the world now stands in admiration,
And it estemeth as a heavenly deed
For earths repose, Because a peaceful King,
Is now so great an Actor in the thing.
And his great Highness, does his worth discover,
And makes his Princely honor higher famed,
By choosing such a Phoenix for his lover,
As to whose self, no equal can be named:
Since none there is on earth, of Adams race,
That for all worths, may challenge better place.
N. Crynes
Unto her Greatness witness gives the Sun,
Tasked no hour to shine at any hand,
As he his course about the Globe does run,
But on some part of her late Fathers land.
An homage which he never did before,
To any Prince, nor like to do no more,
And for her feature, such it does appear.
That Rubens the Apelles of our days,
Unable to approach this beauty near,
Dares not attempt to paint his own disprayse:
But of this work of Nature wondering stands,
And lets his pensill fall from out his hands.
As for her Virtues, I refer their praise
Unto the Heavens, who best know how to do it,
Knowing I cannot from the low earth raise,
Their altitude so high as longs unto it,
Nor yet how to begin, or to intend
A work wherein I see not any end,
FINIS.

