CERTAIN GODLY AND VERY comfortable Letters, full of christian consolation.
Written by M. Ed Dering unto sundry of his friends. And now published, for the
proffite of the Church of God.

2. THESE. 1.15. Stand fast, and keep the instructions which ye have bine
taught, either by word, or by our Epistles NEWLY IMPRINTED.

NON VI SED VIRTUTE decorative border incorporating the monogram of printer
(RM)

Mr Derings words spoken on his deathbed at Tokye. The 26. of June, 1576.
GOd forgive me my negligence, that I have not used the precious gifts of God
laid up within me, more to his glory in my time: Yet I thank God that I have
not used them in vain glory, or to please the vain affections of men.

After my death my enemies will become my friends, except some that know me
not, and those which have no feelinge of the truth: For I have faithfully
served the Lord and my Prince in a good conscience.

A Preacher saying unto him: It is for thee a great blessing that thou shall
depart in peace, and go from many troubles that our brethren shall bear and
see. He answered: I shall go from many troubles and leave many behind me. If
the Lord has appointed that his saints shall suppe together, why go I not to
them: but if there be any doubting or staggering, our Lord reveal the truth.

Hearing one say, He hoped that in his silence, his mind was nevertheless
exercised in godly meditation. He answered: As a poor frail man, and the
least of all the elect saints, yet believing and lookinge on Christ my
salvation. We shall all meet together with the sweet harmony of the Lord of
hosts. What a cloud of witnesses is here: yet a little while and we shall
see our hope. We have overtaken the ends of the world which is come upon us,
and we shall quickly receive the end of our hope which we have waited for.
Afflictions, sickness and pain, are but the worlds portions from the Lord. It
is not to begin for a moment, but to continewe in the fear of God all our
days: for in the twinkling of an eye we shall be taken away. Dally not with
the word of God, make not light of it: Blessed are they that use their tongues
well when they have it.

E. D.

An Epistle of M. Ed. Deringe, before his 24 Lecture on the Hebrews, which he
preached the 6. of December, 1572. And gave for a new years gift to the
godly in London and elsewhere.
To his very loving friend Master M. F.
THe outward afflictions and manyfold troubles of a great number of gods
childrie, whose travel and labor, from day to day J had still in experience,
and the inward feelling of many wounded spirits, whose woeful sighs and bitter
mournings, J beheld in other, and had tried in my self: it made me very
desirous to seek for remedies, to stop the complaints of so grievous
cryings, and to prepare our hearts in a strong defense, that the fiery darts
of the Devil might not wound us. Upon this occasion when J had to expound that
place of the Apostle full of notable comfort: That Christ in the days of his
flesh, offered up prayers and supplications to him that was able to save him
from death, with strong cryings and tears, and was delivered from the things
he feared. J tarried the longer in that matter, and declared more at large what
boldness and assurance of hope was offered here unto all that should obey the
word. Which when I had done, as God gave me utterance, the poor in spirit, to
whom J applied my self, one or two required me to set it down in writing,
that it might be profitable to many, which was comfortable to them. I durst
not reject such a good request, but though sometime I deferred it, ye I never
forgot it, till I had written all as I was required. Which when J had done, I
purposed then with my self, to make it yet more common, and set it abroad in
print: knowing assuredly, where God would give it increase it should bring
forth the fruit of consolation, that we might stand upright in the day of
evil. Thus having performed both the request of others, and mine own desire,
and the time fallinge out with the beginning of a new year, I thought it not
amiss to offer my labor to you, who I know would well accept of it as a new
years gift, though of no great price, yet of great good will: and though
easily obtained, yet not little to be esteemed. Therefore my dear brother,
whom J love in Christ, and reverence in the world as many ways J have cause,
so I offer it unto you: The Lord for his mercies sake work his own good
pleasure, that J may have of you the fruit that J desire, and you the grace
that ye stand in need of: that as God has greatly blessed you, and made you
abound in many graces to the glory of his name, the comfort of your friends,
and the benefit of his people: so your joy, that it might be made perfect,
you might also abound in this, to have a strong faith against the day of
trial: which God of his mercy will surely grant unto you, and finishe the
good work that he has begun. Though J love not to speak fair (for
flattery and deceytful praises, I see what mischief they breed) yet J fear
not to bear you witness of your well doing: the spirit of God has planted
humility more deep in your breast, then that pride and arrogancy can pull it
out. And in deed the better you are, the more effectual you do see your own
unworthiness, that all your righteousness is as a defiled clothe: and the more
you approach unto God, the more you abhor your self, and know that in our
flesh there dwells no goodness. Abraham our father; Job, Esaie, and many
other men of excellent virtue in the sight of God, they have been all
astonished, to see how their righteousness has been scattered away as the
clouds of the heavens. Paul cries out: O wretched man that I am, who shall
deliver me from this body of death! But because we have an enemy, that
spares not to displaye all our corruptions before our eyes, to the end he
might make us despair, therefore we may be bold, to the strengthening of our
hope, to set before us again, the spiritual graces that work within us, to
assure our selves that we be borne of God. So our Savior Christ praised many
that believed on him, so did the Apostles, so may we: and our heavenly Father
will ratify and confirm our words, when we speak the truth, according to
the measure of faith that every one has received. So Saint John bids us all
be bold, and not be deceived: He that does the things that are righteous,
him self is righteous, and like unto Christ in whom he is sanctified. So may
J say unto you, the grace of GOD has wrought happily in you in these years and
condition of life, that so unfeignedly you have sought the Lord. It can not be
of your self, who are not able so much as to think a good thought, but it is
of him, whose seed abides in you. And although, because you have that
treasure in a brittle vessel, you see sometime the fruit of old Adam, and
the pricks of his transgression within your bowelles: yet fear not his malice
that has wrought this woe: You are bought with a dearer price, then that sin
may reign again within you, and he that has purchased you, he will not
suffer his inheritance to be spoiled. It is necessary you should know your
sin, or you could not understand how great were your redemption. But your
sins can not separate you away from him, who has buried them in the earth,
and will not see them any more. When you shall ascend to come into his sight,
the earth will hold her own, and keep your sins behind you. The pearcing
serpent shall not clime to accuse you, nor the crooked serpent shall not hyde
your redemption from you. Your care is cast upon him that cares for you, and
you know him who has spoken: All power is given unto me in heaven and in
earth. Ye know him who has a name above all names, that in the name of Jesus
all knees shall bow: Even he that bought you with a price, and you are not
your own. If it be possible for you to perish, then is it possible again
that Christ should suffer injury. This boldness you have through him who has
made manifest his grace unto you, that you denying impiety and worldly
concupiscence, should live soberly, purely, and godly in this present life, and
look for the blessed hope that shall be revealed, when all secrets shall be
opened. To which issue and happy end of life, the Lord bring both you and
yours, in the fellowship of his saints, to praise his holy name, when he shall
make known unto you his glory unspeakable, and crown it with immortality,
Amen.

Farewell in Christ Jesus, and pray for me. The 26. of December. 1572. Yours in
the Lord to command, Ed. Deringe.

A letter of M. Ed. Deringe to his brother Master R. D.
THe grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you ever Amen. For Master S.
whether he be angry or no J know not, if he be God is witness between him
and me how little I have deserved it, true it is, he seemed not very well
pleased, but if God be pleased man's goodwil, either it shall be reconciled, or
shall not do much hurt: if I have the loss in worldly things, I am content
to bear it, and God will supply my want where I am able to do nothing. J had
lever be your Brother not worth a grote, but having a good conscience to pray
for you, then have (as I might) great living, and encomber my conscience with
much sin. And good Brother Dering, here follow me, you shall be a great deal
richer then you are: study the scripture, read books, be able to reason in
your faith, especially and above all, have a lively feeling of God, that you
think more vile of all the glory of the world, then of the dust of the earth:
you know we must all perish, and you must walk the way of all flesh: Our
good Parents both Father and Mother, they are gone before: you do but wait
the time, and you must go after, your goods and lands must abide behind, and
the riches of your mind, they are only your own. You are my eldest brother,
and you know not how glad I would be, to see you go before me in Religion:
God has given you, neither a light head nor little understanding, if you
would apply your self unto knowledge, you should then reap the fruit of your
labor in more gladness of heart then yet you can imagine: begin once but a
little, and taste how sweet the Lord is, and you shall feel the riches of his
glory, and say: Happy be the time that ever I knew it. Let not good Brother,
let not the world deceive you, it is faithless and deceiptfull, when you
shall love it best, it will soonest deceive you. And of me think thus: that in
the world I can not do you so great a pleasure, as continually to provoke you
to know God: and this I shall be able to perform, though otherwise I shall be able
to pleasure you nothing, and therefore I beseech you pray for me, and I will
pray for you, and so the Lord God shall help us both, that I may be faithful
which way J am called, and you may be such as I desire. And for Master S. or
any other of such high calling, I love them in the Lord, even as I love mine
own soul, and will pray for them while they and I shall live: Though I bear
the loss of worldly things, yet by the grace of Christ, J will never lose a
good conscience: and though they be angry with me, yet I will not leave to
pray for them, and commit my cause unto God, he will one day multiply his
graces, where he has so well begun, and they shall (I trust) be thoroughly
taught, whom God has already so far instructed. For my L. of C. J have been
once with him, but J mean not yet to go the second time, God will work his
will, his name be praised for ever. My L. of L. is a good man, I am often with
him, I have seen in him so good tokens of a good spirit, that I reverence him
in my heart and will serve him in Christ all ways that J may. And for my
doing with any man, I pray you tell me where you see me faulty, but if you
know not of any sin, do not diswade me from going upright in the Gospel: But
for my comfort, if you see me grieved, let me see in you, how you profess the
gospel: and persuade your self of this, that a lively zeal, and holy knowledge
in you, and in my Sister, shall make me gladder then any bishoprike in England.
The Lord God for his mercies sake that has called you out of the kingdom of
darkness, and placed you in the fellowshippe of his saints in light, make
you to feel the depth of his graces, that you may be renewed, confirmed,
strengthened, and made perfect unto the end, Amen. Fare you well in Christ
Jesus, and do my hearty commendations to my sister.

From London, the xix. of November. Your loving brother Ed. Deringe.

To his brother Master R. D.
THe grace of our Lord Jesu Christ be with you ever, Amen. Good brother, I
would gladly write oftener unto you, but otherwise I have so much to do, that
some time I forget many duties. Another cause is, J have nothing to write as I
would, so I have no pleasure to do that I would not. So it is, that I am
forbidden to preach: which grieueth me most, then slanderous reports do hurt
me much, where J would fainest please, so far as I may in the fear of God.
But how so ever things are, it is a blessed sentence which he has spoken, who
will surely perform it: To them that love God, all things happen to the best,
and pray for me good Brother, that I may hold steadfast that love, and waver
not in the faith of the gospel in which we have assured life: and as I am
bound J trust I will pray for you, that your eyes may have perfect and pure
sight, to see the loving countenance of the Lord which is better then life: so
you shall be happy even in the days of your vanity, and when nature shall
make you yield to the necessity of all flesh, to go walk in the way of all
the world, then shall you reap the fruit of your labor, and say with
gladness: Lord now let thou thy servant depart in peace. This is all the
hope we have, and the only joy that is to be looked for under the heavens:
the nearer you shall feel it, the more you shall see it, it shall delight you
and set you on a sure ground, that you shall not be ashamed for ever. The Lord
God for his Christ's sake strengthen us all to so good a purpose, and the
mutual debte we owe one to another in the bound of nature, let us pay it in
this holy affection, to pray for our perseverance unto the end. And as
touching the issue of all my business, look for the worst, hope for the best,
and bear whatsoever shall fall. J trust to God once I shall see the day
wherein J shall faithfully speak it, even as Saint Paul Vita mea no^ est chara
mihi, vt consuma^ cursum meu^ cu^ gaudio The Bb. and many other seek occasions
against me. God has still raised me up many friends, but my hope is only in
him, that has kept me hitherto, and not in man, when J know what end will
come, you shall hear: If I would lose the truth I could win the world, but
that were a miserable change. God bless us and send us peace, make us wise in
his Gospel, and steadfast unto the end. My Wife has been I thank God in no
trouble, neither was any toward her, that J know of, if any fall, God has
made her rich in grace and knowledge to give account of her doing. D.W. on
frydaie last as I was about to preach, forbad me in her Majesty's name, so I
stand now forbidden, not by the Bb. but by our Princess, whom J beseech God
make a happy governor in his church, and many years to give peace unto his
people. If we prayed as we should, God would make perfect the good work he
has begun, and make us see the peace of Jerusalem all the days of our life.
And J beseech God, that we may wish so effectually his mercies, that at last
he may shutt us up in a blessed unity, that they whom he has afflicted, may
rejoice. Commend me to all. Thank^ my cosen, for her letters, and for the
parsonage she writes of: I will not refuse it if I may have it, neither will I
sue for it though it were much better. If God call me to it, I pray God I may
do my duty: if not, yet his will be done. I am persuaded, if I be settled
there, it shall be a blessinge unto the country: if not, without me God keeps
those that be his. Farewell good Brother, And the Lord keep you and all
yours, Amen.

The 24. of December 1573. Your loving Brother, Edward Dering.

To his Brother I. D.
THE God of all grace who gives us eyes to see, and ears to hear, give unto
us ever his holy spirit, that in the midst of a dark world, we may see the
brightness of his heavenly kingdom, and in this weak tabernacle of small
continuance, we may know the dwelling place which we shall have for ever in
the resurrection of the just, Amen. I thank you, good brother, for your
letter, and for your care of my recovery, but most of all because you show a
good testimony of your mind, that the fear of God does dwell in you: of
this J am glad, and I am sure I shall be glad. For I know how earnestly I
desire it, and I see how unfeignedly you are brought unto it, and when the
Lord in his good will, and his appointed time shall make us see more clear how
great this blessinge is, we know we shall reap the fruit of it in the sight
of his presence and in eternal life, this is enough for us: a strength unto our
hope, a stay unto our faith, a continuance unto our love, let the good work
of God be finished in us. And of this we may be sure, whosoever regards it
not, or else embraces the present world, he knows not God, nor yet has
ever seen the length and breadth of immortality. And therefore good brother,
(because blessed are the eyes which see that we see,) let us strenghten our
sight, with the sweet oyntement of Gods spirit, that we may yet see more
clear, till through all the graces of GOD our Father, we may see our bodies
also raised up from the dead, and our selves joined unto our Savior Christ by
decree and sentence which never shall be reuersed, Come you blessed unto eternal
life: unto this, a good conscience will carry us with joy and gladness. Beyond
this our senses fail us, and our heart is able to comprehend nothing of the
glory which we shall see. Only J know it is exceeding great, whose greatness
I can neither see, nor hear, nor comprehend with thought: And therefore if
ever thing delighted us, or if ever we have seen pleasure, or can wish the
thing in which we would rejoice, let us turn all our affections hither with
heart and soul, life and strength, to delight in this, which alone is all, and
no body shall take it from us. And sure brother, this is true, if God have
received us to that blessed kingdom, he has appointed the time in which he
will give us his spirit (though not fully) to comprehend it, yet so far to
see it, that we will accounte all the world to be but dunge, to the end we
may win Christ. And this J am persuaded, good brother, God has and will give
plentifully unto you, so that you shall use the world as though you used it
not, and be here with men, as one whose dwelling were with the Angels of God,
using your calling in any godly recreatio^, but having your heart nearest unto
God, that gave it: and the Lord grant you this happiness, that all the
pleasure of your life may be in deed acceptable, such as shall not after be
mingled with shame and sorrow. And J beseech God bless my good Uncle B. and
make him now to know, which in his tender years he could not see: for the
world was then dark, and we were blind in it: but since we have been
lightened with the gospel of the Lord Jesus, and so much more earnest lie
now we must pray that it may be unto us the gospel of health, and we may
increase in the knowledge of the mystery of it. And the Lord open his
gracious countenance revealed in it, unto my Aunte, that she may also make a
blessed change, to leave vain imaginations of her own mind, which are full
of ignorance, and learn the scripture, which can make known unto her the
living God. And commend me heartily unto them both, to whom I wish as to my
self.

Your loving Brother, Ed. Dering.

A comfortable Letter written by Master Ed. Deringe, to a Christian
Gentlewoman, in heaviness of spirit.
IT is true (good Maistres H.) which the spirit has spoken, and we feel it by
experience, That by many tribulations we must enter into the kingdom of
heaven. This is a common decree which God has sanctified to be a lot for all
his children. So the author and finisher of our faith, Jesus Christ him self
was made perfect. Into his similitude we are also predestinate that we should
first die with him, and then be partakers of his glory: Let us not therefore
refuse that condition of life in which we have the fellowshipp of all the
Saints of God, but rather confess with the holy Apostle, That blessed is the
man who endures temptation. But because all afflictions are bitter for the
present time, and when the mind is shaken with sorrow, it is then most
easily cast down of the enemy, let us learn wisely what our troubles are,
and be prepared of remedy in the day of trial. All our afflictions are either
according to the flesh, in hunger, cold, nakedness, shame, contempt,
slander, etc. or according to the Spirit, in lamentations and mourninges,
which the world knows not. The first euilles are easily borne, for they
are all but vanity, and in vanity they shall dye: if we see no favor in the
sight of the Sun that shines not here acceptable unto us, when we have paid
the debt we owe unto death, the Lord will deliver us from all the injuries of
men. But in this behalf let me comfort my self, God has set you free from
such afflictions. Your goods are unto you in a liberal portion, your life
made happy with a loving husband, your calling acceptable under a gracious
and good Mistress, in whose sight you have found favor, in this estate you
feel no trouble, therefore I let it pass. The other affliction which is of
the spirit, and which can not be resisted with any earthly blessing, look
for it assuredly, for it will come unto you, that you may suffer with Christ,
and reign with him in glory. These troubles they come many ways, even as the
spirit of God does lead us unto life. First we are commanded to learn and
know the word of God, against this look for many tentations, the enemy will
try which way to pluck that out of our hearts: Out of the word we must
learn a precious faith, and hold that immovable before God: against this
what temptations are between heaven and earth, you shall feeele your portion,
if any thing possible ca^ discourage you. With faith you must join a lively
hope, which is, a longinge apprehension of Gods glory: in this also Satan
will pretermitte nothing to quench your affections, that it may be dead, and
to darken your mind that you may see nothing, without these you can not
possibly live, and unto these you can not possibly come, but first you shall
feel what is the strength of sin. And yet notwithstanding faint not, the
Lion has overcome which is of the tribe of Judah. The force of the Serpent
shall bruise our heel, but it shall not take away from us the headpiece of
salvation. Learn therefore first the word of God, this is the seed of
regeneration, by which we are made new creatures, this is the bread of
spiritual nourishment, by which we are grown up into eternal life. This is
the weapon of our warfare, by which we may wound and drive away our enemies.
This is the Scepter of our glorious kingdom, by which we do know that God
does reign in us. Take this unto you, the shield of your defense, the
strength of your age, the wisdom of your heart, and the safety of your life,
commended unto you in the word of Christ. Search the Scriptures, and seal it
in your heart with a good persuasion that it is the word of God and of life,
and he has graven in it an express image of eternal truth. Let it dwell
plentifully within you, and your heart is armed with a most strong defense,
all enemies shall fall before it, the wisdom of the wise shall be brought to
naught, and the council of the prudent shall be made foolish, the ways of the
adversaries shall be scattered, and the scorners seat shall be thrown down,
so true it is that the Lord has spoken. Blessed is the man whose delight is
in the Law of the Lord, and whose meditation is in it day and night. Let us
then bring down the hautinesse of our minds, and receive with meekness the
word grafted in us, which can save our souls. To this desire of
understanding, when God has brought us, then let us pray to be delivered from
temptation, and take heed we be not spoiled of so great a treasure. We have
three especial enemies in this behalf, of which S. Paul bids us all
beware: the one is, Phylosophie, that is, a vain and curious searching of Gods
mysteries, or measuring things revealed according to our understanding, with
which tentations whylest our Fathers were overcome, they became foolish in
their own imaginations, and changed the glory of God into the likeness of a
corruptible man, making Images, praying to Angels, imageninge of souls like
little children, devising Purgatory, reasoning of Gods wisdom above our
capacity: As if we be predestinate we may live as we list, if we are
commanded to work, if our days are nombred, why seek we any safety to our
life. Jf the Angels do keep us in all our ways, that we shall not hurt our
foot against a stone, why fear we any falling? These fantasies, and worse
then these, disquiet our minds and fight within us against our humble
obedience to the word of God. Which all when we have overcome (and said with
the Prophet: secret things are for the Lord, but things revealed for us and
our children) yet have we no peace. A second enemy rises up greater then
the first, which Saint Paul calls The traditions of men, for the heart of
man which drinks in error, as the ground does drink water, is very
obstinatlie bound with old customs and long continuance, measuring truth
which is pure and holy, only by time which is corrupt and evil, and not only
this, but nature also has inflamed our affections to love to much our fathers
ways, to like their opinions, to esteem their judgments, to praise their
doeinges, to commend their age, to talk of their names, till through many
entisements we are at last bewitched, our wisdom is stolen away, and truth
is taken from us: by this means all corruptions which have ouerflowed the
earth, have still wide rooms in the hearts of many. The Popes supremacy,
Latin service, prayer for the dead, Masses, Diriges, Pardons, Pilgrimages,
Sensinge, and all popery, with the authors of it, Popes, Cardinals, Monks,
Friars, all which have neither truth, nor shadow of truth: not one word of
them is in all the Gospel of Christ, only old custom has bredde it in our
bones, and an opinion of our fathers has printed it in our breasts, and we
will not cast it out. But the Lord be thanked, who has had mercy upon us, to
make us hold fast the word of truth, what soever our fathers have vainly
taught us, and yet we are not in security. But a third enemy is in the heart
of man, that the word of God may not have his perfect honor, and that is an
opinion conceived of earthly things, and planting of holiness in corruptible
creatures, as in Meats, Drinks, Days, Garments, conditions of life, places,
times, Ceremonies, neither hearing our Savior Christ, that God is a spirit,
and only he is to be worshipped in Spirit and Truth. Neither his Apostle
Paul, That the Element of that world commend us not unto God, for neither if
we eat, are we ever the worse: neither if we eat not, are we ever the better.
These and many great temptations stand against us as soon as we would give over
our selves to the word of God, which is the beginning of a christian life.
Trow you that in the continuance of our course and journey, before we come at
our Savior Christ, shall we not be sifted and tried to see what is within us?
And you (good Maistres H.) to apply this to your self, tell me how you have
learned Christ, has his Gospel been peaceable in you from the first day till
now, without all contradiction? Was your mind never puffed up in vain
imaginations? Did the traditions and persuasions of men never shake your
thought? Have you not been tempted with opinions of creatures, as though some
were more holy, some more profane? J know as you long after Christ and desire
his truth in single heart: so his grace you have not, without sharp and
bitter trials, and the more freely the word of God shall possess your soul,
and fill your heart with all desire of it, the more you shall feel what fight
is against it, look for the like in all your life, and when you approach to
the true fear of God, prepare your heart to the strongest assault. The word
of God thus made known unto us, and when we follow it with all our soul,
that we may have a lively faith to rejoice at the promises of God, to fear at
his threatninge, and feel a full persuasion of a certain performance of all
his words: O Lord, what is the malice of Satan! And though many temptations
are against us, the long prosperity of the wicked in which they triumph, why
lest the goodness of God provoke them still to repentance, the bitter
sighting of the godly, in which they mourn under many crosses, whiles God
makes their faith precious before him: these have rooted quite out of the
hearts of the ungodly, the faith and truth which they owe unto God, so that
against all his judgments, they have opened their mouth, and said aloude:
Where is the promise of his coming? And against all his mercies they have
proclaimed war, and said, They will not have Christ to reign over them. But
these temptations Christ has overcome in us, and given us his spirit, in
which we know assuredly that the Lord reigns: neither slacketh he his
coming, as many accounte slacknes, but he will come, and his glory shall be
known. And yet we are not in peace, but Satan will sifte us another way: he
will lay our sins before us, to make us fear, that tht promises of God
belong not unto us, and this of all temptations is the greatest, yet we fear
not, for what belongs to all our sins, which Christ has not borne?
sorrow, sickness, death, hell, condemnation, were they not in his body, and are
they not all crucified upon the cross? Is he not risen from them, and has he
not broken the chains of death, and so is ascended into glory? If this be my
fear because I am a sinner, rather let me rejoice, for Christ has taken my
sins upon him, and has buried the^ deeper then the bottom of the Sea, he
has led it openly in triumph, and nailed it upon the cross from henceforth
and for evermore it has no strength, whosoever seem to color it as redd as
scarlet, or make it like purple, it is still nothing, and casts but a vain
terror before our eyes: we will never deny this but freely confess it, that
we be miserable sinners, and not worthy to lift up our eyes to heaven, but
who will lay our sins to our charge, now God has justified us? or what
sin can rest upon us, now Christ has washed them away? That which once was
in fight with Christ, and he has overcome it, who shall set too his hand the
second time, to make the victory perfect? This is true, and everlasting
truth has sealed it up, that sin is abolished for ever and ever, howsoever
we fear or tremble, or be faint hearted, yet before the Lord with whom our
life is hid, there is no peril, no danger, no fear, but peace and
righteousness without end. Let our sins be never so great, neither we nor
our sins can change the new Testament, that God is merciful to our sins,
and will blot out all our transgressions: therefore this care is past, that our
sins be many, the more they are, the greater is his mercy, who has forgiven
them. And this is the token which God has given us, that we are his, because
we are grieved with our sins, for our Savior Christ overcame sin with
pains and sufferinges which belong unto it, and this is the badge of our
redemption, to be made like him in afflictions, we have sin, and abhor it,
it wounds us with fear, it sets before us condemnation, we have a sense
and feeling of Gods anger against it, and hell gnaweth upon our souls because
of transgression. O blessed state, and treasure of gladness, this was the Jmage
of Christ when he overcame sin, a mark of my redemption in mine own
flesh, that I should not fainte. As the sun makes the day, and the night
darkness, so this affliction of sin is the badge and cognizance of our
certain forgiveness. And herein see the goodness of God, which turns all
things to the best to those that love him. Through fear of sin the Devil
fights against us, without fear of sin we could never have boldness:
through anguishe of heart the Devil would ouerwhelme us with sorrow: without
anguish of heart we could never have joy. In feelinge Gods anger, the Devil
would make us to despair: without feelinge his threatening, and trembling
before him, we could never have strength of faith, that his mercies are for
ever. In all sufferings I am like to Christ, they are the marks of mine
adoption, that J am his child. Do we not hear the Lord? Himself does
speak, If we be without correction, then are we bastardes and not sons:
and to show what our correction shall be, he says in an other place: If we
be planted with him into the similitude of his death, then shall we also be
partakers of his resurrection. Who has heard so great salvation as this? Every
weapon wherewith the enemy strikes, the same armeth us to greater salvation:
And every wound that we do receive, the same confirms us to a surer life.
Then (as before I said) care not for sin, for that is abolished, so here I
may add, care not for hell, for the nearer we feel it, the further we are
from it. Let them fear sin that feel it not, and let them be afraid of
condemnation that know not what it is, upon whom destruction shall come
sodenlie as an armed man. Our eyes have been kept waking, and we have seen our
sins: our hearts have fainted before the anger of the Lord, And we have not
despised his heavenly calling, therefore in the day of trouble, we shall have
rest. In this persuasion we will live and die: and if our souls should melte
for fear within us, although the Lord should kill us, yet would we trust in
him. Abraham believed in the Lord, and it was imputed unto him for
righteousness, against hope he believed under hope: and if our hope seemed to
be taken from us, yet would we patiently wait the Lords leisure, until he
save our hope again, that at the least our faith might have again the glory
and truth of full assurance. Another thing we must labor in, and in another
thing we shall have temptation, and that is, that we may see what is the
glory of God and immortal life: herein let us meditate in our beds, and
think on this in our secret places, in the midst of our companies, let these
cogitations be often in our hearts, and in all places let these be our muses.
When we shall apprehende with all the servants of God what is the height, the
breadth, the length, the depth, we shall know that the glory is great of
immortality, and he is only to be believed, who shall shine in honor when
this vanity is ouerpast His strength is great that laid the foundations of
the world, and his brightness exceeding, that made the Sun and the Moon. His
treasure and riches, are above measure, who has given Princes their gold and
silver and other precious stones for the honor of man: he in deed is of
excellent majesty, who is King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, and his power is
above all, who makes sickness his messengers, and death his minister, till he
shall abolishe them both. For his mercies are unspeakable, that forgiueth us
all our sins, and his goodness is great, who has had regard to the children
of men. From nothing he brought us into life, he kept us from the grave, he
will restore us, and make us see his glory. When I would think on this, my
soul is compassed with dulnes of flesh, that J cannot see the fulness of his
favor: When I would consider in my heart what is his grace: Darkness
ouershadoweth mine understanding, and all my thoughts do vanishe in his
immortality. When J would speak of his loving kindness, my tongue cleaves to
the root of my mouth, and my words stick fast within my lips. But this
one thing in all mine infirmities J can perceive, that his glory is exceeding
great, whose glory I can not comprehend, and the life is long, appointed
unto man, where his heart and mind can see no end. If all the world were a
flowing water, and every year one drop should be diminished, the Sea should
be all made dry, and the bottomes of the deep should appear, before he shall
cease to live, whom God has raised from the dead, and this breadth and
wideness between heaven and earth, if it should be filled up, and every
year but one handful of earth added to the work: yet sooner should the great
distance be closed up, and the empty places made full, then he shall cease
from joy and gladness, who shall stand in the resurrection of the just. This
is the glory that has neither spot nor blemishe, before which me thinks,
not only Princes and the glory of the world, but the Sunn and Moon and all
the hosts of heaven are nothing else but mere vanity, for death shadoweth the
glory of man, though he spread his branches never so far, yet the grave
closseth up in little room the ambitious heart, which before was enlarged from
East to West. And the Heavens that are high and free from death, yet are holden
under the tyranny of envious and consuming time, in which they shall be
changed: Only the Lord is in honor and majesty, who has set eternity round
about him, and cast out time unto confusion. Oh Lord, where are their eyes
that see not this, or their hearts that see and regard it not! Who has
bewitched them, in the countenances of men, to carry the hearts of beasts,
and to forget the latter end. The Lord turn them that run astray, that
they may know and see where is their glory, but the temptations have
overtaken them. Which are against our honor when the Lord shall deliver them
from evil, they shall give thanks and rejoice with us, that they also have
eyes to see. And blessed are you (good Mistres H.) and God has visited you in
an acceptable time, whose heart he has touched with fear, and whose
afflictions he has filled with hunger and thirst, that you should mourn for
the redemption that is in Christ, and be pleased with nothing but with the
grace of his countenance. This is a Schoolemistres to bring you unto him, and
a bond to tie you fast, that you shall not be separated: and accomplish J
beseech you, this good work of his grace, till you love the Lord withal your
heart, and till you can say with the blessed Apostle, I desire to be dissolved,
and to be with Christ.

For this purpose we are chastised of the Lord, and when our faith is tried,
at the last it shall be made strong, that with it we may quench all the fiery
darts of Satan, and in righteousness and peace, and joy of the holy Ghost,
run the course that is set before us, till in a blessed issue of happy
days, with a good spirit we may say boldly, Lord, now let thou thy
servant depart in peace. Which I beseech God the father of our Lord Jesus
Christ, the God of mercy, and Father of all consolation grant unto you, Amen.

Pray, pray, pray, pray, this is your best service wheresoever your duty is
most bound.

Letters of Ed. Der. to Maistres B.
GRace, mercy and peace from God our Father, etc. J had much lever good
Maistres B. come my self then write unto you, but as other things are far
contrary to my desire, so is it in my coming unto you, and J am constrained
rather to write then to come, but God appointes our ways, whether J come and
be with you, or else be other where and hear from you, J trust and am
persuaded, that both I shall hear from you, and you shall have the same
constancy in the love of truth and still increase in the knowledge of it,
till the good grace of God have made the work perfect that it has begun,
and you with all your heart and all your soul do fear the Lord, and delight
in all obedience of his holy will. Whereunto though we be sufficiently
persuaded by the nature of godliness it self, which all men do praise, and the
righteous do love: yet a greater provocation is in you, because God has given
you a good estate, in which your example shall do good to many, and because
good has filled you with a hearty affection to testify his Religion, that you
may accordingly in all weldoing surmount the praise of your profession, and
especially because he that has called you is holy, that you may express his
similitude and likeness in all your ways, and this good course through evil
days, when God of his mercy shall make straight unto us we shall see then
what is the latter end. Our hearts shall be satisfied with it, and our tongue shall
speak not as the world does, blessed are the rich me^ or blessed are the
mighty, for all these have wings to fly away, and high estates to sit down
in the dust, when man must go make his bed in the dark, and say to coruption
thou art my father, and to the worm thou art my mother and sister, but our
song shall be in better hermonie, and we shall say with the Prophet David,
blessed is the man that fears the Lord and delights greatly in his
commaundeme^ts: For when all hatred shall grow against this, and all adversity
shall strive to come upon it, yet all is nothing and shall not move it. For
when our heart is strenghtened with this grace, we see our portions in all
estates and times: in discredit, we see praise, in poverty, riches, in anger,
favor, in darkness, light, in bondage, liberty, and in death, life, yea
whatsoever in weakness of body, in envy of time, in uncertainty of estate, in
danger of life, or in any thing else, because nothing can seperat us from the
love of God, nothing can turn unto our harm, for we have his promise that
is able to perform it, that to those that love God all things happen for the
best. This purpose of life is soon had, and this course is easly begone, but
the fruit of it does not vade nor the gladness of it shall never be lost so
that we shall not, nor by the grace of God we: will not for so little labor
lose so great a reward, nor for a little pleasure which vainlie we think is in
other things, receive the reward of our foolishnes, which assuredly we know
has everlasting grief, we have not so vnfruictfullie learned Christ nor so
vnhappelie given witness of his truth, But better things belong unto us, in
better ways we wll run our course, in a better hope lay down our bodies: The
children of the world shall make the world their portion, we look for
another city of which the Lord is the workman, and we will not build up our
unhappiness in the vain desires and concupiscence of this world, neither yet
(saying God is good to us to fill our days with peace) will we deny any
comfort that is offered us in this present pilgrimage, but seeinge the earth is
the Lords and all that therein is, we have perfect pleasure in friends,
riches, authority, honor: if all be his? All are pure: if all be of him? Jn
all is pleasures for where his kingdom is, there is righteousness and peace and
joy of the holy Ghost: and sorrow and sin is cast out, only let us care as
all things are good, so we use them: and as they are corrupt, so to let them
alone. St. Paul teaches that to the pure all things are pure, but to the
impure all things are impure: And the things of this world are made
according to the conscience of man: Houlde this to remember it at noone days,
and let our reins instruct us in it in the night season, that we feell our
hearts inflamed with the love of God, and that it may be acceptable unto us as
our own life, to set forth his praise: That we acknowledge his glory which
shines in all his his works, and then the Lord has set us in a large rome
of liberty, where we walk with boldness in good delight of his creatures: and
in deed and in truth this it is when this affliction has taken root within
me, and I feel the work of it perpetually within my mind, whether J be
following my Hawk or my bowl, J make a more acceptable sacrifice to God, then
the heart barren of this love of God can do: though the knee bow or the
tongue say, praised be the Lord, for every one that says, Lord, Lord,
shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven, but in whom so ever the love of
God does reign, and has driven out the lewd desires of a dissolute mind,
him God has chosen, and the spirit of his son Christ cries within him, Our
Father: yet I mean not here to justify these worldly minded men, to whom the
day is to short for their vain plays, except they reach it out till midnight
at Cards and Dice: such people as they, commonly fill all their delights with
blasphemy, so let them know that the love of the living God they never felt,
but the god of this world has blinded their unbelieving hearts, and in their
uncleanness there I leave them, till the sins of their youth be rotten in
their bones, that they may sink deep in their own shame. My meaning is, that
the man of God whose soul does thirste to see his glory, and has the joy
of his life in immortality, in respect of the which he accounts all the
world to be but dunge: I say, that man may have true delight in the days of
his vanity, the smelling of the dog, the flying of the bird, the qualities
of all creatures, they were made for him: and he is injurious to the blood of
Christ, that thinks he may not use them: but all these things are good for our
recreation, to comfort the frailty of weak bodies, and to bring refreshing to
a weary spirit: which end, if we forget, and make it our pastime, and so call
it, then we turn our pastime into sin. For what is our time that we are
weary of it, or what is our life that seems so slow to pass, are we
grieved with the light which the Lord has set in the Heavens, or is the
feeling of our body burdenous unto us, or our eyelyddes payned with being open,
or are our ears wounded with the sound of the air, or what grief, what
care, what sorrow is it, why we wish our time forgotten and past? Surely Job
knew not this when he said, His time passed faster the^ a post: nor David
knew it not when he thought his life but a spanne long: and surely he has
but a wretched life, and let him not love it, who is feign to run to the
birds of the air, and the beasts of the field, to seek some comfort
against it. And therefore (good Maistres B.) let pastime alone, and be not
wearied with your good days, your times are passed meetely well, and you have
seen 40. years filled and gone, the residue behind will pass with them, You
shall not hold them if you would, but pastyme and they will dwell together,
till our appointed time shall come: and one end shall be unto all. But then you
shall see another state, and this enimitie between us and it, shall be taken
away: we shall not be weary of it to wish it gone, and it will not be weary
of us to wear us away, but Time and we shall dwell together, and the glory of
God shall be eternally before us, and we before his Majesty in Jmmortalitie. A
blessed state, a hope of life, a glorious body, a heavenly mind, and woe be to
all these time passers of, that know how to delight in this, but have more
pleasure in all uncleanness: when the end of their labor shall come upon them,
they shall feel more grief in one day, then after shall be eased world without
end. And in one sentence of an angry Judge (go you cursed into eternal
fire) they shall be wounded with that misery, which world without end shall
rest upon them, and their old pastime shall never more be found: but this is
the portion of them that know not God. But you good Maistres B. have already
passed the days of your ignorance, and the kingdom of heaven is come unto you
with power: you love the truth of the Lord Jesus, and all false ways you do
abhor: you do feel the hope of the Elect of God, and it has quenched the
desires of ungodly. Pray still, that you may have increase: and read the
Scriptures, in which you shall have comfort: these will lead you in a perfect
way, and neither Paul nor Peter have a more blessed end, then is for us, in a
like precious faith: and J (as J am bound) will beseech the God of mercy,
and father of our Lord Jesus Christ, that he will look upon you, to fill you
with his grace and holy spirit, that it may guide you and all your children
before you, and your household committed to your charge, that you may dwell in
the new and blessed Testament of the forgiveness of sins through faith in
Christ Jesus, who has destroyed the works of the Devil, and is able to keep
you for ever more. And to his gracious defense, J heartily leave you and all
yours.

Yours in the Lord Ed. Dering.

To Maistres B.
THe grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you ever, Amen. Good Maistres
Baret, how feign J would be with you, God knows, and how I am indebted to
do good in your house, if J should not confess, I must needs accuse my self
of much unthankfulness, but God alone disposes all our ways, to be so as
pleases him, whom heartily I beseech for his sons sake, bless us with that
blessing which he gave his Apostle, that in all places we may be unto him
in Jesus Christ, a sweet savor of life unto life to all his saints with whom
we are. So shall I more gladly walk all the ways of his appointment, and
you more willingly bear with mine absence, the will of God be done in all
things. When you are at Braye, if the Lord will, I shall be more quiet with
you. In the mean time (good Maistres) so believe as you have seen and heard,
and pray for me that I may live to his glory, who has showed me such mercy,
that I may say with the Prophet David: What shall I give again for all that he
has given me? And so do you rejoice in the blessing that GOD has given you,
that more and more your estate here may be a sure testimony of a more blessed
hope, that shall one day be revealed, when honor and glory shall succeed in
the place of labor and sorrow that now abounds. The Lord bless you and
all yours, keep you and give you a plentiful blessing in his new Testament,
and in his kingdom, which is righteousness, and peace, and joy in the holy
Ghost, the glory whereof shall not be darkened, when the Sun and Moon
shall lose their light, and feign men with desire of it, that shall fill us
once with the countenance of the Lord. A glorious hope in an earthly
tabernacle, but a more glorious performance in a heavenly creature, when we
shall be free from sin and death, and be made like unto him that sits at the
right hand of majesty and power. Which time the Lord God fulfill in the
goodness of his pleasure, for our souls hope: in whom we have settled our hope.
Commendations, etc.

Yours Ed. Deringe.

To Maistres B.
THe grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you ever, Amen. J am sorry that
hitherto I could not come unto you, and I would be more sorry, if you should
think I had lever be any where then in your house, I had thought shortly to
have come, and I felt my self somewhat strong and able to travel, but now
on friday last the eleue^th of this month, I had a fever, and five or six
days after I felt it, and my stomach is very ill ever since, and my cough
much increases. This is my health that God gives me. But let him do his will,
he is the God of life, and one day will abolishe these troublesome things, and
make us feel health in immortality, and I beseech him for his Christ's sake
to remember us in his goodness, that we may know all his mercies, and then J
am well assured both you and I, and all weak bodies, shall so little care for
the frayeltie of these tabernacles, that we will rejoice in the remembrance of
putting them of, to think that we shall see and take hold of him that lives
ever, and will one day make these mortal bodies, like unto the glorious body
of his beloved son. This we know and in this we are comforted: and hold it
fast good Mistress B. even as you will hold your happy days: for the hope
of it shall not be confounded. but when all our enemies have spentt their evil
wills, and can do no more hurt unto us, he shall be on our right hand whom we
have looked for, and he shall call us with that blessed voice, Come ye blessed
of my Father. Let us pray to understand this, for it has pleasure and
effectual gladness, more then all the fair countenances of the world, in which
in deed there is nothing but vanity of vanities, and all is vanity: and
think good Mistress B. how many occasions are before us to cause us to
forget this, or to let the desire of it, to be^ quenched in us, or at the least
to fill our selves with other pleasures of the world, but God shall keep you
from the corruptions of the world, and give unto you a wise heart, which every
day may search your thoughts, and suffer you never to forget your latter
end: and seeing every day does bring you near unto it, let every day kindle
more your affections, that you may love it unto the end: and then our hope
shall be full, and our mouths opened for ever, Amen.

Yours Ed. Deringe.

To Maistres B.
THe grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you ever. As J trust the Lord
does strenghten you to better health, that you may live to his praise, so J am
desirous to hear also of your amendment, but much more (as God has made
manifest in you many tokens of his grace) so J heartily pray that you may be
made even as Paul to moorne still in this earthly tabernacle, and to say
unfeignedly, I desire to be dissolved, and to be with Christ: this is that
good issue of life to which I have often prayed that J might attain unto it:
this is that measure of grace, which as I am most bound, so heartily J beseech
our God and Savior, that it may plentifully be powered upon you. And if we
shall be made in our lives so happy, then have we a dwelling in perfect peace:
and in deed we be received into the covenant of the new Testament, that we
should be filled with joy of the holy Ghost. For what can disquiet us, or what
can be grievous unto us, if in the face of Jesus Christ we see our rising
again from the grave, and fear not before the shadow of death, all other
afflictions they are but ministers unto this, and in the presence of death they
are dispersed, and they do not follow us unto the dark places. If God will
have mercy upon us to bless us into this victory, the^ has he given us our
inheritance in pleasant places, and our portion in a happy lot. What so ever
enemies are against us, they shall strive in vain: and all things contrary
unto us, shall have no strength, for beyond death there is no power in them,
and death it self is despised in our eyes. Jf we felt not this in our hearts,
but would seek outward testimony of men, let him speak that finds any
greater fear then this. The sick person or prisoner may be loath to dye, but
the dead man he fears no evil: and they that live in prosperity, this is
not their fear least they should have a fall, but it is death that is bitter
unto all them that have peace in their riches. Seeing this then is the greatest
tyrant that makes Princes tremble, and that anguish of heart that turns all
pleasure into wormwoode, what soever is under the sun, good maistres B. as
you are, so abide: and as you have received, so abound till the good graces of
the living GOD have made you stronger then sin or death: so shall your days
be all in blessing, and your accounted times have true delight till the latter
end do shine in hope. So shall you be bold to say with David: Surely the
Lord will deliver me from the snare of the hunter, and from the noisome
pestilence: I shall not be afraid of the fear of the night, nor of the
arrowe that flies in the day, nor of the pestilence that walks in the
darkness, nor of the plague that destroys at noone: I have set the most high
to be my refuge, and there shall no evil come near my tabernacle. The Lord
bless us in this good hope, and make strong our confidence in this
persuasion, that at last we may dwell in joy and gladness: if fear have often
recourse into our frail bodies, because we carry in us corruption, which is
the strength of death, yet that fear shall not always grieve us, for our hope
is perfect, and shall not be shaken. We shall go but as Saint Paul, and
Peter, Abraham and Jsaac have gone before: and not only they, but our
Fathers, our Mothers, and our dearest friends are gone with them: and all that
are behind shall overtake us. The trouble of the travel must needs appear
light in the midst of so happy company: or if their love have not such
force in us that Parents and Friends, Apostles, Prophets, Patriarchs, and
all the Saints of God can make us say, Let us dye with the righteous, and let
our latter end be as unto them: yet sure when among the dead I have seen
Christ, and in the grave have found the God of glory, J shall say with a
perfect heart, Christ is my life, and death is mine advantage. What then
remains more unto us, but to strive faithfully that we may come unto this,
that God may work with us, as with his saints, and we may be pertaker with
the happy Prophet, to see the loving kindness of the Lord, which is better
then life, and to say with him: As the heart longs after the water brooks,
so my soul longs to see the Lord: and in the mean season that we yet
fulfill our accounted time, which the Lord grant for his Churches sake, that
you may do even until old age and many years, in good increase of your
childrens children, and happy peace of his chosen people. In the mean while I
say, that your hope may be precious before you, and in this earthly
tabernacle, yet may have your conversation in the highest heaven, from thence
lookinge for a Savior, even Jesus Christ the righteous, who shall change this
corruptible body, to make it like to his glorious body, in that blessed time
which shall skatter away all affliction, and seal within that happy
assurance of immortality, which shall be in the presence of the God of glory:
when this weak body shall have a recompense (of a few sorrowful days) in
everlasting righteousness. Jn which hope the Lord grant many years you may
rest.

Yours Ed. Dering.

To Maistres B.
THe Lord who is rich in mercy, keep us ever in the assured covenant of his
new Testament made in Jesus Christ, that we may feel the forgiveness of our
sins, and rejoice in the hope of eternal life, Amen. I am sure you will be
glad (good maistres B.) to hear of our safe coming home, And J would be
glad to hear of all your well doing, at your Saint Ellins, and therefore J
writ unto you, Both to hear again that God continues his good blessings
toward you, and to certify you that (I thank God) J am now safe at
Shenfildes, I have not yet taken the plaster, but this day J have begone to
drink Maistres P. Water. Let it have the work which God will: For in health
our meat do not nourishe us, but by his word. In sickness medicines can do
us no good, except he bless them. We have no news here to write of but of
country things, scarce worth the telling, and less worse the practisinge of
it could be amended, every man goes after his Ox and his horse: and most do
glorify God no more then their brute beast. Jf they be like unto us which
are in the Court and in the City, that the one be as ambitious, the other as
covetous as we be brutishe, and God be forgotten of us all alike, we may take
us again the Lamentation of Jeremy: for it is the great mercies of God that
we be not consumed. But if such be the misery in the world, we that are not
of the world, but by Christ are taken out of the world: Let us not love the
world which is such an enemy unto God, and then we shall not be condemned
with the world when Christ shall come in glory. And the Lord be praised, who
has given us eyes to see and ears to hear, that we might be wise hearted:
not to say peace and truce with such things, with such men cry peace and
truce, but rather to have our life hidden with Christ in God, and on his right
hand behold the peace which passes all understanding, and good Maistres B.
increase in this, God has given you a happy helper, who is willingly led
to all righteousness: The Lord God make his good work perfect for his sons
sake, in him, in you, and in us all that love the coming of Jesus Christ, Amen.

Yours in the Lord Ed. Dering.

A Letter of Ed. Der. to Mistres H.
GRace and peace, etc. I have heard (good Maistres H.) of your heavy estate,
that in many troubles the Lord does exercise you, but I trust you are also
taught to say always before God, Thy will be done, and if this be your
prayers, then know that nothing happens but by his appointement, and be
contented with all that he has done, so that your heart may bear you
witness, that of all things the Lord is most dear unto you: and for your
troubles, give only your heart to love the Lord, and they shall seem
neither great nor strong unto you. For what can be great, if our heart be
prepared to say with Saint Paul, That we rejoice in afflictions, because they
shall breed in us a hope which shall never make us ashamed: or what can be
great, if God have taught us, That the momentaine afflictions of this world,
they are not worthy of the glory that shall be revealed unto us: or what can
seem great, if we hear the Apostle: Brethren rejoice in afflictions, rejoice
exceedingly: when you fall into many and great tribulations, Surely good
Maistres H. all is nothing, for a frail body, a short life, a sinful
creature, what can come unto it that should dismay it: nay how should we not
(if we know it well) be glad, if death also were at our beds side, that we
might at once see the outmost malice of the devil, and after for evermore be
delivered from him. A great cloud of witnesses (as t'h Apostle says) are
cited unto in the eleventh Chapter to the Hebrews, of which every one should
be our example to bear all crosses that the Lord does send, knowing that he
is delighted with us, when we be faithful to abide these momentaine and
light chastisementes. Job, David, Paul, our Savior Christ himself, how many
things suffered they, how are we not ashamed to refuse the cause which they
have borne, and way well your own case what it is, and you shall see little
cause of sorrow in it, or if you compare it with other, none at all. Has your
husband been unkind unto you, bear it, and you shall win him at the last:
if not, thank God that you can continewe loving and obedient even unto an
unkind husband. And I assure you in this one virtue there is more comfort and
joy, then there can be grief in all the discourtesies of men: and what is
that cross of yours in respect of that which Abigaill did so long and
patiently bear? But your son has grieved you much* yea but you have not
the hundredth part of the grief that David might have had for his son
Absolon: and will you be more grieved then he? Your son I trust, shall yet
prove well, and you shall see his recovery: if not, this manner of disease is
rather a testimony of a conscience grieved with his evil doing, then an
argument of his destruction, so that even in this grief you have great cause
of joy: and what if God take from you the comfort of one child, leaving
again unto you the comfort of a great many: Will you, or can you repine
against the loving kindness of the Lord? How glad would David have been of
other good children in the loss of one evil: yet you have lost none, neither
is your son known to be so evil, but you may rejoice in him again: yet if
all things were as evil as you could imagine, what then? Where is our love to
Jesus Christ, that gave his precious body to the death for our sins? If we
will not leave son, daughter, and our own life for his sake, can one hear
fall from your sons head but at Christ's commandment? Is not he head of
his Church, and all things happen they not unto us as he will? Herein you
shall know you love God above all, when you can forget the child of your
womb, for his sake. And therefore (good Maistres H.) give not your self to
any inordinate affections to offend God, and hurt your self, but say and
think, Thy will be done, O Lord, and when the time shall come of our latter
end, we shall never have end of the blessed life which God shall give unto
you, and to all his saints in that day. Thus in haste I am constrained to
cease to write, but I will not cease to pray, that God may bless you, and
give you his joyful Spirit, to fill you with all spiritual comfort, against
the tentations of the world, and all the envy of the Devil. And pray for me
I beseech you, that I may account all the world to be but donge* to the end I
may win Jesus Christ, (to whom) the living and eternal God I committ you for
ever, Amen.

The xix. of April. Yours in the Lord Jesus, the only forgiveness of all our
sins, Edward Deringe.

Letters of Ed. De. to Mistres K.
THe Lord God direct us with his holy spirit, that we may love and fear him
unto the end, Amen. It greeueth me good Maistres K. that you should be so
long at Hendon as now you have been, and all this while I could find no
leisure to come unto you, and whatsoever my fault has been herein, I will
make no other excuse, but desire you to forgive it. And I pray God though I see
you not, yet I may so remember you, as J am bound, and so my not coming unto
you shall grieve me the less. Now touching your own case, I know you are
wise to see, that the Lord gives you new instructions to be wise in him, and
to give over your self unto him. For as God has blessed you many ways, and
given you a good calling in the world, So he visits you every day, and
humbles you with many chastisementes before him. God has given you husband,
children, famelie, and other blessings, but you enjoy none of them without a
cross, sometime one thing, sometime another, and commonly your own weak and
sickly body makes you that you can not have your joy as you would. Yea J
doubt not, but it is so abridged unto you, that sometime it grieueth you that
you cannot either have care over your house, as you wish, or attend on your
children as you desire, or rejoice with your husband, as otherwise you might.
But this grief God recompenceth with great benefit, for our Savior Christ is
our good warrant, that this is the lot of Gods saints, to enjoy his
blessings with afflictions, so that the more that you be sorrowsull, the more
you be sure that the living God has given you your portion: And so your
sorrow is joy unto you. Besides this, the mingling of your joy with sorrow,
and wealth with woe, is a happy tempringe unto you of heaven with earth, that
you should neither love nor rest in this, above that which is meet, but
acknowledge, all is but vanity, so love it as transitory things, and have
your great delight with the Lord alone, who is unto you health, prosperity,
joy, and eternal life. This good Maistres K. you know, but yet this I also
put you in mind of for though God have blessed you, yet you are but a weak
woman, and have need (in the common frayeltie of man's nature) to be stirred up
with exhortation. Remember therefore ever that which is the end of all, Fear
God, and keep his commandments. For this is the whole scope of our life,
which when we have brought to his appointed end, we shall see the hope, which
we have long looked for: and when immortality has brought happiness into
light, and scattered away our fear, we shall say then, Blessed be the day in
which first we learned to fear the Lord. And the Lord bless you with his
holy spirit, that you may in the midst of other care, have pleasure in this,
and in other sorrow rejoice in the Lord, and always rejoice. Commend me J
pray you, to your little ones, Nan, Besse, and Marie, And the Lord make you and
master K. glad parents of good children, Amen.

From Tobie, the last of February 1575. Yours in the Lord Jesus, Ed. Dering.

To Maistres K.
THe grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you ever, Amen. I thank you good
Maistres K. for your letter and for your medicine, and for your good will to
him to whom you before did owe so little. Touching my disease, I did soddainlie
cogh and spit much blood, so that when with much forcing my self, I refrained,
it ratteled in my throat, as if I had been a dying: next day in the like sort
J did, and once since the taking of these medicines for the staying of it, it
is now stayed, but J feel a great stopping of my wind, and much provocation
to coughe, which if I did, J should spit blood as before. I pray you ask your
Physician what he thinks good to be done. And good Maistres K. against all
diseases and sicknesses of the body, do as you do, and increase it with an
unfeigned testimony of your own heart. Committ your health, your sickness,
your body, your soul, your life, and your death, to him that died for us, and
is risen again. A sick body with such an aid, has greater treasure then the
Queens Iewell-house. Pray still, and pray for me. J see the goodness of God
such toward me, as (I thank God) except sin, I waighe not all the world a
f^ather: and with as a glad a mind I spitt blood, (I trust) as clear
spitle. To those that love God, all things are for the best: he has a hard
heart that believes not this. For the Church, I commit it to the Lord: the
Lord grant with that affection that I owe unto it, and for all my labor in
it (I thank God) I am guilty neither of covetousness, nor ambition, but as God
has given me grace, J sought only his glory. J write this unto you good
Maistres K. because you know it, and that you may the more effectually
remember him, that will know you when the world, your health, your
corruptihle body, death and sin it self, have done their worste. Commend me
to Master K. your little ones, to Master R. The Lord bless us all, that we
make our bodies shake, and not our bodies us.

Vale in Christo Jesus. 25. Iul. 1575. Tuus in Christo Ed. Dering.

To Maistres K.
TTe Lord God who shows mercy to whom he will show mercy, and have
compassion on whom he will have compassion, according to his love with which
he loved us before the world was made, look upon us, and lead us in our
ways, that in righteousness and holiness, peace and joy of the holy Ghost, we
may finishe our compass and come unto him, Amen. If I could, good Maistres K.
do as J should, then my ways were perfect among men, but it is with me as
with many other, small hindrances to an unwilling mind, are occasions great
enough to keep us from doing well. This has made me to pretermitt many
duties which had been better done. And J dare not make any other excuse why J
have not written unto you oftener: for though I have in a weary body many
things to do, and could make excuses which you would easily believe, yet
sure I am, if slought and negligence were utterly gone, a few lines were so
soon written, that J could not want time for so little labor, this is true,
and sit erranti medicina confessio. Touching my sickness, he that sent it he
does rule it, and as he will so far let it go. J feel yet difficulty of
breath and coughinge: and I see palenes and leanes abiding still, yet I thank
God I am so well, as we supposed all to have seen you at Henden this next
Monday, but God has changed our way, and by occasion we have differred it,
trusting yet to see you very shortly, if the Lord will, to whom we commit
both your ways and ours. And now good Maistres K. further J need not write
unto you, for which cause yet especially you crave my letters, I know whom
you have believed, upon what ground you stand, who has sealed your
persuasion in you, he is able to keep that you have committed unto him, even
until that day, that the things of the world are changed before us all.
Affliction may be great and make us murmur, prosperity may abound and make us
proud, the world may fill our eyes and our ears, that sometime we may be
blind and not see our hope, our own concupiscence may peradventure stinge us
that we forgett the good works wherein we had delight, but the council of
the Highest stands fast for ever: the Lord knows all that are his. Jn this
tower of defense our dwelling is made for us, and the gates of hell shall not
prevail against us. When we sin, we must needs be sorrowful, and to
offend such a Savior, it will grieve us more then death it self: but to
remember again so assured hope, we can not but rejoice in the Lord, and
always rejoice. Thus I leave you to your own heart, where is your strong
safety: and to your secret thoughts, which comfort you in the night. And
committing my self unto your prayers, I beseech God the Father of our Lord
Jesus Christ, to keep you and yours. Commend me to your little ones: pardon
me for writing in such piece of paper, J could hardly get this. Master H.
and my wife wish to see you. The Lord keep us unblameable in his sight.

From Tobye, the xiiij. of August, 1575. Your bounden in the Lord, Ed. Deringe.

To Maistres K.
THe Lord God direct us in all our ways, that they may be unblameable in his
sight, and our faith may be strenghtened in the blessed hope of his elect, so
that nothing be able to shake it from henceforth, from the boldness and
assurance of eternal life. Many and just causes good Maistres K. have kept
me, so that these holy days I could not see you, but I know no excuse why I
could not write unto you: and therefore for the one as I am sure you do
willingly pardon me, so the other I beseech you to except, both as a
testimony of my mind that I forget you not, and as a discharge of that duty
J owe unto you: for if I should not faithfully remember you, though you had
otherwise done nothing for me, yet I were unworthy of so much good will. And
if I should not as in bounden duty be most careful to strenghten and comfort
that good purpose; which your self have chosen for the curse of your life, I
were not worthy of the acquaintance of the saints of God. Therefore departing
from London again (as J could not choose) I have yet written unto you, as I
must needs: And I hartelie pray that God may increase his goodness in you, and
earnestly beseech you, as you have received that, so you would abound more
and more, a short request and soon heard: but exceeding difficult to some to
practice, and yet not difficult unto you, but easy and light, as you can
desire, for he that is borne of God overcomes the world. And the anointing
(as John says) which you have received of God, dwells in you, and you need
not that any man teach you, but as the same anointing teaches you all things,
and it is true and not lyinge, and as it is taught you, you shall abide in it.
Marvel not that J write this unto you, nor be unwillingly affected to hear
of your own happiness. It is (as Solomon says) an other man's mouth that
prayseth you and not your own, and what need you fear. And I speak not
deceitfullie, which J thank God J hate, nor give I titles, as Job says,
which the Lord does abhor. But seeing (as I am persuaded) that in you,
which Saint John could see in the people to whom he wrote and to whom he gave
so honorable praise: why should not J be bold upon so good warrant to say also
unto you: You are the Lords: and God who justified then his Apostles words,
he will justify them now and ever, for he is merciful without end. Let us
not then good Maistres K. be henceforth sorrowful or faint hearted: Paul
and Peter, and all tht Apostles and Prophets have spoken glorious things unto
us, and we will believe them. And yet not they, but the spirit of God has
given us this testimony, and it is true. For what were the Romans,
Corinthians, Galathians, and all other whom the Spirit names Saints and
Holy ones, were they not as we? Frail and weak as we, and our faith as
theirs? But we feel a great deal of infirmity in our selves, did not they
so, and did not the spirit of God see more in them, then them selves could
feel? yet it calls the^ saints: yea and so it calls us, that we should
not fear: and therefore as I said, I say again, you are anointed of the
Lord, and you shall not fall, if your heart bear you witness, that the
profession which you make, is unfeigned in you, as I am sure it bears you
witness. One care only we have, which also we will have unto the end: and
that is, that we may glorify him, who has glorified us. Jn this doing, as I
accuse my self most above all other men, so J praise not you a white. For J
know good Maistres K. herein you are too too faulty, and so is all flesh:
our flesh, the world, and the Devil, they are to strong for us, but blessed
be the Lord God, who has given us victory in Jesus Christ, and we will do
if God give us grace, as his Apostles did, we will chastise our bodies, and
bring them in subjection, that all that know our religion, shall not blame
our works: And I thank God for all that you have obtained: And I beseech you
increase and abound more, that as he will give us a full reward, so we may
offer up our bodies a holy sacrifice, to praise his name, who has had mercy
upon us. And pray for me, that my hands and tongue may join in the works of
Gods Saints: and let us all grow together unto that blessed hope, till we
have found that happy stre^ght, by which the world is crucified unto us, and
we unto the world: But the Lord that teaches you, to him I leave you: whom I
beseech to open your eyes into so large and wide a spiritual sight, that you
may yet more clearlie see and feel the glory of God and immortality. Fare
well good Maistres K. Commend me to Nan, Besse, Marie. The Lord bless you
with them ever, Amen.

Tuus in Christo, Edwardus Deringe.

A Letter of M. Ed. De. to the Lady G.
The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, be with you ever, Amen. JF either I might
do the duty whereunto your well deserving has bound me, or might requite
with thanks that with all your good will you have deserved: I know and confess
it (good Madame) long since I should have come to see you: but such is my case
as I cannot do either what is most meet, or what I most desire: for sometimes
by business and sometime by sickness, and sometime by opportunity of others, I am
holde^ here, that J could never yet have opportunity to ride fare, or to see
my native Country and nighest friends. Once in So^mer J would have gone to M.
B. besides Windsore and the second night of my travel, J could not sleep,
but tarried a seven night in the same place, and then came back again, ill at
ease: thus it pleases God to deal with me, and such a body he has given me,
to the end (I am sure) J should not love this present vanity, but remember
him that lives ever, and desire to be dissolved to see his glory. And this I
beseech you think to be the only cause, that I have not of long time seen
you and others, with whom otherwise I would wish to dwell: and if it be the
good will of God to prosper my iourneys in time convenient, J trust to see you
oftener hereafter: but his will be done, who appoynteth our ways, and
numbreth our steps, and does all things for the best to those that love him,
and to him if J can commit you in my daily prayers, that so my spirit be
present with you, how long soever J be absent in body, yet my duty I owe
you, shall not be altogether unperformed, and that piece of it which yet is
wantinge, that in daily exhortation J might (by the grace of God) stir up
your mind, that in the mean time let me supply with these letters: In which
most heartily I beseech you (good Madame) go on forward, and faint not in the
course of godliness, increase still in faith, in love, in hope til with a wise
heart you have such a feeling of the glory of God, and of eternal life, that
you have made your account up with the world, and are at a point with all that
is under the Sun. While God shall prolong your days, rejoice in him that has
given you life, and use all his gifts to his glory: and when his appointed time
shall come and bring death into your doors: let this be the preparation of your
heart, you desire to be loosed and to be with Christ, and let this be the
answer of your tongue, Lord now let thou thy servant depart in peace.
Surely then it shall come unto you, that a happy life shall have a blessed
end. Your former times have found their wished issue, and the entrance of your
grave, shall be the beginning of your glory: He has spoken it that can not
deceive us, That every one that believes in him shall not taste of death, but
shall pass from death to life. This (good Madame) is the crown and garlande
of all our pleasures: rejoice in feeling it, and be glad in loving it, knit it
fast to all the thoughts of your heart, and never forget it, it shall give you
more pleasure in one day of your life, the^ without it you can find in a
thousand years: and all the men of the world which feel their pleasure in
this life, and know nothing better, then to follow their own concupiscence,
they shall perish when you shall abide, and they shall mourn when you shall
rejoice, because they have forgotten the living God whom you have loved: Many
tentations shall be continually against you, but God is able to set you free
from them: cast your care on him, and you have won the victory. And to the
end you may know him, and how to trust in him, as the Prophet David did so
let us do, that is: Let us make his testimonies to be our delight, and
exercise our selves in the^ day and night, for they only can make us wise,
and renew in us the image of God, that we may be perfect as our heavenly
father is perfect. This hope J thank God has bine before me, that J have not
feared in any trouble: and in a good conscience of this doing, I had rather
have the displeasure of the world, then with loss of this desire or any hurt
of it, to win the favor of all mortal men. And so I am sure it shall be
with you that day, in which you shall so feel Gods glory, and eternal life,
that you will consecrate your life for ever unto him, love hi^* fear him,
long after him: It shall be more joyful unto your the^ the day of your birth,
and your heart shall be see as Saint Paul says, to use the world as though you
used it not: not to forsake the world or worldly things, (for they are the
gifts of god for the comfort of our life) but as though we forsaked it, so
let our love be taken from it, and be ever with him who is the giver of all,
and has all immortality. There is not a day that passes over our heads, but
it afflicts the body, and makes it a day shorter living then it was: Let
there not be a day but shall strenghthen our faith, that we may be glad we are
one day nearer the presence of our God, then we were before. And I beseech
god (who only can do what he will) work his good will with you in all
spiritual blessings, that you may abound: and in the condition of this life
that you may rejoice, till your accounted times be all fulfilled. Amen.

Yours in the Lord Jesus, Ed. Deringe.

A Letter of M. Ed. De. to the Lady M.
THE Lord God who has only power to work his will, and has showed mercy
unto us in an eternal covenant, make us perfect in all our ways to abound in
righteousness, and love his glory, that in life and death we may be happy, and
have joy in his presence, who lives ever, Amen. Good Madame, tbe duty that J
have long owed unto you, does much bind me: and the experience of your good
inclination, sufficiently does emboulden me to write at this time unto you:
and J trust the Lord God who has given you his grace, and called me to this
work, will bless the labor that it may be profitable to his glory and your
comfort. For if his word have so great strength in his Saints when they are
yet unbelieving and ignorant, that it reuealeth even the secrets of their
hearts, that it makes them fall down to worship him and to acknowledge his
mighty power in it: J am sure it can not be but the same word shall have
strength in you, wholly and altogether to consecrate your self unto the Lord,
till all your delight be in him alone. So that I am now, more to pray for my
self then for you, that I may rather speak the truth then you hear it: for
of this I am sure your heart is prepared (as the Prophet says) to a good
purpose, the Lord make my hand as the pen of a good writer. And now (good
Madame) this is the sum of all, Fear God and love him: your goods, your
credit, your thoghts, your desires, your body, your life, give it all unto him,
that he only may please you, nothing but he only delight you, his word
instruct you, his will persuade you, that whether you live or whether you die
you may be wholly his: A short lesson and soon learned, hard J confess of the
world to practice, but not hard to you whom God has loved: for what is it
can call away your desire, that wholly and altogether it should not be in this?
It is only the world that has taken up enimitie against us, and strives
daily to separate us from the Lord. But what is in the world why the
persuasions of it should please us? especially you who have had experience of
it, whose life God has filled with worldly things. You know what is the
comfort of houses and lands: you have weighed them well and found them light.
You know the gladness of a mother, and have in your sight Sons and Daughters,
the trial of it is in you, and has entered deep, eue^ as they have bin the
fruit of your own womb: but in them you have no such joy as in the spirit
of adoption, by which you know your self to be the child of God. You know
the treasure of a good husband, with whom you have had peaceable and louinge
days: but how much is it a greater joy of unspeakable gladness to feel your
self joined to Jesus Christ, and made a chaste member of his glorious body
with whom you shall be joined for ever. You have seen a great many years of the
age of man, and have measured the length of them, so that if you might live the
days of Abraham, yet you might account your hours and see the time at hand,
when in the end of your course you shall take your rest: and what were this to
immortality. To be short and to pretermit many things wherewith God has made
your life as a blessing, you have seen favor, Credit, Lands, Authority,
Friends, Servants: the pleasures of these God has given you. You have seen
fullness of such delights: but this and all else that you have seen what is it
to the grace of God, the fellowshippe of Saints, the forgiveness of your
sins, the love of his countenance, the assurance of your life, the brightness
of his glory, and your eternal blessings. Since then in the world is no sure
refuge, the more I have seen the fruit of your faith, the more assuredly J
know the constancy of your mind ready to leave the world to approach nearer
unto God, and to account all these things to be but dunge, to the end you may
win Jesus Christ, in whom you shall be so much more blessed, as light is more
bright then darkness, health is more excellent then sickness, and life more
precious then cruel death. This (good Madame) you have long known, and with
praise professed it among men: And now especially reap the fruit of it in
these days of Gods visitation, in which in a weak body you have had a sharp
sickness, to teach you that your life is in the hands of God, and the nature
of your body that it is but dust, so that you should not love it but in the
Lord, nor be pleased with it but as it pleases him, ready to lay it down
when he shall call you. This is that great and high commandment: To love God
above all, and this is the greatest obedience required of man, to be ready to
dye at the will of God: Unto which commandment when I do beseech you
willingly to yield, I feel in my self how the nature of man strives
against it: all those delights of which I spoke before (the pleasures of this
present life) they arise against it: although we had no other comfort, yet life
it self is sweet unto us, and we are loath to make our beds in the dark, our
eyes they would yet see the sun, our ears would hear the sound of worldly
elements, though our flesh be grass, yet grass has a flower, and our frail
bodies have vanishinge fantasies agreeable unto them as earth unto earth, and
from which most hardly you shall pull it away, the Patriarchs and Prophets
were sometime afraid, Paul and Peter were not always bold, they loved ever
that life which they saw in hope, but they did feel the death whichc did
fight in their members: And how should I then say unto you a weak woman,
fear not death, or if I say it how can you perform it being so weak a
vessel of flesh and blood: yet good Madame, give me leave to entreat you and
J hope you shall have a heart to grant it: J most humbly beseech you, fear
not death. The Apostles were men as we are, yet Paul obtained at last to be
dissolved and be with Christ: if we be weaker then he, the graces of God shall be
more exalted in us, and we also shall say at the last, Let thy servant O Lord
depart in peace: It is the Lord that has promised this blessing unto us, let
us hear it with faith, and it will make death vile in our eyes: it is enough
if we know God will give this victory to his people, let us be bold, though
we fear a little while, yet fear shall be cast out, and we shall say with a
free spirit, O death where is thy stinge, etc. try your self therefore every
day, and if your heart be bold, rejoice good Madame, and rejoice for ever: the
last and greatest enemy (which is death) is trodden under your feet, and what
else can hurt you: all other things of the world they are but servants of
death, and serve to make his power more fearful unto us, friends or
kinsefolke, gold, silver. precious stones or al other pleasures, all labor
unto one end, to make us more loath to die: vanquish death and you have
vanquished all, height and depth, life and death, all is yours, and you are
Christ's. And see I beseeeh you what glory you have gotten, you are but a
weak and sick woman whom God has shut up into your chamber, and tied to your
bed: and yet the great tyrant of the world, that holds in bondage Kings and
Princes, and wounds them all with fear and terror, he is confounded before
you, and the Lord of life he has crushed him in pieces under you. A blessed
day that brought you first into this battle, a blessed sickness that made
you endure the fight, and most blessed end in which you get the victory: for
who has given you this strength, or who reigns in you in such a day, but he
who has said and done it, O death I will be thy death: and if he be in you who
has abolished death, and in whose sight death shall never have any rule, what
treasure, what depth of joy and gladness shall he bring with him: while you live
you shall live in him, and no man shall take your joy from you: and when you die
you shall die in him, and death shall be no death, but you shall pass to
eternal life: and all that is fearful shall be far from you: the burden of
sin, the malice of the devil, the terror of hell: the dreadful words, go
ye cursed into eternal fire: All this is abolished and trodden down in the
cross of Jesus Christ, who reigns in you, and gives you his spirit, that
you fear not death: and all things that fill with joy not the earth only, but
the heavens also (you have destroyed death) you shall feel the^ all within
you: the fellowship of Saints and Angels, the forgiveness of sins, the
resurrection of the body, the life everlasting, and the God of glory: your
eyes lightened with a pure faith shall see these things in so perfect beauty,
that you shall cast out death and the fear of it: yea you should think your
time wearines if your days should be prolonged, and you should be yet many
years a soiorner in this body, in which you are a stranger from the presence
of the Lord: And the nearer your time approaches, the gladder you shall be of
the end of your journey, when your heart shall feel it: And when the earthly
house of this tabernacle shall be destroyed, you have a building given of God, a
house not made with hands, but eternal in the heavens. In this faith you shall
not only not fear death, but you shall sigh and moan (as Paul says) till
you see your glory, and the lot of the saints that is in light, where there is
no more sorrow nor care, nor fear, nor death, but the God of all mercy, and
father of our lord Jesus Christ shall be before us for ever. Thus Madame (as my
duty is) J have written unto you, and God will bless it as his promise is,
that it shall be for the best, and in the wisdom of his word we shall be
strengthened in his grace, that death and sickness shall be forgotten, and all
the desirs of our heart shall be with him. And the Lord God for his Sons sake,
so have mercy upon us, that all evil taken from us, we may rejoice in him,
and see his blessed age that is in immortality, and is sealed in our hearts
with his blessed spirit: To whom be glory for evermore, Amen.

From Saint Ellens, the tenth of January, Anno Domini, 1576. Yours bounden in
the Lord Jesus, the only forgiveness of all our sins, Ed. Deringe.

A Letter written by M. Edward Deringe, to his Lord and Master the Duke of
Northfolke.
Gratia et pax a Deo patre, et domino nostro Jesus Christo.
THE long good will that I have borne unto you, as to one that earnestly
professed the Gospel, and the great duty I owe unto you as to my Lord and
Master, make, that now I should write unto you, not knowing whether
opportunity shall be such that hereafter J may do you any service. God the
author of all life he has shut both you and me up in his hands: that there
is great likelihood, our lives in this world they are but short. The Prince
that executes the judgment of the Lord, she has found you out in your great
sins: and sickness that reigns over all flesh, it has taken now long
hold upon me. So that as I said, we are both in the hands of the Lord, we
are summoned paremtorilie, death has given an assault, and the weak holds of
our life they are violently shaken. Now therefore my good Lord, let it us
take counsel together, and as a wise Master, learn of a faithful servant
what is best to be done: the worst that our sins can do unto us, is to lay
upon us the just reward of death, my disease which thus afflicts me for many
thousand sins, it can but take away my life which J have so abused. And all
your deep dissimulation and hypocrisy, your great ambitions, your faithless
religion, which have so bewitched you, what can they do more then this? The
remedy now is to make of necessity a virtue, that is, to bear it wisely,
which you must needs abide. J have (I thank God) found that grace, that I
can love this saying, Cupio dissolui and esse cum Christo, the Lord also open
your heart and guide your understanding, that with all saints you may do
likewise, and pray, Veni Domine Jesus. And now for as much as this is the last
duty, that J am like to do unto you, as God shall give grace I will so
advice you as I may testify mine own faith, and make you strong against the
day of trial: trusting that our God shall so remember us both in mercy, that
after a little while we shall see better days, and reign with him that
abides King for ever. There is now but one thing necessary for you to learn
in this life, that is, how you may willingly desire to die: a hard lesson for
a natural man, for death is our last enemy and his assault most violent to the
trial of our faith: but Christ who has overcome death and hell, he has
broken the strength of this battle, and set up the songs of triumph unto all
that believe, that we may have the fullness of joy and say with gladness, o
death where is thy sting. Now that this joy may be yours, and this gladness
your inheritance, prepare your self, not in your own wisdom, for that has
alredie deceived you, but in the wisdom of god, that your hope may be sure. Jf
you will now have the heart that shall condemn the force of death consider
wherefore you are called to die: It is laid to your charg, that you have dealt
traytrously with your Prince, with your country, and with the religion of God:
and upon these crimes you are condemned to die. If you be guiltles, o my Lord
blessed are you, and blessed is your portion: he has spoken it that never will
change: Jf when you do well you suffer wrongfully, take it patie^tly, for this
is acceptable to god: but if you be guilty you have not your hope in death (for
that you have deserved) but your hope is this, that you die so as it becomes
you: which if god shall grant unto you, then blessed is the hour that God shall
bring upon you, you shall make that change, which god for his Christ's sake, lay
speedily upon all his children, and you shall die once, that you may live ever.
Now that you may know how you ought to die: learn this of the lord which he
has so plainly taught you. The first part of your true repe^ta^ce, must be an
humble confession: what soever your own conscience can utter more the^ is
revealed. O my Lord speak openly the truth, satan is enemy unto us and his
slightes are many: if you will tread the malicious serpent under your feet,
and triumph with Christ who has spoiled hell, tell the truth my Lord,
conceal nothing, so shall you shun the devil. If my words seem but light to
persuade you, hear the wisest counselor that ever reigned in Israel: He that
hides his sin (says Solomon) shall never prosper, but he that confesses
and forsakes them, shall find mercy. When Acan had transgressed in Israel
and deserved death, when he was brought into judgment, Joshua said unto him,
My Son J beseech thee, give glory to the lord God of Israel, make confession
unto him, and show me now what thou have done. Lo my Lord, this is to give
glory unto God: to confess your sin, and tell what you have done. The good
king David when he had deserved death, and feared greatly the sentence of the
Prophet, he confessed gladly and made it known unto the world what his sin
was, and wherein he had offended. When God gave his laws unto Israel, and in
the blood of goats and calves shows the^ the redemption that was in Christ
Jesus: He so ordained, that before their forgiveness was preached, the high
priest should proclaim openly what were the sins of the people, and so lay
their sins upon the beasts. So stands it now with us, if we will find
forgiveness of our sins, let us cast off the cloaks of shame, and confess
before heaven and earth, what we have sinned and what we have done. What
greater persuasions can you yet require, or how can you think to please God if
you will hide your sins? That was the practice of old Adam, but you are borne
anew: that was the sin of Cain, but you my good Lord are of a better kindred.
Speak the truth and shrink not, God will once reveal the secrets of hearts,
and the^ you shall rejoice that there is nothing of yours hid: fie upon that sin,
that you should turn away for one hour and receive hereafter everlasting
co^fusio^: better a thousand times to receive the reproach of flesh, and after
receive your glory of the Lord. When John Baptist preached first the Gospel,
he bpatized no more the^ such as confessed their sins. The lost Son when he ran
away, he found no hope of pardon, til he called heaven and earth to witness
his great iniquity. Paul who preached the gospel to us Gentiles, how often
does he confess that he was a persecutor. The happy thief that was hanged
entered not into paradise, til he first in the hearing of all Israel said, we
are rightly punished, and receive things worthy of that we have done. What
should J say more, J trust you fear God, and J have seen in you many signs
of grace: I doubt not but you will make it known whatsoever is in your heart.
It is the word of God that I have spoken, and it is the only truth upon which
you may build your faith. This thing touches so near the glory of God and the
safety of his gospel, that you must now needs forsake your friends and
kinsme^, yea forget the love of your self: and if you have bin partaker of any
counsel, disclose the co^spiracies of the wicked: you have stood in judgment
not before me^; for they are but ministers, but before the Lord, who sits in
the middst of judgment. Surely if you seek to hide your sins, you seek to
hide them from him that knows the secrets of the heart and raynes, and to
dissemble with him that will not be mocked: and therefore with all humblenes of
duty, I beseech you, and in the name of God J crave this at your hands,
vnburthe^ your own conscience, make your heart glad, cast of the burden of your
secret sins, purge the eyes of your mind, that you may see Christ, let true
repentance break forth in holy confession, shame the Lords enemies, and make
the church of God rejoice, and lo in the name of Christ J tell it you Blessed
is the day in which it was said of you, a man-child is borne, and blessed
shall be the hour in which it shall be said of you, you are dead in the Lord: the
closing up of your eyes shall be the beginning of your sight: and death your
entrance into life. And now my Lord, I beseech you pray for me, and humbly upon
my knees I ask you hearty forgiveness wherein I have not done as it became me
touching you. You know how in my time I have persuaded you from your wicked
servants, from your popish friends, and from your adulterous woman. But (alas)
my Lord, your high calling has bridled my words, I could not speak as I should,
my words were to soft to heal so old a disease: why should I have tarried in
your lordships house, except these things had bin amended? this bearing with
your evil, was the greatest evil I could have done you. And I beseech you
forgive me, and God for his mercies sake shall make me strong, that herafter J
shall not fear to reprove the sinner, and God shall forgive you your dulnes of
spirit, that could not be moved with a little counsel. Now my Lord, be strong in
the Lord, and fear not, if you must dye, remember that Christ bath overcome
him that has the power of death, and has set us free from the power of the
grave. Though you do for a very little time turn again unto dust, yet again
you shall hear the voice of the trumpet: corruption shall die, because he was
no better the^ his fathers: and you when you go, you shall go to your fathers,
the long race of Nobility of which God has raised you, every one in his time
is gone before you, and so many as have died in the faith, they shall be again
of your fellowship and kindred, and you shall praise God with the^, and not
fear the second death. The lord open your eyes that you may see your hope, and
you shall love that company above Kings and Princes. You shall see Abraham, of
who^ you have heard so much, Jsaac, Jacob, Job, Samuel and Daniell, whose
names you loved, you shall see Paul and Peter, whose society you wish for, all
the Patriarchs, Prophets and Apostles that are gone before you. Be bold
therefore, and be bold to dye: with Elias you shall see Christ clothed with your
flesh, who has immorta^^^^e in his hand, and shall make you reign for ever:
yo^ (...) shall not be tedious, and your glory shall (...) change: and he that
made the heavens so high abo^^ earth, the Sun the moon the stars, so full of
excellent beauty, he shall be your portion in his endless glory: would God you cold
see him now with open countenance, that you might know his loving kindness, how
much it is better the^ life: J would you cold withal his saints perceue what were
the height, the ^reath* the lenght and the depth of his unsearchable riches.
^^apy (...) that shall never end, o blesed inheritance that shall never wast O
holy city new Jerusalem, the perfection of beauty; where the inahbitants are
princes, O'pretious buildng that is not made with hands, and joyful
tabernacles which God himself has pitched: my voice fails and my tongue
cleaueh to my mouth when I would declare the everlasting gladness, when God
shall wipe away al tears from our eyes, and there shall be no more death nether
sorrow, nor crying, nor yet any pain for the first things past. Who reme^breth
this and says not, all flesh is grass, and the glory of man is as the flower
of the field. We have nothing here, but fear of our enemy, grief in
poverty, pain in labor, care in riches, unsteadfastness in frindship, envy in
authority, emulation in honor, change in nobility, fear in a kingdom: and
as the greatest of al princes has wisely pronounced, vexatio^ of spirit in all
things that is under the Su^, so true it is vanity of vanities and al is but
vanity. You need no example O my Lord and Master, behold your self and see
what you were: rejoice in the lord and love better things, cease to eat of
this corruption, and desire Ma^na: drink not of these puddels, but go to the
pure water of life, which is clear as crystal, and proceeds out of the
throne of god and of the la^be: you are but one step from this glorious
blessing, and that is to die willingly and well: speak forth the secrets of
your heart, and giu^ God glory The Lord bless and keep you, the Lord make his
face to shine upon you and be merciful unto you, the Lord ^^ft up his
countenance upon you and send you peace.

FINIS.
MASTER DERINGS WORKS.
LO here the Pearl of precious price
From Deringe dead that lives again
To preach in print and give advice
Of that he taught in life with pain
Lo now he lives both here and there
Whose life his foes could hardly bear.
Read then to learn and put in ure
And taste the sweetness of his vain
So shall you see an heavenly lure
That draws you up from the earth amain
And shows the way that leads to life
And eke the rest that ends all strife.
Study to be approved to the Lord, for if he allow not our doings, though
all the world be with us, it shall bring us no comfort: and this is our
reioycinge, the testimony of a good conscience.


