THE SINNERS ACQVITTANCE. A Check to Curiosity. The safest Service. Delivered
in three Sermons at the Court. BY JOHN DENISON Doctor of Divinity, and one of
his Majesty's Chaplains then in Attendance.

LONDON, Printed by JOHN LEGATT, and are to be sold by John Budge, at the sign
of the Green Dragon in Paul's Churchyard. 1624.

THE SINNERS ACQVITTANCE. A Sermon preached before the KING at Greenewich, May
4. 1623. BY JOHN DENISON Doctor of Divinity, and one of his Majesty's
Chaplains.

LONDON, Printed by JOHN LEGATT, and are to be sold by John Budge, at the sign
of the Green Dragon in Paul's Churchyard. 1624.

TO THE RIGHT Honorable and Reverend Father in GOD, JOHN Lord Bishop of
Lincoln, Lord Keeper of the Great Seal of England, and one of His Majesty's
most Honorable Privy Counsel.
RIght Honorable and Reverend, I presumed, long since, instead of a better
present, Lord Elsmere Lord Chancellor of England.
to Dedicate my Act Sermon to that noble Lord (my honorable Master) who now
rests in peace, and found acceptance. Whom, me thinks, J see in part
described, when I read that of Posseuin, concerning the excellent Historian
Thucydides who is styled by him, Posseuin. de Historicis, Sect. 2.
Acutus, concitatus; neruosus, densus, solidus, and sapiens. And I may add
that which was eminent in that noble Lord (an especial note of solid
judgment) his Constancy. For (as Tully speaks of Cato) grauitatem perpetua
constantia roborauit. Cicero de Offic. lib. 1.
He was not like Alcibiades, in conciliandis amicitijs, quam in retinendis vir
melior; But did ratherimitate that famous Emperor Augustus Caesar; Sueton. in
August. Caesar. Cap. 66.
Qui amicitias neque facile admisit, and constantissime retinuit. But that
which did crown all his natural and moral parts, was his pious care and
courses in furnishing the Lords vineyard with good laborers. For he conferred
not preferments for gain, but freely, and nobly. And (that which was
extraordinarily honorable) he rather enquired after well deserving men, then
stayed till be was sued to. I write what some others have done, and many, I
doubt not will ingenuously acknowledge. Now, your Lordship having been to that
noble Lord (absit inuidia verbo) like the beloved Disciple to our Savior,
Saint John.
conuersing with him in matters divine and humane, and succeeding him both in
the seat and actions of Honor, with general applause: I have been emboldened
to present unto your Lordship these Sermons, which many my worthy friends in
Court have much desired, and to whom, for the publishing of them, I am by
promise engaged.

The God of heaven multiply his blessings upon you, to the good of this Church
and Commonwealth.

Your Lordships humbly devoted, John Denison.

THE SINNERS ACQVITTANCE. A Sermon preached before the King at GREENEWICH, May.
4. 1623.
ISAI. 53.4. Surely he has borne our infirmities, and carried our sorrows.


WE read in the first of Samuel, and the ninth, 1 Samuel 9.9.
that the Prophets, in ancient time, were called Seers, because that from that
watchtower of divine speculation they saw that which others saw not; Hierom.
ad Paulin.
or, as Saint Hierom says, Eum quem caeteri non videbant, Him whom others saw
not.

Amongst the Prophets some were more eminent and excellent then others, and
amongst them all, none comparable to the Prophet Isaiah, who was amongst the
Prophets, 1 Samuel 9.2.
like Saul amongst the Israelites, higher then the rest by the shoulders upward.

It is said of Abraham, John 8.56.
that he saw our Saviors days, and so did Isaiah, who, albeit he lived above
six hundred years before Christ was borne, does set forth his birth, life,
and death so lively, as though he had seen all things acted, and accomplished
before his eyes. Hieron. quo supra.
Insomuch, that S. Hierom says, Non tam Propheta dicendus sit, quam
Euangelista, He may rather be called an Evangelist, then a Prophet, and may
seem rather to have written a History, then a Prophecy, whereof, this which I
have read may be called an Abstract, and it is indeed an Epitome of the Gospel.

It may be fitly divided into a Preface, and a prophetical History. General
division.


The Preface is brief, in this one word, Surely.

The History is not long, it contains but five words in the Hebrew, and not
many you see in the English; He has borne our infirmities, and carried our
sorrows.

The Preface is brief, but material, it gives assurance of the truth of the
History, which one fitly compares to the eyes of a man: For, Polybius.
as the eyes of a man put out, leave the body a mere truncke: so, the truth
removed from an History, leaves it a vain discourse.

The History is not long, but full; it contains matter admirable, lamentable,
comfortable. Admirable, in respect of him who is the glory of the History, even
the Lord of glory. Lamentable, in regard of what he sustained, that is,
infirmities, sorrows. Comfortable, in respect of them for whom he bare them;
they were our infirmities, our sorrows.

I may say of this Scripture in S. Chrysostomes words; Chrysostom. in Genesis hom. 8.
Etsi verba sint pauca, magnus tamen thesaurus in illis est reconditus; Though
the words be few, yet they contain a great deal of rich treasure. This
sentence is like Jacobs Ladder, we cannot spare one round of it. It is a
golden sentence, and the least parcel thereof is more worth then all the gold
of Ophir. We will therefore diligently search the mind.

The Preface.
ANd first to begin with the Preface. The word (...) Surely, may be either
Vox distinguentis, or asseuerantis, either a word of distinction, or
asseueration. A word of distinction, and so the vulgar Translater may seem to
have taken it; for he renders it, vere tulit, He has truly borne our
infirmities. The Priests, in the time of the Law were said to bear the sins
of the people, Leuit. 10.17. But they bare them typically, he truly; he bare
them, not in figure, but in fact, not in type, but in truth. Again, he bare
them not imaginary, imaginarily, and in outward appearance only, Tertul.
aduers. Marc. 4.8. August. de haeres. ad quodvul. har. 46.
as the absurd Manichees and Marcion held; but as he was a man, (...), in
nature and truth (as Damascen says) so did he bear our infirmities, and carry
our sorrows vere, sicut verus homo, truly, as being truly a man, Aquin. in
loc.
as Aquinas interprets the word. It was not with our Savior, as with the three
Children in the third of Daniel, who came forth of the fiery furnace, Dan. 3.17.
not having their hair sindged, Plutarch. in vita Coriol.
nor their garments changed: But rather, as Coriolanus multas ostenderet
cicatrices, could show many Cicatrices of the wounds received in the wars. So
our blessed Savior could give the like demonstratiue satisfaction, to the most
incredulous Thomas. Ioh. 21.27.
Let them therefore, who talk of an imaginary Passion, expect an imaginary
Salvation; We know that our Savior bare our infirmities truly.

Again, the word may be vox asseuerantis, a vehement asseueration. And that,
both to stop the mouth of a stubborn Jew, and to strengthen the Faith of an
humble Christian. So is the word used, Genesis 28.16.
Genesis 28. where Jacob beholding in a vision the Ladder, whose foot stood upon
Earth, and the top reached to Heaven, the Angels ascending, and descending,
said comfortably, and confidently, Surely God is in this place. And so, the
Prophet Isaiah, beholding by the eye of Prophecy Christ Jesus in his dejected
estate; said no less comfortably and confidently, Surely he has borne our
infirmities, and carried our sorrows. Yea he so speaks of it, as though
Christ had done it, when the Prophet spoke it; which was so indeed by way of
mystery: For Christ is the Lamb of God, Reu. 13.8.
slain from the beginning of the world. But it is rather spoken in a
prophetical manner, in regard of future certainty.

As the Lord was Oculus prophetarum, the eye of the Prophets; so were the
Prophets Os Domini, Luke 1.70.
the mouth of the Lord: So that whatsoever they saw, or said, in their
Prophetical Office, must needs be accomplished. We must therefore take heed
of Eues incredulity, Genesis 2.17.
which cleaues close to her posterity. When the Lord had said to Adam, by way
of asseueration (as the Hebrew phrase imports Moriendo morieris, Genesis 3.3.
thou shall surely dye, Eve comes in with her addubitation Ne forte moriamur,
lest we dye. The Lord will not suffer any word of his Prophets to fall to the
ground, and the truth of this Prophecy experience has manifested, and the
blessed Evangelists, the Lords holy Historians, have recorded for the comfort
of the Church to the end of the world.

The History.
SO much for the Preface; Now to the History; wherein may it please you to
observe

1 The Person especially mentioned in the same, in the word He, that is, Christ.

2 His Action; He has borne, he has carried.

3 The burdens he has borne and carried, they were infirmities, sorrows.

4 For whom he bare them: they were our infirmities, our sorrows.

I may say of this Text, as the woman of Samaria spoke of Jacobs well, The well
is deep, Ioh. 4.11.
and it has diverse springs, which must be opened, that we may from thence draw
the water of Consolation.

The pronowne (...), He, The Person especially mentioned.
is often silenced and included in the verb, but is here expressed, as being
very emphaticall. He, either by way of Admiration, or Exception. By way of
Admiration; And it is admirable indeed, if either you consider the dignity of
his Person, or the indignities of his Passion. He that was the Son of God,
Colos. 2.13. 1. Cor. 2.8.
yea the Son of his Love, Colos. 1. He that was the Lord of Glory, 1 Corinthians. 2. He to whom the glorious Angels do homage, Hebrew. 1. Hebr. 1.6.
He bare our infirmities, and carried our sorrows. Well might it have agreed
to his excellent Nature to have conferred benefits, but to suffer torments, it
was strange, admirable. His Person, and Passion, in discourse of humane reason,
are very incompetible.

Again, He by way of exception, that is, He and none but He. He, who (...) by
himself, Heb. 1.3.
has purged our sins. Aug. de temp. Hom. 108.
He, Qui sordes omnium solus posset abluere, who himself alone was able to
wash away all our sins, says S. Austin. He alone entered the lists, and
undertook the combat against Satan, as David did against Goliath, when all the
Israelites were mere spectators, and to him belongs the glory of the victory.
Sueton. in vita Aug. Caesar.
When Augustus Caesar desired two Consuls to be joined with him in Office, the
Senate denied it, as holding it a sufficient diminution of his dignity, that
one should be joined in the Consulship with him, that was so worthy. And surely
it must needs derogate from our Saviors dignity, that any one should be his
copartner in the work of our redemption. He trod the wine press alone; Isa.
63.3.
and there is no other name given under heaven, by which we must be saved. Act
4.12.
And so I come from the person to his actions.

His Actions.
THe word (...), he has borne, is a word of a large extent: Yet has it two
special significations, which fitly agree with these actions of our Savior.

1. It signifies in humeros tollere, to take up a burden upon ones shoulders;
and so is it used in the 12. of Ezechiel; Now what this burden is, the Prophet
David shows, when he complains, in the 38. Psalm, Psalm. 38 4.
My sins are gone over my head, and are as a heavy burden, too heavy for me
to bear. And so the septuagint translate it, (...), He carried our sins.
This burden of our sins did our Savior bear upon the cross, Thom. Aquin.
Vt vas noster by way of imputation as our surety, and the burden of
punishment, due to our sins, formaliter in his person actually. According to
that in the first Epistle of Peter, the second chapter, Who, his own self, 1.
Pet. 2.24.
bare our sins, in his own body, on the tree. Therefore Chrysostom has
observed, Chrysostom. in loc.
that the Prophet says not, Curauit, but portauit, Not, he cured, but carried,
Yea took them to himself: As if a Physician, forth of his cure, and for the
cure of his patient, should take the disease upon himself. So, tulit in se, vt
a nobis tolleret, he took them upon himself, that he might take them from us.

Again, the word signifies auferre to take away; And so it is used in the 32.
Psalm. 32.5.
Psalm. For whereas our translations have it, Thou forgauest the punishment of
my sin, it is in the Hebrew (...) thou tookest away the punishment of my
sin. And so the word agrees very fitly to our blessed Savior: for his
pertulit, was an abstulit, Tertull adv. Marc. 4.10.
as Tertullian interprets it, in his fourth book against Marcion. Christ, when
he bare our sins, took them away, According to that in the second to the
Colossians, Coloss. 2.14.
He took away the hand writing that was against us, and nailed it on his
cross. The bond of obedience, which Adam had forfeited as S. Ambrose says,
Ambros. de Sacrament. lib. 5. cap. 4.
Christ discharged by his active and passive obedience, and so cancelled it on
the Cross. Therefore John Baptist, pointing at our Savior, might very well
say, Be hold the Lamb of God, Ioh. 1.19.
that takes away the sins of the world.

The word (...), he has carried, Albeit in the English it differs not from the
other, (...) he has borne, yet does it in the Hebrew: For the one signifies
Onus ipsum tollere; the other, Onus impositum go stare; as a learned linguist
distinguishes them; Pagim.
that is, to take up a burden, and to bear a burden imposed, and so both words
may be well applied to our Savior Christ. For, tulit, he took upon him the
burden voluntarily; Hieron. in Esai. 53.
Crucem sustinuit voluntate, non necessitate, His death on the Cross was
voluntary, not of necessity: according to his words in the tenth of John, Ioh
10.18.
No man takes my life from me, but I lay it down for my sheep. And portauit,
he carried the burden imposed, as it is in the sixth verse of this chapter: The
Lord has laid upon him the iniquity of us all. Thus, as Saint Paul says,
Romans 8.32.
God gave Christ for us, Romans Gal. 2.20.
8. And, Christ also gave himself for us, Gal. 2. So may it be said, that God
laid the burden upon Christ, and that Christ also took up the burden. For
here mercy and truth met together: Psalm. 85.10.
God exacting our debt as a strict creditor, and Christ discharging it as a
cheerful Redeemer. And so says S. Bernard, Bern. panos. Hebd. ser. 4.
Christus inuita passivam habuit actionem, in morte passionem activam
sustinuit. As Christ had a passive action in his life; so had he an active
passion in his death, it was voluntary.

His Burdens.
NOw to the burdens he bear, and carried, they were infirmities and sorrows.

The Hebrew word (...), infirmities, signifies any corporal pain or anguish,
proceeding from some part that is smitten or hurt. As in the tenth verse it is
said, Mich. 6.13.
The Lord would break, or bruise him, to make him subject to infirmities: and
in the sixth of Michea, I will make thee sick with smiting.

Thus our Saviors body was subject Laesioni, and sensui laesionis, both to
outward violence, and to the sense of it. Though not respectu primae causae,
Aquin. par. 3. quae. 15: art. 5.
yet propinquae, as the Schooleman says; Not in respect of sin inherent, but
in respect of the principles of nature. For he voluntarily took such a body as
was subject to hurt, and consequently to pain.

The word (...) imports some sensible sorrow, or anguish of the soul. As his
body was subject to corporal afflictions, Tulit corporis sensus, and animi
affectus. Leo de passione sermon. 7. Hier. in Loc.
so was his soul to sorrowful affections. And so S. Hierome distinguishes
these words, Corpus habuit flagellatum, animum vere doluisse, etc. As his body
was scourged, so his soul was grieved; and this grief was exceeding great.
Even a sword of sorrow did pierce through his soul, as Simeon spoke of the
blessed virgin in the second of Saint Luke. Therefore he is called, Vir dolorum,
A man of sorrows: Verse 3. of this chapter.
which Hebrew phrase, imports extreme sorrow, like that, vir sanguinum, a
bloody man: 2. Sam. 16.8.
and surely his sorrow was exceeding great, as his mournful speech does
manifest, My soul is very sorrowful, Mark. 14.34.
even to the death. Therefore the ancient fathers have applied to him
Ierusalems mournful complaint, in the first of the Lamentations of Jeremy.
Lam. 1.12.
Was there ever sorrow like my sorrow? Ierusalems sorrow might be such, in her
apprehension, as could not be matched; but our Saviors was such, in the truth
of comparison, as could not be paralleld. The Evangelists do express this
anguish of our Saviors soul, by diverse pressing words; Math. 26.38.
as (...) to be sorrowful, (...) to be grievously troubled: (...) to be sore
amazed. (...).
His sorrow was an immediate stroke upon the soul, according to the etymon of
the word. It is said in the tenth verse, that God struck him, and so did the
Jews, they struck his body in malice toward him, God struck his soul in
mercy toward us. Job complains in his sixth chapter. Job 6.4.
The terrors of the Lord do set themselves in array against me. And so does our
Savior in the fourteenth of Mark, (...), Mar. 14.34.
My soul is environed with sorrow on every side.

Such was the sorrow of our Savior, it was an immediate passion of the soul.
As his soul did suffer, by way of sympathy, when his body was tormented; so
did his body, when his soul was wounded. For when he sweat drops of blood,
no hand of external violence came near him, it was the anguish of soul, that
cast him into that bloody sweat. And this was necessary: For as S. Augustine
says, Totus homo perijt, and totus saluatore indiguit; As Adam sinned both in
body and soul, so he needed a Savior both of body and soul: which that
Christ might be, it was necessary that he should suffer both in body and
soul. And as the soul of Adam sinned by immediate action, so the soul of
Christ suffered by an immediate passion. Yea as the soul was the first agent
in the transgression; so is it here the first patient in the affliction. For
the first act of this Tragedy was in the garden of Gethsemane, and there did
that anguish seize upon his soul, before the spear or nails, or thorns did
touch him.

And whence proceeded this sorrow and anguish, but from the immediate hand of
God that struck him? Otherwise it were strange, that our Savior should be
brought into this extreamitie. Is it credible, as S. Austin says, August. in
Psalm. 93.
Vt Paulus servus exultet, Christus Imperator tristis sit, that Paul the
servant should triumph, and Christ the Lord should be troubled in sustaining
of torments, were it not, that both the hand of God and man was upon him? Now,
how far this stroke of God, and sorrow of our Savior proceeded, it is beyond
the apprehension of men, yea, the contemplation of Angels. It grieves my soul
to see how some do extenuate, others do aggrauate it. It shall be our modesty
not to attempt the gaging of it, our happiness, that we never feel it.

For whom Christ bare these burdens.
WE are in the next place to consider, for whom our Savior bare these
infirmities, and sorrows, and the affix (...) ours does appropriate them; they
were our infirmities, our sorrows; they were ours by way of appropriation,
though his by way of imputation. Peccat Aemylius, Rutilius plectitur, We
sinned, and he was punished; We as sheep went astray, Esaias 53.6, 7.
he as a sheep was brought to the slaughter. Doles, domine, non tua, sed mea
vulnera, O blessed Lord, says S. Ambrose, they were not thy wounds, Ambr. de
fide lib. 2. cap 3. 2 Cor. 5.23.
but mine, that caused thy anguish. He knew no sin, says the Apostle, neither
was there guile found in his mouth, Esaias 53.9.
says the Prophet. Maxim. Taur. Quadra. ser. 1.
Eum nullum maculauit delictu^, He was free from the least blot of sin,
figured in the Lamb without spot, Exodus 12.5. And therefore he might boldly
make that challenge to the faces of his greatest adversaries, John 8.46.
Which of you can rebuke me of sin? Such was the innocence of our Savior,
Ab omnibus accepit testimonium, Iren. lib. 4. ca. 14. Luke 23.46.
as Iraeneus says, that he had the testimonies of all men, of all sorts.

The Heavens were darkened, as being abashed to behold the Lord of glory so
abased. Mat. 27.51.
The earth trembled, as being afraid to bear those miscreants, by whom
innocence should endure such injury. God from heaven proclaimed more then once,
Mat. 3.17. and 17.5.
This is my well-beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased. Infinite are the
passages where men of all sorts do publish and applaud his innocence. The
Angel Gabriel spoke thus of him to the blessed Virgin, That holy thing that
shall be borne of thee, Luke 1.35.
shall be called the Son of God. The Devils thus confessed him, Mark 1.24.
I know thee who thou art, even the holy one of God. Isay 53.11. 1 John 2.2.
His friends, as Isaiah the Prophet, and S. John the Evangelist do style him,
the just, the righteous. His foes endeavored by all the engines, that wit or
malice devise, to fasten some accusation upon him, but in vain. Mat. 26.60.
His acquaintance did justify him: for so S. Peter, who was well acquainted
with innocence, objected to the Jews, You have denied the holy one, Acts 3.14.
and the just. Strangers did acquit him, as Pilates wife in her monitory
message, Mat. 27.19.
Have nothing to do with that just man: and Pilate himself professed freely,
Luke 23.4.
I find no fault in this man.

Thus our blessed Savior had all the testimonies of his innocence, that heaven
or earth, God or man, Angels or Devils, friends or foes, acquaintance or
strangers, could yield. So that these infirmities and sorrows were ours; They
were ours, yet his too; ours, as I said, by way of appropriation, his by way of
imputation, and expiation, as it is in the 8. verse of this Chapter, Fulgent.
ad Thrasimund. lib. 3.
For the transgression of my people was he smitten. Quoniam peccata non habuit
propria, portare dignatus est aliena. He that had no sins of his own,
vouchsafed to bear the sins of others, says Fulgentius. It was necessary
that our Savior Christ should be free from sin: for had he been a sinner,
he could not have been a Savior. But now, He that knew no sin, being made
sin for us, we thereby are made the righteousness of God in him, Infirmitas
and mortalitas recepta sunt ad supplicium vt impenderentur ad precium. Leo de
Resur. ser. 2. 1 Pet. 3.18.
2 Cor. 5.23. As our infirmities were his punishment, so are they our payment.
My righteous servant, says the Lord, shall justify many, verse 11. and
therefore justified, because righteous. According to that of S. Peter, Christ
suffered for us, the just for the unjust, that he might bring us to God. That
he might so bring us to God, that we might in this life be partakers of his
grace, and of eternal glory in the life to come. Merchants use to share in
their pains, their gains, their losses; but behold, Christ has taken the
pains, sat down by the loss, and yield; us the gain, the benefit.

There is yet one little spring more to be opened, which has not fallen into
the stream of our translation. Chrysostom. in Romans hom. 31.
Si aurifusorum pueri, etc. If Goldfiners diligently seek and gather together
the least parcels of gold, I see no reason why we should neglect the least
particle in this golden sentence. Here is the affix am, those, and the accent
Athnah, which, as Grammarians say, Lift up the syllable.
does attollere syllabam, teaching us, that in the consideration of our
Saviors sufferings, we should raise up our meditations to the highest pitch.
He bare those our infirmities; those, which were exceeding pressing; those,
which no tongue is able to express; for, Hic omnis lingua silet, Barn. de
quad. debit.
Every tongue must be mute, as Bernard says. Those, which all the men, and
Angels, in heaven, and earth, were not able to bear; those, which his humane
nature could never have sustained, had it not been supported by his divine
power. Max. Taur.
Patitur vt homo, vincit vt Deus, though he suffer as man, he conquers as being
God.

How, when, and where Christ bare these infirmities and sorrows.
HItherto we have opened the springs; now we will consider the streams.

In Histories, the vbi, quando, quomodo, are very remarkable circumstances.
Therefore we will briefly observe how, where, and when our Savior bare our
infirmities, and carried our sorrows, in three especial passages, that is, in
his birth, life, and death. In his incarnation, his passion, his compassion.

1. 1. In his Incarnation. Phil. 2.7.
In his incarnation, he was exceedingly debased. He that was equal to God,
made himself of no reputation, (...), he emptied himself, as it were, of his
excellent glory, when he took upon him our humane condition. Heb. 2.16.
He in no sort took on him the nature of Angels, says the Apostle, neither
took he the excellent estate of Adam. He took not upon him the glorious
estate of the Angels, for then, where had been our greatest comfort? He took
not the excellent state of Adam, for then, where had been his abundant love?
But as S. Bern. in Epiph. ser. 1.
Bernard says, Suscipiendo miseriam, ostendit misericordiam, In taking our
miserable condition, he does manifest his mercy and compassion. He was made
like unto us in all things, except sin, Heb. 4.15. And that indeed is justly
excepted; for, Assumpsit carnem, August. in Psalm. 142. Romans 8.3.
non iniquitatem, though he took the similitude of sinful flesh, yet he
took not the sin of the flesh. As Physicians, by correcting their
ingrediences, do take away their malignant quality, and make the medicine
healthful: So the Holy Ghost in the conception of Christ, did utterly take
away the aduentitious iniquity, and sanctify the natural infirmities, that no
evil might cleave unto them.

Christ was subject to infirmities both of body and soul: Not to every
particular infirmity, as agues, aches, gouts and the like: For such coming ex
mala temperie, vel intemperantia, either by distemper, or an ill temperature,
he was not subject to them. He bare the natural infirmities, not the
personal. As Chrysostom says, Quae communem naturam invaserant, those that
are incident to the common nature of mankind, those he took. He was hungry,
for so we read Matthew. 4. thirsty, John 19. sleepie, Matthew. 8. weary, John 4.
In his soul he was subject to fear, Math. 26. Mark 35.
anger, sorrow and the like; He was abased in his kindred, some of them being
sinners, adulterers, gentiles. Whereupon S. Chrysostom cries out, O
admirabilem natiuitatem, O admirable nativity.

At the time of his birth, he had a stable, in stead of a stately Palace; a
manger, in stead of a cradle; the company of beasts, in stead of humane and
Angelical attendance: So was he parvulus aetate, and paupertate, Augustine.
little both in age and estate. Luke 2.21.
In his infancy he was subject to that painful Sacrament of Circumcision, and
pursued from place to place by the hand of persecution. Math. 2.13.
His whole life was dedicated to pains and poverty. The open field was his
house, the ground his bed, broyled fish his diet; his iournies were laborious,
his attendants men of mean quality. Thus did he bear our infirmities in his
Incarnation.

2. Again, 2. In his compassion. Cyprian de Lapsis.
in his tender compassion he carried our sorrows. For, as S. Cyprian says,
Maeroris pondera participat, etc. He that has compassion on another, partakes
in the burden of his sorrow. So did the Apostle when he said, Who is weak, 2.
Cor. 11.23
and I am not weak? who is offended and I burn not? And thus did our Savior,
in commiserating both the corporal, and spiritual infirmities of men. Those
that wanted food, and were ready to faint, he pitied: those that were
oppressed with sickness, Mark 8.1.
or possessed with evil spirits he condoled: Math. 8.
When he saw people as sheep without a shepherd, He had compassion on them.
Math. 9.


He is that good Samaritan, that had compassion on the wounded man, Luke 10.
powered wine, and oil into his wounds, and bound them up: And therefore was he
sent, Luke 4.18.
that he should heal the broken hearted. If a man should see a Surgeon
making a plaster of his own blood, for the curing of his patient, he could
not but wonder at it. And is not our Saviors compassion admirable, Augustine.
Qui ex proprio, and pretioso sanguine, Who of his own precious blood made a
plaster to cure the wounds of our souls? Sueton. in vita Vespas.
Suetonius writes of that good Emperor Vespasian, Justice etiam supplicijs
illachrymauit, and ingemuit: He was so compassionate a Prince, that he was
wont to sigh and weep, even for them that were condignly punished. Diverse
stories do mention many famous in this kind. But what is all the compassion
of men, yea of Saints and Angels, but gutta pusilla, Chrysostom.
a little drop of water, to the maine Ocean of our Saviors compassion? He was
troubled in the spirit for treacherous Judas; John 13.21. Luke 19.4. Romans 5.8.
Luke 23.34.
wept for careless Jerusalem, shed his blood for his enemies, prayed for his
cruel persecutors.

Lastly, In his Passion.
as our Savior did bear our infirmities, and carry our sorrows in his
compassion, so especially in his Passion. What step did he take, what word did
he speak, what place came he to, where he left not Vestigia dolorum, like the
print of the nails in his hands and feet? When, in the garden of Gethsemane,
Math. 26.38.
he desired the Disciples to watch with him, he bare our infirmities, Mark.
14.34.
and when he complained, that his soul was heavy unto the death, he carried
our sorrows. When he prayed, Math. 26 39.
Father if it be possible let this cup pass, August. in Psalm. 100.
(Quid illa vox nisi sonus infirmitatis nostrae?) then he bare our infirmities,
and when he had need of an Angel to comfort him, Luke 22 43.
he carried our sorrows. When he was bound, and so led to Annas and Caiphas,
he bare our infirmities, and when he spoke to Judas in that mournful manner,
John 18.12.
betrayest thou the Son of man with a kiss, Luke 12.48.
he carried our sorrows. When the soldiers struck him with their reeds,
Math. 27.30.
and scourged him with their rods, he bare our infirmities, Mark 14.64.
and when he was charged with blasphemy, which his soul abhorred, he carried
our sorrows. When Pilate, showing him in that pitiful plight, said; John
19.5.
Ecce homo, Behold the man, he bare our infirmities, and when he heard that
fearful execration of the Jews, His blood be upon us, Math. 27.25.
and upon our children, he carried our sorrows. But if we follow him to Mount
Caluary, there shall we see this prophecy most lively accomplished. When his
hands and his feet were pierced with the nails, his side with the spear, and
his head with the crown of thorns; when the cross was his bed, the crown of
thorns his pillow, gall and vinegar his meat and drink, scoffs and railing
his music, he bare our infirmities; and when like a forlorn man, forsaken,
as it were, of God and man, he cried out, My God, my God, Math. 27.46.
why have thou forsaken me? he both bare our infirmities, and carried our
sorrows. Here, his passion, and compassion met together, when his head hanged
down to kiss us, His arms stretched out to embrace us, His blood gushed out
to wash us, His soul and body were offered up in sacrifice for us. Bernard. in
Cant. Sermon. 61.
Per vulnera patebant viscera, here through His side wounded with the spear,
you might behold His bowels of compassion wounded with love.

Application.
AN ingenuous reader cannot go over some rare and admirable story, but it will
work his affections, in one kind or another. Behold, the world never yielded
such a memorable and admirable story as this; It must needs be therefore our
stupendous dullness, if it do not affect us.

First, who can consider these things without admiration? Here is that, which
may make both Saints and Angels to wonder, that one, who in his humane nature
was descended of the blood royal of Judah, and in his divine, was Lord of
heaven and earth, should be thus dejected and abased, and for whom? Pro
vernaculo, imo pro vermiculo. Bernard. de quadrup. debito.
For us, who were the bond-slaues of sin and Satan, worms and no men. Psalm.
8.
What is man O Lord that thou art so mindful of him, or the Son of man that
thou should so regard him? Math. 8.21.
They that saw our Saviors miracles, wondered, saying, Math. 8.21.
Who is this, that both winds and sea obey him? But there was no such cause to
wonder at his actions of power: But rather, that he, Math. 28.18.
who had all power given him in heaven and earth, should be subject to
weakness; and that by his infirmities and sorrows, he should obtain a
glorious victory, it is (...), beyond admiration.

Again, this story must needs yield comfort to a Christian heart. For he bare
these infirmities, and carried these sorrows for our sake, for our good; as it
follows in the next verse; He was wounded for our transgressions, he was
bruised for our iniquities, the chastisement of our peace was upon him, and by
his stripes we are healed. Some write of the Pelican, that, her young ones being
dead, she bathes them in her blood, and so restores them to life. How true that
is, I know not: but sure I am, that as S. Hierome says, Christus suo vulnere
nostra vulnera curauit. Christ's wounds have cured ours. For so says the
Prophet, Verse 5.
By his stripes we are healed; his infirmities and weakness are our strength;
his sorrows our joy, our comfort. He that bare our infirmities, and carried
our sorrows, pitties us, when infirmities or sorrows do seize upon us.
Cyprian Epi. 9.
Luctatur in nobis, he wrestles for us, with us, in us. He takes to heart the
afflictions of his Church, and, as though he were wounded through her sides, he
cries out, Saul, Saul, Act. 9.4.
why persecutest thou me? He is sensible of our afflictions; Heb. 4.15.
For we have not a high Priest, which cannot he touched with feeling of our
infirmities; He might say, Non ignara mali miseris succurrere disco. For so
says the Apostle, In that Christ himself has suffered, being tempted, he is
able to succor them that are tempted, Hebr. 2.18.

Again, who can read this Story without indignation toward the Jews, the
cruel Actors in this doleful Tragedy? He shed tears of pity for them:
they like pitiless wretches shed his precious blood. He turned their water
into wine: they turned his wine into gall and vinegar. He had an Ignosce for
them: Forgive them Bern. Ser. 4. Hebd panos.
they a Crucisige for him. He gave health to their sick, life to their dead
they, in stead of requital, took away his life, and put him to death. May not
I say in the Prophets words, Ier. 2.12.
O ye heavens be astonished at this, be affraide and utterly confounded?

Again, who can read this Story of our Saviors passion, without compassion
toward him? Zach. 12.10.
They shall look upon him, whom they have pierced, and they shall lament for
him, says the Prophet. Can a man behold, or hear, that his honorable friend
has been buffited, scourged, and put to extreme tortures for his sake, and not
be touched with compassion? Luke 10.31.
Shall we be like the Priest, and the Leuite, that passed by the wounded man
without pity? Shall we say with those wretches, concerning the shedding of
our Saviors innocent blood, Mat. 27.4.
Quid ad nos, What is that to us? Then may he very justly take up that
expostulation, in the Lamentations of Jeremy, Lam. 1.12.
Have you no regard all you that pass by the way? Behold, was there ever
sorrow like my sorrow?

Thus far, even a mere natural man may be moved, and affected with this
Story; he may be stirred up to admiration, entertain consolation, be moved to
indignation, touched with compassion, and when he has done all this, he has
but viewed the cover of the Book. There are other effects, which the
meditation of this Story must work upon our affections, and in our actions.

1 This doleful Story must strike our hearts with compunction, without which
we cannot have sound consolation. When the tender hearted women of Jerusalem
bewailed and lamented our Savior, as he went to be crucified, he said unto
them, Daughters of Jerusalem, Luke 23.28.
weep not for me, but weep for your selves, and for your children. So should
we bewail our sinful condition, the cause of our Saviors infirmities and
sorrows. Luke 23.48.
With should, with those good people that saw his passion, Luke 18.13.
strike our breasts, and say with the Publican, God be merciful to me a
sinner. Chrysostom. de Passio. Hom. 5.
For In spinis illis eum peccata nostra pungebant, Our sins did pierce him in
the Crown of Thorns; and is it not reason, that our hearts should be pierced
with remorse for our sins?

It is not the weeping over a Crucifixe, that Christ requires at our hands, but
rather that we be crucified with him, as the Apostle speaks, Gal. 2.20. that
is, as he interprets himself, Gal. 5.24.
that we crucify the affections of the flesh, with the lusts thereof. Prote
Dei filius ingulatus est, Orig. Hom. 2. in Leuit.
and iterum te peccare delectat? The Son of God was wounded for thee, and can
thou yet delight in sin? He has borne a heavy burden of infirmities, and
sorrows, and shall we load him with new burdens? God forbid. For what were
this, but with the Soldier to strike him to the heart, and, as much as in us
lies, Heb. 6.
to crucify him again? The serious meditation of Christ's passion, if we be
not graceless, will be a restraint of sin.

2 Again, as the Story calls for our compunction, August. de Pastore. cap. 5.
so does it for our sanctification. Haec omnia ille pro te, tu nihil pro illo,
says Saint Augustine? Has Christ done, and endured all this for thee, and will thou do nothing for him? This were odious ingratitude. Take my yoke upon you,
says Christ, Mat. 11. And it is very reasonable, that as he has taken the
yoke and burden of punishment from our shoulders, so we should willingly carry
the burden of obedience; especially if we consider the difference of these
burdens. Ours laid upon him was very ponderous, yea so heavy it was, that it
made him sweat under it. His is light as it is in the 11 of Matthew, Mat. 11.33.
Yea, Psalm. 119.32.
so light, that a man, whose heart is sanctified, may run under it. And we
must take up Christ's burden willingly, and bear it cheerfully, as he did
ours. That we may say with him, Psalm. 40.7.
In the volume of thy book it is written of me, that I should do thy will, I
will do it with all my heart.

3. Again, if it please God to lay upon us the burden of infirmities,
sorrows, sickness, this may teach us patience. Barn. paru. ser. sermon. 11.
Prius bibit potionem, quam parauit suis. Christ has begun to us in the cup of
sorrows, and shall we think much to pledge him? His (...) should be our (...),
his patience in his passion must be our instruction. And indeed, when we are
oppressed with sorrow, smitten with pain, or cast upon the bed of our
sickness, what meditation comparable to this, to lighten the burden of
infirmities, and sorrows, and to sweeten the bitterness of pain and anguish?
Did my blessed Savior, who was holy and innocent, endure such intolerable
torments for my sake? And shall I repine, or be impatient, when it pleases God
to afflict me? What are my greatest afflictions to the pains of his passion?
The time will come when pains or sickness are upon us, that we shall need
this Cordial, it shall be our happiness to have it in a readiness.

To conclude, has Christ borne our infirmities, and carried our sorrows? This
must press upon us the Apostles exhortation, Gal. 6.2.
Bear ye one another burdens. For Christ is to us both speculum patiendi,
Bernard.
and compatiendi, a looking-glass and spectacle of Patience and compassion. If
we cannot cure, yet we should condole the miseries and infirmities of others.
1. Sam. 15.35.
Thus did Samuel bemoane the reiection of Saul. Thus did S. Paul bewail the
casting away of Romans 9.2.
the Jews. And when he saw some walking in the way of damnation, Phil. 3.18.
he could not speak of it without tears. Colos. 3.12.
So let us (as the Apostle exhorts) put on the bowels of compassion; that so we
may show our selves lively members of our merciful head Christ Jesus.

Thus, if the meditation of our Saviors bearing our infirmities and sorrows,
do work in us the grace of compunction, of sanctification, of obedience,
patience, and compassion; then have we read it, heard it effectually: and we
shall one day reap the fruit thereof most comfortably, when Christ shall
return, Non in infirmitate, sed in gloria and maiestate. Bern. de Aduent. Ser.
6.
not subject to infirmities and sorrows, but clothed with majesty and glory,
and shall give us possession of that blessed habitation, where all tears shall
be wiped from our eyes, Revel. 21.4.
and we in stead of sorrow and infirmity, shall enjoy eternal joy and
felicity. Which the Lord for his mercies sake, and for our Saviors sake grant
us; to whom with the Holy Ghost, all honor and glory, majesty and dominion, be
rendered and ascribed for evermore. Amen.

A CHECK TO CVRIOSITY; AND The safest Service. TWO SERMONS preached at
WHITEHALL, the one the 5. of May, the other the 12. 1622. BY JOHN DENISON
Doctor of Divinity, and one of his Majesty's Chaplains.

LONDON, Printed by JOHN LEGATT, and are to be sold by John Budge, at the sign
of the Green Dragon in Paul's Churchyard. 1624.

A CHECK TO CVRIOSITY.
JOHN. 21.22. If I will that he tarry till I come, what is that to thee? follow
thou me.


THere was extraordinary intercourse of love and familiarity between Peter, a
pillar of the Church, and John the beloved Disciple.

By him, Peter enquired concerning the Traitor. By his means he got into the
high Priests Hall. With him, he ran to the Sepulcher. And by him he knew Christ
at the sea of Tiberias.

Therefore when our Savior had told Peter by an Allegory, that he should be
subject to martyrdom; Peter demanded of our Savior what John should do? To
whom our Savior answered in these words that I have read, If I will that he
tarry till I come, etc.

In which I observe Christ's Reprehension, and his Iniunction. Corrigit, and
dirigit.


His Reprehension in these words, If I will that he tarry till I come, what is
that to thee?

His Iniunction in these, Follow thou me.

In the Reprehension I note four particulars;

1. The soueraignety of Christ's will, opposed to Peter's curiosity, If I will.

2. Christ's will applied to an object, John's tarrying, If I will that he tarry.

3. John's tarrying limited with a circumstance of time; Till I come.

4. Peter's quid, checked with another quid, what is that to thee?

Of these points briefly, and in order.

If I will.
1. THe vulgar Latin has sic volo, so I will, but I may truly say, that that
translation is sick. And I cannot but wonder at the Rhemists, who tie
themselves so strictly to the same, that they swallow even the gross errors of
ignorant scribes. For they translate it, so I will. But the learned Papists in
translating these words, do generally correct and censure the vulgar Latin.
Tollet gives two reasons why it should be si, not sic, that is, it is (...),
if, in the Greek. And he might with Sa (another Jesuit) have said it is so
likewise in the Syriacke. Notat. in Bibl.


2. If our Savior had said sic, so I will have him remain, the question had
been answered, and no further doubt had remained concerning his words. Mald.
Omnes fere latinos cedices contaminauit. And adds, It is so in all Greek
Copies, yea, that famous one in the Vatican. Iansen. Concor. cap. 148.
Maldonat says, That reading has corrupted almost all Latin books. And
Arboreus, a Doctor of Paris, speaks yet more freely, The vulgar (says he) is
harsh, uncouth, unsavory. Yea, the case is so clear, that Iansenius says,
He is peevish that will contend for the vulgar translation. Only Michael the
Master of the Popes Palace, will have it to be sic, so, because it is so in the
Missall corrected by Pius Quintus. But the reason is weak: for Sixtus Quintus,
albeit he took as great pains in correcting the vulgar Latin, For, as I
remember, he has left in his edition euertit domum, for euerrit. Luke 15.8.
as Pius did in correcting the Missall, has left some places of the house to
be swept by others. Caietan (with whom Bellarmine also agrees) says
reasonably, Bellarm. de verbo Dei lib. 2. cap. 11.
The Text should not be changed for the ancient errors of ignorant writers.

But if any will contend for this ancient vulgar error, let him abound in his
own sense. We will proceed to the Sovereignty of Christ's will. If I will.

The sovereignty of Christ's will.
NOw Christ is to be considered as God and man. As man, John 5.30.
he came not to seek his own will, but the will of the Father, who sent him.
But as God, he has a divine will, and the same is either secret or revealed.
His secret will is his eternal purpose and decree concerning all things.

This his secret will is absolute, without dependence: he may will or nill
whatsoever pleases him. It is omnipotent without resistance; for who has
resisted his will? Romans 9.19.
it is free without coaction; Romans 9.15.
For he will have mercy on whom he will have mercy. It is universal without
limitation; For he bears rule, Dan. 4.32. In maximis, minimis, and
contingentibus. Math. 10 29.
not only in the army of heaven, and the inhabitants of the earth, but so, that
a sparrow cannot fall on the ground without his will. It is exact without
errors, as being a most perfect rule of righteousness. It cannot properly be
said, he wills it because it is good: but rather, it is good because he wills it.
In a word, it is constant without altering, neither men, nor angels, nor devils
(notwithstanding the deuillish positions of Vorstius) can change it. They may
sooner remove the earth from her center, or stay the motion of the heavens,
Isai. 46.10.
then alter it. My Counsel shall stand, says the Lord.

Now the revealed will of Christ is that perfect rule of righteousness
contained in the holy Scriptures. And to both these we must submit our selves,
but differently; to the one pattendo, in being content with that which God
does: to the other faciendo, in doing what he commands. For these two wills, are
like two streams rising out of one head, the one running above, the other
under the ground, and both falling into the Ocean of Gods glory.

The secret will, we must not be too busy with, as some are in their desperate
disputes about Predestination. Deuteronomy. 29.29. Hieron. lib. 2. aduers. Pelag
For Secret things belong to the Lord. Voluntas Dei non discutienda, sed
patienda; This will of God is not to be searched, but to be suffered, says S.
Hierome. And this was Peter's fault: He was too inquisitiue after that which was
locked up in our Saviors breast, and was therefore justly checked. Yet even to
this will we must subscribe in suffering patiently, and entertaining thankfully
whatsoever it pleases the Lord to do. As Ely, when he had heard that doleful
doom denounced by God against his house, 1. Sam. 3.18.
said, It is the Lord, let him do what seems him good. Thus King David, when
he went forth against Absolon, (not knowing what might be the issue of that
war,) set up his rest. 2. Sam. 15.25.
If I shall find favor in the eyes of the Lord, he will bring me again and
show me both the Arc and the Tabernacle thereof: But if he thus say, I have
no delight in thee, Behold here am I, let him do to me as seems good in his
eyes. And our blessed Savior, when he was in the greatest agony that ever
seized on the soul of man, and drank the bitterest cup that ever was
tasted, submitted himself in this manner: O Father, Math. 26.42.
If this cup cannot pass, except I drink it, thy will be done.

Again, as we must submit our selves to the secret will of Christ in suffering
what he inflicts; so must we to the revealed, in doing what he commands. And as
it shall be our wisdom to know this revealed will of God (according to that
in the 5. to the Ephesians: Ephesians. 5.17.
Be not unwise, but understand what the will of the Lord is) so shall it be
our happiness to do it, as our Savior says in the 13. of John. Ioh. 13.17.
If you know these things, blessed are you if you do them.

This revealed will is called the voice of God, 2. Sam. 15.22. And that very
fitly: For as the echo resounds to the vnice, so must we, both in our
affections and actions, be answerable to the will of God. In our affections,
Psalm. 27.8.
as when the Lord said to David: Seek my face, David's heart answered like an
echo, Lord I will seek thy face. In our actions like Noah, Genesis 6.22.
Who did according to all that God commanded him, even so did he. And this we
shall the more readily do, if we consider the corrupt current of our own
wills, and the absolute perfection of Almighty Gods.

That is a most arrogant Romish Extrauagant, which yields that sovereignty to
the Pope, that belongs only to God, In his quae vellent, ijs esse pro lege
voluntatem. Though the Popes be ignorant, or dissolute, and stand for a law.
And their actions, though never so absurd or impious, are not subject to
control, that a man should say, Domine cur hoc facis, Sir why do you thus?
But avaunt to this Luciferian arrogancy; it is the will of God to which we
must thus necessarily, and absolutely subscribe. And the more prompt our
obedience, the more do we resemble the holy Angels. For with the blessed
Angels, In caelesti Angelorum curia Dei voluntas Lex est. August de Ciuitat.
Dei. z. 19. Psalm. 103.20.
Gods will is a law in the Court of heaven, as S. Austin says. And their
elogium is in the 103. Psalm; Ye Angels that do his commandment, in obeying
the voice of his word. Yea herein we shall imitate our blessed Savior, who in
his passion prayed; Not as I will, Math. 26.39.
but as thou will: Ioh. 4.34.
And in his actions accounted it his meat and drink to do the will of his
Father. And if we thus join with our blessed Savior and his holy Angels in
will and affection, we shall hereafter be joined with them in a blessed
habitation; according to that of our Savior, in the 7. of Matthew. Math. 7.21.
He shall enter into the kingdom of heaven, that does the will of my Father
which is in heaven.

Christ's will applied to an object.
2. IF I will that he tarry. This tarying has not reference to John's tarying
in the place where he was, but his remaining in the state of life which he
enjoyed; as the same phrase is elsewhere used. (...). 1. Cor. 15.6. Whereof
many remain.
Peter understood by our Saviors words that he must die by the hand of
violence, and he would know whether the thread of John's life should be cut off
in that manner. But our Savior intimates the contrary, saying, if I will that
he tarry; that is, If I will that he remain alive. In which manner of speech
he sets forth the vanity of this present life, as being transitory, and only a
temporary tarrying. And so does Job speak of it. Job. 14.1.
Man that is borne of a woman is of short continuance, he shootes up like a
flower, and is cut down, he vanishes like a shadow, and continues not. And
if there be any continuing, it is limited with a Donec.

We are all tenants at will. And this world is to us but diuerticulum, an Inn
to host at, not a settled habitation to rest at: as even the heathen have
called it. Heb. 13.14.
Hic non habemus permanentem ciuitatem: Here we have no abiding City. This
did king David acknowledge ingenuously, 1 Chronicles. 29.15.
in the height of his honor and happiness. We are strangers (says he) and
soiourners, our days are as a shadow, there is no abiding. Some tarry here but
a while, like David's infant, 2 Samuel 12.18.
that dyed the seventh day; some not so long. Nec dum introitus, iam exitus,
as S. Hierome says; Pliny.
they live not to enjoy the light whilst the snuff of a candle makes an
abortiue birth. Some live longer, like the Shunamites child. 2 Reg. 4.
Some till they have attained to their full strength, Job 21.23.
and their bones are full of marrow, 2 Samuel 19.
Some even to a decrepit estate, like old Barzillai. Yet he that tarryeth
longest (of which there are fewest) has but a time of tarrying. Though Comets
differ from one another in brightness, and some shine longer then others, yet
at last they all vanish: So, albeit in the firmament of this present world,
some attain to higher degrees of honor, and some live longer then others, yet
there is a vanishing of both. The fashion of this world passes away, 1. Cor.
7.31.
says the Apostle. Therefore when Constantius the Emperor asked Hormisda the
famous Architect, what he thought of Rome, it being such a goodly City, he
returned him little more then this answer: Platina in vita Faelicis. 2.
Didici quoque ibi homines mori, This I have observed, that men die there as
well as in other places.

Every sublunarie creature groans under the bondage of corruption, Rom 8.22.
and has some thing in it, that works the decay of it. The Iron has rust, the
tree the worm, the ca^ker; and so has man his depraved humors, besides those
external accidents which abreuiate his days. This life is a continual
consumption. Aul. Gell. Noct. Attic. 11.2.
Therefore Marcus Cato was wont to compare a man to Iron, Si exerceas
conteritur, If you use it, you wast it: if not, yet the rust consumes it. And I
may say with that devout Father, Dum vobis hodie loquor, Even this day whilst
I am speaking to you, the Lamp of my life wastes, and whether I shall tarry
to finish what I have prepared I know not. Oh how great is the folly of these,
who would build them everlasting habitations in this vale of misery; Psalm.
49.11.
And think their houses shall continue for ever, and from generation to
generation? Behold the Psalmists censure: Bern. de consider. ad Eugen. lib. 2.
This their way utters their foolishness. Per ina nem sollicitudinem in
aliena migrant saecula, non profutura, imo nec futura. Their care extendes to
other ages, which shall neither yield benefit, no, nor being. The years they
reckon of, The great year. The great folly. Zanch. Luke 12.19.
are like the Philosophers Annus maximus, which one very justly calls Maximam
stultitiam. As that rich man, Luke 12. did, who said to himself, Soul thou
have goods in store for many years, and therefore received that just answer by
the celestial Oracle, Thou fool, this night shall they take away thy Soul.

Men's hope of long life is Fluxa and falsa, Aug. in Ps. 53.
false and floting, as S. Augustine said. Ps. 90.12.
Therefore Moses prayed, Teach us oh Lord to number our days, that we may
apply our hearts unto wisdom. And how should we number them? Not like that
foolish Arithmetician, the rich man, by many years; (...) Job 14.1.
but as Job does (according to the words in the Original) by a few short
days. Why should any one make reckoning of this tarying; Basil. Hexam. Hom. 5.
when as Vna nox, vna febris, vna pleuritis, One nights sickness, one poor
fever, or pleurisy may end this life? Eccl. 1.4.
One generation passes, and another succeeds, as Solomon faith. How many
carcases of demolished Cities may we see, wherein multitudes of people
inhabited? How many worlds of people, having tarried here for a while, are swept
away by death, like the gathering Host of Dan? What greater folly therefore,
then to be prodigal in measuring that time which is not in our disposing? How
much better shall we do? How much happier shall we be, if we be careful to
employ our pittance fruitfully, to the glory of God, and the furtherance of
our happy account in the day of the Lord?

The Heathen Philosopher very worthily taxed this folly, Seneca Epi. 22.
that Most men desire to live long, few have care to live well; Cum omnibus
contingat been viuere, nulli diu; When it is in every man's power to live well,
but in no man's to live long. Vt aliquid efficiat quod vita dignum sit. Lactan.
de Opif. Dei cap. 4.
A good man may desire to live long, but it must be, that he may do good. For
therefore indeed (says Chrysostom) Deus facit viuere vt illi viuamus, Our
lives are given us of God, that they should be spent in his service, and to his
glory: Otherwise our Morari, our tarying, is but a Morari with a long syllable
as Nero spoke in Suetonius, Suet in Neron. cap. 33.
Our days are spent foolishly, and shall end miserably. To conclude this
point; Forasmuch as here is no long tarying, why should we dote upon this
transitory life? Is here no abiding City? Let us look for one to come, 2.
Cor. 5.1.
Heb. 13. Shall these earthly tabernacles of ours be destroyed? Let us desire
that building, which is eternal in the Heavens. Will the time come that all
earthly Kingdoms shall have their periods, and Christ himself deliver up his
Kingdom to the Father? 1. Cor. 15.24.
Let us then aspire to that heavenly Kingdom, that can never be shaken. Heb.
12.28.
Here indeed is (...), a tarying, but it is with a donec, for a short time; but
there are (...), constant mansions, as our Savior speaks, Luke 16.9. 1. These.
4.17.
Ioh. 14.1. Yea (...), everlasting habitations. There (...), we shall ever be
with the Lord; in whose presence is the fullness of joy, Psalm. 16.
and at whose right hand are pleasures for evermore. And (that I may end this
point with S. De ciuitate Dei lib. 22. cap. 30.
Augustins words) Quis alius noster est finis, nisi peruenire ad regnum, cuius
nullus est finis? To what end do we live, but, that after our tarying here, we
may come to that Kingdom that shall never end?

John's tarying limited.
3. TIll I come. I may say for the meaning of these words, Quot homines tot
sententiae, So many men, so many several opinions. Some by this donec, till I
come, understand Christ's coming at the end of the world. And that has been
the ground of a vulgar, but senseless error; Namely, that John the Evangelist
is yet alive, Beda de te^pore.
whereas he dyed in peace, the 98 year of his life at Ephesus. Yea some there
have been, who, under the color of this exposition, have taken upon them the
person of S. John; As that late Impostor of France did, Beza refert Annot. in
Ioh. 21.
and was therefore justly burned at Tolouse. Some understand it of Christ's
coming to John, by summoning him to his death; which if it be meant of death
in general, without any difference between the manner and means of such
death, must needs be a groundless construction. For so Christ came to all his
Disciples, whereas this coming implies something more then ordinary. Diverse
other conceits there are concerning this coming of Christ, which are not
worthy the repeating, much less the refuting. I may say of this question,
August. in Ioh. trac. 46.
as S. Augustine speaks upon the like; I will in this deep question deliver
what to me seems right, reserving to every one what likes him best.

Now for clearing of this place other Scriptures will yield us light. They are
like the Cherubims, Exodus 25.20.
that looked one on another, Exodus 25. And those that had their wings joined
one in another, Ezech. 1. Ezech. 1.9.
They are like so many sweet Instruments according in one note of truth.

S. Bernard. de Aduent. ser. 3.
Bernard has a distinction of a threefold coming of Christ mentioned in the
Scriptures; The first, ad homines, to men, in his incarnation; The second, in
homines, into men, at their conversion; The third, contra homines, against men,
at the worlds dissolution. The first of these was in infirmity, the second in
power and spirit, the third shall be in majesty and glory. Now two of these
are his coming in person, that is at his Incarnation, and the day of Judgment;
the third is his coming in power, that is his powerful work in the
promulgation of the Gospel, and the conversion of sinners; And of this his
third coming our Savior speaks to Peter.

That place in the sixteenth of Saint Matthew, is, Mat. 16.28.
in my opinion a lively parallel to this. Verily, there are some standing
here, which shall not taste of death, till they have seen the Son of Man come
in his Kingdom. For what is this, he shall tarry, but that, he shall not taste
of death? What is this Donec, till I come, but that coming of the Son of Man
in his Kingdom? And what is that Kingdom, but the powerful effects of the
Gospel? as it is in the same Evangelist, Mat. 10.7. and 12.28.
where our Savior says The Kingdom of God is come to you: As the Apostle
Peter also explaines it, 2 Pet. 1.16.
We opened to you the power and coming (that is the powerful coming) of our
Lord Jesus Christ. True it is, that then Christ came powerfully in his Doctrine
and Miracles; But afterward more powerfully, and plentifully in the Ministry
of the Apostles, as will be evident, if we consider these three circumstances

1. The first is the effusion of gifts poured out upon the Apostles at the
feast of Pentecost. Act. 2.33. (...). Luke 24.49. (...). 2. Judge. 6.34. (...)
Romans 15.19.
For then they were endued with power from on high. Even clothed with the
Spirit of power, as it is said of Gideon in the sixth of the Judges. They had
the power of signs and wonders. They had that powerful Apostolical rod,
wherewith Saint Peter struck Ananias the dissembler, Acts 5.5. Act. 13.11.
and Paul Elymas the sorcerer.

2. The ample promulgation of the Gospel. For as Noes sons dispersed
themselves for the peopling of a new world; so did the Apostles for the
planting of a new word. Eusebius writes, Eusebius. hist. Eccles. 2.3.
that about the end of Tyberius reign, the Gospel through Gods gracious
blessing, Orbi vniuerso veluti solaris quidam radius illuxit, Did shine like a
bright Sun-beame to all the world. Saint Paul caused the Gospel to sound out
from Jerusalem to Illyricum. Romans 15.18.
Chrysostom.
And if one Apostle did so much in one part of the world, what may we think of
all the rest? Surely that which we read in the tenth of the Romans, Romans
10.18.
Their sound went forth to all the earth, and their words to the end of the
world, and that prophetical promise was now fulfilled; Math. 10.23.
Ye shall not go over all the Cities of Israel, till the Son of man be come.

3. The effectual and happy conversion of the world, by that ministry of the
Apostles, was very wonderful. Peter's draught was great, John 21.11.
when he took 153. fishes; But that greater, when, being made a fisher of men,
Acts 2.41.
He in one day converted 3000. sonles. Now the Curtains of the Church were
spread out, and her tents enlarged exceedingly. So that whereas she was before
like Gideons fleece, she became now like Gideons floor, enlarged and watered
abundantly with the dew of the Gospel. Eusebius. quo supra.
Insomuch that as Eusebius writes, many Cities and Villages, were veluti
refertae frugum areae, as it were threshing floores full of corn. Now, if the
Gospel flourished, and the Church increased thus in the days of Tiberius, how
much more in the days of Traian, Baron. tom. 1. ad annum 69. nu. 34.
which was 60. years after, All which Saint John tarryed to see? Thus in
respect of the powerful gifts of the spirit, the ample promulgation of the
Gospel, and the wonderful conversion of the world, we may well say that Christ
Jesus then came, and came in his kingdom, his scepter being so gloriously
advanced.

But it concerns us much, by way of application, to consider more thoroughly
of this coming in homines, into men.

The coming of our blessed Savior at the time of his birth, was apparent.
For, John 1.14.
The word was made flesh, and dwelt among us, ( and men saw the glory thereof,
as the glory of the only begotten Son of the Father) full of grace and truth.
And such will his coming to judgment be: For he will come in flaming fire, 2 Thessalonians. 1.8.
and render vengeance to the ignorant, and disobedient.

Those two commings of Christ are manifest, and of them men are sensible; But
this middle coming is Ocultus and spiritualis, Bernard de Aduent. Ser. 3.
Secret and spiritual, and few are truly apprehensiue of it. Yet they only
shall have comfort of his coming in infirmity, and at his coming in glory,
who have experience of his coming in grace. Romans 8.9.
For if any man has not the Spirit of Christ, the same is none of his. Bernard
ibid.
Aduentus iste medius est via per quam veniatur ad vltimum: This middle coming
is the way by the which we come happily to the last.

Behold (says Christ) I stand at the door, Revel. 3.20.
and knock. He stands at the door of men's hearts, and knockes with two
especial hammers, the Ministry of the word, and the motions of his blessed
spirit, but is often neglected, repelled. As it is said of his coming in person,
Ioh. 1.11.
He came amongst his own, but his own received him not: so is it true of his
coming in power, that he comes to many by outward means, to whom he comes
not by effectual grace. Therefore it is necessary to examine how Christ is come
to us. Yea every one should, in this case, be Curiosus explorator, Bernard in
Cant. Sermon. 74.
A curious and diligent examiner (as Saint Bernard speaks.) According to that
of the Apostle, Brooue your selves, 2. Cor. 13.5.
examine your selves, know you not that Christ is in you, except you be
reprobates? Every one will acknowledge, Acts 17.28.
that in him we live, and move, and have our being: But then only are we
happy, when we can say, Gal. 2.20.
that Christ lives in us. Therefore, as Saint Paul prays, Ephesians. 3.20.
that he may know the virtue of Christ's resurrection; so we should pray, that
we may know the power of this his coming.

But Vnde adesse norim? Bernard. quo supra.
says S. Bernard, How shall I know that he is come? And surely this is a
worthy, and weighty question. For resolution whereof, we are to take notice,
that where Christ comes, he comes as a Conqueror. There will be fuga vitiorum,
Sin will be put to flight: Bernard. Potentia peccati imminuta, etc. Chrysostom.
Orat. 8. Reu. 1.16. Heb. 4.12.
At least the strength of sin will be abated, and the power of Satan quelled.
For Christ has his two edged sword, which is lively and mighty in operation,
and those weapons, that can cast down the strongest holds. Where he comes in
spirit, and power, Satan's forts and bariquadoes must needs be battered. Can
Dagon stand before the Arc? or Belial before Christ? Those therefore that
find in themselves the power of sin abated, may conclude with comfort, that
Christ is come. And contrarily, where the forts of Satan stand vnbattered, and
the force of sin remains, Christ is not come effectually.

Again, where Christ comes powerfully as a Conqueror, he makes his residence
graciously as a King, Vt nos ei subijciamur, That we, Nazianz de fill. Orat. 5.
as good subjects, may serve and obey him. He will not suffer sin to reign,
where he has his residence. So says the Apostle, Romans 6.14.
Sin shall not have dominion over you, for you are not under the law, but
under grace. We cannot be totally free from sin, whilst we live in this vale
of misery; but, if Christ be in us, he will suppress the power of it. For, can
a rebel stand before the face of a potent Prince? Where Christ reigns as
King, his subjects will be ready to be ruled by his scepter, and they stand in
awe of his sword of Justice. A good subject will take heed to the mouth of the
King. Eccles. 8.2.
And can he be a good subject to Christ, the King of Kings, which will not be
guided by his word? Those therefore that say in their hearts, Let us break
their bonds asunder, Psalm 2.3.
and cast away their cords from us, do show themselves, not subjects, but
rebels: They have not yet entertained Christ; and their doom is fearful, as
it is pronounced, Luke 19. Luke 19.27.
Those mine enemies, which would not that I should reign over them, bring
them, and slay them before my face. We pray daily, Thy kingdom come, Augustine
Hom. 42.
Et veniet si volumus: It will come, if we our selves be willing; If we be
contented to be ruled by the spirit of Christ, directed by his word, and tender
unto him the homage of cheerful obedience, then is this King of glory come
graciously to us, Luke 17.21.
and the kingdom of God is within us.

Again, where Christ comes effectually, he comes as a gracious benefactor, He
comes not empty handed. Bern. in Cant. sermon. 74. August. de Trinit. and unit.
cap. 11.
Quid est venire, nisi gratiam suam nobis confer? What is this coming of
Christ to us, but the conferring of his grace? 1 Cor. 15.10.
And his grace in us will not be in vain, but will stir us up to the
practice of all holy duties. Si Christus in cord sit, Orig in Romans 14.
nobis diem facit, If Christ be entertained into our hearts, he, Mal. 42.
being Sol iustitiae, the Sun of righteousness, will expel the darkness of
error, and cause the light of knowledge to shine into our souls. For, Luke
1.78.
he came to give light to them that sit in darkness, and to guide our feet
into the way of peace. He is the Prince of peace, Romans 5.1.
and through him we have peace with God. If our souls be wounded with
remorse, he brings his cordials to comfort us, and his suppling balmes to cure
us. Hieron. in Eccles. 7.
He is magister medicorum, the great Physician, and pitiful Chyrurgion. His
cures are strange, he heales the broken hearted: And how? Orig. in Leuit. hom.
8.
Non herbarum succis, sed verborum Sacramentis, he cures them by speaking
peace to their souls. That which was lost by Adam, is restored by him; and
that image which was defaced, is renewed by him. Bern. in Cant. sermon 74.
Expergefacit dormientem animam, etc.
S. Bernard reckons up a large Catalogue of comforts, and benefits, that we
receive by the coming of this gracious benefactor; He awakens the drousie
soul, and mollifies the stony heart; he plucks up vice, and plants virtue;
he casts down the walls of iniquity, and builds us up in grace; he waters that
which is thirsty, enlightens that which is dark, opens that which is locked
up, and kindles that which is cold.

Now, to conclude this point: has Christ enlightened us with saving knowledge,
spoken peace to our souls, awaked us from drousie security, mollified our
hearts, planted grace in our souls, changed our affections, made us zealous of
his glory? then may we say confidently, and comfortably, with that blessed
Martyr, He is come, he is come. And indeed no comfort on earth like unto this,
Beatus apud quem mansionem facis Domine Jesus, O Lord Jesus, (says S. Bern. de
Aduent. sermon. 3.
Bernard) happy is the man with whom thou take up thy dwelling. Let us
therefore be careful, not only to entertain, Nobilem hospitem Bern. It is
said they constrained him. Luke 24.29. John 14.23.
but also to retain this noble guest. Let us make the Disciples importunate
suite to him, in Luke 24. Mane nobiscum, abide with us. If any man love me, he
will keep my word, and my Father will love him, and we will come unto him,
and dwell with him. They are the words of our Savior; Let us therefore do
what he requires, and he will assuredly perform what he promises. Let us love
him, serve him, and keep his commandments cheerfully, and constantly, then
will he constantly take up his habitation with us in this life, and we shall
eternally possess those everlasting habitations with him in the life to come.
And so I come to Peter's check, Quid ad te? What is that to thee?

What is that to thee?
4. ANd yet, to speak ingenuously, I come not very willingly to it. I utterly
dislike that prying and censorious humor of them, who take delight to spy out
the least mote in the eye of others, Math. 7.3.
and care not what aspersions they cast upon them. Such are the brood of Cham.
I had rather with Sem and Iapheth, cover the nakedness of any servant of God
with the mantle of charity. Yet, Romans 15.4.
forasmuch as whatsoever was written before time, was written for our learning;
And the frailties of holy men are recorded in Scripture, Chrysostom.
Vt casus maiorum sit tremor minorum, that the slips of men eminent in grace,
may make us, who are but underlings, to look warily to our own steps: It
cannot be unlawful, or unprofitable, to view them as Sea-markes, for our safer
sailing in the Ocean of this dangerous world.

And such is this frailty of Peter, whom not only diverse ancient Fathers, but
many learned Papists also (whose uttermost endeavors have not been wanting to
advance the Roman See) have thus censured. Only Cardinal Tollet, In Locum.
of all that I remember, does absolutely deny, that Peter's was a curious
question. To whom I may oppose two Cardinals, no less learned, and as much
devoted to Peter and the Sea of Rome as himself, namely Caiet. and Baron.
Caietan. in Ioh. 21. Baron. Tom. 1. ad an. 34.
And Tollets reason is very weak to maintain his paradox, We should not
easily believe (says he) that Peter being lately and highly advanced by
Christ, should so soon fall into curiosity. To him S. Aug. de verb. dom. sermon.
13.
Augustine shall answer for me, upon the like frailty of Peter's, Petrus paulo
ante beatus, postea Satanus, Peter, who a little before, for his worthy
confession, was called by our Savior blessed, was afterward for his
inconsiderate disswasion termed Satan. Yea says S. Ibidem.
Austin, In momento vno, infra pauca verba, almost in a moment, within a few
words. And I think it safer that Peter be censured for curiosity, then our
Savior for an unjust check; In hoc locum.
For, Christi responsio est cum obiurgatiuncula, Christ's answer is with a
check, says Salmeron.

Indeed Bellarmine dares not take upon him to justify, but does only
endeavor to qualify this slip of Peter's, Bellar. de Romans Pontif. 1.28.
saying, Ista si curiositas dicenda, venia dignissima est. If you call this
curiosity, it is very pardonable, in regard of Peter's love to John. To whom I
do willingly condescend; yet this only frees Peter, In part, not altogether.
a tanto, not a toto. Now, curiosity in minutissimis, even in the smallest
matters is to be restrained, and avoided, as S. August. confess. 10.35.
Augustine shows in his Confessions. And so our Saviors quid comes in here to
check Peter's quid, like his si, to check the man's si in the ninth of Mark,
If thou can do any thing, says the father of the possessed Child; Mark
9.22.23
If thou can believe, says Christ. For so, when Peter asks, Hic autem quid?
What shall John do? Christ answers, Quid ad te? What is that to thee? And the
Syriacke doubles the check with an emphesis, Ad te, quid ad te? What is that
to thee, to thee?

This curiosity, as it was the sin of our first Parents; so is descended to
all their posterity. Hence it is, that the boasting Pharisee insults over
others so disdainfully, Luke 18.11.
I am not as other men, extortioners, unjust, adulterers, nor even as this
Publican. But, Quid ad illum? What has he to do with that? Romans 14.4.
Who art thou that iudgest another man's servant? Hence it is that there are so
many reformers of our Church, Etiam opifices quorum res fidesqque in manibus
sitae sunt, Even mere Handicrafts men, whose credit, Salust. de bello Iugurth.
wealth (and wit) lies in their hands (as Salust speaks of the Roman factious
Plebeians) are very busy this way. They think they see the Arc shake; and
with Vzza, 2 Samuel 6.6.
they will take upon them to stay it: but quid ad eos, (if it were so) what
have they to do with that? Who required this at their hands? Esa. 1.12.
Yea, from this corrupt humor it comes, that there is scarce so mean a
Mechanicke, or silly rusticke, but is ready to censure the Church, the King,
the State; but Quid ad eos? What have they to do with matters and mysteries of
State? Ne suitor vltra crepidam, it becomes them well to keep themselves within
their own lasts and lists; according to the Apostles advise, 1. These. 4.11.
Let us study to be quiet, and to meddle with our own business. It may be
objected that S. Paul exhorts us to consider other men's business. And it is
true; Phil. 2.4.
But there is sollicitudo charitatis, and curiositatis, A care and
consideration of charity, and the like of curiosity; The one is to counsel,
comfort, and relieve; the other only to pry, to know, to censure. The one has
the warrant of a calling, the other arises forth of a pragmaticall disposition,
and is the trade of busibodies: that the Apostle commends; this he condemns.

But it is no marvel that curiosity is busy with men's affairs, when it
fears not to intrude it self into Gods secrets. One is busily searching, when
the day of Judgment shall be? another questions why the world was made no
sooner? another what God did before he made the world? Aug. confess. lib. 11.
cap. 12.
To whom (as S. Augustine says) it might well be answered, Alta scrutantibus
gehennam parauit, He was making hell for such curious inquisitors.

Wheresoever our Savior meets with this vice, it never goes without a check.
When the Disciples demanded of him, Act. 1.6, 7.
Lord will thou at this time restore the Kingdom to Israel? He took them up
thus, It is not for you to know the times or the seasons, which the Father has
put in his own power. Yea when his Mother said to him at the marriage in Cana
in Galile, Ioh. 2.3, 4.
They have no wine; He answered her, Woman what have I to do with thee? mine
hour is not yet come. Neque Ambrosius veritus est dicere, Christem arguisse
matrem, And S. Ambrose was not afraid to say that Christ reproved his mother,
says Iansenius.

When a busy fellow was very inquisitiue concerning the gods, Euctid answered
him well, Caeter a nescio, illud scio quod odere curioses, Other things I know
not, but well I know that they hate curious questionistes.

And indeed curiosity does justly deserve a check. It is both odious and
dangerous. Solomon says, Prou. 25.1.
It is the Glory of God to conceal a secret. And is it not then inglorious to
him when men shall busily and curiosly pry into that which he has concealed?
Romans 11.34.
Who has known the mind of the Lord? or who has been his councellor? says
the Apostle. Happy are we if we may be of his Court, though we be none of his
Council. Genesis 3.5.
It was a just punishment upon our first Parents that they were infatuated, for
desiring to match God in knowledge. And it is very just that those, who in
sacred things will sore beyond their pitch, have the eyes of their
understanding dazzled, and when they think to be most wise, turn fools, like
them in the first to the Romans. Romans 1.22.
The men of Bethshemesh smarted very worthily for prying into the Arc. 1.
Sam. 6.19.
And Pompey for rushing into the Sanctum sanctorum. Munst. cosmog. descrip.
Italiae.
And did not Pliny lose his life by his curious searching after Mount Vesevus?
Gods judgments (says David) are like a great deep; Psalm. 36.6.
and who is able to diue into the bottom of them? Not the blessed Apostle,
Romans 11.33.
who rather adores, admires then seeks to comprehend them. O altitudo, O the
deepenesse of the riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of God! How
unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past finding out!

That is an evil and a usual fruit of curiosity, which S. Augustine speaks
of, Curiositas inuenit haeresim, Curiosity has been the author of heresy.
And what else has incombred the Church with Arminius quiddities, and Vorslius
horrible blasphemies, but proud curiosity? And what else has case diverse
(from their dislike of our Church government) into those lamentable gulfes of
Brownisme, Anabaptisme, Arianisme? Curiosity can find no center to rest on,
but leads men into endless labyrinthes. It is a drunken humor, and
intoxicates exceedingly. Therefore the Apostle exhorts men to understand
according to sobriety. Romans 12.3.
How have the Schoolmen, and some others pusled themselves about that
question, why Christ should love John more then the other Disciples? I am not
ignorant that diverse probable reasons may be rendered. But it is, in my
judgment, a mere curious question, and deserves a quid ad te? For, shall the
servant call his master, or the subject his sovereign to account? Must Christ
give a reason to silly sinful men of his affections and actions? This is
temeraria scientia, as S. Rash and presumptious knowledge. Aug. de verb. Apl.
Ser. 20. Exodus 19.12.
Austine calls it. It shall be our wisdom, that we be content to be ignorant,
where the Scripture is silent. As the Lord set marks and bounds at Mount
Sinai; so has he for the searching of his sacred and secret councels. That is
a worthy question of Lactantius, Lact. institut. lib. 2. cap. 9.
Quid ergo quaeris, quae nec scire potes, nec si scias beatior fias? Why should
a man hunt after the knowledge of those things, which he cannot attain to? and
which being attained to, can make him never a whit better or more blessed? If a
man were the acutest Logitian, the most eloquent Orator, the profoundest
Mathematician in the world. If he knew all the motions, constellations, and
influences of the heavens; and were able with Solomon to discourse of Beasts,
and Birds, and Vegetables, from the Cedar of Libanon to the Hysop on the wall:
Yet if that vnum necessarium be wanting, Luke 10.42.
he does but ex arena funiculos nectere. All that knowledge is but, Knit cords
of Sand. Iren. l. 2. cap. 45.
mere vanity and idle curiosity. It is wholesome doctrine that makes a
Christian batle in grace. 2. Tim. 4.10.
One dram of Divine knowledge tending to salvation, is more worth then all the
abstruse speculations of the most curious Artistes in the world.

That is good counsel of the Son of Syrach, In superuacaneis rebus etc.
Eccles. 3.24.
Be not curious in superfluous matters. Chrysostom. in Ioh. hom. 23.
And that of Chrysostomes better; Traduce hanc curiositatem ad curam salutis
tuae, Change this curiosity into a care of thy salvation. And what else did
our Savior intend, when to one asking, Luke 13.24.
Lord are there many that shall be saved? He answered, Strive to enter in at
the strait gate. As if he should say, Quid ad te? What have thou to do with
the number of them that shall be saved? Rather consider the difficulty, and
know, it is thy duty to use all diligence for the obtaining of eternal
salvation. Therefore to conclude, if we will be inquisitiue; Act. 9.6.
Let us chang Peter's quid into Paul's quid, Act. 9. Domine quid me vis facere?
Lord what will thou that I shall do? Act. 16.30.
and into the Gaolers quid, Act. 16. Quid me oportet facere vt salvus fiam?
Sirs what must I do to be saved? and into David's quid, Ps. 116.12.
Psalm. 116. Quid retribuam? What shall I render unto the Lord for all his
benefits toward me? 2 Pet. 1.10.
Let us Study to make our election sure, as S. Peter exhorts. These indeed
are worthy inquisitions; this is a necessary study; which, when all frothy
curiosity shall vanish, will yield us comfort in this life, and make us
eternally blessed in the life to come.

FINIS.
THE SAFEST SERVICE.
JOHN. 21.22. Follow thou me.


YOU have heard that these words contain our Saviors Reprehension, and his
Iniunction. In the one he checkes Peter for his curiosity. In the other he
prescribes him his duty. In the Reprehension I noted the sovereignty of
Christ's sacred and secret will, concerning John. Concerning which Peter being
inquisities hears from our Savior, that Quid ad te? What is that to thee? And
now I come to the Iniunction, Follow thou me.

It is a strange speech of Sanders in his sixth Book De Visibili Monarchia. In
hoc toto sermon Christus nihil voluit aliis commune eum Petro esse. In all
this speech Christ would that no man should have any thing to do but only
Peter. A most absurd and false position. For concerning some part of the
speech, Saint Augustine says, De agone Christiana, cap. 30.
Cum ei dicitur omnibus dicicur, Amas me? pasce oues incas. Where it is said to
Peter, Love thou me? feed my Sheep, it is said to all Pastors. And
concerning the other, Eusebius. Emiss. Hom. de Johan. Enangel.
Eusebius Emissenus says in like terms, Quod Petro dicitur omnibus dicitur,
Sequere me. That which is said to Peter is said to all, Follow me. Yea this is
not spoken to the Disciples only, but to every particular Christian. Simon de
Cassia
Quod Petro dicitur ad sequelam, omnibus dicitur ad regulam. It is a rule of
direction to all men. As our Savior said to the Disciples of watching, Mark.
13.37.
What I say to you, I say to all men, watch: So may I say, What he says to
Peter, he says to every man, Follow me. For every one has given his name to
Christ, and received the name of a Christian from Christ, because he becomes
his follower. Christ entertaines none into his service, but upon that
condition, If any man will come after me, let him deny himself, Luke 9.23.
and take up his cross, and follow me.

The ancient Fathers have expressed this following of Christ in diverse phrases,
by way of explication. Non passibus corporis, sed cordis, And S. Bern. Non
corpore sed cord. S. Hier. in Mat. 20. Non pedibus sed virtutibus. Aug. Hom.
23.
says S. Augustine, This following is not corporal, but spiritual. We must
follow Christ, not with the feet of the body, but with the affection of the
heart. And Saint Augustine and Gregory likewise show, Greg in Euan. Hom. 19.
that this following of Christ is the imitating of him in holiness, and
righteousness of life and conversation. These are by David called the paths
of righteousness, Ps. 119.35.
Psalm. 23.3. And Psalm. 119. he desires to tread them, saying, Make me to walk
in thy commandments. The Seafaring man, that will be prosperous in his voyage,
must propose to himself a safe haven, a good way, and a skillful Pilot. Behold
here, Heaven is our Haven, Christ Jesus our Pilot, and for the way he has
given us an exact Card. Yea he himself is our Cynosura, and our eye must be
still fixed upon him, Heb. 12.2.
the Author and finisher of our Faith.

It is true, We should live by rules, and not by examples. But this example is
beyond all rules. Bern. in Cant. sermon. 59.
Validior vox operis quam oris, The voice of works is more forceable then the
voice of words. Moral demonstrations are more powerful then all the Logical
that can be devised. The Physician shall prevail more with his Patient by
tasting the medicine himself, then by all the reasons he can use. And behold
Christ Jesus is our gracious Physician, and has taken that course. He is our
Captain, and requires no Soldier to set one foot further then himself has
gone.

All other guides must be followed with a Quatenus, as S. Paul says, Be you
followers of me, 1 Cor. 11.1.
as I am of Christ. And reason. For albeit the blessed Apostles, as they were
our Saviors Secretaries, were privileged from error in matter of Doctrine;
yet were they not from aberrations of life and conversation. Peter himself did
not (...), Gal. 2.14.
He walked not with a right foot. But this guide must be followed absolutely in
the paths of his precepts and practice; as being an exact pattern of
perfection. 1 Timothy 3.16.
God manifested in the Flesh, justified in the Spirit, seen of Angels,
preached of to the Gentiles, believed on in the World, and received up into
Glory. And he it is that says, Follow thou me.

These words I might divide into three parts, according to the number of the
words.

As first, an Action, Follow.

Second, the Agent, thou.

Third, the Object, me.

But I intend for more plainness to handle this Iniunction, Jointly rather
then severally
coniunctim, rather then diuisim; and in stead of those three parts, to observe
these three passages.

1 The matters wherein we must follow Christ.

2 The manner how we must follow him.

3 The motives why we should follow him.

Concerning the matters wherein we must follow Christ; we will consider the
same first Negatiuely, then Affirmatively.

Negatiuely, that we may see what paths we are to avoid in our following of
Christ.

And first, we are not to follow him in his miraculous works; they are no
paths for us. And therefore where as our Savior says, Mat. 11. Learn of
me, S. Augustine says, Aug. de bonis coniugal, c. 37.
what to do? Not to create the world, to walk on the water, to raise the
dead. We must follow him, Non in quantum filius Dei, Aug. de sanct. virgmit.
ca. 27.
sed in quantum silius hominis, Not as he was the son of God, but as he was
the son of man, as the same Father says. For in his miracles his divine
virtue did concur with the humanity. Mat. 14.19.
When he fed that multitude with five loaves and two fishes, the humanity did
break the bread, the divinity did multiply it. When he raised Lazarus, the
humanity said, Ioh. 11.43.
Come forth, but the divinity put life into him.

Secondly, As we must not attempt the following of Christ in his miraculous
works: so must we not in his satisfactory, and meritorious. We may, we must
follow him in those, as occasion shall be offered, in respect of the matter,
and the form, but not in regard of the end. For alas, all other works (be
they active or passive) come far too short of merit and satisfaction. They must
be of infinite value, that must merit and make satisfaction to the infinite
Justice of God; therefore we must leave that alone to Christ, Es. 63.3.
who trod the wine press alone. Bernard. in Cant. ser. 61.
And the best man living must say with S. Bernard, Meritum meum miserationes
domini, The Lords mercies are my merit.

Thirdly, We are not bound to follow Christ in every circumstantiall action
of his, where we have no precept. As for an instance, our Savior did
ordinarily sit when he preached, as all the Evangelists do show. Yet is this
no absolute rule of direction to us. He cast himself upon his face in prayer,
as we read in the twenty sixth of S. Matthew. Mat. 26.39.
We are not bound so to do when we pray. And if he had sit at the institution
of the Lords Supper, (which though many urge, yet no man is able to prove to
me) yet were we not bound therein to imitate him without a precept.

Thus much for our direction negatiuely.

Now concerning the paths affirmatively.

These I might divide Scholastically; But my desire is to direct you the plain
way to Heaven, and so to commend unto you some especial paths wherein every
faithful Christian must follow Christ, if ever he look to come to Heaven
after him.

The first and chiefest is the path of Piety, which is Verus Deicultus, Aug.
epis^
The true worship of God, wherein our Savior walked abundantly. He preached in
the day, and prayed in the night. He was zealous of Gods glory, Ioh. 2.
even to a consumption, as it were; according to that in the second of John,
John 2.17.
The zeal of thy House has eaten me up. In so much that when he saw God
dishonored and his House profaned, though he were the meekest that ever
lived, yet was he moved with indignation, and whipped the buyers and sellers out
of doors. And so should every good Christian take it to heart, when he sees
God dishonored.

Thus the Magistrate in ruling, the Minister in preaching, and every
Christian, in reverend hearing of the Word, devout calling upon the Name of
God, and religious receiving of the Sacrament, must endeavor the advancement
of Gods glory, and so follow our blessed Savior in the paths of Piety.

2. The second path, wherein we must follow Christ, is the path of Christian
Love and Charity, and this we must have both Actu and affectu, in action and
affection. Bern. in Cant. Sermon. 50.
If one give a poor man good words, Iam. 2.16.
and give him not those things which are needful to the body, what helps it?
And if a man should feed the poor, 1. Cor. 13.3.
and give his body to be burned, and have not love, it profits nothing. Ephe.
5.1, 2.
Be you followers of God as dear children (says the Apostle) and walk in
love as Christ has loved us, and given himself for us. Coloss. 3.14.
This love is the bond of perfection, and the badge of Christianity. Yea that
(...), Ioh. 13.35.
as Christ has loved us, calls both for the manner and measure of our love,
both intensiue and extensiue: it must be intensiue as our Saviors was.
Charitatem exigit intensam Chrysostom. in 1. Cor. hom. 32. 1. Ioh. 3.16.
As he so loved us, that he laid down his life for us; we ought also to lay
down our lives for the brethren. 2. It must be extensiue. As Christ loved us
even when we were enemies, Romans 5. So must we do, except we will be mere
Pharisees. Matthew. 5. Such was his love and compassion to his enemies, that in
the midst of all their rage and fury he prayed for them. Luke 23.34.
Father, forgive them, for they know not what they do. And the like he
requires of us, saying, Love your enemies: bless them that curse you; Math.
5.44.
do good to them that hate you, and pray for them that persecute you; that you
may be the children of your Father which is in heaven.

3. The third especial path wherein we must follow our Savior, is Humility.
This is a lesson which he commends unto us in especial manner, by his precept,
and gracious promise annexed to it. Math. 11.29.
Learn of me that I am meek and lowly in heart, and you shall find rest to
your souls. Dux nobis fuit ad superhiam, August. hom. 12. ex 50.
The devil (says S. Augustine) was our ringleader to pride, let us follow
Christ our guide to humility. And in this our Savior was an admirable
pattern, as the Apostle shows, Phil. 2. For when he was equal to God, Phil.
2.7.
he made himself of no reputation, he did disrobe himself of his glory,
(...), even emptied himself as it were of his divine dignity, to undertake a
base and humble condition for our sakes; and stooped down from the throne of
his Majesty, to raise us up who were fallen into the gulf of misery. This
Humility is radix virtutum, even the root of all divine virtues. For the
humble vallyes are fruitful, when the higher mountains are barreine. Iam. 4.6.
God resists the proud and gives grace to the humble. This virtue is not to
be found in the gardens of Philosophy, but to be learned in the school of our
Savior. It is the foundation of our advancement in heaven, and, the lower we
lay this foundation, the safer and stronger is our building. S. Augustine
compares heaven to a stately Palace with a low door, a man must stoop that
will go into it. As it was with our Savior, so must it be with his servants,
there went an exinaniuit before an exaltauit, Phil. 2.8, 9.
he humbled himself, and God exalted him. For, so says our Savior, Luke
18.14.
He that humbles himself shall be exalted.

4. The fourth path wherein we must follow Christ is the path of Patience,
Lactant. lib. 5. cap. 23.
which is, Malorum aequani mitate perlatio, moderate and patient bearing of
injuries and evils. And hereunto you are called, 1. Pet. 2.21.
says the Apostle Peter. For Christ also suffered for us, leaving us an
example that we should walk in his steps. Oh the disgraceful scoffs and
mockes that he was subject to! the reproachful taunts and reuilings that he
endured! the extreme violence that he sustained, and all this with admirable
and immovable patience! When he came to a City of the Samaritanes that would
not entertain him, the Disciples, Luke 9.55.
forth of their vehement indignation, would have called for fire from heaven:
but he rebuked them, saying, You know not of what spirit you are. In the
midst of all injuries and oppositions, such was his meekness and patience,
That he did not strive, Math. 12.19.
neither was his voice heard in the streets. When he was led as a sheep, not
only before the shearer, but even the slaughterer, he was dumb, and opened not
his mouth. And all this he, Isa. 53.7.
who in his humane nature was nobly descended of the blood Royal, and in his
divine was and is God blessed for ever, Romans 9.5.
endured at the hands of ignoble, base, and sinful wretches.

5 The fifth especial path wherein we must follow Christ, is the path of
Obedience. In Affection. In Action. In Passion.

In which as he walked, so must we affectiue, active, passive, as the
Schooleman speaks. For the first, he applied his will to his Fathers will,
saying, Not as I will, but as thou will: Math. 26.39.
and so must we, that we may say with them, Act. 20.14. The will of the Lord be
done. In his Active obedience likewise he was ready and resolute; Yea professed
himself to be in the number of those, Heb. 10.7. Calv. in Loc.
who are in the Lords Catalogue of obedient servants. And so as we pray, thy
will be done, we must be willing to do it. But in his Passive obedience he was
yet more admirable, Phil. 2.8.
when he was obedient to the death, even the death of the cross. And so must
we endeavor to settle our hearts, Iam. 5.8.
1. Pet. 3.17.
that, if it be the Lords will to call us to the fiery trial, we may be able
to say with that blessed Apostle, I am ready not only to be bound, Acts 21.13.
but also to dye for the name of the Lord Jesus. Lo, these are some of those
especial paths, wherein we must follow Christ, that by them we may be guided
to the kingdom of heaven.

2. But forma dat esse. And the manner of our walking conduces much to the
Been esse of our following Christ. The well being.
For the best services we take in hand, or tender to God, if they want their
due form, can find neither respect nor reward from his hands. Therefore we
will consider the manner how we must follow Christ, which is the second maine
point I proposed. And in this there are four especial circumstances to be
observed.

First, We must see, that we follow Christ sincerely. For sincerity is that
which seasons all our actions, and makes them acceptable to Almighty God. This
the Lord required of Abraham in that mutual covenant, Genesis 17. Genesis 17.1.
Walk before me, and be thou upright. And concerning this David gave that
charge to Solomon his son, 1. Chro. 28.9.
That he should serve the Lord with an upright heart. Our Savior manifested
his hatred to Hypocrisy, by those many woes thundered out against it, Math. 23.
and admonished his Disciples to beware of that Pharisaicall leaven. And
reason; for it eats out the sweetness of religion; and commonly where religion
begins in hypocrisy, it ends either in Atheism, or Apostasy. This is the
condition of hypocrites, Boni videri volunt sed non esse, etc. Bern. in Cant.
Sermon. 66. Prou. 21.1. Psalm. 51. Mich. 6.7. Prou. 23.26.
They would seem to be good, but will not be so: they will be evil, but would
not seem so. But the Lord pondereth the Spirits, and loves truth in the inward
parts. It is not the thousands of rams, nor ten thousand rivers of oil, that
he regards. It is the sincere heart that he delights in. Rustie gold is better
then the brightest brass; And sincerity, though in weakness, is a thousand
times better then pompous hypocrisy. Whatsoever poor services therefore we are
able to tender to God, let them be done in simplicity, and singlenes of heart:
that we may hear from our Savior that Euge serve bone, Math. 25.23.
Well done thou good servant and faithful, thou have bin faithful in a little,
I will make thee ruler over much. And set down this for an axiom, An hypocrite
is no fit follower for Christ. 2. We must follow Christ diligently and
resolutely. As our Savior, when he went to Jerusalem, where he was to be
persecuted, and put to death; the Evangelist says, He settled himself fully,
or, (...). Luke 9.51.
as it is in the original, He hardened his face to go to Jerusalem. And
therefore the Scriptures yield such phrases, as require this diligence and
resolution. We must ask, seek, knock, Math. 7.7.
that the door of mercy may be opened to us. (...).
We must strive, like Champions, to enter in at the strait gate. Luke 13.24.
Can a master endure to see his servant go lazily about his business? surely
no; neither can the Lord. And therefore there is a curse denounced against him
that does the work of the Lord negligently. Ierem. 48.10.
He that loves a cheerful giver, loves a cheerful follower. Necessitas
habet timorem libertas amorem. Aug.
Careless following argues want of love, and the Lord cares little for it. I
know, beloved, it is with us in our actions, as it is with the motion of a
clock which grows weak and flag by degrees; As Chrysostom observes of
Peter: Caepit ambulare longinquius, Math. 4.20.
he that at first, (...) immediately followed Christ, Math. 26.58.
began at last to follow him slowly. Theorefore when we find the motion of our
Christian endeauours to wax weak, we must wind up the plummets by earnest
and fervent prayer, that so we may follow our Savior resolutely and diligently.

Thirdly, We must follow Christ totally. We must not observe the commandments
of the first table, and neglect the second; for that is plain hypocrisy: nor
observe the second and neglect the first, for that is mere morality. We must
not be like Herod, Mark. 6.20.
who heard John Baptist gladly, and did many things, but resolved to keep one
especial sin, Job 20.12.
like a sweet morsel under his tongue. We must not be like the Jews, who drew
near to the Lord with their lips, Isa. 29.13.
but their hearts were far from him; but we must say with David, Psalm. 75.7.
O God my heart is prepared.

We must not attribute our salvation partly to the merits of Christ, and partly
to the merits of men; but we must say with that blessed martyr, Only Christ,
only Christ. We must not halt between two religions, 1. Reg. 18.21.
as the Israelites did between two opinions. The Lord, in the time of the Law
could not abide any garment to be made of linen and woollen: And surely he
cannot abide any linsie wolsie professors of the Gospel. He can be no good
servant to Christ, that is a secret retainer to Antichrist. Christ is like the
natural mother of the child, 1. Reg. 3.26.
that would either have all or none of it. Therefore when the young man desired
that he might go and bury his father, our Savior answered, Let the dead bury
the dead, Math. 8.22.
follow thou me. As if he should say, If thou will be my follower, thou must
totally addict thy self to me. Now this is not invidentiae, Bern. in Psalm. 91.
Sermon 8.
sed prouidentiae: Totum sibi manner inbet, ne tibi pereat. Christ does this
forth of his singular providence: He would preserve all to himself, lest all
perish and be lost to thee, says Bernard.

Fourthly, We must follow Christ Constantly. Religion is in Scripture compared
to a walk, which teaches us that we must not serve God by fits. We must
imitate the Angels on Jacobs ladder, Genesis 28.12.
that were still going up and down. We must not follow Christ only when he is
followed with Hosannaes, but even when he is pursued with Crucifiges. This was
the fault of the Galathians, that they began well, Gal. 5.7.
yet did not persevere, but were like Ephraim, Psalm. 78.9.
who turned back in the day of battle: And so are there many that have good
motions, good meditations, and purposes to follow Christ, but they suffer them
to vanish, and, they start aside like deceitful bows. Psalm. 78.57.
It was to small purpose that Lots wife departed out of Sodom, when for
looking back she was turned into a pillar of salt. Genesis 19.26.
Nor as it much, that the Israelites went out of Egypt, when for their
murmuring they perished in the wilderness. Our Savior suffered many afflictions
in his passion, Ioh. 19.30. It is finished.
but never rested till there was a consummatum est. And this was the praise and
happiness of Caleb, Numb. 14.24
that he followed the Lord constantly. His happiness I say, for Sola
perseuerantia coronatur, Bern. Sermon. 1. in Pascha.
says Bernard: Only perseverance gains the crown of glory. And so says our
Savior, Math. 10.22.
He that indures to the end shall be saved. According to which method he made
his prayer a little before his death; I have glorified thee on earth, Ioh. 17.4.
I have finished the work thou gave me to do, and now O Father glorify me.
And the blessed Apostle after the same manner concludes very comfortably, I
have fought the good fight, I have finished my course, 2 Timothy 4.8.
I have kept the Faith, henceforth there is laid up for me a crown of
righteousness, which the Lord the righteous judge shall give me at that day.
And so much briefly for the manner how we must follow Christ.

3. NOw to the motives, which may induce us thus to follow Christ; 1. From
matter of equity.
which I may reduce to these three heads: the 1. ab aequitate, the 2. a
periculo, the 3. 2. From the danger of neglect.

3. From the benefits which accrue by following him.


a beneficio.

1. And first the favors and mercies we have received from our blessed
Savior, should in equity be unto us a strong bond of obedience. In odore
vnguentorum, Cant. 1.2, 3.
In the odor of his sweet ointments we should run after him. As blind
Bartimeus, when he was restored to his sight, followed him in the way: Mark
10.52.
so should we in those ways I have mentioned. Eum sequebantur, Bernard in
fest. Dom. sanct. Sermon. 1.
quorum saluabat animas sanabat corpora. Those became Christ's followers, whose
bodies he healed, and whose souls he saved. And reason: For these are the
cords of men, Hos. 11.4.
and the bonds of love that Hose speaks of. And to this purpose it is, that
Samuel exhorts the children of Israel to consider the great things the Lord
has done for them. As, 1. Sam. 12.24.
when Elias had cast his mantle over Elizeus, he followed him: so should we
follow our blessed Savior, who has covered our iniquiries with the mantle of
his merits. Thus Marie Magdelen, having received by him the pardon of her
sins, and comfort to her soul, followed him to his Cross, to his grave, and
never left him till he left the world.

2 The second motive is a periculo. For the neglect of this is full of
prejudice and danger. The Lord threatened the Israelites, 1. Reg. 9.6.
1. Reg. 9.6. That if they turned away from him, he would cast them out of that
Land he had given them. As appears, Cap. 11.
The woeful accomplishment whereof, they found by experience. And no marvel
that such a man's case is dangerous; for he is like the Soldier that flies from
his Captain into the Camp of the Enemy. He exposes himself to a double
misery. First, he is in the hands of Satan, a deadly Enemy. And albeit he may
for a time be entertained kindly into his Camp, Judge. 4.18.21
as Sisera was into Iaels Tent; yet let him look for a hammer and a nail,
which will fasten him to a woeful condition. Again, as such a reuolting
Soldier by his flying loses the protection of his Captain: So this poor
Soul by his flinching, is deprived of that comfortable protection, which he
should have by Jesus Christ; according to the words of Azariah, 2 Chro. 15.2.
The Lord is with you whilst you are with him; but if you forsake him, he will
forsake you. Yea he not only loses that comfortable protection, but incurres
also Christ's heavy indignation. As it was with the Israelites when they
revolted; so will it be with him; Whither soever they went, Judge. 2.15.
the hand of the Lord was against them.

3 The third motive is a beneficio. From the benefit we shall receive by
following Christ in these paths of holiness and righteousness.

1 And first, these paths are comfortable. This Peter knew well. For when our
Savior seeing many of his followers become flinchers, said to the twelve
Disciples, John 6.68.
Will you also go away? Peter answered, Master, to whom should we go? Thou
have the words of eternal Life. As if he should say, God forbid we should
forsake thee: for then we may say, farewell to all our hope of eternal
happiness. Yea this following of Christ yields comfort both in health and
sickness, in life and death. Job 23.11.
Thus did Job comfort himself in the midst of all his afflictions; My foot
has followed his steps: his way have I kept, and not declined. 2 Reg. 20.3.
And so did Hezechiah on his sick bed: Remember I beseech thee, O Lord, that I
have walked before thee in truth and with a perfect heart, and have done that
which is good in thy sight. Thus when all other comforts fail; Conscientia
been actae vitae, This shall be the only comfort of every good Christian, that
he has been a fathfull follower of Christ Jesus.

Secondly, As these paths are comfortable; so are they honorable. De Aduent.
Dom. sermon. 6.
Non erit tibi indignum sequi auctorem tuum, says Bernard, yea, It shall be
thy happiness to follow thy founder and Maker. If we esteem it our honor to
be the followers of mighty Princes, how much more to follow Christ, Reu. 19.16.
The King of Kings? If the Queen of Sheba pronounced them happy, 1 Reg. 10.8.
who attended upon Solomon, a prudent and a potent King; how much more are we
blessed in waiting upon Christ Jesus, who is Omnipotent, Math. 28.18.
and In whom are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge? Col. 2.3.
Eccl. 23.28.
It is great glory (says the Son of Syrach) to follow the Lord. Math. 11.30.
August. de temp. ser. 182.
Christ tells us that his yoke is easy. Iugum eius merito est suaue, cui
scruire est regnare, says S. Austin: His yoke is light and sweet indeed, whom
to serve is to reign as Kings. And for our comfort and encouragement, in
following of Christ, behold the Saints of God, who as a cloud of witnesses are
gone before us. Heb. 12.
We have their worthy examples for our direction: we have their prayers for
our safe conuoye: and their expectation for our happy arrival.

Again, these paths are the paths of safety. A good way, and a good guide
are great comforts to a traveler; and this is our comfort in following Christ:
Ioh. 14.6.
For he himself is our way and our guide. He is the way, John 8.12.
the truth, and the life. He is the light of the world; he that follows him,
shall not walk in darkness, but shall have the light of life. Prou. 14.12.
There is a way (says Solomon) that seems good to a man in his own eyes, but
the issue thereof is death. But these paths are the paths of life. Prou.
12.28.
We say that he which walks in the kings high way walks safely, for he is
under the Kings protection. And such is his case that follows Christ in these
paths of holiness and righteousness; he is in the high way to Heaven, and
has a Divine protection, as it is written in the 91. Psalm, Ps. 91.11.
He shall give his Angels charge over thec, to keep thee in all thy ways,
that thou dash not thy foot against a stone. It is very obserueable throughout
the sacred Story of the Evangelists, Mark 8.2. Et passim.
that our Savior had a continual care, that none, who followed him, should
want. Yea he, that at the time of his apprehension had not a word of defense
for himself, had a Sinite hos abire, for his Disciples. Let these depart. Ioh.
18.8
And it was his great glory, that he could say, John 17.12.
Those that thou have given me, I have kept, and none of them is lost but the
child of perdition: And he was that treacherous Soldier I spoke of.

4 Lastly, as these paths are the paths of safety, so are they the paths of
felicity. The Lord takes it very kindly at the hands of the Israelites, as
we see in the second of Jeremy; Ier. 2.2.
I remember the kindness of thy youth and the love of thy marriage, when thou
wentest after me in the wilderness. Bernard.
Eius reminisci est remunerari, His kind remembrance imports a recompense,
says Bernard. And no marvel: for Masters, that are of a noble and generous
disposition, will not suffer their servants to be unrewarded; much less will
Christ Jesus. The Lord said of Caleb, that to him he would give the Land of
Canaan, Deuteronomy. 1.36.
because he had constantly followed the Lord. And so shall those, who are
constant followers of Christ, possess the celestial Canaan, the Kingdom of
Heaven.

As Henoch walked with God, Heb. 11.5.
and was translated, that he should not see death: So those that walk with
Christ in these holy paths, shall be partakers of eternal life; according to
that in the twelfth of John, Ioh. 12.26.
If any man serve me, let him follow me; for where I am, there shall also my
servant be. As he that follows some great River, shall by it be guided to the
Sea: So those that follow Christ, shall by him be conducted to the Ocean of
eternal felicity. And so our Savior told his Disciples, and that with an
asseueration for ratification; Verily I say unto you, Mat. 19.28.
that when the Son of Man shall sit in the Throne of his Majesty, you that
have followed me in the regeneration, shall sit also upon Thrones, and judge
the twelve Tribes of Israel.

Application.
THus have you heard the matters, the manner, and the motives for our following
of Christ. Now it remains, that I conclude all with some words of application,
and so finish my speech. S. Augustines discourse, in his seventh Sermon, De
Verbis Domini, Ordine ali quantulum mutato.
shall be my ground. There were (says Saint Augustine) three men of several
dispositions and inclinations that came to Christ with whom he dealt
accordingly.

1 Vnus differebat, and culpatus est. One deferred to follow him, and he was
blamed. So are there many that defer and neglect this following of Christ.
Some intend to become his followers, but they put it off till sickness, or old
age seize upon them; till Sin and Satan has cassiered them; and they are
able to do Christ little service. Some there are who do totally neglect this
following of Christ. They are entertained by the Flesh, the World, and the
Devil; yea any thing but Christ: though the ways wherein they walk yield
nothing but vanity and misery. Thus the young man in the Proverbs follows
the strange woman, Prou. 7.22.
like a fool to the stocks, and an ox to the slaughter, till a dart strike
through his Liver. Thus Demas embracing the world, 2 Timothy 4.10.
forsook the Apostles. Thus riches carried away the man that ran to Christ.
Mark 10.22.
For when he had given him histaske, he became a flincher, and went away
sorrowful. Caroclamat ego inficiam. Diabolus clamat, ego decipiam. mundus
clamat, ego deficiam. Ego reficiam.
But what can these Masters promise to their followers? Only that which S.
Bernard mentions, The world, it cries, I will fail thee; the Devil, he cries,
I will deceive thee, the Flesh, it cries, I will infect thee. But come to me,
says Christ, and I will refresh thee.

Satan is a master like Pharaoh; Exodus 5.14.
who set the Israelites all day on work, and scourged them at night. For so
does the Devil employ his Vassals, in the works of iniquity in the time of
their life, but at the day of their death, rewards them with the scourges of a
troubled Conscience, and at the day of Judgment, with hellish torments. To
Witches, and such other wretches he promises fair, but the end is commonly a
shameful death to their bodies, and eternal condemnation to their Souls. The
world is a master like Laban, Genesis 31.41.
that changed Jacobs wages ten times, and would have sent him away empty. Who
would serve that master, which will keep him hard in toyling, and in the end
strip him out of all he has, and turn him away naked? Behold, the world is
such a master; 1 Timothy 6.7.
for as we brought nothing into the world: so it is certain that we can carry
out nothing. Naked came we out of our mothers wombes, Job 1.21.
and naked must we return again. Saladine at his funeral had one going
before his corpse who carrying his shart upon a lance, cried, Saladine that
Conqueror of Asia, caries nothing with him but this. Plat. in vit. Clem 3. Ier.
2.13.
The greatest Monarchs (as that great Saladine did well consider) have only a
winding sheet; or peradventure some Monument, a mere monument of the worlds
vanity, and man's mortality. I may truly say therefore, that those who leave
Christ Jesus to follow the world, the Flesh, or the Devil, commit those two
evils that Jeremy mentions, They leave the Fountain of living waters, to dig
to themselves broken Cisternes that can hold no water.

2 Alius se obtulit and reprobatus est. Another offered to follow Christ, and
he was rejected. And indeed such bad followers our Savior has many: Some
respectu formae, some respectu finis: Some in respect of the form, some of the
ends. As it was in the days of his infirmity, so is it now in the days of
his majesty. Some followed him for by-respects, some for bad respects. Some
followed him to entangle him, as the Herodians. Mat. 22.16.
Some to betray him, as Judas. Mat. 26.15.
Some only to gain by him, as those that followed him for the loaves and the
fishes. John 6.26.
Christ has some followers that are like Comets, they are not fixed by a
lively Faith in Christ the Sphere of holiness, but are carried about with an
uncertain motion, according to some star which rules them, and they vanish
accordingly.

Again, some there are which fail in the manner of their following. As S.
Bernard speaks of praying, so may I say of their following. Bern. de
quaedrages. Ser. 4.
Some follow Christ timide, some tepide, some temerarie. 1. Some follow him
timide, fearfully. As Peter did when he was led to Annas and Caiphas. John 3.2.
As Nicodemus, that came to him by night. He durst not be seen to be a
follower of Christ. And those rulers in the 12 of S. John, which believed in
him, John 12.42.
but were afraid to confess him. Thus every little rub turns them aside,
whilst they say. A Lion is in the way: Prou 26.13.
A Lion is in the streets. These are like those Israelites, who liked well of
the Land of Canaan, Numb. 13.33
but were afraid of the Anakims. It was a just recompense that they never
entered into it. Reu. 3.
2. Some follow Christ tepide, coldly, like the Church of Laodicea. These are
like Solomon's sluggard, Prou 13.
Vult and non vult piger. He could be content to follow Christ, but he cannot
abide to take too much pains. These follow Christ so, as that they were as
good to stay behind: he had rather have their room then their company. He that
will be a welcome follower of Christ, Acts 11.23.
must (as Barnabas exhorted) with full purpose of heart cleave unto the Lord.
Cant. 1.3.
He must say with the Spouse in the Canticles, Draw me, we will run after thee.
And be resolute with Joshua; Josh. 24.15.
Choose you this day whom you will serve; but I and mine house will serve the
Lord. 3. Some follow Christ temerarie, rashly. Some march furiously with Iehu,
An. dom. 1535 Sleidon. Com. lib. 10.
As the Anabaptists did in horrible vprores and combustions in Germany. The
Papists, who in Q. Mary's days breathed out nothing but fire, and fagots. In
Q. Elizabeth's, Pistols, and poisons. And in the reign of our gracious
soueraign, fire and gunpowder. Some inconsideratly betake themselves to be
Christ's followers, but like foolish builders, Luke 14.28.
not counting what it may cost them, they sit down with disgrace; and when the
parching sun of persecution, or affliction comes upon them, Mat. 13.6.
like the stony ground, they wither away. Some again are so rash, that they do
Antecedere Christum, Aug. in Ps. 62.
as S. Aug. says, Whereas they should follow Christ, they go before him. Such
as follow their own inventions, rather then divine direction: Such as have
zeal without discretion and judgment: that thrust their sickles into other
men's haruests, and run beyond the bounds of their calling: as many private men,
who are very forward about the reformation of the Church, yea, before
themselves be reformed. Those that would be welcome to Christ, must follow him
boldly, yet without presumption; zealously, yet without contention; discreetly,
without precipitation.

Thirdly says S. Austin, Alius non audebat, et excitatus est, One dared not to
follow Christ, and he was encouraged. I doubt not but it fares with many as it
did with that man. Confessionum Lib. 7. and 8.
S. Austin confesses that he himself was much perplexed when he was entering
into religion. He thought thus with himself; what shall become of me, when I
become a professor of the Gospel? I shall lose all my delights and pleasures;
and what comfort then shall I have of my life? But it pleased God that these
mistes did vanish; and he found more true comfort to his soul, after he became
a constant follower of Christ, then ever he did before. Insomuch that he could
say forth of experience, Aug. in Ps. 117.
Dulcioros sunt lachrymae orantium, quam gaudia theatrorum, Even the tears of
a Christian shed in the midst of his prayers, are sweeter then the joys and
delights of the theaters. Beloved, Bonum Dominum habemus. Amb. mentioned by
Poss. in vita August.
why should any one be discouraged to become a follower of Christ? nay, why
should not every one be encouraged? seeing he is such a good master as will
not fail to reward his servants abundantly. Reu. 22.12.
Behold (says Christ) I come shortly: and my reward is with me to give every
man according to his works. If you remember and consider the motives, you need
no further encouragement. The paths wherein you are to walk, are comfortable,
and honorable; they are the paths of safety, and eternal felicity: fear
not, neglect not therefore to follow Christ, though it be through fire and
water. Your journey may peradventure cost you some pains, cares, and tears:
yea fightings without, 2 Cor. 7.5.
and terrors within; but the end shall be joyful and comfortable. Heaven shall
be your habitation; for Christ is gone before to prepare places there for his
followers: and there you shall enjoy his blessed presence, and be partakers of
such joys, as neither eye has seen, nor ear has heard, nor can enter into
the heart of man.

The Lord, for his mercies sake, give us grace to be faithful and constant
followers of our Savior Christ in the ways of holiness and righteousness;
that by the merits of his death and passion, we may be partakers of eternal
bliss and happiness. To whom with the Father, and the holy Ghost, all honor,
and glory, majesty, and dominion be rendered, and ascribed, world without end.
Amen.

FINIS.

