A MEMENTO for Christians. IN Some short Meditations on the third verse of the
thirteenth chapter of the Epistle unto the Hebrews.

Remember those that are in bonds as bound with them; and them that are in
afstiction, as if ye were also afsticted in the body.

Published by the Author, For the comfort of all those that mourn in Sion, and
very fit to be seen in the hands of all men in these troublesome days of the
Churches sorrow.

PSALM. 137. 5, 6. If I forget thee O Jerusalem, let my right hand forget her
cunning: if I do not remember thee, let my tongue cleave to the roof of my
mouth: yea, if I prefer not Jerusalem to my chief joy. PSALM. 137. 1. By the
rivers of Babel we sat, and there we wept, when we remembered Sion. LONDON,
Printed by I. L. for Fulke Clifton.

1623.

To the holy Church of God; the Spouse of Christ, and Matron of all the
faithful: planted in these nearer parts of Christendom: all peace be within
thy Walls, and prosperity within thy Palaces.
HOly Mother, from whom I have received all that I have, and more then I have;
to whom I owe both my self and service: Looking about me, unto whom I should
Dedicate this little Treatise, I could find none more fit, in respect of duty
from me, nor none more fit in respect of parentage from you, you being the
highest 1 Ioh. 5. 1. Psalm. 45. 9.
for birth; none more fit in respect of matter; it concerns thy self: none
more fit to free me from censure of any by-respects; nor none more right to
claim it at me, nor none more worthy to deserve it of me then thy self. To
thee therefore, holy Mother, do I presume to offer these first ripe fruits
complete of my meditations, as a handful of mandrakes such as they be:
receive them Genesis 30. 14.
Mother; what though they be crazed in the gathering, and so made vnsightable,
yet if they will procure thy Husbands love, whereby thou may be made more
fruitful, accept of them; of which good will of thine, I have no cause 1 Cor.
4. 7. 1 Cor. 11. 23.
to doubt, seeing they are thine own, received from thee, for thee; such
therefore as I have received, do I offer unto thee and no other: pass by my
unskillfulness, accept of my willingness; And so doing, thou shall increase my
diligence to help thy furtherance. I rest a son of thine age,

E. D.

The Churches Lamentation, by reason of her sorrow.
BEhold O Lord, for I am in distress, Lam. 1. 20
my bowels are troubled, my heart is turned within me: abroad the sword
bereaueth, at home there is death. They have heard that I sigh; there is Verse
21.
none to comfort me: All mine enemies have heard of my trouble; they are glad
that thou have done it. Hear I pray you all people, and behold Verse 28.
my sorrow: my lovers and my young men, are gone into captivity. I called for
my lovers, but they deceived Verse 19.
me; my Priests and mine Elders gave up the ghost in the City, while they
sought their meat to relieve their souls. For these things I weep; mine eye,
mine Verse 16.
eye runs down with water, because the Comforter that should relieve my
soul is far from me; my children are desolate, because the enemy prevailed.
Sion spreads forth her hands, and there Verse. 17.
is none to comfort her; the Lord has commanded concerning Jacob, that his
adversaries should be round about him; Jerusalem is as a menstruous woman among
them. Is this nothing to you all ye that pass by? Verse. 12.
Behold and see, if there be any sorrow like to my sorrow, which is done unto
me, wherewith the Lord has afflicted me in the day of his fierce anger. To
the Christian Reader greeting.
CVrteous Reader, unto whom this little Treatise in particular is dedicated, if
you be in Christ, and so a member of the Church; and therefore I doubt not,
but that it shall find free acceptance with thee. I presuming to honor thee
with that, which men ordinarily design to their chiefest friends, even the
dedication of a book, neither respecting honor nor greatness, nor pomp and
dignity, which the world ordinarily looks after; but finding in thee jointly
all whatsoever is worthy due respect: I have fastened mine eyes (by reason of
my affection) full upon thee; as I presume therefore on thy loving acceptance,
so I desire thee to make claim unto it, for it is thine by right; not only in
respect of the drift of the matter, but also in the intention of the Author; it
is dedicated unto thee: therefore, if thou will not show thy self inhumane,
receive it lovingly, read it diligently, consider it weightily, and respect it
worthily. The matter concerns as thy self, so the whole Church of God: it
intreates of a duty enjoined us by God; which is, to remember those that are
in bonds as bound with them, and them that are in affliction, as if we were
afflicted in the body; for considering with my self, the troubles of the
Church, not only at home more covertly, but also abroad more openly: insomuch
that it may justly take up that complaint of the Church in the Lamentations of
Ier. and being no way able to relieve it, I could do no less then show my
affection toward it, by stirring up all Gods people to remember it: the which
I could not more forcibly do then in the words of God himself, wherein he
calls upon all men to remember those that are in bonds. Wherein I observe the
Lord first exhorting us to a duty. 2. directing us in the manner how to do the
same. In the exhortation I observe the earnestness of it in the word,
Remember; in the direction I observe the strictnes of it in these words, As
though you were bound with them. Next I observe the words in particular,
wherein I note first what we are to do, To remember. Secondly, who; those in
bonds, Thirdly, how, As though we were bound with them. And lastly from the
words in general, I observe the great love of God toward his afflicted
servants, in calling upon all his people as it were by open proclamation to
remember them. In this Treatise, we have showed also how we are to perform
holy duties, that we may do the will of God on earth as it is done in heaven;
For we must have respect to the manner, as well as to the matter, in the
performing of holy duties: as the revealed Will of God must be our ground for
the matter, so the holiness of God must be our rule for the manner, seeing the
Lord is as strict in directing us how, as earnest in exhorting us what to do.
Also I have endeavored to answer some questions: as first, how we are to
remember those in bonds. Secondly, why the Lord suffers his to be in such
bonds and afflictions. And thirdly, how the godly may know that the Lord loves
them; notwithstanding they are in great affliction, which is, by entering into
the Sanctuary of God; also I have showed what the Sanctuary is, and how they
may behold God walking therein for their greater comfort.

Now considering also the weight of the word Remember, that it exempts none:
for if the Lord should have said, Relieve them, many have it not: if he
should have said, speak for them, many are bard from it with Hester, unless
they venture Hest. 4. 16.
their lives or liberty: if he should have said, fight for them, many may not;
if he should have said, deliver them, many cannot; and therefore he says,
Remember them, which every one may; for this breaks through all lettes,
neither farrenesse of place, nor opposition of power, nor difficulty of danger
can let, but every one may remember them. None can complain of the poorness
of their estate, the weakness of their bodies, the disability of their
nature, nor the tenderness of their sex: for every one may remember them by
praying for them, sighing for them, groaning for them, and so mourning and
suffering with them. This will stretch even from the city of Shusha^ throughout
all the 127. Provinces of the King Ahashuerose: the opposition of great Haman
cannot let, nor the presentnesse of their danger prevent it, nor the
tenderness of Hesters sex hinder it. We may many times want eyes to see them,
or times to visit them, or opportunity or means to minister unto them; but
we shall never want occasion nor means to remember them, if we be not wanting
in affection toward them. And therefore seeing my ability could not do that I
would, I thought it my duty to do that I could, and therein have endeavored
to stir up others that are better able, to do what they should; whether in
the Kings Court with Nehe. 1. 4. Hest. 5. 2. 1 Samuel 20. 4. Ier. 38. 7, 8. Act.
5. 34. Ier. 9. 1. Psalm. 74.
Nehemiah; or in the Kings favor with Hester; or of the Kings seed with
Jonathan; or one of the Eunuchs with Ebedmelech, or one of the counsel with
Gamaliel; whether they are Prophets of the Lord with Jeremiah, or Governors of
Commonweals with David: not doubting but this motive shall have good
success, seeing they are not my words, but the words of the Lord of hosts,
even the God of heaven and earth that does require it; and seeing that the
duty is weighty, though the performance be easy, and yet every one by
nature backward hereunto. Let this present Treatise be a means to provoke
others who are far more able, to set pen to paper, and to show thereby not
only their remembrance of those in bonds, but also to stir up others
according to their place to mind the same, seeing the State of the Church
calls for it like that in Jeremy, Lamen. 1. 12. And thus not longer hindering
of thee from the work it self, (wherein if you find any benefit, give God
the praise, and let me have the benefit of thy prayers,) I leave it to thy
holy meditations, and thy self to Gods gracious visitations, wishing as much
good to thy soul as thou can desire prosperity to thy body.

Farewell in the Lord, In whom I rest ever thine, if thou be his. E. D.

The several points of doctrine, which in this ensuing Treatise are at large
confirmed and applied.
From the exhortation.
1. THat in effecting our salvation, the Lord does more manifest his love then
show his power. 2. That the Lords words come not lightly nor slightly from him,
but with abundance of affection and earnestness. 3. That it is a special duty
laid upon us by God himself, to remember those that are in bonds.
From the direction.
1. That the Lord in his word does not barely exhort us to do his will, but is
very diligent to direct us in the manner how to do it. 2. That the Lord is
very strict in the obedience of his will. 3. That it is not enough to do holy
duties, but we must be very strict in the manner how we do them:
From the words in particular.
1. That the Lord would have us take great notice of the affliction of his
people. 2. That naturally we are very subject to forget the afflictions of Gods
people. 3. That the people of God in all ages have been subject to bonds and
afflictions. 4. That we ought so to mind the afflictions of Gods people, even
as though we our selves were afflicted in the body.
From the words in general.
11. That the Lord is very pitiful of his afflicted servants.
A Memento for Christians.
HEB. 13. 3. Remember those that are in bonds as though you were bound with
them, and them that are in affliction as if you were also afflicted in the
body.
THe sum of which words is an exhortation to a duty, with a direction for
the manner how to perform the same. In the exhortation we may observe the
earnestness of it; Remember those that are in bonds: In the direction the
strictness of it; even as though we our selves were afflicted in the body.

These words as they are a perfect sentence of themselves, so they need not
much to be stood upon for the explication: the latter part expounding the
former. For by bonds is not meant only chains and imprisonment, but all kind
of reproaches, adversities, and persecutions that come upon us for the truths
sake: as is plain by the word affliction. Therefore let us see what
instruction the Lord does afford us in the same; in the which for orders sake
we will first observe the exhortation; secondly the manner of it, which
consists in the earnestness of the words: and thirdly the duty we are
exhorted unto. In the direction we will first observe the direction it self;
secondly the manner of it, consisting in the strictness of the words: and
thirdly the thing we are directed in. And after we have thus considered of the
words, as they are laid down by the Lord, for exhortation and direction, we
will consider of the words themselves, as they lie in the text; wherein we
will observe first, what we must do, Remember; secondly who, those in bonds;
and thirdly how, even as though we were bound with them; and lastly we will
consider of the words in general, taking them altogether, and observe from
them, what they then do naturally afford in one point: for the accomplishment
of which work so that God may have glory, and each of us benefit, he that
opens and no man shuts, and shuts and no man opens, vouchsase his
special presence, for direction and assistance. Amen.

In that the Lord who has made all things, and gouernes all things, and
therefore has power over all things, need but command, and might be obeyed: yet
of his free grace does so stoop unto us, as to exhort where he might compel:
We learn thus much:

Doct. That in effecting our salvation, the Lord does more manifest his love
then show his power; the truth of which point as it is clear from the text, so
also it will evidently apeare, if we do duly consider of all the parts of our
salvation, the beginning, the degrees, the means, the manner, the causes, and
the effects; they all preach unto us of nothing else but the love of God. For
the beginning of it as it is manifested unto us in Genesis 3. What should move the
Lord to make that gracious promise, that the seed of the woman should break
the serpents head, but his free love, wherewith he loved us from the foundation
of the world? For the degrees of it, what should move the Lord to send his
Son into the world in the fullness of time, to fulfill all righteousness,
and by his death to purchase us salvation and life, but because he loved the
world? John 3. For the means of it, what should move the Lord to give his
judgments unto Jacob, his statutes, and his ordinances unto Israel, but
because he had a favor unto them? for he has not dealt so with every nation,
Psalm. 147. For the manner of it; what should move the Lord to use so many
exhortanions, persuasions, inuitations, and allurements, but only his love,
because he would not that we should die? Ezekiel. 18. For the cause of it, where
is it to be found but in the love of God? Deuteronomy. 7. And for the effects, which
is grace here, and glory hereafter, what does it show unto us but the love of
God, that where he is there we might be also? John 17. By all which it is
evident that in effecting our salvation, the Lord does more manifest his love
then show his power.

Math. 5. 45.
over all his works.

Mich. 7. 18.
he delights himself in showing mercy, and manifesting his love.

Romans 5. 8.
that must do us good. This point being thus proved both by Scripture and
reasons, the uses follow.

O the Ephesians. 3. 18, 19.
height and depth, the length and breadth of the love of God toward us, in the
beginning, the degrees, the means, the manner, the causes and effects of our
salvation.

2. Secondly, it serves for imitation to all those that any way are instruments
in the salvation of others; not so much to show their power and authority they
have received, asto manifest their love toward Gods people, and to say with
the Apostle, that the 2 Cor. 5. 14.
love of Christ constraines us: for in this they follow the best master that
ever taught.

3. Thirdly, it serves for exhortation unto every one to praise God, for his
mercy: like as for our preservation Psa. 107. 12
by his providence, so especially for our salvation by his love, Psalm. 103.

4. Fourthly, it serves for reproof of all those whom God has made
instruments in the salutation of others, that stand more to show their power
and authority, then to manifest their love; in this they leave the example of
Christ, and follow Antichrist.

5. Fifthly, it serves for consolation unto all those that have part in the
salvation brought unto them by the Lord Jesus; they have so many testimonies of
the love of God, as they have experiments of the work of their salvation.

So much for the first point in the exhortation; the manner follows, which
shows the earnestness of it in the word remember, from whence we learn,

remember those that are in bonds, which shows the earnestness of his
affection; but elsewhere, Oh that my Deuteronomy. 32. 29.
people would have heard, oh that they would understand, oh that they would
remember their latter end: and sometime why will ye Ezekiel. 18. 31.
die O house of Israel? which plainly proves the truth of this point, that the
Lords words come not lightly nor slightly from him; but with abundance of
affection and earnestness.



The point being thus proved both by Scripture and reason, the uses follow.



between God and man; therefore 2 Cor. 5. 20.
they should with the Apostle say, As though God did beseech you by us, we pray
you in Christ's steed, be you reconciled to God. Romans 12. 1.
And in another place; I beseech you by the mercies of God, that you give up
your selves a living sacrifice; holy and acceptable unto God.

Elias; for it is said of Christ that he spoke with authority, and not as the
Scribes: in which words there is a plain difference between the ministry of
Christ, and those of antichrist: those of Christ as they come in the name, so
in the power also: those of antichrist come in the name only, which howsoever
they may be great scholiers, and be of great note in the Church, even as the
Scribes and Pharisees Mat. 5. 20.
were, yet our righteousness must exceed theirs, else shall we never enter
into the kingdom of heaven. For these men handle not the word as the word of
God, nay not as the cause of men; for if they were made arbitrators between
men, oh how earnest they would be, oh how full of affection, how full of power
in persuading and entreating? But now in the cause of God, they are frozen up
as it were, unless it be in respect of titles or personal wrongs, then they
will bestirre them, even to spend whole sermons on it: which shows that they
prefer themselves, and the cause of men before the cause of the Lord, who is
Almighty: Therefore because they respect the Lord no more now, he will respect
them no whit hereafter; for howsoever they may come with their fellows, and
plead, Lord have we not preached in thy name? yet because it has been but
in the name only, he will say unto them, Depart from me ye cursed into
everlasting fire, I know you not.

4. Fourthly, it serves for consolation to all those that in handling the word
of God take this course, to imitate the Lord herein: for howsoever it may not
be liked of the most: yet we know that it is approved of the best. And
howsoever they may be called hotspurres, and thought to be too much of the
Spirit: yet it is better to be blamed of the world, to be too much of the
spirit, and live: then to be Romans 8. 13.
blamed of God, to be too much of the flesh and dye. And so much for this
point concerning the manner of the exhortation: the duty that we are exhorted
unto, follows: that is, that we remember those that are in bonds, from whence
we learn this lesson:

To remember those that are in bonds, to remember those that are in affliction.

The truth of which as it is clear from the text, in that the Lord is so
earnest and diligent in the pressing of it; so also, in that he has taken such
vengeance, not only on those which have been instruments of their sorrow, as
on Pharao, Amelecke, Exodus 14. 24 Isa. 37. 36, 37. Judge. 5.
Rabsheca and the rest, but even of those who have not helped them in their
sorrows, as Curse ye Meroshe, because they came not to help the Lords people,
and Amo. 6.
Woe to those that are at ease in Sion, and are not sorry for the affliction of
Joseph: therefore shall they go captive with the first, their sorrow is at
hand.

is to seek that which is not to be found, or to pass by an impassable way.
Jehovah, whose name is, Iam, persuade us to obedience?

stand in relation to us. Those from our selves are drawn partly from the
benefit we shall reap if we do it, and partly from the evil that will ensue
if we do it not.

The first motive then to stir up every one to the diligent practice of this
duty is, because it is the will of God, God does earnestly require it: the
which if we would but duly consider, when we look upon the affliction of Gods
children, or do but hear of it in any kind that they are afflicted in their
estates, in their names, in their persons, or in their liberty: if, I say, that
we do but duly consider of this present text, that it is the Lords will that
we should remember them, it would be motive sufficient to stir us up to the
practice and performance of this duty.

2. The second motive is drawn from the sake of God, because they are his.
Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? Act. 9. And in Hebrews 11. Moses in said
to esteem the rebuke of Christ greater riches, then the treasure of Egypt.
Mark, he says, The rebukes of Christ, showing that the afflictions of his
people in all times have been his affliction: therefore if we would take to
heart to see the Lord Jesus Christ in his own person to be afflicted,
imprisoned, reviled and persecuted; oh then let us remember the bonds, and the
afflictions of the people of God; for they are his, they are his bonds, they
are his afflictions, they are his rebukes, they are his persecutions: therefore
if any thing will move us, the due consideration of this will.

3. The third motive is drawn from men, and first from others, as they stand
in relation unto God being his children; for 1. Ioh. 3. 1. 1. Ioh. 5. 1.
all true believers are the sons of God, they are borne of God: now the
consideration of this, that all the people of God are Gods own children, will
be a great motive to cause us to take to heart their bonds and their
afflictions: for if the children of a King being in a strange land where they
were not known, should be in great calamity and distress, and it should be
manifest to some other by their princely carriage, or by their honorable
speech, that they were the children of such a King that were a great Monarch on
earth: O how would these men labor to deliver them and free them, partly by
their suits, telling their adversaries that they must take heed what they do.
They are honorably descended, that they are children to such a King, and
heirs apparent to such a kingdom, well known in their own country, And
thus having delivered them, o how would they strain themselves to do them
good, by letting them dwell in their own houses, feed at their own tables,
and lodge in their own beds; persuading themselves that when the King their
father should hear of it, they should be richly rewarded for the same,
although happily they know not their fathers mind how he stands affected
toward them, nor the power of the king how he is able to steed them, or at
least it may be a long time ere the king might hear of it.

Now beloved all the people of God, are Gods own children, who is the Lord of
Lords, and King of Kings, the great Monarch of heaven and earth: and they are
in this world as in a strange country where they are not known, for the world
knows them not: by reason whereof Ioh. 15. 19
they are many times in great calamity and distress, sometime in bonds,
sometime in great afflictions O then how should this move us to take pity
upon them, knowing that their Father, even the Lord Almighty is not only able
and just to recompense tribulation to those that trouble them, but also is
ready and willing 2. These. 1. 6
richly to reward all those that unfeignedly endeavor to do them good, yea and
takes notice of the least good that is done unto them, and that at the very
first moment of time, if we do but unfeignedly inquite of their estate, or
offer up a prayer unto God for them; yea if we can but sigh unto God fot them
in their distress, the Lord who searches the hearts takes notice of it: but
if we give but a cup of cold water in his name, we shall not lose our Mat.
10, 41
reward.

But lest any should think that this might be soon rewarded, the Lord seco^ds
it saying, That whosoever shall give house or goods, or lands, leave father or
mother, or wife or children for his sake and the Gospells, they shall receive a
hundred fold now at this present, and in the world to come eternal life. O
rich reward! shall not the least kindness be forgot even to a cup of cold
water? and shall the greatest favor we can do, even to the leaving of all,
be so abundantly rewarded! O how should this move us to take to heart the
affliction of Gods people, and to strive to the uttermost of our power to do
them good, and to remember them, even because they are the children of the
Almighty.

4. The fourth motive to stir us up to the practice of this duty, is drawn
from the people of God as they stand in relation unto us: that is, They are
members with 1. Cor. 12. 26.
us, of one and the same body. Now shall one member suffer, and shall not the
whole body suffer with it? this were against nature: Therefore let the
consideration of this move us to the diligent practice of this duty.

5. The fifth motive is drawn from our selves, and first from the benefit we
shall reap if we do it; as, we shall testify our obedience to the holy will
of God. Secondly, that we do it for the sake of God. Thirdly, that we love
God: for those that love him which begat, love those also which are begotten of
him. Fourthly, that we are living members of the Lord Jesus. Fifthly, it will be
the best means to provide comfort for us in our affliction, according to that
law of equity, our abundance now supplying their want, another time their
abundance may supply ours: and according to that general law, What measure
ye meat, it shall be measured to you again. Sixthly, it will cause the Lord
to give us abundance of good things here. And seventhly, and lastly, glory and
life hereafter.

6. The sixth motive is drawn from the evil that will ensue, if we do it
not: that is, not only to be deprived of all the former blessings, but also
it will testify against us; 1. that we are disobedient to the holy will of
God. 2. that we will do nothing for the sake of God. 3. that we love not God.
4. that we are not living members of the body of the Lord Jesus. 5. that we
shall want comfort in our affliction, according to that speech of the Holy
Ghost, There shall be judgment Iam. 2. 13.
merciless to those that show not mercy. 6. They shall have no reward here;
and 7. they shall be shut out of heaven hereafter. Yea, not only thus, but
by the omitting of this duty, they pull upon Math. 25.
themselves horrible judgments, as Curse ye Meroshe, because they came Judge.
5.
not up to help the Lord. And woe to those that are at ease in Sion, that put
Amos 6.
far away the evil day, that lie upon beds of Iuory, and eat the lambs
of the flocks, and sing to the sound of the violl, and drink wine in bowls:
that is, do abound with these outward things, and are not sorry for the
affliction of Joseph: that is, of the people of God; Therefore shall they go
captive with the first that go captive, and their sorrow is at hand; and in
Obediah, The vision of the Lord against Obed. 12.
Edom, because of thy cruelty against thy brother Jacob in the day of his
calamity: shame shall cover thee, and thou shall be cut off for ever.

7. The seventh and last motive is drawn from the example of God, and the
Saints of God in the Scripture; in Exodus 3. 6. 8, 9. the Lord is said to see
the affliction of his, and to come to deliver them, and to bring them into a
good land: and in the book of Judge. how often is the Lord said to see the
affliction of his people, to hear their prayers, and to deliver them out of
their distress? And for the Saints we have Nehemiah, Mordecay, Hester,
Daniell, and whole Churches in the new Testament: some that have ministered 2.
Cor. 8. 3.
unto them beyond their ability; some that 1. Cor: 16. 2
have set apart for them every first day of the week: the due consideration of
which will serve to quicken up every one whom the Lord has made willing,
continually to put in practice this duty. But if neither those motives which
concern God as the first three, nor those that concern men as the last three,
nor those which concern God and man together in the last place; if none of
these, nor all these together will move us to the sincere practice of this
duty, it shows plainly that as yet our hearts are exceeding obdurate and hard.

Remember those that are in bonds, as if he should say, If thou can not help
them any other way, yet do not forget them in thy prayers. Now thy purse will
extend to all their necessities, as to cloth them and feed them; thy presence
to visit them, thy pains to go for them, like Hester to the King. But the
two first will extend furthest: therefore howsoever they are most harshest: yet
they should be most practiced.

God loves a cheerful giver, 2. Cor. 9.

Secondly, it must supply their wants, in the thing whereof they stand in
need, James 2. 16. But if any think this an hard saying, and to go too near
the quick, let them consider besides the motives that have been alleged,
the benefits that it will affoorde, laid down by the Apostle himself in the
2. Cor 9. and that is, it will cause God to be praised, the necessity of the
Saints to be supplied, and our selves to be enriched, and that in 3. things, in
out souls, in our estate, and in our names.

in our own bodies, every one knows what we would do, there need not much
inquiry what we should do; even present^y seek all lawful means of ease and
help, all lawful means (I say) not in sciknes or ^osse to seek to witches or
wizzards; nor to ease the body to afflict the soul, by doing any unholy,
unjust, or unwarrantable thing: for this were to be eased of a small and
little affliction, and to bring upon our selves an intolerable burden; for a
wounded conscience who can bear? yea this were in stead of a blessing to bring
a curse* But they will use all lawful means for ease and help, even so
should we for the people of God: that is, if they be afflicted in their
names, seek to clear them; if in their estates, seek to relieve them; if in
trouble, seek to deliver them. But if it so fall out that when we have done
all that we can, and yet cannot bring to pass the thing we desire, as
sometimes it may so fall out in case of the body, as the woman that spent all
that ever she had on Physicians, Mar. 5. 26.
and yet could not be healed nor cured: Then we must even sit down under the
burden, mourning with the people of God, not only for them, but with them, and
so help to bear the burden with them, waiting every fit occasion for help
like the poor man that sat by the poole waiting the moving of the waters. I
do Ioh: 5. 5.
not say we must lie down under the burden as weary of it, but to sit down
under it the better to nestle our shoulders under it, resolving to bear it,
until the Lord shall take it off. And thus much for the use of instruction.

1. Ioh. 3: 18.
the like, an ayrie kind of remembrance; and have not spent all that thou have
on Physicians, nor sold all thou have, and laid it down at the Apostles
feet, although happily thou may some part with Ananias and Saphira; nor have
wished Act. 5. 1.
thy self to be raced out of the book of life for thy brethrens sake:
howsoever these Romans 9. 3.
are rare examples, and that some think they belong not to us now, and that
Paul and Moses erred in their passions, they are much deceived: for God
requires them as strict at us now as then he did, and Gods glory in the
salvation of all his people, ought to be preferred before our own salvation.
Therefore howsoever thou have gone far, yet if thou have not gone thus far,
know that thou have not done yet that thou should have done: therefore let
it humble thee, yea let it serve to further thy humiliation at this present
time, that thou have not only failed in a duty, but in a special duty required
of thee, not only by precept, but also by example; yea provoked thereunto by
so many strong motives. And let it quicken thee up for time to come, to settle
thoroughly upon the performing of this duty: yea to make conscience of it, as of
hearing the word, receiving the Sacraments, or prayer it self.

If any yet shall through too much worldlines, object against this, and think
that it is a little too strict, and think that hereby they should be deprived
of being masters of their own goods:

I answer, That we have nothing but what we have received: and have we
received it for our selves? No, for the heathen can answer, that man is not
borne wholly for himself, but partly for his country; but divinity teaches
us that man is not borne in part, but wholly for the Church of God, even to the
laying down of our lives if need be for the testimony of the truth, for the
brethrens sake, Romans 9. 3.
as Paul says, Phil. 2. 17. Yea though I be offered up upon the sacrifice and
service of your faith, I am glad and rejoice with you all. And so much is
employed in the story of the talents, that what gifts we have received from the
Lord, whether concerning the inward or outward man, they should be wholly
employed to his use; and this every one will grant in respect of the inward
gifts, as wisdom, knowledge, utterance, boldness, memory, or the like, that
we have not received them for our selves alone, but for others. And shall we
be so lavish in the more excellent, and so spare in those that are more mean?
Fie, fie: therefore of our own mouths shall we be condemned. Indeed we must
not love others better then our selves, nor give so much to one as utterly to
disable us from giving to another: yet thou must measure it at least by this
rule, To do to others, as thou would that others (in thy estate) should do
by thee, if thou were in their case. Have done what thou can for them, it is
well. Have thou ventured thy office with Nehemia: or thy pleasure with Moses:
or thy life with Hester? Nehe. 2. 5. Heb. 11. 25 Hest. 4. 16.
Nay, have thou prayed for them; sighed for them, groned for them? Yea, have
thou been heavy for them? Yea, has thine eye broken thy heart with sight of
their sorrow? Have thou neither eat nor Lam. 3. 51.
drunk for three whole days for them? Hest. 4. 16.
Nay, have thou abstained from pleasant fare for three whole weeks of days
for them? Nay, have thou given no quiet rest Dani. 10 2. Isay 66.
to thine eyes, nor to thine eyelids, till thou have seen some rest for the
people of God? Yea have thou called thy childs name Ichabod, when thou have
heard that 1 Samuel 4. 21.
the enemies have prevailed over Gods people, and so to take the glory from
Israel?

Happily (to sell some part of thy possession) thou think it much; yet some
have done it, (which yet were as far Acts 2. 45.
from community of goods, some ignorantly dream of, as they were from other of
their idle fantasies: they had community in use indeed, but not in propriety:)
but to venture life is more; yet some have done it, as Hester; If I die, I die.

To venture thy office thou think is much, yet some have done it, as
Nehemia. To venture the displeasure of a King, thou think is much, yet some
have done it, as Jonathan. To build an house for them, thou think it much,
yet some have done it, as the Sunamite. To entertain them in house thou
think is much, yet some have done it, as Abraham and Lot. But for a night or
two it may be thou could be content, but for a longer time thou think it
much, yet some have done it, as Simon the Tanner. To become poor to make
others rich thou think it much; yet some have done it, as Christ: to give
beyond ones ability thou think is much, yet some have done it, as the
Macedonians: to join in prayer for them with the brethren thou think is
much, yet some have done it, as in the house of Mary: to speak to the King for
them, thou think is much, yet some have done it, as Ebedmelech the black
more: to forsake the treasure of a kingdom, and the pleasures of a Court for
them, thou think is much, yet some have done it, as Moses.

Well, if none of these precepts nor motives, nor examples will prevail with
thee, to cause thee to Remember them that are in bonds, (to help them) the
Lord shall send them help and deliverance from some other place: But thou and
thy fathers house shall be destroyed; yea thou Hest. 4. 14.
shall be the first that shall go captive, Amos 6. Yea if thou will not yet
remember them, the Lord will send them help some other way, but it shall not
be to thine honor, Judges 4. 9. The Lord shall sell them into the hands of a
woman: that is, will raise up some week means to relieve them; for he will
send some Raven to feed them, or cause some Gamaliel to speak for them: or
some Iayler to favor them; or he will feed them with Angels food: or else
cause that their feet shall not swell, nor their garments to wax old for 40.
years: or to cause their meal and their oil miraculously to increase; or at
least cause them to like better with water and pulse, then thou shall with the
kings fare, when as thou shall have that black brand set upon thee by the holy
Ghost himself, 1 Ioh. 3. 17. how dwells the love of God in him? But if any shall
yet object, that they would be more forward, but that there are so many
hypocrites, that in releeuing of the Saints many times they should feed the
unworthy. name of a disciple: that is, whom thou see by profession to be a
disciple, thou shall not lose thy reward: and it is far better for thee to
set before thee the example of Abraham and Lot, who in entertaining strangers,
received Angels into their houses. So thou know not whether in relieuing of
the saints, thou shall relieve Christ himhimselfe: not, as some foolishly
think, that he comes in the shape of an old man, but we are sure that he ever
comes unto us in his members: and better it were that our goodness should
extend to all, then that Math. 25. 40. Gal. 6. Math. 5.
any of the household of faith should want; as the Lord who lets his Sun to
shine upon the good and bad; upon the just and unjust. Now if any shall say
that they would do more good: but they want opportunity. I answer, if that they
do what good they can, and desire to do more good if they could, the Lord
will accept the will for the deed: and let this text as a shrill trumpet ever
sound an alarm in thy ears, that thou may remember those that are in bonds;
and then thou shall never want opportunity to remember them at least in thy
prayers.

day of account, Math. 25.
but to further their condemnation.

gives unto the poor, lends unto the Lord. Now, what though money be short in
thy own purse, yet if it be in a sure hand, thou will not care; but
whatsoever thou give or bestowest on the afflicted Saints of God, thou
lendest unto the Lord, who is a sure paymaster, that will not fail thee at thy
need. And thus much for the point concerning the duty contained in the
exhortation; the direction follows, from whence we learn this doctrine:



This is clear from the text, and most plentifully showed in the Scripture: I
will Luke 1. 74.
but instance one place in the first chapter of Luke, there is a duty required
of us to serve God. But is that all? No, he adds the manner also how we must
do it: that it must be in holiness and righteousness: and that without
fear, before him, all the days of our lives: and this is typed out unto us,
in the old Testament, in the building of the Tabernacle; Moses must do all
things according to the pattern showed to him in the mount, Exodus 25. 40. And
of the house of the Lord, which were representations of Gods outward worship,
both the goings out, and the commings in, with the whole form thereof must be
kept, Ezekiel. 43. 11. and 46. 9. And as this served for the old Testament, so it
is in the new; for Christ is faithful in all his house, as Moses. Moses as the
servant, Christ is as the Son over his own house, whose house we are, Heb.
3. 2. 1 Timothy 3. 15.

into his sacred worship; but as Moses, must make all things in the Tabernacle
according to the pattern showed him in the mount, and the whole form of the
house must be kept, both the length and breadth, and height and limits of it
round about; so we must do nothing in the worship of God, neither for form
nor fashion of it, but according to the pattern showed unto us in the revealed
will of God.

2. Secondly, he does it because he would leave no scruple nor doubt in the
mind of his people.

Timothy, that it is able to make the man; yea the man of God 2 Timothy 3. 17.
perfect, yea absolutely perfect unto all good works.



but after the example of God himself, that they add direction for the manner
how they should do the will of God.







This is clear from the text, Remember those that are in bonds: But is that
all? No, it must be as though ye were bound with them: and in Luke 1. We must
serve the Luke 1. 75,
Lord in holiness and righteousness. But is that all? No, it must be without
fear before him, all the days of our lives. And in David's exhortation to his
son Solomon; Know thou the God of thy fathers says he, and serve him. Is not
that strict enough? No, it must be with a perfect heart, and a willing mind,
1. Chron. 28. 9. Yea, this is plentifully cleared throughout the whole
Scripture: not only in the precepts of the Law, but of the Gospel also: the
law says, Thou must observe Deuteronomy. 12. 32.
all things that are written in the Law, to do them. The Gospel says, He
that looks on a woman to lust after Math. 5. 28
her, has committed adultery with her already in his heart: and he that is
but angry with his brothers unadvisedly, Math. 5. 22.
is guilty of murder; and he that does but covet that which is another, in
his eye, or in his heart, is guilty of theft. And James says, he that
observes the whole Law, and Iam. 2. 10.
yet fails but in one point, is guilty of all: And Moses we know was barred
from entering into the land of Deuteronomy. 32. 50.
Canaan, for that wherein we can scarcely perceive he sinned. By all which it
is manifest, that the Lord is very strict in the obedience of his will.





in a whole skin, according to the proverb; they will hold profession so
long as they may keep their livings too, and no longer: according to the
saying, they would go to heaven in a hay-barne: but I may add, in a halter:
for they may as well expect to go to heaven in a halter, as in this halting
way. I speak not of the 1 King. 18 21.
Martyrs that questionless went to heaven, as well by this death as by any
other: but of the tibernites that are enemies unto Such are Church Papists.
the truth of God, that think the sufferings of the Saints to be just upon
them, if it have been for any thing wherein themselves come short; not
considering that we must keep the true pattern of wholesome words, which we
have learned, 2 Timothy 1. 13. And that our righteousness must exceed the
righteousness of the Math. 5. 28
Scribes and Pharisees, or else we shall never enter into the kingdom of
heaven. But these are they that desire to make a Gal. 6. 12.
fair show in the flesh, which would have others to be like them, only because
they would not suffer persecution for the cross of Christ; but God forbid that
we should rejoice, but in the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, whereby the
world is crucified unto us, and we unto the world: for in Christ Jesus nothing
will avail, but a new creature; and as many as walk according to this rule,
peace shall be upon them, and mercy, and upon the Israel of Gal. 6. 16.
God.



Fourthly,

mouth, and excuse the Lord; yea acknowledge him to be just, when he shall
come in flaming fire, rendering vengeance unto all those that know not God, and
that obey 2 Thessalonians. 1. 8
not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ; when he shall come to be glorified
in his Saints, and to be admired in all those that believe.



Remember those that are in bonds as bound with them. Whence we learn,



This is clear from the text, as also from the points formerly raised. Wherein
we have seen the LORDS diligence to direct us even in the manner of his
worship: which shows that it is our duty not only to do holy duties, but
also that we must be very strict, for the manner how we do them. As also the
whole Scripture is plentiful for proof of this point, and therefore it is
that our Savior says, Take heed how ye hear. So in another Luke 8. 18. Math.
6. 1. 5. 16.
place, Take heed how ye pray; take heed how ye give alms; and take heed how
ye fast: all which makes the point plain, that it is not enough to do holy
duties, but that we must be very strict in the manner how we do them. And in
the Lords prayer our Savior teaches us to pray, Thy will be done on earth, as
it is done in heaven. Hark, he does not teach us simply to pray that the will
of God may be done; but that it may be so done on earth, even as it is done in
heaven: and the holy Ghost teaches servants to serve their Masters as serving
the Lord. Hark, he does not teach them simply to serve them, but to serve them
even as serving the Lord, and not men. Which makes the point very clear.

Isay 11. 12.
does more respect the manner then the matter of his worship, how we do it,
then the thing it self.

Jeremy to cry out, The temple of Ier. 7 4. 8, 9. 11. 12.
the Lord, the temple of the Lord; and yet will steal, murder, commit
adultery, swear falsely, and burn incense unto Baal; these are but lying
words. Yea, this is to make the house of the Lord a den of thieves: yea this
is the next way to bring down fearful judgments, that the Lord should do
to you as he did to Shilo. But with David we must wash our hands in innocence,
etc. and so compass the altar; for Psalm. 26. 6.
as the will of God must be our ground for every action, so the holiness of
God must be our rule. We may not for the matter of our worship do as the
people of God, and for the manner, like the Gentiles. Nay, we may not serve our
God for the manner, as they do their Idols, Deuteronomy. 12. 4. And this stretches
it self unto every holy duty. We may not pray as the hypocrites do, nor
give alms as Math. 6.
as the hypocrites do, nor give alms as the hypocrites do; fast as the
hypocrites do: which is to rest only in the outward work, or to do it only
to be seen of men; but as our Savior said to his Disciples, that they must
not fast as the Scribes and Pharisees did, so may I say to you:

1. Thou must not fast as the Papists do: that is, to rest in the doing of the
work; as though we had done God great service in abstaining from a bit of
meat: for God respects the manner how we do it, more Isay 58. 6.
then the work it self.

2. You must not fast as the Papists do, only to be seen of men, but to
approve Math. 6, 18
our hearts only in the sight of God.

3. You must not fast as the Papists do, to put holiness in the thing, but to
Isay 58. 2.
labor to do it in a holy manner to have it acceptable.

4. You must not fast as the Papists do: thinking to merit by it: forbodily
exercise 1. Tim. 4. 8.
profits little, but godliness is great gain.

5. You must not fast as the Papists do, thinking to satisfy for sin: for
that is Col. 1. 14.
done only by the blood of Christ.

6. You must not fast as the papists do, thinking to make God beholding unto
thee: for when we have done all that we can, we are but unprofitable servants.

7. You must not fast as the papists do, in appointing set time in the year,
or set days in the week, for that is Montanisme: for our Savior has enjoined
it to the Montanus the heretik first appointed it in the Church.
times of mourning: therefore we can appoint set times of fasting no otherwise
then we can set times of mourning.

8. You must not fast as the papists do, in abstaining part of the day, and
filling themselves in the other part: for the least time of a religious fast is
one whole day. Leui. 23. 32.

9. You must not fast as the Papists do, in abstaining from flesh, but not from
fish; for a true fast is an utter abstenance, further then for necessity and
honesty. Hest. 4. 16.

10. You must not fast as the Papists do, in abstaining from meats, but not
from Pro. 31. 5:
drinks; for drinks do commonly more inflame nature then meats do.

11. You must not fast as the Papists do, in abstaining from grosser meats,
and glutting themselves with mere delicates: for this may rather be called a
feast then a fast, yea this is devilish. 1. Tim. 4. 1. 3.

12. You must not fast as the Papists do, only from meats: for a true fast is
an utter abstenance from all outward comforts, so far as honesty and
necessity will bear.

13. You must not fast as the Papists do, in abstaining from meats, but not
from sin, as swearing or the like; For a true fast must be an holy
convocation unto the Leu. 23.
Lord, wherein we must seek the face of God, and turn from all our evil
ways. 2. Chro. 7, 14.

14. You must not fast as the Papists do, in hanging down the head like a
bulrush Leu. 23. 27
for a day: for a true fast is to afflict the soul, Joel. 2.

15. You must not fast as the Papists do, to rest in the doing of some
ceremonies: for a true fast is to humble our selves, 2, Chro. 7. to loose every
yoke, Isa. 58. yea to cry mightily unto God, Joel. 2.

Now because of the present occasion, if any ask then how should we fast: I
answer, That we must go to the word of God, and therein we shall know the
will of God, as for the matter, so for the manner of it also: for it does not
only exhort us to do the thing, but also does direct us in the manner how to
do it. For it is a most perfect rule for our practice. Now howsoever some
light is already given unto it by opposing of it unto the fained hypocritical
fasts of the Papists, as that we may not rest in the work done, nor do it to
be seen of men, nor put holiness in the work, nor think to merit by it,
nor to satisfy for sin with it; nor to appoint times to fast without lawful
authority, or otherwise then we have occasion of sorrow offered unto us; nor to
observe part of the day, but a whole day at least unto the Lord; nor to
abstain from flesh but not from fish, from meats, but not from drinks; from
gross meats, but not from delicates; but from every thing wherein the fast
may be broken: nor from meats only, but from all outward comforts so far as
honesty and necessity will bear. And lastly not from meats, and outward
comforts only, but from sin also; yea that we must not hang down the head
like a bulrush for a day, but that we must afflict our souls, humble our
selves, loose every yoke, and cry mightily unto God.

Now howsoever this may give some light, yet more briefly, thus thou must fast
1. Observe. The occasion. 2. Join thy self with Gods people.
on this manner, when the Lord offers occasion of sorrow and mourning, either
in respect of thy self or others; join thy self with the people of God, if
thou can, as in the days of Iosia: but if not, then thy self with Nehemiah:
and then set some time apart, according to the occasion, 3. Setting apart.
either one day with the Jews, or three days with Hester, or 14. days with
Paul, or three weeks of days with Daniel, according as the occasion is of
greater or lesser weight. And thus having set time apart, in the fourth place
testify the inward affection 4. Testify thy inward affection by thy outward
carriage.
of thy soul by the outward carriage of thy body: that is, 1. by humiliation
before the Lord, by ridding thy self of all outward comforts, so far as
necessity and honesty will bear, as from the use of the marriage bed, fine or
costly apparel, sweet smells, precious ointments, pleasant music, or dainty
fare. 2. Testify the inward desires of thy soul by thy earnest suits unto
God, for attaining the thing thou desire, or to be freede from the evil thou
fear. And thus continue seeking the face of God the whole time of thy fast.
Now because the exercise of this duty is hard to flesh and blood, it is good
for us to observe the motives hereunto: as first, because God has commanded
it. 2. the Saints have practiced it. 3. much good has been obtained by it, and
4. by the holy and sincere practice of it, much peril has been prevented.



Isa. that have afflicted their souls for a day, and hanged down their heads
like a Isa. 58.
bulrush: have they not fasted for strife and debate, and to smite with the
fist of wickedness, yea that they might the more colourably commit sin? Now if
it have been so with thee, although thou have made thy voice to be heard on
high: yet this is not the fast which the Lord has chosen: for as he has
appointed how we should fast, so he has in his word also set down what we
should do in the day of our fast: that is, to unloose the Isa. 58. 6.
bands of wickedness, to undo the heavy burden, to let the oppressed go
free, yea to break every yoke: and not only so, but thou must deal out thy
bread to the hungry, bring the poor that are cast out into thine house, cover
the naked, and not hide thy self from thine own flesh; that so by thy outward
work, thou may testify the inward sincerity and uprightness of thy heart
in the service of God. For think thou, that if thou art cruel, and
unmerciful unto thy brethren, that the Lord will be merciful unto thee in the
day of thy fast, in hearing and helping of thee. No, no; therefore examine thine
own heart, for we may deceive ourselves exceedingly herein: for thou may
seek God daily; yea thou may delight Isa. 58. 2. 3. 5.
to know his ways, yea thou may delight in approaching near to God, yea
thou may afflict thy soul before the Lord, and cause thy voice to be heard
on high in the day of thy fast, and yet be no whit accepted with the Lord, if
thou come not to it with a pure and upright heart, and sincere and holy
affection.

Now the Lord has promised, that if his people shall humble themselves, and 2.
Chro. 7. 14.
pray, and seek his face, and turn from their wicked ways, then that he
will hear from heaven, and forgive their sins, and will heal their land. Now
God is true, and every man a liar; therefore if thou have not found this
effect, blame thy self, and seek to find out the cause in thy self: for
either thou have not humbled thy self as thou should, or not bin so earnest
in prayer unto the Lord as thou ought; or thou have not sought the face of
God with that singleness of heart as was meet: or at least thou have not
turned from every evil way. Now we must do all these, and not rest in the
doing of any one of them; for we must humble our selves, we must pray, we
must seek the face of God, we must turn from every evil way, and then we
may rest assuredly on the promise of God for a blessing. Therefore if thou have
failed heretofore, settle upon it thoroughly for time to come, not in part, but
in the whole, both for matter and manner, as God requires: and then try the
Lord whether he will not hear from heaven, whether he will not forgive thy
sin, and heal the land. And thus have we thought good because of the present
occasion, and being so necessarily led unto it by the doctrine which teaches
us, that it is not enough to do holy duties, but that we must be very strict
in the manner how we do them; to digress a little, to show you how we ought
to fast so as may be best pleasing unto God.

the Sacraments, fast, pray, give alms, but never respect the manner how they
do them; neither for the inward nor outward man. Now howsoever these are holy
duties as they are commanded of God, yet because they are performed vnholily,
the Lord does no more respect them then the cutting off of a dogs neck, or the
offering of swines blood, or of manslaughter; which are all things most
hateful and abominable unto him. Isa. 66. 3.



Pharaoh. Yea, thou may do the will of God, and be a Rabsheca, and a
Nebuchadnezzar, and be a Pilate: yea thou may do the will of God, and be a
devil. For it is not enough to do the will of God, but we must do it
according as we pray, On earth as it is in heaven: for it is the will of God of
preach the word, yet if it be but in the name only, and not in the power and
evidence of the Spirit, he shall say to thee, Depart from me, I know you not.
It is the will of God to hear the word, yet if any cause division contrary to
the truth which we have learned, we must avoid Romans 16, 17
them. It is the will of God to hear the word: yet we must come with honest
hearts, else it will not bring forth fruit in us; we must come with hungring
affection, else we shall not be filled with it: yea we must hear in faith, else
it will not profit us. So Heb. 4. 2.
it is the will of God to receive the Sacraments: yet says the Holy Ghost, Let
a man examine himself, and so let him eat, and so let him drink: otherwise
thou may be guilty of the body and blood of the Lord. So that thou may
preach the word, and be shut out from the presence of God; hear the word,
and reap no profit by it; communicate in holy things, and yet be spued out
of the mouth of God: yea, receive Reu. 3. 15.
the Sacraments, and yet eat and drink damnation unto thy self. So that it
is not enough to hear with Herod, pray with Balaam, preach with Judas, which
yet are all good for the matter, being the will of God: yet because they failed
in the manner, they failed also in receiving any benefit by their work.

God, according to the will of God, that perform holy duties holily, that have
respect as well to the manner how they do, as to the matter what they do. I
may say of them as the Psalmist says, They do no iniquity, they walk in his
ways, therefore Psalm. 119. 3.
blessed are they.

same; as in the Papacy in Queen Mary's days, many of the Martyrs were
compelled to cap and kneel, and crouch: yea to put on their Idolatrous
apparel although it received but little honor, by them: as in the history of
Doctor Taylour, who when he had a deal of their trumpery Fox in the 1385. page
of his 2. history.
on his back, leapt and skipt, saying, Behold what a brave fool am I.

Thus have we by Gods assistance gone through the exhortation unto the duty,
with the direction added how to perform the same. Wherein we have considered
of them, first as they are laid down by the Lord, with the earnestness of
the exhortation, and strictness of the direction. Secondly, as they require
duties from us in two points. Now we will consider of the words severally as
they lie in the text. And first of the word Remember, which signifies two
things, either to move attention, or to put us in mind of our forgetfulness:
in the first use or acceptance, it is al one with the word Selah, or behold:
whence we learn:

Scripture.

Psalm. 116.
in the sight of God; for Precious in his sight is the death of his Saints, and
those that touch them, touch the apple of Zechar. 2.
his eye.

1. Pet. 2. 9.
are all Kings, and Priests, and Senators.

Ioh. 2.





The word Remember being taken in the other signification or acceptance, to
put us in mind of our forgetfulness, is all one with that in the beginning of
the 4. commandment; whence we learn:





that we have been so forgetful of the affliction of the people of God in
former time.

Thus much for the word Remember, it is added, Remember those that are in
bonds: which teaches us thus much:

Abel by Cain, Abraham by Abimelech, Isaacke by Ishmaal, Jacob by Esau, Joseph
by his brethren; the Israelites by the Egyptians, the Moabits, the Ammonites,
the Amalekites, the Palestits, the Canaanites, the Babilonians, the Tyrians and
Syrians, and who not? David by Saul, David by his sons: yea David by his
wife. And if we come to the new Testament, Christ by the Jews; his Apostles,
by the Gentiles; his faithful Disciples, by the Antichristian Romans, and his
whole Church by the world of unbelievers. Yea as the Israelites had not one
people alone set against them, but even so many as there were nations under
heaven, so it is with the Church of Christ; they have not one people alone
adverse unto them, but so many as there are unbelievers in the whole world,
whether they be Turks, Papists, or of what nation soever: besides those
secret enemies that it nurceth up in its own bosom. And yet they have not
only these enemies of diverse sorts, but also they are subject to afflictions
of all sorts, as necessities, distresses, stripes, imprisonment, tumults,
labors, watchings, fastings, dishonours, evil reports, and what not?

Ioh. 15. 19 20, 21.
gives in Ioh. 15. and that is, Because they are not of the world.

2. Secondly, because they are not greater then their master; for says
Christ, If they have persecuted me, they will persecute you also.

3. Thirdly, because they profess the name of Christ.

4. The fourth reason that our Savior gives in that place, is in respect of
the wicked themselves, because they know not God; for says Christ, All these
things will they do unto you for my names sake: because they have not known
him that sent me.

the woman, and the seed of the serpent, Genesis 3.

6. Sixthly, because the Lord has more respect to them then to the wicked, as
in the example of Cain and Abel, Genesis 4. 5, 6.

7. Seventhly, because they testify unto the world, that the works thereof are
eeuill. Ioh. 7. 7.

8. Eighthly, because they cannot but speak the things that they have seen
and heard. Act. 4. 20,

9. Ninthly, because they will not run with the world into the same excess of
riot. ^. Pet. 4.


10. The last is, because they follow goodness, Psalm. 38. 20.



Heb. 12. 10
Heb. ver. 10. that he does it for their profit, and that in diverse respects:
first here; secondly, hereafter; Partly in respect of the good it brings forth
in them, partly in respect of the good it brings upon them, or causes unto
them; as first hereby that they might be partakers of his holiness. Heb. 12.

2. Secondly, that it might bring forth in them the quiet fruit of
righteousness, ver. 11,

3. Thirdly that the inward man might be renewed daily, 2 Cor. 4. 16.

4. Fourthly, that by an increase of grace, the love of God may be shed abroad
in their hearts, Romans 5.

5. Fifthly, that the life of Jesus might be made manifest in their bodies, 2
Cor. 4. 10.

6. Sixthly, that hereby their faith being made to shine the more pretiouser: it
might be found unto their praise and honor and glory, at the appearing of
Jesus Christ, 1 Pet. 1. 7.

7. Seventhly, that hereby they might receive a far more excellent and
eternal weight of glory, 2 Cor. 4. 17.

8. Now is not this for their profit, to be blessed now? 1 Pet. 4. 14.

9. And to be comforted hereafter? Mat. 5. 4.

10. Is not this for their profit to have God dwell with them here, Isay 57. 15.

11. And they to reign with him hereafter? 2 Timothy 2. 12.

12. Is not this for their profit to have the Spirit of glory rest upon them
here? 1 Pet. 4. 14.

13. And to receive a crown of life, James 1. 12. a crown of righteousness,
2 Timothy 4. 8. yea, an incorruptible crown of glory hereafter? 1 Pet. 5. 4.

14. Further, the Lord suffers his children to be in bonds and affliction to
try them, Iam. 1. 3. and prove them, 1 Pet. 4. 12. For he will have none but
pure metal: if they will not endure the fire of affliction, nor the fan of
sorrows, nor the sieue of adversities, they are not for him. Mat. 10. 38.

15. Further, he does it to prove others, Math. 8. 20. For as he will have
none but pure metal, so he will have none but true metal as we say; such
that notwithstanding they may see those in the forefront of the battle to be
beaten and sore oppressed, yet will be ready to stand in the face of the enemy,
when their turn shall come: Such that notwithstanding they may see Christ in
his members oftentimes have not whereon to rest their head, yet with Ruth will
resolve to worship the same God with them; yea to live with them and die with
them: notwithstanding it requires the forsaking of country, kindred, means,
and all. Ruth 1. 16.

16. Further, the Lord suffers his to be in bonds and affliction; sometime to
shame Satan and wicked men that accuse them, that they serve God but for their
belly sake, as Satan accused Job, Job 1.

17. As also because they meddle sometimes with that they have nothing to do
with; as Abraham with Hagar, Genesis 16. 4. And David with numbering of the people,
2 Samuel, 24. 10.

18. Also, because that through the unregenerate part that does remain in
them, they are apt to forget God with David, who in his prosperity thought he
should never be moved, Psalm. 30.

19. Also, because they are children; now the rod is as necessary for children
as meat and cloth, Prou. 22. 15.

20. Also because they are patients; now strong potions are as necessary
sometime for patients, to purge out the superfluous that offends, as cordials
to comfort: yea, ordinarily before comforting cordials, there go purging
potions, as the Lord causes his to drink of the waters of Mara before he
settle them in Boaz possession, Ruth 1. 20. and 4, 14.

21. Further, he does suffer it, because he has appointed them unto it. 1 Thessalonians. 3. 3.

22. He has predestined them for it, Romans 8. 29.

23. It is the end of their calling, 1 Pet. 2. 21.

24. And of the preaching of the Gospel, Math. 10. 34.

25. Further, the Lord suffers his to be in bonds and affliction, to teach them
obedience, Heb. 5. 8.

26. To exercise his graces in them, as faith, love, patience, and
perseverance, and to make them the more manifest, Romans 5. 4. Iam. 1. 3.

27. As also, because he loves them, Heb. 12. 6.

28. And offers himself unto them as unto sons, Verse. 7.

29. Yea, that they might be perfect, entire, lacking nothing, James 1. 4.

30. Further, the Lord suffers them to be in bonds, to weane them from the
world, Psalm. 30.

31. As also, because it is the very highway to heaven, Heb. 11. 39.

32. Further, that no flesh should glory in his presence, 1 Cor. 1. 29.

33. As also, that we should rejoice in the Lord only, 2 Cor. 10. 17.

34. And trust in the Lord wholly, and not in these uncertain riches, Phi. 4.
6. Psalm. 37. 1 Timothy 6. 17.

35. Further, to make them long after heaven; and to look for and love the
appearing of the Lord Jesus, Phil. 1. 23.

36. Further, the Lord lets his to be in bonds and affliction, to let them
know, that the promises of God do consist in better things then the world can
afford, and to make them search for them, 1 Cor. 2. 9.

37. As also, that the consolations of Christ might abound in them, 2 Cor. 1. 5.

38. Yea, that they might be able to comfort others, 2 Cor. 1. 4.

39. As also, because it is written, The just shall live by his faith, Haba. 2.
4.

40. As also, because we must first fight, before we be crowned, 2 Timothy 4. 7.
therefore is our life called a warfare, Job 7. 1.

41. As also, we must first labor before we can reap the fruits, 1 Cor. 9. 7.

42. Yea, we must first run before we attain, 1 Cor. 9. 24.

43. Further, the Lord does it because he would be called upon, Psalm. 50. 15.
and be sought unto, Ho^ea 5. 15.

44. Yea, because he has delight in those holy sacrifices that his people
offer up unto him most plentifully in their affliction, Psalm. 51. 1 7.

45. Yea, because he takes delight in his own graces that he has wrought in
them, as faith, love, patience, and perseverance; not that he takes delight in
their affliction, but in the fruits thereof, Psalm. 5. 15.

46. Further, the Lord lets his be in bonds and affliction, because he would
magnify his providence in upholding of them, 2 Cor. 4. 9.

47. His goodness in relieuing of them, 2 Cor. 6. 10.

48. His power in delivering of them, Psalm 34. 19.

49. Further, he does it that heaven might be the better welcome unto them,
when they shall come thither, coming out of great tribulation, and all tears
being wiped away from their eyes, Reave. 7. 14.

50. And lastly, he does it because he wills it; for the holy Ghost says, that
through many afflictions we must enter into the kingdom of heaven.

And, All that will live godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer persecution, 2 Timothy
3. 12.

This point being thus proved and cleared, the uses follow.



2. Secondly to instruct us, that we think it no strange thing, if the like
do befall us, seeing that it is the lotte of all Gods people, 1 Thessalonians. 3. 4.

3. Thirdly, it serves to comfort us in affliction, knowing that hereby we are
so far from being severed from the people of God, that even by it we are
made companions with them, 1 Thessalonians. 2. 14.

4. Fourthly, it serves to take away the offense of the cross in others;
seeing that the Lord in his wisdom and love, makes it so many ways
beneficial unto his children. Thus much for this point, it follows.

for afflictions are evil of their own nature, Amos 3. 6. And indeed they are
most evil unto all the ungodly, even as the beginnings of hell unto them,
Psalm. 11. 5, 6. and 50, 22. 2 Thessalonians. 1. 6. But unto all the faithful, they
are fatherly chastisements, whereby the Lord judges them here, that they might
not be condemned hereafter, 1 Cor. 11. 32. So that this is it that makes them
profitable, whilst the faithful do feel God to be between them and the
weight of the evils which they endure in the punishments and chastisements
which he inflicts upon them, 2 Cor. 4. 9. They have therein a certain pledge
and seal of his love, Heb. 12. 6. for if he loved them not (as one well says)
Calvin: on Heb. 12. ver. 6.
he would not be thus careful for their salvation, Heb. 12. 7. Therefore most
ignorant are all those that under this pretense that afflictions are
profitable, do rashly, unadvisedly, indiscreetly, or wilfully pull affliction
upon them: but most of all foolishly ignorant are the Papists, that under this
pretense presently vow voluntary poverty, and so bring a burden upon the
Church carelessly, by a company of loytering lubbers, idle bellies, whose glory
is to their shame. And there leaving them, we proceed: it follows in the text,
As though ye were bound with them. Whence we learn,

Cor. 12. 25.

Ephe. 5. 30. Now we know what a simpathie there is in the members of a body,
though it be farthest remote from the head, and of least honor, yet if it be
grieved; what readiness, what diligence, what care, what respect the whole
body has unto it.

in any member, thou art afflicted in the fame: therefore deny thou not the
duty of a true, natural and living member unto them; but as Christ who is the
head, said unto Paul; Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me, Act. 9. although he
was going to vex the poor Saints at Damascus: Whether thou be an eye, an arm
or hand or leg.
so do thou, when thou hear of the affliction of the people of God in any
place, take it to heart, as if thou were thy self afflicted in thy own body.

Thus much for the words apart, now let us see what sweetness we may suck
out of them as they lie together: Remember those that are in bonds, as though
ye were bound with them; and those that are in affliction, as though ye were
afflicted in the body. Whence as a second gleaning after harvest, we learn,



This is plain in the words of the text, Remember those that are in bonds: but
is that al? no, but even as though ye were bound with them: remember those that
are in affliction: but is that all? No, it must be as though we were afflicted
in the body. Wherein the Lord calls upon us seriously to think upon the
affliction of his people; which shows that he is very pitiful of them. This
is very plain also, in all the rest of the Scripture, Exodus 3. Psalm. 9. Judges
2. 18. Deuteronomy. 32. 36. 2 King. 13. 4. Yea, it is proved not only in those places
cited before, where the Lord pronounces a woe unto all those that do abound
with these outward things, and are not sorry for the affliction of his people,
and curses those that sit at ease, and come not out to help them in their
need; but also in all those places, where he calls all those to account, that
have been instruments of their sorrow, as the Idumeans, the Assirians, Ezekiel.
35. 15.
the Babilonians, and the rest; and like a pitiful father, who having whipped
his child cannot endure to look upon the rod, but either casts it into the
fire, or breaks it into pieces: so does the Lord deal with them which
evidently shows, that he is very pitiful of his afflicted servants. And yet
this will further appear, if we do duly consider, that all the promises in
the Gospel are principally made unto them, as Blessed are they which suffer
persecution for righteousness sake, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven,
Math. 5. 10. those that mourn they shall be comforted, verse. 4. yea Christ is
principally sent to them, Isay 60. 2. they receive the Gospel, Math. 11. 5.
God will dwell with them, Isay 57. 15. And look unto them, Isay 66. 2.

David cry out to his servants to remember the young man Absalom, 2. Sam. 18.
5. even as the Lord calls to Satan when Job must be afflicted, O spare his
person, O spare his life. And this is the reason why the LORD calls unto all
his people to remember those that are in bonds, to remember those that are in
affliction, even because they are his children.

Ezekiel. 39. 24. According to their uncleanness I hid my face from them,
therefore thus says the Lord, Now will I bring again the captivity of Jacob,
and have mercy upon the whole house of Israel, and will be Jealous for mine
holy name.

And in the thirty sixth Chapter of Ezekiel, and the twenty one verse, the
Lord says unto Israel, that he had pity on them for his own holy name,
which was profaned among the heathen where they were scattered: for the Lord
cannot endure that the heathen should say where is their GOD become? Therefore
it is that he calls so upon all his people to remember those that are in
bonds, to remember those that are in affliction, even because he would not
have his Name blasphemed among the heathen.

Daniel, or in the stocks with Joseph, or in the dungeon with Peter, or in the
fire with the three children, or in the waters with David; whether oppressed by
open enemies with the Isralites, or betrayed by secret enemies as Christ;
whether they are afflicted inwardly in their minds, or outwardly in their
bodies: Whether in their estates by poverty, or in their names by reproaches,
in their own families or abroad, with inward fears, or outward terrors, of
what kind so ever, or by what means soever; here is comfort and consolation
for them, as a manuscript sent from heaven to certify them, that the Lord is
very pitiful of them.



David and Christ: for David was so afflicted and so long, that he thought the
mercies of God were clean gone, and that he had forgot to be merciful, and
had quite broken covenant with them; and Christ in his agony thought that God
had utterly forsaken him, Psalm. 77. 8, 9. and 89. 39, 49. Math. 27. 46. But
they were but words of passion, for God was as pitiful of them in their
greatest afflictions, and loved them as at other times. And this Christ knew,
when he calls him my God, my God; and David, when he had remembered the years
of the right hand of the most High, and meditated of his works, and devised of
all his acts; then he could say, Thy way O God is in the Sanctuary: that is,
that it is too high for flesh and blood to conceive of, but only by faith.
Therefore, if thou think through thy great affliction, that the Lord has
forgot to be merciful unto thee, consider that it is but the apprehension of
flesh and blood: thou must know with David, that Gods ways are in his
Sanctuary, the which if thou would attain to know, thou must enter into his
Sanctuary with David, Psalm. 73. 17. and there thou shall clearly see the end
of the Lords dealing toward thee, and how he pittieth thee in thy greatest
affliction. Now the Sanctuary for the Saints, is the sacred Scripture, into
the which if thou will enter with me a while, we will call to mind the ways
of God for thy greater comfort.

1. And the first step shall be in Genesis 17. 1. where the Lord says unto
Abraham, and in him unto all the faithful:

I am God all-sufficient.

The second is in Joshua, 1. 5. Where the Lord says to Joshua (and in him to
all the godly; as the holy Ghost himself does expound it, Hebrews 13. 6.) I
will never fail thee nor forsake thee.

3. The third is in Isay 54. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. where the Lord speaks unto the
whole house of Israel, saying: For a small moment have I forsaken theee, but
with great mercies will I gather thee: in a little wrath I hid my face from
thee, for a moment, but with everlasting kindness will I have mercy on thee,
says the Lord thy Redeemer; for this is as the waters of Noah unto me. Yea,
the mountains shall depart, and the hills be removed, but my kindness shall
not depart from thee, neither shall the covenant of my peace be removed, says
the Lord, that has mercy on thee: O thou afflicted, tossed with tempests, and
not comforted.

4. The fourth is in Isa. 49. 15. Can a woman forget her sucking child, that
she should not have compassion on the son of her womb? yea they may forget,
yet will not I forget thee.

5. The fifth is in Isay 57. 18. I have seen his ways, and will heal him, I
will lead him also, and restore comforts unto him, and to his mourners.

6. The sixth is in Isa. 61. 1, 2, 3. The spirit of the Lord is upon me,
because the Lord has anointed me to preach good tidings unto the meek; he
sath sent me to bind up the brokenhearted, to proclaim liberty to the
captives, and the opening of the prison to them that are bound, to proclaim
the acceptable year of the Lord, to comfort all that mourn, to appoint unto
them that mourn in Sion, to give unto them beauty for ashes, the oil of joy
for mourning, the garments of praise for the spirit of heaviness, that they
might be called trees of righteousness, the planting of the Lord, that he might
be glorified.

7. The seventh is in Isa. 66. 5. Hear the word of the Lord, ye that tremble
at his word: your brethren that hated you, that cast you out for my names sake,
said, Let the Lord be glorified: but he shall appear to your joy, and they
shall be ashamed.

Tho eight is in Isa. 66. 10. 11, 12. Rejoice ye with Jerusalem, and be glad
with her, all ye that love her, rejoice for joy with her, all ye that mourn
for her; that ye may suck and be satisfied with the breasts of her
consolations, that ye may milk out, and be delighted with the abundance of
her glory. For thus says the Lord, Behold I will extend peace to her like a
river: as one whom his mother comfort, so will I comfort you, and ye shall
be comforted in Jerusalem.

9. The ninth is in Zepha. 3. 17. 18, 19. The Lord thy God in the midst of
thee is mighty, he will save, he will rejoice over thee with joy, he will rest
in his love, he will joy over thee with singing. I will gather them that are
sorrowful for the solemn assembly: Behold at that time, I will undo all
that afflict thee; and I will save her that halteth, and gather her that was
driven out, and I will get them fame and praise in every land where they have
been put to shame.

10. The tenth is in Psalm. 34. 19. Great are the troubles of the righteous, but
the Lord delivers him out of them all.

11. The eleventh is in Psalm. 97. 11. Light is sown for the righteous, and joy
for the upright in heart.

12. The twelfth is in Psalm. 126. 5, 6. They that sow in tears, shall reap
in joy: he that goes forth and weepeth, bearing precious seed, doubtless
shall return with joy, bringing his sheaues with him.

13. The thirteenth is in Genesis 22. 14. In the Mount will the Lord be seen.

The fourteenth is, in Deuteronomy. 32. 36. The Lord shall judge his people, and
repent himself for his servants, when he sees that their power is gone.

Here are fourteen steps answerable to those fourteen excellent songs, called
Psalms of degrees: by which we may ascend up into the holy Temple of God,
where we shall hear that melodious harmony of sweet melody, sounding in our
ears, which will cause our hearts exceedingly to rejoice, though now for a
season: Iam. 1. 2.
if need require, we are in heaviness through manifold tentations, 1. Pet.
1. 6.

And now being by faith ascended into the Sanctuary of the Lord, if we trace
him Psalm. 106. 44, 45. Psalm. 105. 8. 42.
from one end thereof unto the other, we shall find that he never forsook any
of his in their affliction, but ever when they called upon him, and turned unto
him, he heard and answered, and delivered them out of their distress, either
by remoouing the affliction from them, or them from it, as the book of Judges
does plentifully witness; and in the 107. Psalm. how often is it said, that when
they cried unto the Lord, in their trouble, he delivered the out of their
distress? But yet if the tentation lie sore upon thee, by reason of thy great
affliction, that thou may yet doubt of the mercy and truth of God toward
thee, and think that he has forgot thee, consider what the Lord himself
says in the Psalm. 105. 8, 9, 10. That he remembers his covenant for ever; and
his word to a thousand generations, even the covenant which he made with
Abraham, and his oath unto Isaac, and confirmed the same unto ^acob for a law,
and to Israel for an euerla^ting covenant. And that we may be fully confirmed
in the truth of this doctrine, that God is very pitiful of his afflicted
servants, seeing it is so hard to fasten it upon us in our passions, let us
further consider:

1. First, how highly the Lord is displeased and offended with the instruments
of their afflictions, and what revenge he has, and is purposed to take, not
only on particular persons, as Pharao, Rabsheca, and Herod, but also on whole
peoples and nations, as the Egyptians by drowning them in the midst of the sea,
the Babylomians by dashing their young against the stones, the Jews by
scattering of them on the face of the earth, and the Antichristian Romans by
pouring on them the full violes of his wrath; yea by consuming of them utterly
with the breath of his mouth and the brightness of his coming: yea it is, as
the Apostle says, a righteous thing with God, to recompense tribulation to
them that trouble you, and to you that are troubled, rest, when the Lord Jesus
shall appear.

2. Secondly, that all their wrongs he takes as done unto himself: Saul, Saul,
why persecutest thou me: Act. 9. He that touches you, touches the apple of
mine eye. Zacha. 2.

3. Thirdly, that their afflictions are precious in his sight: for Precious in
the sight of the Lord is the death of his Saints, Psalm. 116. 15.

4 Fourthly, that whatsoever is given, he takes as lent unto himself. Pro. 19.
17.

5, Fifthly, how that he has taken order that none should do them wrong.
Psalm. 105. 14, 15. Touch not mine anointed, and do my Prophets no harm: yea
he has reproved kings for their sake.

6. Sixthly, how he supports them in their troubles. Psalm. 46. 1.

7. Seventhly, how he accompanies them through them. Isa. 43. 5.

And lastly, how he calls upon all his people every where to remember them.
The consideration of these things, wilfully establish the truth of the
doctrine, That the Lord is very pitiful of his afflicted servants.

For if a King seeing his subjects in great affliction and distress, should
severely take vengeance on their adversaries that were the cause of their
affliction, and thereby should make it known, that all their wrongs he took as
done unto himself, and that their afflictions were dear and precious in his
sight, and thereupon had taken order that no man should do them wrong; and on
the other side should make it known unto all his subjects, that whatsoever
were given unto them to help them, he took as lent unto himself: yea should
himself support them in their troubles, and accompany them, through them, in
the fire, in the water, in the den, in the dungeon, in banishment, in exile,
in poverty, and in every distress: And last of all, should make it known by
public writing sealed with his own seal, that it were his will that all his
subjects should remember them to minister unto them, and to do them good;
would not this persuade their hearts, that the king did exceedingly pity them
in their afflictions? Yea, yea, beloved brethren, the Lord does this to you,
and more too; for the king could do it but as a man, like Darius who labored
till the going down of the Dan. 6. 14
Sun to deliver Daniel, but that was all he could do; but the Lord does it
as the Almighty, who is all-sufficient to support thee in thy affliction, to
accompany thee through it, to daunt the adversary, and all at once. Therefore
as it may serve to confirm the doctrine, so it serves exceedingly for thy
comfort, whosoever thou art, or whatsoever thy affliction be: and therefore
seeing it is chiefly the intent of the words in the text, and principally
intended in the raising of the point to bring comfort unto thee, deprive not
thy self of the same.



Math. 5. 45. and that they want a great deal of love to God: for he that
loves him that begat, will love him also that is begotten, 1. Ioh. 5. 1. And if
we love, we will show it by our pitying of them, 1. Ioh. 3. 17.

those that are instruments, or causes of the afflictions of the people of God.
For howsoever it may be necessary in some respects that they should be
afflicted: yet, as it is said in another case, so I say in this; Woe be to
them, by whom the affliction comes; for does God pity his afflicted
servants? then he will have no pity on thee that art the instrument or cause
of their affliction, but will esteem it a righteous thing to recompense
tribulation unto thee. Yea if he pronounce a woe unto his own people, because
they sorrowed not for them in their afflictions: what will he do to thee, who
do afflict them? Yea if Meroshe be cursed that came not out to help them,
what will he do to thee who come out against them? but even give thee thy
portion with Pharaoh, or Herod, or with the Babylonians, or with the
Antichristian Romans, to be destroyed here, and to be cast into the black
lake hereafter? For if thou had no other sin against thee but this, even
thy cruelty and vnmercifullnesse against the afflicted servants of God; It were
sufficient to side thee out to the left hand of God amongst the goats, to hear
that woeful doom, Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire, which is
prepared for the devil and his angels, Mat. 25. O consider this ye that forget
God, lest he tear you in pieces, and there be no help, Psalm. 50. 22.

Remember those that are in bonds: For it concerns all, it belongs to all,
of what estate or degree, or condition soever, whether high or low, rich or
poor, in prosperity or adversity, here is matter for thy meditation. If thou
be in prosperity, it informs thee of thy duty; if in adversity, of the Lords
care over thee for thy comfort. Therefore let it often be in thy mind, and
often in thy memory: let it lie down with thee, and rise up with thee: Yea let
it be with thee in thy going out, and at thy coming in, and accompany thee in
all thy ways. And as these words in the text, so all the branches of the same,
with the several instructions that it yeeldes for our use; and consider what a
storehouse of treasure is contained in it; for howsoever a text may be full of
heavenly good matter, yet it shall not be good to thee, unless rhou
profitably receive it. And as this is the masters joy, so it will be the
scholars comfort, even with David to hide the word; and with Mary to lay it
up in their hearts: And seeing it is the intent of the Lord in speaking, of his
Spirit in inspiring; the inuiter in gathering, and his soul in desiring, that
it may be for thy profiting, deprive not so many of their expectation, thy
self of so much good. And seeing that the sweetness of it made it easy in
gathering, let it not be tedious unto thee in reteining it being gathered.
And as it serves for all persons, so for all times and all changes; when thou
art in prosperity, to teach thee; in adversity to comfort thee.

Therefore O that men would praise the LORD for his merciful loving
kindness, and count it exceeding joy, when they fall into diverse temptations,
seeing that they are not forsaken in them.

All praise to him who is all-sufficient.

O That the salvation of Israel were come out of Sion: when the LORD brings
back the captivity of his people; Jacob shall rejoice, and Israel shall be
glad, Psalm. 14.
For Sions sake I will not hold my peace, and for Ierusalems sake I will not
rest, until the righteousness thereof go forth as brightness, and her
salvation as a Lamp that burns, Isay 62. 1.
(...)at make mention of the Lord, keepe^ not silence, and give him no rest
till he establish, and till he make Jerusalem a praise in the earth, Isay 62.
6, 7.
FINIS.

