Heavens Joy, FOR A SINNERS REPENTANCE. A SERMON PREAched at WHITE HALL the 4.
of March, 1623. BY JOHN DENISON, Doctor of Divinity, and one of his Majesty's
CHAPLAINS.

LONDON, Printed by G. P. for John Budge, and are to be sold at the sign of
the green Dragon, in Paul's Churchyard. 1623.

To the Reader.
I Understand (Christian Reader) that there will be an expectation of a Title,
and an Epistle. I pity those Readers, who are moved only by so slender
inducements, to peruse what is necessary. I have seen Titles, much dissonant
from the Books, Quorum tituli remedium habent, pyxides venena. Lactan. 3.15.
like gally-pots, whose inscriptions have been Antidotes, and the matter
contained in them Aconites: And have read Epistles, swelling with bubbles of
great words, and promising Mountains, Proijcit ampulias, etc. Horac. de art
Poet. Parturiunt montes.
when the work has been poor, and yielded only Mole-hils. Yet have I
condescended to custom, and the Printer. I cannot promise thee much in this
little Sermon. If thou find in it, that which may further thy Repentance, it
is that I have aimed at, both in the preaching and publishing it. And so,
commending it to the blessing of God, and thee to his saving grace, I rest,

Thine in the Lord, I. D.

Heavens Joy, for a Sinners Repentance.
Luke 15.7. I say unto you, that likewise joy shall be in Heaven for one sinner
that repents, more then for ninety and nine just persons, which need no
repentance.


AS skillful Phisicions repair to those places, where many are sick and
diseased, and the sick to such Phisicions: So, our blessed Savior, the great
Physician of soul and body, resorted to those places, where people were
diseased in body, or distressed in soul, and to him did such distressed ones
resort.

Chrysolog. ser. 168.
Now the Pharisees, non minus inuidi quam superbi, being a proud and envious
generation, murmured enuiously, and said proudly, This man receives Sinners,
and eats and drinks with them. Hereupon our Savior percutit, Caietan.
consolatur, prouocat, checks the proud Pharisees, comforts the humble
Publicans, and stirs up every sinner to repentance. And, that he may hunt the
Pharisees out of these thickets of pride and envy, he delivers three parables,
that the same be as a threefold cord, not easily broken. The first is, of a man
that has lost a sheep, and goes carefully after it. The second, of a woman
that has lost a groat, and seeks diligently for it. The third, of a father
that joyfully receives his lost Son. These actions in those persons the
Pharisees cannot dislike, Now thus stands the case, These sinners are the lost
sheep, the lost groat, the lost Son. Why then should the Pharisees murmur at
this gracious act of Christ, Luke 19.10.
who came to seek and save that which was lost? Yea, why should they not
rather rejoice, as heaven does? For behold, there is joy in heaven for one
sinner that repents, more then for ninety and nine just persons, that need
no repentance.

In which words, may it please you to observe, 1. Quis, who it is that
speaks, in these words, I say unto you. 2. Quomodo, the manner of his speech,
and it is in a Parable, whereof this word likewise is the word of application.

3. Quid, the matter of his speech, and it is this, There shall be joy in
heaven for, etc.

And in that we will consider, first, who rejoices, secondly, for whom the joy
is.

The first of these is delivered in these general words, There shall be joy
in heaven.

The second in the words following, for one sinner that repents, etc.

Wherein we have a comparison of persons, and their different condition.

The comparison of persons in respect of 1. quantity, one, opposed to ninety
and nine. 2. quality, A sinner that repents, to them that need no repentance.


Their different condition; There shall be more joy for that one, then for
those ninety and nine.

So that here the Person which speaks, may challenge our attention: It is the
Son of God.

The manner of his speech is worthy our consideration; It is the opening of
that which was locked up in a parable.

The matter of his speech yeeldes great consolation; for it acquaints us with
the joy of heaven, for a sinners conversion.

I say unto you.

THese words may be opposed to the words of the proud Pharisees, The first
general point.
as a corrosiue, to eat out their censorious humor. They said, This man
receives sinners: therefore says our Savior, I say unto you: as if he should
say, that which you, say savors of earth, of envy; that which I do, is an act
of charity, and has the approbation of heaven.

They may be also a cordial to comfort the heart of an humble penitent.

The troubled conscience will be ready to say with the Prodigal Son, My case
is woeful, I have sinned against heaven, even against God, and his holy Angels:
but hear what Christ says, Repent, and heaven shall be pacified, God and his
holy Angels shall rejoice for thee.

They may likewise be a Preface, to stir up our attention. Here is our
Pythagoras, and his Dico vobis, I say unto you, must rowze up our spirits, and
raise up our attention to what he speaks: John 7.46.
for never man spoke like this man.

When our Savior said to Simon the Tanner, Luke 7.40.
as we read in the seventh of Luke, Simon, I have somewhat to say to thee:
Simon answered, Master, say on: So should we (when Christ does thus preface
his speeches) long to hear what he will say, expect from him some remarkable
matter, and say with Samuel, 1. Sam. 3.10.
Speak, Lord: for thy servant hears thee. Yea, we should so hear, that
with the blessed Virgin, Luke 2.52.
we lay up all his sayings in our hearts.

Second general point.
NOw the quomodo: the manner of his speech will be a further motive to this
purpose: where under the leaves of Metaphors, Sub literis quasi sub foliis,
etc. Chrysostom. in Phil. hom. 4.
there lies hid much singular fruit of comfort. If in a great company one
amongst the rest be veiled, every ones eye will be upon him, with neglect of
the rest, who are not so. So when our Savior does thus (as it were) veil his
speeches with parables, it should draw our ears to attention, and our hearts
to consideration of that which is spoken: for sic loquitur, Basil in Psalm. 4^.
vt auditorem excitet.

These parables are like a medicine, and this word likewise, (as I said) like
the application of the medicine. Pliny writes, Plin. Lib. 24.
that Democritus a famous Physician, having one Considia a noble Matron to his
patient, because her weakness could not brook any Physic in the species,
gave her the milk of Goats, which he caused to feed upon Masticke: so does
this gracious Physician of the soul, our blessed Savior: Condulcet sermonem,
says Chrysostom, Chrysostom. in Romans 6.
he does so confect, and compose his heavenly medicines, that they may
minister grace to every penitent patient.

This was Salomons course, being King and Preacher of Jerusalem; as it is in
the twelfth of Ecclesiastes, He prepared many Parables: Eccles. 12.9.
and it follows there immediately, The words of the wise are like goads, and
nails, fastened by the Master of the assemblies. And surely, Parables and
similitudes have much life in them; they have a maruailous piercing and
fastening property; a piercing of the intellectual faculty, like goads, and a
fastening in the memory, like nails. They pierce the understanding: forasmuch
as ordinarily, nihil in intellectu, quod non prius fuerat in sensu, the senses
are the souls windows, to convey in the light of knowledge. Therefore it
pleases God to teach us heavenly things by earthly. Chrysostom. quo supra.
And as nurses speak to the Infant, in the Infants language: so has the Lord
guided the tongues and pens of his sacred Orators and Secretaries, that they
should speak to us, not so as he could enable them, but so as we might he able
to understand them.

Again, Parables are very powerful to work upon the Conscience. They set
before a man, as it were in a glass, his virtues commended, or his vices
condemned, in another, and cause him, before he is aware, to give sentence
against himself. Thus our Savior by the Parable of the householder, and the
husbandman, Mat. 21.41.
extorted from the chief Priests, and Pharisees that fearful doom upon
themselves; Luke 19.22.
He will cruelly destroy those wicked men; That by the confession of their own
mouths, they might be condemned. Thus Nathan by a Parable drew from David that
sharp sentence upon himself; 2. Sam. 12.5.
The man that has done this thing, is the son of death: Yea, such a strong
impression it wrought in him, that it made him retire himself, and with deep
sorrow to bewail his sin, Psalm. 51.
as his mournful penitential Psalm does manifest.

When Moses saw the burning bush, which I may call a visible Parable (as
representing the state of the Church, which may be oppressed, but can never be
suppressed) he said, I will turn aside, Exodus 3.3.
and see this great sight: so should we sequester our meditations to the due
consideration of this our Saviors cloze and application of an excellent
Parable.

The 3. general point.
Especially if we consider the Quid. what it is that he says; for behold, it
is matter of Joy; and joy is that which every one desires to have and hear of;
because, a joyful heart causes good health, Proverb. 17.22.
whereas a sorrowful mind dries the bones. Neither is this earthly, but
heavenly joy; Earthly joy is rather desolation, August. Epist. 121.
then consolation, as S. Augustine says. It is like the silver streams of a
swift river, Chrysostom. in Psalm. 5
which glides away smoothly, and falls suddenly into the brackish Sea; but the
celestial joy is constant; and permanent.

There is joy in heaven: And no marvel, for no sorrow can have access
thither. Revel. 21.10.
The place yields joy, it is a goodly City, a glorious Kingdom: Mat. 25.34.
There (as the Psalmist says) there is joy and gladness in the Tabernacles of
the righteous, where the Angels sing Halleluiaes to the blessed Trinity: And as
the place, so the presence yields joy; there are not only, The spirits of just
and holy men, and innumerable company of Angels, Heb. 12.22.
and Jesus the Mediator of the new Covenant: but there is also the presence of
God, Psalm. 16.11.
in whose presence is the fulness of joy, and at whose right hand are pleasures
for evermore. Bern sermon. 1. in Romans 14.17.
Here Gods servants gaudent in spiritu, there de spiritu. Their joy here
arises from the sense, there from the presence of Gods blessed Spirit.

But who are they, that rejoice thus in heaven? Before I answer that, I must
remove some Romish Rubbish. The Rhemists in their Annotations on this place
write thus: The Angels, and other celestial spirits rejoice at every sinners
conversion: therefore our inward repentance is known to them; and betwixt the
Angels, and the blessed souls of Saints: there is no difference in this case,
the one being as highly exalted as the other, and as near God, in whom they
see and know all things.

Lord, what a number of falsehoods are wrapped up here in a few words?

First, the Romish doctrine controwles this Remish note: for if the souls of
the Patriarchs were (as they teach) then in Limbus Patrum, how could they be
said to be as near God, as the Angels?

Secondly, those that have taken upon them to marshall the host of heaven, have
denied to the Saints this propinquity of place.

Thirdly, to affirm, that the Saints do know our inward repentance, is both
false and impious, as being an incroachment upon Gods Royal prerogative, 1.
King. 8.39.
who only knows the hearts of all men.

Fourthly, Whereas they say, that between the Saints and Angels there is no
difference in this case: Even in this case there is a maine difference: For,
the Angels, Heb. 1.14.
being ministering Spirits, may, by conuersing with men, judge probably of their
conversion by their conversation: but how can the Saints, having no such office
designed them?

Fifthly, That place in the two and twentieth of Matthew, Mat. 22.30.
assumed by the Rhemists, for proof of their Paradox, is by them grossly
perverted: They shall be as the Angels of God in heaven: For, albeit the Saints
are like to the Angels in this, that they are freed from infirmity, iniquity
and mortality. Fulgent. de Passion. Dom. lib. 3. It follows not.
(as Fulgent. says) yet that they are therefore like to them in all things, is
a non sequitur. And this is the Rhemists fallacy, They take that simpliciter,
which is spoken secundum quid, as they might have learned of their own
Iansenius; yea, of themselves, if they had but reuiewed their own Annotation
upon that place.

Lastly, whereas they say, that the Saints and Angels see all things in God, it
is a vain and idle conceit. For the Angels, who are as near God as the Saints
are, and do see as much in him as the Saints do, were ignorant of the Gentiles
infranchisment, Ephesians. 3.10.
till it was made known to them in the Churches, by the Apostles preaching;
And our Savior says, they know not the day of Judgment. Mat. 24.36.
Neither does this conceit make the Saints equal to the Angels only, but both
Saints and Angels to Almighty God, in respect of that incommunicable Attribute,
his Omniscience, whereof no creature is capable. So that this Romish speculum
Trinitatis, is but speculum vanitatis: Their glass (as they call it) of the
Trinity, is indeed a glass of vanity.

Leaving therefore those celestial spirits, Who they are that reioyc for the
repentance of a sinner.
the Saints, to such celestial joys, as they do certainly and happily enjoy;
They are the holy Angels, and the blessed Trinity, even by general consent of
Antiquity, that do here rejoice. The Angels rejoice.
The holy Angels are those amici, and vicini, mentioned in the sixth verse;
those friends, which have idem velle, and idem nolle, Concur in will.
with Almighty God, and those neighbors, that are near to him in the place of
bliss and happiness.

Now the Angels do thus rejoice in respect of themselves, in respect of us, and
in regard of Almighty God. They rejoice in respect of themselves, Quia numerus
eorum repletur: Anselme in Ephesians. 4.
Because their society is repaired by the accession of repentant sinners, which
was diminished by the fall of the reprobate angels. They rejoice for us, in
regard of the singular benefits that accrue to us by repentance. For as the
damned spirits would be glad of our confusion; so these blessed Spirits rejoice
for our conversion: they are our nurses, Psalm. 91.11.
and carry us in their hands, and therefore rejoice for our advancement, when
by repentance we are delivered from the power of darkness, Colos. 1.13.
and translated into the Kingdom of Christ Jesus. They are our guard, Psalm.
34.7
and do pitch their tents about us; so that they mourn, when they see us in
Satan's camp, and rejoice, when by repentance we return to our Captain
Christ Jesus. They rejoice in regard of God; for Angeli eos amant, Chrysostom. ad
Pop. Antioch. ho. 22.
qui Dominum suum diligunt; The Angels love those that love their Lord and
Master. And as a good and loyal subject rejoices in the honor of his
Sovereign, and the enlargement of his dominions; so do the Angels rejoice when
they see their Lord honored, and his Kingdom enlarged by the repentance of a
sinner. Therefore S. Bernard calls Lachrymas poenitentium, Bern in Cant. sermon.
30.
vinum Angelorum, The tears of repentani sinners, the wine of Angels, because
they make them glad. Thus as Jobs friends, after he was freed from his heavy
afflictions, Job 42.11.
came to comfort him: so the Angels our good friends, when they see us freed
from the heavy burden of sin, do rejoice for us.

The blessed Trinity rejoices. Verse 24.
Again, the blessed Trinity rejoices for our conversion.

1 God the Father is that indulgent Father, who rejoices here for the return
of his Prodigal Son. He that protests so solemnly, Ezech. 33. As I live,
Ezech. 33.11.
I delight not in the death of a sinner; and calls so passionately and
compassionately, Turn you, turn you, for why will you dye, O you house of
Israel? must needs rejoice for the conversion of a sinner. For more honor
redounds to Almighty God, By the restoring of man that fell, then by the
creation of the Angels. Beda.

Aquiu. 1. sec. q 11. Ar. 9.


restauratione hominum, quam creatione Angelorum, as Beda says. Yea, The
conversion of a sinner (says the schoolman) is a more glorious work, then the
Creation of the world, because the one is transient, the other is permanent.
Therefore as Abraham, Genesis 21.3, 8.
the father of the faithful, rejoiced at the birth of Isaac, and feasted it at
his wear^ing; so our heavenly Father rejoices at our new birth; A heavenly
banquet, Greg.
and it yeeldes coeleste conuiuium, when we are weaned from our corruptions.

2 As God the Father who created us, so God the Son who redeemed us, rejoices
for our conversion. He that in the days of his flesh mourned for the hardness
of men's hearts, Mark 3.5.
and rejoiced in the Spirit, when he saw Satan cast down like lightening: Luke
10.21.
and poor sinners, rescued out of the paws of that roaring Lion, cannot but
be sensible of the happy condition of his servants. He that, when he was on
earth, sighed, wept, sweat, fasted, prayed, shed his blood for the salvation of
sinners; being now in heaven, must needs rejoice for a sinners conversion, when
he sees that his fasting, sweating, bleeding, his sighs, prayers, and tears
are not spent in vain. According to that in the three and fiftieth of Esaiah,
Verse 11.
He shall see of the travail of his soul, and shall be satisfied.

3 God the Holy Ghost, who sanctifies us, Ephesians. 4.30.
rejoices. For, as we grieve the Spirit of God by our sins; so we make him
glad by our repentance, as the careful Physician is glad for the recovery of
his sick patient. You are the Temples of the Holy Ghost, 1. Cor. 3.16.
says the Apostle. Now when these temples shall be like the Egyptian temples,
wherein was nothing, but a Cat or a Crocodile, the Spirit of God mournes, but
when these temples shall be cleansed by repentance, and become like the Arc,
which held the holy things of God, he rejoices.

Thus as a man, having taken pains in setting, watering, and cherrishing some
fair plant, greeues to behold it eaten with the Canker; but when he sees the
Canker killed, and the tree become flourishing and fruitful, rejoices in his
labor: So God the Father, who has planted us with a divine hand, God the
Son, who has watered us with his precious blood, and God the holy Ghost, who
cherrisheth us with the influences of grace, beholding the Canker of corruption
fretting in our souls, mournes; but seeing this Canker killed by repentance,
and us, like good trees, become fruitful in good works, rejoices exceedingly.

NOw this joy of the elect Angels, For whom this joy is in heaven.
and the blessed Trinity, is, for one sinner that repents. Almighty God, who
has recorded in his Calendar, the Book of Life, the names of all the Elect,
neglects not one of them: So that, Whosoever shall offend one of these little
ones, Mat. 18.6.
it were better that a Millstone were hanged about his neck, and he cast
into the depth of the Sea. John 10.11. Luke 15.4.
He that is the good Shepherd, seeks after that one lost Sheep, and
rejoices so when he has found him; Chrysostom. sermon. 168.
Quia in vno, inuenit omnes; because in finding that one, he finds every one.

One link of his golden Chain must not be broken, because it is the
dissoluing of the whole; So that if any one of his go astray, he sends after
him, to reclaim him and when this wandering sinner returns by unfeigned
repentance, he rejoices more in him, then in ninety and nine just persons.

Luke 17 17.
But as our Savior said concerning the Lepers, and nouem vbi sunt? Where are
the nine? so may I say, Where are these ninety and nine just persons? Surely it
is here, as it was there, the writ will be returned with a non sunt Verse 18.
inuenti: they are not to be found. Solomon tells us, Eccles. 7.20.
that there is not a just man upon earth, that does good, and sins not. S.
John says, If we say, 1. John 1.8. James 3.2.
We have no sin, we deceive our selves. Yea, S. James acknowledges, (without
excluding himself) that in many things we offend all. Quomodo potest esse
iustitia, vbi non potest deesse culpa? How then, Bern. sermon. 5. in Isaiah.
says Bernard, can we stand upon our righteousness, when as we cannot be
free from sinfulnes? There is no man so righteous, but it may be said unto him
in our Saviors words, Vnum tibi deest: There is one thing wanting to thee.
Mark 10.21.
Yea surely many things. Therefore S. Augustine said truly, August. de ciu. Dei,
19.27.
our justice consists rather in remission, then perfection: Where then are
these ninety and nine just persons? I answer, the Scriptures speak of two
sorts of just persons; there are some just opinione, in conceit and opinion;
some veritate, in truth.

There are some who are just in conceit only: such were they of whom our
Savior speaks, Mat. 9.12, 13.
The whole have no need of the Physicion, but the sick; I came not to call the
righteous, but sinners to repentance. Those whole and righteous, are the same
that these just persons are; Nomine iusti, te superbi. Chrysostom.
men just in title, but proud in truth; whose proud spirits raised up in them a
high conceit of righteousness: and as those needed not the Physician: so these
need not repentance. And the like stupifaction we find upon the conscience of
the vaunting Pharisie, Luke 18.11.
I thank God (says he) I am not as other men, extortioners, unjust,
adulterers; I fast twice in the week, I give tithes of all I possess. Here is
a man that is just and sins not, as appears by the negative and
affirmative branches of his confession: But this was opinione tantum, only in
his own conceit. And such were these Pharisees, whose folly our Savior here
checks very justly: as if he should say, I tell you, there is more joy for one
of these penitent sinners, which you despise, the^ for ninety nine such just
persons as you are, who are just only in conceit.

Again, as there is justice in conceit, so is there also in truth, and that
both passive and active; there is justice by imputation, and justice in action:
So Abraham believed in God, Genesis 15.6.
and that was counted unto him for righteousness; and in obedience to Gods
commandment he was ready to sacrifice Isaac, Genesis 22.10.
and so he was just in action: So was he just, as S. Paul describes Justice,
Romans 4.6.
and as S. James does. Now this passive justice, which is by imputatio^, Iam.
2.21.
is perfect, Romans 4.5.
because it is the act of God which caused the Apostle to make that comfortable
challenge, Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods chosen? It is God that
justifies. Romans 8.33.


But the active and inherent righteousness is not so, A house begun, Bern. in
Psalm. 91.
it is but domus inchoata, as S. Bernard says: and this building is never
perfected, until we come to that House, whose founder and builder is God. It
was therefore a worthy speech of famous Constantine to Acesius the Nouatian,
Socrat. histor. lib. 1. cap. 7.
that stood upon this absolute Justice: Para tibi scalam, Acesi, etc. Get thee
a Ladder Acesius, by which thou may climb to heaven alone.

Brightman, upon the third of the Revelation, has a harsh comparison, and a
worse Conclusion. He makes the Church of Laodicea a type of the Church of
England, but most injuriously: For what? can he find nothing that is good and
worthy of commendation in this Church, as our Savior found none in the Church
of Laodicea? This comparison is bad, but his Conclusion is worse: Would to GOD
thou were totally Romish, Vtinam totus Romanus esses, vel plena^ reformatione^
susciperes. Eccles. 7.16.
or would embrace a full reformation. You see here, that there is a reason
of Salomons Counsel; Be not just overmuch. Shall a Church, because she cannot
obtain a perfect reformation, reject her union with Christ? What more impious?
And shall a Christian, because he cannot attain to an absolute perfection,
cast off all care of Christianity, and betake himself to a debosht kind of
life? What more absurd?

If Brightman had that full reformation he desires, yet a Brownist would take
up that vtinam against him, because his would not be a perfect constitution of
a Church. And were he turned Brownist, the Anabaptist would use his vtinam
also, because, he has retained the mark of the Beast. And, Tertullian said
truly. Et pariter laedunt gelidum feruensque lauacrum: sic nimium sapere
stultum facit improba secta ad Senatore^.
if he should embrace Anabaptisme, the Familist would come upon him with that
vtinam, because he had not obtained the lovely being. Thus erroneous
singularity hardly finds any Center; and when men run into extremes, they
precipitate themselves into endless vanities. The Apostles sapere ad
sobrietatem: to be wise to sobriety, is a singular blessing. Romans 12.3.
We know, there are diverse degrees of active righteousness, according to the
measure of grace, severally imparted to the servants of God. Some there are,
who, for their eminency in grace, 1. Chron. 11.
are like David's three Worthies; some like his thirty, who were valiant, yet
attained not to the honor of the three; some of an inferior rank, yet good
Soldiers too. And so are there scholars of diverse forms in the School of
Christ, and soldiers of diverse ranks in his camp, yet good Christians too. As
one Star differs from another in glory, so do the servants of God in grace.
Job shined like the day star in the East. Job 1.1, 8.
He was a perfect and upright man, and none like him in the earth: yet may a
less measure of grace make a man capable of this title of a just person. For,
whosoever is justified by faith in Christ, and sanctified in some measure, by
the Spirit of God, may truly be called a just man, albeit he be not free from
infirmities and frailties; because his frailties and imperfections are covered
with the mantle of Christ's merits; and his sincere, though weak endeavors, are
accepted of Almighty God as perfect actions; according to that 2. Cor. 8.12. If
there be in us a willing mind, God accepts not according to that we have,
but according to that we have not. And so, these ninety nine may be called
just, In their degrees.
suis gradibus, and need no repentance comparatiue, by way of comparison, as
having not so much need as others, who have sinned more grievously. For as it
was in the legal pollutions, some had not so much need of clensing as others:
so is it in the spiritual, according to our Saviors saying, He that is
washed, John 13.10.
needs not to wash, saving his feet only. And such just persons also may our
Savior seem to speak of, in regard of the comparison: For (to speak
exexactly) there is small, yea, no joy in heaven for such as are righteous only
in conceit.

But this may seem strange, if it be seriously considered; Romans 9.14.
Is there unrighteousness with God? Shall not the Judge of all the world do
right? Genesis 1^.25.
If God shall more respect a notorious sinner, that is converted, then another,
who has not been so deeply drenched in sin, how can we clear his Justice?
Magna relinquere, amare minora, Dei potestatis est. Chrysolo. sermon. 168.
To this I might answer with Chrysologus, To leave the greatest, and to love
the meanest, is in Gods power, and at his pleasure. He will ever be a free
dispenser of his favors, Romans 9.15.
and will have mercy, on whom he will have mercy. But a distinction will
satisfy this doubt, without recourse to the Sanctuary of Gods secret and
absolute will.

This joy may be said to be respective, or accidental. Respective, in regard of
circumstance thus: there is more joy for such a notorious sinner, because that
such a one being effectually called, commonly becomes the most serious
penitent, and the soundest convert. Such a one will be more humble, more devout,
more diligent then other, in the service of God. Such do exceedingly hunger and
thirst after righteousness. Mat. 5.
By them the Kingdom of heaven suffers violence, and the violent take it by
force, as Christ speaks. Mat. 11.12.
It is with such conuerts, as with iron, and other cold and solid metals,
which, being thoroughly heated, are hotter then other substances, and remain so
longer. The Scriptures yield us two notable insta^ces in this kind. Mary
Magdalen was a notorious sinner, Chrysostom. de Poenitent. hom. 5.
etiam omni delicto conuoluta, as Chrysostom. says; and being converted, who
like her in her repentance, that not only bedewed her cheeks with her tears,
but shed them so abundantly, Luke 7.38.
that she washed our Saviors feet with them? Who more constant in following
Christ? for she never left him, till he left the world, and was translated to
heaven: And her encomium, given her by our Savior is this, Many sins were
forgiven her, Luke 7.47.
therefore she loved much. And S. Paul, who had been a famous persecutor, when
he was called in the way to Damascus, did he not hold a proportionable
correspondence in his conversion and conversation? None more displeased with
himself for his sins, then he; none more humble, more devout, more diligent in
the service of God then he. As before he was a chief sinner; so he now became
a chief Labourer in the Lords Vineyard. So that in this respect, 1. Tim. 1.15.
1. Cor. 15.10.
the holy Angels, and the blessed Trinity may rejoice for the conversion of
such a notorious sinner, more then for ninety and nine, who having not sinned
so hainously, have not repented so seriously, nor reformed themselves so
effectually.

Again, this joy may be called accidental; not that there is any thing
accidental in God: but as Cyprian, his tract de duplici martyrio, (speaking of
this subject) says, Scriptura secundu^ humanos affectus loquitur. The
Scriptures speak to us after the fashion and affections of men. Now with men,
such is the accidental and aduentitious joy, as here is mentioned, and this
with other the like actions and affections, are, for our capacity, ascribed to
Almighty God. Though a man have many Children, and love them all well, yet if
one have been dangerously sick, and be recovered, or been taken captive, and
is delivered, he reioyces more, for the present, in that one, then in all the
rest. And so does our heavenly Father rejoice, when one of his children is
delivered from the sickness of sin, and the captivity of Satan, as appears by
the parable of the fathers feasting, at the return of his prodigal Son; of
who^ Tertul. says, Tertul. de poenitent. cap. 8.
Chariorem senserat quem amiserat: He esteemed this regained son which was
lost, most dear unto him. The more dangerous the fight, Quanto maius periculum
in bello, tanto maius gaudiu^ in triumpho. Aug. confess 83.
the more joyful the triumph. Loss and want, gain more desire and delight,
then fruition can. The lost sheep is diligently looked after, when the restare
scarce looked on. How acceptable is a calm after a storm? how comfortable the
bright Sunshine, after a dark and gloomy day? Nazian. de. Cypr. Orat.
how delectable the pleasant spring, after the sad winter? Transisse a morte ad
vitam, vitae gratiam duplicat: Bern. in Cant. sermon. 68.
To be restored from death to life, makes life much more acceptable. And what
is the restoring of a sinner to the state of grace, by repentance, but life
from the dead, Romans 11.15.
as the Apostle speaks? And this was the ground of the fathers Joy, in the
last verse of this Chapter; This thy brother was dead, and is alive again.
Thus there is a joy, for a man remaining in the state of grace, like the still
continued current of a river, and there is a joy for a sinner restored to the
state of grace by repentance, which is like the interrupted stream of the same
river, which, having got passage, runs strongly and violently. But in a word,
to speak punctually, these speeches import thus much, that repentance is Deo
gratissimum, Cypr. quo supra.
(as Cyprian says) that which is most acceptable to Almighty God.

Hitherto I have opened my text; Now I will draw to an end with some words of
Application.

And is there such joy in heaven for the repentance of a sinner! why then
should any penitent sinner despair? Shall a man continue mourning, when heaven
reioyces for him? shall he be dejected on earth, whilst the Angels do carroll
it in heaven? This is dangerous to man, and odious to God. It is dangerous to
man: Non tam grave pugnantem vulnerari, Chrysostom. ad pop. An^^o. hom. 80.
etc. says Chrysostom. It is not so dangerous to be wounded as desperately to
refuse to be cured. It is hateful to God, as that which calls into question his
glorious attributes of Power, Truth and Mercy. His Mercy, which is over all his
works; His Truth, Psalm. 145.
who has protested solemnly, As I live, Ezech. 33.
I delight not in the death of a sinner; His Power, who is able to do exceeding
abunda^tly, Ephesians. 3.
above all that we can ask or think. The cause of despair is sin, especially
some notorious sin, which wounds the soul more dangerously: but oppose to this
the infinite mercy of Almighty God. Say not to me (says Chrysostom.) My sin is
great, and how can I be saved? Quod tu non potes, Chrysostom. ad pop. hom. 80.
tuus potest Dominus: That which thou can not do, thy merciful God can.
Gods mercies are exceeding great, and must not be measured with our shallow
scantling. Yea, they are infinite: 2. Sam. 24.14. Mensuram non habent.
Chrysostom. de poenit. hom. 3.
So that if thou be truly penitent, thy sins, in comparison of Gods mercy,
are but scintilla ad Mare: a spark, in comparison of the Sea. And can a spark
of fire live in the vast Ocean? Again, consider these lively presidents of
Gods gracious pardon, granted to penitent sinners. Is thy sin great? so was
Peter's. Are they many? Mat. 26.70, 74. Luke 7.47.
so were Mary Magdalens. Are they foul? John 8.3.
so were the woman's taken in adultery. Are they cruel? so were Paul's. Act.
22.4. Psalm. 51.14.
Are they bloody: so were David's. Yet behold, all these upon their serious
repentance obtained mercy. And it is very obseruable, that our Savior, Iansen.
Concord. cap. 146.
after his resurrection, In consolationem poenitentium, for the comfort of true
penitents, appeared first to Mary Magdalen, and to Peter, who had been
grievous sinners. Your hands are full of blood, says the Lord to the Jews,
Isaiah 1.15.
When you spread them out, I will hide my face: yet upon condition of
repentance, Verse 17, 18.
he calls them to a parle of peace. Cease to do evil, learn to do well; Then
come, let us reason together, says the Lord; Though your sins be as scarlet,
they shall be as white as snow, though they be red like crimson, they shall be
as wool. Nulla est macula, (says Anselm) Sin can never take so deep a die,
Anselme in 1. Cor. 12.
but by true and unfeigned repentance it may be washed away.

August. hom. 27. ex. 50.
When S. Augustine had delivered a point of doctrine like this, some objected
that he opened a gap to sin; but he truly answered, that it was Portus
poenitentiae, a haven to which a penitent sinner should repair, and was
therefore rather a door and motive to repentance. And reason, because this joy
of the Angels in heaven, and comfort of men upon earth, depends upon this
repentance. Non meis verbis sed amentiae suae culpa tribuenda est. Romans 6.1.
And as Chrysostom. said in the like case, If any hereupon will take boldness to
sin, it is his own folly, not my fault. Shall we continue in sin, that grace
may abound? God forbid. This indeed were a wicked, a wretched resolution.
Fulgent. de paenitent.
Fulgentius says truly, As to repent without hope is mere desperation, so to
hope without repentance, is vain presumption. That is a worthy caveat that
Chrysostom. gives to this purpose; Pervert not the order, Ordinem' non peruertas,
ne vtilitatem perdas. Chrysostom. de poen. ho. 3.
lest thou lose the benefit. A man must keep a right method, that will have
true comfort; Thou must not sin, that thou may repent, but thou must repent
if thou have sinned. Medicamentu^ propter vulnus etc. Ambros. de poenit. 2.10.
The wound is not ordained for the Plaster, but the plaster for the wound.
And so, sin was not ordained for repentance, but repentance for sin. And what
is the end of this our Saviors speech, and all that I have said, but that you
and I, and every one of us, be thereby stirred up to repentance?

The ancient fathers have given many Elogiums to this duty, to stir us up to
the diligent practice of it. Peccata absoluit, Cassiodor. in Psalm. 31. Diabolum
superat coelum aperit. Chrysostom. de poenitent. hom. 3.
etc. It procures both remission and reward, says Cassiodore. It subdues the
devil, and opens to us the door of heaven, says Chrysostom. Neither is this a
slender motive, that it yields joy to heaven: Tu ergo laetare Angelos, says S.
Ambrose: and so say I, Let us all endeavor, that heaven may rejoice for us,
which must be effected by our repentance. A man that is wounded, may easily
be persuaded to seek for cure. Peccatum vulnus paenitentia medicina. Chrysostom.
de paenit. hom. 3.
Now sin wounds, repentance cures. Should we not seek for it? A man in a
dangerous shipwreck, will gladly lay hold upon a planke, to save himself,
from drowning. Est naufragis tabula, says Tertullian, Tertul. de paenit. cap.
4.
repentance is a planke to save our souls from drowning in the gulf of
eternal perdition. should we not lay hold on it? Paenitentia pacem operatur.
Bern.
A subject that has offended his Sovereign, will be glad of means of
pacificatio^; behold, repentance is the means to make our peace with God; should
we not be glad of it?

Oh the miserable condition of them, who remain impenitent! whilst they cannot
mourn for their sins, they make heaven mourn for them; they deprive
themselves of unspeakable comfort, lie under the wrath of God, and are liable
to eternal condemnation, according to that in the 2. Romans 5. Thou, after thy
hardness, and heart that cannot repent, treasurest up to thy self wrath against
the day of wrath. Chrysostom.
Hoc nobis Deus inseuit: God has planted this principle in every man's heart,
that sin must be punished, either in this life, or in the life to come: either
in this life by unfeigned repentance, or in the life to come, by eternal
torments. Now if any, notwithstanding all this, will yet remain impenitent, and
hope for mercy; let him hear what Chrysostom. says, Chrysostom. in ^. Corinth.
hom. 23.
Quomodo Deum rogas vt tibi parcat, cum tu tibi minime parcas? How can thou
desire God to have compassion upon thee, when thou have no compassion upon thy
self? Aulus Gellius writes, that the Romans sent the Carthaginians hastam,
Aul. Gel. lib. 10 cap. 27.
and caduceum: a spear and a white wand, the ensigns of war and peace, and
offered them their choice. So deals the Lord with us; upon our repentance he
offers us conditions of Peace; but if we stand out, he proclaims open war
against us, by his holy Harold the Prophet Isaiah, Isai. 48.22.
saying, There is no peace to the wicked, says the Lord.

Repentance, I know, is yrkesome to flesh and blood, but the issue thereof is
comfortable; 2. Cor. 7.10.
for it is to salvation. And how much better is it to mourn and sorrow here,
where comfort is to be had, then in hell, where there is no hope, no help?
Better it is to weep here for our sins, where our seed of tears may procure
us a joyful harvest, Psalm. 126.5.
then to reserve them for that place, where is nothing but weeping and gnashing
of teeth. What are a few sighs or tears, to those eternal torments of hell?
What is the abandoning of a few vain and transitory pleasures, to the rivers
of celestial and permanent joys? I may say in Nazian. words, Haec negotiatio
est omnium praestantissima: Nazianz. Orat. de Cypr.
No traffic in the world like this, to change a little sorrow, for a great
deal of joy; yea, for infinite and endless joys.

It was a moderate speech of that devout father to Eugenius. Non dico semper
etc. I do not exhort thee to restore thy self to thy self always, Bern. de
consider. ad Eugen.
I do not desire thee to do it often, but only sometime. And that which he
speaks of Eugenius his retyring himself to consideration, I may apply to the
sequestring of our selves to the actions of humiliation; as fasting, prayer,
repentance. I do not exhort you to do it always; nay, I do not now press you
to do it often. Yet in all reason, some times are to be set apart to these
duties; for shall we have times of feasting, and not of fasting? of mirth, and
not of mourning? of sinning, and not of repenting? And if there be any, behold,
the present time does especially inuit us hereunto. For the Church has
anciently sequestered this time of Lent, for these holy duties, in especial
manner; In regard of our Saviors Passion, in respect of his Resurrection,
Which are at this time celebrated.
and for the celebration of the blessed Sacrament. In regard of his Passion,
and that fitly: for by our humiliation we do, in some sort, partake with Christ
in his Passion; according to that in the 8. Romans 17. If we suffer with him, we
shall also be glorified with him. For albeit we are not called to follow him
to mount Caluary, that our hands and feet may be pierced with the nails, our
sides with the spear, and our heads with the Crown of thorns; yet, whosoever
will have comfort by Christ, must have his heart pierced with remorse for his
sins, that he may be partaker of that benediction, Blessed are those that
mourn, Mat. 5.
for they shall be comforted.

Again, in respect of his resurrection; Easter, as Leo says, is the greatest
of all Christian solemnities. The Nativity of Christ is indeed a high
Festival, but his Resurrection surpasses it. For, when Christ came into the
world, he went down like David into the valley to encounter Goliath, in the
opinion of men, like David, 1. Sam. 17.
a weak champion for such a combat; but when he arose from the grave, he
came up, like David out of the valley, a glorious Conqueror.

Now Lent is, Leo de Quadrages. sermon. 3.
ad Paschale festum praeparatio, a preparation to the great solemnity of
Easter, that we may keep that feast with the unleavened bread of sincerity
and truth, 1. Cor. 5.
and be worthy partakers of the blessed Sacrament. S. Chrysostom more then
once, calls it sanctam Quadragesimam, the holy time of Lent; not because the
time is in it self more holy then others; but because that this time should be
dedicated, and we, at this time, devoted to holiness in especial manner.
Yea, Leo doubted not to say, Parum religiosus, etc. Leo de Quadrages. sermon. 1.
If a man be not religious at this time, there is little hope that he will be
at any time.

To conclude therefore; Seeing we have the time inuiting us, and our Saviors
comfortable speech exciting us; Let us search and try our ways, Lam. 3.40.
and turn unto the Lord; Let us meet him with broken and contrite hearts; let
us seek mercy from him, with prayers and tears of true repentance, that
heaven may rejoice for us. In a word, if there be any one, which has heard me
this day, whose heart has smitte^ him for his sins, and his soul is touched
with remorse, with a purpose of reformation (as I hope there are many) then may
I say in our Saviors words, Luke 19.
This day is salvation come to this house. You have made heaven glad: The holy
Angels, and the blessed Trinity do this day rejoice for you, and you shall one
day rejoice in heaven, in the presence of those holy Angels, and that blessed
Trinity, and that joy shall never be taken from you: which the Lord for his
mercies sake, and for the merits of our blessed Savior, grant us; To whom with
the Father and the holy Ghost, be all honor and glory, Majesty and dominion,
now and for ever, Amen.

FINIS.
A SVB-POENA FROM THE STARCHAMBER OF HEAVEN. A Sermon preached at Paul's Cross
the 4. of August. 1622. With some particular Enlargements which the limited
time would not then allow. By DAN. DONE, Master of Arts, and Minister of the
Word.

August. Confess. lib. 8. cap. 12. Toll, Lege: Toll, Lege. LONDON, Printed by
Augustine Mathewes for John Grismand, and are to be sold at his Shop in Paul's
Alley at the Sign of the Gunne. 1623.

Honoratiss. Dominis. IOHANNI COM. DE HOLDERNESSE, VICECOM. HADDINGTON, ET
BARON DE KINGSTON AD THAMESIN, etc. ET DOMINO HENRICO HOBART, MIL. ET BARONET.
CAPIT. JUST. DOMINI REGIS DE BANCO. NEC NON VIRO VERE REVERENDO MVLTIS QVE
NOMINIBVS COLENDO IOHANNI DONE DOCTORI IN SACRA THEOLOG. ET DECANO ECCLESIAE
DIVI PAVLI LONDON.

DANIEL DONE HAS SVAS QVALES CVNQVE MEDITATIONES HVMILLIME. D. D. D.

To the Reader.
COurteous Reader, I have in the Title Page of this Book rendered a sufficient
reason of the Excrescencie of this Sermon. Yet for thy more particular
satisfaction, understand, that from the Beginning of it to the 52. Page, I
preached it word for word, as it is Printed. Now because many at the Cross had
run into Desperate Debts, Borrowed so much Time of the Auditory, as they
never meant to repay: therefore I resolved to content my self with a brief
Paraphrasticall Explication of the Particulars that remained, and so, to keep
my self out of Debt; rather then Borrow what I thought I should never repay.
Since, being solicited to Publish what I then Preached: that each Part might
enjoy its just Proportion for the Exact Composition of the whole, I have
enlarged my self in Those last Particulars: and Commend my Pains therein to
thy Candid Interpretation. If thou meet with any Faults in the Print, they are
I dare promise but Literal, and such as will scarce puzzle the most
Illiterate. Correct them, if thou please, with thy Pen. If there be any thing
amiss either in the Method, or Matter: thy Friendly Information shall be
Thrice acceptable. In the mean time, I advise Thee to Read with understanding,
to Remember what thou do Read: And the Lord give thee grace to practice what
thou do remember. Farewell.

Thine in Christ, DAN. DONE.

A SVBPOENA from the Star Chamber of Heaven.
LVKE 3.9. Now is the Axe laid unto the root of the the trees: every tree
therefore not bringing forth good fruit, is hewn down, and cast into the
fire.


THis Text at the first blush, appears like it self, bearing a face of utter
ruin and destruction: parallel unto that of the Edomites, Psa. 137.7. Down
with it, down with it, even to the ground. It begins with the Axe, and
ends with Fire, two merciless instruments of ruin and destruction. The
former makes work for the latter; the Axe for the Fire: for the Axe is laid
unto the root of the tree, that the tree being cut down, may be cast into the
fire. The entrance into this Text does something resemble that into Paradise:
there was a flaming sword, Genes. 3.24.
Genesis 3.24. here a fearful Axe: yet both far different for their ends:
that was forcibly to drive Man back from the way, but this is forcibly to
drive man into the way unto the Tree of life: that, whilst he seriously
considers his fearful estate, how that his transgressions have made him
like a Tree, unto the root whereof an Axe is laid to hew it down, that it may
be cast into the fire, he may presently turn unto God, and in due time bring
forth fruits meet for repentance, lest he also be hewn down by the Axe
of Gods wrath, and so perish for ever.

This sacred Writ may not unfitly be termed a Subpoena, sent from the
Star Chamber of Heaven, the high Court of Almighty God, and served by John the
Baptist, Gods especial Bayliffe, upon certain Pharisees and Sadduces that
came unto his Baptism: wherein is given them to understand, that they must
not, as formerly they had done, content themselves with an outward form of
repentance, a seeming godly sorrow for their sins: but must manifest the
truth thereof in bringing forth fruits worthy repentance, making their
appearance out of hand before almighty God in all holiness and righteousness
of life under pain of both temporal and eternal destruction. Now this
Subpoena is expressed by way of Parable, or Metaphor, wherein God is resembled
unto an Husbandman, or Gardener traversing his ground, with an Axe in his hand,
having this resolution in his heart; not to suffer any Tree to grow in his
Orchyard, that does not bring forth good fruit, but to cut it up even at the
very root, and to make of it fuel for the fire. The whole World is Gods
Orchard: the men in the world are the trees of this Orchyard: that man which
brings not forth the good fruit of good living, the Lord will utterly root
up out of the land of the living: for, Now is the Axe laid unto the root of the
trees; every tree therefore not bringing forth good fruit, is hewn down, and
cast into the fire.

For the resolution of this Writ, may it please you to take three things into
your consideration.

1. The parties whom it summons and concerns, expressed, 1. Indefinitely,
(...), trees. 2. Universally, (...), every tree.


2. The thing required of every tree, and that is, (...) to bring forth good
fruit.

1. We must (...), bring forth, there is a production.

2. We must (...), bring forth fruit, there is a fructification.

3. We must (...), bring forth good fruit, there is a qualification.

3. The Penalty, in case the parties prove delinquent, and that is set down,

1. as intended, in the first words, Now is the Axe laid unto the root of the
trees.

2. as inflicted, in the words following, Every tree therefore not bringing
forth good fruit, is hewn down, and cast into the fire.

In the Penalty, as intended, observe,

1. the Instrument for the performing of it, (...), an Axe.

2. the Application of it, (...), it is laid to the trees.

3. the Place or part unto which it is applied, (...), unto the root of the
trees.

4. the Time of laying this Axe unto the root of the trees, (...), now, now is
the axe laid unto the root of the trees.

In the penalty, as inflicted, we have to observe,

1. The Duplicitie of it.

1. an excision, (...), is hewn down. 2. an exustion, (...), is cast into the
fire.
2. The Certainty of it, intimated in the tense, wherein it is expressed: It
is not said, The tree which brings not forth good fruit, shall be hewn
down, and cast into the fire, but is hewn down, and cast into the fire, it
being as certain as if it were already inflicted.

3. The Generality, or large extent of it, no tree shall escape, for (...),
Every tree not bringing forth good fruit, is hewn down, and cast into the
fire.

These are the particulars obseruable in this text; I have here as ye see,
Magnum in paruo, a little world of matter in a few words; Bu^linger. in 3.
Matthew.
Singula verba suam habent epitasin, each word has his weight, and is not
lightly to be passed over: therefore something of every thing, plainly of all:
I pray God as profitably unto all.

The first general Part.
And first of the Parties, whom this Writ does summon and concern;
indefinitely, (...), trees: not natural, but metaphorical; for by trees is
meant men. And let not this Metaphore seem strange: Mark ^.24.
for as he did that was our Saviors patient for the recovering of his eye
sight, so may we see men, (...), like trees. It is the allusion of that
renowned Heathen, Aristotle.
that Man is planta inuersa, a tree turned vpside down: his head is the root,
his body the trunk, his arms and legs the maine branches, his fingers and
toes the lesser boughs, his skin the bark, his soul the life of the whole.
And in the sacred Scripture, we find it a familiar metaphor, to express Man by
a tree: Matthew. 12.33.
Either make the tree good, and his fruit good; or the tree corrupt, and his
fruit corrupt: for the tree is known by the fruit. Where by tree is meant man;
by fruit, his works: both Jews and Gentiles are by Saint Paul termed trees,
Romans 11. Romans 11.
the Jew a good Olive tree, the Gentile a wild Olive tree. Not to multiply
instances, let one place speak for all. The Prophet David describing the state
of Psalm. 1.5.
the child of God, he shall be (says he) like a tree planted by the rivers of
waters. Thus man is a tree, cuius radix, voluntas: folium, cogtatio: flos,
sermo: fructus, opus, says Ludolphus: De vita Christi.
his will is the root, his thought the leaf, his speech the flower, his work
the fruit.

Now as of Trees, some are high and lofty, as the Cedars; some low, as the
shrubs: so of Men, some are high and mighty, like the Cedars of Lebanon, and
the Oaks of Basan, public men, men of eminent place in Civil and
Ecclesiastical government: some low like shrubs, private men, men of inferior
note and condition: This Subpoena concerns not only some one tree
particularly, a princely Cedar, or petty shrub; but indefinitely, (...), trees,
that is, any trees: yea universally, (...), every tree: not only Genera
singulorum, some Princes, some Priests, some People: but singula generum, all
Princes, all Priests, all People. So that you cannot say unto me, as the
Apostles unto our Savior, Matthew. 26.22.
when he told them that one of them should betray him, Is is J? or, is it I?
or as the high Priests to Judas, Matt 27.4. What is it to us? For as our
Prognosticators in the Frontispice, and Title page of their Almanacks, that
they are calculated for the Meridian of some particular Town, or City, but may
serve generally for the whole Country: So may I say of this Subpoena, though
it was particularly served upon the Jews that came to be baptized of John in
the river of Jordan; yet it concerns all, both Jews and Gentiles, for whose
sins our blessed Savior shed forth the Jordan of his precious blood: And
therefore God does send me, though the meanest of those that minister and serve
at his Altar, to serve this Subpoena upon every one here present: Clamo and
mihi ipse, I except not my self: Non enim tam improbus sum, vt curationes
aeger obeam, sed tanquam in eodem valet udinario jaceam de communi malo
vobiscum colloquor, remedia communico. As Seneca most sweetly, and more
particularly to his Lucilius, Ep. 27. Seeing therefore it is directed to every
one of us, let every one of us in the fear of God, as we tender the good of
our own souls, hearken with reverence and attention what God in this Writ
requires of us; and the Lord of his mercy give us grace and power to perform
it.

That which God in this Writ requires of us, is, (...), The second general
part.
to bring forth good fruit.

1. We must (...), bring forth, there is a Production.

2. We must (...), bring forth fruit, there is a fructification.

3. We must (...), bring forth good fruit, there is a qualification.

First for the Production, 1. A Production.
Every tree must (...), bring forth. This verb (...) is a word of action: and
action is the life of the world. The Celestial creatures have their continual
motion, the Sublunary are estated in alteration Officiosum hoc animal Deus
creauit, and naturalis est sibi exercitiorum instantia: otium vero in natural.
Obest enim inertia cunctis corporis membris, nulli autemvt animae. E^ namque
cum continuo sit naturaliter mobilis ociari non patitur. Aqu in loc^^.
Man the great worlds little sum, has an active soul infused into an
organicall body: nothing is more natural unto him then to be in action. Sloth
is not more the bane of the body, then of the Soul: for the Soul (says
Aquinas) being always naturally mooueable, cannot endure to be out of action.
A garment out of wearing, is subject to the M^ath: Iron not used, contracteth
rust; standing waters, corruption. The wheel that lies still, is a fit Loome
for the Spider to work in. Otium puluinar Satanae.
When man is idle, out of action, the Devil is ready at his elbow to press
him for his Soldier. What is the reason that many do so lust after their
Dalilahs, offer so much incense unto Venus, and sacrifice so often to her
Shrine? Is it not because they are Idle? For as our learned Postiller has
observed it, Doctor Boys.
Unchaste folly is for the most part begot of an idle brain, and hatched in a
lazy body. Otia dant vitia. Men in doing nothing, learn to do nothing but
eui^l: yea, like soft wax, they are then capable of any impression, fit to do
the Devil any service. Singularly commendable therefore is that Discipline which
is practiced in Cassan, The Preachers Travels.
a principal city in Parthia: there no idle person is permitted to live among
them. Sure I am in Gods vineyard none must stand idle. Adam even in his
innocence must dress and keep the garden of Eden. Gene. 2.15.
Man is borne to labor as the sparkles that fly upward, says Job It is every
man's Calling to work, Job 5.7.
Gene. 3.17.
to eat his bread in the sweat of his brows; but to be idle, neither Church nor
Commonwealth affords any such Calling. In both some labor, some look over,
but none must look on, standing like ciphers to make up a number, or fill up a
room: God will not allow such dead trees any room in his Orchard: none must
be dry and barren, but all bearing Trees, Every tree must (...) bring forth.

All Trees must be bearing Trees, 2. A Fructification.
Trees that bring forth: but this is not all: there must be fructification as
well as production. Every Tree must (...) bring forth Fruit. We read that our
Savior, Matthew. 21.19.
going from his lodging in Bethany unto the City of Jerusalem, saw a Fig
tree in the way, went unto it, and finding nothing thereon but Leaves, left it
not as he found it, but cursed it; so that it presently withered away. My
beloved, understand the Moral, for Christ knew well enough, it was not the
time of the year for the Fig tree to bring forth fruit: no, Ludolph. de vita
Christi.
Non ficus, sed fidem, non fructus arboris, sed fructus operis quaesiuit. He
sought not for Figs but for Faith, not for the fruit of the Tree, but for the
fruit of Works. It is not with God as it is with Man: Though we will not
suffer dead Trees to stand in our grounds, but will dig them up by the
roots, and have them carried forth to the Fire; yet we will suffer many trees
and plants to grow in our grounds, not because they bring us forth any fruit,
or are otherwise profitable unto us, but because they adorn and beautify the
ground with their pleasing variety. But God, as he will not suffer a dead
stock to cumber his Orchard; so he cannot endure fruitles and unprofitable
Trees, such as grow pro forma tantum, only for fashions sake, that are all for
leaves and flowers, but nothing for fruit. It is not the carrying of a Bible
under the arm, It is not the frequent repayring unto Gods Temple to hear his
Word, that makes a sound and acceptable Christian in the sight of God: for
though Happy is that house, and blessed always that Congregation, wherein
Martha complains of Mary: Foelix domus and beata semper congregatio vbi de
Maria Martha conqueritur. Sermon. de Virginis Assumpt.
as says Saint Bernard: Though it be a joyful sight and a blessedness to the
beholding eye, when men and women are so Reliously affected as they can find
in their hearts to sequester themselves from their worldly cares to go to Gods
Church; yet who is ignorant that this may be done for half ends, and sinister
respects, to have our brains swimming in knowledge, and our tongues tipped with
the Scripture Dialect, that so we may beget an opinion of our holiness in
others, and the better work out our more private ends. It is not therefore I
say, sufficient that we be frequent hearers of the Word, unless we be doers
also: It is not a formal conformity, in passages of Piety, it is not the
turning up of our eye unto heaven, it is not a volubility of discourse in cases
of Christianity that will serve the turn, all this is but a mere flourish,
but a bringing forth of leaves and flowers; whereas God will have every Tree
(...) to bring forth fruit.

And though nothing but Fruit, 3 The Qualification.
yet not any fruit will serve his turn: it must not be (...) sed (...): bad,
but good. Every tree must (...) bring forth good fruit, the fruits of
holiness and sanctification.

The word (...) which is here translated Bonum g^^^^ (...) ^fie pulchrum be
(...) we must bring (...): ^t must be beautiful in the (...) of Men: and good
in the sight of God: our fruit must be beautiful ^n the sight of Men; for our
lives must so shine before men, that they may see our good Works, and glorify
our Father which is in heaven. Matthew. 5.16.
Our fruit must be also good in the sight of God; for he will not be put off
with counterfeit piety: with him it is no better then double impiety: for so
shall we find it in our reckonings at the last day. Both then must go
together: we live here in the sight of God and Man, and therefore must with
Saint Paul, Acts 24.16.
herein exercise our selves, that we may have a good Conscience void of
offense toward God and toward man. Most true it is, Only good fruit is ever
beautiful, but that which is only beautiful, is never good. Indeed the
Pharisees had their fruits, such as were beautiful, full of beauty unto the
eye, they had their Almes-deedes, Matthew. 6.
their Prayers, their Fastings, excellent works, excellent fruits of Piety,
at the first blush beyond all compare, not to be paraleld, they being
presented unto the eye of the world in so absolute and complete a form: But
were they as they appeared to be? Certainly nothing less: for our Savior
making a narrow search into the nature of them, found that they were nothing
better then the fruit which Solinus reports to grow in Sodom, which is in
show like other fruit, but being touched there is a strange discovery, Extimae
cutis ambitio fuliginem fauillaceam cohibet, the outward rine or skin is but
a case that is full of filthy soyly embers, and stinking ashes: So their
outward piety was but a case to cover their inward impiety; their fruits
carried a fair gloss, seemed by their outside to side with the best: but All
is not gold that glisters: within they were full of pride, vain glory, and
hypocrisy: men did see what they did, and thereby happily did glorify God;
but what they did, was only to be seen of men, and therein they did dishonor
God. Indeed such fruits ordinarily go for current with man, because he
receives direction for his Judgment, as he is informed by his outward
senses. But it is not so with God: his All-seeing Eye, piercing the most inward
and secret parts, he prizeth every thing according to the inward worth, and
judges of the works of piety, as they proceed from the inward purity; so
that he will not be satisfied with false and counterfeit fruits: Such Wares
are not warrantable, not marchantable with God; he requires truth in the
inward parts: Psalm. 51.6.
he will have every tree, (...), to bring forth fruit, not only outwardly
beautiful, but inwardly good and sound.

Every man, as ye have heard, is a tree, every branch of a good tree brings
forth good fruit, so must each part of man: our Hearts must be fruitful, in
sanctified thoughts, and holy desires: our tongues must bring forth gracious
words, such as may magnify Gods holy name, and minister grace and comfort unto
others: our Hands must work the things that are good in the sight of God and
man: our Feet must walk in the ways of peace: in a word, we must give all
our members servants unto righteousness in holiness; Romans 6.19.
Abounding in the fruits of the Spirit, Galat. 5.22.
in love, peace, long suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness,
patience, and in every good work, that may make us perfect men in Christ
Jesus. For this were we elected before the world: Ephesians. 1.4.
God the Father did choose us in Christ his Son before the foundations of the
world, that we should be holy, and without blame before him in love. For this
were we created into the world, whereas all things were made to serve for the
use of man, man was made to serve his Maker: For this end were we redeemed out
of the world: Luke 1.74.
For Christ delivered us from the hands of our enemies that we might serve him
without fear, in holiness and righteousness before him all the days of our
life. For this purpose does God sanctify us in this world with his Holy
Spirit: I will put my Spirit within you, Ezekiel. 36.27.
and cause you to walk in my Statutes, and ye shall keep my judgments and
do them. And for this shall we be glorified in the world to come: Come ye
blessed of my Father, Matthew. 25.34.
take the Inheritance of the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of
the world, for I was an hungered, and ye gave me meat, etc. Thus will God
crown the holy lives of his servants with an eternal weight of glory: Such
honor shall have all his Saints, which are fruitful in good works: not that
they do by their fruits of holiness, and works of piety, No man can merit
heaven.
merit so glorious a remuneration: alas, what can we plead for by way of merit
at Gods hand? seeing when we have done all that we can do, yea, that we are
commanded to do, which is more then we can do; Luke 17.10.
we are but unprofitable servants, says our Savior. And what is the reward
for unprofitable servants, which God will render unto them at the last day?
Why, this is their fearful Sentence, Matthew. 29.30.
Cast ye the unprofitable servant into utter darkness, there shall be
weeping and gnashing of teeth. No, my beloved. Eternal life is not of man's
merit, but of the mere gift of God through Jesus Christ our Lord: Romans 6.23.
As a reverend religious Prelate of our Church has observed, Doctor King, By.
of London.
we may read of a Mercy-seat in the Temple of God, but never hear of a Stool
of Merit, but in the Chapel of Antichrist. Indeed God does in many places of
his Scripture promise the kingdom of heaven to all that lead a religious and
holy life; but this his promise is not grounded upon a foresight of any merit
in man, but proceeds merely from the free grace and bounty of God, who herein
deals with us, as a loving and bountiful father with his child, promising
him some gift of great worth, for the performance of some small piece of
service, happily for making unto him a leg, or the like: that so by his
bounty he may bring his child on willingly to tender that reverend respect,
which otherwise of duty he is bound to do. Holiness of life and conversation
is that which God strictly commands and accordingly requires from every
Christian: It is (as you have heard) the end of our Election, Creation,
Redemption, Sanctification, (...), to bring forth good fruit. If we search the
Bible from the beginning to the ending, we shall find this to be the very pith,
the marrow, the maine subject, and life thereof: yet behold the great goodness
of God, what he might command and compel us unto, in the name of our
Sovereign Lord and maker, he does (considering our weakness and infirmity)
entreat and woo us unto, in the language of a loving and bountiful Father.
Sermon. 3. de verbis Domini.
As S. Augustine most sweetly, Nobis praemia repromittit, vt nobis obsequia
debita seruitutis extorqueat, he does make unto us a promise of remuneration,
to draw us to the performance of that service which in duty we owe unto him in
the whole course of our life and conversation: Vt quos nolle seruire conspicit
sponte, suorum beneficiorum possit promissionibus inuitare, that whom he sees
will not freely serve him of his own accord, he might lovingly and friendly
inuit, by promising a reward.

Why God does promise a revvard to good works.
This does God, to make it known and manifest unto the sons of men, 1. how
sweet and pleasing a savor the bring forth good fruit here on earth; such as
labor for the inward sanctity, and lead a holy and religious Sun of Gods
grace and bounty may yet more clearly and freely reflect its beams upon the
eyes of your understanding, I hold it not unfitting before we proceed any
further in a word or two to remove out of the way the opinion of Man's merit,
which like a thick mist and dark cloud the enemies of the cross of Christ,
have cast before it, to the great obscuring and impayring of the glorious
splendour thereof. It is a point, I take it, well worth the time, and may justly
plead for your Christian attention. Sure I am, it makes much for the promoting
of Gods glory, and the furthering of our own Good: for when we seriously
consider the insufficiency of our own works to save us, we may learn a point
of true wisdom, not to lean upon the broken staff of our own Merits, which
will surely deceive us, but wholly to rely upon the loving mercies of God,
which are sure, and will never fail us. Thus Gods shall be all the glory, and
ours all the good.

I am not ignorant, that many of our modern Divines have not a little studied
this point, and left the fruits of their learned Labors unto the broad eye of
the wo^ld, that who so list may look into them, and receive satisfaction to
the full; for nothing of substance can be super-added unto that, which they
have already set forth: yet I think it not amiss, considering the present
occasion, to borrow a little handful out of the liberal harvest of their
labors, and present you with a taste of their fruirs dressed after my own
fashion: I doubt not but it will be pleasing unto some, I hope and pray that it
may be profitable unto all. Happily I may herein seem to some to make an
impertinent digression from my text; but who so well weighs the drift of the
Holy Ghost, shall find, and consequently bear me witness, that I do not beg
my Theme, pick a quarrel with that which the text of it self will not seem
to afford and offer. That which God in this Writ requires of us, is the
bringing forth of good fruit: this is the maine thing intended in this text,
and pressed upon pain of Gods furious wrath, and fiery displeasure for ever,
signified in being cut down, and cast into the fire. As if he had said more
fully, yet briefly and plainly thus: If ye bring forth good fruit, ye shall be
saved: but if ye do not bring forth good fruit, ye shall be damned. Now, the
not bringing forth of good fruit, being the meritorious cause of our
Damnation, (as you shall hear afterward) one would think on the contrary,
that the bringing forth of good fruit, is a meritorious cause of our Salvation.

That we cannot by way of Merit challenge so magnificent a remuneration, as God
out of his great goodness does bind himself by promise to confer upon the
Sons of Men for their pious and god^y conversation, may be plainly
demonstrated unto you by diverse particulars I will at this time contract my
self in five. In every Work to make it meritorious there are five things
requisite. Our works no^ meritorious for five Reasons.


1. Gratuitie. 2. Utility. 3. Propriety. 4. Purity. 5. Paritie.
1. That Work which does merit any thing at Gods hand must of necessity be
opus Gratuitum, a free will Offering, a work of Gratuitie, and in no wise due
for any other cause or respect. Seeing then we owe of duty unto God whatsoever
we are or have; undoubtedly whatsoever we do, can merit nothing at Gods hand.

2. There must be Utility, that Good which we do, to make it meritorious,
must be profitable and commodious unto him, at whose hands we merit any thing.
But no action of ours of what strain soever it be, can bring any benefit, any
commodity unto God: for as Eliphaz said unto Job, Job 22.23.
May a man be profitable unto God as he that is wise may be profitable unto
himself? Is it any thing to the Almighty that thou art righteous? or is it
profitable to him that thou make thy ways upright? His Interogation does
argue a strong negative resolution: as if he had said in a word, No man's
righteousness can be any way profitable unto God: and therefore we can merit
nothing at Gods hand.

3. In that by which we merit any thing we must have an absolute propriety; it
must be our own. Now Good works, Good fruits are not our own, they are Gods:
we cannot of our selves so much as Will, much less work that which is Good,
for it is God that works in us both the will and the deed: Phil. 2.13.
Therefore we can merit nothing at his hand.

4. There must be a Purity, our works must be performed according to that
absolute Perfection and Purity which God in his revealed will requires of us:
they must be vindicated and freed from all uncleanness and imperfection,
which no man so long as he lives in the flesh can undertake for the best and
choicest fruit he brings forth: for even our best actions, were they narrowly
scanned, in some thing or other Carnis putredinem sapiunt, Lib, instit. de
Justif. fidei, Cap. 10.
as Calvin notes, do savor and relish of the Corruption of the Flesh:
happily they have leaned to some sinister respect, or have not been performed
with such sincerity and alacrity as God requires.

5. To make our works meritorious, there must be a Paritie, there must be
some proportion and equality between that Good we do, and the reward we
receive for it: Now what Parity, what Proportion between our works which are
but temporal and finite, and the reward which is eternal and infinite: The
Natural Philosopher, and any one that is not a mere natural, will tell us
that Finiti ad Infinitum nulla est proportio, there is no proportion between
that which is finite and that which is infinite. Therefore our choicest fruits,
our best works being defective in every one of these five particulars which
ought necessarily to concur for the making of them meritorious, it is strange
there should live in this great light of the Gospel any that dare attempt such
a work of darkness as to stamp man's works with the Character of Merit.
Sure I am in the Word of God we cannot so much as find the Word Merit Indeed
God does very frequently in the Sacred Scripture promise a reward to the godly,
and hence they fondly collect that the godly do merit by the holiness of
their lives: as if between reward and merit there were a mutual relation, that
no reward is given but upon a presupposed merit. For answer whereunto, I may
tell them, as our Savior the Sadduces, Matthew. 22.19.
That they err not knowing the Scriptures: for as the Learned have observed,
that which by Saint Matthew is termed (...) a Reward, Math. 5 46. Luc 6. 32.
is by Saint Luke termed (...), Grace, favor or thanks; to signify unto us,
that when God rewards the righteousness of men, the reward is not to be
ascribed to any worth or dignity in the Creature, but wholly to the benignity
of the Creator: not to any desert or merit in Man, but unto the mere grace and
mercy of his Maker. For as Saint Paul 2 Ephesians. 8.9. 2 Ephesians. 8.9.
a place worth the noting, By Grace we are saved through Faith, and that not of
our selves; it is the gift of God: not of works, lest any man should boast
himself. The Case being so clear, we may be bold to affirm that most
blasphemous is the practice of the Papists who both in Pulpit and Press so
stiffely contend to enthronize the imperfect, impure works of sinful man in
the Chair of Merit, in which nothing by right but the holy and perfect
obedience of the Son of God can sit. My beloved, I dare confidently affirm
it for truth, and you may boldly take it upon that term, that no Mortal by
building him up a Babel of his merits can ever reach Heaven: Heaven being a
transcendent, too high for the short reach of humane merit. The sairest face
has some Mole or Freckle: the soundest Pomegranate, some rotten Kernel:
Corruption is a great part of the best: yea the best even from their conception
are wholly overrun with corruption, from which they can never be thoroughly
purged till the soul and the body by death be parted and put asunder: by
reason whereof even our best actions are stained, our best fruits we bring
forth are foulely blemished, and will not endure the Just eye of heaven to
behold them as they are in themselves: the serious consideration of this made
the Prophet David thus pray unto God: Enter not into judgment with thy
servant, Psalm. 143 2.
for no flesh is righteous in thy sight: Therefore my beloved, instead of
standing like Proud Pharisees upon the tiptoes of of our own goodness, let us
with the Penitent Publican truly humble our selves before the throne of his
Sacred Majesty for our manifold transgressions which bring us under the curse
of the Law: for the manifold sinful imperfections and blemishes even in the
best fruits that ever we brought forth, for which we stand guilty before him:
Let us reject the menstruous and rotten rags of our own righteousness, Esa.
64.6.
wholly relying upon the loving mercies of our heavenly Father, which he has
set forth unto us in his Son Jesus Christ, who himself alone by his most
perfect and all-sufficient obedience has merited our redemption from the wrath
to come, and purchased for us a Kingdom that cannot be moved. Heb. 12.28.
This has he done for us: but how? under condition of our new obedience; of
putting off the old Man, and putting on the new: of forsaking the crooked
paths of Sin, and following the straight way of Righteousness: So that being
redeemed and bought with the price of the Lamb, we must not think we may
live according to the lusts of our own hearts and whatsoever seems good in
our own eyes, for this is nothng else but a trampling of the blood of Christ
under our feet, a turning of the grace of God into wantonness, the only way
to make our selves incapable of that inestimable bounty of our blessed
Redeemer: No, no; such as are Justified by the blood of Christ, and have any
saving portion in his bitter death and passion, are also sanctified by his
blessed Spirit unto all holy obedience, to bring forth good fruit, the fruit
of good living: This is the true Character and cognizance of such as are of the
household of Faith: For as the tree is known by the fruit: James 2.18.
so is Faith made manifest by the works of righteousness. The bringing forth
of good fruit is via Regia, the Kings, yea every Christians highway wherein
he must walk, if he make any account to attain unto that Spiritual Caanaan,
to be a free Denizon of the holy Jerusalem, that city above, the mother of the
elect. For as among the Antique Romans, the two Temples of Virtue and Honor
were so contrived, that none could have access unto the latter, unless he
did take the former in his way: So it is with us, God in his eternal decree
has set down this resolution, which like the Laws of the Medes and Persians
will admit of no alteration, that none shall obtain the life of Glory, but
such as live in the state of Grace: The penny is paid only to such as labor
in Gods vineyard. Matthew. 20.2.
The Crown of righteousness is laid up only for those that fight a good
fight, 2. Tim. 1.6, 7.
and finish up the course of their lives in the faith of Jesus Christ. Hence
that of the Prophet David, Psalm 37 27.
Eschew evil and do good, and live for ever. To draw up all in a word, though
we can never be saved for bringing forth good fruit, yet we can never be saved
without it, such is the necessity thereof: Sola fides justificat, sed non
solitaria. It is a common, a known position, Only faith does justify us, but
not faith alone: only faith does justify, as the Instrument by which we
apprehend and lay hold on the Obedience of Christ, the only meritorious cause
of our salvation; but not faith alone, that is, a barren, a dead faith, a faith
without fruits; for that is no saving, no justifying faith: and therefore every
tree must bring forth good fruit. Haeretici hodieconsilia carnes dederunt, and
doctrinam Ba^aam tenuerunt,- nec ipsas Dei leges aut ma^data esse ad salutem
necessaria, sola fide omnes sal^ari. - Vt via^ spi^ituale^ destruerent, omnem
de peccatis and virtutibus sa^n^m d^ctrin^m venena^is suis dogmatibus
infeceru^t - negando vllam bon^ru^ op^rum veram iustitiam, aut ad salutem
necessariam, and consequenter omnia in Sola si^e collocan^o. Stapl. promptuar.
Mor. in Domine. 7. Pentecostes.


This is the Doctrine we Preach and Press. See then by the way, the impudent
malignitie of our broad-mouth'd adversaries, the brats of Romish Babylon, in
traducing and branding our Protestant Ministers for Solifidian Preachers, such
as in their Sermons are al for faith, and nothing for fruits. Thus like cursed
Vipers they vent out the venom of their malice upon us, of purpose to bring our
persons and doctrine into contempt with their hood-winkt Proselites, and all
because we will not with them beyond truth, add to the worth of good works,
and detract from the sole efficiencie of Christ his obedience. Maugre their
virulent malice, this is our abundant comfort, that besides the testimony of
our own clear consciences, which are unto us as many Conscientia mill testes.
millions of witnesses: those many learned and religious Treatises of our
Churchmen, which have undergone the Press, and are at this present extant:
that little world of Christian people by our ministry fed to their everlasting
happiness, those many holy and blessed Angels always present at our solemn
sacred Assemblies: and God himself, who is all in all, and above all, will
subscribe to our white Innocence, and their black Impudence.

Oh my beloved, I would to God all of us, both Priests and people, could as
generally wipe away this their foul and false aspersion, by bringing forth of
good fruit, as by our general preaching and professing the necessity thereof.
But alas, the never too much to be lamented misery, whilst out of our zeal to
Gods glory, we labor to maintain the sacred prerogative of Christ his
obedience, and labor to pull down those proud pillars of merit which our
Adversaries of their own heads have erected to the honor of man's worthless
works, and the dishonor of God, we carelessly neglect, and scarce so much as
once think upon that which is Gods chiefest glory, and the life of our
Christian profession, bringing forth good fruit.

I remember I have read this censure of the Roman State, Omnium honorum
principum imagines in vno posse exculpi annulo, that the pourtratures of their
good Princes might be cut out within the compass of a little ring. Oh my
beloved, is it not as justly to be feared, that the like may be as truly
affirmed of us? So small is the number of those in this our Sardis, Revel. 3.4.
which have given up their names unto Christ, (if we may take the liberty to
censure the tree by the fruit) that should the Lord send forth a Jeremy to make
inquisition for a man, Ierem 5.1.
that is, a good man, Job 1.
one that like Job truly fears God, and is fruitful in all holiness, he
would return, if not with a non, yet with a vix est inuentus, scarce is such a
creature found. Good men being like little veins of gold in great and mighty
mountains of ground; Esaias 7.
or like the gleaning of the ears of corn after the harvest is past, or the
gathering of grapes the vintage being ended: they lie but scattering and very
thin, one in a city, Ierem. 3.14.
two in a tribe, whereas Romish Idolaters, counterfeit Professors, and impudent
transgressors, such as are not ashamed to glory in ungodliness, and prostitute
their deeds of darkness unto public notice, are the greatest part, yea, very
near the whole number of such as are called Christians.

Not to speak of that Antichristian Spawne and Popish fry, though not one of
the least and lightest burdens under which, as the labor of her womb this our
Land groaneth. Proceed we unto the second sort; and who is there so blind or
deaf that does not behold or hear, how plentifully this our Sion is
furnished, yea rather how lamentably be pestered with a numerous brood of Apish
professors, and Mocke-Christians, as I may term them, such as in outward
appearance might seem deservedly to b^ registered in the roll, and ranked in
the number of true Nathaneels, John 1.47.
but are indeed as rank false and perfidious, as Ioah, An outside singularly
commendable, if the inside he answerable.
or Judas They would seem by the preciseness of their habit, and demureness
of behavior, to be truly mortified to the world. To give them their due, which
our English Proverb will not deny the Devil himself: they will reprove sin,
refrain from swearing, celebrate the Saboth, yea many hours of the week
days in hearing of the Word, laboring if they like the Preacher to digest it
in their memories by penning and mutual conference: in a word (oh the
sanctity of the Devil) they will pretend a great deal of fair and religious
dealing, seem to be Gods white children: but (oh the Deuillishnes of these
Saints) does it not plainly appear, that they are little better then Devils
transformed into Angels of light? 2. Cor. 11.14.
fell and cruel Wolves covered and clothed in Sheepskins, making Religion to
serve but for a Stalking horse, wearing Christ's Livery for their own
conueniency, that so they may the more safely and vnsuspectedly compass their
secret vnsacred ends? has not Time the mother of Truth revealed this for a
truth, that there are none more unjust in their dealings, none more covetous,
deceitful, full of pride, envy, hatred, malice, and all uncharitableness then
they, though they take upon them a more strict profession of Christ then
ordinary?

In a word, as the Trojans were never more damnified, th^n when Aeneas did put
on harness like unto theirs, breaking into the midst of their troops like a
member of their army: So the true Nathaneels of our Jsrael, yea godliness it
self never received more disgraceful affronts, then have bin and are
continually most unhappily occasioned by the counterfeit piety of these so
common hypocritical professors. Matthew. 26.49.
As Judas betrayed Christ into the hands of his enemies; so these have and do
continually betray the holy calling of Christianity, and the sincere
Professors thereof unto the sharper tongues of lewd-liuing Libertines, and
ungodly Atheistes; yea, of many framed of a more sober, honest and tractable
temper, to be scourged and lashed with terms of disgrace: for let a man out
of a holy reverence unto the sacred Majesty of God, make conscience of an Oath:
let him out of a sincere heart be careful to sanctify the Sabbath of the
Lord in all holy and religious exercises: let him vow himself to all sobriety
and temperance, and be zealous for the Lord of Hosts in reproouing
ungodliness. In a word, let him heartily desire, and accordingly truly
endeavor to keep a good conscience in all things both toward God and man,
Acts 24.16.
not partaking in the sinful courses of these wicked times, but laboring so far
forth as in him lies, according to that measure of grace he has received, to
live within the limits and compass of an holy profession, it is reputed but
preciseness, he is ordinarily derided under the name of a Catharist or
Puritan, and of the most hated and detested as much, if not more, then a
treacherous bloody Papist, or damnable Atheist. Thus the seeming Saints of our
age, by their ouer-hasty running after Christ for sinister respects, have cast
the true Nathaneels of our Israel behind hand in their just credit and
estimation: John 1.47.
the world measuring the feet of all professors by the Last of these false
professors.

And not only does counterfeit piety, Hypocrisy thus flourish to the great
contempt and reproach of sincere professors: but in the third place we may
observe, that all ungodliness has advanced it self and taken heart. Iniquity
has put on a brow of brass, and Impiety like a shameless strumpet, attended
by Impudency, has taken up her standing in every street, and corner of Court,
City, and Country: Ambition, base flattery, perfidie, drunkenness,
covetousness, prodigality, pride, lechery, luxury, injustice, theft, murder,
adultery, fearful swearing, and perjury, contempt of the Manna and Ministers
of Gods holy Word; and what seldom heard-of crimes in former ages, are not the
familiar minions and darlings of these Times! It is a tedious task, and would
prove but an irksome discourse to trouble your ears with a particular
enumeration of all the sins that roost, yea reign in this Land: for it may
be truly said of it, as the Poet in his Epigramme unto Caesar concerning his
Theater:

Martial.
Quicquid fama canit, donat arena tibi. There is almost no sin so peculiar to
any foreign Country, which is not presented to the life upon the stage of
this Land: and there is almost no person of what place or fashion soever that
does not act his part in them more or less. Thus ungodliness is become an
Epidemicall disease: like a Contagious leprosy it has infected and run over
the whole Body of this Land; and no part more then this City: in so much that
it may truly be said of us as the Prophet of the Jews, Esa. 1.4.5.6.
We are a sinful Nation, a people laden with iniquity: The whole head is
sick, the whole heart is heavy, from the sole of the foot to the crown of
the head there is nothing whole therein but wounds, and swellings, and sores
full of corruption. And which does consummate our iniquity, though we are so
desperately sick of sin that we lie even at the door of death, and there
be scarce so much as a thresh-hold between us and eternal destruction; yet
who is there that with patience will suffer the Preacher, Gods Deputy-Physician
for the good of his soul, so much as to lay his finger upon those his cankred
sores of sin, which suffered to run on their course, will vncurably corrupt,
and irrecouerably cast away the whole man both body and soul. Sin,
especially that which ordinarily thrusts it self into the service of any
calling, and like the silver Shrines of Diana, Acts 19.24.
brings in any emolument, or reuenew, must have a Protection, must not be
touched. The corrupt courses of those which appertain to Courts of Justice,
the sacrilegious practice of Church-robbers, fraudulent and unconscionable
dealing in private commerce; these and the rest of your bosom and best beloved
sins prove but vnplausible, but harsh Themes for a Preachers inuectiue. Sure
I am, we may speak it feelingly, we are sensible of no less: for deal we
ingeniously and faithfully in reproving the corruptions of the time? do we lay
open your beloved sins unto the life? our labors are entertained with
laughter, and our fidelity requited with a world of neglect and injury. Are not
these the fruits that call this our land their mother soil? I would to God
they did not: I dare presume ye will all pass your words that I have
delivered nothing but truth: and I may safely add, nothing to that which might
have been delivered for truth: for like those whom Moses sent to spy out the
land of Canaan, Numb. 13.23.
I have cut down but a Branch, with a Cluster of the Grapes that grow in this
our Eschol, and have brought with me but a Sample of that cursed fruit this
land in great plenty affords. O that we who have so liberally participated of
the superabundant love and bounty of God, should thus above measure abound in
iniquity. The time was (O that we had the grace seriously to consider it) the
time was, when we were without Christ, Ephe. 2.12, 13
and were aliens from the Commonwealth of Israel, and were Strangers from the
Covenants of Promise, and had no hope, and were without God in the world: but
now, through the Mercy of the Almighty, we who were once a far off, are
made near by the Blood of Christ, that so we might be no more strangers and
Forraigners, but Citizens with the Saints, and of the Householde of God.
Again, Jam tua res agitur paries cum proximus ardet.
whereas other Nations do ride even up unto their horsebridles in blood, have
their Corne-fieldes depopulated, their Towns unpeopled, their nearest kindred,
and dearest acquaintance most cruelly butchered, and their whole country
exposed to the injury of Arms. We through the great Goodness of God, sit
every man under his own Vine in peace: The Lord of his mercy continue it long
amongst us: whereas other Nations suffer the famine of the Word, or at least
have it served out unto them mingled with the Cockle and Darnell of Popish
errors and traditions: We, God be thanked, have the Word most plentifully and
purely preached among us; yea such plenty of the word we enjoy, that like the
Israelites, we are crop sick, and loath that heavenly Manna, which our
forefathers in the time of Popery and persecution so much longed after. I pray
God this bring not a scarcity of spiritual Bread amongst us. Whereas others
have been straightened for the ordinary sustenance of nature, and wasted with
misery, hanging up their harps upon the trees, and translating the sorrows of
their souls into mournful ditties, and so ending their miserable lives:
Psalm. 144 13.14.
Our Garners on the contrary, have been full and plenteous with all manner of
store: Our sheep have brought forth thousands, and ten thousands in our
streets: our oxen have been strong to labor, we have no leading into
captivity, no complaining in our streets. In a word, no Nation under the Sun
can prescribe and plead a greater portion of the immense Treasury of Gods mercy
and favors, then ours: the least of all which should for ever bind every one
by way of thankfulness to consecrate himself both soul and body unto the
service of his so benign and bountiful a God, in all holy obedience, and
newness of life, to bring forth good fruits, the fruits of holiness and
sanctification: But alas, we are so far from bringing forth this good fruit,
that on the contrary, we are barren in all goodness, and only fruitful in
the damnable works of darkness, sucking in sin, as fishes do water; like
swift Dromedaries, running with full speed into all ungodliness, Prou. 10.23.
making it a pastime to do wickedly: neue^ so much as once dreaming of that
dreadful day of account, that great and terrible Assizes of the Lord, wherein
he will execute his wrath and vengeance upon the children of disobedience. O
my beloved, let us take heed we be not deceived. This is the will of God,
says the Apostle, even your sanctification: 1 These. 4.3.
now the will and pleasure of God is not barely propounded unto man as a thing
arbitrary, or of no great consequence, whether performed or not: for as with
bountiful promises, so with fearful penalties, it is in sacred Scripture
frequently pressed, the Lord as he has a Gerizim, Deuteronomy. 11.29.
for blessing, so he has an Eball for cursing. As he will most graciously and
liberally recompense all such as work righteousness, with an immarcessible
crown of glory: so he will most severely and terribly reward all workers of
iniquity with an unmerciful weight of misery. They which like good trees bring
forth good fruit in due season, their leaf shall not wither, says the
Psalmist, they shall flourish for ever: Psalm. 2.
But they which do not bring forth good fruit, shall be like the chafe which
the wind scatters away from the face of the earth, they shall perish for
ever: so says the Baptist here in my text, Every tree not bringing forth good
fruit, is hewn down, and cast into the fire, which is the third general Part
obserueable in this sacred Writ, The third general part.
the penalty attending delinquents, such as perform not what God in this Writ
requires.

The Penalty is here expressed, 1. as intended, God premonisheth before he
punishes.
Now is the Axe laid unto the root of the trees, 2. As inflicted, Every tree
not bringing forth good fruit, is hewn down, and cast into the fire. A
Merciful Method, and well beseeming the God of Method, who is full of mercy:
though our sins be so numerous and heinous, that like unto that of Cains,
Genes. 4.10.
they do even call and cry unto God for present vengeance: though our
iniquities be so enormous, and grown to so great a height, that they reach up
unto Heaven, and even pull God out of his Mercy-Seate, to enter into Judgment
with us, to empty out the full Vialls of his wrath upon us to our present
fearful confusion: yet, Oh the goodness of God, he deals not with us
sinful miscreants according to our deserts, and as many a merciless
Creditor with his Debtor, who covertly without the least noise procures an
Execution against him, and serves it upon him, happily to his irrecouerable
undoing, not so much as once fore-acquainting him with his Resolution, that so
he might in time think upon some honest course for prevention.

No, my beloved, though man's ways are full of cruelty, yet Gods ways are full
of mercy: He would have all the world to know, that he is not delighted in the
death of a sinner, Ezekiel 13.23.
but had rather he should turn from his wickedness, and bring forth fruit
worthy of repentance, and so live for ever: and therefore, as Jonathan shot
three arrows to forewarne David of Saul's displeasure, 1. Sam. 20.
that he might the better provide for his saftie: so almighty God first in
mercy proclaims his wrath and indignation, before in Justice he proceed to
Execution. First, he is pleased to foretell us that for our transgressions, for
our not bringing forth good fruit he intends a severe penalty against us,
before such time as he suffer it to be inflicted upon us: Praemoniti.
Praemuniti.
that so we being forewarned of that fearful evil which from God is like to
befall us for our falling away from God, we might in time make our peace with
him, and so prevent the execution of his wrath. For the more effectual
performance whereof, that we may the more carefully and speedily address our
selves, proceed we according to our propounded method, to take some punctual
notice of the fearfulness of his fury displaied in the particulars of the
penalty. Now is the Axe laid unto the root of the trees: Every tree therefore
not bringing forth good fruit, is hewn down and cast into the fire.

Each word (as you have heard) bears a part and every part does most
evidently demonstrate the Greatness of Gods wrath and indignation against us,
and is of power to imprint Characters of terror in our hearts, were they as
hard as rocks of Adamant.

To take up the words as they lie in their order.

First, behold the Lord of Hosts is already up in arms, and his wrath, like
Iehu the Son of Nimshi after Iehoram marches most furiously after us: 2
King. 9.10.
yea to our greater terror it has already wrought it self within distance;
for Now, even Now is the axe laid unto the root of the trees. Secondly,
consider we the instrument apprehended for the execution of his wrath, Musculus
in locum.
it is not Culter Sarmentarius, a pruning knife, but Securis excisionis, a
ruining Axe. Thirdly, this ruining Axe is not vibrata, Gorthan in locum.
brandished or shaken over the trees, but posita, it is put, laid close to the
trees. Fourthly, this ruining Axe is not laid ad truncum aut ramos, Bullinger.
to the body or boughs of the trees, but ad radicem, to the fountain of
life, the root, which once hurt or cut, de tota arbore actum est, the whole
tree does perish, and is past all hope of shooting forth again. Such is the
penalty here intended, and is pronounced, as inflicted, Every tree not
bringing forth good fruit, is hewn down, and to make it more fearful, is
cast into the fire.

There was a custom among the ancient Romans that their Consuls had as
Ensigns of their authority bundles of rods, and an Axe carried before them:
Rod^ the (...) of Justice to cut them off in case they proved incorrigible, and
would not be reformed with any favorable correction. In like manner Almighty
God has his Pruning knife, and his Axe: Having planted his Ground with Trees,
and not finding them fruitful according to his expectation, like an expert and
careful Gardener with his pruning knife he shreddeth and pareth off the
luxuriant branches, and uses all such means for their fructification, as in
his heavenly wisdom he apprehends most prevalem and effectual. Quamdiu spes
est remedii, stercoratione aut putatione subuenitur arborum vitiis: caeterum
vltimae desperatio it is indicium est quotier Securis admouetur radi^i. Bull.
Thus for many a year with much patience expecting their improuement, at
length the season of fructifying being come, wherein he resolved to put a
period to his patient expectation, he walks toward his Plantation with an
Axe in his hand, resolved if after his so great care and cost he find any
Trees that do not bring forth good fruit, to cut them up by the roots and cast
them by for the Fire.

In a word or two, to add a little more light unto the darkness of the
letter. This Axe laid unto the root of the Trees does signify nothing else but
the vengeance of God which hangs over our heads ready to fall suddenly upon
us to our fearful confusion. Ne^p vero novu^ est securim and gladium in
Scripturis poni pro graui dei vindicta. Idem ibid.
My beloved, does not the cloudy and heavy countenance of these Times promise
and presage as much? Certainly take we a true Inuentory of our general
Apostacy from all godliness and piety, we cannot look for less. I but the
Lord is merciful and Gracious, Exodus 34.6.
slow to anger and abundant in Goodness and truth, reserving mercy for
thousands. True my beloved, and have we found him less? Do not all those
gentle and more favorable courses he has taken for reclaiming us from our
sinful courses speak as much? May not the Lord justly expostulate and
reason the case with us, as he did with his beloved Vineyard. Esai 5.
He has Planted us in a most pleasant and fruitful soil: he has encircled
and hedged us round about with his loving mercies: and what could he have added
more unto that which he has already done? How often, how long has he labored
for our conversion by the preaching of his Word: Sermon upon Sermon, with
extraordinary earnestnes and importunity knocking at the doors of our hearts,
that hearing him we might open unto him, and he enter in unto us: Psalm. 51.10.
He I say, who only is able to create in us clean hearts, and make us
fruitful in all holiness. And to make his Word the more powerful for our
conversion, how often has he actuated it by many temporal afflictions, which
he has inflicted upon us: as inundations of waters, dearth of corn, loss of
our fortunes, loss of our faithful friends, and such as had deepest interest
in our affections: sometimes scourging us with the refractarinesse and
disobedience of those which through natural or civil reference are nearest
and dearest unto us: sometimes making these houses of clay (our mortal bodies)
Hospitals for pestilentiall and painful diseases: sometimes suffering the
high-priz'd treasure of our reputation to be rifled by wretched Shimeyes. But
alas, what has all this pruning prevailed? What good work have these and the
like afflictions wrought upon us! Happily for the present they have a little
humbled us, and wrung out of us a repentant tear, with a protestation of new
obedience, of bringing forth better fruit for the time to come then formerly we
had done: but this repentance of ours has been as the Prophet speaks; but as
a Morning cloud, Hos 6.4.
and as the morning dew it has gone away; like Dogs we have quickly
returned to our own vomit, 2 Pet 2.22.
and instead of bringing forth Vuas, grapes, Esaias 5.4.
we have brought forth Labrucas, wild grapes: our grapes are grapes of gall,
our clusters be bitter, Deuteronomy. 32.32, 33.
our wine is poison of dragons, and the cruel gall of Aspes. My beloved, will
God, think we, suffer himself to be thus deluded from time to time? Are we
sure he will always look upon us with a favorable aspect, and never shut up
his loving kindness in displeasure? O let us beware of carnal security: it
is as dangerous and fearful an evil, as the soul imbarqued in the body can
meet with, whilst sailing in the Sea of this world. Certainly, if his so many
gentle and merciful visitations will not reclaim us from our dissolute
courses, but we will still frequent our old sinful haunts, drawing iniquity
with cartropes, and sin with the cords of vanity, he will lay aside all
lenity, ^^sa patientia sit si^^or.
and deal with us more roughly and severely. It is not a pruning-knife, some
favorable affliction, some fatherly correction shall serve the turn: for
(behold) he has put an axe into the hand of the destroying Angel, not like
Abimelech, Judge. ^ 43.
to cut down some boughs from the trees: no, he has given him a straight
charge, a strict commission, if he find any tree, any man that brings not
forth good fruit, to hew him down even at the very root: that is, by death to
root him out of the land of the living, which is the first particular penalty,
the Excision. The first penalty an Excision.
Every tree not bringing forth good fruit, (...), is hewn down.

Do but consider, I beseech you the fearfulness of this penalty. True.

Hor Carm. lib. 3 Ode 1.
-- Ae qua lege necessitas,
Sortitur insigneis and imos:
Omne capax mouet vrna nomen.
Psalm. 89.47. Hebr. 9.27.
What man lives and shall not see death? There is a Statute for it, Statutum
est omnibus semel mori. It is appointed unto all men once to die. Cui nas^i
contigit mori restat. Sen. Ep. 110.
Death is Gods Sergeant, unto whose arrest the whole suruiuing race of Adam is
subject, as well the godly as the ungodly: and therefore it is not here said,
that he which brings not forth good fruit, shall dye; but shall be hewn
down; to signify the fearfulness of that death which shall befall him. The
godly man, he that brings forth good fruit, shall die: but he is happy in his
end: for that he departs this life in the sweet peace of conscience, which he
has obtained through faith in Christ's blood, whereby he is reconciled unto God,
and sealed up unto the day of redemption: so that the misery of death is unto
him the death of all misery, and his last end the beginning, Dies iste quem
tanquam extremum reformidas aeterninatalis est. Sen. Ep. 102.
the birthday of eternity. And therefore laetus lethu^ excipit, come Death when
it will come, it is truly and heartily welcome, and finds him ready and willing
with much unfeigned joy to entertain the stroke which shall separat his soul
and body, that so being freed from the prison of his body, he may enter into
his masters joy, Matthew. 25.21.
and be crowned with glory and happiness in the highest heavens. In regard
whereof, Justus dum per mortem e vita tollitur, non exciditur, sed in vberius
solum transfertur. Fran. Luc. Brugiens in locum
when by Death he is taken out of this life, he cannot be said to be hewn
down, but rather transplanted into a more fruitful soil. On the other side,
the ungodly man, that brings not forth good fruit, but is barren in all
goodness, and only fruitful in the damnable works of darkness, he shall die,
but a death far different from that of the righteous: for being besotted with
the pleasures of sin, and having his affections fast glewed to the things of
this world, when Death arresteth his Body, his Soul will depart out of it like
sawdust grated out of the belly of an hard Oak, with much labor and striving:
so unwilling and loath it will be to break up house, and bid farewell unto the
world. Yea, for as, much as he never endeavored to keep a good Conscience
toward God and man, therefore his guilty Conscience, like the evil Spirit
which vexed Saul, 1 Samuel 16.14.
shall most fearfully wrack and torture him, and a wounded spirit who can
bear? Prou. 18.14.
says the Prouerbialist: and thus in the anguish and bitterness of his Soul
he shall be broken like a tree: Job 24.20.
the Axe of Death shall cleave and rent his soul and body asunder with all
violence and terror, he shall be hewn down, says my Text.

But is this all? shall this Tree thus felled, there lie and rest and rot where
it falls? I mean, shall his soul and body thus parted, so perish, as that
he shall cease ever to have a being any more, and consequently a feeling of any
further misery? Certainly, though sinful man be like unto the beasts that
perish, yet he does not perish like the beasts, whose bodies are turned into
ashes, and their spirits vanish as soft air, and are no more. No, his soul is
an immortal substance, and his body, though in the eye of a carnal Sadducee,
it seems so to perish, as that it shall never have a being any more; yet it
shall at the last day by the power of God be restored to its just proportion:
for after Death there must come a Judgment particular of the Soul, when it
departs from the body; general, of Soul and body at the general
resurrection. So that this fearful hewing down is but as the Prologue to a
more tragical and fearful Scene: it is but (...), the beginning of sorrows,
the forerunner of more fearful torments. For after the axe of Death has with
all violence, cleft and rent his Soul and Body in sunder, after that (...),
he is thus hewn down, it follows in the next place, (...), be is cast
into the fire, he is thrown headlong into the flames of Hell.

And this second penalty, his exastion, The second p^naltie, an Exastion.
is indeed principally that which causes his dissolution to be so comfortles
and full of terror. For when the hand of God lies heavy upon him to hew him
down by death, it is not the separation of his soul and body that does so
much trouble him, nor the leaving his beloved world that does so much afflict
him, no, nor the cruel gnawings of his guilty conscience that do so wrack and
torture him, otherwise then joined with the present apprehension of being cast
into this fire, which he then foreseeth will most certainly befall him after his
dissolution. And no marvel, if the apprehension thereof strike such a dread
and terror into his departing soul: Et hic. ^ c. 9.
for what Aristotle that heathen oracle of learning said of the natural death
of the Body, as one who saw no farther then the twilight of Nature would give
him lean, may more truel^ be auerred of this second penalty, that it is (...),
the most terrible of terribles. As Zeuxis that excellent painter desiring to
draw Junocs picture exactly, viewed all the Agrigentine Virgins with a curious
eye, picked out five of the choycest Pieces Nature did afford amongst them, out
of which, for the composition of her picture, he abstracted and expressed with
his pencill what he apprehended more accurate and excellent, either for
proportion or beauty: So the liueliest resemblance can be framed of this
fearful penalty, is by presenting unto our fantasy all the torments that ever
seized upon the sons of Adam in this valley of misery; and out of them to make
choice of such as are most exquisite, acrimonious, and intolerable, and out of
these, if it were possible to extract a Quintessence, and to inflict this
quintessence of torment upon one man: and yet when we have done all this, this
all is as nothing: we shall have framed but a dull, a weak Idea of this
penalty. For the Eye has not seen, the Ear heard, nor has it entered into the
Heart of Man, 1 Cor. 2.9.
as what joys God has prepared for those that love him, so what sorrows he
has laid up for those that leave him. And therefore as the Painter presenting
the sorrow of the father of Iphigenia, when she was to be sacrificed, drew him
with his face covered, as confessing his Art insufficient to express in his
visage a grief of that degree: so being at this time, according to my
propounded Method, to present so terrible and fearful a penalty, as to be
cast into hell fire, my best course, I confess, were to cast over it the veil
of silence, as being best co^scious of my own insufficiency, for a task of such
transcende^cy. Yet unwilling my particular weakness should frustrate the
general expectation of so Honorable an Audience: And fearing my silence in a
point of such importance may occasion some to slight their own ruin and
neglect their speedy reformation: For such is naturally our slavish disposition
that (notwithstanding all the grac^ous and glorious promises of the Gospel)
unless the terrors of the Law be punctually propounded unto the understanding,
and so reflect and beat upon the Conscience, we walk without either fear or
wit in the ways of vngod^inesse, and as if we had taken a liberal Dosis of
Opium, are cast into a Spiritual Lethargy, and fall into Hell before we so
much as dream of Damnation. Therefore a word or two more particularly for the
description of the fearfulness of this particular penalty: For I intend not,
though the case might justly require it, to entertain you with a particular
discourse of the several punishments, wherein all the powers and parts of each
damned Wretch to his greater terror shall have their share; as those Positive
of intolerable cold, the Worm that never dies, palpable darkness, the
horrid aspect of the Devils, and infinite more, the least of all which is most
horrible, Pectori generoso non tam molestu^ est rerum angugustia premi, quam
abundantia and gloria priuari. Stapl. promp. mor. Mali non tantu^ dolebunt de
ipso tormento, quam quod repellentur a tali consortio. Ludolph. Si nulla
externa poena torqueret haec sola sufficeret. Mestreth ex Chrysostom.
too heavy for Nature to sustain in her greatest strength. Neither will I
speak of the perpetual privation of the blessed vision of a most glorious
God, and happy society of the holy Angels and glorified Saints: a penalty by
all Divines both antique and neotericke determined to be more terrible and
fearful, then all the Positive miseries Hell, yea ten thousand Hells can
afford. The large and learned labors of Others concerning these particulars
shall at this time save me a labor. I would gladly draw toward a conclusion,
and therefore must desire so much favor as that I may confine my self unto
this in my Text, as being most frequent in the Scripture, and of a Positive
torment the most fearful and intolerable. Ex vngue Leonem. I shall in it
give you, as it were the length of Hercules foot, and so leave you to guess at
the full pourtaiture of his whole body. The Tree which brings not forth good
fruit shall be hewn down and cast into the fire.

There are three things that do more punctually discover unto us the
fearfulness Hell fire most fearful for three causes,
of this Penalty.

Extremity of it.

Many are the torments which cruel Tyrants the Devils Engineers have framed in
the forge of their hellish invention to make poor Nature suffer: Multa sunt ab
hominibus excogitata supplicia, sed nullum acutius, nullum vehementius, nullum
acrius igne. Bellar. de gem. Columb. lib. 2. cap. 2.
But of all; there is none more acute, none more vehement, none more
acrimonious then that which is effected by Fire: and yet for extremity of heat,
so infinite are the degrees whereby this Hell fire surpasses our Hearth fire,
that the most expert Mathematician is unable to take their true distance.
Nebuchadnezzars Furnace, though heated seven times more then ordinary, yet it
compared with the extreme heat and fervor of this Fire is but as the
Chill-warmth of the Sun in an extreme cold Winters day, or as the mere
picture of Fire unto the Fire which is Pictured: this Fire burns in such
extremity, that in it the least moment of Pain will swallow up whole Ages of
forepast pleasures.

fearfulness of this Penalty appears in the Universality of it: this
terrible Fire burns not a finger only, Math. 10.28.
or a hand, or a foot, but the whole body, yea, the whole man both body and
soul. For as both like Simeon and Leui have been brethren in the evil of
Sin: So both shall be brethren in the evil of suffering, both shall be
tormented in this Flame, be cast into this Fire.

fearefulnes of this Penalty appears in the Perpetuity of it. Though the
whole man be extremely and terribly tortured, yet it were some comfort if this
acrimonious Penalty might have either some end or some ease. In Corporal
griefs it is an experimental Maxim, Nemo potest valde d^lere and di^ Seneca
^p 78. Praeceps morbus alterum facies, aut extingu^tur aut extinguet. Ibid.
Do^or quo incitatior, ^o citius in aliena^ione fluporemque conuertitur, hoc
itaque solatium est vasti doloris quod necesse est desinas illum sentir^ si
nimis senseris. Senec. Ibid.
and ministers some comfort unto the sick Patient, a Disease the sharper the
shorter: the more violent, the less permanent. It is impossible (says Seneca)
for a man to be in great pain and a great while in pain: for either it will
suddenly leave Him, or He suddenly leave it. And if neither his Disease be
suddenly taken from him, nor he from his disease; yet certainly his Pain
cannot long continue in extremity, but will at length be translated into a
stupiditie; it will produce a Stupefaction and numnesse in the parts it
affects: and so the Party ouersensibly affected cease to be sensible of
his grief.

Again a violent and virulent Disease though it be a long time ere a man can
wholly shake it off and bid it farewell, sometime not till his last of time, Si
longus est, habet intercapedinem, dat refectioni locum, multum temporis donat,
necesse est vt exurgat and desinat. Idem ibidem.
(Diseases commonly coming on Horseback, but going away on foot) yet it is
no small comfort unto the sick Patient that it comes but by fitts: it does
not keep a continual Term in his body but has sometimes its recesses and
Vacations: it does not always sit in commission; sometimes it has an
intermission, and leaves Man to himself to recollect his scattered spirits,
and repair the ruined and crasie walls of his earthly Tabernacle, whereby he
is the better enabled to hold out against the furious assaults thereof.

Besides, there are diverse artificial Confections which the skillful in
Physic are able to prescribe and prepare, if not for the extirpation of his
disease, yet at least for the remission and mitigation of his Pain: there are
lenitiues to assuage and quallifie the raging madness thereof. Howsoever at
length that Catholic Esculapius Doctor Death will one day visit the perplexed
Patient, and give him a diet drink that will undoubtedly cure him of all his
griefs. Thus, I say, though a man be infested with a disease that does
extremely plague and torture him, yet he has these comfortable hopes and
helps to sustain him in it: either He and his Disease will suddenly take
their last farewell one of an other; or if it continue any time with him, it
will in process of time, through extremity of pain, produce a stupefaction, or
admit of some friendly intermission, or at least of some gentle remission, to
make it the more supportable: howsoever, the Patient and his pain must one day
part, and then there is an end of all his sorrows. But alas, it is not so
here, he that is cast into this fire, is not capable of the least of all these
comforts: for the extremity of his pain is perpetual, his torments are both
endless and easeles.

It was indeed the opinion of Origin and his Disciples, that all the damned,
August. lib, 21. de Ciuitate Dei, Cap 17.
yea, even the Devils themselves, should one day be absolved from their pains,
Tanto inuenitur errare deformius, and contra Dei ve^b^ peruersius, quanto sibi
videtur sentire clementius August. ibidem.
and received into the society of the Saints: which though it be a very
merciful opinion, yet it is a very foul error, and has bin therefore justly
exploded by the Church, as contradicting both reason, and plain text of
Scripture. Reason requires a corresponde^cy between the reward of
righteousness, and the wages of iniquity: that as he which like a good tree
brings forth good fruit, shall be removed from earth to heaven, there to
inherit everlasting felicity: so he which like a bad tree, does not bring
forth good fruit, should be cut down from off the face of the earth, and cast
into perpetual misery. And the sacred Scripture does plainly inform us that
Ex inferno nulla redemptio, from Hell there is no redemption: As none can go
from Heaven to Hell, Luke 16.26.
so none can go from Hell to Heaven; No, their heaviness is continual, their
plague desperate, and cannot be cured. The breath of the Lord like a river of
brimstone, Esaias 30.33.
does kindle the fire of Hell; and being once kindled, it never either of it
self goes out, or can be put out: Math. 35.41. Esaias 66. Exodus 3.2.
for it is fire everlasting and unquenchable: and whosoever is cast into it,
like Moses bush, shall be burned, but never consumed: he shall there continue
eternally both body and soul in unspeakable misery. The extremity of his
pain shall not produce in him the least stupefaction: for he shall be
eternally and totally perfectly sensible of this fire. His pain shall not
admit of the least intermission, or remission there shall not be the least
moment of time, but in which he shall feelingly confess, I am most extremely
and fearfully tormented in this flame. He shall not obtain so much as a drop
of cold water in the eternity of his extremity, to cool the tip of his tongue.

It is no small content unto one that is afflicted with a violent burning Fever,
that he can turn and tumble himself too and fro in his bed in a vain hope of
ease: But He that is cast into this fire, shall be no more able to move
himself, Ji qui fuerunt hic dissoluti D^i mand^torum vincul^ d^r^mpentes, tunc
legatu manibus and ped^bus mittentur in panam aeternam. Guil. Paris. Math. 22.
Est aliquod solamen in mise^is sectos habuisse doloris. Job 16.12.
then a Tree that is hewn down and cast into the fire. For seeing that
through his dissolute course of life he often broke the Chain of Gods
Commandments: he shall therefore by Gods commandment be fast tied hand and
foot with such chains as he shall not be able to break: thus bound he shall
be cast into Hell.

And whereas in Misery it is accounted some Comfort to have Company: He that
is cast into this Fire, shall indeed have Company, but such as (like Jobs
friends) will prove unto him but miserable comforters: their company shall be
so little for his consolation, as that it shall much conduce for the augmenting
his affliction. For (not to speak of the horrid aspect of his Tormentors, and
the fearful howlings of the Tormented) he shall then see those in hell with
him, of whose damnation himself was the procuring cause: and this shall add
infinitely to his pains: for as He, who by his godly counsel, and religious
conversation has bin an instrument, to convert others unto God, shall shine as
the stars in the firmament, D^n. 12.13.
have a peculiar reward of glory above others: so He who by his wicked and
lewd conversation has occasioned the fall of others, shall for it, besides his
more general pains, have some more special torment inflicted upon him: so
that the very sight of such for whose sake he sustaineth his peculiar torments,
shall bring no small affliction to his Soul. And hence it was (as Divines have
observed) that Dives being in Hell fire, requested Abraham to dispatch Lazarus
to his Fathers house, Luke 16.27, 28.
to premonish his Brethren, that they might not come into that place of
Torment: not for any good he intended toward his Brethren, (for Hell is as
far from Charity, as Heaven from Envy) but out of fear lest his pains
should be augmented through their presence, he having corrupted them by his
bad example.

In a word, Simon Pauli Suerinensis.
Sicut nihil in Coelo desideratur quod non inuenitur: ita nihil in inferno
inuenitur quod desideratur: as in Heaven there is nothing desired which is not
found: so in Hell there is nothing found which is desired. Dabitur miseris vita
mortalis, morientur and semper erunt. Cassiodorus. Revel. 9.6.
He that is cast into Hell fire, shall seek Death, but shall not find it: he
shall desire to dye, but Death shall flee from him: He shall desire ease, but
be so far from the least hope of obtaining it, that whether the present
pain he sustaineth in such extremity, by virtue of this fire, or the present
thought of the perpetuity thereof be his greatest affliction, it is hard to
determine.

I am not ignorant, that this penalty is Paradoxicall to natural Reason: for
first, it being a Position in Phylosophie, That the Agent is more Noble then
the Patient, how can this Fire which is generally held Corporeal, afflict the
Soul which is Spiritual? Again, Esaias 33.14
this Fire being of a devouring nature, how can it burn the Body; and not at
length consume and reduce it to nothing, the body being naturally as
combustible as Chafe? Here indeed is Saint Paul's (...): as Simonides in
another case: so must I confess in this, Quo diutius mecum cogito, eo minus
inuenio: The more I seek into it, the more I am to seek in it: It is a great
Mystery, a Gordian Knot, which natural Reason cannot untie. What Saint
Augustine for the former Quaere, Lib. 21. de Ciuit. Dei, cap. 10.
Fit miris, sed veris modis, may also satisfy for the latter. That this
Corporeal Fire does afflict the Soul, which is Spiritual: that it
continually burns the Body, but never consumes it, is not more strange then
true. Non nulla animalia in ignibus v^uere in ^st^one sine co^bustione,- per
mi^^culum omn^potentissimi Creatoris, ib. c. 9.
The same Father, for the settling of our Faith in this point, instanceth in
diverse Creatures, and more particularly the Salamander, that does miraculously
live in the fire without being consumed. Man's weakness is unable to determine
the power of God, it exceeding all that we can possibly apprehend. These
therefore being ineffable Mysteries, are not to be measured by the scantling of
natural Reason. Our best course is to believe it here, lest for our unbelief
we be made to feel it hereafter.

But it may be replied, That to punish Man eternally, who sinned but
temporally, may argue God of Injustice, and Cruelty. Saint Gregory does
excellently well demonstrate the Equity of this Penalty. Iniqui cum sine
deniquerut, quia cum fine vixerunt: nam voluissent vtique si potuirsent sine
sine viuere, vt p^ssent sine sine p^e^are Ostendunt enim quod in peccato semper
viuere cup^unt, qui nunqua^ desinunt peccare dum viuunt, Greg. ^, Dialog
The wicked, says he, sin but for a time, because they live but for a time:
By their good wills they would never dye, that they might ever sin: For they
show they would ever live in Sin, because they never leave sinning so long
as they live. And therefore, as he elsewhere speaks: Ad districti iudicis
sententiam per^^^^t, vt nunquam ea cant supplium, quo imens in vac vita nu^quam
voluit carere peccato: and nullus detur iniquo terminus vitiones, qui quam
(...) vt aut h^^ere nouit ^ermi^um ^ri^^^s, Greg. 3. lib. Moral.
It stands with the Justice of God, to visit man with a perpetual Penalty,
who if he might would live perpetually in Iniquity. Besides, Man in sinning
offends an Infinite Majesty, and therefore in all equity deserves an
infinite misery, to be afflicted with endless torments. But why do I stand
disputing upon the equity of this penalty? as if it were a fit thing to call God
to an account for his Judgments

Certainly though they be secret, yet they can never be unjust, for as Abraham
unto God; Genesis 18.25.
Shall not the Judge of all the world do right?

We see then the fearfulness of that Penalty which God will after this life
inflict upon sinful man: he shall be cast into Hell fire, there to be
tormented extremly, to be extremely tormented totally, to be extremely and
totally tormented eternally. O what an eating torment is but the aching of a
Tooth? What a sharp and piercing pain to hold but a finger in the fire: but
to be all on fire of Hell? to have no part free? for the whole man to be
nothing else but a torment in extremity, and so to continue without the least
hope of ease world without end? We cannot but apprehend and confess an
intolerable an inexpressible penalty.

But to what purpose do I labor to set forth the fearfulness of this
penalty? When we speak of these things, do we not participate of Cassandraes
blessing? Though we speak the truth and nothing but the truth, yet as the
Prophet complains, Esaias 53.2.
Who will believe our report? Or at least who will be reformed by it? If we
consult with the extraordinary sinnefulnesse of this age wherein we live, the
horrible security of many, and those outrageous and unheard of villainies every
where practiced and perpetrated even in the eye of the Sunn, it will plainly
appear that the greatest part of mankind take Hell fire to be but Inane
terriculamentum, a silly Scarcrow to keep man in awe and order, an Old wives
fable, a mere Poetical fiction: so little does it prevail with them for
their reformation: Certainly, My beloved, were our belief in this point as
sound and our Meditation thereon as Serious as our living is sinful; O, what
a holy and blessed change would it work both in our consciences and
conversation.

Tully writes of one Damocles a Parasiticall Courtier, Tuscul. lib 5.
that though placed in the Seat-royall of Dionysius his Sovereign, and
presented with a banquet of the choycest rarities, and to wrap up the whole
History in a word, liberally furnished with whatsoever his heart could desire
for the accomplishment of his conceited happiness, yet when bestowing his eyes
about him he espied a glittering Sword hanging over his head in a Horse hair
ready to cleave and split him in twain every moment. Which as the former, was
done at the command of Dionysius to let him see his e^rour, that he beheld his
happiness in a false Glass. The just fear of his imminent danger did so
captiuate his freer iollitie, that he then began extremely to loath what
before he did so entirely love: his delicate iuncates were unto him but as
unsavory viands, and his del^ghtfull objects but as music in a time of
mourning: he then had rather part with his happiness upon even terms, then
purchase it at so dear a price. In like manner though naturally we are
i^finitly delighted in following the lusts of our own hearts, and repute it
the only happiness that can befall us freely to disport our selves in all
licenciousnesse: Yet if we did but deliberately weigh our own case, as indeed
it nearly concerns us so to do, Laying the pleasures of sin which can
last but for a little season in one Scale, and the Penalty for sin which will
hold out to eternity in the other; if we did but seriously consider that the
wrath of God is revealed from Heaven against all ungodliness and
unrighteousness Romans 1.18.
of men, as the Apostle speaks: that the Lord has whet his Sword, Psalm
7.12.13.
and bent his Bow, and has made his instruments ready to wound the hayrie
Scalpe of him that goes on in his wickedness, as the Prophet David speaks.
That the axe of his wrath is already laid unto the root of the Trees, and that
he is resolutely determined that those Trees, those Men which bring not forth
good fruit shall be hewn down and cast into the fire, into Hell Fire, there to
be extremely and totally tormented eternally, it would beget in our hearts a
mortal hatred even of our bosom and best beloved corruptions, and work with
us even in the midst of our sinful pleasures as the Handwriting upon the
Wall with Belshazzar in the midst of his Iollitie: Dan. 5.6.
it would cause our countenance to be changed, our thoughts to trouble us, the
joints of our loins to be loosed, and our knees to smite one against the
other: it would make us with the Iailor to tremble and and fall before the
Ministers of God, Acts 16.29.30.
and say, Sirs what shall we do to be saved? Raro antecedentem scelestum
deseruit pede paena claudo. Car. lib 3. ode 2
Oh, it is a terrible and fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living
God.

Though he has leaden heels, yet he has iron hands. Tarditatem vindictae
Supplicij grauitate compensat.
Sero, sed serio, He is indeed slow to proceed in Judgment, but when he comes,
as come he will, he strikes home, and lays it on heavily. Therefore, my
Beloved, let us take heed we do not dally with God, The certainty of the
penalt^e.
and slight his terrible Judgments, as if they did nothing concern us: for
that the Lord will render vengeance unto the children of disobedience, and
visit the iniquities of impudent and impenitent sinners with the intolerable
eternal torments of hell fire, is a truth as clear as that God is truth: we
have it delivered from his own mouth, and recorded under his own hand: his
sacred Word endited by the Holy Ghost, has most clearly revealed it unto us;
and questionless, we may venture to take his word and build upon it: Numb.
23.19.
for God is not as man that he should lie, neither as the son of man that he
should repent: has he said, and shall he not do it? and has he spoken, and
shall he not accomplish it? Certainly, Heaven and Earth shall sooner pass
away, Luke 16.17.
says our Savior, then the least jot or title of the Law shall fall. And
therefore the penalty here threatened, shall most certainly be inflicted. Yea,
to intimate the undoubted certainty thereof, it is not here said in the
future Tense, The tree which brings not forth good fruit, shall be hewn
down and cast into the fire, but is hewn down and cast into the fire: it
being as certain, as if it were already inflicted: So he which believes not,
John 3.18.
is already condemned, says our Savior. The Law has already denounced the
Sentence of malediction against the Sinner, Cursed is he that confirms not
all the words of the Law to do them: Deuteronomy. 27.26.
And what the curse of the law is, is not unknown to the veriest Babe in
Christianity: it is the eternal destruction of body and soul in hell fire.
So that there is nothing wanting unto the certainty of this Penalty, but a
more solemn declaration, and a real execution thereof: which shall be then
effected, when the Son of man our Lord Jesus Christ shall come in the clouds
in his Glory accompanied with all his holy Angels, to judge the quick and the
dead: then shall he pronounce that dreadful Sentence of condemnation,
Discedite a me maledicti, Matthew. 25.41.
Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire, which is prepared for the
Devil and his Angels, and then shall it be put into execution, for they shall
go into everlasting torments, verse 46

The Generality or exte^t of the Penalty
And let no man delighting in impiety delude his own soul with a vain hope of
impunitie; let him not think to escape the judgment of God, whilst he
commiteth such things as are worthy of death: Romans 1 32.
for the Lord is a powerful and an impartial Judge: Who can stand before his
wrath? or who can abide the fierceness of his wrath? His wrath is powered out
like fire, and the very Rocks are broken by him, says the Prophet. King
Nebuchadnezzar, though a most puissant Prince, a great Tree, as the Scripture
styles him, strong and high unto heaven, Dan. 4.11.
in whose boughs the Birds of the air did build their nests, yet saw in a
Vision a Watcher, Verse 14.
a holy One coming down from Heaven, who cried alowd Succidite arborem, Hew
down the Tree and Destroy it. Tophet is prepared for the King, Esaias 30.53.
says the Prophet Esaias. Though his excellency mount up unto the heavens and
his head reach up to the clouds, yet shall he perish for ever like his own
dung, Job 20.6.7.
says Job.

Regum timendorum in proprios greges, Hor. Carm. lib. 3. Ode, 1.

Reges in ipsos imperium est Iouis,
Clari Gygant eo triumpho,
cuncta supercilio mouentis.
God has an vnresistahle power over the most Commanding Princes: Pro 3.15.16.
By him Kings reign, Princes, Nobles and all the Judges of the earth do rule,
says Solomon the greatest Prince that ever ruled upon the earth. At his
footstool the mightiest Monarchs must lay down their Crowns and make their
appea^ance before his most dreadful presence, submitting themselves to be
censured and sentenced and suffer according to their demerits. God spares none
though never so mighty: yea, for that respect he deals more sharply with
them. For as Hieronimus Guadalupensis upon this Text observes, Quanto quisque
potentior sinon ferat f^uctum tanto maiori d^gnus est supplicio, qui ^occasio
est multis non ferendi bonos fructus. Scilicet in vulgus manaut exempla
regentum. Claudianus.
The more Potent a man is, if he do not bring forth good fruit, the greater
punishment he deserves, because He is an Occasion unto many of their not
bringing forth good fruit: Men ordinarily suffering themselves to be directed
and lob-led by the example of their Superiors, like the Spaniard that held his
neck awry because Alphonso of Arragon his king was wry neckt.

It is no man's Greatness that can shelter him from the smoking shower of Gods
wrath. Even that Mitred man of Sin, which treads Scepters under his feet,
and exalts himself above all that is called God, though he plead both a
canonizing and a confounding power, yet He also shall one day be brought before
the Bar of Gods Justice, to be arraigned for all his Abominations, wherewith
he has infatuated and besotted both himself and Gods Inheritance, and shall
drink of the dregs of Gods wrath cup, the promerited reward of his works.

And let no hood-winkt Catholic deride this peremptory assertion, as
proceeding from a distempered brain: for I know what I say: If his Holiness
cannot procure his own immunitie from the pains of Purgatory, as for example,
De Gemitu Columbae, li. 2. c. 9.
Pope Innocentius the third, who as Bellarmine writes, is to continue there
till Doomes day: much less shall he be able by his pretended power to deliver
himself from hell fire. Now if these lofty Cedars of Lebanon, and sturdy Oaks
of Basan cannot avoid the stroke of the Axe, but shall be hewn down and cast
into the fire, what shall become of the lesser trees, the lower shrubs?
Certainly, God will be impartial in his judiciary proceedings: his eye will
spare none. Romans ^.9, 11, 12. v^^^^^.
Tribulation and anguish upon Every soul of man that does evil, of the Jew
first, and also of the Gentile. With him there is no respect of persons: for as
many as have sinned without the Law, shall also perish without the Law: and as
many as have sinned in the Law, shall be judged by the Law. Psalm. ^^.^1
God will wound the hairy scalpe of Every one that goes on in his wickedness,
says the Prophet David. Ez^kiel 18.4
The soul that sins shall dye. Indeed the Gibeonites could gull Captain
Joshua with their old shoes, their moldy crustes, Joshua ^.4, 5.
and thread bare garments, and so save themselves from his sword: But God has
oculum in Sceptro, as he is omnipotent, so he is omniscient: he is (...),
Psalm. 13^, ^.
the Hearts searcher: he knows us all, and all our ways too well to be
deceived by us. Cic. Offic li. 3.
It is not the wearing of a Gyges Ring can keep us out of Gods sight: for
there is nothing that has a being in nature, which is not the object of his
eye. If I say, Psalm. 139.11.12
Surely the darkness shall cover me, even the night shall be a light about
me; yea, the darkness hides not from thee, but the night shines as the day;
the darkness and the light are both alike to thee.

In a word, when the Lord shall call the sons of men to a particular account
for their transgressions, then vana salus hominum, as says the Psalmist, Man's
help is all but in vain. Though hand join in hand, Prou. 11.25.
says Solomon, the wicked shall not escape unpunished: that is (says our
English Gloss) Though they make never so many friends, or think themselves
never so secure, yet they shall not escape. It is not the fantastical
treasure of the Saints Supererogatiue works under his Holiness lock and key
can serve the sinners turn in that day: for the Wise Virgins could not lend
any Oil, Math. 25.6.
lest they should lack for themselves. It is not any man's Potency can be his
Protection: for the most powerful Monarch is but as a Potters vessel, easily
broken into sheards and shiuers with the least touch of Gods iron rod. Revel.
2.27.
It is not the subtle pate of the deepest Politician can prevail for any man.
For the wisdom of the World is but foolishness with God. 1 Cor. 1.20. Esaias
29.14.
I will destroy the wisdom of the wise, and will cast away the understanding
of the prudent, says the Lord. No course can be taken to disappoynt God of his
revenging purposes: for as the Prophet has it, Amos 2.14, 15, 6.
The flight shall perish from the swift: and the strong shall not strengthen
his force: neither shall the mighty save his life: nor he that handles the
bow shall stand: and he that is swift of foot shall not escape, neither shall
he that rides the horse save his life: And he that is of a mighty courage
among the strong men, shall flee away naked in that day, says the Lord. Omnis
sine person^rum exceptione, sin excusationum algatione, sine alicuius cuosione.
Gorth in locu^.
So that without any personal exception, without any excusiue allegation,
without any particular ones evasion, Every tree, every man not bringing forth
good fruit, the fruits of holin^sse and sanctification, shall be hewn down,
and cast into the fire.

Every tree not bringing forth Good fruit: Many in their own account pass for
current Christians, and are persuaded they shall go for no less with God, when
they are called to give up their accounts unto him, if they do not bring forth
bad fruit: Luke 18 11.
if like the proud Pharise they can but plead for themselves, Not guilty as
other men, Extortioners, unjust, adulterers: If they can say, We are no
Drunkards, no Swearers, no spend thrifts, no grinders of the Poor, and the
like: If like Saint John's Herb, which (as Cooks report) being put into the
pot, procures nor good nor hurt to the pottage: so if they do no hurt, though
they never do any good; if they be honest harmless men, as they are commonly
styled, such as neither meddle nor make with others: but live quietly, (it is
no matter for religiously) among their Neighbors, all is well: they hope in
God to go to Heaven as sure as the best. Alas, poor miserable wretches, how
palpably, how grossly they deceive themselves, Ixion-like embracing a Cloud
instead of Juno: like Camelions feeding upon the ayerie hope of that happiness
they shall never find. Indeed, Not to do evil is commendable; but not to do
good, is culpable, is condemnable. Cast the unprofitable servant into utter
darkness: Math. 25.30.
there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth: And here in my text, Every tree
not bringing forth good fruit shall be hewn down, and cast into the fire.
Luke 16.
We do not read that the Rich man in the Gospel dispoyled Lazarus of any
thing whereof he was possessed: yet because he did not open unto him the
bowels of compassion, and cause to be tendered unto him wherewith to sustain
him in his want: therefore Hell mouth was opened to swallow him up unto
everlasting torments.

Now the reason is this, 1. John 3.4.
we read in John, that (...). Sin is the transgression of the Law: and the
transgression of the Law is Sin, and the wages of Sin is Death. Rom 6.23.
Now the Lords Mandates are as well Affirmative, for the ensuing of Good, as
Negative, for the eschewing of Evil: and the Affirmative as well as the
Negative under the Curse require exact obedience. So that, He is no less
liable unto the Laws malediction Qui omittit facienda, which omitteth things to
be done, then Qui facit omittenda, He which does things to be omitted. The
last and great Assizes will fully and plainly resolve this case, determine
this point. Matt. 25.41.
for, Then shall the Son of man say unto the Goats on the left hand, Depart
from me ye cursed into everlasting Fire prepared for the Devils and his
Angels: Here is the Curse. Hear we the Cause: It follows, For I was an
hungered, and ye gave me no meat: I thirsted, and ye gave me no drink; I was
naked, and ye clothed me not: Sick and in prison, and ye visited me not.
Where we may see the bare omission of the good works of mercy the procuring
cause of perpetual misery: ratifying the Position in my Text, that every Tree
not bringing forth good fruit shall be hewn down and cast into the fire.

Now if Every Tree not bringing forth forth good fruit shall be thus served:
how fearfully shall it fare with those trees that do not only not bring
forth good fruit, but also bring forth bad fruit? Dionyst^^ Carthusianus in
loc^
Si sola omissio aternoigne punitur, vitiosa actio quid meretur? If the bare
omission and neglect of a pious office be punishable with everlasting fire:
what does a vicious action deserve? Si sterilitas condemnatur, continuata
impietas, foeda delectatio, affectuosa peccati prosecutio quam dire
torquebitur? If sterilitie and barrenness be condemned: how direfully shall
continued impiety, wallowing with delight in the stinking puddle of iniquity,
an affected prosecution of all ungodliness even with greediness be tortured
and tormented? Non minoris est criminis habe^ i tollere, qua cum possit and
habes indigen^ibus denegare. Ambr. in quedam Ser.
If those shall be thrust into Hell that have not relieved the poor and needy
in their want and misery; what shall be come of such as lay violent hands upon
their Patrimony? If such as neglect the performance of Religious duties whether
toward God or Man are guilty of everlasting damnation; How shall they escape
the dreadful judgment of God which like the unrighteous Judge fear nor God,
nor man: Luke 18 4.
but live in the wilful breach of their Makers Laws? If such shall most
certainly be condemned as are only barren in goodness: what shall be come of
those that are also fruitful in the damnable works of darkness? If the
Fig tree for not bringing forth good fruit must be cursed, Math. 21.19.
how shall the Vines of Sodom and Gomorrha escape which bring forth bad
fruit, Deuteronomy. 32.32, 3^.
fruit bitter as Gall, Deadly as the poison of Dragons.

O Consider this all ye that forget your God, Psalm. 50.^2.
that forget your own good in being strangers from the life of God, least the
Lord in his wrath hew you down, and there be none to deliver you. For if God
spared not his blessed Angels, nor his beloved Israel when they brought forth
the cursed fruit of rebellion and disobedience: how shall he spare us that are
but dust and ashes: Worms and not Men: by Nature mere aliens from the Common
wealth of Israel, and strangers from the covenants of promise: seeing in
lewdness of life and Conversation we are nothing inferior to the Collapsed
Angels or rejected Israelites?

My beloved, I must ingeniously acknowledge with the Prophet Jeremy, Jeremy
1.6.
Puer sum, et nescio loqui, I am but a child and know not how to speak: fitter
like an Auditour to sit at Gamaliels feet, Acts 22.3. Matt. 23.2.
then like a Doctor in Moses chair. Yet seeing the Lord has called me to
this place, and put his word into my mouth: I beseech you suffer with all
patience and reverent attention, a word or two of premonition and exhortation.
It may please God so to magnify his strength in my weakness, as to make the
words which he has taught me effectually powerful for the reformation of
your lives, and consequently for the everlasting salvation of your Souls and
Bodies.

Shall every tree not bringing forth good fruit be hewn down and cast into
the fire? 1 Clergy
O lay this unto heart with me ye Chariots and horsemen of Israel, ye that
are of the house of Aaron and the Tribe of Leui, my beloved fellow laborers in
the work of the Ministry. Let us consider that the Lord has committed unto
us the dispensation of his Word, 1 Cor. 4.1. 1. Pet. 1.23.
that most precious and immortal seed whereby Christ may be conceived in us,
and we become spiritual Fathers of many Children in Christ. 1. Cor. 4.15.
O then let every one of us in the fear of God, according to the Talent
wherewith we are entrusted, so labor in the Word to be found faithful
dispensers of the Word, feeding the flock of Christ concredited to our charge
with sauory food in season, 2. Tim. 4.2.
and out of season, that we may become fruitful in begetting children unto
Christ for the enlarging of his Kingdom. Let us remember that the Church is
Gods vineyard, the People his plants, and we the Ministers his hired servants,
to labor in his vineyard that it may yield forth fruit unto the Lord. And
though John Baptist may have a back-friend in Herod's court, yet let us not be
put to silence, or discourag^d, but boldly with a h art strike with the Sword
of the Spirit at the head of that Serpent Sin, in whoms^euer we see it:
remembering that we are Ambassadors for Christ, 2 Cor. 5.20.
One who is able to maintain his cause even against the Devil himself. But
above all, let us labor to put life into our labors, by bringing forth the
fruit of good living, that so we may the better win our people to entertain
the si^cere Profession of the Truth, and save our own Souls at the day of the
Lord Jesus. Sermon. de Sancto Benedicto Abbate.
For as Saint Bernard most sweetly, Sermo vivus and efficax Operis est,
plurimum faciens suadibile quod dicitur, dum monstrat factibile quod suadetur:
We shall easily persuade the people to practice what we preach, when what we
preach, we practice. In a word, let us remember, that as there it a Vae mihi si
non euangelizavero, a woe unto the Minister if he do not labor in the
Gospel: so there is a vae mihi si non been vixero, a woe unto the Minister if
he do not live according to the Gospel: for every Tree that brings not
forth good fruit, the fruit of good living shall be hewne down and cast
into the fire.

In the next place think upon this ye People of this place, 2. Laytie.
of this City, of this Land. Sure I am, there is no Nation under the Celestial
Poles, prof^ssing the faith of Christ over which the Lord has placed so
Learned, so Laborious, so Religious a Clergy as over This. Consider how in it
ye are blessed of God, that so ye may bless God when ye consider of it:
Bless God? but how! why, bless him in Sacrificing unto him the Calves of your
lips: Hosea 14.2.
Bless him in consecrating unto him the short remnant and remainder of your
lives: Bless him in a reverend estimation of his holy Ordinances: In a word, 1 Thessalonians. 5.12, 13.
Bless him in your singular love unto those that are over you in the Lord,
that are dispensers of his sacred mysteries: least ye be hewn down and cast
into the fire.

And do ye not so? I would to God I could pass by you concerning these
particulars, especially the latter, without apprehending any just cause for
your general reprehension. It is a Sore I no more but touched, but named
before, intending in this place to handle it more at large, and to apply unto
it a corroding Plaster, if it were possible, to draw away the malignant
quality wherewith it is so much infested: that it is even swo^ne up as high as
Heaven, to the pulling down (as is justly to be feared) upon this Land, a
sudden Babel of confusion, without some speedy reformation.

Gal. 4.15.
I doubt not but there are some Galathians amongst us that would pluck out even
their own eyes, to do Paul good. 1 Kings 17.
That there is some Zareptan, that would even hazard the hastening her own
hunger-staruing to communicate unto Elishaes necessities: for whose sakes, I am
persuaded, the Lord has been many ways gracious unto this Land, and suspended
the infliction of his fearful judgments which for our sins we have long
since justly deserved. But alas, all these Some, these Galathians, these
Zareptans are but a small Sum, scarce to be called a number, in respect of
those that are contrarily affected. For as it was the sin of Jeroboam, 1 Kings
12.3.
with which he is branded unto posterity by the Spirit of God, that he made
Priests of the lowest and basest of the People: so it is a sin may be seen
and read in great characters upon the foreheads of most in this Land, that they
make Priests the lowest and basest of People: the lowest, by depriving them of
their allotted Maintenance; the basest, by prosecuting them with all
irreverence. Not to speak of the former, and therein of those violent,
maleuolent, vnchristian-like courses wherein they are very frequent, and
fruitful for the dispoyling, and robbing us of those revenues God out of his
holy wisdom has set apart, and consecrated for the maintenance of those that
minister and serve at his Altar, that so they might make the Levites to stoop
unto them, and hang upon their sleeves like beggars for their Alms and
voluntary contributions. How unreasonably do they load the Prophets of the Lord
with all the injuries and indignities their deuilish malice can invent? The
sacred title of our thrice honorable Function is but a term of disgrace in
the mouths of these scoffing Ismaels, whose malignant spleen is such, that
they will not stick to strike at us with the sword of their virulent tongues,
even in the face of the world, as we walk in the open streets. Nay, such is
the height of their impudency, that they will not forb^are to offer violence
unto the honor of our Calling, even before Gods own face, even in the
Sanctuary it self, which has always bin reputed a place of privilege, as if
they would out-beard and out-braue almighty God himself. Is it possible such
a high-handed disrespect and contempt should reign where the Gospel of Christ
is so plentifully, and so sincerely preached?

But I do the less marvel at it, when I call to mind the base usage wherewith
the Son of God, Hebr. 6.20.
that High Priest for ever after the Order of Melchisedeck, our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ, was saluted in the days of the flesh: He was in the
world (says the beloved Evangelist) and the world was made by him, John 1.10,
11.
and the world knew him not. He came unto his own, and his own received him
not. Nay, they did not only not receive him, but did, as ye may read at large
in the History of his life, prosecute and persecute him with a world of
indignities, even unto the death. Math. 10.24, 25
Now the Disciple is not above his Master, nor the servant above his Lord. It
is enough (says our Savior) for the disciple to be as his master is, and the
servant as his Lord. If they have called the master of the house Beelzebub, how
much more them of his household? Our Lord has drunk unto us out of this bitter
cup, and we must resolve to pledge him round. O thrice happy we, if we could
so apprehend it, that he is pleased to accept us into his sufferings. For if we
suffer with Christ, 2 Timothy 2.12.
we may be assured we shall also reign with Christ. But unhappy all those
whose delight to grieve our spirits by their disrespectiue carriage and
unconscionable courses, shall make us to be called Great in the kingdom of
heaven: yea, thrice unhappy and accursed, if they break not off this their
sinfulness by a more sanctified and conscionable course of life. We are indeed
but weak Earthen vessels, 2 Cor. 47.
as the Apostle styles us. We are sinful men, men full of sin, and therein
not unlike your selves: let him that is among you with out sin cast the first
stone at us. John 8.7.
Yet consider that we are your Spiritual fathers; 1 Cor. 4.15. Revel. 3.1.
that we are the Angels of God, and Ambassadors for Christ. 2 Cor. 5, 20.
If we be your Fathers, where is our honor? What though Elisha be bald? shall
the children of Bethel call him Baldpate unpunished? 2 Kin. 2.2^, 23.
No, two Bears come out of the Forest, and tare them in pieces. What though
Noah be drunken? shall his son Ham mock and deride him without a curse?
Genes. 9.25.
No, Canaan is cursed, a servant of servants shall he be unto his brethren.
If we be Angels of God and Ambassadors for Christ, where is that homage and
reverence you owe unto us in the name of our Lord and Master? Will an earthly
Prince, which is but a piece of clay, take to heart as done to himself,
whatsoever indignity is offered unto his Ambassadors? And will not Almighty
God be sensible of that dishonor which is daily done unto his Ambassadors?

I have heard credibly related, how superciliously and contemptuously the
Palsgraues Country has looked upon their Clergy. In what case that Country
now stands, I suppose the remotest Christian Region is not ignorant. I will
not presume peremptorily to determine that this one sin has been the
procuring cause of so fearful a Judgment. Thus much I am sure of, that the
contempt of the Messengers of God cost Jerusalem a desolation. 2 Chronicles. 36 16
God is so tender over his Prophets, that he will not have them so much as
touched: he has reproved even Kings for their sakes. So sensibly he is
affected with the wrongs they sustain, that he takes them as done to
Himself. Do ye rob them of their Tithes? Malac 3.8.
Ye have robbed me, says the Lord. Do ye neglect and despise them? Ye despise
me, says Christ, Luke 10.16.
and him that sent me, even God the Father. And will not the Lord revenge these
wrongs? Yea, has he not already in some measure punished this land for them?
Have not the Coals your Forefathers have stolen from Gods altar, set their
neasts on fire, brought a curse upon their substance, that it has not thriued
unto a third generation? yea, whilst they and you have denied God his Tenth
part, has not God taken away your Nine parts, and given you only a Tenth?

Again, has not the Lord taken unto himself many conscionable and painful
Ministers, which according to the course of nature might have lived long, to
have bin worthy Instruments for your everlasting good, because ye have so
undervalued them, and set so low an estimate upon them? But alas, my Beloved,
these are but flea-bitings if compared to the remoouing of our Candlestick
from amongst us: Revel. 2.5.
and is it not justly to be feared, that he has even at this present some
such work in hand? I pray God he has not. But say he do continue the light of
his Gospel amongst us: yet what benefit can accrue unto us by this light, if we
be taken from it, and cast into utter darkness? This God can do, and will
do, if we do not bring forth better fruit: for every tree that brings not
forth good fruit, shall be hewn down and cast into the fire. O consider of
this, all ye whose greatest glory is to be the scourge of the Clergy; lest
that High Priest Christ Jesus take you in hand, and ye be made to howl
eternally in Hell, for contemning his Substitutes, his low Priests here on
earth. Let the Word of the Lord, and the Ministers thereof be precious in your
sight, that you and your posterity may be precious in the sight of the Lord.
Have those that are over you in the Lord, and labor amongst you in singular
love, if not for their own sakes, yet for their Masters sake, and for their
works sake, considering how like Candles they consume and waste themselves
away to light you in the way unto perpetual happiness. Give unto them double
honor, and cut them not short of their due reverence and maintenance, lest the
Lord in his fury cut you off from the state of mercy, lest ye be hewn down
and cast into the fire.

I have, I suppose, not a little exceeded your expectation, I am sure, my first
intention in giving so much way unto this last particulars extention: but the
time I have borrowed of you in it, I will God willing, repay you to the full in
the rest that follow.

Shall every tree not bringing forth good fruit be hewn down and cast into the
fire?

My Honorable Lord, 3 The Lord Mayor.
I will give you but a word, take heed God do not one day give you a blow. He
has ordained you a Magistrate under his Majesty, and has put the Sword of
Justice into your hand. I would desire you to take notice, that he has also an
Axe in his hand: therefore like a good tree bring forth good fruit in that
place wherein he has set you: be the Orphans father, and the Widows husband:
be of a good courage, and be zealous for your great Lord and Master, your
Maker the Lord of hosts: protect and countenance the good; correct and cut down
the bad, lest the Lord hew you down and cast you into Hell fire. 4 Judges and
Lawyers.


Ye Reverend Judges of the Land, and all ye that travel in the Study and
Practice of the Law, remember there is a dreadful Judge above you, even the
Lord of Heaven and Earth, who will one day call all of you to a strict account
for all your courses. Therefore like good trees bring forth good fruit in your
several places, as you will answer it at the Bar of his Tribunal. Let
neither the fear of greatness, nor unrighteous Mammon; let neither private
spleen, nor particular affection so prevail with you, as to interturbe and
ouerturne the course of Justice: but walk uprightly and conscionably, as having
the fear of God before your eyes, lest he hew you down and cast you into hell
fire. 5 Tradesmen.


All ye that exercise your selves in Civil commerce, come hither and consider
what I shall say unto you. What will it advantage you to be Lords over the
whole world, and to loose your own souls? Luke 9.25.
Therefore so Sell and Buy, and Barter, that ye make not shipwreck of a Good
Conscience, and loose the kingdom of heaven into your Bargains: that is, deal
honestly and sincerely with all men, as it becomes the Servants of Christ: and
do not go about cunningly to entrap any with terms of Equivocation, and to
cheat them with false Wares, Measures, and Weights: for these things are an
abomination unto the Lord. But above all things, take heed of that most
frequent and most fearful custom of swearing worth and credit into your
Commodities; lest while ye labor to make them marchantable, and good
penny-worths with man: ye loose your credit and your penny, that is, your
Crown of Glory with God. Think upon it, for believe it the time will come,
when the Lord shall weigh you in his Balance, as he did Belshazzar, and shall,
Da^ 9, 25.
if he find you too light, separate you from the Kingdom of Heaven as far as
the East is from the West, and the North from the South: for every Tree that
brings not forth good fruit, shall be hewn down and cast into the Fre.

In the next place take notice of this all ye, 6 Married folk.
whom the Lord has linked together in Holy and Honorable Matrimony: that so
ye may bring forth fruit beseeming so holy and so honorable an estate. Make
conscience of performing those several Offices and respects God in his Sacred
Word requires of you one toward another. Be Careful Religiously and
Constantly to observe and pay those Solemn vows ye made before God and Men
at the Solemnization of your Nuptials. More particularly and principa^ly
seeing God has made you One of Two, Genesis 2.24.
suffer not the Devil to make you Two of One: but live peaceably, discreetly,
and loyally together: nourish mutual affection, 1 Thessalonians 4.4.
and possess your vessels, that is, your bodies in holiness and honor: and
keep your selves one to another as undefiled members of Christ's Body, H^b 13.4
free from lusting after strange flesh, least ye be hewn down and cast into
the Fire.

Again, shall every Tree not bringing forth good fruit be hewn down and cast
into the fire?

Consider this all ye whom the Lord has blessed with the fruit of the Womb,
7 Parents.
least this temporal blessing prove your eternal bane. Think it not enough
that ye bring forth children into the world, and provide for them an earthly
inheritance: unless ye also bring them up unto the Lord, and so fit them for
the Kingdom of Heaven. Alas, what is their first generation more then their
Corruption? Psalm. 51 5.
for they are shaped in wickedness and conceived in sin: and so poor
Infants, Damnati antequam nati, they are damned before their mothers are
delivered: and being so, what is your Temporal provision unto them, though
never so plentiful: if after their joy in this World (if they know any) they
be so far from knowing any in the next, that on the contrary they lie howling
in Hell flames for ever? If therefore you truly love your Children, for their
sakes undertake a second labor, and bring forth this good fruit of your
Fatherly love toward them, once more travel in pain of them, but as Paul did
of the Galathians, till Christ be formed in them: Gal. 4.19.
labor that they may be begotten a new in Christ by the immortal seed of the
Word, 1. Pet. 1.23.
and be made heirs of the Kingdom of Heaven. Let it be your care, whatsoever
it cost, to have them brought up even from their Childhood in the fear of
God. That when they leave this world, they may attain unto the Land of
everlasting life, there to reign with Christ world without end. And if you
will not do thus much for their sakes, at least do it for your own sakes.
For know, to bring forth this good fruit of true fatherly affection, to be
careful for the Spiritual welfare of your Children, and to promote and
further it to the utmost of your power, is a duty God strictly inioyneth. And
if through neglect hereof your Children rebel against God, Ephesians. 6.4
he will require their blood at your hands. For as God does visit the sins
of the Fathers upon the Children: So he does visit the sins of the Children
upon the Fathers. For an instance remember Old Eli: 1. Sam. 2.
when his Sons trespassed against God, He did not sharply reprove and
correct them: but suffered the^ to run on in their Sins: and this was his
ruin: In a word, remember the Judgment here threatened in my Text, and be moved
thereby to bring forth the good fruit of true Fatherly affection: instruct
your Children in the fear of the Lord: reprove and correct the^ when they
offend the Lord: least the Lord hew you down and cast you into the fire. 8
Children.


In like manner ye Children, remember the Rock out of which ye were hewn,
the Stock whereof ye are stemmes: your Parents from whom, next under God, ye
have received your natural being. Oh wound not their tender hearts with your
untoward carriage and rebellious courses, the only course to accelerate and
hasten their heads to the grave: but like good Children, bring forth the good
fruit of filial fear and affection, that ye may exhilarate and rejoice their
Souls to the prolonging of their days. Reverence them inwardly in your
hearts, and outwardly in your Behavior: yield unto them all dutiful obedience
in the Lord, least ye pluck their Curse upon your heads, and the Lord hearing
it, 9 Masters of families.
hew you down and cast you into the fire.

Ye that have the care of Servants committed to your charge, bring forth the
Good fruit of Good Masters in your several Families: do unto your Servants
that which is just and equal, Col. 4.1.
knowing that ye also have a Master in Heaven. Command them not but in the
Lord, and that lovingly. Allow them a befitting competency, be it in matter of
indument for the Back, or aliment for the Belly; and do not withold their
wages from them. But above all, instruct them in the knowledge and fear of
God, as well by your examples, as precepts: and allow not their profanation of
the Lords Sabaths the least Conniuence: Least the Lord hew you down and cast
you into the fire.

10 Servants.
And ye that are Servants, serve your Masters faithfully both in word and
deed: and observe them with all respective reverence, and submit your selves
unto them to obey them in the Lord, least the Lord hew down you also, and cast
you into the fire.

In a word, to draw toward a conclusion, give me leave to draw out an Ear
or two of the Corn we have already inn'd: for I fear growing too voluminous
and large, in particularizing farther. Ye have heard how gracious and
bountiful a God the Lord has vowed to show himself unto all those that
submit themselves unto his laws, and labor to serve him faithfully in
bringing forth good fruit: in leading a holy and religious course of life:
that he will reward and crown their holy endeauours with an eternal weight of
Glory in the kingdom of Heaven. Ye have likewise heard how severe and
terrible a Judge he will reveal himself unto all such as run disobedient
and rebellious courses, that he will wound the hayrie Scalpe of every one that
goes on in his wickedness: yea, that he will hew down and cast into the
fire every Tree not bringing forth good fruit. If therefore the sweet
blessings of Gerizim, the loving mercies of God cannot work upon our
rebellious hearts, to reclaim us from our wicked ways: let the bitter
cursings of Eball, the dreadful terrors of the Law make us fear to offend:
least the Lord in his wrath deliver us up unto a reprobate mind, and in that
fearful estate hew us down: that is, by a violent Death rent our Souls and
Bodies a sunder: and cast us both soul and body into the fire, to be
intollerably and eternally tormented in the flames of Hell. My beloved, as God
is Jealous of, so he is Zealous for his glory: if he be not glorified a nobis,
of us by our conversion: he will be glorified de nobis upon us, by our
confusion: if we do not turn unto him, he will turn us into Hell: for it is a
conclusion so ratified, as never to be repealed: that Every one whether Jew or
Gentile, bond or free, high or low, rich or poor: Every tree not bringing
forth good fruit, shall be hewn down and cast into the fire. O then, let
every one of us make a diligent search into his own bosom, and judge
himself, least he be judged of the Lord. Let us dissect and rip up that body
of sin which is within us; not only that Natural corruption, which we have
all alike succ^ssiuely received from our first Parents, but also those personal
transgressio^s which every man has made himself guilty of, more or less.
Then having faithfully laid open our sinfulnes, let us look on it with a
loathing eye and a lamenting heart: unfeignedly deploring the time wherein to
our just damnation, had we our deserts, we have not only brought forth no
fruit, but also naughty fruit, fruit cursed and abominable: and herein, not
only dishonored God our selves: but also, to our further damnation, drawn
others to do the like by our lewd examples: for which, let us go with faith in
the blood of Jesus Christ to the throne of Grace, imploring mercy at the hands
of our heavenly Father, who is ready and willing to embrace with the arms of
his mercy, al such petitioning him for grace in the Name of his Son: and let
us for the time following, entertain this settled resolution into our hearts,
faithfully to labor in the reformation of all those faults we lament: And which
is the consummation and perfection of our repentance, let us crown our holy
resolutions by putting them into action: by bringing forth fruit worthy
amendment of life, as it is in the verse before my Text, or as it is here in my
Text, by bringing forth good fruit, by leading in our several places and
callings a right holy and religious course of life. For it is not a bare
entertainment of better courses into our thoughts, of dead, of naked purposes:
nor an outside of Religion, an outward conformity to the service of God, will
preserve us from the wrath to come: the former being but a bringing forth of
good leaves, the latter but of good flowers, or if of fruit, but of such as is
false and counterfeit: No, we must either bring forth good fruit, that is, as
ye have heard, Fruit not only outwardly beautiful and good in the eye of man,
but also inwardly good and sound in the sight of God, or we must undergo the
wrath of God be hewn down, and cast into the fire. Such fruit must every Tree
bring forth, and that 1. Properanter, presently. 2. Abundanter, plentifully. 3.
Perseueranter, perseuerantly.


We must bring forth good fruit
First, we must bring forth good fruit properanter, presently; it is a task we
must take in hand out of hand: 1. Presently.
as much is implied in the letter of my text, Every tree, (...), not bringing
forth good fruit, that is, Now, presently (for it is a word of the present
tense, and does urge a present task) shall be hewn down and cast into the
fire. This Speed is emphatically pressed in the first words of my text, Now is
the axe laid unto the root of the trees; as if the Baptist had more largely
delivered himself thus: It is no delaying the time of your turning unto God:
he has tarried your leisure so long, that he is resolved to attend you no
longer: therefore look to your selves, God will now be but a word and a blow:
for he has already taken his Axe, the instrument of death, into his hand: yea
he has already lifted up his arm to strike: nay more, he has so far set
forward his blow, that he has even laid his Axe to the root of the trees,
resolutely determining to make his blow, to hew you down out of hand, and cast
you into the fire, if ye do not presently repent, and bring forth fruit
worthy amendment of life. O then, my beloved, I beseech you let us consider,
that now only is the time of making or marring our fortunes for ever. Alas,
what is our life but a blast? Spiramus, expiramus: we breath, and instantly our
breath is gone. So it is, that no man living can assure unto himself the least
moment of time beyond that which he does at the very instant enjoy. Indeed the
Devil, to lead us on in our sins, would persuade us, that Nature has sealed
unto us a long Lease of our lives; and that we need not as yet trouble our
heads with repentance; there will be time enough for that hereafter. But the
truth is, we hold this fading breath but as Gods Tenants at will. He may and
will, if it please him, without the least warning take it away from us. But
suppose we may live long, and repent time enough hereafter, for that
poenitentia vera nunquam sera, Poenitentia sera, raro vera.
True repentance is never too late: yet are we sure we can repent when we
please? No, True repentance is the gift of God, and it is just with him to deny
it that man at his death, which has so carelessely neglected it throughout the
whole course of his life.

So that in a word, in mora (...), it is but a folly, yea extreme madness to
dally and delay the time of our conversion, considering the imminent wrath of
God, and our own frailty. Sure I am, As the tree falls, so it lies; as Death
leaves us, so Judgment finds us. Let us therefore even Now, whilst it is
called to day, begin to work out our salvation with fear and trembling: When
the night of Death comes, no man can work. Let us Now, whilst the
acceptable little time of salvation lasts, unfeignedly repent, and call upon
God for mercy. Let it suffice that we have spent the time past upon the lusts
of our own hearts, in brining forth the corrupt fruit of the flesh, in
drunkenness, in swearing, in profaneness, in pride in uncleanness, and the
like: Let us Now begin to awake out of sin, and to walk in newness of life:
lest the Lord do suddenly before we so much as dream of it hew us down, and
cast us into the fire.

Secondly, 2. Plentifully.
we must bring forth good fruit abundanter, plentifully. It is the Encomium
Christ gives his Spouse the Church, Cant. 4.14.
that she is an Orchard full of sweet fruits. And Saint Paul affirms of the
Romans, Romans 1, ^. Romans 15.14.
that their faith was published throughout the whole world. and Romans 15. I am
persuaded, says he, that ye are full of goodness, and filled with all
knowledge; and of the Thessalonians he affirms, that their faith did grow
exceedingly, 1 Thessalonians 1.3.
and their love did generally abound. My beloved, th^se and the like
testimonies of the Saints are recorded for our imitation. The plain truth is,
God cannot away with starueling trees, such Professors as are Non-proficients.
If therefore we mean to avoid the stroke of his axe, and to be freed from the
torments of hell fire thretned in my text, we must like good trees thrive in our
spiritual estate, we must increase and grow in grace and goodness, we must
abound in every good work that may make us perfect me^ in Christ Jesus; we must
bring forth good fruit ple^tifully

And good reason has God to require it at our hands, VV^y God expects at our
hands bringing forth of good fruit plentifully.
considering the extraordinary cost and care he has bestowed upon us to this
end and purpose. For first as has bin said before, he has bin pleased pure
seed of his Word in no place so plentifully as in this land, in no place of
this land so plentifully as in this City.

Tum pater omnipotens faecundis imbrious ether, etc. Virg. 2. G^org.
sweet fructifying showers from heaven: and to infuse a quicken^ng power into
the ground of our hearts; he has caused the Sun of Peace, Pax al^eit vites,
and suc^os codid^ vu^, funderet v^ nat^ tesla paterna merum. Ti^. lib. 1. leg.
1.
the Mother of Plenty, for these medicinal courses has he neglected, which
in the judgment of man might conduce to the furthering of our fruitfulnes? He
has pared off our riotous Twigs, and lopped off our luxuriant Branches, ripped
up our Rind, opened our Roots: that is, he has scourged us with sundry kinds
of Crosses and Afflictions, that thereby he might call us back from wandering
abroad after the bewitching pleasures of Sin, to serve Him the only true and
everliving God, with a sound and upright heart in all holiness of life and
conversation. All which laid together, we have no reason to think, that
praying unto God in the Church once a week, the hearing of a Sermon once a
month, a strict observation of the Saboth once a quarter, a Receiving of the
Sacrament once in six months, a Feasting of the poor once a year will serve
the turn. No, God will not be satisfied with such a Barren and Dwarfling
Obedience: he will not be contented with the Gleanings of Harvest, with here
a Bery, and there a Bery, as it was with the shaken Olive Tree, Esaias 17. No,
Every tree must bring forth good fruit plentifully: for, Unto whom soever much
is given, Luke 12.48.
of him shall be much required, says our Savior.

So that it does stand us every one in hand accordingly to endeavor the real
answering of Gods just expectation, lest in the day of his wrath, we have the
d^eper share in his just indignation. For Quanto mayor gratia, Quo clarior lux
verbi and gratiae off^ get, (...) gra^^iores paenas mundi ingratitud^nem sibi
accelerate. Chemnit.
tanto amplior postea peccantibus poena, says Saint Chrysostom. God will at
^he Last day proportion out the punishment of a sinner according to the means
of grace he has afforded him in the time of his sinning At the worlds great
Sessions it shall go harder with Chorazin and Bethsaida, then with Tyrus and
Sidon: it shall go harder with Capernaum, then with Sodom: because God did
more abound in the means of grace to Chorazim, Bethsaida, and Capernaum, then
to Tyrus, Sidon, and Sodom. Seeing therefore it has pleased God to deal so
liberally with us in the means of Grace: let us in the name of God endeavor
in some proportion to answer his bounty in our measure of grace. Let us labor
to be full of the sweet fruits of the Spirit: Let us labor to be strong in
the Faith, 2 Pet. 1.5 etc.
and (as Saint Peter speaks) With our Faith let us join Virtue; with Virtue,
Knowledge; with Knowledge, Temperance; with Temperance, Patience; with
Patience, Godliness, with Godliness, Brotherly Kindness; and with Brotherly
Kindness, Love. In a word, let us labor to abound in every good work, that
may make us pleasing and acceptable un o God: let us bring forth good fruit,
Abundanter, Plentifully. 3 Perseuerantly.


Thirdly and lastly, lest all our labor prove but in vain, we must bring
forth good fruit Perseueranter, Perseuerantly. For to what purpose is it, if a
Soldier at the first onset courageously encounter with the Enemy: and before
he has obtained the victory, throw away his Arms? Or what does it profit a
Mariner to commit himself to the Sea, and to enjoy the benefit of a fair gale
of Wind even unto his desired Ports mouth: if then the wind do turn, and so
turn him back again before he can thrust into the Port? Happily thou have
been just, and have done that which is lawful and right, as it is in Ezec.
18.5. Ezekiel. 18.
More particularly, as the Prophet there expresses himself, Thou have not
eaten upon the Moun^aines, nor lift up thine eyes unto Idols, nor defiled thy
neighbors wife, nor oppressed any, but have restored to thy Debtour his
Pledge: thou have spoiled none by violence; thou have given thy Bread to the
Hungry, and covered the Naked with a Garment; thou have not given forth upon
Usury, neither taken any Increase: thou have withdrawn thy hand from
iniquity, and executed true Judgment between man and man: thou have walked
in Gods Statutes, and kept his Judgments to deal truly. Thus far have thou
gone, and in these good courses thou have continued a long time, and in so
doing have done well: But tell me, what will all this thy righteousness
avail thee, if afterward thou shall fall away from God, 2 Pet. 2.20.
and entangle thy self again in the filthiness of the world, like the Dog
that returns to his own vomit, and the Sow that is washed, to her wallowin
the mire? Ezekiel. 18.
If the righteous turn away from his righteousness, and commits iniquity,
shall he live? says the Lord. No, All his righteousness that he has done,
shall not be mentioned: In his trespass that he has trespassed, and in his
sin that he has sinned, in them shall he dye. Ezekiel. 18. Yea, It had been
better for him never to have acknowledged the way of Righteousness, 2 Pet. 2.
(as the Apostle speaks) then after he has known it, to turn from the
holy Commandment delivered unto him: For the latter end of that man, is worse
then the beginning.

If therefore thou would make sure work for the good of thy Soul, and store
up comfort for thy self against the day of death, and that great day of wrath:
then thou must not rely upon thy former righteousness, Luke 12.19.
as the Rich man in the Gospel did upon the store he had treasured up in his
Barnes: and say, Soul take thine ease, and freely disport thy self
hence-forward in the delights of sin; for thou have already brought forth
good fruit plentifully, which will serve thee for many years. No, thou must
bring forth good fruit Perseuerantly: for it is not here said, every tree,
Quae non fecit, which has not brought forth good fruit: but every tree non
faciens, not bringing forth good fruit shall be hewn down and cast into the
fire: So that fecisse non sufficit, it suffices not formerly to have brought
forth good fruit, unless thou continue in so doing perseuerantly.

No man, says Christ, Luke 9.62.
putting his hand to the Plough, and looking back, is fit for the Kingdom of
Heaven. Bernardus.
Sola perseuerantia singularis summi regis est filia, (says a Father) ea enim
sola est haeres regni Coelorum: Perseverance is the only Daughter of the King
of Heaven, for she only is H^ire to the Kingdom of Heaven. therefore says our
Savior to his Disciples, Matthew. 24.13
Qui perseuerauerit, h^ that continues to the end shall be saved; Revel 2.10.
and to the Church of Smyrna, Be thou faithful unto the death, and I will give
thee a Crown of Life. And upon these terms does Saint Paul assure himself,
and every faithful Christian a Crown of righteousness: I have fought a good
fight, 2. Tim. 7.8.
and have finished my course; I have kept the faith. Hence forth is laid up for
me the Crown of righteousness, which the Lord the righteous Judge shall give
me at that day: and not to me only, but unto all them also that love that his
appearing. The absolute necessity of this Perseverance for all such as expect
the Happiness of a better life, has so deeply sunk into the thoughts of
Gods Children in all ages, that they have constantly resolved to suffer the
bitterest torments the pregnant malice of the Devil and his Factors could
inflict upon them; rather then to loose the blessed hope of their Heavenly
inheritance. If therefore we respect our Future Ha^pinesse, let us not be
like the plant Epheme^on, which does spring and flourish, and fade in a day:
but as the Olive tree flourish^th and fru ifieth all the year long so let us
continue in bringing forth good fruit perseuerantly. To be short, the way to
Heaven though it be Narrow yet it is Long: and our life at the Longest but
Short. Let us therefore, that we may the better compass so great a Journey,
get up betimes out of our beds of Sin, even in the morning of our age, at the
first hour of the day; and quickly make our selves ready, that so we may set
forth betimes toward the Celestial Canaan. And when we have once set our
feet in the way of righteousness, the d^rect and only Rode to that Holy
City, If at the end of our lives, when we can travail no longer, we would
rest in Abraham's bosom: let us labor to imitate him in his iourneying unto
the terrestrial Canaan: that is, Genesis 12 9.
let us eundo pergere, still be going forward from grace to grace, whatsoever
Remoraes do encounter us in the way, whatsoever afflictions do befall us
having our eyes fixed upon those heavenly joys, whereof the troubles and
afflictions of this life are not worthy. The older we grow in years, the more
let us grow in goodness: Let our Works, our Love, our Service, our Faith,
Revel. 2.19.
our Patience be like the Thyatirians, more at the last then at the first. Thus
like good Trees, bringing forth good fruit presently, plentifully,
perseuerantly; we shall at length be brought by him who is Alpha and Omega
the beginning and the ending, Revel. 1.8.
unto the beginning of that unspeakable Happiness which shall have no ending.

But happily you will reply in the words of Saint Paul, 2 Cor. 2.16.
(...)? who is sufficient for these things? Is not our Father an Amorite, and
our Mother a Hittite! The best of men by Nature is no better then a Briar,
Micha 7.4. Math. 7.
a Thorn, a Thistle. And do men gather Grapes of Thorns, and Figs of
Thistles? Ex Spinis non nascitur Rosa. Such as is the Tree, such is the Fruit.
It Is true: And therefore to bring forth Good fruit presently, plentifully,
perseuerantly, we must be ingrafted into the true Vine, and abide in it. I am
that Vine, says Christ, John 15.5.
and ye are the branches. He that abides in me, and I in him, the same
brings forth good fruit: For without me ye can do nothing. verse. 6.
If a man abide not in me, he is cast forth as a branch that is withered, and
men gather them, and cast them into the fire, and they are burned. But how are
we ingrafted into Christ? by Faith. How do we abide in Him? By Love. How does
He abide in us? by his Holy Spirit: through whose gracious opperation we are
enabled to bring forth the good fruits of the Spirit: Now for as much as no Arm
of Flesh can command this Faith, this Love, this Holy Spirit,

Therefore
O LORD GOD, we do here in all humility address our selves unto thy divine
Majesty, entirely desiring thee in mercy to look down from Heaven upon us
miserable wretches here on earth. We acknowledge, O Lord, and thou know,
that of our selves we have no power to order our ways aright unto thee: for
we are a crooked generation, a people by nature the children of wrath: so that
if thou should leave us to our selves, we must look for no less, then like
fruitless Trees to be hewn down, and cast into the fire. But, good God,
remember that thou art our Creator, and we thy Creatures: that thou art our
Father, and we thy children. Oh, neglect not the work of thine Hand; neither
suffer us thy children to perish: but look upon us in the sweet compassions of
a tender hearted Father: for the blood of Christ pardon all our sins past:
throw behind thy back those cursed fruits we have hitherto continually
brought forth to the dishonor of thy Great and Glorious Name, that they may
never be laid unto our charge: and enable us for the time to come to do what
thou requirest, and then require what thou will, and we will do it. O Lord
stretch forth thine hand, and engraft us by a true and lively Faith into the
Body of thy Son Jesus Christ. Dwell in us, O heavenly Father, and blessed
Son by thy holy Spirit: that by the gracious and powerful operation thereof,
like good trees we may bring forth good fruit, that we may every day more and
more abound and increase in grace and goodness, till we come to be perfect
men in Christ Jesus. Graciously hear us, most merciful Father, and grant us
whatsoever thou know to be good for us, and that for thy Son and our
Savior Jesus Christ his sake. To whom with thee and the blessed Spirit, be
ascribed of us and of all thy Saints, all praise power and Glory for ever. Amen.

FINIS.

