DAVID'S DESIRE TO GO TO CHVRCH: as it was published in two Sermons in St Mary's
in Oxford.

The One the fifth of November in the Afternoon to the University 1609. the
Other on Christmas Day following to the Parishioners of that place.

By JOHN DAY Bachelour of Divinity, and one of the Fellows of Oriell College.

Basil in Psalm. 115. Audite vos Ecclesiam relinquen^es, and in domibus
communibus diversantes, miserabilia pretiosi corporis fragment^, quod preces ac
vota in medio Jerusalem reddere oportet, hoc est Ecclesiae Dei. AT OXFORD,
Printed by Joseph Barnes. 1612.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVL Mr Dr BLENCOW Provost of Oriell College, the
Fellows, and Students there:

WITH THE RIGHT Worshipful, the Worshipful, and the rest of the Parish of St
Mary's,

GRACE BE WITH YOU and peace from God our Father, and from the Lord Jesus
Christ.

THE EPISTLE Dedicatorie.
RIGHT Worshipful, and you the rest Beloved in our Lord. That which the
Apostle said concerning Wives of being subject to their 1. Pet. 3.1
Husbands that even they which obeyed not the word might without the word have
been won by the conversation of the wives, while they beheld their pure
conversation which was with fear: may with good congruity be said to
Protestant-Christians, of often freque^ting Church Service, that even they
which obey not the word (I mean Roman-Catholickes) may without the word be
won by the conversatio^ of such Protestants, while they be hold our pure
conversation which is or ought to be with fear. Howbeit such has been the
coldness of a many in this kind, the aversenes of others unless there be
Sermons to, the connivence even of Pastors, I, and soothing their Flock in
this sin, that the People who by their conversatio^ should have converted
others unto us, are themselves now in these days co^verted unto them, and a
many of us the Ministers that hoaped of much interest of bringing souls unto
God, stand now in doubt of loosing the very Etiam de sort nunc venio in
dubium miser, Terent. Ad^lph. Act. 2 sc. 2.
principal it self. I pray God 2. Tim. 4.16.
says the Apostle in a case of less moment, that it may not be laid to their
charge. Doubtless among all the oversights to be laid to the charge of us
Protestants, this of freque^ting Gods house no better is not the least,
especially now in these times when the Lord our God has done so
miraculouslie so much for us, and when his honor (as it were) lies at the
stake, and the fruit that we bring forth makes his name (I would I might not
say) blasphemed among the Papists.

The consideration hereof Right dear and dearly Beloved Christians, has
caused me as at the first to preach these two Sermons, the one to the
University, the other to your selves: so now to set them forth only and wholly
to your selves, that as one of them was the very first Sermon that ever I
preached unto you since I came to be your Pastor, so it might remain unto you
for ever as a testimony of my care of you, and not perish with me when I am
gone as did a many good words in this kind with my worthy Predecessor Mr
Wharton.

Were this your Parish of that nature that others be, and the Pulpit not so
often, and necessarily to be supplied by the University as it is, perhaps I
would speak thence unto you more often then I do, but since I cannot what I
would, I will now do what I can, even preach unto you Evangelizo manu and
scriptione Raynold. de Romans Eccles. Idol Epist. ad Commit. Essex.
by writing, and it grieveth me not (as Phil. 3.1.
speaks the Apostle) to write the same things to you, and for you it is a sure
thing.

When our Savior was risen again from the dead and Mary Magdalen, and the
other Mary came to see the sepulcher, and by reason of the Angels countenance
that had descended from heaven, it should seem they were somewhat frighted,
Fear ye not Mat. 28.5
says the Angel, for I know that ye seek Jesus which was crucified: he is
not here for he is risen, as he said, Come see the place where the Lord was
laid, And go quickly, and tell his Disciples that he is risen from the dead:
and behold he goes before you into Galile: there ye shall see him: lo I have
told you. I doubt not Beloved, a many of you are as desirous to find Jesus as
ever those women were, especially in this age when so many Romish Sable
Catholics, so many English Browne-Schismatickes so verefie our Saviors words,
Mark. 13.21.
Lo here is Christ, or to he is there, as it is in Saint Marks Gospel. I know
I am not fit to be likened to the Angel, but yet may I say what did the Angel
Lo I have told you, and as our Savior Mat. 11.14.
said in another case of John the Baptist, And if ye will receive it, this is
Elias: so I in this case, And if ye will receive it, this is the truth I have
here delivered in these Sermons.

Wherefore as the Prophet Esaias Esaias. 30.21.
said to the Jews, Thine ears shall hear a word behind thee, saying, This is
the way walk ye in it, when thou turnest to the right hand, and when thou
turnest to the left: so assure your selves that now in this Age when there is
so much turning on the Right Hand, and on the Left, this is the Word your ears
have heard, and I ingenuously profess that after so many years spent in this
famous University in reading Old and New writers (you know whose Mat. 13.15.
precept it was) if either of the other ways, or any other had appeared unto
me better, for the better directing of your Souls, or doubtless I would have
proclaimed it to you upon the house top, having had so many opportunities, or I
would at leastwise at this time have utterly abstained from printing This: a
labor (believe me) not the least, and now as the world goes not so
necessarily to be undertaken.

J had purposed to have put you in mind, of the place of abode God has given
you, even in the eye of this University (the University the eye of the Land)
as though his meaning were you should be examples to all about you, how they
also like you should frequent his House: of Church Service and of Sermons how
they are both (if well performed) like Rahel, and Leah (but Leah without a
blemish) which twain did build the house of Israel and multiplied the heirs
of the promised land: of being to be as loath to loose the one at any time
whatsoever, as a many are or seem to be, to loose the other, the profit being
incomparable that accreweth unto us by either: of being much more hard to Pray,
then it is to hear a Sermon, and therefore how it behooves us to come the
oftener to show our willingness to undergo the greater pains in Gods Service:
but I am now, even very October. 15. 1612.
now, surprised with the news of her death, who was unto me in her life the
only Jewel of this world. I had thought that She also should have had the
pervsing of these Sermons, and have seen in St Anstens Mother (twice mentioned
in the former of them) the true similitude of he^selfe. But God has now
disposed otherwise, and given her the place already, which this Book would but
have guided and directed her unto, and well am I worthy to loose the benefit of
so good a Reader as She would have been, who have suffered it so long to lie
hidden by me as it has. O my dear and worthy Mother what shall I say
concerning thee? I might say of thee as Muliebri habites, virili fide, anili
securitate, materna charitate, christiana pietate, Aug. Confess- l. 9. c. 4.
St Austen of his Mother, Thou were of a womanly carriage but of a manly faith,
thou were fraught with an aged tranquillity of mind, with motherly love and
Christian affection. I might say of thee as Nazianzen of his Nazian E^itaph.
Patris.
Mother: As the Sun beams are fair and clear in the morning and grow
brighter and warmer toward noone, even so my Fathers wife, showing forth the
pleasant first fruits of godliness at the beginning, afterward shined out
with greater light. I might say of thee as did St O vera matter, adamante
forti^r, melle dulcior, flore fragrantior Ambros. de Jacob. and vita beata. l.
2. c. 12.
Ambrose of the Mother in the Machabees, O truest Mother, stronger then
Adamant, sweeter then Honey, more fragrant then the Rose. But I will now say
nothing of thee, only this will I say of my self, I that have said so much
upon the seven and twentieth Psalm the fourth verse, the subject of this
book: must turn me now unto another Text, and meditate another while upon the
I went heavily as one that mourns for his Mother. Ps. 35.14.
five and thirty Psalm the foureteenth verse, the project perhaps of another
book.

Pardon me Beloved if I have as you see thus left you a while, and paid this
tribute of these few lines to the true Sovereign of my Love, I now come unto
you again, and speak again unto you but in that which heareafter follows,
and which in part you have heard already, in part you shall now hear.

Your no less loving, then loved Pastor, JOHN DAY.

DAVID'S DESIRE to go to Church. 1. Sermon.

IT is 2. Sam. 7.^
recorded of king David, Right Worsh: Men, Fathers, and Brethren, beloved in
our Lord and Savior, that when he sat in his own house, and the Lord had
given him rest from all his enemies round about him, how he desired as S.
Stephen speaks Acts the seventh, at the six and fortith verse, that he might
find a tabernacle for the God of Jacob. I will relate it to you in David's
words, Lord says Ps. 132.1.
David, or whosoever else was the author of that Psalm, Lord says he, remember
David, and all his trouble: how he swear unto the Lord and vowed a vow unto the
Almighty God of Jacob, I will not come within the tabernacle of my house, nor
climb up into my bed, I will not suffer mine eyes to sleep, not mine eye lids
to slu^ber, nether the temples of my head to take any rest, until I find out a
place for the temple of the Lord, an habitation for the mighty God of Jacob.
All this in the second of Samuel the seventh chapter and second verse, is thus
epitomized: The king said unto Nathan the Prophet, Behold now, I dwell in a
house of Cedar trees, and the Ark of God remains within the curtains. His
meaning was that since al fell out so favorably, with such correspondence to
his desires, since he had so much rest from al his enemies, and God was the
author of all this, he would now be grateful again to that God, not so much
in words which are but wind, as in very truth and real deeds, such as might be
testimonies thereof both to the time then present, and to after ages that were
to come. Behold now, I dwell in a house of Cedar trees and the Ark of God
remains within the curtains. It was as if he had said, God has bestowed a
house on me, I will bestow a house on him too, he has given me rest from all
mine enemies, I will give him a kind of rest too, he shall not be from 1.
Chron. 17.5.
tent to tent, and from habitation to habitation as he has been hitherto. A
princely mind and meditation, a resolution fit for him who was to be the man
after Gods own heart, Sam. 13.14.
as Samuel the Prophet avouched of him.

The former part of this day now newly spent and gone, has by the silver tongue
of one of the chiefest and M.D Riues Warden of New College
sweetest singers in this our Israel put us in mind of like benefits received
on our parts from God above: of setting at home here in our own houses, every
of us under our own vine: of a singular rest given unto us from all our
enemies round about us. This day, this very day, it was more then miraculous
that God did for us, it was in truth a heap of miracles, as first the
preserving of our bodies and goods, secondly the prolonging of our lives,
thirdly the saving of our whole Realm, fourthly the protection of true
Religion, and all these then and at that time when safety it self might
safely have sworn that she for her part could not have saved us. David on a
time near to danger spoke most significantly when speaking of it unto
Jonathan, As the Lord lives, and as thy soul lives 1. Sa^. 20.3
says he, there is but a step between me and death. Anacharsis the Scithian
speaking of those that sailed by sea, and hearing that a ship was but four
fingers thick at the most, then are there but four fingers, Diog. Laert tit.
in Anach
says he, between them and death. At another time being demanded who were
more in number the living or the dead: tell me first, Diog. Laert Ib.
quoth he, among whether of them you reckon those that travel by sea: his
meaning was that howsoever they seem to live, to move, and have a being, yet
they might with good congruitie be accounted even for dead, for nothing so full
of casualties as the Nihil tam capax fortuitorum quam mare. Tacit. Annal. l. 14.
sea and that in the turning of a hand.

Upon how ticklish terms we stood this very day when time November. 5 1605
was, the more we muse of it the more we may, and how might al and every of
these speeches here rehearsed have bin verified of us. A step of that wretched
miscreant might irrecoverably have laid all our honor in the dust, a very
finger of his might have done it. Our adversaries abroad that saw the case
wherein we stood, how did they newse it to one another that we might be now
accounted dead. A Discourse of this late intended treason. Fol. F. 3.
Terrible Blow was now at hand, we had all and every of us but one neck, and
that neck of ours was now on the block. The horror whereof if we would conceive
let us but imagine another Fauks in some one of the vaults here abouts, as many
barrels, as much powder, and that which then matched both barrels and powder.
Doubtless we are never better affected unto God the^ when we pray: we are now
in the house of prayer, and prayer you know was the last, the very last thing
we did, yet should we all of us now miscarry and in this very in stant of time
be snatched out of the world and have the sudden death of those of who^ Elihu in
Job Job. 34, ^0. Tremel.
speaks momento moriuntur, they are gone in a trice, or as speaks the 1.
Cor. 15 5^.
Apostle S. Paul, In momento, in ictu oculi, in a moment in the twinkling of
an eye, how vnpreparedly might we all go to appear before that throne where
this day we should receive every of us our last doom. And yet we are but a
handful to the Sea the B. of Linc. Answer to a nameles Cathol. p 360. 361.
house full of the^ that should have miscarried, and yet they though well
affected no doubt as men in civil affairs might be, yet somewhat perhaps
behind our selves in respect of the souls business we are about.

But it is not now of this point I point now to speak, my intent and purpose
is to speak of the Thankfulness and Gratitude we are to perform to God for
this, not so much in words which are but wind, as in very truth and real
deeds, such as may be testimonies thereof both to these times now present, and
to after ages that are to come. What has the Lord preserved our honor? We will
also preserve his. Has he made our households like Ps 107.4.
flocks of sheep? We will endeavor in like manner to furnish also his house: be
it early, be it late, it shall not for our parts, be so naked as it has
been hitherto.

To the producing of which effect in every of us here present, be we of the
one Corporation or of the other, of the one or other sex, I have at this time
brought unto you a certain passage of David's Psalms, that as David is the man
who puts us in mind of this gratitude, so he might instruct us in the manner
to how this gratitude should be performed, not in finding out new places for
the Temple of the Lord, new habitations for the God of Jacob (there is no such
necessity now a days) but in maintaining the old places, the old habitations
of the God of Jacob, and that by tendering there our continual presence at the
usual times of Divine Service.

The words I have chosen to this purpose are in the fourth verse of the seven
and twenty Psalm, and parcel of the words this very night to be read at
Evening Prayer: which will cause me also in reading them to follow the
tra^slatio^ we the^ use, not that which is usual in our Bibles though the
difference in this verse be but small. The words are these: One thing have I
desired of the Lord which I will require, even that I may dwell in the house
of the Lord all the days of my life, to behold the fair beauty of the Lord,
and to visit his Temple.

IN which words without curiosity of giving every hen her own egg, as Pliny
Plin. hist. not. l. 10. c. 15.
tells us of one that was able to do it with his hens, may it please you to
observe with me two special points as here they lie, First a Petition of the
Prophet David's, Secondly the Reason of that petition. The Prophets Petition in
these words One thing have I desired of the Lord which I will require, even
that I may dwell in the house of the Lord all the days of my life: the Reason
of it in these, To behold the fair beauty of the Lord, and to visit his
Temple. The Petition we shall best consider of, if so be we consider therein
the Matter of it, and the Manner of making it. The Manner of making it in these
words, One thing have I desired of the Lord which I will require: the Matter of
it in these, Even that I may dwell in the house of the Lord all the days of my
life. But it is with this Matter and Manner here as it was with Thamars Genesis
38.28.
twins, the Manner shows it self first, but the Matter must first be
handled. First and foremost therefore of the Matter, Even that I may dwell in
the house of the Lord all the days of my life. Wherein for our better
proceeding I shall observe unto you three points, first, what kind of house this
was, secondly, what it was to dwell in it, thirdly, the convenience of dwelling
there. And of every of these in their order, and every of these in these words,
Even that I may dwell in the house of the Lord all the days of my life. First
therefore of the house, Even that I may dwell in the house of the Lord.

As the Lord God out of the whole mass of mankind has reserved to himself
some whom he calls his Elect, of times and seasons some his Saboths, and
solemn Feasts, of servants and attendants some his Ministers, and Priests, of
goods and wealth that men enjoy, some his Tithes and Oblations, so out of the
habitations of the sons of men some he has reserved which he calls his House
and Temple. Now what kind of house this was, what better instruction may be had
then from the owner of it himself. The owner of it was the Lord, who though
he Esaias. 66^
said when time was, Heaven is my throne, and the earth is my footstool, where
is that house that you will build unto me, and where is the place of my rest?
that is, as St Steven Act. 7.49.
interprets it, what house will ye build for me, or what place is it that I
should rest in? Yet a house he had, and a place there was, not so much to rest
himself in, as where his people might rest there hopes to hear daily and duly
from him. The very first me^tio^ of this house is made in the book of Exodus,
where he calls it a Sanctuary, when speaking unto Moses, They shall make me,
says he, a Sa^ctuary that I may dwell among the^. Exodus 25.8.
True it is that long before some speech there was of Gods house, as in the
book of Genesis, how fearful G^. 28.17
says Jacob is this place? This is no other but the house of God: and V. 22.
again a little after, This stone which I have set up as a pillar shall be Gods
house: but where mention was first made that it should immediately be gone in
hand withal, and a special name given unto it whereby perpetually it should be
called, that as I said was first in Exodus where the Lord himself calls it by
the name of a Sanctuary. It is called in the same place an Exodus 25.10.
Arc besides, and a V. 19.
Tabernacle, which three names howsoever severally distinguished among them
selves, are but the diverse appellations and names of this house, as first for
the Sanctuary, Psalm the seaventy third at the fifteenth verse, Then thought
I says the Prophet to understand this, but it was to hard for me, until I
went into the Sanctuary of God: secondly for the Arc, Psalm the hundred
thirty second at the eight verse, Arise O Lord into thy resting place, thou,
and the Arc of thy strength: thirdly for the Tabernacle, in the Ps. 27.5.
next words to this my text, He shall hide me in his Tabernacle, yea in the
secret of his dwelling shall he hide me. Now as in a material and worldly
building we then know it best when we know the several rooms of it, and to
what use each room serves, so let us see in the sacred Scriptures and other
writers besides what is said of these three rooms, in regard whereof this
house of God was called by these names.

First then concerning the Tabernacle we shall find it recorded Act. 7.44.
Exodus 25.40. Heb. 8 5.
that it was the Lords own invention, and how he showed a pattern of it in
the mount; Joseph. Antiq. l. 3. c ^.
that after it was once reared it saved Moses his long iournies up to mount
Sinay, the Lord as it were taking the pains to come down to him: lastly, that
the cloud of the Lord was Exodus 40.38.
upon it by day, and fire was in it by night in the sight of all the house of
Israel throughout al their iournies, whereupon an ancient Father, Clem. Alex.
Orat. Adhor. ad Gentes.
this cloud, says he, waited on the Hebrews like a (...).
handmaid, and as for the fire it was, says the same Father, a (...).
token of grace and fear too, if so be they would obey then was it light to
lead them, if not but they would be waiward, then was it fire to consume them.

Secondly concerning the Arc we shall fiind it recorded in holy scripture that
it was styled and called by Gods own peculiar Ios. 4.13. 2. Sam. 6.2,
name: that when it was borne on the Priests shoulders, the feet of them that
bare the Arc were no sooner dipped in Iordans water but Jordan was driven Ios.
3.15.
back, the mountains skipped like Ps. 114.3.
rams, and the little hills like young sheep: that it was the cause of the
falling down of Josh. 6.4.
Iericoes walls: that when it was brought into Dagons house, 1. Sa^. 5.3.
Dagon was overthrown: that V. 9
when it came into Gath, it made havocke of Gods enemies, Ps. 78 67.
it smote them on the hinder parts and put them to a perpetual shame: that when
it came to Ekron, it did as much unto the 1. Sa^. 5.11
Ekronites: that when the milch kine brought it home it 1. Sa^. 6.12
guided the kine in that their journey, it was as the rudder in a ship which
though it be behind, yet directs all before: lastly we shall there find that
when the men of V. 19.
Bethshemeth pried into it over boldly, it slew above fifty thousand at one
time, so exasperated was the Lord against them. All that afterward happened by
it, as the 2. Sa^. 6.7.
slaying of Vzzah but for touching it, the blessing of V. 11.
Obed Edom for entertaining it, and some other things besides, I now omit at
this time as being done by all likelihood after the composing of this Psalm
and therefore not likely that the Prophet here had any relation to these events.

Thirdly concerning the Sanctuary we shall find it recorded there, what
precious Jewels that had in it being the cabinet as it were and casket of them,
as first, this aforesaid Heb. 9.4.
Arc and all the sacred things therein contained, the golden pot wherein was
Manna, and Arons rod that had budded, and the Tables of the Testament:
secondly, the golden Heb. Ib.
Censer: thirdly, the mercy seat of Exodus 25 17.
gold: fourthly, the V. 18.
Cherubins of gold too: fifthly, the V. 38.
dishes, cups, coverings, and V. 31.
candlestickes of gold. We shall find it recorded there that the Lord from
thence gave forth his Exodus 25.22. Numb. 7.89
Oracles, and told all things unto Moses concerning the children of Israel. We
shall find it recorded there that the high Priest went into it Heb. 9.7. Levit.
16.33.
once every year to make an atonement both for himself, for the Priests, and
for the People. Lastly we shall find it recorded there that it was Heb. 9.3.
called Sanctum Sanctorum, that is, The holiest of all, for so is the Hebrew
phrase in stead of the superlatiue, like as our Savior is 1. Tim. 6.15.
called in holy Scripture, Rex Regum and Dominus Dominantium, that is, King of
Kings, and Lord of Lords, according to that dialect.

And these are the excellent things recorded of that house, whereunto as this
our Prophet no doubt had special reference here in these words, so they may
serve us as a draught in some sort to know what manner of house this was.
There are that Joseph. Antiq. l. 3. c. 8.
compare this house to this great world wherein we live, for it being divided
say they into three parts the Outward Court, the Inward, and the Sanctuary:
two of them signify the Earth, and the Sea, wherein al kind of creatures are,
and such were the Outward and Inward Court: the third part which was the
Sanctuary signifies Heaven say they which was reserved for God alone in like
sort as the Heaven is not to be come unto by men. In my conceit it may more
fitly be compared to the little world of man, as man in holy These. 5.23.
Scripture is said to have a Body, a Soul, and a Spirit: the Soul being taken
as Dicitur anima dum ^^getat, spiritu^ dum co^templatur. Aug de Sp. and Anim.
l. 1 c. 13.
sometime it is for the will and affections, the Spirit for the understanding.
First then concerning the Tabernacle, that J resemble to the Body, my reason
is, for that so oftentimes in holy 2. Cor. 5.4 2. Pet. 1.13. 2. Pet. 1.14.
writ we find this Body of ours resembled to a Tabernacle. In this Body is a
Soul, and in that Tabernacle an Exodus 40 3.
Arc, which Arc containing principally the Two Tables of stone the ten
Commandments, what may we better resemble them unto then to the will and
affections over which they bear the sway. The Sanctuary I may well resemble
unto the Understanding, though as the chiefest room in this house it passed
indeed all understanding. Nor may it seem strange that the Temple here should
thus be compared unto man, seeing man so often times in holy Scripture is
called the Temple of God. Know ye not 1. Cor. 3.16.
says the Apostle, that ye are the Temple of God, and that the spirit of God
dwells in you? If any man destroy the Temple of God him shall God destroy,
for the Temple of God is holy which ye are. And again in another 2. Cor. 6.16.
place, ye are the Temple of the living God: whereupon Tertullian very
elegantly, Being all of us, Tertul. de cultu Fam. Eius templi Aeditu^, and
Antistes P^dicitia est.
says he, the Temple of God, the Person and Prelate of that Church is
Chastity, which will not suffer any unclean or profane thing to be brought
into it, least that God that does inhabit it should utterly leave the place by
reason of such pollution. But thus much of his house. Now let us see what it is
to dwell in it, Even that I may dwell in the house of the Lord.

Hannah the mother of Samuel when she had been long barren, and it was often
cast her in the teeth, she vowed a vow and 1. Sa^. 1.11
said, O Lord of hosts, if thou will look on the trouble of thy handmaid, and
remember me, and not forget thy handmaid, but give unto thy handmaid a man
child, the^ will I give him unto the Lord all the days of his life, and there
shall no raiser come upon his head. Her meaning was that he should be brought
up in the house of the Lord in Shiloh, there to do the Lord that service that
Eli the Governor should enioin him. Al things happening to her desires, that is
the Lord looking on her trouble, and remembering, and not forgetting her, and
giving unto her a man child indeed, she gave him indeed unto the Lord, he
became a Nazarite, and a Levite, and dwelt in the house of the Lord all the
days of his life. But this is not the dwelling here meant in this place. This
kind of dwelling was for Prophets indeed, and for the Children of the
Prophets, howbeit David though he were a Prophet, yet had he besides an other
calling, and by reason of that calling could not thus dwell in this house. The
dwelling then that David meant was in all public assemblies both at Morning
and Evening Sacrifice to tender his presence to the Lord, to sort himself with
those who Ps. 121.1
gladded him so much when as they said unto him we will go into the house of
the Lord, to be always praising of the Lord in those Assemblies according unto
that in an other of his Psalms, Ps. 84 4.
Blessed are they that dwell in thy house they will be alwaie praising thee.
And this because he could not now perform by reason of his banishment how
dry was his soul within him, and what bitter moan does he make, Psa. 42.2.
My soul says he is a thirst for God, yea even for the living God, when shall
I come to appear before the presence of God? I, for his banishment had berest
him of the exceeding solace he there took, he prefers before himself those very
fowls of the heaven, before which our Mat. 10.31.
Savior in another case would have preferred him so much, The Sparrow Psa.
84.3.
says he has found her a house, and the swallow a nest where she may lay her
young, even thy altars O Lord of hosts, my king, and my God. I know there are
of the Calvin and Tremell in hunc loc.
Interpreters that take these words otherwise, but since our Church thus
reads them* I for my part am contented in this case not to vary from the
Church. But to return unto my purpose.

To approach continually then unto the Temple, and thither continually to
repair was the dwelling no doubt here meant; to dwell, to reside continually
there, not to come for a spurt, or a fit, as you heard this word Dwelling
descanted upon by Mr Doct. King. Vice-chancelor of Oxford and De^ne of
Christ-ch. in a latin Sermon at the beginning of the Term, upon Ps 91.1
one of the worthiest amongst us in another dialect not long ago. And thus
dwelt Anna here the daughter of Phanuel, who is said in the second of Luke 2.37
Luke for the space of fourscore and four years not to have gone out of the
Temple; not that she was there always, but often says Lyra and Beda in hu^c
loc.
Lyra, and venerable Bede to the same purpose, not that she was never absent
no not an hour, but for that she was often in the Temple. And the same S. Luke
speaking of our Saviors disciples after they had seen him ascended into
heaven, They returned Luk 24.52.
says he to Jerusalem with great joy and were continually in the Temple
praising and landing God. Thus S. Austens mother in her time to might be said
to dwell in Gods house, whereunto she came so duly and truly twice a day,
that she in thy Scriptures A^g. Confess. l. 5. c. 9.
says S. Austen, might hear O God what thou said to her, and thou in her
prayers what she said to thee. In a word, such were the Christians the same S.
Austen speaks of in another place whom he calls the Emmets of God, Behold the
Emmet of God Aug. in Psalm. 66.
says he it rises early every day, it runs to Gods Church, it there
prays, it hears the Lesson read, it sings a Psalm, it ruminateth what it
hears, it meditateth thereupon, and hourdeth up within it self the precious
corn gathered from that barn flower. And thus much for the dwelling here, now
concerning the convenience of dwelling in this place in as much as he desired
it for term of life. All the days of my life.

Many and manifold are the cares that are taken by mortal men concerning
their habitations if so be they have purse-opportunity either to purchase, or
to rent them. Some like the City best, some the Horat. Epist. l 1. Ad Fuscum.
Virg. Georg. l. 2.
Country, some one Hor Carus l. 1. Od. 7:
Coast, some an other, and yet when all comes to all, nor City, nor Coast, nor
Country whatsoever that continually can content them. Variety of houses in
every age has been a great salve for this soar, that as he Terent. Eunuch.
Act. 5. sc. 6.
said in the Comedy when they are weary of one house they may presently
walk unto another. Even Princes themselves have this variety how well
acco^modated soever their Palaces be, and no house of theirs so gorgeous, so
glorious whatsoever, but should they be tied unto it continually, it would
seem a Prison rather then a Palace. It seems it was not so with the Lords
house in this place, for a Prince here is so desirous to live therein
continually, as that he wished there to dwell all the days of his life: and
therefore in one of his Psalms, I will dwell Psa. 23 6.
says he in the house of the Lord for ever, and again in another Psa. 61.4.
place, I will dwell for ever in thy Tabernacle, He could have been contented
it seems to have set up his rest there, like as the Lord Ps. 132.15
speaks of Sion, This shall be my rest for ever here will I dwell for I have a
delight therein. This it was in effect that Zacharias John Baptists father did
aim at long after when speaking of the effect of our redemption by our
Savior, that we Luk 11.74
says he being delivered out of the hands of our enemies might serve him
without fear in holiness and righteousness before him all the days of our
life. And here Beloved let us admire the great goodness of our God and his
exceeding mercy toward us, who speaking to us when time was in so great anger
and indignation, Genesis 3.17
Cursed is the earth for thy sake: in sorrow shall thou eat of it all the
days of they life (for in that he spoke it to our first father Adam he spoke
it to us to) does sweeten as it were this curse again by taking us into his
own service, and in that service to remain with him all the days of our
life. Wherein what do we else but even set at his own table, either as 1.
Sam. 20 27.
David did at Saul's, or 2. Sam. 9 7.
Mephibosheth at David's. It was a vain hope of Lamech therefore who upon the
birth of Noah his son, this son Gen 5.29.
says he shall comfort us as touching the earth which the Lord has cursed: it
is the son of God only that so can do, and so shall it be done unto us if so
be we endeavor to serve him all the days of our life. I end this point with
the words of Peter which he spoke unto our Savior, somewhat vnadvisedlie I
confess in the case he then spoke them but for our purpose very fitly, Master
Mat. 17.4
says Peter it is good for us to be here, right so say I, it is good indeed
for us to be here, and therefore let us here be all the days of our life. And
thus much of the Matter of the Prophets Petition here, now as touching the
Manner of making it which I told you was in these words, On thing have I desired
of the Lord which I will require, wherein I consider these points: first that
he made it his Chief Desire and that in these words, One thing have I desired:
secondly, his Constancy in it and that in these, I desired of the Lord: not I
desired of thee o Lord as if he had spoken it in private, but I desired of the
Lord in the third person, and therefore speaking no doubt to others, even to
all who should ever have the pervsing of this Psalm. And of each of these in
their order, and first of making it his Chief Desire, One thing have I desired.

David's desire for it was One thing here, is not so to be understood as if it
therefore were but One, or the only thing he did desire. This very Psalm
dispelleth that conceit for there are even in this Psalm diverse and sundry
desires besides: as first to have Psa. 27.7.
mercy upon him, and to forgive him; secondly, not to v. 9.
hide his face from him: thirdly, to v. 11.
illighten his understanding that he might tread his ways aright: fourthly, to
v. 12.
deliver him from the malice and malitiousnes of his Adversaries: over and
above a thousand desires and petitions besides, both in this his book of
Psalms, in the book of Samuel* and else where. It is nor therefore to be said
of this One as speaks the Apostle to the Ephesians. 4.4.
Ephesians, of one body; one spirit, one hope of our vocation, or in the words
immediately following, V. 5.
one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism; or as it was said of our Saviors coat
that it could not have bin Tunioa unless it had been D. Playfers Pathway to
Perfection page 130.
Vnica, that is, one or else none; or, as Ruffinus Cypr. in. Symb. sine Ruffinus.
speaks of that Son in the firmament which is so only one that there cannot
be another, or a third to bear him company: (...) vel (...) ^ddi (...) possit.
no it is not such a one, the meaning therefore is that he principally desired
this one thing, that he specially and chiefly would require it, like as our
Savior (...). 20.^^.
says of Mary's choice One thing is needful: Mary has chosen the good part,
and yet was Martha her sister to have a child's part to. For if so be a cup of
cold water only give^ to one of our Saviors little ones in the name of a
Disciple should not loose a Mat. 10.^^.
reward, how great a reward was hers to be that gave so great entertainment
to our Savior and that in the name of a Savior to? For that she believed in
him now it is more then manifest, in respect her Brother Lazarus had now been
Ioh. 12.2.
raised from the dead. But thus much briefly for the emine^cie of the Prophets
desire here in this place. Shall we now see his constancy in it? Or was it with
him as with the Poet, Horat. Ep. ^. 1. ep. 1.
quod petijt spornit, was the wind afterward in another quarter? No, in no
wise, and therefore to the preterperfectence he adds the future here, which I
will require: Virg. Aen. l 4.
Men's immota manet, his mind was steadfast, it was like Queen Elizabeth's
Semper eadem, Ever and never but the same. Which I will require.

It was our Saviors question concerning the Mat. 11.7
Baptist what went ye out into the wilderness to see? A reed shaken with the
wind? And what Greg. in Evang Hom 6.
says S. Gregory is understood by this reed, but only a carnal mind which
accordingly or as it is hoysed up by favor, or by slander depressed down,
yeeldes presently it self or to the one or to the other. The author of the
imperfect work upon Matthew gives the reason, A reed Chris. Ob. Impers. in
Mat. Hom. 26.
says he, is a void and empty thing, having in it nor strength, nor vigor,
and therefore is it driven with every wind, right so a carnal man says he
that has no pith of faith within him, no strength nor virtue of truth
whatsoever temptation comes upon him, it not only bruseth, but breaks him to.
The Baptist by our Saviors testimony was no vegitable of this nature, he was a
huge high oak rather as Et quantu^ v^rtice ad auras Aethereas tantum radice in
tartara tendens Virg. Aen. l 4.
deep in the root as he was high too, able to withstand any tempest whatsoever.
And as it was with John the Baptist so was it before with this our Prophet,
whom no adversity could drive from the love he bare to this house. He was
affected it seems to this desire as was Cic. de Clar Orat. and de Orat. and
Orat ad Brut.
Demosthenes to Action, or S. Austen to Humility, he gives it the first and
second, and third place too, he has and will desire it. Aug. ep. 56
For as the learned Barth. Traheron upon John. Ioh. 1.15. and v. 30.
Interpreters gather of those words of John the Baptist, This is he of whom I
spoke, that he had before made many Sermons concerning Jesus, so in that the
Prophet here says, One thing have I desired, it may probably be gathered that
he had desired it often times before, so that he is nothing like the inconstant
man. The inconstant man, D. Hals Ch^ract. l. 2.
says a worthy writer of our age, treads upon a moving earth and keeps no
^ace. It is a wonder if his love or hatred last so many days as a wonder. His
heart is the Inn of all good motions, wherein if they lodge for a night it is
well, by morning they are gone, and take no leave, and if they come that way
again they are entertained as Guests not as Friends. It was not thus with this
our Prophet, He was like the round world rather even so sure that he could not
not be Ps. 93.2.
moved: He was like those heavenly Orbs above that keep an Arist de Col. l. 2.
c. 6.
uniform course and station: in a word, He was like unto his Pattern whose
image he was, the eternal God, of whom it is said in Malachy, I am the Lord. I
change not, Malachy the third at the sixth verse. And this was the Prophets
Constancy, a virtue so virtuous, that as it was said of the Stoics that they
were Mares Philosophorum, the Male Philosophers of all the rest (but it was
said but by a Sen. Quod in Sapient. no^ cadit iniur^^*
Stoicke) so no virtue without this virtue but is as it were a Widow.

M. D. Eeds his Iter Bore^^^.
Viduata Philemone Baucis, one that has lost her true Philemon indeed. Witness
the three Theological Virtues, Faith, Hope, and Charity, and what are they
without this Constancy? Witness the four Virtues Quae quasi origines and
cardines sunt amnium Vir^urum. Aug. de Spir. and anim. l 1. c. 4
Cardinal, Justice, Prudence, Temperance, and Fortitude, and without Constancy
what are they? The Intellectual and Moral Virtues are as Thomas Th. Aquin.
(...) 2^. in P^^l.
Aquinas tells us reduced to these seven* and therefore if these without
Constancy are no more, no more are they. Nay are they not harmefull rather, 2.
Pet. 2.21
sure I am St Peter says tha^ better it were not to have known the way of
righteousness, then after we have known it to turn from the Commandment
given unto us. Howbeit h^^e we must have special care that we take not Quid
pro Quo, one for another as many do. It is easily done, and often, and never
more often then now a days. The Pastor of souls, Greg. Past. Cur. Part. 2. c.
9.
says St Gregory, is to know (and so is the Flock to) that vices a many times
do hear themselves as virtues. Thus Covetousness cloaks it self under the
name of Thrift and Parsimony, and contrariwise riotous spending under the name
of Liberality. To much pity a many times is thought to be Piety, and
unbridled Anger the virtue of Zeal. A headlong Action is accounted quick
dispatch, and to be to too tardy in performing ought a high point of singular
wisdom. The vice that bears it self as the virtue of Constancy, no vice any
virtue more, is the vice of Self will and Obstinacy, a sour and a sullen
vice, and that which has blasted so many hundreds of our age both on the right
hand of us, and on the left, Schismatics and Papists. But utterly to avoid
this mock virtue, this Virg. Aen. l. 7.
Alecto in deed in another likeness, the safest and surest way, is to have
good ground for what we do, not a particular spirit with the one, or the
Religion of our Fathers, and Mothers, and Forefathers with the other. It is a
good thing, Gal. 4.18.
says the Apostle, to love earnestly always in a good thing. And this good
ground the Prophet had, the Law of the Lord was his direction, and for he was
so stable and steadfast in the same, the virtue which he had was not vice in
virtues robes, it was virtues own self the virtue of Constancy. And thus
much of his Constancy in this his desire, come we now to the Manifestation of
this his desire to the world which I told you was in these words, I desired of
the Lord.

There is a piece of a verse in ^^id more canonical with a many, ^^e I am more
powerful then all the verses or chapters either concerning the contrary
throughout the whole Bible; Ovid. Trist l. 3. Eleg. 4.
Been qui latuit, been vixit. He that lurks well, lives well, as if the Lord had
sent us into the world to play all hid. I grant the times may be such as may
cause us to betake our selves to such a kind of retired life, or to play least
in the worlds sight, even as those Christians of old time, of whom the Apostle
to the Heb. 11.38.
Hebrews, They wandered in wildernesses, and mountains, and dens, and caves of
the earth: but to do it now in these days, or to keep our Consciences to our
selves, or not at al to employ the Tale^ts that God has committed to our
charge, is ungratefully to liken these times to the ticklish times of Nero,
wherein sloth Tacit. vit. Agric.
says Tacitus was a virtue* and to do nothing the greatest wisdom of all.
Such wyzards in the end will play but wyly beguily with themselves, who while
they proceed in silence as Qui dum iuuenes ad se ^^ctutem, se^es prope ad ipsos
exactae ^tatis terminos per silentium veniu^t. Tac. Ib.
speaks the same author from young men to aged, from aged to the grave, are
like to make the next step from thence to hell if so be they be not there
before. Mat. 25.30.
Cast that unprofitable servant into utter darkness, there shall be weeping and
gnashing of teeth. True it is, it is the Heart that God requires for his
service, but he requires withal the Tongue to, and if we think this tongue of
ours is not to be employed in public Assemblies as well as at hoame, let us
remember what was said to Meroz by the Angel of the Lord, Curse ye Meroz Iud.
5.23.
said the Angel, curse the inhabitants thereof, because they came not to help
the Lord, to help the Lord against the mighty. Our Prophet you see in this
place was far from this sin, he proclaimed to all the world of what religion
he was. He stuck not to tell it unto others, and to acquaint all men living
with the desire of his heart, especially al such as should have or the hearing,
or seeing, or singing, or saying this Psalm. He does Pers. sat. 2.
Aperto vivere voto, he regards not who hears him, he believed, and 2. Cor.
4.13.
therefore spoke, he spoke, and in speaking proclaimed it to the world. And
thus much of the manifestation of this his petition to the world, and
consequently of the Petition it self, namely of the Matter of it, as also the
Manner of making it. We are now to come to the second point to wit the Reason
of this Petition, which I told you was in these words, To behold the fair
beauty of the Lord, and to visit his Temple. Wherein I thought to have observed
to you these points: First, his Contemplation, and that in these words, To
behold the fair beauty of the Lord: Secondly, his Action, and that in these,
To visit his Temple: Thirdly, the ioining of both together and that in the
particle [And] To behold the fair beauty of the Lord, and, to visit his
Temple. His Contemplation in respect of the Soul, his Action in respect of the
Body, the Joining of both together in respect of both combind together, Body
and Soul. But this were to enter a new Ocean, a word of exhortation therefore
and so God willing an end, One thing have I desired of the Lord etc.

OF all the days in the week there is special notice taken of one day as
very dismal to the Irish, and in a manner fatal to the^. This day ^^ani^^urst.
^o Reb. Hi^^rn. l. 3.
they say is Tuesday, for upon a Tuesday they lost Limmirick, upon a Tuesday
they lost Wexford, upon a Tuesday they lost Waterford, and upon a Tuesday
again they lost Divelin. I and at a fifth time too upon a Tuesday it was, that
they had a great overthrowe the Earl of Tumond that the^ was being chief of
all their troup^. But whatsoever may be said of that day concerning the Irish,
sure I am that of this day a Tuesday too when In the year of our Lord 1605.
time was, and of an other day in this Month, it may be said of us English,
that we have received two as great Blessings from the immediate hand of God, as
ever did nation in this world or ever is like to do to the worlds end. I mean
the Beginning of Queen Elizabeth's Reign of happy memory, the Seauententh of
In the year of our Lord 1558.
this Month, and that which this fifth day we have celebrated, the Continuing
of King James his. Which two days the Seauententh and Fifth might they parley
with one another as Plutarch Plut. Quest Romans qu. 25.
reports the Holy day and the Worky day once did, and the Seauententh should
say as did the Holy day, unless I had been so happy, thou had never been:
how might this Fifth reply agai^^, but if so be I had not been, thou had
never been so happy. For indeed had not this day been, what should it have
profited us to have lived in prosperity some forty years there abouts, and
at the last to have been a byword to all the nations of the world. Would it
not have been said of our Land as was sometimes of Jerusalem, but of Jerusalem
overthrown, Ier. Lam. 2.15.
Is this the Country that men call the perfection of beauty, and the joy of the
whole earth? Might not our Mother this little Island have said, Ier. Lam. 1.15.
The Lord has trodden under foot al my valiant men in the midst of me, he has
called an Assembly against me to destroy my young men, the Lord has trodden
the wine press upon the Virgin the daughter of England. Might not the
Survivers of us have said, but alas who should have survived? but yet if any
should, might they not have said with the Ier. Lam. 4.20.
same Prophet, The breath of our nostrils, the anointed of the Lord was taken
in the nets, of whom we said under his shadow we shall be preserved? But
thanks be to our God, there are eve^ in that Prophet other words which better
fit us, and may be said and spoken of us; which this our Island may also speak,
and we the Inhabitants may speak also, Ier. Lam 3.22.
It is the Lords mercies that we are not consumed, because his co^passions
fail not. I will speak it Beloved again, Virg. Aeneid. l. 3.
Et repetens, iterumque, iterumque monebo and Matt. 11.15.
he, that has ears to hear let him hear, It is the Lords mercies that we
are not consumed because his compassions fail not.

Such the mercies of the Lord toward us and his compassions so great, what
greater recompense to be made him then to perform that very thing which the
Prophet in this place does desire, Even to dwell in the house of the Lord all
the days of our life. What will ye say in these Churches? or in such as are
inferior unto these? I, even in these Churches, or in such as are inferior
unto these, even where soever the Lord shall place us, and the lot of this
world shall hereafter fall upon us, the meanest of which and respect their
beauty with the right eye of understanding in deed, and not Salomons Temple in
all its glory, much less this Tabernacle here, arrayed like one of them. For
what was all they had but shadows of what we do, that House in truth, and in
the eye of faith, was but a Cottage unto ours. Wherefore as Hieron. ep. ad
Laetam et ep. ad Saluinom ex Turtull. ad Martyr.
St Ierom in another case, Si tanti vitrum qua^ti margaritu^, If so be glisse,
says he, be so much to be esteemed, of what estimation is a Pearl to be, so
say I in this case, if this our Prophet were so inamored with so very a Glass
as that was (I speak it by way of comparison) how should we be with our
Pearls, and that so orient as ours are. Nor let me now seem contrary to my
self for that I call that Tabernacle a Temple of glass in respect of our
Churches, seeing it is in that respect that I only call it so, as a candle in
respect of a lamp, Hieron. Apol aduers. Iouin.
says St Ierom, is nothing to be accounted of, a lamp in respect of a star
why it gives no light at all, compare the star, with the Moon and the star
is obscure, set the Moon, again by the Sun, and the Moon shines never a
whit, lastly compare the Sun and Christ together, says he, and what is the
Sun but mere darkness: and so was the candle of this Tabernacle in respect
of our Lamp, the lamp of this Tabernacle in respect of our Star, the star
of this Tabernacle in respect of our Moon, the Moon of this Tabernacle in
respect of our Sun, in a word the Sun of this Tabernacle in respect of our
Christ, or which is all one in effect our Christian Congregations. And do we
yet doubt to make them our chief desire? In making them our chief desire we
may happily get more by it then indeed we do desire. You know what was said to
Solomon when he asked wisdom of the Lord. Because, 1 King. 3.11.
says the Lord, thou have asked this thing and have not asked for thy self
long life, nor riches, nor the life of thy enemies, behold I have done
according to thy words, and I have also given thee that which thou have not
asked, both Riches, and Honors, and so forth. Thus fell it out with St Austens
mother too, she desired that she might but see her Son a Christian
Catholic before her death (mark I pray you the phrase of those times, a
Christian Catholic, whereupon Baron. Annal. Tom. 1. fol. 310.
Pacianus, Christian is my name, says he, Catholic my surname, and St Austen
elsewhere, by the goodness of Christ, Aug. ep. ^07.
says he, we for our pares are Christian Catholics, not the only style now
adays a Catholic Roman, or no Catholic) but she but desired to see him a
Christian Catholic before her death, and my God, Aug. Confess. l. 9. c. 10.
faith she to her Son S. Austen, has given me more abundantly then I
desired, even to see thee his servant, and to contemn all the felicity of
this world besides. God indeed is no nigard he gives sometimes before we ask,
sometime more then we ask, always as much, and that or in the same kind that
we ask it, or else in some other much more behoofull and necessary for us.

But we must be Constant in this desire. But alas when he that wrote of
Constancy became Just. Lips.
himself so inconstant, and so many hundreds after him as little constant as
he, and some even of our own selue^ as constantly inconstant as they, what
shall I say of Constancy when so many flock-meale fall away. Beloved, I will say
as once our Savior said Ioh. 6.67
What will ye also go away? Why but whether? Or to whom? Here are the words of
life eternal: -- Horat. Epist. l. 1. ep. (...) Bu^^^^*
Quod quaeritis hic est,
Est Vlubris animas si vos non deficit aequu^.
not the meanest Church in this our Land but will afford you much more comfort
in the service of our God, then the goodliest Synagogue this day or at S.
Omets, or at Rome. Nor would I have you think I speak altogether
unexperienced in this comparison.

Virg Aeneid. l. 11.
Vidimus o Ciues Dio^^dem; Argiuaque castra, I have seen Beloved; seen I have,
though not the Popish Mufftie apud Turcas Sacerdotum supremus vt apud nos Romans
Pont. Busheq. ep. 1.
Mufftie him self, yet his Pavillions and his Tents, I mean a many Assemblies
and Congregations of his where I am sure but as few words as Porpheries
Praedicables with understanding; if the Apostle S. 1 Cor. 4.19.
Paul were not mistaken, would to those Assemblies have done more good, then
those many thousands that then were uttered by so many Black Birds there, so
many Parrets, so many Crows, and Pyes, not understanding what they said or
sung, the similitudes are Aug. in ps. 18. Expos. 2
S. Austens. And now I have said thus much let me go a little further, and
speak unto you a little more concerning those our Adversaries, upon whom had I
looked with a carnal eye, I should say I confess, as did those Spies Number.
13.32.
we be not able to hold out against them for they are stronger then we all the
people that we s^^ there are men of great stature. Giants they are, the sons
of Ana^, and we to them but Grasshoppers. But the Lord that gave meat that time
an others gates eye to behold them with, puts another message into my mouth,
and as a learned Divine M. Gossen in his Trumpet. of war, p. D. 5. b.
speaks of Caleb that he had not asheepes eye as the other Spies, but the eye
of a Lion, and how he passed by that people with an honorable scorn: right so
say I with Number. 14.9.
Caleb, Rebel not you against the Lord, neither fear ye the people of that
Land for they are but bread for us, their shield is departed from them, and the
Lord is with us fear them not.

The greater cause have we to proclaim this desire of ours unto the world
mauger all the banded Forces of all the Romanists whatsoever, who what have
they Pamphletted against our How lets 9 Reasons why Catholics may not go to
Church, answered by D. Fulcke and M Wyburne.
Public Service, or our Religion therein contained which has not been fully
answered, or at least wise may be, and that in the turning of a hand. Their
Proofs are Dormans proof of certain Articls in Religion reproved by M.
Nowell.
reproved, their Disproofes confuted, their Rocks undermined, their Stapletons
Differences and Fortress of the faith, answered by D. Fulke.
Fortresses overthrown, Dormans Disproufe of M Nowel^ Reproufe confuted by M.
Nowell.
their Heskins Parliament repe^led by D. Fulke.
Parlaments repealed, their ^istons Challenge answered by D Fulcke, and Oliver
Carter.
Chalenges answered, their Martials Reply to M Calfeth answered by D Fulcke.
Replies reioined unto, their Harding^ Reioynder to M. Jew, answered by M.
Deering.
Reioinders disiointed. True it is they rest not satisfied, nor is it likely
they ever will, Sanders Rock of the Church undermined by D Fulcke.
Rana, says St Austen, est loquacissima vanitas, nothing so full of tattle as
Folly, and that, says he, was signified by the Frogs of Egypt.

But happy it were with us had we in this point of Church Service the Romanists
only our only Adversaries. Cassius and his Accomplices we could deal withal
well enough, but what shall we do when our own Mothers Children lift up the
heel against us, and so vilify our Church Service especially in their
practice, that unless there be a Sermon with it, we shall seldom or never
have their company. 2. King. 6.21.
Shall I smite them Fathers and Brethren? shall I smite them? They are flesh I
confess, of our flesh, and bone of our bones: Why, but shall I let them go
then, and die in their error? that were a cruel kind of compassion, let their
error die in them rather, Moriatur error, vivat homo, says St Austen, Aug. de
Verb. Apost. Ser. 31.
slay the error, save the man. And will you the^ behold their error? O, say
they, unless there be Sermons, what beauty is there in our Churches? why
should we take so much pains to go fo often unto them? The Scriptures that
there are read we can read our selves at home, we can pray those Prayers at
home too, have we but the Psalter and Bible in our houses, what beauty have we
not that there is to be had? So say they indeed that little know or what is
Beauty, or what is Service, or what are Sermons, or the Minister of God, or
intruth these Churches. For if so be they did, would they thus speak? would
they huddle up together so many Solecismes? would they first compare their
Houses to the proper and peculiar House of God? themselves unto his Ministers?
their private prayer to the Public? and debase Public Prayer so much as to
make it so much inferior unto Sermons? why what other Gospel preach our
Sermons then that which our Service delivers to them? If in their own house
where Mat. 18.20.
but two or three be gathered together, the Lord (it may be) is in the midst,
how much more when we are such troops and multitudes in Church Assemblies? when
we there set by Marc. 6.40.
rows, by hundreds, and by fifties? If he or she may compare themselus, I,
their very Children to the Priest, or Minister, because they can read as well as
he, so many a Butcher among the Jews was as able as the Priest himself to
have killed a Calfe, or an Ox, and was it as lawful therefore and fit for him
to have sacrificed the same? Lastly, if so be the Lords House be of no more
value with thee then thine own, take heed the Lord another day leave thee not
altogether to thine own, when there shall be no Prince in this our Israel, but
every man doing that which is best in his own eyes, when there shall be no
Priest, but every man of a Religion that he has forged in his own brain, and
which is the consequence of both these when we shall be no People neither, but
Virg. Aen. l. 1.
Relliquiae Danaum, the Relics, and Remnant of a People, when a man shall be
more precious then fine Gold, and above the wedge of the gold of Ophir, I mean
in respect of the rarity of them as speaks the Prophet Esaias. 13.12.
Esaias in another case.

But I am persuaded better things of you Beloved though I now thus speak, the
rather for that a many of you (I may say it of my own experience) visit so
well the Lords house at the usual times of Divine Service, so that I may now
say as said the Apostle in his 2 Thessalonians. ^.4.
Epistle to the Thessalonians, We are persuaded of you through the Lord that
you both do, and will do the things which we warn you of. Rev. 22.11.
He that is righteous let him be righteous still, and he that is holy let him
be holy still. Gal. 6.9.
Let us not be weary of welldoing for in due season we shall reap if we faint
not. And that shall be, and it shall be then* when we shall not hereafter on our
deathbeds depart as one Vt n^n ex vita sed ex domo in domum vid^retur migrare
Corn. Nepos in vita Attic
speaks out of this life, but out of one house into another, that is when
upon the parting of Body and Soul we shall be sped from this House of Prayer
here on earth, to that higher house above, the House of Praises in Heaven,
where Ambros. Te Deum.
with Cherubins and Seraphins continually crying Holy, Holy, Holy Lord God of
Saboth, we shall all of us be satisfied with the Ps. 36.8,
plenteousnesse of that house. I will ^^d with that of Austen who ending a Tract
of his with the words of this my Text does thus descant thervpo^, Let thy Soul
Aug. in Evang Joan. Tract 3.
says S. Austen say, One thing have I desired of the Lord which I will
require, even that I may dwell in the ^^use of the Lord all the days of my life
to behold the fair^ beauty of the Lord. Fear not says S. Austen, that thy
continuance ^h^re, will br^^d a fulsomnes in thee. Such a pleasure of beau^y
shall it be that it shall be^ always in thy ^ie and yet shall thou never be
satisfied with it. Or rather to speak the Truth says he, thou shall ever be
satisfied and never to. For if I should only say thou shall never be satisfied,
then mights thou fear some hunger to ensue, if I should say only thou shall be
satisfied, then might thou on the contrary fear there should be some
fulsomnes, where nor fulsomnes shall be, nor hunger, I faith he for my part am
ignorant what to call it. But howsoever I am ignorant, yet has the Lord
sufficient to give and to bestow on us, which we are ignorant how to call, and
yet believe that we shall receive it.

The same Lord so bless us, and the seed that has been sown, that with you
of the poorer sort the Mat. 13.^2.
Cares of this world, with you of the wealthier, the deceitfulnes of your
riches, with either of you of either sort the lusts of other things grow not up
like thorns and choke it.

Erratum.
Page 28. lin. 10. amend it thus:

Secondly, his Constancy in it and that in these, which I will require:
Thirdly, his Manifestation of it to the world, and that in these, I desired of
the Lord: not I desired of thee O Lord.

DAVID'S DESIRE to go to Church. 2. Sermon.

One thing have I desired of the Lord which I will require, even that I may
dwell in the house of the Lord all the days of my life, to behold the fair
beauty of the Lord and to visit his Temple. Psalm. 27. ver. 4.
IT is not long since Right wo^ and dearly beloved in our Savior Christ, that
my course coming in order to execute the Priests Luke 1.8.
office before the Lord in this kind, I made my choice of these few words to be
entreated of at that time. When by the assistance of the same Lord having
multiplied the self-same words into as many more words as took up the space
of a whole hour, there was yet behind some overplus, such as at that time
could not be disposed of, and therefore reserved by me till some fitter
opportunity. Which opportunity now come by reason of the Solemnity of this Day
which requires at our hands a more then ordinary respect, I am now come with
that overplus and as it were the Ne velut semesas verborum nostrorum epulas
reliquisse videamur. Ambros. de Penitent. li. ^. c. 1.
fragments that were left, that nothing be lost as speaks our Savior, John
the sixth at the twelfe verse.

When first I handled then these words, you that were present may remember, you
that were not are now to know, that I the^ divided the same into two especial
points. First into a Petition, secondly, into the Reason of it. The Petition in
these words, One thing have I desired of the Lord which I will require, even
that I may dwell in the house of the Lord all the d^ies of my life. The Reason
of it in these, To behold the fair beauty of the Lord and to visit his Temple:
In treating of the Petition, I observed the Matter of it, and the Manner of
making it. The Manner of making it in these words, One thing have I desired of
the Lord which I will require: the Matter of it in these, Even that I may dwell
in the house of the Lord all the days of my life. Jn the Matter of the
Petition I handled these points, First, what kind of house this was; Secondly,
what it was to dwell in it: Thirdly, the convenience of dwelling there. In the
Manner of making it, these; First, that it was his Chief Desire: Secondly, his
Constancy in it: Thirdly, the Manifestation of it to the world: and thus far
I then proceeded.

That which remained then behind, and with the which I am now come, and of the
which you are now to hear, is the Reason of the Petition, and it is as I said
in these words, To behold the fair beauty of the Lord and to visit his
Temple. In which words may it please you to observe with me these two points:
First, what this Fair Beauty was: Secondly, the Power and Force that this
Fair Beauty had. What this Fair Beauty was we shall thoroughly observe if so
be we do observe how it consisted in two points. First, in regard of the
Parties that were present in that house: Secondly, in regard of the Things
performed by those Parties. The Parties present in that house was first the
Lord himself: Secondly, the Priests: Thirdly, the People. The Things
perform^d was the public solemnity of the worship of God, both in the Word
and Sacraments, and Sacrifices, and Prayer, and Praises. And of every of these
in their several order, and first of the Presence of the Lord.

Anaxagoras being demanded to what end and purpose he was borne, his answer
Lactantius ^^st. l. 3. c. 9.
says Lactantius was, to behold the Heavens and Sun in the firmament. Which
answer of his says Lactantius is of all men much admired, and accounted to be
a speech well befitting a Philosopher I, says he, for my part am quite of an
other mind, and persuade my self that the party not knowing in that case
what to say, thought good to say somewhat yet least he should have been
thought by his Oppone^t to have been put to a non plu^. For indeed to say the
truth says Lactantius, in so few words then uttered, how many solecismes shall
we find, and those no mean ones neither? As first in that he referre^ the
whole duty of man only to the eye of man, to the mind of man nothing at all,
and how if Anaxagoras had bin blind says he, should he thereupon have had in
this world nothing to do? Again says Lactantius the other parts of the Body
had they no offices to perform? Besides that the chief Soveraignety seems
rather in the ears says he then in the eyes, because Learning and Wisdom
may be obtained by the ears only, by the only eye they cannot be. That which
Lactantius there aims at, namely that the Creator of Heaven should have been
respected not the Creature which was Heaven, at least wise before the Creature,
is respected no doubt by our Prophet here, in regard of whom it principally is
that he acknowledges here so fair a beauty. For what is it that makes the
Court more glorious then all places and assemblies in the Land besides, Is it
not the presence of the King? Doublesse where the King is, there is the Court,
as it was told Commodus the Emperor Meredian l. 1.
there was Rome where the Emperor was. Now that the King of Kings here was,
witness that of the Book of Numbers wherein it is Numb. 7.89.
said that wh^ Moses went into the Tabernacle to speak with God, he hard the
voice of one speaking unto him from the mercy seat that was upon the Arc
between the two Cherubins. Hence that of this our Prophet in another of his
Psa. 80.1.
Psalms, Here oh thou shepherd of Israel, thou that leadest Joseph like a
sheep, show thy self also thou that set upon the Cherubins. And again in
another Psa. 99.1.
Psalm, The Lord is King be the people never so impatient, he sets
between the Cherubins be the earth never so unquiet. And as in these two
Psalms he is said to set, so in other places of holy Scriptures he is said to
dwell between the Cherubins, both these terms Setting and Dwelling
signifying unto the^ his presence there. Not that he sat or dwelt there in
truth and in very deed, as we in our tongue understand or Setting or Dwelling,
yet that he was as really there present in that place, as themselves were in
the seats they sat on, or in the houses where they dwelt.

Concerning the Priests that here were present though the beauty they had was
nothing comparable to this beauty, yet considered in it self it was a Beauty
no doubt exceeding gracious and glorious too. They were the Deuteronomy. 33.8.
holy one of God, and had a^ Moses says the Vrim and Thummim, that is, Light
and Perfection, the one signifying their Knowledge, the other their Life and
Conversation. Of Priests were two sorts the High Priest and the Rest that were
inferior unto him. Concerning the glory of the High Priest we shall the
better conceive what it was, if so be we call to mind what the son of Syrac
said concerning one of them namely Simon the soon of Onias. He was, Ecclus.
^0.6.
says the son of Syrac, as the morning star in the midst of a cloud, and
as the Moon when it is full, and as the Sun shining upon the Temple of the
most High, and as the Rainebow that is bright in the fair clouds, and as the
flower of the Roses in the spring of the year, and as Lillies by the springs
of waters, and as the branches of the Frank^ncense tree in the time of Summer,
as a fire and incense in the Conser, and a^ a vessel of massy gold set with
all manner of precious stones, and as a fair Olive tree that is fruitful, and
as a Cypress tree which grows up to the clouds. When he put on the garment
of honor and was clothed with all beauty he went up to the holy Altar and made
the garment of holiness honorable. Concerning the glory of the other Priests
which were inferior unto him we may make an estimat by that which there
follows. When he took the portions out of the Priests hands he himself
stood by the hearth of the Altar compassed with his Brethren round about as
the branches do the Cedar tree in L^banus, and they compassed him as the
branches of the Palm tree. So were at the sons of Aron in their glory and
the oblations of the Lord in their hands before all the Congregation of Israel.
In a word, the Jews they were Levit. 20.24.
separated as Gods peculiar people from all other people besides, and the
Priests as more peculiar unto God were (...). 8.14.
separated from the Jews.

Concerning the presence of the People, if so be in civil Societies whereas they
are orderly pyld together and they are not a tabble or a rout, it is no small
beauty which in such Societies is to be seen, how much more was the beauty
in those Assemblies in so peculiar a People as that was. One Timotheus a
Captain of Athens being demanded by Themistocles what was the greatest joy
that ever he had in all his life, It was, Ae^ian. l* ^3. c. 43.
says he, when in the Olympian games beginning to play my Prize, the whole
Theater there present beh^ld me with their eyes. And famous is that of the
Senators of Rome, who when the Gauls had taken their City, and now were
entered into the Senate, They Live. Dec. 1 l 5.
seemed unto them at the first like the Images of the Gods, of such a goodly
presence they were. The order observed in these Assemblies as it was far
beyond those, so was the Beauty no doubt far faierer, a worthier object to the
eye. It is well seen o God, Ps. 68.24.
says David, how thou go, how thou my God and King go in the Sanctuary.
The Singers go before, the Minstrels follow after, in the midst were the
Damsels playing with the Timbrels, Nor was it prejudicial to this beauty that
there was perhaps in those Assemblies much cockle among the wheat, the bad
among the good, all as speaks the Romans 9.6.
Apostle St Paul, not being Israel that were of Israel, nor all of them
Children because they were the seed of Abraham: seeing it was in respect of the
better part that this beauty here was thus accounted of. Like as we say in our
Creed, The holy Catholic Church, notwithstanding there are too many neither
Catholic therein, nor Holy. But thus much of the Persons, the Parties here
present.

The Things performed in these Assembles wherein this Beauty did consist, was
as I said the Public Solemnity of the honor and service of God, both in his
Word, and Sacraments, and Sacrifices, and Prayer, and Praises; and indeed
admirable was the beauty in every of these particulars being beheld with
spiritual eyes. As first and foremost in the Word, to consider how the eternal
God at Heb. 1.1.
sundry times and in diverse manners spoke unto them by the Prophets. Secondly,
in the Sacraments, to consider how the same God did bind himself unto them,
even as the Debt or binds himself by bond unto his Creditor, or man to man
by way of Indenture. Thirdly in the Sacrifices to consider what was due unto
the sins themselves committed* I say themselves committed, and yet Ovid. Met
l. 15.
Placidum pecus, inque tuendos
Natum homines,
the mild and gentle Sheep, Animal sine fraud, dolisque, the innocent and
harmless Ox, they forsooth must die the death. Fourthly in their Prayers,
how they needed not now make such Apologies as Abraham did unto the Lord, Ge^,
18.27
Behold now I have begun to speak unto my Lord, and I am but dust and ashes:
and again, V. 30.
Let not my Lord now be angry that I speak: and yet again, V. 32.
Let not my Lord now be angry and I will speak but this once: no they might
now talk their fill with him, every Morning, every Evening, both at their
Morning and Evening Sacrifice. Lastly in their Praises to consider how they Ps.
150.1.
praised God in his holiness, praised him in the firmament of his power, praised
him in his noble acts, praised him according to his excellent greatness, praised
him in the sound of the trumpet, praised him upon the Lute and harp, praised
him in the Cymbals and Daunces, praised him upon the strings and Pipe, praised
him upon the well tuned Cymbals, praised him upon the loud Cymbals. Indeed it
was a good thing as Ps. 147.1.
said the Psalmist to sing praise unto their God, yea a joyful and pleasant
thing it was to be thankful. And thus much of the Fair Beauty in respect of
the Things performed in those Assemblies: now as touching the Power and Force
this Fair Beauty had, which was as you may remember the second point to be
observed.

Concerning the Power and Force of this Fair Beauty here specified, we shall
take a scantling thereof, if so be we do consider how it ravished this our
Prophet, Body, and Soul. First his Soul, and that by way of Contemplation, To
behold the Fair Beauty of the Lord: Secondly his Body, and that by way of
Action, To visit his Temple: Thirdly in that it caused him to join them both
together, and that in the particle, And To behold the fair beauty of the Lord
and to visit his Temple. And of every of these in their order, and first that
his Soul was ravished by way of Contemplation. To behold the fair beauty of
the Lord.

Great is the Power of Beauty though it be but worldly beauty such as is the
beauty of women* Is not the king 1. Esd. 4.28.
says Zorobabel great in his power? Do not all regions fear to touch him?
Yet I saw him and Apame the kings concubine, the daughter of the famous
Bartacus, sitting on the right hand of the king. And she took the crown of
the kings head, and put it upon her own, and stroke the king with her left
hand. Yet in the mean season the king gaped and gazed on her, and if she
laughed at him, he laughed, and if she were angry with him he did flatten her
that he might be reconciled with her. The sons of God Genesis 6.7.
says the Scripture saw the daughters of men that they were fair and they
took them wives of all that they liked. Behold Ge^. 12.11
says Abraham to Sara I know that thou art a fair woman to look upon,
therefore it will come to pass that when the Egiptians see thee they will say
she is his wife, so they will ki^^ me but they will keep thee a live. Now if
so be in worldly beauty which is but a superficial color only covering the
blood, skin, and bones, things most hideous to be beheld, and that which
Diseases some times, always Age does deforme, Fl^vit vt in speculo ruga^
adspexit aniles Tyndaris. Ovid. Metam. l. 15
the power and force thereof is so great, what may we think of this Beauty which
was ever the self same, as fresh in David's times as it was in the time of
Moses, and in the times of the Prophets after, as in David's long before, nay
much more fresh and glorious, having a most beautiful Temple to adorn it, the
Temple of Jerusalem. Howbeit here we are to note that the beauty here specified
was not outward so much as within, and therefore needed an inward eye, the eye
of Contemplation. The Kings daughter Ps. 45.14.
says the Prophet is all glorious within, quite contrary to worldly beauty.
Worldly beauty as you hard even now reaches no further then to the skin, to
the outward Superficies, It may be fair without and foul within, much like to
the Egiptian Temples which were mavelous beautiful without, but within
instead of a God, they had a Crocodile, or a Cat, or some strange serpent more
meet for a cave, or a den, I for a dunghill says an ancient Clem. Alex
Paedag. l. 3. c. 2.
Father then for a place so gorgeous. It was not so with this Temple. There was
beauty without i^ deed, but more, much more within, and therefore not to be
seen with corporal eyes so much, such as are common to us with Flies, and
Gnots, as with the eye of understanding, even with those eyes as speaks (...).
Theod. Grae^ Affect. C^r^^ Ser. 11.
Theodoret, which faith has put into our heads. And thus much for the Prophets
eye, the Eye of Contemplation: not the eye he beheld when time was the beauty
of 2. Sam. 11.2.
Bathsheba with, no he was now blind on that side, but the eye of the mind,
and of the soul, To behold the fa^re beauty of the Lord. The thing I noted
here was that it ravished his Body to, and that by way of Action, and that in
causing him to take the pains to go him self in person thither, and therefore
now concerning his body: To visit his Temple.

The word Temple in this place does not argue that this Psalm was made after
the building of the Temple, and that consequently it was none of David's, the
Temple in David's time not being built, for even long before this time it was ^.
Sam. 1.9
said of Eli the Priest, that he sat upon a stool by one of the posts of the
Temple. It is by a kind of figure then that it is termed here the Temple, like
as S. Jerome upon Ezechiel, we in steed of the city Noe Hieron. in Ezech. l.
9. c. 30.
says he, have translated it Alexandria; for that it was afterward so called;
and S. Aug. de Consens. Evang. l. 2. c. 17.
Austin to this purpose, we hear that Christ's disciples were bidden to the
marriage at Cana in Galylie, not that they were his disciples then and that at
that time, but that they were afterward so to be. But now concerning the
Action of visiting the Temple.

The verb To visit being a freque^tatiue intimates unto us the frequency of
the Prophet David's going to that Temple, his frequencie of going thither the
fervency of his desire. Concerning his freque^cy of going thither it was well
observed by the Arist. Eth. l. 1. c. 7.
Philosopher that a habit is not gotten by one only action, no more the^ ^ne
swallo^ as he speaks in an other case, or one fair day makes a summer. I^ ^as
well observed by him in Ethic. l. ^. c. 4.
another place, that it is not the multiplicity of actions neither that does
denominate the party virtuous but if he do them virtuously: as aiust man if he
do just things justly, a temperate man if he do temperate things temperatly. In
regard whereof the Vid. Jewels Defense of the Articles. Art. 5. Div. 5 and M.
Hooker Eccl. Pol. l. 5. Sect. 62.
Canonists were wont to say that God was the rewarder of Adverbs, not of
Nownes, and our Savior to this purpose, Mat. 6.22
If thy eye be single, thy whole body shall be light, but if thine eye be wicked
the^ all thy body shall be dark: that is as S. Austen August. de Sermon. Dom. ^^
Monte. l. 2
interprets it, such shall be thy deeds as thy intention is to do them. These two
points the one of Multiplicity the other of Quality, are both of them
intimated here in this single sole word of Visiting: To Visit implies both;
First it implies a Frequency of going to the Temple, as if the Prophet had
meant his feet should even wear out the very steps of the door. Secondly, it
implies his Feruency of spirit which manifestly shows that what was done was
done religiously. And this it is that must be done, and it must be done thus,
that must be held to be such an action as the Prophet protests here he would
perform. If either of these two want, or Frequencie, or Ferventi^, it makes us
like a bird that has but one only wing, well we may hop to Church, but fly
thither we cannot, we shall never be able as speaks the Esaias. 60.8
Prophet, to fly thither like a cloud, and as the Doves to their windoes.

The ioining of both these puts me in mind of the third point, namely how
this our Prophet ioineth likewise together, Contemplation and Action both, and
that in the particle [And] To behold the fair beauty of the Lord, and to visit
his Temple: so that he seems not to say as Match. Comment. l. 2. c. 2 and l. 3.
c. 3.
Machauel in another case, Divide and Impera, divide them and master them both:
but as it was Quintil. Inst. l. 6. c. 4.
said of the Ship rather, Si dividi^, per di^: If ye once divide it, you mar
all. And therefore what the Apostle 1. Cor. 7.1.
says of married folks, Defraud not one another except it be with consent for
a time that you may give your selves to fasting and prayer, and again come
together that Satan tempt you not for your incontinency, may not unfitly be
applied as to the two lives the Contemplatiu^ and Active in general, so to
this Contemplation and Action of the Prophet here in particular. Our Souls and
Bodies are Caro atque Anima velut quadam lege sociantur co^iugii. Ambr. de
Abrah. Patriarch. l. 2. c. 6.
Man and Wife as it were, so lovely linckt together that till death it self
depart them, no Divorce betwixt the both. With consent indeed they often times
1. Cor. 7.5.
defraud one another, that so they may give themselves to fasting and prayer,
and what is this but the Life Contemplative? But afterward they come together
again, and are careful for things convenient for them, and this is the Life
Active. These two several lives the Active and Contemplative have had their
several welwillers from the beginning of the world to this day, while some
preferring the one Life, some the other, have wholly addicted themselves or to
the one, or to the other. Much I confess may be spoken in the behalf of
either of the^, but when all comes to all, the Life that ioines them both
together and unites these two Roses, the White as it were and the Red, is the
Life in my opinion best accepted with God and man. I appeal in this case to
Antiquity it self, which took such strict order that very Monks who had
betaken themselves to Contemplation, should not be Vid. A^g. de Opere Monach.
Tom. 3.
labourlesse notwithstanding; I they were to work with their own hands, and
that to get their own living. Howbeit the Action here meant by the Prophet in
this place, is not an Action of this nature, it was to use his feet not his
hands, especially his hands in a Mechanical kind of sort. It was indeed to use
those feet of his to the often coming to the Temple, and not upon the wagging
of a straw, or to absent himself from thence, or to make of his own house a
Chapel of ease. Hence it is that he so often Ps 26.12.
voweth unto God the sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving in the Congregation,
that he so Ps. 134.2.
earnestly exhorts others to sing praises to the Lord in his Courts, in his
Ps. 134.3.
Sanctuary, before the Ps. 30.5.
Memorial of his Holiness, and so much complains of his own uncomfortable
exile, See M Hoeker Eccles. Pol. l. 5. Sect. ^4.
wherein although he sustained many most grievous indignities, and endured the
want of sundry both pleasures and honors before enjoyed, yet as if this one
were his only grief and the rest not felt, his speeches are all of the
heavenly benefit of Ps. 27.4.4^.4.84.1.
Public Assemblies, and the happiness of such as had free access thereunto.
And as the Prophet here in this place thus ioineth them together, so doubt
less no good Professor that lived in those times but also did the like,
joining and coupling both together, least with idle Contemplation without
coming at all to Church Assemblies he might vanish away in his speculation, or
coming to Church Assemblies without the benefit of Contemplation he should be
like to those who Esaias. 29.13.
came near to the Lord with their mouths, and honored them with their lips,
but their heart was far from him. And thus much of the Reason of the Prophets
Petition in this place, the Beauty of the Church that so much moved him to be
so desirous to go to Church. Now to apply what has been spoken, and to make
such use of it as is fit, and to come to the mark it self whereat I first
aimed when I first made choice of this Text. To behold the fair beauty of the
Lord and to visit his Temple.

Little wrong was done to Saul by the woman of Israel when they made it the
burden of their song, 1. Sam. 18.7.
Saul has slain his thousand, and David his ten thousand. The unlike deserts
of these two Princes, M.D King on Jonas. Lect. 1.
says a worthy Divine of our days, might justly admit an unlike commendation.
Our Savior in the Gospel indeed Luke 5.39
prefers old wine before new: but in the same Gospel if we mark it, he
prefers the New Luke 7.^8.
Testament before the old. There is no greater Prophet then John, Mat 11.11.
says he, among them that are begotten of women, nevertheless he that is
least in the kingdom of God is greater then he, the kingdom of God being
there taken as the kingdom of heaven, Matthew the third at the second verse,
and the Gospel of the kingdom, Matthew the fourth at the three and twenty
verse, and the word of the kingdom, Matthew the thirteenth at the nineteenth
verse, in a word, as our Savior meant when he said, The kingdom of God shall
be taken from you, and shall be given to a Nation which shall bring forth the
fruits thereof, Matthew the one and twentieth at the three and fortieth verse.

These things thus, Beloved, it shall be no disparagement to the Temple here in
this place, if so be we prefer before it the Beauty of our Temples. The
Beauty I told you of this Temple consisted in two points, First in regard of
the Parties that there were present: Secondly in regard of the Things performed
in those Assemblies. The Parties present were first the Lord himself, then the
Priests, the^ the People. The Things performed in those Assemblies was the
Public Solemnity of Gods worship both in the word, and Sacraments, and
Sacrifices, and Prayer, and Praises: and does not the Church of God whereof our
Assemblies are every of them parts and parcels, of the self same nature the
Church is, eve^ the meanest Assembly that is (so it be a Congregation) does not
the Church I say so far excel that Synagogue as the Sun in his brightness
the meanest star? Begin we first of all with Gods presence, and is it not
more in Christian Assemblies the^ it was to the Israelits in that Temple: At
sundry times and in diverse manners Heb. 1.1.
says the Apostle to the Hebrews God spoke in the old time to our Fathers by
the Prophets, in these last dais he has spoken to us b^ ^is Son: and never
spoke Prophet (...) ^^ke the Son, John the seventh (...) ^e six and fortith
verse. O but you w^ say God him self spoke to Moses, Moses hard his Numb. 7.89.
own voice: I grant he did; and was not the same voice of the same God hard
also in the new Testament first upon the baptism of our Savior, Matthew the
third at the seave^teenth verse, secondly, at another time John the 12 at the
eight and twenty verse? True it is, it was at those times, it was then, it is
not now, howbeit as S. Austen in the matter of the Tongues, To one that should
say Ang. de Temp. Ser. 188.
says he if thou have received the Holy Ghost why then speak thou not as
did the Apostles with diversity of tongues, thou may answer him again, yes,
I speak with diversity of tongues, for I am in the body of Christ that is the
Church, which speaks with such diversity: right so may we say in this case,
no particular Church whatsoever but in regard this was spoken to our Savior
Christ the head thereof, but has the benefit of those words, and may be said
to have hard the voice of God.

Now as we have God the father here, the first Person in Trinity, so have we
here God the son to, even as he testified of himself, where two or three
Mat. 18.20.
says he are gathered together in my name, there am I in the midst of the^.
Not as he was in the midst between the two thieves, giving influence to the
one, and none at all to the other, Luke the three and twe^tith at the three and
fortith verse, but as he was in the midst of the Luke 2.46
Doctors, or in the midst of the Luke 24.36.
eleaven Apostles, or if not so personally for he is now at the right hand of
God, and there sets as speak the Mark. 16.19.
Scriptures, yet as he was in the midst of the candleslickes Revelation the
first at the thirteenth verse.

Over and besides the Son of God, we have God the holy Ghost to, of who^ our
Savior himself said, that he should abide with us for ever, and is therefore
called by Tertullian, The Tertull. de Vir. Veland.
Vicar of Christ upon earth. True it is they had in their Temple this Trinity
as well as we, the Father, and Son, and Holy Ghost, for they were but one God
both then, and now, and ever; but come to the manner of their being there, and
being with us in our Assemblies, and it was a ridle to the Jews, we that have
plowed with Judge. 14.18.
Sampsons heyfer, that is, with the holy Scriptures, have easily found it out.
You shall hear Dichers and Delvers says (...). Theodor. ad Graec. Infid. Ser.
5.
Theodoret of the Christians in his time, and he spoke it not in skorne
neither, reasoning about the Trinity.

Over and besides the Holy Trinity, we have the Angels to, here present, in
regard of whom the Apostle in his Epistle to the 1. Cor. 11 10.
Corinthians, The woman ought to have power on her head, that is, to have her
head covered, because of the Angels. Nor are they present only as Spectators,
but they assist us after a sort, I they solace themselves in the beauty of this
house according to that of St 1. Pet. 1.12.
Peter, The which things the Angels desire to behold: speaking of the mysteries
published in the Gospel. The word (...) Beza. in 1. Pet. 1.12.
Beholding there used, being the same that was used of himself when he looked
so diligently into the Luke 24.12.
sepulcher, and the Apostle alluding thereby as it is thought to the figure of
the Cherubins that were so fashioned by the hand of the work man, as if they
had Exodus 25.20.
looked into the Arc.

Concerning the other Parties that were present, namely the Priests and
People, how infinitely in each of them do we Christians out strip the Jews?
First concerning our Priests they are not in deed so gorgeous in attire as
they were, but being Ministers of better things, how are they more beautiful
notwithstanding? How beautiful Romans 10.15.
says the Apostle are the feet of them which bring glad tidings of peace, and
bring glad tidings of good things? And St Chrysostom, he compares the^ in one
Chrysostom. de Eucharist. in E^^^n.
place to the Angels, in another Chrysostom. de S^^ced. l. 3.
place he prefers them far before the^. To them says he that inhabit the
earth and are conversant therein, is committed the dispensing of those things
which are in h^ave^. They have that power given unto them which he never gave
to Angels, no not Archangels themselves.

Concerning the People, they indeed were a Nation, but they were but one
Nation, we the whole world. And therefore as our Savior Mark. 28.^9.
said to his disciples, Go and teach all Nations, so they went and taught them
severally; See Eus^b. l. 3. c. 1. and Hieron. Catal. script. Ecclesiast.
S. John the Asians, S. Andrew the Achaians, S. Matthew the Ethiopians, S.
Philip the Phrygians, S. Bartholmew the Indians, S. Thomas the Parthians, and
so forth, their sound Romans 10.18.
says the Apostle went out through all the earth, and their words into the end
of the world. Or if so be they went not to all places in their own proper
persons, as S. Austen Aug. ep. 80
seems to be of opinion, yet has every Nation now, or at the least wise has
had the benefit of that doctrine which the Apostle delivered to those nations
that in their own persons they then visited. We may well add unto this point
that peculiar honor and testimonial that is given unto Christians in that
they are said so 1. Cor. 3.16. 2 Cor. 6.16
many times to be themselves the Temple of God, I every of them in particular
in regard of their 1. Cor. 6.19.
bodies to be the Temple of the holy Ghost. But thus much of outstripping them
in regard of the Parties present: that we no less outstrip them to, in regard
of the Public Solemnity of Gods worship, namely in the Word, and Sacraments,
and Sacrifices, and Prayer, and Praises, remains now to be declared, and
first concerning the Word.

First then concerning the Word, they had Moses I grant, and they had the
Prophets. Moses as speaks Theodoret, who was the Theodoret. ad Graec. Infid.
s^r. 2.
Ocean of Divinity, and instructed mouth to mouth as it were by God himself;
the Prophets, who were the floods and so many rivers as it were derived from
him. Moses he delivered them the Law, the Prophets they were the Interpreters
of that Law. Both Moses and Prophets so complete at that time for the salvation
of the Jews, that that of Abraham unto Dives concerning the salvation of his
Brethren then living, Luke 16.29.
They have Moses and the Prophets let them hear them, was an argument that
would not admit of any reply that Dives made. For when he answered thereupon,
v. 30.
Nay Father Abraham, but if one come unto them from the dead, they will amend
their lives, the Patriarch holds himself to his first resolution, v. 31.
If they hear not Moses and the Prophets, neither will they be persuaded
though one rise from the dead again. Now if they were then taught so wholly and
perfectly by Moses and the Prophets alone, how much better is our case who
have the Apostles, and Evangelists annexed unto them? Moses and the Prophets
indeed being a light as S. Peter 2. Pet. 1.19.
speaks, that shines in a dark place, but the Apostles, and Evangelists as
the day star arising in our hearts. And thus much of the Word.

How far we outstrip them in the Sacraments S. Aug epist. 118. and de Doct.
Christ. l. 3. c. 9.
Austen will bear us witness, who speaking of theirs, and ours; we, says he, are
not pressed with the heavy burden they were, but our Lord and his Apostles have
delivered unto us a few Sacraments in steed of many, and the same in performing
most easy, in signification most excellent, in observation most reverend, and
he names in that place Baptism and the Supper. True it is the Apostle 1. Cor.
10 1.
says, they were all under the clowd, and all passed through the sea, and were
baptized unto Moses in the clowd, and in the sea; and again, v. 3.
they did all eat the same spiritual meat, and did all drink the same
spiritual drink* for they drank of the spiritual rock that followed them and
the rock was Christ, howbeit this which the Apostle says is in regard of the
substance and effect of the Sacraments, the signification of our Sacraments is
much more clear the^ theirs was.

In our Sacrifices we are farther before the^ then in our Sacraments, having
had in our church the self same Sacrifice really acted, whereof al their
Sacrifices were but shadows. For if the blood of Bulls, Heb. 9.13
says the Apostle, and of Goats, and the ashes of an Haifer sprinckling them
that are unclean, sanctifies as touching the purifying of the flesh: how much
more shall the blood of Christ which through the eternal spirit offered
himself without spot to God, purg your conscience from dead works to serve the
living God? And again a little after, The law, Heb. 10, 1
says he, having the shadow of good things to come, and not the very image of
the things, can never with those Sacrifices which they offer year by year
continually sanctify the comers thereunto. v. 4.
For it is impossible that the blood of Bulls and Goats should take away sins.
Now if so be we would know the virtue of our Sacrifice, though it were but one,
their Sacrifices being many, with one offering, v. 14.
says the Apostle, has he consecrated for ever the^ that are sanctified. And
he had said a little Heb 9.27.
before As it is appointed unto men that they shall once die and after that
comes the judgment, so Christ was once offered to take away the sins of
many. And comparing his Priesthood with theirs, Among them, Heb 7.23
says he, many were made Priests, because they were not suffered to endure by
the reason of death, but this man because he endures ever, has an everlasting
Priesthood. And again a little after, Heb. 7.2^.
Such a High Priest it became us to have which is holy, harmless, undefiled,
separate from sinners, and made higher then the heavens, which needed not daily
as those High Priests, to offer up Sacrifice, first for his own sins, and
then for the Peoples, for that did he once when he offered up himself.
Comparing then those Sacrifices with this of ours, I may say of them as did
Theodoret of the like offered by the Gentiles, they were such kind of
Sacrifices as were fit for (...). Theodoret. ad Graec. Infidel. Ser. 7.
Hucksters and Butchers to make.

Lastly concerning Prayer, wherein I comprehend with the Zanch. de Redemp. l.
1. c. 19.
Learned not only the asking of things needful for us, and deprecation of
things hurtful, but the confession of our sins, the praises of God, and giving
thanks for benefits received at his hands, how far we outstrip the Jews,
witness that of the Prophet Malachie, who co^paring both together theirs and
ours, From the rising of the Sun, Malac. 1.11.
says he, unto the going down of the same, my name is great among the
Gentiles, and in every place Incense shall be offered unto my name, and a pure
offering. Now what is this Incense but Prayers, for so the Holy Ghost himself
interprets Ince^se, Revelation the fifth at the eight verse. And that this Pure
Offering is the same, witness that of Tertullian Tertul. advers. Marcian. l. 4.
a Pure Offering, that is, a Pure Prayer from a conscience that is pure, for if
so be, as speaks the same Father in another Tertul Exhort. ad Cast.
place, the Conscience blush, Prayer it self will blush too. I but you will
say, since these our Prayers must needs taste of the caske from whence they
come, and the caske is very impure be it the Conscience, or the Heart of man,
how can they be the Pure Offering here spoken of in this place? I answer
according to Scripture that there is in heaven a certain Rev. 8.3.
Angel, it is indeed our Savior Christ, that goes and stands before the Altar
having a golden Censer and much odours given unto him that he should offer with
our prayers. Howsoever then as proceeding from our selue, s they are tainted
and corrupt, yet are they sweetened by bur Savior, provided that they be
infirmities only that taint the^ not loud crying sins, for if they once come
to that pass, then farewell all approaching and appearing in Gods sight. When
you shall stretch out your hands, I, says the Esaias, 1.15
Lord, will hide mine eyes from you, and though you make many prayers I will
not hear: the reason he gives immediately, for your hands are full of blood;
and yet immediately after that too, as if he were loath to give even such an
utter repulse, Wash you, (...). 16.
says he, make you clean, take away the Evil of your works from before mine
eyes, cease to do evil, learn to do well, and so forth, Come now and let us
reason together, says the Lord, though your sins were as crimsen they shall
be made white as snow, though they were red like scarlet they shall be as
wool. And to this end and purpose has the Church of God for this sixteen
hundred years and upward been in her several Congregations continually on
her knees. We come by troops, Tertul. Apol. l. 1. c 39.
says Tertullian, that being banded as it were together, we may be supplicants
enough, not so much to beseech, as to beseige God with our prayers. This force to
God is most acceptable. The sound of men, women, children, and infants, Basil
Hexam Hom. 4.
says St Basil, praying in the Church together, seems like the sound of the
waves beating against the sea shore. Hieron. in 2. Prooem. ad Gal.
St Ierom, he likens it to the noise of Thunder, and in another place
discoursing of the Funerals of Fabiola, The Psalms, Hieron. ad Ocean. Epitaph.
Fabiol.
says he, did sound a loud, and the Haleluiah that was sung did shake at that
instant the golden seelings of the Temple with the noise it made.

But of all the Beauties in our Church nothing so beautiful indeed as the
Beauty of our Savior. He was, says Aug in Ps. 44.
St Austen, a beautiful God, he was the word that was with God, he was
beautiful in his mothers womb, where he lost not his Divinity, and yet he
took Humanity on him. He was beautiful being borne an Infant, because when he
was an Infant, when as he sucked the dug, and was carried in his mothers arms,
the heavens spoke, the Angels praised him, the stars directed the wise men to
him, he was adored in the manger being to be meat convenient for the mouths of
gentle Beasts. And this is that fair beauty which we celebrate this day. This
day it was that having made for himself a Tabernacle, as speaks Theodoret, in
the womb of the Virgin, he issued forth from thence both (...). Theodoret. de
Grac. Affect. Ser. 6.
a visible man, and a God to be adored. Borne of the substance of the Father
before all worlds, but assuming that of the Virgin Mary which did appear to
the world. Borne, says the same Father, as it were this day, and yet from all
eternity. Borne of his Father, Aug de Temp. Ser. 12
says St Austen, without a mother he created every day, borne of his mother
without a Father he has consecrated this day, so that whereas, says he, in
the worlds beginning man was made to the likeness of God, the case is altered
now at this time, for this day God is made to the likeness of man. Nor let it
seem incredible, says the same August. de Temp. Ser. 181.
Father, that he should be borne of a Virgin, who out of the Virgin earth made
the first man that ever was.

These the Beauties of our Church, and of every our several Congregations,
what remains but our desires in respect of them be such as was the Prophets
concerning the Temple, namely to behold there these fair beauties, and to
visit these places, that if so be that Beauty were so powerful with the
Prophet which was so far inferior unto ours, ours with us should be more
powerful as being far more beautiful and so far superior unto theirs.
Let it ravish then our Souls by way of Contemplation, and like a load stone
draw our Bodies to by way of Action to these places, and let us join here Body
and Soul by Contemplation and Action both Let us not take as Gods name, so not
his beauty in vain, if so be the Lord will not hold him guiltles that takes his
Exodus ^0.7.
name in vain, how will he judge those another day that so much contemn this
his Beauty?

And to the better effecting hereof let us come often to this House, and as the
word used here is a frequentatiue, so let our deeds be frequent to. To come
not at all with the Popish Recusant, or but monthly with the false hearted
Protestant, or in the forenoone or afternoon only with the half Christian, or
when Service is half done with the careless Gospeller, or when there is a
Sermon only with the Precisian, are vices all of a quality, though not al of
the self same quantity, all able to drown us though not all after one sort.
The Precisian he is drowned as it were in rose water, Moses and the Prophets
are nothing with him here, unless forsooth they be interpreted: The careless
Gospeller in a bole of water, a little serves his turn: The half Christian in
mud and water: The false hearted Protestant in a river of water, but the
Recusant he that will never be here, and that utterly shunneth these
Assemblies, he is drowned in a sea of water, drowned in deed as are the rest,
but the manner of his drowning more dreadful, so much the farther from all
hope as he will needs be far thest from all help. If now you demand of me how
often you should come hither. I answer even as often as this Beauty here is to
be seen in the Public Service of our God. Whether on the Saboth day, or on
Nostri dies festi in 4o praecepto nomine Sabbathi comprehensi. Zanch. de
Redemp. l. 1 c. 9.
Holy days, or even on the week days to, specially Masters and Mistresses of
families, unless as Zanch. Ib. qu. 2.
Za^chius well states the question, our sickness is such as that we cannot come,
or our affairs of such importance that we may not defer them till an other
time. He that at every time else comes when ever opportunity is offered, it is
a sign he is enamored with this Beauty of the Lord, and he that with this
Beauty is so enamoured in this world, shall an other day behold his fairer
Beauty, and visit his other Temple in the world to come. Of which Beauty, and
which Temple to speak in S. Austens August. de Tripl. Habitac. c 4.
phrase, whatsoever a man shall say it is as it were but a drop in comparison
of the Sea, and a spark in respect of a fire. For how, says the same Aug. in
Ps. 85.
Father, should it possibly come into the tongue of man, that could never come
as yet into the heart of man. It being an invincible truth which the Apostle ^.
Cor. 2.9
S. Paul delivers, The things which eye has not seen, neither ear has
hard, neither came into man's heart, are, which God has prepared for them that
love him.

The same God so bless us and the seed that has been sown, etc.

FINIS.

