THE GENTILE CRAFT.

The second Part.

Being a most merry and pleasant History, not altogether unprofitable nor any
way hurtful: very fit to pass away the tediousness of the long winter
evenings.

By T. D.

Newly corrected and augmented.

Haud curo invidam.

LONDON, Printed by Elizabeth Purslow, dwelling near Christ Church 1639

To the Master and Ward^^ (...) worshipful company of the Co^^^ in London, all
continuance of health and fect brotherly affection.
ONce more has good will embolde^^^ me, to present unto your Worships, my
worthles labor, to manifest the good affection I bear to this fraternity: and
finding, you lent a gentle look on the first part of this History, I have
been the more bold to proffer you the second: for having bound my self by
promise to perform it: and you perhaps clayming promise as a debt, expecting
payment, I bent all my study to keep touch: whereupon I tender this small
trifle unto you, only craving at your worships hands, a good opinion of my
poor endeavors. And albeit this pamphlet does not minister matter worthy your
grave view: yet in regard of the subject, I trust you will deigne to esteem it
since so well as I could, though not so well as I would, I have sought herein to
procure your delight: and although you find not all the men spoken of, which
is promised in the first part, yet think it no faintnes in me, but fault of
good instruction: and again, for as much as these men here mentioned, were all
of this City (whose story grew longer then I supposed) and the other of the
country: I thought good so to break off, and to defer their story to another
time, when I may more perfectly speak thereof. In the mean space I commend
your Worships to the protection of the most highest.

Your Worships in all he may. T. D.

To the Courteous Readers health.
GEntle Reader, you that vouchsafe to cast courteous looks into this rude
Pamphlet: expect not herein to find any matter of light value, curiously penned
with picked words, or choice phrases, but a quaint and plain discourse, best
fitting matters of merriment, seeing we have herein no cause to talk of
Courtiers or Scholars. Notwithstsnding, if you find your self over charged
with melancholy, you may perhaps have here a fit medicine to purge that humor,
by conferring in this place which Doctor Burket: or if you meet with round
Robin, he may chance ryme it away. I tell you among Shoomakers is some solace,
as you shall see by Tom Drums entertainment, and other mad merry prankes played
by the Greene-King of S. Martins. If that will not suffice, you may in meeting
with Anthony now now, have such a fit of mirth, with his firking Fiddle, that
it shall be a great cause to expel choler. And so I leave you to your own
liking, whether you will enter to see this sport or no: stand back I pray,
room for a Gentleman, for you cannot come in under a groat.

CHAP. 1. Containing the History of Richard Casteler: and the first of his love
THE l^uely Maidens of the City of Westminster, noting what a good a husband
Richard Casteler was and seeing how diligently he followed his business,
judged in the end he would prove a rich man: for which cause many bore unto
him very good affection, and few there was that wished not themselves to be his
wife: insomuch that he having the custom of all the pretty Wenches in the
City, by that means knew the length of every Maidens foot so well, that he
about all other best pleased them: On the Sundays when he came into the
Church, the Maids eyes were so firmly fired on him, that he could neither
look forward, backward, nor on any side, but that he should be sure to have a
wink of one, a smile of another the third would give a nod: and to be brief,
they would all cast on him such gracious looks, that it was easy to guess by
their outward countenance, their inward good will.

And when in his Holy Days attire he past along the streets, the Maidens
(after their business was done) standing at their Masters doors and spying
him, would say thus one to another: Now verily there goes a proper civil young
man, wise and thrifty: yea such a one as in time will prove wondrous weal hy,
and without all doubt, will come to great credit and preferment these and the
like words would they use of him continually, whereby he had among them such a
^enerall good opinion, that as he stood a days at his cutting board, he should
be sure to have twenty cursies made him in an hour, by Maidens that past up
and down: some would bestow on him dainty sweetnosegayes, of the fairest
flowers they could find, and other some would bring him handkerchers of
Cambrick, and diverse such like favors, well bew^aying their friendship toward
him.

But among many that secretly affected him, I will only tell of twain,
because above all the rest, their merriments do only remain in memory, the
one of them was called Margaret, of the spread-Eagle, but more commonly known
by the name of long Meg of Westminster: The other was a proper neat wench named
Gillian of the George, both of them as wily as they were witty, who among all
the Maids in Westminster were repused to be the best servants; having
therefore good wages, they maintained themselves gallantly, and therwithall so
honestly, that no man could quip them with bad living, though afterward it fell
out otherwise, as in this history you shall hear.

Margaret was a maiden borne in Lancashire, in height and proportion of body,
passing the ordinary stature of women, but there-withall very comely, and of
amiable countenance, her strength was agreeable to her stature and her courage
as great as them both: she was of a quick capacity, and pleasant disposition,
of a liberal heart, and such a one as would be suddenly angry, and soon
pleased, being readier to revenge her wrongs by weapons, then by words: and
therein did she differ from the nature of other women, because she could not
abide much brabling: and so hee^full was she of her behavior in her younger
years, that her good properties far exceeding her portion, she was woo^d by
diverse, but would be won by none, for the man whom she most loved, least
thought upon her. And albeit she manifested her good will by diverse means,
yet did Richard little regard it, having his mind nothing bent unto marriage,
by means whereof Margaret grew into such sad conceits as changed her chery
cheeks into a green wan countenance: in-somuch that every one wondered to see
her pensiuenes.

At last it chanced that Margaret having occasion to go into London, it was her
good fortune to meet with Gillian of the George, whom her mistres had sent
thither to buy Comfets, and Carawayes, with diverse other sweet meats, for that
they had a banquet bespoken by diverse gallant Courtiers, which that night
poin^ed to come thither: but so soon as Margaret spied her, she smiled,
saying: Gillian now in good sadness welmet, (if thou be met a maid) and ill
met (quoth she) not meeting so good a maid as my self: Tush said Margaret; it
is good for us to think well of our selves, for there is enough that think ill
of us: mary I defy them quoth Gillian that thinks ill of me, and I respect as
little their speech, as they do my profit. For a woman with a good life, fears
no man with an evil tung: If you be so hot quoth Margaret where the wind
blows so cold, what will you be by that time supper is ready, where the fire
will be as fierce as your choler is great? and mistake me not good Gillian,
though I said men think ill of us, I mean not thereby that any go about so
blemish our good names, but I suppose they think not so well of us as they
might do that do not love us so well as to marry us.

Nay said Gillian if that be all, I am at a good point; for though my
maidenhead be some what burdensome to bear, yet I had rather keep it, then
bestow it on a bad husband: but though I say it, though I be but a poor wench,
I have choice of husbands enough, and such as I am assured in my conscience,
would both love me well, and keep me gallantly. Wherefore then do you not
marry quoth Margaret? in my opinion it is the most pleasingst life that may be,
when a woman shall have her husband come home and speak in this sort unto her.
How now Wife? how do thou my sweetheart? what will thou have? or what do
thou la^ke? and therewithal kindly embracing her, gives her a gentle kiss,
saying: speak my pretty mouse, will thou have a cup of Claret Wine,
White Wind, or Sack to supp^r? and then perhaps he carues unto her the leg of
a Capon, or the wing of a Chicken, and if there be one bit better then other,
she h^th the choice of it: And if she chance to long for any thing by and by
it is sent for with all possible speed, and nothing is thought too dear to do
her good At last having well refresh themselves she sets her silver whistle to
her mouth, and calls her maid to clear the board: then going to the fire, he
sets her on his knee, and wantonly stroking her cheek, amourously be chockes
her under the chin, fetching many stealing foutches at her rubie lips, and so
soon as he hears the Bell ring eight a clock, he calls her to go to bed
with him. O how sweet do these words sound in a woman's ears? But when they
are once close between a pair of sheets, O Gillian then, then: why what of
that quoth she? Nay nothing says Margaret, but they sleep soundly all night.
Truly quoth Gillian there be many wives, but few that meet with such kind
husbands: but seeing you ask me why I marry not, in troth Meg I would tell
thee, if I had time to stay: but I I fear I have stood too long prattling here
already, and therefore farewell good Meg, when I see thee again, thou shall
know more of my mind.

Nay Gillian hear you quoth she, go but a little way with me, and I will go
home with you as straight as a line, for I have nothing to buy but a score of
Quinces, and couple of Pomegranets, and that shall be done in a trice: Gillian
was contented for her good companies sake to stay a while, and as soon as
Margaret had made her market, they settled themselves to go homeward, where by
the way Gillian entered into this communication.

You did even now demand a question of me, and very desirous you were to know
why I did not marry when I was so well offered: Trust me Margaret, I take you
to be my friend, which makes me the more willing to unfold my fancy, being as
well persuaded of your secrecy as I am of your amity, and there-upon I am the
more willing to make you copartner of my counsels. Fire in straw will not be
hidden, and the flames of affection will burst for that length, though it be
long kept under. And truth it is that I have forsaken good matches, for I might
have had Master Cornelius of the Guard if I would, who as you know is wealthy,
and therwithall of very good conversation, yet there was one thing made me
refuse his kind offer: what was that quoth Margaret. I pray thee tell? Quoth
she, he loved not me so well but I loved another ten times better, and
therefore it is not good for hands to join, where hearts agree not. No Meg,
no, there is a youth in our street that nearer touches my heart and better
pleases my mind, notwithstanding he shall go namelesse, for it is an old
proverb, two may keep counsel if one be away. Nay then quoth Meg, if you dare
not trust me tell no-further, notwithstanding I have had credit in as great
matters as yours, for many a man has put his life in my hands, and found no
hurt thereby, and as many women have committed their secrets to me, as men have
ventured their bodies with me. Go to Margaret, you are disposed to jest said
Gillian, but swear by thy Maidenhead that thou will never bewray my liking,
nor prevent me in my love, and I will show thee all: nay fie do not so quoth
Margaret, show not all for shame, least more see it then my self, for so may
they blush at thy boldness, and nothing commend thy modesty: but it is happy
that I have a maidenhead left to swear by: else I perceive I should know
nothing of thee: no trust me quoth Gillian, for such a one as cannot keep her
Maidenhead, will never keep a secret, and that made Katherine of the Crane to be
such a blab: but now Meg I will proceed to the matter. What do you think by
Richard of the Rose, the wakeful cock of Westminster?

Oh h^ quoth Meg, is that the man? there is no reason I should think amiss of
him that every man commends: nevertheless, he is no body in respect of riches,
being but a young housekeeper of one years standing, a man God wot unacquainted
with the worlds guise, and to speak truth nothing comparable to Master
Cornelius. I will tell thee what quoth Gillian, that man which needs neither
to flatter with his friends, nor borrow of his neighbors, has riche^
sufficient: and he is most poor that has least wit, by which arguments I am
able to prove, that the Cock is as wealthy as he is wary, for he will sure be
beholding to no body, or to as few as he may, and it is al ways to be noted
that men of such minds do never prove beggars.

Margaret hearing Gillian so stoutly to take Richards part, perceived by her
vehement speches the great affection she bore to him, and finding that she was
sick of her own disease, Margaret sought means to remove the cause of her
grief, and thereby thrust her self into the greater sorrow: And the policy
she used most herein, was to speak altogether in Richards dispraise, seeking
thereb^ to dislodge her love, and the more firmly to plant her own, whereupon
she uttered her mind in this sort.

Well Gillian, seeing you bear so good an opinion of Richard of the Rose, I
would not for a bushel of Angels seek to dissuade you: but because you request
my opinion how I like the man, in troth I will tell thee my mind without fraud
or flattory: I confess that Richard is a gentle young man, courteous and kind,
diligent about his business, and wary in his dealings, which argues good
husb^ndry. Notwithstanding, I like not these over covetous fellows, of such
greedy minds, such penny fathers, and pinchf^^stes, that will not part from
the paring of their nails, nor the dropping of their nose, if they thought it
would yield them but the fourth part of a farthing. Tell me I pray thee what
joy should a woman have with such a churl, that would grudge at every
halfe-penny that is laid out that in a whole year would not leave a farthing
worth of mustard unwritten in his book: And such a one I fear will this Cock
prove, for me thinks he looks with a hungry nose, and h^wsoeuer you think of
him, I know not, but I verily fear though he be a Cock by name, he will
never prove a Cock of the game. Again he is but a dwarf in respect of a man,
a shrimpe, a Wren, a hop of my thumb, such a one as a body might hide in a
wrinkle of their buttocks.

Well Meg quoth she, you are privileged to speak your pleasure, but should
another thus mistearme him, I would tear her face: I tell thee true I had
rather have a winner then a waster, a sparer then a prodigal spender: for when
a man in his youth, has gotten something with pain, he may the better spend
it in his age with pleasure, and far better it is he should be thought
covetous, then careless; his stature and proportion of body pleases me well
enough, for it is no matter how great he is, but how good he is.

But Margaret seeing our talk has endured so long, that it has brought us
both home, let us at our parting be mindful of our promises, to keep secret
whatsoever has been said, for little knows the young man the depth of my
mind, and therefore would I keep it close, till I saw some sign of good will
proceeding from him, for it becomes not maidens to be woers, though willingly
they could wish to wed where they best fancy, and so farewell sweet Margaret.
Adue gentle Gillian quoth Margaret, until our next meeting, when I hope I
shall further understand of your proceedings in your love.

When Meg had thus understood her mind, and saw how she matter went, she sought
all means possible to preuenther, as hereafter shall be shown.

CHAP. 2. How Margaret requested Richard to the eating of a Posset at night:
And how her Masters buttocks was scalded therewith.
IT chanced that against Whitsontide, Margaret stood in need of a new pair of
Shoes: Therefore in a morning betimes she came to Richard of the Rose to
bespeake them aforehand, and the more to declare her kindness, and to win his
good will, she carried with her a bottle of excellent good Muskadine, which one
of the Yeomen of the Kings wine seller had bestowed upon her: and to make it
relish the better, she carried with her a dainty piece of powdered beef, and
the tender carcass of a cold Capon, and thus plesantly began to greet him. All
health to the kind cock of Westminster, that with the Lark greetes the Sun
rising with a cheerful note, and mounts above many to the love of pretty
lasses. Tell me quoth she thou bouny Lad, will thou take the length of my
foot, and make me a good pair of shoes against Sunday? that I will Margaret
quoth he, therefore let me see thy foot: there is both my foot and leg said
Meg, I am not ashamed to show either of them, for I am not legged like a Crane,
nor footed like a Fly, and therewith lift up her clothes to the knee, whereat
Richard smiling said; a little higher Meg and show all: whereupon she suddenly
replied in this sort: soft Richard not so, for I will tell thee one thing.

Every Carter may reach to the garter,
A Shoemaker he may reach to the knee,
But he that creepes higher shall ask leave of me.
Good reason quoth Richard, leave is light, which being obtained a man may be
bold without offense, but this only is my grief. I have never a Last in my
shop long enough for thy foot: then I would they were all fired quoth Meg. He
that will be counted a good workman must have fools to fit all persons and I
muse that you which strive to be counted excellent, will want necessaries: Fie
Richard fie, thou should never be unprovided especially for women.

Well Meg quoth he, be contented, consider you are a woman of no ordinary
making, but as in height thou ouerlookest all, so in the length of thy foot
thou surpassest all; therefore I must have a pair of Lasts made for the nonce,
and that shall be done out of hand: I tell thee Dicke quoth she, as high as I
am, I am not so high as Paul's nor is my foot so long as Graus-end Barge.
Notwithstanding quoth Richard, a pair of Lasts to fit thy foot will cost as
much as a hundred of fagots which will not be bought under ten groats: if they
cost a crown quoth Meg, let me have them; what man rather then I will go
without shoes I will bear the charge th^reof my self and in token that I
mean troth, take there the money, thou shall find me no Crinkler, but one that
will reward cunning to the uttermost: I love not to pinch for a penny, or stand
upon terms for two pence, if I find my shoes good I will not shrink for a
shilling; In troth quoth Richard frank customers are worthy of good ware, and
therefore Meg doubt not, for thou shall have as good a shoe as ever was drawn
upon woman's foot, God a mercy for that sweet Dicke quoth she, and seeing thou
say so, I will bestow this bottle of wine on thee to breakfast, beside that,
I have brought here a modscome that will prove as good a shooing-horne to draw
down a cup of Muskadine as may be: and therewithal she plucked out her
powdered beef and her cold Capon; Richard seeing this, with thanks to
Margaret for her meat, reached out a couple of join stools, and after that
they had laid a cloth thereon, they down did sit, at which time many merry
speeches did pass between them. And at that very time there was in the same
shop, amongst a great many other men a pleasant journey man called round
Robin, being a well trust fellow short and thick, yet very active and
pleasantly conceited: for singing he was held in high reputation among all the
Shoomakers in Westminster, and he would scant speak any thing but in rhyme.
This jolly companion seeing them bent so well to their breakfast, and nothing
at all to respect him, in the place where he sat cast out these merry speeches
unto them.

Much good do it you masters and well may you fare,
Beshroe both your hearts and if you do spare:
The wine should be naught as I judge by the smell,
And by the color too I know it full well.
Nay faith quoth Meg that is but a jest,
I Will swear quoth Robin it is none of the best.
Taste it quoth Meg, then tell me thy mind:
Yea marry quoth Robin now you are kind.
With that Margaret filling a cup brim full, gave it into his hand saying: Now
taste it Robin and take there the cup. Nay hang me quoth Robin if I drink it
not up.

By my Maidenhead quoth Margaret, I see that thou art a good fellow: and to
have thee drink it up, is the thing that I crave.

Then swear quoth Robin by the thing you have,
For this to swear I dare be bold:
You were a maid at three years old.
From three to four, five, six, and seven,
But when you grew to be eleven,
Then you began to breed desire;
By twelve your fancy was on fire:
At thirteen years desire grew quick,
And then your maidenhead fell sick:
But when you came unto fourteen,
All secret kisses was not seen:
By that time fifteen years was past,
I guess your maidenhead was lost.
And I pray God forgive me this,
If thinking so I think amiss.
Now by my honesty quoth Meg you do me mighty wrong to think so ill of me:
for though indeed I confess, I cannot excuse my self, for women are not
Angels, though they have Angels aces: for to sp^ake the truth might I have had
my own hearts desire when time was, I would rather have chosen to lie with a
man then a maid, but such merry motions were out of my mind many a dear day
ago, and now I vow that a maiden I will die.

By this wine quoth Robin I dare swear you lie,
For were I as my master by this good light,
You would leese your maiden head ere twelve a clock at night.
With high derry derry,
If it be not gone already.
Nay quoth Margaret your Master scorns me, he keeps all his gowns for Gillian
of the George: a pretty wench I confess, having a proper body but a bad leg,
she has a very good counteance but an ill color, and you talk of desire, but
her desire I doubt will bring her the green sickness, if your master like a
good Physician give her not a medicine against that malady: why Margaret quoth
Richard, has she told you so much of her mind, that you know her grief so
well? It may be she has quoth Margaret, but whether she did or no, it is
sufficient that I know so much: But I think quoth Margaret you are not so
besotted to make any account of a Tallow cake.

No faith quoth Robin, a nut-browne girl,
Is in mine eye a Diamond and a Pearl:
And she that has her cheeks cherry red,
Is ever best welcome to a young man's bed.
Certainly quoth Richard, which is the best or worst I know not yet, nor do I
mean hastily to prove; and as Gillian of the George, as she has no reason to
hate me, so she has no cause to love me: but if she do, it is more favor
then I did ever merit at her hand, and surely were it but in regard of her good
will, I am not to scorn her nor for her favor to feed her with floutes, but
for her good thoughts of me to think well of her, though not so well as to make
her my wife: Well said Master, quoth Robin.

In this sort grind you still,
So shall we have mo sackes to mill.
Trust me quoth Margaret, I speak not this so much to disgrace Gillian, as for
the regard I have to your credit: but to make an end of Gillian and this jest
altogether, let me entreat you soon at night to come to our house; and think
this, though your cheer chance to be small your welcome shall be great. I know
that this Summer (and especially against these holy days) you will work till
ten, and I promise you by eleven I will have as good a posset for you, as ever
you did taste on in your life. My master is an old man, and he commonly goes to
bed at nine, and as for my mistress, I know where she will be safe till midnight
mass be ended, so that for an hour we may be as merry as pope John: what say
you Richard quoth she, will you come? In troth Margaret quoth he, I heartily
thank you for your good will, I would willingly come but I love not to be from
home so late.

I think so quoth Robin least you should miss Kate,
But take my counsel, when you are with Meg:
Suppose you have got fine Kate by the leg.
Robin said he, thou art so full of thy rhyme, that often thou, art without
reason; thou see that Margaret has been at cost with us to day, and it is
more then good manners to charge her further, before we have made amends for
this: and beside that late walking in the evening brings young men into much
suspicion. Tush quoth Margaret, once and use it not, is not such a matter:
therefore sweet Richard you shall come, and you shall not say me nay, therefore
I charge you on pain of displeasure not to fail, and forget not to bring
round Robin with you, and so farewell.

No faith quoth Robin, it shall not need,
I am bidden already and so God speed.
Who bad thee quoth Margaret?

What are thy wits so unsteady?
You did bid me quoth Robin, have you forgot already?
Why then I pray thee good Robin said Meg, do not forget in any case, and put
thy Master in mind thereof if he should chance to change his opinion, or
ouerslip the time through greedines of work for I faith Robin if thou bring him
along with thee, I will think the better of thee while I live: why then quoth
he.

And as I am no knight,
We will come to eat the posset soon at night.
Now Margaret was no sooner gone, and Richard at his cutting board, and Robin
set on his stool, but in comes Gillian of the George, bringing in her aporne
the corner of a Venison Pastie, and a good deal of a Lamb pie, who with a
smyling countenance entering the shop, bidding Richard good morrow, asked if he
had broke his fast? yes verily quoth Richard I thank long Meg, we have been at
it this morning, and had you come a little sooner you had found her here, for
she went away but even now, and I verily think she is scant at home yet.

It Is a lusty wench quoth Robin gentle and kind,
And in truth she bears a most bountiful mind.
Gillian hearing Robin to enter into Megs commendations, began to grow jealous
of the matter: out upon her foul stammell quoth she, he that takes her to his
wife shall be sure of flesh enough, let him get bread where he can: it is such a
bold betrice, she will acquaint her self with every body. Notwithstanding
this I will tell you Richard, the less she comes in your company, the more it
will before your credit. And howsoever she deserves it, God knows, I cannot
accuse her, but I promise you she has but a hard report among many. But
letting her rest as she is, see here what I have brought you, and with that she
gave him the Venison and the rest, and drawing her purse, she would needs send
for a quart of wine, Richard sought to persuade her to the contrary, but she
would not be entreated; what man quoth she, I am able to give you a quart of
wine. That Is spoke like an Angel quoth Robin.

And this I do think,
If you be able to give it, we be able to drink.
Hereupon the wine was fetched, and so they sat them down to their meat, at
what time they fed not so heartily on the Venison pasty, but Gillians eye fed
as greedily on Richards faour: and as soon as the wine was come, she plucktout
of her pocket a good piece of sugar, and filling a glass of wine tempered well
therewith, she drank to him saying: here Richard to all that love you and me,
but especially to him whom I love best: let it come quoth Richard, I will
pledge him whosoever it be.

So will I quoth Robin without any fail,
Were it the best Hipocras, I would turn it over my nail.
Then Gillian looking round about spoke to this effect: verily Richard here is
a pretty house, and every thing hansome by Saint Anne, I see nothing wanting
but a good wise to keep all things in his due kind: whereunto Robin made this
answer.

Now speak thy conscience, and tell me good Gill,
Would not thou be that good wife, with a good will?
Who I? alas quoth she, your Master scorns me, he looks for a golden girl, or
a girl with gold, that might bring him the red ruddocks thinking in a bag, and
yet possible he were better to have one with less money, and more huswifery:
for my own part I thank God, and in a good time may I speak it, I would not
come to learn of never a woman in Westminster, how to deal in such affairs:
I think no less quoth Richard, and therefore I pray God send you a good
husband, and one well deserving so good a wife: with that Gillian fetched a
great sigh, saying; Amen I pray God, for it is a sinful thing to lead a
sinful life, except: Nay, say your mind, speak your mind quoth Richard: Why
quoth she? it is written, that we shall give an account for every idle word,
and that ill thoughts are as bad as wanton deeds: it is true quoth Rich rd,
then God help us all quoth Gillian, but if I were married, I should remove a
great many of them. Why then marry me quoth Robin, and thereby prevent the
peril of bad thoughts: hark in thy ear Robin quoth she, I would thy Master
would say as much and then he should soon know my mind.

Ha, ha, quoth Robin, I faith you drab,
And would you have him to stamp the crab?
Why what is the matter quoth Richard? nay nothing quoth Gillian, but that I
was bold to jest with your man, and I hope you will not be offended if he and I
talk a word or two. There is no reason I should quoth Richard, and therefore
confer at your pleasure, and the whilst I will be busy with the Lamb pie,
then Gillian rounding Robin in the ear, spoke in this sort unto him. I
perceive you can spy day at a little hole: you may see Robin, love is like an
unruly stream that will overflow the banks if the course be once stopped, as by
my speeches no doubt you have noted: nevertheless how forcible soever fancy
is, it is thought small modesty in a maiden to lay open her heart in those
cases, but I am of opinion that affection growing as strong in a woman as a
man, they ought to have equal priv^ledge, as well as men to speak their
minds. Robi^, I take thee to be an honest fellow, and it is the part of a man
in cases of honest love to assist poor maidens: counsel the key of certainty,
which makes me to require both thy counsel and help In truth Robin to
be^laine, I love thy Master with all my heart: and if thou would be so much
my friend to break the matter unto him and therewithal to procure his good
liking to me, I would bestow on thee as good a suit of apparel as ever thou
wast m^ster of in thy life: whereunto Robin answered, saying, Here Is my hand
Gillian, at thy request
I Will make a vow I Will do my best,
But for my apparel grant me this,
In earnest first to give me a kiss.


There it is quoth Gillian and I do protest, that upon that blessed day, when
h^ gives his happy consent to be my husband, at the delivery of thy apparel I
will make that one kiss twenty, and hereupon shaking hands, they came to the
tabl^ and set them down again. Richard marking all, said nothing, but at her
approach to the board took the glass and drunk to her, giving her thanks for
her cost and kindness: she gladly accepting the same, bending her body in stead
of cursie, took it at his hands, and with a wink drunk unto Robi^, and so
taking her leave of them both as light as a Do she ran speedily ho^^.

So soon as she was gone, Robin told his Master it was the pleasantest life in
the world to live a Batcheler, during which time he could neither want good
cheer nor good comp^ny: I mary quoth Richard, but what I get one way I spend
another way, while I pass the time in trifling about nothing: you see quoth
he, here is a forenoone spent to no purpose, and all by the m^ans of a couple
of giglets, that have greater desire to be playing with a man, then to be
mindful to follow their business: but if I live I will suddenly avoid both
their delights and their loves. I tell thee Robin, I account their favors full
of frawd, and their inticements dangerous, and therefore a man must not be won
with fair words as a fish with a bait.

Well Master quoth Robin, all is one to me, whether you love them or loath, but
yet soon at night let not the posset be for got.

Believe me quoth Richard, if I rest in the mind I am in now, I mean not to be
there at all. O then you will loose her love, quoth Robin for ever and ever
Amen: that, said his Master is the only thing that I request, for the love of
a shroe is like the shadow of a cloud that consumes as soon as it is seen,
and such love had I rather loose then find.

But yet quoth Robin, this once follow my mind
Though by her love you set but light,
Let us eat the posset soon at night:
And afterward I will so deal,
If you will not my tricks reveal:
That they shall trouble you no more,
Though by your love they set great store:
For one another they shall beguile,
Yet think themselves well pleased the while.
Verily quoth his Master, if thou will do so, I will be Megs guest for this
once, and happy shall I think my self to be so well rid of them: Hereupon
being resolved, they plyde their work hard till the evening, and when the
Sun was crept under the earth, and the Stars up in the skies, Richard having
his shop window shut in and his doors made fast, he with his man Robin, took
their direct way to the spread Eagle, where they no sooner knocked at the door,
but Margaret came down and let them in, with such a cheerful countenance, as
gave perfect testimony of their welcome. Now Richard quoth she, I will witness
you are a man of your word, and a man that has a respect of his promise: I
pray you heartily come near, for to have you come in my office, is my desire:
but tell us first quoth Robin, was your office never a fire? Y faith no quoth
she, you see the kitchen is large and the chimney wide: but how many rookes
quoth Robin, has the goodness of your kitchen tried? I know not said Meg, how
many or how few: trust me quoth Robin I think even so. Go to quoth Meg, I
smell out your knavery, and guess at your meaning, but taking it to be spoken
more for mirth, then for malice, I let them pass. Then taking Richard by the
hand, she had him sit down saying, good Richard think your self welcome, for
in froth I have never a friend in the world that can be better welcome: I thank
you good Magaret said he.

I thank her still quoth Robin, with thanks of every degree,
For you that have all the welcome, shall give all thanks for me,
Why Robin q. Meg, be not offended for thou art welcome to me, I faith quoth
he, you bid me welcome when you have nothing else to do.

Herewithall Margaret very neately laying the cloth, with all things necessary,
set a dainty minst pie on the board piping hot, with a great deal of other
good cheer, and having sent another maid of the house for a pottle of wine,
they fell to their meat merrily, whereof when they had eaten and drunk,
Margaret stepping from the board went to reach the posset, but while she had it
in her hands she suddenly heard one coming down the stairs: Gods precious
quoth she, my Mastercomes, what shift shall we make to hide the posset, if he
chance to see it, we shall have more anger then ten possets are worth with that
she quickly whipped into she yard, and set the posset down upon the seat in the
privy-house, thinking it there safest out of sight, for her Master being an old
crabbed fellow, would often steal down to see what his maids were a doing,
but God wot that was not the cause; for the old man being raised by the
loosenes of his body, came hastily down to pay tribute to Ajax, where when he
was come, he clapped his buttocks into the posset, where with being grievously
scalded, he cried out saying, alack, alack, help maids, help, or I am spoild
for ever; for some spirit or devil in the foul bottom of the privy has
thrown up boiling lead upon my buttocks and in this case like one dancing
the trench more he stamped up and down the yard, holding his hips in his hands:
Meg that better knew what the matter was then her master, ran into the house of
office with a spit in her hand, as if she had been purposed to broch the
devil, and there casting the well spiced posset into the midst of the puddle
taking the basin away, said, how now Master, what is the matter, who has hurt
you, or are you not hurt at all? Hurt quoth her master, I fell thee Meg, never
was man thus hurt, and yet I am ashamed to show my hurt: bring me a Candle
quoth Meg, I tell you Master, it is better all should be shown, then all
should be spoiled: and there with casting by his shirt, spied both his great
cheeks full of small blisters, whereupon she was feign with all possible speed
to make him a medicine with sallet oil and houseleeks, to assuage the fury of
an unseen fire. And by means of this unhappy chance, Richard with his man was
feign secretly to slip away, and to go home without tasting the posset at all:
which was to Robin no small grief, and yet they could both of them scant stand
for laughing, to think how odly this, least fell out.

I am quoth Robin, forty years old and more,
Yet did I never know posset, so tasted before:
I think his eyes in his Elbowes he had,
To thrust his arse in the posset, or else he was mad.
His master answering said, believe me Robin, I never knew she like in my life,
but by the grace of God I will never go there no more to eat a posset: and so
going to bed they slept away sorrow till morning. At what time Margaret coming
thither told them she was very sorry they were so suddenly broke from their
banquet; but Y faith Richard (quoth she) another time shall make amends for all.

CHAP. 3. How the Cock of Westminster was married to a Dutch maiden, for which
cause Long Meg, and Gillian of the George, wore willow Garlands.
RIchard Casteler living a long time a Bachelor in Westminster, after many
good proffers made unto him, refusing all he at last linked his love to a
young Dutch maiden dwelling in London, who besides that, was of proper
personage, and comely countenance, and could do diverse pretty feats to get
her own living To this pretty soul went Richard secretly a wooing, who for
half a year set as light by him, as he did by the Maidens of Westminster,
And the more he was denied, the more desirous is he was to seek her good
will, much like to an unruly patient, that most longes after the meat he is
most forbidden: and such is the fury of fond Lovers, to esteem them most
precious, that are to them most pernicious: he scornfully shunnes such as
gently seeks him, and wooes her earnestly that shakes him off frowardly: but
while he was thus busied to make himself blessed by matching with a Maiden in
London, round Robin cast in his mind how to set the Maidens wits a work in
Westminster, which he effected as occasion was offered in this sort.

Margaret and Gillian coming often by the shop, cast many a sheep eye to
spy out their beloved friend, and after they had many times mist him from his
business, they thought either that he was grown lovesick or lazy: but knowing
him a man to be mightily addicted to the getting of money, judged that it was
not idleness, that withdrew him from his business, but rather that he was gone a
wooing to one pretty wench or other, for loving hearts have ever suspicious
heads and jealousy is copartner with affection: whereupon Margaret entered
into these speeches with round Robin.

I muse much quoth Meg, where pour Master lays his knife a board now adays,
for seldom or never can I see him in his shop: trust me, I doubt, he is become
thriftles, and will prove but a bad husband in the end: tell me Robin said she,
I pray thee say where does the Cock crow now?

Not so said Robin, my Master will not that allow,
I must not show his secrets to one or other:
Therefore you shall not know it though you were my mother,
Yet thus much by thy speech I plainly do see,
Thou think not so well of him as he thinks on thee.
Margaret hearing round Robin rhyme to so good purpose, asked if he knew his
Masters mind so much? truly, quoth she, if I wist he bore any spark of love
toward me, it should neither go unregarded nor unrewarded, therefore sweet
Robin let me know whereupon thou speak; fear not my secrecy, for I will
rather loose my life then bewray his love. Hereupon Robin said, that his
Master was very well affected toward her, and that if it were not that Gillian
of the George did cast searching eyes into his actions, he would long ere this
h^ve vttred his mind: but quoth Robin, he is so haunted by that female spirit,
that he can take no rest in no place for her, and therefore the more to quiet
his mind, he has left his shop to my charg, and betaken himself to wander the
Woods so wild.

These words uttered by Robin made Margarets heart leap in her belly:
wherefore taking gently her leave of him, she thus began to meditate on the
master: Now do I well see that the tongue of a wise man is in his heart, but
the heart of a fool is in his tongue: and Richard quo h she, have thou borne
me such secret good will and would never let me know it? Iwis, Iwis, soon
would thy sorrow be assuaged if thou soughtest remedy at my hand: well though
the fire be long suppressed, at length it will burst into a flame and Richards
secret good will, at last will show it self, till when I will rest my self
contented, thinking it sufficient that I know he loves me: and seeing it is so,
I will make him sue and serve, and dance attendance after me: when he is most
courteous, I will be most ^^y, and as it were scorning his proffers, and
shunning his presence, I will make him the more earnest to entreat my favor:
when he says he loves me, I will laugh at him, and say he canfaine and flatter
well: if he affirm he be grieved through my disdain, and that the lack of my
good will has been his greatest sorrow, I will say alas good soul, how long
have you been lovesick? pluck out thy heart man and be of good cheer, there
is more maids then Malkin: though I do lightly esteem thee there are some
that perhaps will better regard both thy grief, and thy good will: and
therefore good Dicke trouble me no more.

Thus must maids dissemble least they be counted too courteous and showing
themselves over fond, become the less favored, for a woman's love being hardly
obtained, is esteemed most sweet, therefore we must give our lovers an hundred
denials for fashion sake, though at the first we could find in our hearts to
accept their proffered pleasures.

Thus in a jolly humor Margaret let home, flattering her self in her happy
fortune, in which delight we will leave her, and make some rehearsal of
Gillians joy: who coming in the like manner to Robin, asking for his Master,
was certified by him, that for her sake only he lived in such sorrow, that he
could not stay in his shop, and therefore was feign to drive away melancholy by
marching abroad. O Gillian (quoth he) had it not bin for two causes, he would
long ere this have uttered his mind unto thee, for he loves thee above measure:
Y faith, quoth Gillian, is it true (Robin) that thou do tell me? Doubt not of
that (quoth he) do you think that I will tell you a lie? I should gain
nothing by that I am sure: if then you will believe me you may, if not choose, I
mean not to entreat you there^o: Nay good Robin (quoth she) be not angry,
though I credit thy speeches, yet blame me not to ask a question, ask what
you will quoth Robin, I respect it not, and I may choose whether I will answer
you or no: Swounds, now I have opened my masters secret, you were best blab it
through all the town. Nay good Robin that is not my mind quoth Gillian, but I
beseech thee, let me know those two causes that keeps thy Master from uttering
his mind: Nay soft, there lay a straw for fear of stumbling quoth Robin, hold
your peace Gillian, it is not good to eat too much honey, nor to gorge you with
too much gladness: let it suffice that you know what you know. Nay good sweet
Robin quoth she, I pray thee make it not dainty now to tell me all, seeing you
have begun: the day may come that I may requite thy courtesy to the full: Say
you so, Gillian quoth he? now by good Crispianus soul I swear, were it not
that I am in hope you will prove kind to my Master, and be a good Mistress to
us when you are married, I would not utter one word more, no not half a word,
nor one syllable. Well Robin quoth she if ever I come to command in thy masters
house, and to carry the keys of his Cubberts gingling at my sides, thou shall
see I will not keep a niggards Table, to have bare platters brought from the
board, but you shall have meat and drink plenty, and be used as men ought to
be used in all reasonable manner. And whereas you seem to make doubt of my
kindness toward thy Master ha Robin, I would thou knew my heart.

Robin hearing this, told her this tale, that his master loved her intyrely,
and would long since have uttered his mind, but for two reasons: the first was,
that he could never find fit opportunity to do it, because of Long Meg, whose
love to him was more then he could wish, and such as he would gladly remove if
he might: for says Robin, though my Master do not care a straw for her, yet
she casts such a vigilant eye upon him, that if he do but speak, or look upon
any, she by and by poutes and lowres, and many times inveyes against the
parties with disgraceful terms, which is to my Master such a grief, that he
is feign to keep silent, what otherwise should be shown: and the second reason
is this, that because he is not so wealthy as he could wish himself, you would
disdain his suit, and make no account of his good will. Who I quoth Gillian?
now by these ten bones it was never my mind to say him nay. I tell thee Robin I
do more respect his kindness then his goods: he is a proper youth and well
conditioned, and it is far better to have a man without money, then money
without a man. Why then good Gillian quoth Robin, harken hither three days
hence, and you shall hear more, but in the mean space look you play mum
budget, and speak not a word of this matter to any creature. I warrant thee
Robin quoth she, and so away she went being as glad of this tidings as her
Master was of a good Term: Now when his Master came home, his man Robin asked
him how he sped in his suit? verily quoth he, even as Cooks do in baking of
their pies, sometimes well, sometimes ill. London Maids are wily wenches: on
Sunday my sweetheart was half won, but now I doubt she is wholly lost. Now she
is in one mind, by and by in another, and to be brief never steadfast in any
thing.

Tush Master quoth Robin, stoop not too much to a thistle, but take this
comfort, that what one will not another will: I tell you Master, Crabs yeeldes
nothing but ve^juice, a sower sauce good ^or digestion but bad to the taste,
and these nice minions are so full of curiosity, that they are clean without
courtesy: Yet well fare the gallant girls of Westminster, that will do more
for a man then he will do for himself. What is that said his Master? mary
quoth he, get him a wife ere he is aware, and give two kisses before he calls
for one. That indeed is extraordinary kindness quoth Richard, but their loves
are like brai^ed wares, which are often shown, but hardly sold.

Well Master quoth Robin, you know your two old friends Meg and Gillian: I,
what of them quoth Richard? In Troth quoth he, I have made them both so proud,
that they pr^nce through the streets like the Kings great horses: for I have
made them both believe that you love them out of all cry. And I beshroe thy
heart for that quosh Richard, for therein thou do both d^ceive them, and
discredit me: I assure thee I like not such je^ting.

Now gip quoth Robin are you grieved at my talk?
And if you be angry I pray you go walk.
Thus you do never esteem of a man,
Let him do for you the best that he can.
Richard hearing his man so hot, pacified him with many cold and gentle
speeches, wishing if he had begun any jest, that he should finish it with such
discretion, that no reproach might grow thereby unto him, and then he would be
content: whereupon Robin proceeded in this sort.

Upon a time Margaret according to her wonted manner came thither, whom Robin
persuaded that his Master was newly gone into Tuttle field, and that he left
word if she came she should do so much as to meet him there: but quoth he,
take heed in any case least Gillian of the George spy you, and so follow to
the place where my Master attends your coming, who I dare swear would not for
all the Shoes in his shop it should be so: and therefore good Margaret if you
chance to see her, go not forward in any case, but rather lead her a contrary
way, or make some queint excuse, that she may leave your company, and not
suspect your pretense. Tush quoth Margaret, let me alone for that, if she
follow me she were better no, for I faith I will lead her a dance shall make
her weary before she have done, and yet shall she go home as very a fool as
she came forth, for any goodness she gets at my hand: and therefore farewell
Robin quoth she, for I will trudge into Tuttle fields as fast as I may.

But look quoth Robin, you loose not your Maidenhead by the way.

Robin presently thereupon runs unto Gillian, saying what cheer Gillian, how
goes the world with all the pretty wenches here? it is a long while since I
have seen you.

I faith Robin quoth they, we rub out with the rest, but what is the news with
thee?

Small news quoth Robin yet somewhat I have to say,
All Maids that cannot get husbands must presently marry,
They that cannot stay,
But hear you Gillian a word by the way.
And with that (rounding her in the ear) he told her that incontinent it was
his Masters mind that she should meet him in Tuttle fields, charging her if she
met Margaret of the Crane, that she should in no case go forward, but turn
her steps some other way, for quoth he, my Master cannot abide that great
rounsefull should come in his company.

For that let me alone quoth Gillian, but trust me Robin, it could not have
come in a worse time this twelve month, for this day have we a mighty deal of
work to do, beside a great bucke that is to be washed: why then let it rest
till another time quoth Robin: nay quoth she, hap what hap will, I will go to
him, since so kindly he sent for me; and thereupon making her self quickly
ready, into Tuttle fields she got, where at last she espied Margaret with a
hand-basket in her hand, who as suddenly had got a sight of her, and therefore
made a show as if she gathered herbs in the field. I wis that craft shall not
serve your turn quoth Gillian, I will gather herbs as fast as you, though I
have as little need of them as your self.

But in the mean time Robin got him home, and heartily laughed to see what pains
these wenches took for a husband. O quoth he, what a merry world is this, when
Maids runs a madding for hu^bands, with hand-baskets in their hands? now may
I well swear what I have seen.

Two Maids run as fast as they can,
A mile in the fields to meet with a man.
Then how can men for shame say that Maidens are proud, disdainful or coy,
when we find them so gentle, that they will run to a man like a Falcon to the
Lure, but alas poor souls, as good were they to seek for a needle in a bottle
of hay, as to search for Richard of the Rose in Tuttle fields: but hereby do I
know their minds against another time, if my Master should chance to request
their company.

Thus did round Robin deride them when he found their fondnes to be such: but
to leave him to his humor, we will return to the Maids that were so busy in
picking up herbs in the fields: when Meg saw that Gillian would not away at
last she came unto her, asking what she made there? Nay what do you here quoth
she? for my own ^art I was sent for to seek Harts-ease, but I can find
nothing bu^ sorrel: Alack good soul quoth M g, and I come to gather thrift but
can light on nothing but thistles, and therefore I will get m^ ways home as
fast as I can: In doing so you shall do well quoth G^llian, but I mean to get
some Hearts ease ere I go away: Nay Gillian quoth she, I am sure I shall find
thrift as soon as you shall find Harts-ease, but I promise you I am out of
hope to find any to day, I pray you get you gone then quoth she, what would you
so feign be rid of my company quoth Meg? for that word I mean not to be gone
yet: I faith Gill I smell a rat.

Then quoth she you have as good a nose as our gray Cat: but what rat do you
smell tell me? I doubt I doubt if there be any rat in the field, you would
feign catch him in your trap if you knew how; but I faith Meg you shall be
deceived as cunning as you are. Then belike quoth. Meg you would not have the rat
taste no cheese but your own: all is one for that said Gillian, but
wheresoever he run I would have him creep into no corner of yours: Your words
are mystical quoth Meg. but if thou art a good wench, let us go home
together: not so said Gillian, as I came not with you, so I mean not to go
with you.

No quoth Meg? before God I swear I will stay as long as thou for thy life. In
troth quoth she, I will make you stay till midnight then. Yea quoth Meg? now as
sure as I live I will try that. And in this humor sometimes they sat them
down, and sometimes they stalkt round about the field, till it was dark
night, and so late, that at last the watch met with them, who contrary to
Gillians mind, took pains to bring them home both together: at what time they
gave one another such privy flouts, that the watchmen took no little delight
to hear it: But their Mistresses that had so long mist them from home though
they were very angry with their long absence. yet were glad they were come
again. And asking where they had been so long, the watchmen answered, that
the one had been to seek Harts-ease, and the other to gather thrift and
therefore that they should not blame them for staying so long to get such good
commodities: Verily quoth their Mistresses we will not, for no marvel if they
stayed out till midnight about such matters, seeing we have sought it this
seven years and could never find it: and in this sort this jest ended.

Within a while after this, Richard through his long woing, had gotten the good
will of his sweetheart, and therefore making all things ready for his
marriage, the mat^er being known through Westminster, Margaret and Gillian, had
tidings thereof with the soonest, who coming unto Richard said he was the most
false and unconstant man in the world. Have I quoth Meg, set my whole mind upon
thee to be thus served? Nay quoth Gillian, have I loved thee so deerly, and
endured such sorrow for thy sake, to be thus unkindly cast off? And I q^oth
Meg. that never thought any thing too much for thee, that loved thee better
then my life, that was at all times ready at thy call, and ready to run or go
at thy commandment to be so ^ndeservedly forsaken, grieves not my heart a
little: Nay quoth Gil^ian could you make me leave my work to wait upon th^^
in Tut^le-fields? Nay did I wait there half a day together quoth Meg, at thy
request to be thus mocked at the hand? Now I wish it from my heart, if thou
marriest any but me, that thy ^ife may make thee as errant a Cuckold as ^ack
Coomes. So you ^re very charitable quoth Richard, to wish me no worse then ^ou
mean to make your husband: but when did I req^est th^e to come into
Tuttle-fields? What have you so weak a memo^y quoth she? I pray you ask your
m^n round Robin wrether it were so or no: Well quoth Robin how then? wherefore
did you no^ speak with him at that present?

You know it comes in an hour, comes not in seven year,
Had you met him at that instant you had married him clear.
A vengeance take her quoth Meg I could not mee^e him for Gillian. And I could
not meet him for Margaret, a mor in take her ^d Gillian. Richard perceiving by
their speech there was a pad lying in the straw, made this reply. It is a
strange thing to see how you will blame me of discourtesie, when the whole
fault lies in your selves: had you come at the appointed time, it is likely I
had married one of you, seeing my mind was as well addicted to the one as to
the other: Why may it not be yet quoth they, if it please you? not so said
Richard, you speak too late, men gather no grapes in January, my wine is
already provided, and my wife prepared: therefore I thank you both of your
good wills, though I be constrained of force to forsake you the maidens being
herewith struck into their dumps, with water in their eyes, and grief in their
hearts went home, to whom Robin carried two Willow garlands, saying.

You pretty souls that forsaken be,
Take here the branches of the Willow tree,
And sing loves farewell jointly with me.
Meg being merrily inclined, shook off sorrow in this sort, and gently taking
the willow Garland, said: wherefore is grief good? can it recall folly past?
no: can it help a matter remediless? no: can it restore losses, or draw us
out of danger? no: what then? can grief make unkind men courteous? no: can it
bring long life? no: for it does rather hasten our death, what then can it do:
can it call our friends out of their graves? no: can it restore virginity if we
chance to lose our maidenhead? no: Then wherefore should I grieve? except I
went to kill my self: Nay seeing it is so, hang sorrow, I will never care for
them that care not for me, and therefore a Fig for the Cock of Westminster:
by this good day I am glad I have escaped him, for I do now consider I should
have never took rest after four a clock in the morning, and alas a young
married wife would be loath to rise before eight or nine: beside that I should
never have gone to bed before ten or eleven, or twelve a clock at night by
that means, what a deal of time should I have lost about other women: have
him quoth you? now God bless me, I swear by Venus, the fair goddess of
sweet love, in t^^ mind I am in, I would not have him, if he had so much as
would lie in Westminster Hall. And therefore Robin this Willow garland is to me
right heartily welcome and I will go with thee to Gillian presently, and thou
shall see us wear them rather in triu^ph, then in timorous fear. Well said in
good sadness, quoth Robin thou art the gallantest girl that ever I knew. But
when she came to Gillian, Robin staid for her at the staire foot: they found
her sick in her bed, fetching many sore sighs, to whom Margaret spoke in this
manner. Why how now Gillian, what sick a bed? now fle for shame, pluck up a
good heart woman, let no man triumph so much over thee, to say thou gave the
Crow a pudding, because love would let thee live no longer: he content quoth
she, and take courage to thee, death is a sour crabbed fellow.

Ah no quoth Gillian, death is sweet to them that live in sorrow, and to none
should he be better welcome then to me, who desires nothing more then death to
end my miseries: What now quoth Margaret, whose Mare is dead? art thou a young
wenc^, fair and comely, and do thou despair of life? and all for love, and
all for love. O fond fool worthy to wear a coat with four elbowes, this
were enough if there were no more men in the world but one, but if there were
two, why should thou languish, much less knowing there is so many to he had.
O quoth Gillian, what is all the men in the world to me now I have lost Richard
whose love was my life. I pray thee rise quoth Meg, and let us go drink a
quart of Sack to wash sorrow from our hearts. O quoth she, I cannot rise if
you would give me a hundred pound, nor will I rise for any man's pleasure: what
quoth Meg, if your father sent for you, would you not go to him? No quoth she:
would you not go to your mother? no: but what if your brethren requested you
to rise? Y faith I would not quoth she: say that some of the Kings Gentlemen
entreated your company? never prate, I would not go to the best Lord in the
Landqd. Gillian, nor to no man else in the world: No quoth Meg, I am suit you
would. Quoth she if I do, say I am an errant queen, and count me the verleit
drab that ever trod on two shoes. Nay quoth Meg, seeing you say so, I have
done, I was about to tell you of a matt, but I see it is to small purpose, and
therefore I Will keep my breath to cool my pottage.

A matter said Gillian? what matter is it sweet Meg tell me? N^, no quoth she,
it is in vain, I would wish you to cover your self close, and keep your
self warm, least you catch an ague, and so good night Gillian. Nay but Meg
quoth she, good Meg if ever thou did love me, let me know what this matter is
that you speak of, for I shall not be in quiet till I know it: tush it is but a
trifle, a trifle quoth Meg, not worth the talk: your sweet heart Richard, has
sent his man Robin for you, and as he tells me he has a token to deliver you.
What quoth Gill, is that true? Where is Robin? why comes he not up, truly quoth
Meg, he counts it more then manners to press into a Maids chamber* beside he
would be loath to give any cause of suspicion to any of your fellows, to
think Ill of him or you, for now a days the world is grown to such a pass,
that if a Maid do but look merrily upon a young man, they will say straight,
that either she shall be his wife, or that she is his harlot: but if they see a
man come into a woman's chamber, they will not stick to swear that they have
been naught together; for which cause Robin entreated me to come unto you, and
to certify you that he stayed at the three-Tunnes for your coming: but
seeing you are a bed I am sorry I have troubled you so much, and therefore
farewell good Gillian.

O stay a little good Meg quoth she, and I will go along with you and with
that on she slipped her petticoate, and made such have in dressing her self,
that she would not stay the plucking on of her stockings nor the drawing on of
her shoes: why how now Gillian quoth Meg, have you forgot your self? remember
you are Ill and sick a bed: Tush quoth she I am well enough now: but if you
go forth to night you are an arrant drab, and a very queen quoth Meg: Tush
it is no matter for that, said Gillian, grief has two tongues, to say, and to
unsay, and therefore I respect not what you prate, and therewithal she ran
down the stayres after Margaret, who got Robin to go before to the three
Tons, where when Gillian came, she asked him how his Master did, and what his
errand was to her.

Soft: First let us drink quoth Robin, and then let us talk,
That we cannot pay for, shall be set up in chalk.
You speak merrily, quoth Margaret, whatsoever you mean, but I would I could
see the wine come once, that I may drink a hearty draught; for sorrow they say
is dry, and I find it to be true.

Then drink hard quoth Robin, and bid sorrow a due. Thus when they had whipped
off two or three quarts of wine, Gillian began to grow as pleasant as the best,
and would needs know of Robin, what it was he had to say to her; nothing quoth
he, but to do my Masters commendation, and to deliver you his token. This
token, quoth Gillian? What, a Willow garland? is the matter so plain? is this
the best reward he can give me for all my good will; had he no body to flout
but me? Yes by my faith, quoth Meg, it was his mind that I should bear you
company, therefore, look what he sent to you, he did the like to me, and that
thou may the better believe me, see where it is.

O intolerable injury, quoth Gillian, did I take pains to rise and come out
of my warm bed for this? O how unfortunate have I been above all other in the
world? Well, seeing I cannot recall what is past, I will take this as a just
penance for my too much folly; and if Margaret will agree, we will wear these
disdainful branches on his marriage day to his great disgrace, though to our
continual sorrow: content quoth Meg, all is one to me, look what thou will
allow, I will not dislike, and so paying the shot, away they went.

At length, when the marriage day was come, and that the Bride; in the midst
of her friends was set down to dinner, Margaret and Gillian attyred in red
Stammell petticoats, with white linen sleeves, and fine Holland Aprons, having
their Willow garlands on their heads, entered into the Hall singing this song:
WHen fancy first framed our liking^ in love,
sing all of green Willow:
And faithful affection such motion did move,
for Willow, Willow, Willow.
Where pleasure was plenty we chanced to be,
sing all of green Willow:
There were we enthralled of our liberty,
and forced to carry the Willow garland.
This young man we liked and loved full dear,
sing all of green Willow:
And in our hearts-closset we kept him full near,
sing Willow, Willow, Willow.
He was our hearts-pleasure and all our delight,
sing all of green Willow:
We judged him the sweetest of all men in sight,
Who gives us unkindly the Willow garland.
No cost we accounted too much for his s^ke,
sing all of green Willow:
Fine bands and handkerchers for him we did make,
sing Willow, Willow, Willow.
And yet for our good will, our travel and pain,
sing all of green Willow:
We have gotten nothing but scorn and disdain;
as plainly is proved by this Willow garland.
Then pardon our boldness, thou gentle fair Bride,
sing all of green Willow:
We speak by experience of that we have tried,
sing willow, willow, willow.
Our over much courtesy bred all our woe,
sing all of green willow:
But never hereafter we mean so to do,
For this only brought us the Willow garland.


Their song being thus ended, the Bride said she was heartily sorry for their
hard fortune in love, greatly blaming the Bridegroom for his unkindnes; Nay, do
not so, quoth Meg, for you shall find him kind enough soon at night: but seeing
he has disappointed me in this sort, it shall go hard, but I will make shift
to lose my maidenhead as soon as you shall lose yours, and you shall make
good haste, but I will be before you. O God, quoth she, have I been so chary to
keep my honesty, and so dainty of my maidenhead, that I could spare it no man
for the love I bore so hard-hearted Richard, and has he served me thus? Well
Gillian quoth she, let us go, never will I be so tide in affection to one man
again while I live; what a deal of time have I lost and spent to no purpose
since I came to London? and how many kind offers have I forsaken, and
disdainfully refused of many brave Gentlemen, that would have bin glad of my
good will? I think I was accursed to come into his company: Well, I say little,
but hence forward, hang me if I refuse reason when I am reasonably entreated;
trust me, I would not for a good thing, that my friends in the country should
know, that one of my ripe age, bone and bigness has all this while lived in
London idly, like an unprofitable member of the commonwealth; but if I live,
they shall hear that I will be better employed, and so adue good Gillian. Thus
Margaret in a melancholy humor went her ways, and in short time after she
forsook Westminster, and attended on the Kings army to Bullio, and while the
siege lasted, became a landresse to the Camp, and never after did she set store
by her self, but became common to the call of every man, till such time as all
youthful delights was banished by old age, and in the end she left her life in
Islington, being very penitent for all her former offenses. Gillian in the end
was well married, and became a very good housekeeper, living in honest name
and same til her dying day.

CHAP. IV. How round Robin and his fellows sung before the King.
THe Kings Majesty having royally won the strong town of Bullen, victoriously
he returned and came into England, and according to his accustomed manner,
lying at his Palace of Whitehall, diverse of the Nobility passing up and down
Westminster, did many times hear the Shoomakers iournymen singing; whose sweet
voices and pleasant songs was so pleasing in the ears of the hearers, that it
caused them to stay about the ^oore to hearken thereunto: Robin above the rest,
declared such cunning in his song, that he ever obtained the chiefest praise;
and no marvel, for his skill in pricksong was more then ordinary, for which
cause the Singing-men of the Abbey did often call him into the Quire. Now you
shall understand, that by their often singing in the Shop, the iourneymen of
that house were noted above all the men in Westminster, and the report of their
singing went far and near, in so much that at the last, the Kings Majesty had
knowledge thereof, who hearing them so greatly commended, caused them to be
sent for to the Court. Whereupon round Robin and his four fellows made
themselves ready, and their Master being of a good mind, against the day that
they should go before our King, he suited them all at his own proper cost, in
doublets and hose of crimson Ta^^ety, with black Velvet caps on their heads,
and white feathers; on their legs they had fine yellow stockings, pumps and
pantofles on their feet: by their sides each of them wore a fair sword; and in
this sort being brought before his Majesty, upon their knees they craved pardon
for presuming to come into his royal presence: The King seeing them to be such
proper men, and attyred in such Gentleman-like manner, bad them stand up: Why
my Lords, quoth he, be these the merry minded Shoomakers you spoke of? they are
most dread Sovereign, said they; certainly, said our King, you are welcome
every one, but who among you is round Robin?

My Liege quoth Robin, that man am I,
Which in your Graces service will live and die:
And these be my fellows every one,
Ready to wait your royal Grace upon.
How now Robin (said our King) What, can thou rhyme?

A little my Liege, quoth he, as I see place and time. His Grace laughing
heartily at this pleasant companion, told him that he heard say he could sing
well.

Trust me, quoth Robin, at your Graces request,
You shall well perceive we will do our best.
Hereupon the King sat him down, where many great Lords and Ladies of high
estate attended on his Highness. And being in the Christmas time, after the
master of merry disports had performed all his appointed pastimes, Robin, with
his fellows had liberty to declare their cunning before our King, but the
Majesty of his Princely presence did so amate them, that they were quite dashed
out of countenance, which his Grace perceiving, gave them many gracious words
of encouragement, whereupon they began in this sort, singing a song of the
winning of Bullen.

The Song of the winning of Bullen sung before the King by round Robin and his
fellows.
IN the month of October
Our King he would to Dover:
By leave of Father and the Son:
A great army of men,
Well appointed there was then,
before our noble King to come;
The valiant Lord Admiral,
He was captain General,
Of all the royal Navy sent by Sea:
The fight was worthy to behold,
To see the ships with shining gold,
And Flags and Streamers sailing all the way.
At Bullen then arriving,
With wisdom well contriving:
The armed men were set in battle ray;
And Bullen was besieged round,
Our men with Drum and Trumpets sound,
Before it marched courageous that day.
Then mark how all things chanced,
Before them was advanced,
The royal Standard in the bloody field;
The Frenchmen standing on the walls,
To them our English Heralds calls,
Wishing in time their City for to yield.
Our King has sent to prove you,
Because that he does love you,
He profferd mercy if you will embrace:
If you deny his kind request,
And in your obstinacy rest,
Behold you bring your selves in woeful case.
Quoth they we do deny you,
And flatly we defy you,
Fair Bullen is a famous Maiden town;
For all the deeds that has been done,
By conquest never was she won,
She is a Lady of most high renown.
When they so unadvised,
His proffer had despised,
Our Ordinance began to shoot amain;
Continuing eight hours and more,
For why our King most deeply swore,
Her Maiden-^ ^d that he would obtain.
When thus his Grace had spoken,
He sent her many a token,
Fiery balls, and burning brazen rings:
Fair broad arrows sharp and swift,
Which came among them with a drift,
Well garnished with the gray goose wings.
This Maiden town that lately,
Did show her self so stately,
In seeking favor, many tears she shed:
Upon her knees then fell she down,
Saying, O King of high renown,
Save now my life, and take my maidenhead.
Lo, thus her self she ventred,
And straight her streets we entered,
And to the market place we marched free:
Never a Frenchman durst withstand,
To hold a wepon in his hand,
For all the gold that ever he did see.
Their song being ended, our King east them a purse with fifty fair angels
for a reward, commending both their skill and good voices, and after much
pleasant communication, they had liberty to depart; and when they came home,
they told to their Master, all their marriment before the King, and what reward
his Grace had bestowed on them; and pouring the gold down upon the Table, the
same being truly told by their Master, every man's share came just to five pound
a piece. Which, when round Robin saw, he swore he would bestow a supper upon
his Master and Mistress that night, though it cost him two angels; which his
fellows hearing, and seeing Robins liberal heart to be such, said, they would
join with him, and laying their money together, would have all the Shoomakers
in Westminster to bear them company.

Content, quoth Robin, with all my heart;
And twenty shillings I will spend for my part:
And as I am true man, and sung before our King,
As much shall each of you spend before our parting.
So shall we have music and gallant cheer,
Secke and Sugar, Claret wine, strong Ale and Bear.
This being concluded, they met all together at the sign of the Bell, where
they were so merry as might be, at what time Robin began to blame his Master,
that had not in three years space gotten his Mistress with child. Hold thy
peace quoth he, all this while I have but iested, but when I fall once in
earnest, thou shall see her belly will rise like a Tun of new Ale: thou know
I am the Cock of Westminster.

I, quoth Robin, you had that name,
More for your rising, than your goodness in Venus game.
The company at this laughed heartily, but seven years after this jest was
remembered; for in all that space had not his wife any child: Wherefore Robin
would often say, that either his Master was no perfect man, or else his
Mistress was in her infancy nourished with the milk of a Mule, which bred such
barrenness in her; for till her dying day she never had child. And after they
had lived together, many years, at last, Richard Casteler dyed, and at his
death he did diverse good and godly deeds: among many other things he gave to
the City of Westminster, a worthy gift to the cherishing of the poor
inhabitants for ever. He also gave toward the relief of the poor fatherless
children of Christ's Hosp^tall in London, to the value of forty pound land by
the year; and in the whole course of his life he was a very bountiful man to
all the decayed housekeepers of that place, leaving behind him a worthy example
for other men to follow.

CHAP. V. The pleasant Story of Peachey the famous Shoemaker of Fleet Street in
London.
MVch about this time, there lived in London a rich Shoemaker, and a gallant
housekeeper; who being a brave man of person, bore a mind agreeable thereunto,
and was therefore of most men called lusty Peachey: he kept all the year
forty tall men on work beside Prentises, and every one he clothed in tawny
coats, which he gave as his livery to them, all with black caps and yellow
feathers; and every Sunday and holiday, when this gentleman-like Citizen went
to Church in his black gown guarded with Velvet, it was his order to have all
his men in their liveries to wait upon him, with every man his sword and
buckler, ready at any time, if need required.

It came to pass upon S. Georges day, that this jolly Shoemaker (being servant
to the Duke of Suffolk) went to the Court with all his men after him, to give
attendance upon his noble Master, which some young Gentlemen more wanton than
wise, beholding and envying his gallant mind, devised how they might pick some
quarrel, thereby to have occasion to try his manhood: quoth they, did you ever
know a shoemaker, a sowter, a cobling companion, brave it so with the best, as
this fellow does? see with what a train of hardy squires he goes, what
squaring lads they be they look as if they would fight with Gargantua, and make
a fray with the great Turk, and yet I durst lay my life they dare scantly kill
a Hedgehog: mark him I pray, I warrant you there is never a Knight in this
country that goes with so great a train. Swounes, quoth one, it were a good
sport to draw, and try what they can do. My Masters be advised quoth another,
and attempt nothing rashly: I tell you this fellow is a hardy Coin, he is
current mettley-faith, and whenever you try him, i will warrant you shall find
he will not fly a foot. With that comes by lusty Tom Stuteley, and
Strangwidge, two gallant Sea Captains, who were attired all in Crimson Velvet,
in Mariners wide stops that reached to the foot, in watched silk thrumb hats
and white feathers, having Pages attending with their weapons, who seeing a
cluster of Gentlemen in hard communication at the Court gate, asked what was the
matter? Marry Captain quoth they, we are all beholding to yonder lusty
Gallant, that has so many waiting on him with Tawny Coats: Sblood, what is he,
quoth Stu^eley? he seems to be a gallant man said Stra^gwidge, whatsoever he
be: and were it not I see him in the Duke of Suffolks liverie, I should have
taken him by his train to be some Lord at the least: Nay quoth Stuteley, he is
some Knight of good living. Gentlemen quoth they, how your judgments deceive
you: it is certain he is as good a Shooemaker as any is in Fleetstreet. What?
is he but a Shooemaker quoth Stuteley? O how that word makes me scratch my
elbo: Can a Shooemaker come to the Court with more Servingmen at his heels
^hen Captain S^uteley? see how it makes my blood rise: O the passion of my
heart, how the villain squares it out? see, see, what a company of handsome
fellows follow him, it is twenty pound to a penny but they were better borne
then their Master: not so quoth the Gentlem^n, but I think their birth and
bringing up was much alike, for they be all Shooemakers and his stool
companions: now by this iron and steell quoth Stuteley, were it not that he is
attendant on the good Duke, I would have him by the ears presently. I will lay
an hundred pound, and stake it dow^^ straight, that Captain Strangwidge and I
will beat him and all his forty men. The Gentlemen being ready to set this
match forward, greatly commended the Captains high courage: notwithstanding
they would not hazard their money on such a desperate match. Well Gentlemen
quoth they, you say he dwells in Fleet street, and that he is a Shoemaker, never
trust us more if we become not his customers, but the crossest customers shall
he find us that ever came to his shop for shoo^s. Nay quoth Stuteley, we will
bespeak Boots of him, and thus we will raise our quarrel: when they are made,
if they come not ^n easy, and sit on our legs neatly, we will make them pluck
them off again, and presently we will beat them in pieces about his pate,
which if he seem to take in dudgin, and with his men follow us into the street
for revenge, if we make them not leap before us like Monkies, and force them
run away like sheepbiters, let us lose our credits and Captainships for ever.

But what if you should chance to kill any of them said the Gentlemen: swounes
quoth they what care we, we are bound to sea on a gallant voyage, wherein the
King has no small venture, and without us it cannot go forward, so that it is
not the death of twenty men can stay us at home, and therefore when they should
be seeking of us in Fleetstreet, we would be seeking out the Coast of Florida.

You say well Captains quoth they, and no doubt if you do any such thing we
shall hear of it: for the report thereof will be famous through London. Within
a while after S^uteley and Strangwidge, having thus determined, came into
Fleetstreet, and making inquiry for Peachies shop, they were by every man
directed to the house: where, when they were come, they called for the good man
of the house: the foreman of the shop demanded what their will was? why knave
quoth they, what carest thou, let us speak with thy Master. Gentlemen quoth he,
if you lack any such commodity as we make, you shall find ^e sufficient to
serv^ you, for to that end has my Master set me in the shop. Why Iack-sauce
quoth Stuteley, you whoreson peasant, know you to whom you speak?

The fellow being very chfleeick, and somewhat displeased at these disdainful
speeches, made him this round answer: ask you to whom I speak quoth he? I
goodman flat cap said Strangw^dge, we ask to whom you speak? sir quoth he, I
speak to a Velvet soole, a silken slave that knows not how to govern his
tongue: with that Stuteley swore like a mad man and presently drew out a dudgin
haft dagger that he had by his side, and began to lay at the fellow, which one
of his fellows seeing, flung a Last at his head and feld him to the ground: S
rangwidge thereupon drew his sword, but by that time the fellow had took down
his sword and buckler, which hung in the shop hard at hand, and therewith so
well defended himself, that S^rangwidge could do him no hurt: and by that time
Stuteley recovering crald up again.

But Peachie hearing a great hurly burly in the shop, came forth and demanded
the cause of the quarrel? his servants told him that those Gentlemen had given
the Iourneymen very ill words: How can they choose but speak ill quoth Peachie,
for it may be they never learned to speak well: whereupon he went unto them
saying; how now Captains, how grew this quarrel twixt you and my men?

Thy men quoth Stuteley? thy Roags, and thy self is no better that brings them
up: sir quoth Peachie, your wong me too much, and get you quickly from my
door, or by this sun that shines, i will set you packing, and therefore never
think to outface me with great looks, for I tell thee Stu^^ley and Strangwidge
both, did you look as big as the Devil I fear you not. And you forgot your
manners too much to give me such base terms, for I would you well knew I keep
forty good fellows in my house, that in respect of their manhood may seem to
be your equals. O intolerable Comparison quoth Stuteley, flesh and blood
cannot bear such abuse. I Will tell thee what (quoth he) if we two beat not thee
and thy forty men, I durst be hanged up at thy door. Fie, fie, it is too much
odds quoth Peachy, dare you two take ten? nay dare you fight with five? Take
that and try quoth Strangwidge, and therewithal gave him a sound blow on the
ear: nay this is too much quoth Peachy, put up this and put up all: Stuteley
and Strangwidge (quoth he) if you be men, meet me in Lincolnes-Inne-fields
presently: Content quoth they, and thereupon went their ways. P^achie fetching
straight his sword and buckler, called his man John Abridges to go with him,
charging all the rest not to stir out of doors, and so into the fields they
went, where immediately they met with these lusty Caveliers. The Captains
seeing him come only with one man, asked if there well all the help he had? I
will request no more quoth Peachie, to swinge you both out of the fields.

Brag is a good Dog quoth Stuteley, but tell us, have thou made thy Will, and
set thy house in order? What if I have not quoth Pe^chie? Why then quoth
Strangwidge, for thy wife and childrens sake go home again and do it, or else
get more aid about thee to preserve thy life.

Why how now Master quoth John Abridges, come you into the field to fight with
women? why these be two disguised butter whores i will lay my life, that have more
skill in scoulding then in fighting: but hear you quoth he, if you be men,
leave your foul words, and draw your fair weapons, and because I will spare
your middle piece, if I strike a stroke below the girdle, call me Cut: sblood
shall we be thus out-braved quoth Stuteley? and therewith drawing their
weapons, they fell to it lustily, where P^achie and his man laid so bravely
about them, that they beat both the Captains out of breath, in which fray,
Stuteley was wounded in the head, and Strangwidge in the sword arm, but at
last they were parted by many Gentlemen that came in good time to prevent
further mischief.

The Captains got them straight to the Surgion, and Peachie with his man went
directly home: and while they were a dressing, Peachie hearing how they were
hurt, sent to S^uteley a kerchiefe by one of his men, and by another a scarffe
to St^a^gwidge, by the third he sent a bottle of Aqua vitae, wishing them to be
of good cheer, for he intended to be better acquainted with them ere long.
The Captains finding these favors to be but flouts, were more grieved
thereat, then at their hurt, and therefore with many disdainful speeches, they
refused his proffered courtesy.

And you shall understand that afterward Peachies men by two and two at a time,
did often meet and fight with them, and so narrowly would they watch for them,
that they could be in no place in peace, insomuch that the Captains found
f^ghting work enough, and a great deal more then willingly they would, whereby
they received many scarres and wounds in the body, so that lightly they were
never out of Surgions hands. Upon a time it chanced that being upon the point
of their voyage, and shortly to go to sea: Stuteley and Strangwidge having
been at the Court, and newly come from my Lord-Admirals ledging, before they
came to Charing-crosse, they were encountered by a couple of Peachies men, who
presently drew upon them, and laid so freely about, that the two Captains were
glad at length to house themselves for their refuge: Now a plague on them quoth
Stu^eley, shall we never be in quiet for these quoystrels? never were we so
ferrited before, swownes we can no sooner look into the streets, but these
shoomakers have us by the ears: a pox on it that ever we meddled with the
rascals: sblood they be as unluckie to be met, as a Hare on a journey, or a
sergeant on a Sunday morning, for ever one mischief or other follows it,
Captain S^rangwidge (quoth he) there is no other shift but to seek their
friendship, otherwise we are in danger every hour to be maimed, therefore to
keep our lims sound against we go to Sea, it is best to find means to quiet
this grudge.

Then said Strangwidge, it were good to do so, if a man knew how: but you may
be sure they will not easily be entreated, seeing we have so mightily abused
them in speech. Thus they cast in their minds diverse times by what means they
might he reconciled: and albeit they sent diverse their friends unto Master
Peachie, and by his m^n, yet they would not yield, nor give consent to be
appeased, nor to put up such wrong as they had received without further
revenge: so that the Captains were at length constrained to make suit to the
Duke of Suffolk to take up the matter: who most honorably performed their
request: and so the grudge ended betwixt them, to the great credit of Master
Peachie, and all his men.

CHAP. VI. How Harrie Nevell, and Tom Drum came to serve Peachey of
Fleet Street.
THe fame of Peachey, running through England by means of the frayes which he
and his men had with Stuteley and Strangwidge, it made many of that occupation
desirous to come and dwell with him, for beside that he was a tall man of his
hands, he was also an excellent good workman, and therewithal a bountiful
housekeeper. Among many other that was desirous of his service, there was one
called Tom Drum, that had a great mind to be his man, a very odd fellow and
one that was sore infected with ye sin of cogging: this boasting companion
sitting on a time sadly at work in his Masters shop at Petworth, and seeing the
Sun shine very fair, made no more to do but suddenly shrouded up S. Hughes
bones, and taking down his pikestaffe, clapped his pack at his back, and called
for his Master, who coming into the shop, and seeing his man prepared to be
prauncing abroad, demanded what the matter was that he followed not his
business.

O Master, quoth. he, see you not how sweetly the Sun shines, and how trimly the
trees are decked with green leaves? Well and how then quoth his Master? Marry
sir quoth he, having a great mind to hear the small birds sing, and seeing the
weather fitter to walk then to work, I called you forth to take my leave and to
bid you farewell, I hope sir I have no wager in your hand.

Why no quoth his Master, thou will be sure to take an order for that, and
therefore seeing thou will be gone, adue. God be with you good master quoth he,
and farewell all good fellows of the gentle craft, and therewith he departed.

The iourneymen of the Town hearing that Tom Drum went away, according to
their ancient custom they gathered themselves together to drink with him, and
to bring him out of town: and to this intent, up they go with him to the sign
of the Crown, where they parted not till they had drunk a Stand of Ale dry.

Which being done, they bring him a mile on his way, carrying a gallon of beer
with them: and lastly there once again they drink to his good health, and to
Chrispianus soul: and to all the good fellows of Kerbfoord: which being done,
they all shook him by the hand, and with hallowing and whooping, so long as
they can see him, they bid him a hundred times farewell. So soon as he was
gone out of their whooping, the sweat reeking in his hand, and the Ale in his
head, he trips so light in the highway, that he feels not the ground he goes
on: and therefore being in a merry vain, and desirous to drive out the weary
way, as he walks he begins thus pleasantly to sing.

The Primrose in the green Forest,
the Violets they be gay:
The double Dazies and the rest,
that trimly decks the way,
Does move the spirits with brave delights,
whose beauties Darlings be:
With hey trickfie, trim go trickfie,
under the green wood tree.
The singing of this song awaked a young Gentleman whom sorrow had laid asleep
on a green bank by the high ways side. Who having unadvisedly displeased his
Parents, in a choleric humor departed from them, betaking himself to
travel, thereby to try how fortune would favor him abroad: but having now
spent all his money, he was in a woeful taking, not knowing what to do, for
never had he been brought up to any trade, whereby he might be able to get a
penny at his need. Wherefore being in this distress, he was fully purposed to
go to London, and there to learn some occupation, whereby he might keep
himself a true man, and not to be driven to seek succor of his friends.

Now therefore when he heard Tom Drum so trimly tune it on the way, raising
himself from the sad ground, he awaited his coming, at whose sudden sight Tom
Drum started like one that had spied an Adder: and seeing him provided with a
good sword and buckler, supposed he had been one that waited for a fat purse:
for which cause he began thus to enter parley with him. Good fellow quoth he,,
God give you good morrow, but ill speed. Why say thou so quoth Harrie?
because said Tom by the good light of the day thou may see to pass beside
me, and that by thy speeding ill, I may speed the better: what have thou such
store of money (quoth H^rrie) that thou art loath to lose it?

No by my faith quoth he, I have so little that I cannot spare it: for I assure
thee all my store is but one poor penny, and that thou may see under my
little finger. Why then quoth H^rrie if I were minded to assault thee, it
should be more to rob thee of thy manhood then thy money: but tell me what pack
is that thou bear at thy back? Marry they be Saint Hughes bones: Saint
Hughes bones quoth H^rrie, what is that? a kind of commodity said Tom which I
cannot miss, for they be my working tools.

I pray thee said H^rrie what occupation art thou? sir quoth he, I am a
Goldsmith that makes rings for women's heels: What meanest thou by that said
Harrie? I am quoth Tom of the gentle Craft, vulgarly called a Shoemaker.

The happier thou art quoth Harrie that thou have a trade to live by, for by
that means thou carriest credit with thee in every place: but tell me good
friend, what is thy name, and how far do thou travel this way? sir quoth he,
I travel to the next town, but my journey is to London, and as for my name I
am not ashamed to show it: For my name is a Nowne substantive that may be felt,
heard, or understood, and to speak the truth I am called: who there, I trust
sir you ask for no hurt, you are no Bayliffe nor Bailiffs man, are ye? no not I
said Harrie: Gods blessing on you quoth he, I love you the better: for I was
never so fraid lest my Hostess of the George in Petworth had sent you for to
arrest me, for I think I owe her some ten Groats of the score, set up in very
fair Chalk, as one of the principals of her house is able to testify: but I
pray God send her meat, for I verily think I shall never send her money. But
yet quoth Harrie, I know not how to call your name: verily said he, I am called
Thomas Drum, or Tom D^um choose you whether: Well Thomas quoth H^rrie, I
perceive thou art a man and a good fellow, therefore I will not be strange to
open my need unto thee. I have been unto my parents untoward, and more then
that not knowing when I was well, wilfully I came from them: and now that I
have spent all my money and worn my self out of credit, I have utterly undone
my self, for I am not worth a groat, nor no man will trust me for two pence.
Why then quoth Tom thou art not worth so much as goodman Luters lame nagge, for
my Lord of Northumberlands hunts-man would have given half a Crown for him to
have fed his dogs: notwithstanding be of good cheer, if thou will go to
London with me, I will hear thy charges, and I faith at the next town we will
be merry and have go^d cheer.

Alas quoth Harry, how can that be seeing you have but one penny? I tell thee
what quoth Tom, were thou a Shoemaker as I am, thou might go with a single
penny under thy finger, and travel all England over and at every good town
have both meat and drink and lodging of the best, and yet have thy penny in
store, as when we come to Gilford you shall soon see. Believe me quoth Harry,
that is more then any tradesmen in England else can do.

Tush quoth Tom, shoomakers will not see one another lack, for it is our use
if we know of a good fellow that comes to town, wanting either meat or
money, and that he make himself known, he shall need to take no further
care, for he shall be sure that the jornymen of that place will not only give
him kind welcome, but also provide him all things necessary of free cost: And
if he be disposed to work among them, he shall have a Master provided by their
means, without any suit made by himself at all. Verily quoth H^rry, thou do
ravish me with the good report of the passing kind and courteous trade, and I
would spend part of my gentle blood, to be of the gentle Craft: and for thy
courtesy if thou would teach it me, I would anoint thee a gentleman for
ever: Will thou say and hold quoth Tom? Or else hang me said Harry: then said he
anoint me a Gentlemen, and I will shape thee for a Shoemaker straight.
Thereupon Harry took his knife, and cutting his finger, all to ^meared
Tom-Drums ^a^e with his blood, that he made him look like the Image of
Bred-streete corner, or rather like the Sarazines-head without Newgate.

Tom Drum, seeing him do so, said he might by that means as well anoint him a
Ioyner, as a Gentleman: Nay said Harry, I do not deceive thee I warrant thee,
seeing this blood did spring from a Gentleman, if thou will not believe me,
ask all the men in the town- Malin, and they will say the like.

Well I Will take thy word quoth Tom. And therefore look that presently thou
strip thy self, for I will cast thee in a Shoomakers mould by and by: Harry
perceiving his meaning did what he willed, and so he was suited in Toms attire^
and Tom in his; so that Harry bore the pike staff and Saint Hughes bones: and
Tom swaggered with his sword and buckler; and coming in this sort to Gilford
they were both taken for shoomakers, and very heartily welcomed by the jorneymen
of that plac^, especially Harry, because they never saw him before: And at
their meeting they asked him and if he could sing or sound the Trumpet, or play
on the Flute, or reco^ up his tools in rhyme, or manfully handle his pike
staff, or fight with a sword and buckler? believe me quo^h Harry, I can
neither sound the Trumpet, nor play on the Flute: and beshroe his nose that
made me a shoemaker, for he never taught me to recon up my tools in rhyme nor
in prose.

Tom hearing him say so, told them that he made him of an old serving m^n a new
shoemaker: When was that (quoth they) marry says he, when I was anointed a
Gentleman, I think this face can show, that I have gentle blood about me: Why
then quoth they thou art but a painted Gentleman, but we must account this
young man wise, that to avoid misery betakes himself to follow mystery, for
cunning continues when fortune fleeteth, b^t it will be hard for such as never
were brought up to the bodily labor to frame their fine fingers to any course
faculty.

Not a whit quoth Harry, for labor by custom becomes easy. Thou say true
said Tom, I durst lay a good wager I have made more shoes in one day then all
the jorney-men here have done in a month: with that one of the jorney-men began
to chase, saying, how many a pair of shoes have thou made in a day? I made
quoth Tom, when the days were at longest, eight score pair of shoo^s in one
day.

O monstrous detestable lie, (quoth they) and thereupon one ran into the
chimney and cried, come again Clement, come again. Whom calst thou quoth Tom,
I call Clement carry lie, that runs Post betwixt the Turk, and the Devil;
that he may take his full loading ere he go, for the best jorneyman that ever
I knew, never made above ten pair in a day in his life: and I will lay my
whole years wages with thee, that thou can not make twenty pair in a day,
as they ought to be: I should be ashamed but to do as much as another, and I
never saw him yet that could out work me, yet dare not I take upon me to make
a doozen pair of shoes in a day: but it is an old saying, they brag most that
can do least. Why thou Puppie quoth Tom, thou house Dove, thou Cricket, that
never crept further then the chimney corner, tell me what Countries have thou
traveled?

Far enough quoth he, to prove as good a workman as thou art: I deny that
quoth Tom, for I have been where I have seen men headed like Dogs, and women
of the same shape, where if thou had offered them a kiss, they would have
been ready to have snapt off thy nose: othersome I have seen, that one of
their legs has been as good as a penthouse to cover their whole bodies, and
yet I have made them shoes to serve their feet, which I am sure thou could
never do: nay if thou will go with me, if thou see me not make an hundred
pair of shoes from sun rising, to sun setting; count me worse then a stinking
Mackrell. Now verily thy talk stinkes too much (quoth they) and if thou can
do so, never make further jorney, but try the matter here.

I tell you quoth Tom, I cannot try it in England, nor yet in France, Spain,
or Italy, nor in any part of the l^w countries, nor in high Germany,
Swea^hland, or Polonia. We think no less (quoth they) nor in any part of the
world beside. Yes quoth Tom, I can do it as we travel to Russia, for there
every day is five and fifty of our days in length: nay I Will tell you further
quoth Tom, in some parts of the world where I have been, it is day for half a
year together, and the other half year is continually night: and go no
further quoth he but into the further part of Scotland, and you shall find one
day there (in the month of June) to be four and twenty hours long: and
therefore my Masters w^ile you live, take heed how you contrary a traue^ler,
for the rein you shall but be ^oray your own ignorance, and make your selves
mocking stocks to men of knowledge. And travelers (quoth they) uncontrouled,
have liberty to utter what lies they list.

Masters tell me quoth Tom, were you not borne in Arcadia? No (quoth they) but
why ask you? because said Tom, that country does more abound in plenty of
Asses, where they swarm as thick as Bees, in Cicily we have cause to give you
thanks (quoth they) for calling us Asses so kindly: not so said Tom, I did but
ask a question; but seeing you are so cunning, tell me what Country breeds
the best Hides, and Leather, and from whence have we the best Cork? our best
Cork comes from Portugal quoth. they, but the best Leather grows in our own
land: I deny it quoth Tom, there is I confess good Cork in Portugal, but the
best grows in Sparta; but for Hides and Lether there is none comparable to that
in Siciona: where I have made a man a pair of shoes that has lasted him a
twelve month to toil in every day. O it is a gallant Country, for I tell you
what, there is never a shoemaker in England that kept so many men as I did at
that time.

Then said the rest, thou speak thou know not what: Master Peachy of
Fleetstreete keeps continually forty men a work, and the green-King of
Saint-Martins has at this time little less then threescore journey-men.

Then is pretty well quoth Tom, but what say you to him that for half a year
together, kept waiting on him above a hundred men that never did him stitch of
work? this was a shoemaker of some account: but who was that quoth they? Marry
quoth Tom, simple though I stand here, it was my self, and yet I never made
brags of it. O what a shameless liar art thou quoth they, we never knew thee
able to keep one man. Now by this bread said Tom, you do me mighty wrong, and
were it not that ye be all of this gentle Craft, which science I do so greatly
love and reverence, this Iron and steel should make it good upon your flesh
for I tell you once again, I have been Master of an hundred men, and put
sixteen score to the hundred: I pray you tell us (quoth they) what men were
they? what men were they quoth Tom, they were vermin: in troth quoth they we
thought as much, and we commend you for telling truth, and we suppose if you
were well searched we should find twenty vermin waiting on you still. But tell
us Tom, art thou minded to be Master Peachies man? I am quoth he except he will
make me his fellow. By the Mass (quoth they) then were thou best to have thy
wards ready, and thy hilts sure, for he receives no servant before he tries his
manhood; so much the better quoth Tom, and for that purpose I post up to
London. Thus having had at Gilford very good cheer, the jorney-men of the
town paid for all, and beside gave them money in their purses to spend by the
way, and so toward London they went with all speed.

CHAP. 7. How the wild Knight Sir John Rainsford for burying a Massing Priest
alive, was feign to leave his Lady, and forsake his house, till he had obtained
his pardon of the King: who meeting with Henry Nevell, and Tom Drum, went with
him to serve Peachy of Fleet Street, where for a while he became a Shoemaker.
YOu shall understand that at this time there lived a gallant Knight called Sir
John Ransford, who was for his courage and valiant heart inferour to few men
living he kept a bountiful house, and a brave company of tall men to wait
upon him. To all the poor round about where he dwelt, he was very charitable,
releeving them daily both with money, and meat; he was a famous Courtier, and
in great favor with the King, and the only thing that disgraced his virtues,
was this, that he was something wild in behavior, and wilful in his attempts,
often repenting sadly what he committed rashly.

It came to pass upon a time that as this courageous Knight was riding home to
his own house, there was at a certain village, a corpse carried to be buried,
the deceased father of five small children and the late husband of a woeful
Widdw, whose poverty was such, that she had no money to pay for his burial:
which thing Sir John the parish Priest doubting, would not by any means do
his duty to the dead man, except he might first have his money.

The Widow and her children, with many tears entreated him to do his office,
but he would not be persuaded, saying?

What you beggars, would you have me open my sacred lips to invocate and call
upon the King of Heaven, to receive thy husbands soul, and to persuade our
great Grandmother the earth to wrap his cold body in her warm bosom, for
nothing? I tell thee no: first shall his soul fry in the flames of purgatory,
till it be as thin as a pancake, and his body remain above ground till the
Crows have picked his carrion carcass to the bare bones: and therefore leave
your puling, and prate no more, least you make me as chollericke as a quail;
and there withal, as he was going away, the poor Widow falling on her knees,
plucked him by the gown, saying,: good Sir John, for sweet Saint Charity, say
one Aue Maria, or one Pater noster, and let my poor husbands corpse be covered,
though it be but with one handful of holy ground.

Nay Dame quoth he, do you remember at the last shrift how you served me? you
would not, no forsooth you would not: and now good Mistress I will not: no
penny, no Pater noster, that is ^at: I pray you now see if your honesty be
sufficient to keep your husband from the Crows. I thought a time would come
at length to cry quittance for your coins: and with that word away he went.

The poor Widow seeing his obstinacy, with a heavy heart turned into the high
ways side, which was hard adjoining to the Churchyard, and there she and her
children woefully begged of the passers by, some money to bury their fathers
dead body.

At last Sir John, came riding with all his men, of whom the poor Widow in
this manner began to Ask his alms: good Sir quoth she, if ever woman's misery
moved your heart to pity, give me one penny for Gods sake, toward the burying
of my poor husband: in like manner the children cried, saying, one penny for
Christ his sake, good Master one penny. Sir John, hearing their lamentable cry,
and seeing the dead corpse lying there, as ^t why the Priest did not bury it?

O Sir Knight quoth she, I have no money to pay for the burial: and therefore
the Priest will not do it. No quoth Sir John? by Gods blessed mother I swear,
I Will make him bury the dead or I Will bury him alive: whereupon he willed one of
his men presently to go to the Parsonage for the Priest, and to bring him
thither immediately, his men did so, and forth came Sir John, in his gown and
corner cap, roughly demanding who would speak with him?

That would I, quoth Sir John Rainesford: therefore tell me, how comes it to
pass, that according to order you put not this dead corpse into the pit? Sir,
quoth he because according to order they will not pay me for my pains.

Above all men quoth Sir John, Priests should respect the poor, and
charitably regard the state of the needy, because they themselves do teach
charity to the people, and persuade men unto works of mercy: and therefore Sir
John, seeing good deeds are meritorious, do you win heaven by this good work
let the dead possess their one: I so they shall, said the Priest so I may not
loose my due: for I tell you further, I count it little better then folly, to
fill my soul with pleasure by empt^ing my purse with coin: will thou not bury
him said the Knight: No not without money said the Priest; I pray thee said the
Knight let me entreat thee for this time to do it, because the woman is poor.
Then let me entreat ^ou to pay me quoth the Priest, because you are rich. Sir
John Rainsford seeing him stan^ so peremptory on his points, swore a deep oath,
that it were best for him to bury him, or quoth he. I Will bury thee; bury me said
the Pri^st a fig for you, and bury blind bayard when he is dead, or the dogs
that your Hanks will not eat. The Knight at these words being marvelous angry
commanded his men to take him up and cast him into the grave: his men made no
more to do, but presently upon their Masters word took up the Priest, and
wrapping him round in his gown, put him quick into the grave, and the rest
cast earth upon him as fast ^s they could, at what time the Priest cried out,
hold, hold, for Gods sake, let me rise and I will bury him Nay soft quoth the
Knight, thou art not like to rise, no rising here before the general
resurrection, that thou shall rise to judgment, and therefore quick as he was
they buried him, which being done, he commanded the Sexton to make another
grave for the dead man, and sending for another Priest, he; sat him if he would
bury the dead without money, who making twenty legs, shivering and shaking
with fear, answered I forsooth with all my heart, for they are knaves and no
Christians that will not do it.

Now when the dead man was buried, the Knight gave the poor Widow an angel
in gold to comfort her and her children, and so rode his way.

When he came home, he fold his Lady what he had done; who greatly grieving
thereat, wished he had pa^^ for twenty burials, rather then he had made that one
burial. It Is done now said the Knight, and undone it cannot be again, though
with grief I should kill my self.

Now you shall understand, that the Deane of the Dioces, having word hereof,
rode up presently to London and made a great complaint thereof unto the King,
which when his grace had considered he was very wroth thereat and therefore
sent down pursevants to apprehend the Knight, but he before had forsaken his
house, and wandered in disguise up and down the Country. His Lady in the mean
space made great suite for his pardon, being therein assisted by diverse great
Counselors, and Noble Lords, who much lamented the Knights case:
notwithstanding they could hardly forbear laughing many times when they
thought upon this mad pranke.

But as Sir John disguisedly wandered, he chanced twixt Gilford and London to
light in the company with Harry Nevell and Tom Drum: But Harry vewing him well
in the face, discried by his countenance what he was, and maruelling much to
see him in such distress, made himself not known, but sounded him in this
sort.

Sir quoth he, whither do you wander this way, or to what place travel you?
Gentle youth quoth he, fitly do thou ask me whither I wander, seeing indeed
we do all but wander in this vale of misery: do thou demand whither I
travel? nay rather ask wherefore I travel, or wherewith I travel? and then
could I soon answer thee: sbones quoth Tom, I durst lay a haporth of Ale, that
the Peasant is in labor with love.

Nay quoth Sir John, had thou said I traveled with grief, and that I was in
labor with sorrow, then had thou said right, for I may say to thee, I have
had a sore labor continually this month in pain, and yet is not the time of
my deliverance come, wherein I should be freed from this untoward child of
care: thou did think I was in love, O would to God it were so, for while I
was in love, my days ran forth in pleasant hours, but I am cast off like a
lump of earth from the gardiners spade: I love, but I am not beloved, but
rather hated and despised.

Tush quoth Tom, bridle these foolish passions, for I Will tell thee what, hunger
asswageth love, and so does time, but if thou be not able to do any of these,
then to take an halter, which if thou do use as it ought, if ever thou
complain more, of sorrow or care, never trust my word for a cupple of black
puddings.

Belike, said Sir John, thou have been some hangman that thou art so cunning in
the nature of an halter: but howsoever thou accountest it good, yet it is an
Ill word four times a year at Newgate, and as small comfort is it to me to
hear it rehearst at this time.

Indeed said Harry, these are unsauory terms to be spoken to a sorrowful
man: neither have any of us great cause to be merry at this meeting,
considering the hard cases we are in, that are both masterlesse, and
moneylesse, which if God do not soon send us, will cause our sudden misery.

With that the Knight turning his head, plucked his hat to his eyes to hide the
tears that trickled down his face, saying, O my masters, want of money cannot
make a man miserable, if he have health and liberty, to work for his liding,
but indeed the frowns of a good Master, the displeasure of a good Master, the
hate of a good master, may easily make a servant miserable, as by mine own
experience I have seen, and to my grief but lately felt.

What man, be blithe said Tom, and never grieve so much for the Ill will of a
Master. God keep me from being of thy mind, for if I should have grieved at
the Ill will of every Master that I have served, I verily think I should have
killed a proper man long ere this; for I am sure I have had as many Masters, as
there are Market towns in England, and yet perhaps quoth Harry, none so good a
Master as his was.

Never did man speak truer word said the Knight for he was to me good kind and
liberal, but howsoever he has banished me his house, yet shall my heart serve
him while I live: now does it come in my mind, how happy they are that live in
his favor: how blessed they be that enjoy his presence; O were my head once
again shadowed under his fair roof, it would expel all unquiet thoughts,
which like milstones presses down my hearts comfort.

What, would you go dwell with him again quoth Tom? fie what a base mind do
you bear; were it to me, by this flesh and blood, I would rather run as far as
Jerusalem to seek a Master. Tom, Tom (said the Knight) I know this, wealth
makes men lofty, but want makes men lowly, and commonly gentle. Masters have
proud servants, but had I been as wise, as I was wilful, I might have led a
happy life, but if tears might satisfy for mine offense, I would quickly
recover his favor.

Hereupon the woeful Knight would have parted their company, but Harry secretly
conferring with him had knowledge how his grief grew, and making themselves
known the one to the other, agreed to go to London together, and there to try
what fortune would befall them.

The Knight took great comfort by this conference, and having store of gold
about him, made them great cheer at Kingstone, and in the end was content to
take their counsel: and coming into Fleet-streete, Tom Drum brought them to
Peachies house, where such means was made: that at last upon the trial of
their manhood, they were all entertained; and so well Peachy liked of Sir John,
that he vowed he should not be his man, but his fellow.

Within short time after the Frenchmen had landed in the I Will of Wight, about
two thousand men of war, who burned and spoiled the Country very sore for
which cause the King had made ready an army of men to go thither. Peachy at
his own proper cost, set forth thirty of his own servants, well armed at all
essays, and himself as Captain over them mustred before the King: who liked
so well of them, that he chose out seven of that company for his own Guard;
at what time Sir John, in disguised manner showed there such good service, that
thereby he won his Majesty's high favor, and was by him most graciously
pardoned. Peachy was hereupon made the Kings Shoemaker, who lived long after in
great favor and estimation, both with his Majesty, and all the honorable
Lords of the Court.

CHAP. 8. Of Tom Drums vants, and his rare intertainment at Mistress Farmers
house, the fair Widow of Fleet Street.
THere lived in Fleet-streete at this time a fair Widow, who was famous for
her beauty, as she was esteemed for her wealth, she was beloved of many
Gentlemen, and sued unto by diverse Citizens, but so deep was the memory of her
late husband engraven in her heart, that she utterly refused marriage leading a
sober and solemn life.

Harry Nevell having his heart fired with the bright beams of this blazing
Comet, sought all means possible to quench the heat thereof with the floudes
of her favorable courtesy: and lacking means to bring himself acquainted
with so curious a piece, be wrayed by his outward sighs, his inward sorrows:
which upon a time, Tom Drum perceiving, demanded the cause of his late
conceived grief, saying, How now Hall, what wind blows so bleake on your
cheeks now? tell me mad wag, has Cupid and you had a combat lately? why
look thou so sad? has the blind slave given thee a bloody nose, or a broken
head? Oh, no Tom quoth he, that little tyrant aims at no other part but the
heart, therefore it is my heart, and not my head that bleeds. With whom Hall,
with whom art thou in love, tell me man? it may be I may pleasure thee more in
that matter then my Lord Major: therefore I faith Harry say who is it? never be
afraid man to unbuckle your Budget of close counsel to me, for if I be wray
your secrets call me dogs-nose, and spit in my face like a young kitling.

I tell thee Harry, I am holden in greater account among women then you are
aware, and they will more willingly show their secrets to me then to their
ghostly father: But art thou so in favor with fine wenches quoth Harry?

I faith Sir I, quoth Tom, and I fro I have not lived thus long, but I know how
to make a woman love me, by a cunning trick that I have: I durst lay my life,
I will make a dozen maids run after me twenty miles for one nights lodging,
striving, who should first bestow her maidenhead on me.

That trick surpasses of all that ever I heard quoth Harry.

Nay quoth Tom, I Will tell thee once what a merry pranke I played, God forgive me
for it: upon a time on a Saturday in the morning, I went into East cheap of
purpose to spy what pretty wenches came to Market where I saw a great many as
fresh as flowers in May, tripping up and down the streets with hand baskets in
their hands, in red stammell petticoates, clean neckerchers and fine holland
aprons as white as a Lilly: I did no more but carry the right leg of a Turtle
under my left arm, and immediately the wenches were so inamoured with my fight
that they forsook the butchers shops, and enticed me into a Tavern, where
they spent all the money they should have laid out at Market, only to make me
merry: and never had I so much to do, as to be rid of their company where they
were ready to fall together by the ears, for the kisses they would have
bestowed upon me.

But it may be quoth Harry, your art would fail me now, to help your friend at
a dead lift: not so said Tom, and therefore if there be any in this street that
thou have a mind unto, thou shall carry but the head of a dead crow about thee,
and it shall be of force to bring her to thy bed were it fine Mistres Farmer
her self. But art thou acquainted with her quoth Harry, or do thou think
thou could prefer a friend to her speech? I quoth Tom, why I tell thee I am
more familiar with her then with Doll our kithen-drudge: why man she will do
any thing at my request, nay, I can command her in some sort, for I tell thee
she will not scant be seen in the street, though some would give her twenty
pound for every step, and I did but slightly request her to walk into the
fields with me, and straight she went, and I never come into the house, but I
have such entertainment as no man has the like: for as soon as ever she sees
me set footing on her checkquerd pavement, presently with a smiling look, she
meets me half way saying, what my friend Tom-Drum? honest Thomas, by my
Christian soul, heartily welcome: then straight a chair and a cushion is fetched
for me, and the best cheer in the house is set on the table, and then sitting
down by my side in her silken gown, she shakes me by the hand and bids me
welcome, and so laying meat on my trencher with a silver forke she wishes me
frolic, at what time all the secrets of her heart she imparts unto me,
craving my opinion in the premises. I assure thee said Harry, those are high
favors, well be wraying the great friendship that she bears thee, and I much
marvel that thou being a young man, wilt not seek a wife that is so wealthy,
and so make thy self famous, by marrying Mistress Farmer, for it is likely she
could well away to make him her husband, to whom she opens her hearts secrets.

It Is true quoth Tom, and I know that if I spoke but half a word she would
never deny me: nay she would spend ten of her twelve silver Apostles, on
condition I would vouchsafe to be her husband. But wot you what Harry, it is
well known though Lillies be fair in show, they be foul in smell, and women
as they are beautiful so are they deceitful: beside, Mistress Farmer is too
old for me.

Too old quoth Harry? why man she is not so old as charing-Crosse for her gate
is no^ crooked nor her face withered: but were she an hundr^d year old, having
so strong a body and so fai^e a face she were not in my opinion much to be
mislikt; yet in my conscience I think, since first her fair eyes beheld the
bright sun, she never tasted the fruits of twenty flourishing Summers: nor
scant felt the nipping frostes of nineteen cold winters, and therefore her age
need be no hurt to her marria^e. I Will tell thee my mind quoth Tom, after a wom^n
is past sixteen years old, I will not give fifteen blew buttons for her: but
tell me Harry, do thou like her? if thou do say so, and I will warrant her
thy own.

Gentle Tom Drum quoth Harry, the true figure of unfeigned friendship, and the
assured Map of manhood, do but prefer me to her acquaintance, and I will
request no greater courtesy. Here is my hand quoth Tom, it shall be done, and
on Thursday at night next we will go thither, and then thou shall see whether
Tom Drum can command any thing in Mistress Farmers house or no. The day being
thus set down, Harry had prepared himself a fair suit of apparel against
the time, and beside had bought certain gifts to bestow on the fair Widow:
Tom Drum in like sort had dressed himself in the best manner he might, still
bearing Harry in hand that none in the world should be better welcome then he
to the Widow: which God wot was nothing so, for she never respected him but
only for the shoes he brou^ht her: but you shall see how it fell out. The day
being come, Tom taking Harry by the hand, and coming to the Widows door,
took hold on the Bell and rung thereat so lustily, as if he had been bound
seven years Prentise to a Sexton: whereupon one of the Prentises came
straight to the door, saying, who is there? Sir, quoth Tom Drum, it is I, open
the door; the fellow seeing it to be Tom Drum, with a frown asked him what he
would have? who answered, be would speak with his Mistress. My Mistress is busy
quoth the fellow, cannot I do your errand? No marry can you not quoth Tom, I
must speak with her my self: then stay a little quoth the boy, and I will
tell, and with that in he went, leaving Tom still at the door, where they sat
till their feet waxt cold before the boy returned. By the Mass quoth Harry,
whatsoever your credit with the Mistress is I know not, but the courtesy is
small that is shown you by her man: Tush quoth Tom, what will you have of a
rude unmannerly boy? if any of the Maids had come to the door, we had been
long ere this brought to their Mistress presence: therefore once again I will
use the help of the Bell-rope.

At his second ringing, out comes one of the Maids, saying with a shrill voice:
who the Devil is at the door, that keeps such a ringing? why you queen
quoth he, it is I, what Tom-Drum quoth she, what would you have? I would speak
with your mistress quoth he: trust me said the maid, you cannot speak with
her now, she is at supper with two or three that are suitors Master Doctor
Burket is one, and Master Alderman larvice the other: tut quoth Tom tell me not
of suitors but tell her that I am here, then good enough: well I will quoth
she, and with that, claps to the door again, and keeps them still without.
This gear works but ill-favouredly, yet said Harry and you are little
beholding either to the men, or to the maids, for ought that I see* that will
not show you so much favor to stay within doors: it is no matter, Harry quoth
he, but if their Mistress should know this she would swinge their co^ts
l^stely for it: and with that, one of the bays opening the door, told Tom
that his mistress would have him send up his errand, sblood quoth he, is she so
st^tely that she will not come down? I have seen the day when she would have
bin glad to have spoken with me: I quoth the fellow, it may be so, when you
have brought her a new pair of shoes, that has pincht her at the toes. Come
Harry said Tom, I will take the pains for this once to go up to her, by my
faith but you shall not said the fellow, and therefore keep you back for you
come not in here: Tom Drum seeing himself thus disgraced before his fellow
Harry (being very angry) asked if this were the best entertainment that they
could afford their Mistresses Friends? And therewithal began to struggle with
them: which their mistress hearing, started from the table, and suddenly came
to see what the matter was, who being certified of Tom Drums sauciness, began
thus sharply to check him, why fellow quoth she art thou mad, that thus
uncivilly thou behavest thy self? what have thou to say to me, that thou art
thus importunate? no hurt quo^h he, but that this gentleman and I would have
bestowed a galland of wine to have had three or four hours talk with you.

I tell thee said she, I am not now at leisure, and therefore good honesty
trouble me no more: neither is it my wont to be won with wine at any time; gods
Lord quoth he are you grown so coy? if you and I were alone I know I should
find you more mild: what must no man but Doctor Burket cast your water? is
his Physic in most request? well I mean to be better entertained ere I go,
for there is never a Felmming of them all shall out face me, by the morrow
Mass I swear. Mistress Farmar seeing him so furious, answered he should have
present entertainment according to his desert; whereupon she made no more to
do, but quietly went to her servants, and willed them to thrust him out by the
head and shoulders: which presently they performed. But Harry was by her v^ry
modestly answered, that if he had occasion of any speech with her, the next day
h^ should come and be patiently heard and gently answered: with which words
after she had drunk to him in a gobblet of Claret wine, he departed, and going
home he told Tom Drum he was highly beholding to him for his courtesy in
preferring his suit to Mistress Farmer: surely quoth he, you are in very high
favor with the fair woman, and so it seemed by your great entertainment: I
pray thee Tom tell me how tasted the meat which she set on thy trencher with
her silver forke: and what secret was that she told in thy ear? trust me thou
art precious in her eyes, for she was as glad to see thee, as one had given her
a rush, for when after many hot words she heard thee draw thy breath so short,
she for very pity tumbled thee out into the street to take more apre: well
quoth Tom, floute on, but I am well enough served, I Will lay my life had I not
brought thee with me, never a man should have had more welcome then I: and now
I consider with my self that it did anger her to the heart when she saw I was
purposed to make another copartner of her presence: but it shall teach me wit
while I live, for I remember an old saying, love and Lordship brooks no
fellowship; but when this matter was made known to the rest of the jorneymen,
Tom-Drums entertainment was spoke of in every place, insomuch that it is to
this day a proverb amongst us, that where it is supposed a man shall not be
welcomed, they will say he is like to have Tom Drums entertainment. And to
avoid the flouts that were daily given him, poor Tom Drum forsook
Fleet Street, and at last went into Scotland, being pressed for a Drummer at
Muskelbrough field, where the noble Duke of Sommerset and the Earl of Warwick
were sent with a noble army where, Englishmen and Scots meeting, there was
sought a cruel battle, the victory whereof fell to the Englishmen at what time
there was slain of the Scots to the number of 14. Thousand, and fifteen
hundred taken prisoners, where we will leave Tom Drum till his return, making
mention how Harry Nevell behaved himself in the mean space in London.

CHAP 9. How Harry Nevell, wooed Mistress Farmer and deceived Doctor Burket: and
how they were both beguiled by a Prentice that dwelt in the house, who in the
end married her.
Mistress Farmer fiering the hearts of many with her beauty, was wond^ously
wooed by Doctor Burket, who would give unto her diverse rich gifts, the which
though they were fair and costly, yet Mistress Farmer would hardly accept them,
but even what he in a manner by perforce constrained her to take, least by his
cunning he should insert therein some matter more then ordinary, that might
moove any motion of love, contrary to her natural inclination: upon a time
Harry Nevell coming thither, and finding the Doctor very diligent to breed the
Widows content, whereby he greatly hindered his proceedings, cast in his mind
how he might disburden the house of the Doctor and get opportunity to prefer
his own suit. At last lighting on a device fit for the purpose, in this sort
he dealt with the Doctor; there was an Egyptian woman that at Black-wall was in
travel with child, and had such hard labor, that she was much lamented among
all the wives that dwelt thereabout. Harry Nevell coming that way, and hearing
thereof, thought it a fit matter to employ Doctor Burket about, while in the
mean space he might the better be, wray his affection to the Widow.

Whereupon he sent one to him attyred like a serving man, booted and spurd, who
coming to the Widows house all in a sweat; laid load on the door demanding
for Master Doctor: what would you with him quoth one of the Maids? marry quoth
he, my Lady Sunborne has sent for him in all post have, and therefore I pray
you let me speak with him. I will presently do your errand said the maid,
whereupon running up she told him that my Lady Sunborne has sent a messenger
in very great have to speak with him. Doctor Burket hearing that, and being
well acquainted with the Lady Swinborne, took leave of the Widow and went to
the messenger, saying how now good fellow, what would my good Lady have with
me? Sir said the messenger, she would desire you if ev^r you did tender the
life of a Lady, to make no delay, but presently to put your self a horseback,
and come to her, for she is wondrous sick: I am sorry for that said the Doctor*
and surely I will make all speed possible to come to her: whereupon the Doctor
took horse and immediately went with the seruingman. H^rry hearing of his
departure, came to the Widow with a smiling countenance and thus merrily began
to woo her.

Now Mistress Farmer, happy it is that a yongman once in a month may find a
moment of time to talk with you: truth it is that your good graces have greatly
bound me in affection to you, so that only above all the women in the world I
have settled my delight in your love, and if it shall please you to requite my
good will with the like kindness, I shall account my birth day blessed, and
remain your faithful friend for ever. Gentle man quoth she, for your good
will, I thank you, but I would have you understand, that the less you love me,
the better I shall like you, for your delights and mine are not alike, I have
settled my fancy on a single ^^e, being a Widow unmeete to marry, and unapt to
love; once indeed I had learned that lesson, but my schole master being
untimely dead that taught me, I grew forgetful of all those principles and
then I swore never to follow that study more: wherefore if you will become a
faithful friend to me, let me be assured thereof by this, that from hencefor^h
you will not any more trouble me with this matter, and thereby you shall bind
me to think the better of you while I know you: and do not think I speak this
of any affection proceeding from my self to any other, or for the desire of any
benefit proferred by any other to me.

Fair Mistress quoth Harry, I know it is the custom of women to make their
denials unto their lovers, and strictly to stand on nice points, because they
will not be accounted easily won, or soon entreated: alack dear Dame consider
nature did not adorn your face with such incomp^rable beauty, and framed every
other part so full of excellency, to wound men with woe, but to work their
content.

Wherefore now in the April of your years, and the sweet summer of your
days, banish not the pleasures incident to bright beauty, but honor London
streets with the fair fruit of your womb and make me blessed by being father
to the issue of your delicate body; and though your beauty as the spring does
yet yearly grow, yet in the black winter of old age it will not be so, and we
see by daily experience, that flowers not gathered in time rot and consume
themselves: wherefore in my opinion you should do the world intolerable wrong
to live like a fruitless figtree.

Nay then Sir quoth she, I perceive you will grow troublesome, and show your
self no such man as you profess your self: and seeing among many I request
but one thing at your hands, and you refuse to do it for my sake, I may say
your frindship is more in words then in works: wherefore I perceive I must be
constrained to call my Maid for a cup of voyding beer ere you will depart.

Nay Mistress quoth he, I will save you that labor, seeing your love commands
me, and I pray God grant you a more favorable mind at our next m^eting, and
with these words he departed.

Now you shall understand, that this gallant Widow had in her house a very
proper youth which was one of her aprentices who had a long time borne his
Mistress great good will: whereupon he became so diligent and careful about all
things committed to his charge that thereby he won much commendations among all
the neighbors, and was for the same highly esteemed of his Mistress: who after
he had long concealed his grief at last unburdened himself of so^e sorrow, by
making a friend privy to his passions, who comforted him in this sort ^tush m^^
quoth he what though she be thy Mistress, and thou her prentise, be not ashamed
to show thy affection to her: she is a woman wise and modest, and one that
however she answers thy demand, will not think worse of thee for thy good will:
therefore try her, thou know not how fortune may favor thy suit, and the
worst is she can but say she nay: O quoth he, if I were out of my years. I
could have some heart to woo her, but having yet three quarters of a year to
serve, it may be some hindrance to my freedom if she should prove fr^ward.

Tush stand not on those terms, said his friend Francis, she will never
requite ^indnes with such discurtesse, and therefore William prove not a fool
by being too fearful.

O my dear friend Francis, quoth he, how can I suppose I should speed well,
seeing she disdains Doctor Burket, and refuses Master Alderman, and will show
no countenance to gallant Master Nevell; what a bad reason is this quoth
Francis, some cannot abide to eat of a Pig: some to taste of an Eele,
othersome are sick if they see but a Crab, and diverse cannot away with cheese:
yet none of them all but do live by their virtuals, every man has his fancy,
and every woman will follow her own mind, and therefore though she find not an
Alderman or a Doctor for her diet yet she may think William her man a fit
morsel for her own tooth. I wis quoth William, thy reasons are goo^, and I
have advantage above all other suitors to follow my suit, being in the house
daily with her, and every evening when they are away beside she has appointed
me this after ^oone to come to her Closet, that I may show her my reckoning and
accounts and in what sort her state stands: wherefore seeing I have such
occasion, I will no longer trifle out the time: but so soon as that business
is ended, put my self to the hazard of my happy fortune: wherefore good
Francis farewell till I see thee again, and how I speed, at our next meeting
thou shall know. The time at last being come that Mistress Farmer had appointed
^o have her books cast over getting into her closet she whistled for her Maid,
and bad her call up William, and quoth she let him bring his books of account
with him: the maid did as her Mistress commanded, and up comes William with his
books under his arms: and after he had very reverently don his duty to his
Mistress, she had him sit down saying, now William let me see these reckonings
justly cast up, for it is long since I have cast an eye into mine estate.
Mistress quoth he, doubt not but your estate is good, and your accounts justly
kept for I have had as great regard thereto as the goods had been my own.
Therein quoth she I am the more beholding to thee, neither shall thy true
service go unrewarded if I live; or if I dye thou shall not be altogether
forgotten.

These kind speeches greatly comforted Williams heart, whereupon he fell to his
reckonings roundly, till his mind running too much on his Mistress beauty,
sometimes he would miss and count threescore, and foure-score, nine-score:
Nay there you fail quoth his Mistress, and over-fell forty, for three and four
is but seven, it is true indeed Mistress (said he) and three times seven is just
five and twenty: I tell thee quoth she, it is buton^ and twenty, what fellow
begin you to do^e in your young years?

O my dear Mistress said he blame me not if I do so, seeing your sweet
presence has made far wiser then my self to do^e: O my good Mistress pardon
my presumption, for being thus bold to unburden my hearts grief unto you, my
hearty love to your sweet self is so great, that except you vouchsafe
favorably to censure, and kindly to judge thereof, that the sorrows of my
mind will wound my very soul, and make my life lo^thsome unto me.

Wherefore my good Mistress, despise not your poor servant, but yield unto him
such succor, as may prolong his days with many blessed hours.

His Mistress obscuring her beauty with lowering brows, (like foggy vapors that
blot the sky) made him this answer: How now Sir, has my too much mildness
made you thus saw^y? can you set your love at no lower a pitch, but you must
mount to be Master of your Mistress?

No Mistress quoth he, no master, but your servant for ever. Go to, leave your
prating quoth she, or I will break thy head I swear, have I refused as thou
see, a grave and wealthy Alderman that might make me a Mistress of worship and
digni^y, and denied master Doctor of his request, who as thou ^^owest is at
this day esteemed the cunningest Physician in London, and diverse other honest
and well landed Gentlemen, and among the rest young Master Nevell, whoas some
say is decsended of a noble house, and whose love I dare swear is to me most
firmly devoted so that in my heart I am persuaded he loves the ground the
better that I tread on: and should I, (I say) forsake all these to make my foot
my head, and my servant my superior to marry thee which art a Prentice boy?

Nay Sir quoth she, seeing you are grown so lusty, it is time to tame you and
look to your steps: therefore I charge you leave the shop and get you into the
kitchen to help the Maid so wash the dishes and scowre the Ketiles; and
whereas since my husbands decease I have given four nobles a year to a water
bearer, I will make thee save me that charges, for it is well seen, that too
long the water Tankard has been kept from thy lazy shoulders, and if thou
scornest to do this, get where thou will; but if thou will remain with me, so
long as thou have a day to serve, thou shall be thus employed.

Hereupon she called up her man Richard to supply his place, and to be
foreman of the shop, gracing him with the keys of the counting house: which
William seeing, sadly went out of her sight, woefully to himself bewayling his
hard fortune, but yet such was his love to his Mistress, that he rather chose to
be drudge in her kitchen, then to change her service for any other. All the
servants in the house much mused at this alteration: but to no creature did his
Mistress tell the cause thereof, but kept it secret to her self: toward the
evening, forth he must needs go for water, at what time he wanted no flouts
of all his fellows, nor of many of the neighbors servants: where meeting with
his friend Francis, discoursed to him the whole cause of his disgrace: he
greatly chasing thereat, persuaded him never to endure such base drudgery, but
rather to seek preferment in some other place.

Notwithstanding William would not follow his counsel, but rather chose
patiently to abide all brunts night being come, and supper ended, William was
set to perform his penance for his presumption in love, that is to say, to
scrape the trenchers, scowre the kettles and spits, and to wash up the dishes:
which he went about with such good will, that it seemed to him rather a
pleasure then a pain.

His Mistress closset joining to the kitchen, had a secret place therein to look
into the kitchen, were closely sitting, she earnestly beheld her man how he
bestirred himself in his business: Whereupon she entered into this
consideration with her self. Now fle for shame, how Ill does it beseem me to
set so handsome a youth to such drudgery? if he bore a man's mind he would never
endure it, but being of a base and servile condition, he does ^asily endure the
yoke of servitude, and yet I am too blame so to think, for if he had
stubbornly disobeyed my commandment how could I otherwise judge, but that in
pride and disdain he thought himself too good to be at any direction: some
servants would in such a case have given me many foul words, and rather
malepartly set me at naught, and forsake my service, then to have endured the
terms of disgrace that he has done by this means: but hereby it is evident
that love thinks nothing too much. Well Will quoth she; the virtue of thy mind
shall breed better thoughts in thy Mistress, which shall make her reward thy
good will in a large measure: see see how neately he goes through his work, how
handsomely he handles every thing: and surely well may I suppose that he which
is so faithful a servant, would certainly prove a kind husband, for this has
been no slender trial of his constant heart. With that hearing the Maid and
some other of the servants talk with him, she lending a heedfull ear to their
speech, heard them speak to this purpose: good Lord William quoth one, I
marvel much that you being of so good parents and having so little a while to
serve, will be thus used at her hands? it were too much if you were but this
day bound prentice, to be set to such slavery: I swear quoth an other, I have
three times longer to serve then you and if she should bid me do as thou do,
I would bid her do it herself with a morin: I Will tell you what quoth the
third, I Will be plain and use but few words, but I would see my fair Mistress
with the black Devil before I would do it.

Well we^l my masters quoth William, you are mad merry wags but I take it as
great favor done me by my Mistress thus to employ me, that the^eby I might have
knowledge how to deck up a kitchen that meeting with a bad huswife to my wife
I know how to instruct her in household affairs: I care for no such favor said
he.

Their Mistress hearing all, said nothing, but determined to try them all what
they would do ere it were long: wherefore being now greatly affectioned to her
man, covered her love with such discretion, that none could perceive it. For
Master Doctor being newly returned, came thither puffing and blowing saying, he
was never so served since he was borne; quoth he, since I was here, I have at
least ridden an hundred miles with an arrant knave that carried me I knew not
whether: he rode with me out of Bishops-gate forth right as far as Ware, and
then compassing all Suffolk, and Norfolk, he brought me back again through
Essex, and so conducted me to Black-wall in Middlesex to seek out my Lady
Swinborne, my good Lady and Mistress: at last I saw it was no such matter, but
the villain being disposed to mock me, brought me to a woman Egiptian, as
black as the great Devil, who lay in childbed and was but delivered of a
child of her own color: to the which in despite of my heard they made me be
Godfather, where it cost me three crowns, and I was glad I so escaped, and
who was the author of all this deceit but Master Nevell? but if ever I come to
give him Physic, if I make him not have the squirt for five days, count me
the veriest dunce that ever wore velvet cap.

Master Doctor quoth she, I am very sorry you were so used, notwithstanding to
make Master Nevell and you friends I will bestow a breakefast upon you to
morrow, if it please you to accept my offer. Fair Widow quoth he, never a one
in the world would have urged me to be friends with him but your self, and I
am contented for your sake to do it: and thus till next morning he took his
leave.

Next day as soon as she was up she called up one of her men saying, Sir run
quickly, take a basket and fetch me a bushel of oysters from Billinsgate; the
fellow frowning said, I pray you send another, for I am busy in the shop.

Why knade quoth she, I Will have thee go, quoth he, make a drudge of some other
and not of me, for to be plain I will not go. No quoth she, call me Richard
hither: when he came, she desired him very gently to fetch her a bushel of
oysters.

Why Mistress quoth he, my friends set me not here to be a Porter to fetch
Oisters from Billingsgate. I tell you true, I scorn you should require any
such matter of me. Is it true quoth she? very well, I will remember this when
you forget it. Thus when she had tried them all, she called her man William,
saying: sir goodman scullian take the great close basket, and fetch me a
bushel of oysters from Billinsgate, and look you tarry not. I will forsooth
Mistress quoth he, and presently away he went with such good will as none could
go with better, being mavelous glad that she would request any thing at his
hands.

When he was come again, with a smiling countenance she said, what Wilkin art
thou come already? it is well done, I pray thee bring some of them up into my
Closset, that I may taste how good they be: yes forsooth quoth William, and
after her he went, the Maid likewise carried up a couple of white manchets,
and with a Diaper napkin covered the table. Now Maid quoth she, fetch me a pint
of the best red wine: I will forsooth said the Maid.

Mistress said William, if it please you, I will open your Oysters for you; I
pray you do quoth she: then taking a towell on his arm, and a knife in his
hand, being glad he had gotten so good an office, showed himself so feat and
expert in his ^ccupation, that he opened as fast as his Mistress could eat.

Believe me William quoth she, you are nimble at an oyster, and quick in
carving up shell fish, though dull in casting up accounts, I pray thee tell me
how many shells are in three and thirty oysters? Threescore and six said
William: you are a witty youth quoth she, if thy speech be true it must then
needs follow that I have eaten three and thirty oysters, have also devoured
threescore and six shells, which is too much for one woman's breakfast in a cold
morning in conscience, and therefore I had need quickly to give over, least I
break my belly with oyster shells: whereupon she called her maid, saying: come
hither Ioane, and bring me a goblet of wine that I may wash Williams shells from
my stomach.

Indeed Mistress quoth he, if you take my words so, I spoke without book: it is
true quoth she, for they are always without that are never within, and either
thy knowledge is small, or thy blindness great, or oyster shells very soft,
that I should eat so many and never feel one: for surely, if there be
threescore and six oyster shells in three and thirty oysters, there must needs
be as many more in three and thirty oysters: and to affirm my words true,
behold here the shells that were out of the oysters, now show me those that were
within the oysters. William seeing his Mistress thus pleasant, began to gather
some courage to himself, and therefore thus uttered his mind: Dear Mistress,
needs must I prove both blind in sight, and dull in conceit, while your fair
eyes that gives light to the Sun obscure themselves, and dark the glory of
their shine, when I seek to receive comfort thereby: and the want of your good
will makes my wits so weak, that like a barren tree it yields no fruit at all.

True quoth she: three times seven is just five and twenty: but tell me what is
the cause that moves thee to desire my favor, and to request my good will?
Good Mistress pardon me quoth he, and I will tell you: whereupon she replied,
saying, trust me William, my pardon is easier to be gotten then the Popes, and
therefore be not afraid to proceed. Why then my dear Mistress, seeing you have
so graciously granted liberty to my hearts advocate, to plead at the bar of
your beauty, and to open the bill of my complaint: know this, that hope against
hope persuaded me to labor for your love, that gaining the same I might be
called a blessed man by winning such a wife.

What Will quoth she, art thou not ashamed, that such a youth as thy self, a
lad, a stripling, a prentice boy, should in the ignorance of his age, cumber
himself with the cares of the world, and wantonly take a wife, that knows not
how to guide himself? I tell thee fellow, first learn to thrive, and then
wive. O my dear Mistress, said William, let not pleasant youth which is the
glory of many be a disgrace to me: neither without trial dear Mistress disable
not my manhood, which now I take to be in his chief prime.

Nay quoth she, if thou will have thy manhood tried, prepare thy self for the
wars, and purchase honor by beating down our countries foes, and so shall
thou wear the golden wreath of honor for ever. In troth Mistress quoth he, I
had rather have my manhood tried in another place. Y faith where quoth she? by
my troth said he, in your soft bed, which is far better then the hard field:
why thou bold knave quoth she, it were a good deed to make you a bird of
Bridewell, for your sauciness. Believe me Mistress quoth he, I am sorry you
should be offended, rather will I get me into a corner and die through
disdain, then stay in your sight and grieve you? and with that away he went.
She seeing him so hastily depart, called him again saying: William come
hither, turn again you faint hearted coward, what art thou afraid of
Bridewell? use thy self well, and I will be thy friend: the young man that
with these words was revived like a sick man out of a dead sound, turning
merrily to his Mistress, gave her a kiss, saying: on that condition I give you
this. How now sir quoth she, I called you not back to be so bold: in good
sadness do so again, and I will give you on the ear.

Nay Mistress quoth he, if that be all the danger, take then another, and lay me
on the ear (so I may lay you on the lips) and spare not: nay then said his
Mistress, I see my too much softness makes thee saucy, therefore for fear thou
should catch a surfeit, I charge thee on pain of loves displeasure, to get
you down about your business, and see that all things be in readiness
against my friends come: why go you not? what stand you in a maze? pack I say
and be gone.

And thus my dear Mistress quoth he, parts my soul out of Paradise, and my
heart from heavens joy: notwithstanding you command and I consent and always
let me find favor, as I am forward to follow your precepts, and therewithal
away he went.

He was no sooner gone, but she having determined what to do, sent for her
friends, at what time the Alderman coming thither, and Master Doctor, she had
also invited Master Peachie and his Wife, and with them came gallant young
Nevill.

When they were all set at the table, after they had well tasted of the
delicates there prepared: Mistress Farmer told them for two causes she had
requested their company that day to breakfast: the one was, that master Doctor
and young Nevill might be made friends: and the other that in their sight she
might make her self sure to her husband, that they might be witness of their
vows.

The company said, they should be very glad to see so good a work performed:
whereupon she calling up all her men servants, spoke to this purpose. My good
friends and kind neighbors, because I will have none ignorant, of that which
is to be effected, I have presumed to bring my servants into your presence,
that they also may bear record of the reconciliation betwixt Master Doctor and
Master Nevill, and therefore my Masters, if your hearts consent to an unity,
declare it by shaking hands, that it may not be said, that my house was the
breeder of brawles, and on that condition I drink to you both: the Gentlemen
both pledged her, and according to her request ^nded the quarrel.

When this was done, she merrily told them, that among her men she had chosen
her Master: albeit quoth she, this matter may seem strange in your sight, and
my fancy too much ruled by folly, yet this my determination I purpose by Gods
grace to follow, hoping it shall breed no offense to any in the company, in
such a chance to make mine own choice.

Her man Richard, and the rest that supposed themselves most graced by her
favors, began at this speech to look something peart, and all the company
held opinion that she bore the best mind to the foreman of her Shop: for first
of all turning her speech to him, she said: Richard come hither, thou have
greatly to praise God for making thee so proper a man, thou art a neat fellow,
and have excellent qualities, for thou art not proud, nor high minded, but have
a care to thy business, and to keep the Shop: and because I have committed
great matters into thy hands, I pray thee go down and look to thy charge, for
I have nothing more to say to thee at this time.

The fellow at these words looked as blew under the eyes, as a stale Codshead
under the gill: and going down the stairs shook his head like one that had a
flea in his ear.

Now come hither John quoth she, I must needs say thou art come of good
parents, and thou know they bound thee not Prentice to fetch oysters from
Billinsgate like a Porter, nor to have thy dainty fingers set to drudgerie,
therefore good John get you down after your fellow, for here is nothing for
you to do at this time.

Her man William, that all this while was playing the scullion in the kitchen
was then sent for, who coming before the company with his face all begrim'd,
and his clothes all greasy, his Mistress spoke in this manner. What a
slovenly knave comes here? were not this a fit man think ye to be Master of
this house and Lord of my love?

Now by my troth said Mistress Peachie, I never saw a more unhandsome fellow in
my life: f^e how he stinkes of kitchen stuff: what a face and neck has he? a
body might set Leekes in the very dirt of his lips. I think in my conscience
three pound of Soap, and a barrel of Water is little enough to scowre him
clean: the like flowts used all the rest at poor William, to which his
Mistress made this answer.

Good Lord my masters, how much do your sights deceive you? in my sight he
looks the loveliest of them all, having a pleasant countenance, and a good
grace, and so pleasing is he in every part to my sight, that surely if he will
accept of me for his wife, I will not refuse him for my husband: her friends
looking one upon another, and marvelling at her speech, thought verily she had
but iested, till such time she took him by the hand, and gave him a kiss.

Whereupon William spoke thus unto her: fair Mistress, seeing it has pleased
you, beyond my desert, and contrary to my expectation to make me so gracious
an offer, worthy I were to live a beggar, if I should refuse such a treasure:
and thereupon I give you my heart and my hand: and I receive it quoth she, for
it is thy virtue and true humility that has conquered my former conceits,
for few men would have won a wife as thou did. No, how did he win you said
Harris Nevill? by fetching oysters from Billingsgate quoth she, which I know
you would not have done, seeing all the rest of my servants scorned to do it at
my request: Sblood quoth Harrie, by feching of oysters: I would have fetch
oysters, and mustles, and cockles too, to have got so good a bargain.

The Alderman and the Doctor looked strangely at this matter: nevertheless
seeing it was not to be helped, they commended her choice, saying: it was better
for a man in such a case, to be favorable in a woman's eyes, then to have much
gold in his coffers. Then did she set her black man by her white side, and
calling the rest of her servants (in the sight of her friends) she made them do
reverence unto him, whom they for his drudgerie scorned so much before: so the
breakfast ended, she wild them a^l next morning, to bear him company to
Church, against which time, William was so daintily tricht up, that all those
which beheld him, confessed he was a most comely, trim, and proper man, and after
they were married, they lived long together in joy and prosperous estate.

Harrie Nevill became so grieved hereat, that soon after he went from Master
Peachie, and dwelt with a Goldsmith, and when he had been a while there,
committing a fault with his Masters daughter, he departed thence and became a
Barber-Surgion: but there his Mistress and he were so familiar, that it nothing
pleased his Master, so that in half a year he sought a new service and became
a Cook: and then a Comfetmaker dwelling with master Baltazar, where after he
grew something cunning, having done some shrewd turn in that place, he
forsook that service: and became a Smith, where their maid Iudeth fell so
highly in love with him that he for pure good will which he bore her, showed
his Master a fair pair of heels: and then practiced to be a Ioyner, where he
continued till he heard his Father was sick, who for his abominable swearing
had cast him from his favor, but after he had long mist him, and that he could
hear no tidings of his untoward and wild wanton Son, he sent into diverse
places to enquire for him, and at last one of this servants lighed where he
was, by which means he came to his father again: who in a few years after,
leaving his life, this son Harrie became Lord of all his lands: and coming
upon a day to London with his men waiting upon him, he caused a great dinner to
be prepared, and sent for all those that had been his masters and mistresses:
who being come, he thus began to commune with them My good friends, I
understand that a certain kinsman of mine was sometimes your servant, and as I
take it, his name was H^rrie N^v^ll: who as I hear, used himself but homely
toward you, being a very wild and ungracious fellow, the report whereof has
been some grief to me, being one that always wished him well: wherefore look
what damage he has done you I pray you tell me, and I am content with reason
to see you satisfied, so that he may have your favors to be made a freeman.

Surely sir said Peachie for mine own part I can say little, save only that he
was so full of love, that he would seldom follow his business at his
occupation: but that matter I freely forgive and will not be his hindrance in
any thing. Marry sir said the Goldsmith, I cannot say to: for truly sir he
played the thief in my house, robbing my daughter of her maidenhead, which he
nor you is ever able to recompense, though you gave me a thousand pound, yet I
thank God she is married and does well, I am the glader of that said the
Gentleman, and for that fault I will give toward her maintenance forty pound.

The Barber hearing him say so, told him that he had injured him as much, and
had been more bold a great deal then became him, whereby (quoth he) I was
made a scorn among my neighbors. Tush you speak of ill will said the
Gentleman, if your wife will say so I will believe it: to which words the woman
made this answer. Good sir, will you believe me there was never so much matter,
the youth was an honest fair conditioned young man, but my husband bearing a
naughty jealous mind, grew suspicious without cause, only because he saw that
his servant was kind and gentle unto me, and would have done any thing that I
requested: notwithstanding I have had many a foul word for his sake, and
carried some bitter blows too, but all is one, I am not the first woman that
has suffered injury without cause: alas good soul said the Gentleman, I am
right sorry for thy grief, and to make thee amend. I will bestow on thee
twenty Angels, so your husband will not take it in dudgin; the woman with a
low curste gave him thanks, saying: truly sir I am highly beholding to you, and
truly I shall love you the better because you are so like him. The smith
likewise for his maid said all that he might, to whose marriage the Gentleman
gave twenty pound: thus after he had fully ended with them all, he made
himself known unto them, at what time they all rejoiced g^eatly, and then
after he had bestowed on them a sumptuous dinner, they all departed. And ever
after, this Gentleman kept men of all these occupations in his own house,
himself being as good a workman as any of them all.

CHAP. X. Of the green king of S. Martins and his merry feats.
THere dwelt in S. Martins a iollie Shooemaker, he was commonly called the
Green king, for that upon a time he showed himself before King Henry, with
all his men clothed in green, he himself being suited all in green Satin.
He was a man very humorous, of small stature, but most courageous, and
continually he used the Fencing: school when he went abroad, he carried
always a two handed sword on his shoulder, or under his arm: he kept
continually thirty or forty servants, and kept in his house most bountiful
fare: you shall understand that in his young years, his father dying, left him
a good portion, so that he was in great credit and estimation among his
neighbors, and that which made him more happy, was this, that God blessed him
with the gift of a good wife, who was a very comely young woman, and
therewithal very careful for his commodity: but he whose mind was
altogether of merriment, little respected his profit in regard of his pleasure:
insomuch that through his wastefull expense he brought poverty upon himself
ere he was aware, so that he could not do as he was accustomed: which when his
daily companions perceived, they by little and little shund his company, and if
at any time he passed by them, perhaps they would lend him a nod, or give him a
good morrow and make no more a do.

And is it true quoth the Green king, does want of money part good company, or
is my countenance changed, that they do not know me? I have seen the day when
never a knave of them all, but would have made much of my dog for my sake, and
have given me twenty salutations on a Sunday morning, for one poor pint of
Muskadine: and what, has a throd bare cloak scarde all good fellowship? why
though I have not my wonted habites, I have still the same heart: and though my
money be gone, my mind is not altered: why then what Iacks are they to reject
me? I, I, now I find my wives tale true, for then she was wont to say,
Husband, husband, refrain these trencher flies, these smooth faced flatterers,
that like drones live upon the honey of your labor and suck away the sweetness
of your substance. I wis, I wis, if once you should come in want, there is not
the best of them all, that would trust you for tengroates: by which saying I Will
lay my life she is a witch, for it is come as just to pas as Marlins prophecy.
I would the other day but have borrowed 12 d. and I tried 13 f^inds, and went
without it: it being so, let them go hang themselves for I will into Flanders,
that is flat, and leave these slaves to their servill conditions, where I will
try if a firkin barrel of butter be worth a pot of strong beer, and a load
of Holland cheese, better then a gallon of Charnico: and if it be by the cross
of this sword I will never stain my credit with such a base commodity again.

With that he went to his wife, saying: woman do thou hear? I pray thee
look well to thy business till I come again: for why? to drive away
melancholy, I am minded to walk a mile or twain: but husband quoth she, were
you there where you laid your plate to pawn? I pray you is it not misused? and
is it safe? wo^an quoth he I was there, and it is safe I warrant thee, for ever
coming into thy hands again, thou know I borrowed but twenty mark on it,
and they have sold it for twenty pound: it is gone wife, it is gone. O hu^band
quoth she, what hard fortune have we to be so ill dealt withal? and
therewithal she wept, f^e quoth he leave thy weeping, hang it up, let it go,
the best is, it never cost us groate: were our friends living that gave us
that, they would give us more: but in vain it is to mourn for a matter that
cannot be helped, farewell wife, look to thy house, and let the b^^^s plie
their work. The green king having thus taken his l^ave, went toward
Billings-gate, of purpose to take Barge: w^ere by the way he met with Anthony
now now the firkin Fidl^^ of Finchlane: What master quoth he, well met, I pray
whith^r are you walking? a^^ how do all our friends in saint Martins? Will you
not have a crash ere you go?

Y faith Anthony quoth he, thou know I am a good fellow, and one that has
not been a niggard to thee at any time, therefore if thou will bestow any
music on me do, and if it please God that I return safely from Flanders
again, I will pay thee well for thy pains; but now I have no money for
music: Gods-nigs quoth Anthony, whether you have money or no, you shall have
music, I do not allways request coin of my feiends for my cunning: what, you
are not every body, and seeing you are going beyond sea, I will bestow a pint
of wine on you at the Salutation: say thou so Anthony quoth he, in good sooth
I will not refuse thy courtesy, and with that they stepped into the Tauern, where
Anthony called for wine: and drawing forth his Fiddle began to play, and after he
had scrapte half a score lessons he began to sing.

When should a man show himself gentle and kind,
When should a man comfort the sorrowful mind?
O Anthony now, now, now.
O Anthony now, now, now.
When is the best time to drink with a friend?
When is it meetest my money to spend?
O Anthony now, now, now.
O Anthony now, now, now.
When goes the King of good fellows away?
That so much delighted in dancing and play?
O Anthony now, now, now.
O Anthony now, now, now.
And when should I bid my Master farewell?
Whose bounty and courtesy so did excel?
O Anthony now, now, now.
O Anthony now, now, now.
Lo ye now Master quoth he, this song have I made for your sake, and by the
grace of God when you are gone I will sing it every Sunday morning under your
wives window, that she may know we drank together ere you parted: I pray thee
do so said the Green king, and do my commendations unto her, and tell her at
my return I hope to make merry.

Thus after they had made an end of their wine, and paid for the shot, Anthony
putting up his Fiddle departed seeking to change music for money: while the
Green king of Saint Martins sailed in Gravesend Barge. But Anthony in his
absence sung this song so often in Saint Martins, that thereby he purchased a
name which he never lost till his dying day, for ever after men called him
nothing but Anthony now now.

But it is to be remembered that the Green kings wife became so careful in her
business, and governed her self with such wisdom in all her affairs, that
during her husbands absence she did not only pay many of his debts, but also
got into her house every thing that was necessary to be had, the which her
diligence won such commendations, that her credit in all places was very good,
and her gains (through Gods blessing) came so flowing in, that before her
husband came home, she was had in good reputation with her neighbors: and
having no need of any of their favors, every one was ready to proffer her
courtesy, saying good neighbor if you want any thing tell us, and look what
friendship we may do you, be sure you shall find it.

I neighbor quoth she, I know your kindness, and may speak thereof by
experience: well may I compare you to him that would never bid any man to
dinner, but at two of the clock in the after noone, when he was assured they
had filled their bellies before, and that they would not touch his meat, except
for manners sake: wherefore for my part I will give you thanks, when I take
benefit of your proffer.

Why neighbor we speak for good will quoth they: It Is true quoth she, and so
say they that call for a fresh quart to bestow on a drunken man, when they know
it would do him as much good in his boots as in his belly.

Well neighbor quoth they, God be thanked that you have no cause to use
friends: Mary Amen quoth sh^e, for if I had I think I should find few here,
There and the like greetings were often betwixt her and her neighbors.

Til at last her husband came home, and to his great comfort found his estate
so good, that he had great cause to praise God for the same, for a warm purse
is the best medicine for a cold heart that may be. The green king therefore
bearing himself as brave as ever he did, having sworn himself a faithful
companion to his two hand-sworde, would never go without it.

Now when his ancient acquaintance law him again so gallant, every one was
ready to curry favor with him, and many would proffer him the wine. And where
before they were wont scornefully to thrust him next the kennell, and nothing
to respect his povert^, they gave him now the upper hand in every place,
saluting him with cap and knee: but he remembering how slightly they set by him
in his need, did now as slightly esteem their flattery, saying: I cry you
mercy, me thinks I have seen your face but I never knew you for my friend. No
quoth one, I dwell at Aldersgate, and am your near neighbor, and so much the
worse said the Green king: wherefore quoth the other? Because said he, I
think the place meet for an honester man. I trust sir said his neighbor, you
know no hurt by me.

Nor any goodness quoth the green king, but I remember you are he, or one of
them of whom once I would have borrowed forty pence, yet could not get it, if
thereby I might have saved fifty lives: therefore goodman hog, goodman cog, or
goodman dog, choose you which, scrape no acquaintance of me, nor come any more
in my company, I would advise you, least with my long sword I crop your cowards
legs, and make you stand like Saint Martins beggar upon two stilts. The fellow
hearing him say so, went his ways, and never durst speak to him afterward.

Chap. 11. How the Green King went a walking with his wife, and got Anthony
now now to play before them, in which sort he went with her to Bristow.
THe Green king being a man that was much given to go abroad, his wife upon a
time, thus made her moan to him: good Lord husband quoth she, I think you are
the unkindest man alive, for as often as you walk abroad, you were never the
man that would take me in your company: it is no small grief to me, while I
sit doting at home, every Sunday and Holy Day, to see how kindly other men
walk with their wives, and lovingly bear them company into the fields, that
thereby they may have some recreation after their weeks weary toil: this
pleasure have they for their pains, but I poor soul could never get such
courtesy at your hands: either it must needs be that you love me but little, or
else you are a^hamed of my company, and I tell you true you have no reason
either for the one or the other. Certainly wife said he, I should be sorry to
drive any such conceit into thy head, but seeing you find your self grieved in
this kind, let me entreat thee to be content, and when thou shall perceive
that my love is not small toward thee, nor my liking so bad to be ashamed to
have thee go by my side, Thursday next is Saint James day, against which time
prepare thy self to go with me to the fair, where by the grace of God I Will
bestow a fat Pig upon thee, and there I mean to be merry: and doubt not but I
will walk with thee till thou art weary of walking. Nay quoth she, I should
never be weary of your company, though I went with you to the Worlds end: God a
mercy for that wife quoth he, but so doing I doubt I should try you a very
good foote-woman, or a bad flatterer.

Thus it past till Thursday came, in the mean season meeting with two or three
other shoomakers, he asked them if they would walk with him and his wife to
Saint James fair: That we will with all our hearts: but will you not like
flinchers fly from your words quoth he? To that (they said) if they did they
would forfeit a gallon of wine.

Tush said the green king, talk not so me of a gallon of wine, but will you
be bound in twenty pound a piece to perform it? Why what needs bands for such
a matter quoth they? we trust you will take our words for more then that. My
masters said the green king, the world is grown to that pass, that words are
counted but wind, and I will trust you as little on your word as Long Meg on
her honesty: therefore if you will not be bound, choose, I will make no account
of your company. The men hearing him say so, knowing him to be a man of a merry
mind, after their wits were all washed with wine, to the Scriveners they went,
and bound themselves in twenty pound according to his request.

They had no sooner made an end of this merry match, but as they stumbled into
another Tavern, who should they meet but Anthony now now: who as soon as he
spide the green King smiling with a wrie mouth he joyfully embraced him with
both his hands, saying: what my good master well met, when came you from the
other side the water? by my troth you are welcome with all my heart. God a
mercy good Anthony quoth he, but how chance you come no more into Saint Martins?

O Master quoth he, you know what a dainty commodity I made at your parting to
Gravesendbarge? Yes mary said the green king what of that? why quoth he by
singing it under your window, all the merry shoomakers in Saint Martins took
it by the toe: and now they have made it even as common as a printed Ballad,
and I have gotten such a name by it, that now I am called nothing but Anthony
now now.

Why Master i will tell you, it has made me as well acquainted in Cheapeside, as
the cat in the cream pan: for as soon as the Goldesmiths wives spy me, and
as I pass along by the Merchants daughters, the apes will laugh at me as
passes: beside that all the little boys in the streets will run after me like
a sort of Emits. Anthony now now says one: Anthony now now another: good Lord,
good Lord, you never knew the like: hear ye master? I am sure that song has
gotten me since you went, more pence then your wife has pins: and seeing you
are come again, I will make the second part very shortly.

But hear thou Anthony said he? if thou will come to me on Saint James his
day in the Morning, thou shall walk with us to the fair, for I mean to make
merry with my wife that day: Master quoth he, by cock and pie, I will not miss
you. And thus after they had made Anthony drink he departed.

Saint James his day at last being come, he called up his wife betimes, and bad
her make her ready, if she would to the fair: who very willingly did so: and
in the mean space her husband went to his cubbert, and took thereout forty
fair sovereigns, and going secretly to one of his servants, he willed him to
take good heed of his house, and to see that his fellows plide their
business: for quoth he, I go with my wife to Saint James fair, and perhaps
you shall not see us again this sennight: Well Master said the fellow, I will
have regard to your business I warrant you. Wherewith he called his wife, saying:
come wife will you walk? with a good will husband quoth she, I am ready: with
that Anthony now now, began to scrape on his treable vial, and playing a
huntsup, said good morrow master good morrow, four a clock and a fair
morning.

Well said Anthony quoth he, we be ready for thy company, therefore along
before, and let us hear what music you can make. Fie husband quoth she, take
not the Fiddler with you for shame: tush be content quoth he, Music makes a
sad mind merry: so away they went, and at Saint Giles in the fields he met the
rest of his company: well found my masters quoth he, I perceive you have a care
of your bonds: so away they went with the Fiddler before them, and the Green
king with his two hand sword marching like a master of Fenc going to play his
prize: when they came to the high way turning down to Westminster, his wife
said: y faith husband we shall come to the fair too soon, for Gods sake let
us walk a little further. Content wife quoth he, whereupon they went to
Kensington, where they brake their fast, and had good sport by tumbling on the
green grass, where Anthony brake his Fiddle, for which cause the Green king
gave him ten shillings, and willed him to go back and buy a new one.

And now my friends quoth he, if you will walk with me to Brainford I will
bestow your dinner upon you, because I have a a mind to walk with my wife?
they were content, but by that time they came there, the woman began to wax
somewhat weary, and because the day was far spent before they had dined,
they lay there all night: where he told his friends that the next morning he
would bring his wife to see the George in Colebrook, and then would turn home:
but to be brief, when he came there, he told them flatly he meant to go to
Saint James his fair at Bristow: for quoth he my wife has longed to walk
with me, and I mean to give her walking-worke enough* But sir quoth they, we
mean not to go thither: before God but you shall quoth he, or forfeit your
band. The men seeing no remedy, went along to Bristow on foot, whereby the
poor woman became so weary, that an hundred times she wished she had not come
forth of doors: but from that time till she died, she never entreated her
husband to walk with her again.

An hundred merry feats more did he, which in this place is too much to be set
down. For afterward Tom Drum coming from the winning of Mustleborow, came to
dwell with him, where he discoursed all his adventures, in the wars: and
according to his old cogging humor, attributed other men's deeds to himself,
for quoth he, it was I that killed the first Scot in the battle, yet I was
content to give the honor thereof to Sir Michaell Musgrave, notwithstanding
quoth he^ all men knows that this hand of mine killed Tom Trotter that terrible
traitor, which in despite of us, kept the Castle so long, and at last as he
cowardly forsook it, and secretly sought to fly, with this blade of mine I
broacht him like a roasting pigge. Moreover, Parson Ribble had never made
himself so famous but by my means. These were his daily vaunts, till his lies
were so manifest that he could no longer stand in them. But after the Green
king had long lived a gallant housekeeper, at last being aged and blind, he
dyed, after he had done many good deeds to diverse poor men.

FINIS.

