THE PROGRESS in piety: Taught by Frances Dillingham in his parish of Wilden,
and now published for the benefit of all good Christians.

Bernard in purific. Mariae, ser. 2. In via vitae non progredi est regredi, cum
nihil adhuc in eodem statu permoneat.

Not to go forward in the way of life, is to go backward, seeing nothing
continues in the same estate. seal of University of Cambridge ALMA MATTER
CANTABRIGIA

HINC LVCEM ET POCVLA SACRA



Printed by JOHN LEGATE, Printer to the University of CAMBRIDGE. 1606.

To the right Worshipful, wise, and virtuous Ladies, the Lady Anne Fleetwood,
Elizabeth Luke, and Elizabeth Dive, Grace and peace.
WHen I consider (right Worshipful and virtuous Ladies) the means that GOD
has given us whereby we may proceed in piety and godliness of life, and when
again on the otherside, I consider the little piety that is amongst men, I
cannot sufficiently bewail the times. That which Tullie the heathen man said
of his time, I may say of our age, In ea tempora incidit aetas nostra vt cum
maxim florere nos oporteret, tune vivere puderet; We are fallen into those
times, that when we should most flourish, then we are most ashamed to live. For
what Christian man's heart is not grieved, to hear of the oaths that abound in
this land, and of the usury that is practiced amongst men? but howsoever the
wicked swarm and abound, yet the godly must have a care to proceed in piety:
shall Atheists strive for the deepest damnation and greatest torments in hell,
shall they strive to sin most damnably, and shall not the children of God
strive to proceed from grace to grace? Solomon in the 4. of the Prove. and 19.
v. says, That the way of the righteous shines as the light that shines more
and more unto the perfect day, signifying that the godly increase daily in
perfection, till they come to eternal happiness. We are in this life viatores,
travelers: therefore we must daily travel to come near to our iournies end,
which is everlasting life. The Schoolmen make three degrees of charity, one
of those that are beginners in religion: the second, of those that proceed in
the same: the third, of those that are perfect: now the truth is, we are not
perfect in this life, but must strive to perfection. Optatus speaks thus,
Only Christ is perfect, Lib. 2.
caeteri omnes semi perfecti sumus, all other of us are but half perfect. For
the furtherance of which progress in piety, I have penned this brief
Treatise, delivered in sermons in my parish: in which Treatise I have inserted
authorities, which then I used not for causes known to my self. And as I have
penned this brief Treatise for the benesit of the godly, so I dedicate the
same to your Worships, whose chief care as to fly the corruptions of the
world, and to proceed in godliness of life, as may appear by the careful
using of the means here set down, as I my self can testify. The Lord of his
infinite goodness grant that in so doing ye may continue unto your lives end,
sic itur ad astra, that is the way to heaven.

Your Worsh. to command, Frances Dillingham.

Revel. 22. v. 11. He that is unrighteous, let him be unrighteous still: and he
that is filthy, let him be filthy still: and he that is righteous, let him be
righteous still: and he that is holy, let him be holy still.
AT the tenth ver. of this chapter, S. John is commanded by the Angel, not to
seal up the Prophesy of this book: at the eleventh v. he meets with an
objection which men might make. The objection is this; It may be some will
abuse this Scripture to their own destruction: S. John answers after this
manner: Be it so, he that is filthy, let him be filthy, yet the righteous and
holy men will reap good by it, these are to be regarded, not the other. Out of
which answer, we may gather how fitly the Papists may be answered. The Papist
to keep laymen from reading the Scriptures, plead, that common people will
pervert them to their own destruction: be it so, yet will the godly use them
to their own salvation. But I desire to know of the Papist, whether that
learned men, as Arrius, and others, have not abused the holy Scriptures to
their own hurt or no? it cannot be denied, yet will they suffer learned men to
read them. It is but bad logic to dispute from the abuse of a thing to take
away the lawful use of the same. So the Sun, and the Moon, and other
creatures may be taken away, because they have been abused to Idolatry. To
leave the Papists, and to come to the handling of the words, two things are to
be considered in them. The first is a commination or threatening, that howsoever
the wicked increase in naughtines God has provided answerable punishment for
them: for the Evangelist does not approve their continuance in wickedness, but
shows the godly that such cursed incorrigible creatures are not to be
regarded, and that the godly are not to be hindered from their good course by
these men's examples. The second thing to be considered, is an exhortation to
continue and to increase in righteousness, he that is righteous, let him be
righteous still. Concerning which exhortation, I will first show what a
righteous man is: secondly I will lay down the impediments and hindrances of
continuing in righteousness: thirdly I will speak of the means by which a
righteous man may continue and increase in righteousness. Touching the first, he
is righteous that is without fault in the common place where courts and matters
of judgment are pleaded and decided. Prove. 17. v. 15. He that justifies the
wicked, and he that condemns the just, even they both are an abomination unto
the Lord. 2. He is righteous that is without sin. 1. Tim. 1.9. 3. He is
righteous that deals sincerely in his office: a man may be a just Magistrate,
and yet a wicked man. 4. He is righteous that gives every man his own. 5. He
is righteous that performs his promise. Lastly, he is righteous that walks
in all the commandments of God, though not perfectly. In the first and last
signification the word may be taken here: for it may either signify him that
is righteous before the judgment seat of God, by the imputed righteousness of
Jesus Christ, or else it may note him that is sanctified. Thus having declared
the signification of the word righteous, I am now to answer the Papist, who
gathers out of this place, That a man may increase in justice and
righteousness, and so all men are not equally just. Touching which collection, I
answer, that man does and may increase in justice, which is sanctification, but
in Christ his justice, which is perfect, men cannot increase: to make this
plain by an example; take two debtours, the one owes an hundred pounds, the
other twenty, the creditour forgiueth them both; they are both equally free
from debt, yet not both equally thankful: so the Lord deals; he forgiueth
some men many sins, some fewer sins, all then are equally just: for justice
is the forgiveness of sins, Romans 4.6. yet are not all equally sanctified. Thus
we see how all men are equally just; in respect of Christ his perfect
righteousness imputed to them, but in respect of sanctification, all are nor
equally sanctified: and in this we may increase, in the other, which must make
us righteous at the bar of Gods judgment, we cannot increase. Excellently
speaks Bernard, ser. 11. ad milit. Mors morte Christi fugatur, and Christi
iustitia nobis imputatur, death is driven away by the death of Christ, and his
righteousness is imputed unto us. This is that we must cleave unto.

Concerning sanctification, how we may increase in it, I am now to speak. And
first of the impediments and hindrances, which are many. The first hindrance
why men do not increase in sanctification, is an opinion that they are holy
enough. Thus braggeth the church of Laodicea, Revel. 3.17. saying, I am rich
and increased with goods, I have need of nothing. So does Ephraim, Hos. 12.9.
saying, I am rich, I have found me out riches in all my labors, they shall
find none iniquity in me. Who will suffer himself to be taught, that thinks
he has learning enough? Many might profit in knowledge but that they persuade
themselves falsely and erroneously that they have knowledge enough; so who will
labor to increase in sanctification, which persuades himself that he is
sanctified enough? Well says Seneca, cap. 7. de. br^. vitae.
Tota vita discendum est mori, and vivere tota vita discendum est: we must all
our life learn to die, and all our life learn to live. Hierome his saying is
worthy to be heard, Haec hominibus sola perfectio si imperfectos se esse
noverit: ad Ctesiph.
this is the only perfection of men, if they know themselves to be imperfect.
Wherefore abandon this vile conceit and opinion, that thou art holy enough.

The second hindrance of progress in sanctification, is an opinion that a
little will suffice, and this, as likewise the first, are maine hindrances of
sanctification. For who will take pains to go forward, when a little will
suffice? Many persuade themselves that God is contented with a little, as if he
were a child that would be stilled with an apple, or a nut, but these men shall
know, that God is a consuming fire, and let them know, that they are to strive
with S. Paul to perfection. 3. Phil. v. 12.

The third impediment, is the example of other men. Some think that, quod
exemplo fit id iure fit, that which is done by example is warrantable by law:
but they must know, that we must live by Gods law, and not by example: and
indeed to compare our lives with other men's lives, and to live by examples, is
most dangerous, except they had this privilege, that they could not err.
Well says Bonaventure, Nullus est qui falli non possit and fallere nescit nisi
deus and S. sanctus: there is none but may be deceived, and also deceive, but
God, and the holy Ghost.

The fourth impediment of progres in piety, are scoffs and tauntes of the
wicked men. Jeremy in the 20. chap. would not speak any more in the name of
the Lord because the word of God was daily had in derision: but let men know
that the heathen man could say, qui vult esse bonus oportet eum rideri, he that
will be a good man must be mocked and laughed at. Phoci^^.
A wicked man's tongue is but a fools dagger, which is soon drawn, good
Christian remember this, if wicked men teach their tongues to speak evil, why
should not thou teach thine cares to hear evil? as these miscreants of the
world laugh at Gods children, so the lord will laugh them one day to scorn,
yea they shall change their minds and sigh for grief of mind, Wisd. 5. chapter
and say within themselves, this is he whom we sometimes had in derision, and
in a parable of reproach, we fools thought his life madness, and his end
without honor, how is he counted among the children of God, and his portion
among the saints of God?

The fifth impediment, is respect and looking back to the world: even as a man
cannot look up to heaven and down to earth at one time with his bodily eyes,
no more can he with the eyes of his soul. Plu.
Sextius a Roman having resigned his dignities betook himself to the study
of philosophy, but when his mind could hardly bear the difficulties, he had
well nigh cast himself out of a ship into the sea: so is it with many men,
which having betaken them selves to religion, look back again to the world:
but let us here consider the examples of heathen men, Fabritius divitias
reiecit. Tubero se paupertate dignum iudicauit. Fabritius cast away riches,
Tubero judged himself worthy of poverty: and can not thou that wilt be a
christian, renounce the world? remember this thing, that mortale est omne
mortalium, all that mortal men have is mortal.

The sixth hinderance is slothfulnes, Proverb. 21.29. v. The desire of the
slothful slaieth the fool: for his hands refuse to work: many are so nice
that they can take no pains in the service of God: they cannot travail to
here sermons, they cannot rise to serve God.

Hora^.
Impiger extremos currit mercator ad Indos,
Per mare pauperiem fugiens per saxa, per ignes.
The painful Merchant goes to the Indies that he might eschew poverty, and
wilt not thou take pains that thou might eschew the poverty of thy soul?
Thieves rise at midnight to murder men, and wilt not thou rise to save thy
soul? Omnes arts absque doctore non discimus, sola pietas tam vilis est,
Hierom. in 3. Eccl.
vt non indigeat praeceptore? We learn no art without a teacher, is only piety
so vile that it needs no master? let us not think, Christian brethren, that
men can go to heaven without pains.

The seventh impediment is satiety, (...), there is a satiety of all things,
and surely even in religion with many: but let us know, that as divitiarum
appetitus est infinitus, the desire of riches to a natural man in infinite, so
to a spiritual man the desire of the riches of the soul is infinite: for
spiritual men have tasted the sweetness of the service of God, 1. Pet. 2.
and therefore follow it more and more. Even as a man that has once tasted the
sweetness of meat, desires more of the same; so likewise when a man has tasted
the sweet food of his soul, he desires the same more and more: suavitate
scientiae nihil est homini iucundius, there is nothing more pleasant to man
then the sweetness of knowledge, so there is no thing more pleasant to a
christian the^ the sweetness of piety.

The eight hinderance, is injury and wrong that is offered unto Christians: an
example we have hereof in the ecclesiastical history of Porphery, 7. book, 2
chap.
who as it is recorded in the tripartite history, a quibusdam Christianis
caesus iram non ferens christianismu^ deseruit per furorem, being beaten of
Christians, not bearing the injury, forsook religion in a fury: wherefore let
men take heed how they offer injury to any: for the nature of man is impatient
of injury, and men look for justice at Christians hands, or where should they
look for it? apud Christianos valebit iustitia aut ab eis repulsa vi and
gratia locum vbi consistat reperire non potest, either justice should rule
amongst Christians, or else being driven from them by force and favor it cannot
tell where to have a place to rest. Many are so profane that they care not to
abuse Christians, even because they are Christians, and they are not afraid to
say, with that apostata Julian it is your parts, (...), to suffer affliction,
but let the godly remember that blessed are they if they suffer for
righteousness sake, yea let them consider that the heathen man could say quo vir
melior, clarior, fortior, quo plura virtutis ornamenta insunt eo maiores
illires lassae su^t, the more excellent a man is, the greater afflictions he
has. To end this point, he that is not patient is afflictions will be proud in
prosperity.

The ninth hinderance is Recidivation, that is, a falling into some sin: for
the godly are not so privileged but that they may: sin having through
infirmity committed some sin, the graces of God are wonderfully weakened in
them, so that they are long before they can recover them; it stands them in
hand therefore to be watchful over their hearts. Solomon in the. 4. of the
Proverbs gives this counsel, keeepe thine heart more then any thing that is
kept. And as men must watch over their hearts, so must they also watch over
their senses: for our senses are like unto wanton maids, if they wander abroad
they will be deflowred as Dina was: therefore Job says 31. chap. that he had
made a covenant with his eyes why then should he look on a maid? wherefore as
Bernard says Ieiunet auris a fabulis and rumoribus, oculus a curiosis
aspectibus, let thine ear fast from and tales, and thine eyes from curious
sightes.

The tenth impediment is neglect of the means which God has appointed to
further our piety, it is a principle in philosophy that omnia nutriuntur ex
eisdem ex quibus constant. all things are nourished of the same whereof they are
made: wherefore if faith be begotten by the word of God preached it must needs
be nourished by the same: to neglect then the preaching of the word, reading of
the same and prayer, is an exceeding impediment of piety: the apostle in the
1. of the These. 5. chap. says, quench not the spirit, despise not the
prophecy: wherefore if men will retain the spirit of God, they must make
account of preaching. Solomon also says, Proverbs 29. where there is no vision
the people decay: but he that keeps the law is blessed. I beseech therefore
all Christians that they would frequent sermons; and as they must frequent
sermons, so likewise must they not neglect reading and prayer: Hiero^. ad ^^tam.
orationi lectio, lectioni succedat oration, let reading succeed prayer, and
prayer reading. Excellently writes Cyprian, sit tibi vel oration assidua vel
lectio, nunc cum Deo loquere nunc Deus tecum: either read or preach
continually, sometimes talk thou with God, sometime let God talk with thee.

The eleventh impediment is contention; if the heathen man said, that natura
and studia ad pacem trahunt, his nature and studies did call him to peace, much
more must a Christian say that his study to keep piety calls him to peace:
the Apostle, 1. Cor. 7. says, that god has called us in peace; wherefore let
us avoid contentions: it is not for nothing that the Apostle, 1. Tim. 2.8.
wills all men to pray, lifting up pure hands without wrath and contention:
for how can a man pray aright in malice and contention; nay does not his
contention call him from the service of God, and prayer. When the co^tentious
man should be serving God and giving alms to the poor, then must he give fees
to lawyers and be riding up and down to make friends to end his suites.

The last impediment which I will recite, is violent changing and conversion.
Some men will be conuerts, but their conversion is so high at the first that it
cannot be increased: let these men consider that the works of God are by
degrees, he goes not from one extremity to an other without means. In nature
he makes not the summer without a spring, nor the winter without an Autumn,
so orderly does the Lord proceed: wherefore let men proceed by degrees in
piety. I do not mean that men should not make have in this holy work: for
nescit tarda molimina spiritus sanctus, the holy Ghost brooketh not slow backs:
but they must hasten orderly and by means. Thus I have set down the
impediments and hindrances of proceeding in piety, and have but hastily
handled them; Christians may in themselves observe more: but let us all
endeavor and labor to eschew and avoid these and whatsoever else we find in
our selves. Res ingeniosa est esse proficientem in pietate, it is a cunning
thing to profit in piety. Now then I will speak of the means by which we
may profit: for as Seneca says, 95. epist. Qui praecipiunt vt quod oportet
facias non quemadmodum, ad virtutem non producunt: non enim in facto laus est
sed in eo quemadmodum fiat: they which command a thing to be done, and not the
manner how it is to be done, bring not men to virtue: for praise consists not
in doing, but in the manner of doing it. Therefore to speak briefly of the
means by which men may proceed in piety and sanctification, I think it
conuentent.

The first means is meditation: Lectio sine meditatione arida, meditatio sine
lectione erronea, oration sine meditatione est tepida: Reading without
meditation is barren, meditation without reading is erroneous, prayer without
meditation is lukewarm. Meditation is like unto digestion, as the meat
received profits not without digestion, no more does the word of God except
we meditate. The beasts that did not ruminate were unclean, the man that does
not meditate is unholy. Meditate then, good Christian, upon these twelve
things. First, that pleasure is momentanie, and short: secondly, that the
reward is eternal, and the punishment is eternal: thirdly, meditate that the
companion of pleasure, is thought and sorrow: fourthly, that in pleasure there
is loss of a greater good: fifthly, think that the life of man is but a sleep
and shadow: sixthly, think upon sudden death: seventhly, suspect repentance
and impenitencie: eighthly, consider the dignity and excellency of man:
ninthly, peace of conscience: tenthly, Gods benefits: eleuenthly, the passion
of Christ: twelftly, the testimony of Martyrs, and the examples of Saints:
what heart is so hard as the meditation of these things will not mollify?

The second means by which we may proceed in piety, is daily search of our
ways. To this we are exhorted in the 3. of the Lament. Let us search our
ways, and turn unto the Lord. This search consists in three things: first,
whether we do things otherwise the^ we should do or no: secondly, whether we
do that we should not do or no: thirdly, whether we leave things undone or no
which we should have done. Pythagoras commanded his auditors going home to
repeat this verse,

(...). Wherein have I transgressed, what have I done, what have I left undone?
Shall heathen go thus far, and shall not Christians thus examine their
lives? I will in a word name the impediments of this search, that they may be
avoided: 1. grief, 2. security, 3. worldlines, 4. fearefulnes, for many men
are like unto bankerupts, that dare not look into their estate. 5. ignorance.
6. pleasure.

The third means to proceed in piety, is prayer: piety begets prayer,
and prayer preserves piety; as faith causes hope, and hope nourishes faith;
as friendship causes benefits, and benefits nourish freindship; and as the
heat of the heart begets the fat about it, and the fat preserves the
heat of the heart; so does godliness beget prayer, and prayer furthereth
godliness.

Now we have many arguments to move us to prayer; First, we have a Mediator
in heaven, Christ Jesus; Christus, says Ambrose. lib. 5. Jacob. cap. 8. est os
nostrum per quod patri loquimur, oculus noster per quem patrem videmus, dextera
nostra per quampatri offerimus: Christ is our mouth by which we speak to the
father, he is our eye by which we see the father, he is our right hand by which
we offer unto the father. Secondly, the Lord commands this duty. Thirdly,
he promises bountifully to them that pray. Fourthly, Christians have the
spirit of God, which teaches them to pray. Fifthly, it is our calling to pray:
for all Christians are preistes by calling. Sixthly our necessity should move
us to pray. Seauenthly, the force of prayer which is recorded in scripture to
be wonderful; Plus potest vnus iustus orando quam mill peccatores pugnando:
one righteous man can do more by prayer, then many sinners by fighting.

The fourth means to proceed in Christian piety is exercise of Christian
duties: he that used his five talentes, gained five other: so he that uses his
knowledge, increases his knewledge: to him that has, says our savior
Christ, shall be given, and to him that has not, shall be taken away even that
which he has. Mark. ^.
Many keep in their gifts, as fire is kept in the flint, and do no good with
them: others let them rust with fee blenes, and so in the end by Gods just
judgment they are deprived of them.

The fifth means to proceed in piety, is company with the godly; am not I,
says the prophet David, a companion of all them that keep thy commandments?
Quim solemn venit colorabitur, Psalm. 119.
qui vnguentaria taberna resederunt loci odorem secum auferunt, and qui apud
pios fuerunt traxerint aliquid necesse est, ea est vis pietatis vt non
students solum sed and conuersantes iu^et: He that walks in the sun shall be
colored with it, and they that sit in sweet shoppes, shall carry away the
smell of the place: so they which be amongst Christians, must needs carry
some piety away: such is the force of piety, that it does not only profit the
students but those that converse with them. I marvel not then then though me^
proceed not in piety, Many Protestants are like Papists, who have lean
prayers, and fat fasts.
seeing they are companions of profane men. Noscitur ex socio qui non noscitur
ex sese: he is known by his companion, that is not known by himself.

The sixth means by which a man may proceed in piety, is fasting: concerning
which duty, these things are to be observed. First, that we fast from sin,
Esaias. 5.8. Ieiunium magnum and generale, says Austen, tra. 17. in Ioh. est
abstinere ab iniquitatibus and illicitis voluptatibus saeculi: the great and
general fast, Ipsis Christianis qui omnia percipiunt non nos propter
abstiue^tiam praeseramus. Let not us prefer our selves before Christians,
which eat all things for our abstinence. Prosper.
is to abstain from sin and the unlawful pleasures of the world. Secondly,
we must not trust in fasting: this was the proud Pharisie his fault, Luke 18.
and it is the Papists likewise. Thirdly, it is better to eat daily a little,
then to eat seldom, and much. Hiero. ad Furiam. Parcus cibus and venture
esurie^s triduanis praefertur ieiuniis, and multo melius est quotidie parum
sumere quam raro satis sumere: pluvia illa optima est quae sensim descendit in
terram, subitus and nimius imber in praeceps arva subuertit; A little meat and
a hungry stomach, is preferred before a fast of three days, much better is it
daily to eat little, then seldom a great deal; the small rain does most
good, great rain hurts the fields. Fourthly, and lastly, Christians must
sometimes abstain from all food, Si a quadrup^dibus abstinentes a piscibus
persruantur n^n mihi videatur res^care delectiationes corporis s^d mala re.
Prosp. lib. 2. de vidu. cap. 23.
as good Queen Ester did, and the Ninevites: if men abstain from flesh and
eat fish, they cut not off delights of the body but change them.

The seventh means to proceed in piety, is a Christian exercise of vowing:
concerning vows; First, a Christian may vow to be thankful unto God: as for
example, if a man get the victory, he may vow to praise God, and to bestow
somewhat on the poor. Secondly, a man may vow to put away by prayer the wrath
of God: as for example, if a Christian has offended by eating too much,
knowing that the wrath of God hangs over his head, for this he may vow for a
time to abstain from all dainties. Thirdly, a christian may vow to keep
himself more war was for example if be he overtaken in offending with his
tongue, he may lawfully vow silence in company from idie words. Lastly, a
Christian may vow to stir himself up to religion, as for example, if he
feel himself backward in giving of alms he may vow to give alms to the
poor. If a man feel himself backward in the service of God, he may vow to
serve God with greater alacrity. And now, Christian brethren, to conclude
this point, mark the policy of the deuilltin popery, he abused prayer, in so
much that men prated for the dead; now he drives men to Atheism, that they
will not pray for the living: in popery, he abused fasting; now he drives
men to neglect this duty wholherin popery, he abused vows, now he drives
men to be carlesse in vowing: but the godly must remember to practice prayer,
fasting, and vowing.

The eight and last means to proceed in piety, is the frequent use of the
means that God has appointed; as the word preached, and the use of the
Sacraments: how should he live that neither eats or drinks? how should he
live spiritually that never hears sermons? and as he that eats little and
seldom, has usually but a spare and lean body; so they that hear sermons
little and seldom, have lean souls. Not to use the means that God has
appointed, is to tempt God. Is it not strange that men should think to fly
without wings; is it not strange to think that men can fly up to heaven
without the wings of faith, which is begotten by the word of God preached, and
nourished by the same? By hearing sermons a Christian is reproved, comforted,
instructed, and exceedingly built up in Christ. Habet latentis aliquid
energeias viua vox, says a father. vnde Aeschines cum Rhodi exularet and
legeretur illa Demosthenis oration qua aduersus eum habuerat mirantibus cunctis
atque laudantibus quid si ipsam audissetis bestiam sua verba resonantem?
inquit, ergo vina vox in aures discipuli tranfusa fortiu sonat. A living voice
has some secret force in it: therefore when Aeschines was banished at Rhodes,
and Demosthenes his oration was read, all men approouing and merueiling at it,
what, says he, if you had heard the best uttering these things? therefore a
lively voice has greater force; so the liuelyvoice of preaching, has greater
force, then the word read. And thus I have briefly finished both the
impediments of the progress in piety, and the means to proceed in the same: I
might have enlarged this thing, and so have made a just volume, but give a wise
but an occasion of wisdom, and he will be more wise. The Lord of his infinite
goodness and mercy, grant that we may carefully eschew the hindera^ces and
impediments of so holy a work, and diligently use the means to proceed in
the same, in so doing without all peradventure we shall be heirs of
everlasting life.

FINIS.

