A PERSUASION to the English Recusants, to Reconcile themselves to the Church
of England.

Written for the better satisfaction of those which be ignorant.

By John Dove Doctor of Divinity.

PSALM. 72. Give thy judgment to the King, O God, and thy righteousness to the
Kings son. 1. PET. 2. Fear God, Honor the King. emblem of man walking

Printed at London by V. S. for Cuthbert Burby dwelling in Paul's churchyard
at the sign of the ^

To the most High and Mighty Prince, JAMES by the grace of God, King of
England, Scotland, France and Ireland, Defendour of the Faith.
Gracious and dread Sovereign,
I say the truth, I lie not, my conscience bearing me witness in the Holy Ghost,
that I have with the Apostle great heaviness, and continual sorrow in my
heart for many of my brethren and Countrymen. And my hearty desire and prayer
for them to God, is, that they may be saved. For I bear them record, that
they have the zeal of God, though not according to knowledge, which is the
only cause that moved me to write this short Treatise. And, because God of
his great goodness has vouchsafed your tender years the education of
TIMOTHY, and endued your Highness, since your happy government with princely
gifts, knowledge to discern truth, and zeal to maintain truth, I humbly
present unto your Majesty, these few lines, containing a subject of so great
importance. The common voice, and hope of your best affected people is, that
your Highness has a religious intent, to make God yet better known in IVDA,
and his name yet greater in HIERVSALEM, to bring all these your Kingdoms to
the acknowledgement and profession of one truth; so that hereafter HIERVSALEM
may be as a walled town and fenced city, which is at unity within it self:
and as it was in the days of the IVDGES, all ISRAEL may be gathered together,
as one man, from DAN to BEERSHEBA, unto the Lord in MISHPAH. The Lord guide and
prosper you in all your ways, the Lord establish your house and kingdom, the
Lord bless you out of SION, that you may see the wealth of HIERVSALEM all the
days of your life, that you may see your Childrens Children, and peace in SION.

Your Majesty's humble Subject, JOHN DOVE.


A Persuasion to the English Recu sants, to reconcile themselves to the Church
of England.
CHAP. I.
It is not enough for them to pray privately, but it is also required, that they
join in prayer with the Congregation.

ALthough the prayers of the faithful are heard, if they be faithfully made,
in what places soever, because our Savior says: Matthew 7
Whosoever asks, he shall receive, and therefore, not the Publican only was
Luke 18 2. Reg. 20
heard in the Temple, but also King Ezekias in his Chamber, Elias under the
Juniper tree, Jonas in the bottom of the Sea, Manasses in the prison: Yet the
Church is a place more especially Iona 2 oration Manassis. Matthew 21.
appointed for prayer, it is called the house of prayer, and God is more
peculiarly present in that house, than in all other houses. Of the Temple we
read, that Gods eyes were open toward that house night and day, his name was
especially 1. Reg. 8
there, he harkened to the prayers of his Servants which stretched forth their
hands in that place, and of them which were in captivity, if they turned
toward that house which was built for his name. A greater promise is made to
the prayers of many united together, than of one, and a more favorable
presence of Christ amongst them which make their joint petition; insomuch, that
when a congregation is joined together in his Matthew 18
name, he will be in the midst of them, and if they agree in earth upon any
thing, whatsoever they shall desire, it shall be given of his Father which is
in heaven.

If we lay before our eyes the Stories of the Bible, the exercise 2. Ezra 8
of the godly was such. In the days of Ezra the Scribe it was so: All the
people assembled themselves together, he brought the book of the Law of Moses
before the assembly of men and women, and all that could hear and understand;
he read from morning until midday unto them, the ears of all the people
harkened to the book of the Law, he preached to them out of a wooden Pulpit,
he praised the Lord the great God, and all the people answered, AMEN, AMEN, with
lifting up their hands, and they bowed themselves, and worshipped the Lord
with their faces toward the ground. In the new Testament their manner was to
meet together on the Saboth day, to join in prayer, and to hear the word
preached, and to receive the sacraments. In the Acts of the Apostles at
Antiochia was maintained Act. 14
a Lecture of the Law and the Prophets. Saint Paul delivered words of
exhortation there after the Lecture, and they besought him to preach to them
the same sermon again the next Saboth. Saint Paul and his company being at
Philippi on the Saboth Act. 17
day, went out of the City by a river where they were accustomed to pray,
there he preached and converted Lydia. And no doubt, but if our Recusants would
hear our Sermons, many of them also would be converted. Upon the Lords day at
Troas the Act. 20
disciples were gathered together, to break bread, a multitude was gathered
together, and Paul preached to them. When Peter was in prison, the Church
making a joint petition for him, obtained a Act. 12
speedy and miraculous delivery. And it was observed as an especial virtue in
the primitive Church, that they continued together in prayer and breaking of
bread, and that they had all one heart. And to this purpose Saint Paul
exhorts them saying: I beseech you brethren, in the name of the Lord Jesus
Christ, that 1. Corin. 1.
ye all speak one thing, that ye be knit together in one mind and judgment.
And again; the God of patience and consolation Romans 15.
grant, that you may be like-minded one to another according to Christ Jesus,
that you with one mind, and one mouth, praise God the Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ.

The true marks of the visible Church of God, are the hearing of the word, the
participation of the sacraments and public prayer, as out of the scriptures I
have declared. Let us therefore examine the grounds whereupon so many of our
nation, which would especially be accounted of the true church, withdraw
themselves from our public assemblies, refuse to join with us in so Christian
exercises; insomuch, that whereas it was wont to be reputed a punishment to be
interdicted, suspended, and like Lepers, to be shut out of the Congregation,
they now like Lepers exclude themselves. Saint Ambrose needs not now to
excommunicate Theodosius, for he will excommunicate himself, Sozos. li. 7 c.
24
and we have as much need to whip them into the Temple, as our Savior had to
whippe them out, as he did in the story of the Gospel. They allege for
themselves, they do communicate Ioh. 2.
together in prayer, though not with us; they have their conuenticles and
Masses in their chambers, and the exercise of their own religion; but that it
is against their conscience to come to our churches, that we are Heretics,
Scismatikes, not members of the Catholic Church of Rome, not at unity among
ourselves, and consequently, that they may not safely communicate with us.

CHAP. II.
Of conscience.

THe ignorant Recusant being persuaded by the Minister, or required by the
Magistrate, to show his conformity and obedience to Laws, by resorting to the
Parish Church, where he dwells: when he is not able to answer such
arguments as are objected against him, nor in any sort to defend his own
Religion, pretends his Conscience, and says: It is against Vide Gre. Mar.
in tract de schi.
my conscience, to come to your Church, and whatsoever I do against my
conscience, is sin. I confess that whatsoever is done without testimony and
warrant of conscience, is sin to them which do it, be the thing which is done,
in it self never so lawful, because the Apostle says: He that doubts, is
condemned if he eat, because he eats not of faith; and whatsoever Romans 14.
is not of faith, is sin. In which words, by faith is understood Conscience.
But by the way, they must see that their conscience be rightly informed, else
it will be their damnation. For, as Matthew. 26. Act 9
it was sin in Saint Peter to deny Christ, when in his conscience he know
that he did evil: so it was sin in Saint Paul to persecute Christ, when he
thought in his conscience he did well. Therefore, it is not only damnable to
do contrary to their conscience, but also to do according as their conscience
shall direct them, if they be not persuaded by the truth. Therefore, let them
not deceive themselves, taking that for conscience, which is but an error of
conscience, and indeed a false persuasion of their minds, in follovving that
which the ignorance of their own fantasies and blind conceits does lead
them unto, without seeking any further. For so in his zeal Vzza supported the
Arc 1. Chron. 13
when it was ready to fall, his conscience persuading him that he did well,
although it was displeasing unto God. So saint Paul Act. 22
speaks of himself, that he was zealous toward God when he persecuted,
and so our Savior fore-warneth his disciples, that John 16
men shall excommunicate them, that the time shall come, that whosoever kills
them, shall think he does God good service; and he shows the reason of
this their error. These things says he, they will do unto you, because they
have not known the Father, nor me.

Therefore, for their better instruction, I will define unto them what
Conscience is. Conscience, I say, is an application of a general knowledge
grounded upon Gods word to particular actions and intents. Or thus: conscience
is a kind of argumentation or practike syllogism, whereby, out of a general
proposition, we do, by a particular conclusion, absolve or condemn our
selves, or others. In this syllogism, the mayor proposition is the inward
sense and feeling of Gods judgments, whereby we do reason and discourse of our
actions, intents and purposes, having before our eyes the rule of the law of
God. The minor is the examination of our actions, intents, and purposes,
according to that rule, the conclusion is our final determination concerning
our selves or others, what we or they having thus done, intended, and
purposed, are to deem or judge of our selves or them. So then, in our
conscience first we discourse, then we examine, and last of all we determine.
For example. In David's taking Vrias his wife, we may see what David's conscience
was. 2. Sam. 11.
First, he had this general notion imprinted in his mind, and grounded upon
Exodus, that adultery was damnation: and if Exodus 2^
when he intended to take Vrias his wife, he had examined his intent by the
rule of Exodus, he had found it to be adultery: and thirdly, after due
examination had, finding his intent to be adultery, he could not but
condemn himself in his own conscience, that he was guilty of damnation.
According to this sense Romans 1.
says Saint Paul: They have the effect of the Law written in their hearts,
their conscience also bearing witness, and their thoughts accusing or excusing
one an other.

Albeit conscience is sometimes taken only for the intellectual power and
faculty of our understanding and reasonable soul, by which we are able thus
to argue and discourse with our selves: so Saint Paul says; We must obey
Magistrates for conscience Romans 13.
sake; that is, because of our own reason, knowledge, and understanding, which
reuealeth so much light unto us: GOD will eternally punish disobedience, and
therefore it shall not be safe for us to charge and burden our souls with the
wrath of God. Sometimes for the minor alone, which is the examination of our
actions and intents, whether they be good or evil: so the Apostle says of
himself; Nihil mihi conscius sum, I know nothing of my self, yet I am not
thereby justified; that is, I know no heinous crime wherewith I should be
touched. Sometimes 1. Cor. 4.
for the conclusion alone, so he says: I have in all good conscience served
God until this day; that is, I do absolve my self from any Act. 23.
grievous crime that I have committed.

Now, the Recusants argue in this manner: No Heretics nor Scismatikes are to be
communicated withal, but Protestants are Heretics and Scismatikes, and
therefore not to be communicated withal. Their mayor proposition is
undoubtedly true, because it is grounded upon scripture, Titus the third?
Reject him that is an Heretic after two or three admonitions: and Saint John
in his second Epistle; Bid him not God speed: and Romans 16. Mark them
diligently which make division, and avoid them. The error therefore, is in the
minor or examination of this action of communicating with us according to that
general rule, that no society is to be had with Heretics: for whereas they
say we are Heretics, it is not true. Neither is it marvel though our
Recusants have erred concerning us, seeing that Saint Peter and the Disciples
have erred concerning the like. When the sheet was Act. 10.
let down, wherein were all manner of beasts, and Saint Peter was bidden to
arise, kill, and eat: He answered: Not so Lord: for I never ate any meat
that was unclean. And therefore he argued in this manner: No unclean meats
are to be eaten: But these meats are unclean, therefore they are not to be
eaten. The Mayor was true, because grounded upon Leuiticus 11. Deuteronomy. 14. where
the differences of meats are set down. But in his Minor he was deceived,
which thought those meats to be unclean, for as much as under the Gospel, the
difference of meats was taken away, and no meat was polluted, in respect of
the conscience of man. So then, as it was not Saint Peter's conscience, but the
error of his conscience, when he refused the meats as unclean, which God had
sanctified and made lawful; so it is not their conscience, but the error of
their conscience that they refuse us for schism and heresy, which indeed are
true gospellers and members of the mystical body of Jesus Christ, as by Gods
assistance I will prove. And as the Disciples, not knowing of Paul's Act. 9.
conversation, were afraid to join with him, supposing him to be a persecuter
when he was a Preacher: so they fear to join with us, supposing us to be in
the wrong way, whereas indeed we be in the right.

And because I have said, it is not upon conscience that they sequester
themselves from us, I will show them how many ways a man's conscience may err
and be deceived, and so carried away from the truth, and they are these eight
following. The first is ignorance, so the common sort ignorantly allege we are
heretics, that our religion is not warrantable, but cannot know what heresy
is, neither yet rightly conceive the grounds either of our religion of their
own. For they are inhibited to hear our Sermons, Vide Council. Trid. and Pref.
in indicem expurg. and Greg. Mart. de schis.
to read our books, to have conference with us, or to be catechized by us.
How then should they know our religion? They are nourished in blindness by
their own teachers, which hold it as a principle, that it is fit they should
be ignorant. Neither are they permitted to have the Bible in their mother
tongue. How then can they know their own religion? They are unfurnished and
utterly destitute of all means and helps which may bring them to be able to
discern truth from heresy.

The second is negligence. So they which in some measure are learned, do call
us heretics, which can, but do not read our books, although they have them,
nor examine the grounds which we hold, although they are able, and it is
permitted unto them. Concerning their own doctrine, they are contented to
receive it for truth, upon the credit of others without further proof, and to
see with other men's eyes, hear with other men's ears, speak with other men's
tongues, because they will not spend so much time as to search further, and
what slander soever they do hear of us, they are ready to believe it. For
example, Edm. Ca^p. rat. 1.
Campion slandereth our Church, as if we did offer violence to the holy
scriptures, affirming that Luther wrote contumeliously of Saint James his
Epistle: his disciples blush not to report the same, because he has written
it, without further inquiry, whether he writ the truth or not, whereas if
they would but vouchsafe to examine the place for their own satisfaction, they
would find it a slander, which they because of their slothfulness do hold
for a truth. They are contented to buy Campion alone, and Gregory Martine his
Preface, with the notes of the Seminaries of Rhemes, upon the New Testament,
and now and then to read them. But as for Doctor Whitaker his answer, many of
them suffer it not to be in their studies, or if it be in the Catalogue of
their liberarie, they do not read it. And as for doctor Fulkes answer to
Gregory Martines Preface, and the notes of the Seminaries, they are so far
from conferring the one with the other, that so they might be satisfied and
resolved of the truth, as they are contented to give more money for the Rhemish
Testament alone, then for the same book with Doctor Fulkes answer joined with
it.

The third is obstinacy. For, as the first cannot, because they be ignorant
and unable to judge, and deprived of all means by which they may be enabled;
and the second do not judge rightly because they are slothful, and loath to
take so much pains as to try the spirits, to examine doctrine, and confer
places: So the third sort of men will not understand the truth, because they be
obstinate, they will resist the holy Ghost, and stop their ears against the
truth, as the adder does against the charmer, and as the Jews did against
Saint Stephen. We shall not persuade Act. 7.
them although we do persuade them, because instruction and Romans 10.
faith comes by hearing, they will not hear least they should be instructed,
and believe the truth. They say their fathers professed that religion, and
therefore they will rather err with their fathers Genesis 31.
than embrace the truth with us: like Rachel, which would not leave behind her
the gods of her Father, but carry them with her. They were brought up and
instructed in this religion from their childhood, and now they say they will
not alter. They 1. These. 5.
forgot the rule of the Apostle, which wills them to make trial of all, and
then to hold that which is best. For they will hear none, they will hold what
they have held, and they will not alter for the better. And in so doing, what
do they but as Pharao Exodus 5.
did, who said: Who is the Lord, that I should hear his voice, and let Israel
go? I know not the Lord, neither will I let Israel go. Whereas the Prophet
says: To day if ye will hear his voice, Psalm. 95.
harden not your hearts.

The fourth is perplexity, vnstayednesse, and trouble of mind, like unto
Saul, which after he had put away the Sorcerers and 1. Sam. 28.
Soothsayers out of the Land: yet when he was terrified by the army of the
Philistines, seeing it to be very great, and could have no answer from God,
neither by dreams, nor Vrim, nor Prophets, asked counsel of a Witch at Endor:
So diverse which have renounced that religion, and embraced ours, yet lying at
the point of death, in the midst of their conflicts and tentations, thinking
upon the arguments which are brought on each side, and fearing to halt between
two opinions, and so die unresolved; because they have not had at that instant
conference with such as were able Genesis 19.
to resolve them of all their doubts, have suddenly revolted, and not only
followed the example of Lots wife, which looked back unto Sodom, but also of
the people which have said, come let us go back into Aegipt again.

The fifth is pride, and their own insolency, whereby they are puffed up, and
think that all men must be subject unto them, Number. 14.
but they need submit themselves unto none. As Bernardinus Ochinus writ a
Book in defense of Poligamie, affirming that numerosum coniugium, multitude of
wives was lawful: supposing that after his Master Peter Martyr was dead, no
man was able to match him in writing or in disputation: like Golias of Gath,
which 1. Sam. 17
challenged all comers to the combat. And this is the special cause why Popes
and general Councels do err, because they hold it as a principle in their
Divinity that they cannot err. For what doctrine will they be afraid to
publish, which are thus persuaded of themselves? Nay, who falls so soon as they
which think their footing to be so fast that they cannot fall? Therefore the
Apostle gives this advice: Qui videtur sibi stare, videat ne cadat, He that
thinks that he stands, let him take heed 1. Cor. 10.
lest he fall.

The sixth is singularity: They will hold their opinions because they will
descent from us, as if it were impossible that they and we should agree
together in one truth. They think themselves to be Saint John, and us to be
Cerinthus, as if that Bath Eusebius. hist. li. 3. ca. 23. John 4.
could not be wholesome where Cerinthus does wash himself; themselves to be
Jews, and us to be Samaritans, as if it were unlawful for them to drink
water out of our bucket which we do draw; as if they would not have any place
in the Kingdom of heaven, but relinquish all their right and inheritance
there, if they did think we should come thither. Even as some in our Church,
although otherwise grave and learned, yet refuse some good and wholesome laws
and orders, because they were, as they think, devised by the Church of Rome.
It is not a sufficient Argument, that because we hold it, therefore the
doctrine should be heretical, as it is no good consequent, that because they
hold it, it should be sound, and orthodoxall. So then what is their proof, but
a woman's reason, it is so, because it is so; I will have it so, because I
think so: Non amo te Voluci, non possum dicere quare,
Hoc tantum possum dicere, non amo te.


The seventh is inordinate affection, and love of themselves, for some will
make their conscience incline to their own will and affections, and not frame
their desires according to conscience. For example, they think that religion
soundest, which does most of all serve their turn, as the King Achab judged
those Prophets 1. Reg. 22
to be best which preached pleasing thing; but concerning Micheas, which
prophesied other things then the King would have him to prophecy, it was said:
Put this man in prison, feed him with the bread of affliction, and water of
affliction. So, because of their corrupt and fleshly nature they do incline to
liberty, they think that religion most probable which does favor their
affections most; that is, which holds simple fornication to be no sin, that
offenses may be redeemed by money, that ordinary faults which they commit, are
not peccata, but peccadilia, not sins, but trifles, which are easily pardoned
and dispensed withal.

The last is pusillanimitie, or weakness of mind, when they fear that which
in sincere judgment they ought not to fear, as namely the dislike of their
friends, the rebuke of their enemies, the voice of the people, the good or bad
report of other men, who will object apostasy against them. So Saint Peter,
though he knew Christ, yet said he knew not the man, for fear of rebuke. Matt.
26.
And Nicodemus, although converted to be a Christian, yet kept his place and
profession among the Pharisees still, least it should be said unto him as
afterward it was in the Gospel: Art John. 7. John 11.
thou also of Galile? Some rely upon the opinion of great Doctors, whose
judgment they would, in modesty prefer before their own, and in respect of
them, somewhat distrust themselves, though they see evident demonstrations to
persuade them otherwise. As the Jews would not believe in Christ, for fear of
the Pharisees, although they saw a manifest sign, Lazarus raised from dead.
They fear least it should be vpbraided unto them as it was in the Gospel: Do
any of the Rulers believe in him, but only this people which know not the Law
and are accursed? As Cardinal Pole in his deathbed, said, the protestants are
the sounder men, I would be a protestant were it not for the Church of Rome:
whereas they should not so much respect the opinion of this Doctor or that
Rabbi, when they see the plain and open way lie before them, but prefer a
manifest truth above all. Therefore it behooves our Countrymen to inform
their consciences better, and not to lay it upon their conscience that they
live disorderly, and disobedient to Christian laws.

CHAP. III.
Of Heresy.

THey lay heresy to our charge, as if so be that we were like Vide Gregor.
Mart in tract. de. Scism.
to Seruerus, Cerinthus, and Arrius. If we be heretics, they do well to
refrain our company. But that we may the better proceed in this argument, for
the purgation of our selves, let us first define what heresy is. Secondly, let
us inquire by what Court or Consistory we are condemned of heresy. Thirdly,
let us set down the fundamental points of our Doctrine, that it may appear
whether we were justly condemned or no? Which being done, we shall not only
clear our selves from just suspicion of heresy, but also demonstrate how the
greatest Papists in the world, for learning and judgment, do embrace the same,
and agree in them, with us, not as if we did comforme our selves unto them,
because we hold the same conclusions which we have always held, but they
seeing their own errors laid open before them, and being in their own
consciences conicted by a manifest truth, do daily; so far as they dare, and
may without the general notice of the world, come nearer unto us, as if our
doctrine in their knowledge were the soundest. And therefore, why should not
the inferior sort of Catholics which are but their disciples do the like?
The Church of Rome being taxed by Luther for their discipline as loose, and
their doctrine as erroneous, called the Council of Trent, to devise a
reformation, seeing that in the eyes of the world they were not slandered. In
that counsel they set forth such wholesome Canons concerning Discipline as
were fit for a reformed Church, but they were not so careful of their points
of Doctrine, because they saw the world could sooner look into their
disorders, then judge of their doctrine, and so did as it were yield Luthers
complaint in part to be just. As for the doctrine, although they hold in
terms the same which they did before, because Princes and estates should not
think they had so long deceived the world, and continued in error, and not
espied the same until by Luther they had bin discovered, and as it were by him
awaked like men which were in a dream so many years: yet they set down their
conclusions so cunningly, as if they would bear men in hand that they were (in
some sort) but mistaken, and inclined of themselves somewhat unto that which
Luther persuaded. Whereupon, some protestants suspected that they had an
intent, in time, to become Lutherans, only it should come of themselves, and
not by force of Luthers arguments, until Andradius, a man more audacious then
the rest, to remove that hope of theirs, when he thought the Lutherans to be
more cold, and the brunt almost passed over, took upon him to expound the
meaning of the Tridentine counsel, and to conster all points to as gross
sense as they were ever before. But now they begin to incline to us again,
insomuch that Cardinal Bellarmine late Divinity Reader of Rome, and the
learnedest Divine of that Church which now lives, in the course of his
controversy lectures, though where he delivers the state of the question he
brings what may be brought on their side, for fashion sake, that he may
avoid all suspicion of heresy with them: yet he handles his matters so
cunningly, and so doubtfully, that in his conclusions he agrees with us in
many things, although in diverse terms, wherein his predecessors utterly
dissented from us. And in many things he shows himself to be; so far as he
dares, a Protestant, or at the least not a Papist: if we take papistrie to be
that which before it was. And whosoever does observe him well, shall find how
he discourses of many things superfluous, like one which is more desirous to
deceive the time, to fill up the page with variety of reading multitudes of
Fathers, and citations of places, then to refute us. Yet his Volumes are
allowed by the Inquisition, and he is rewarded for his learned works.
Therefore I say, papistrie is newely corrected and refined, they hold the same
conclusions in general terms which they did, but they hold them not as they
did: they seek out new defenses, as if they could not stand to the old, and
come nearer to us in judgment every day. For so it has pleased God in this
latter end of the world to lighten their darkness, and to quicken the dullness
of their understanding.

Touching the first, if they will understand what heresy is, they must
distinguish between heresy and error, for every heresy is an error, but
every error is not an heresy. As there is one error in manners, and so every
heinous offense is called a crime, as the adultery of David; but such offenses
as are committed only upon infirmity, are called by the general name of errors;
so there is another error in doctrine, and every man which holds a wrong
opinion is said to err, as the Apostle did, which supposed the Kingdom of
Christ to be of this world, and that the Gospel was Acts 1. Acts 11.
not to be published to the Gentiles: and these errors were no heresies, but
that which is heresy, is more dangerous and of an higher nature. It is an old
saying: Errare possum, hereticus esse nolo, I may easily err, as all men have
done, but an heretic I will not be.

I define an heresy in this manner: It is an error stiffly and obstinately
defended and maintained, not by a consequent, but directly impugning some
Article of faith. For example, the Disciples Act. 15
erred when they held it necessary to be circumcised, yet were not heretics,
because they were not obstinate; for they submitted themselves to the judgment
of the Church, and after due consultation was had, they consented to the truth.
Again, that opinion, did not directly impugn faith, but only by a
consequent, for so says the Apostle: Behold, I Paul say unto you, if Gal. 5
you be circumcised, Christ shall profit you nothing, for I testify again to
every one which is circumcised, that he is bound to keep the whole Law. Then,
if we allow of Circumcision, we hold the Ceremonial Law to be still in force,
and by a consequent deny the death of Christ, by whose death only that Law was
abolished. But Arrius was condemned for an heretic in the council of Nice for
these two causes: First, he defended his error obstinately, until his belly
burst, and bowels gushed out, not yielding to the learned Bishops of the world,
which convicted him by manifest places of the scriptures. Secondly, he denied
the Godhead of Christ contrary to the article of the Creed, which has; and I
believe in Jesus Christ his only son: and the doctrine of saint Paul, which
says he was mightily declared Romans 1
to be the Son of God by his resurrection from the dead: and of saint John,
which says, God was the word. It is one thing therefore to deny the faith
directly, as to say, Christ has not yet suffered; and another thing to deny
it by a consequent, as they which hold a necessity of circumcision. But as for
us, we neither hold any opinions obstinately, because we will recant and
subscribe to the Church of Rome, if they can disprove us by the scriptures:
Neither do we impugn any article of faith, because we hold the Creed of the
Apostles, of Athanasius, of Nice, of Ephesus, of Constantinople, which the
Papists also do hold, and the same Bible which we received from them, and we
expound all these as all godly and learned antiquity has expounded them
before us, and therefore we are unjustly charged with heresy.

That I may come to the second thing which I proposed. No Church can be
condemned and adjudged heretical by any private censure, but it must be
public. Therefore they allege for our condemnation, the decrees of the
council of Trent, against the authority of which council we take these just
exceptions: First, they call it a general council, as if almost all the
Divines of the world had been assembled there. Let us therefore number how
many were present. They reckon for the credit of that council as present, six
Cardinals, four Legates, three Patriarchs, two and thirty Archbishops, two
hundred twenty eight Bishops, and five Abbats. We deny not, but at the end
of the council so many were procured to be there, but at the beginning, when
matters were propounded, at the time when points of religion were argued and
debated, they exceeded not the number of forty Bishops, four Legates; very
small assembly to deserve the name of a general council, to consider of so
many weighty causes. Only therefore at the latter end, the Pope seeing almost
all Bishops to forbear coming thither, did create new Bishops to make up a
number, and grace the council with their presence, and to subscribe to all
conclusions for form sake, which they did, neither here argued by others, nor
yet well consider of their selves. Therefore let indifferency be the Judge
between them and us, whether so rash a censure was to stand in force Secondly,
who were there? only our adversaries which Ioh. 7
were of a contrary religion, we were not present, so that they did not only
by us, as the Pharisees did by our Savior, contrary to law contemn us in our
absence and our cause being not heard, but also the same men were both our
accusers and our Judges. If ye ask a reason why we were not there? had we
letters of safe conduct? either could we have trusted to such conduct if it had
bin granted? What if they should have falsified their promise made to us, as
they did to John Huz in the council of Constance? especialy they holding such
a Principle, as they are not bound to keep faith and fidelity with an
heretic. But suppose we had been present, we should have stood for ciphers
and not for a number, because they were linked together in the same
confederacy, to suffer nothing to pass which might be prejudicial to the Sea
of Rome. Thirdly, Bellarmine defines those councels, Tom. 1. controuers. 4.
cap. 4.
only to be universal, where all Bishops of the world either were or might be
present, these be his words: Vbi adsunt aut adesse possunt omnes Episcopitotius
orbis and in the next chapter he defines that council only to be lawful
which the Pope has approved, and the catholics generally have received. But
neither all could be present as I have declared, neither have the greater part
of Catholics yet received that council with the decrees thereof, for they are
refused by the Catholics of Germany, France, Hungary, Bohemy, Poland, as our
own experience can tell us.

In the third place, forasmuch as I have showed you, that Christians dwelling
in one place are to meet together for the exercise of their religion, which
consists in these three things prayer, the word, and the Sacraments: Let us
examine the word which we teach, the leiturgie or form of prayers which we
use, the manner of our administration of the sacraments whereof we would that
they should be partakers.

Concerning the doctrine, as I said before, we hold with them the same
Creed, and the same Bible, concerning which Bible these have bin the chiefest
differences between them and us, which follow.

First, whether all the books of the Bible be canonical or no? They affirm
that Tobie, Baruch, Judith, Ecclesiasticus, Wisdom, the Maccabees, and the
fragment of Esther etc: be canonical; we hold them for Apocripha. They prove
them to be canonical out of Saint Augustine; we, that they be Apocripha out of
Saint Hierome, both which doctors are of no small authority with the Church of
Rome, and therefore in this we differ no more from them than Saint Hierome did
from Saint Augustine, which did both agree, and were easily reconciled. S.
Hierome interprets Saint Augustines meaning, that they were canonical enough
to prove rules of life, not grounds of doctrine and faith. Thus Saint Hierome
answered Saint Augustine in the Primitive Church, thus we have answered the
Papists of our age: and Bellarmine since this answer was given, handling this
controversy at large, replieth not against our answer. Only he proves in
general terms, that they be canonical, which we do also confess, but he
does not so much as mention this destruction of Cannons of faith, and Cannons
of good life and manners, much less does he reply against it, therefore we
take it proconcesso, as a thing granted by the Laws of disputations, De verbo
Dei lib. 1. capitibus 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15.
that he holds as we hold, fl^eth to our defense, and so rests satisfied
with our answer, and the case to be clear between us both.

Secondly: A question has been debated between us concerning the Bible,
forasmuch as there be many editions, as Hebrew, Greek, Latin, which is the
best? We say the Hebrew, they the Latin, and the council of Trent has
obtruded to us one only Latin edition, that is, the old vulgar translation,
and decreed, that it only should be authentical and no other, that all others
should be corrected by it, and it by none. We grant it fit, that for
uniformity in quotations of places in schools and pulpits, one Latin text
should be used, and we can be contented, for the antiquity thereof, to
prefer that before all other Latin books, so much we do yield to the
Council: But forasmuch as that translation has many faults, as al other
translations have, because they are the works of men, we prefer the
original, that is, the old Testament in the Hebrew, and the new in Greek
far before it, forasmuch as they were written by the finger of God the Holy
Ghost, which cannot err. And Bellarmine condescendeth to our opinion, as more
sound than the decree of the council of Trent, showing that wheresoever the
Latin books do descent one from another, that it may be discerned, which is
the truest, each of them to be examined by the original, which is of greater
authority, and the Latin books to be corrected by them, that only to be
sound, which agrees with them, and that to be rejected, which discenteth from
them. His words are these: Ad aliud de emendatione Latinorum codicum ad
Hebraeos De verbo Dei lib. 2. cap. 11
and Graecos respondeo, quatuor temporibus licere nobis recurrere al fontes
Hebraeos and Graecos, vt illi patres monent. Primo quando in nostris codicibus
videtur esse error librariorum etc: Secundo, quando Latini codices variant, vt
non possit certo status quae sit vera vulgata Lectio, possumus ad fontes
recurrere, and inde iuuari ad veram Lectionem inueniendam. Sic Iosue 5. quidam
Latini codices habent: Quibus iurauit vt ostenderet illis terram lecte fluentem
and molle, quidam habent, vt non ostenderet etc: vera lectio videtur esse
posterior. Nam in Hebraeo constanter additur, Non. Sicut e contrario Iosue 11.
Quidam codices habent: Non fuit ciuitas quae non se traderet: Quidam habent:
Non fuit ciuitas quae se traderet, Et hoc est verius quia conform est Hebraeo,
and verba sequentia id requirunt. Sic Lucae 1. quidem codices habent:
Redemptionem plebisuae: Quidam plebi suae, and haec videtur verior, cum in
Graeco sit (...).

A third question concerning the Bible is, whether all grounds of salvation,
all things which are absolutely necessary for a Christian man to know, be
contained in the corpse and body of the Bible? They have held, in times past,
that the Bible was insufficient, Vide Council. Trident.
and therefore they added unto it traditions, which they call unwritten
verities, and would have them to be of as great authority as the scriptures;
as necessary to be believed and obayed. but now, Bellarmine, as if he were
ashamed of that ascertion, does relinquish it, and after he has spoken in the
defense of traditions what he can, concludes that all things which are
necessary, are contained in the Apostles. His words are these: Primum De verbo
Dei lib. 4. cap. 10
est, quaedam in doctrina Christiana tam fides quam morum esse simpliciter
omnibus necessaria, ad salutem, qualis est notitia; articulorum Symboli
Apostolici, item congnitio december praeceptorum, and nonnullorum sacramentorum.
Cetera non ita necessaria sunt, vt sine eorum explicata notitia, and fide and
professione saluari homo non possit, modo promptam habeat voluntatem ea
suscipiendi and credendi, quando sibi fuerint legitime per Ecclesiam proposita
etc: His notatis, dico, illa omnia scripta esse ab Apostolis, quae sunt omnibus
necessaria, and quae ipsi palam omnibus vulgo praedicauerant: alia autem non
omnia scripta esse. But whatsoever they can prove out of the Bible, we will
receive; as for things which are not necessary, although we descent concerning
them, they ought not therefore to refuse to communicate with us.

A fourth question is, of the authority of the scriptures, and who ought of
right to be judge of the same. They were wont to hold the Church, that is, the
general Council, to be above the scriptures, and the undoubted Judge of the
same; we the contrary. Now Bellarmine condescendeth unto us, that the
judgment of the church specified in the council of Trent may so far De verbo
Dei lib. 3. cap. 1^.
be subject to the scriptures, as to be examined by the scriptures, and that
the authority of the Church is inferior to the authority of the scriptures. His
words are these: Addo etiam, quod etsi haereticus peccat dubitando de
auctoritate Ecclesiae, in quam per Baptismum regeneratus est, neque est eadem
conditio haeretici qui semel fidem professus est, and Iudaei aut Ethnici, qui
nunquam fuit Christianus: tamen, posito hoc dubio, and hoc peccato, non male
facit scrutando and examinando, an loca scripturae and Patrum a concilio
Tridentino prelata ita sehabeant, modo id faciat intention inueniendi
veritatem non calumnian di. Deberet quidem ille sine examine recipere doctrinam
Ecclesiae, tamen melius est vt examinando praeparetur adveritatem, quam
negligendo remaneat in suis tenebris. And again in the same Chapter. Decimum
quartum argumentum: Si Pontifex indicat de scripturis, sequitur Pontificem seu
concilium esse supra scripturam: and si scripturae sensus ^sine Pontifice seu
concilio non est authenticus, sequitur verbum Dei accipere robur and firmitatem
a verbo Hominum. Respondeo hoc argumentum quod ab haereticis plurimi fit, totum
in aequiuocatione versari: Nam duobus modis potest intelligi Ecclesiam iudicare
de scripturis: vno modo quod iudicat, verumne sit an falsum quod scripturae
docent: altero modo, quod posito vt fundamento certissimo scripturae verba esse
verissima, iudicet quae sit vera eorum interpretatio. Et quidem, si primo modo
Ecclesia iudicaret, vere esset supra scripturam, sed hoc non dicimus, quamuis
haeretici calumnientur id nos dicere, qui passim vociferantur nos subijcere
scripturam pedibus Papae. At secundo modo iudicare Ecclesiam vel Pontificem de
scripturis, quod nos asserimus, non est Ecclesiam esse supra scripturam, sed
supra iudicia priuatorum hominum. Non enim iudicat Ecclesia de veritate
scripturae sed de intelligentia tua and mea, and aliorum, Neque hinc sumit
verbum Dei aliquod robur, sed intelligentia nostra. Non enim scriptura est
verior aut certior, quia sic ab Ecclesia exponitur, sed mea sententia est
verior quando ab Ecclesia confirmatur.

Thus I could go almost through all the controversies between them and us.
But I do content my self with the fundamental points. Therefore I exhort
them which hold us for heretics, first, to read diligently, to peruse and
examine their own writers, and what they hold, to confer their grounds with
ours, and then to examine their own judgments, whether they find us
heretics or no. And as for those matters, which be no fundamental points,
although in them we descent, we must not despair of their conversion. For
God neither has nor will reveal unto them all truth at once, but, as the
blind man in the Gospel, when he first began to see, thought he saw
Mark. 8
men walking like trees, but when our Savior touched his eyes again, he saw
more clearly: So God will lighten the darkness of their hearts, and take away
the veil or covering which is before them, by degrees, until they come to the
full measure of knowledge, which the Holy Ghost shall judge expedient to be
revealed unto them.

Of Faith and Works.
TO leave these general grounds, and to dispute more particularly. They hold,
with Saint James, that works do justify; Iam. 2. Romans 5.
we with Saint Paul, justification by Faith, and since these two Apostles differ
in words, and not in meaning, why should we disagree, holding the same which
they do hold? Faith goes before, and works follow after justification, but
both do justify: so Saint Paul argues from that which is precedent, Saint
James argues from that which is subsequent, and both argue well. According to
the Grammatical signification of the word, as to justify signifies, iustum
facere, to make a man just: so neither faith nor yet works do justify, but
God alone, according to the acception which is used in Law, as to justify
signifies, iustum declarare, to absolve a man and pronounce him just out of
the mouth of a jury or a Judge, so faith which is invisible justifies us
before the invisible god, which sees our invisible faith, and works which are
visible, justify us before visible men, which see our works as they be
visible and sensible things. As the Angels when they came unto Lot, had not
been entertained, had they not clothed themselves with bodily shapes, so men
cannot discern our faith unless it be as it were clothed and beautified with
works. But to speak of that which is worst: They hold Genesis 19
that works are meritorious, and therefore they work that they may merit
heaven, we ascribing less unto our selves, and more unto God, think not so
honorably of our works, and yet we think works as necessary as they do,
and therefore we will work, and we will work, that we may be saved, and we
will work out our salvation with fear and trembling. We hold works
necessary for them which will inherit, but not for them which will merit, and
therefore we work not that we may merit, Phil. 2.
yet that we may inherit, and our works have these four necessary uses, that
by them we may glorify God, benefit our neighbor, exercise our faith, and
make our election sure. For with us this is the very definition of a work: An
action of the regenerate according to the Law of God, done to these ends, that
God, by it may be glorified, our neighbor profited, our faith exercised, and
our election confirmed. And although we work not for that end as they do, yet
because without works we must not think to please God, we will work as much
as they do, and the same works which they do, with the same zeal which they
do, which think to merit. We will work as earnestly as if we thought to
merit, and yet we will be far off from thinking that we merit, because when we
have done all that Luc. 17
we are commanded to do, we are but unprofitable servants, and therefore we
will rely upon the merits of Christ alone, renouncing our selves and our
works. Let them judge then who are safest, they or we. Our difference is not
concerning the work it self, but only concerning the opinion which we ought
to conceive of the work, they think honorably, we basely, of our own
works, but work the same. And certainly, the worthiness of works does not
consist in the excellent opinion which we conceive of them, but in the true and
faithful working, not in the pleasing of our selves with our selves, or any
thing which proceeds from us.

Of Free will.
THis question has bred some difference between us in the schools, and yet
if we do understand each other, we may be easily reconciled. For the scriptures
speak so plainly, that they take away doubts: We are, say they, not of our
selves sufficient to think a good thought, as of our selves, but all our
sufficiency is of God. The way of man is not in himself, neither is it in man
1. Corint. 3. Ierem. 10
to walk and direct his steps. No man comes to Christ unless the Father
draw him. Draw me, and we will run after John. 6 Cant. 1 Romans 7
thee. What good I would do, that do I not, the evil which I would not do,
that do I, says the Apostle. To conclude therefore, there are three sorts of
agents; the one working of his mere will and pleasure, which is God; the other
of necessity, which is nature; a third between both these extremes, partly
of willingness, and partly of necessity, which is man. And as no man is good
against his will, so no man has power to will any thing that is good, unless
God gives him that will. So says the Apostle: It is God which works in you
even the will and deed, Phil. 2
of his own good will and pleasure. And this will may be compared to the eye,
which being in darkness, yet is not blind, neither does it see without the
especial grace of God.

Of Prayer.
WE invoke God alone, who we are sure does hear us, and they confess, that
in so doing we do well, why then will they not join with us in well doing?
But, as for Saints departed, when they pray to them, to be prayed for by them,
they are not certain that they do hear them, because it cannot be
sufficiently proved; why then will they not pray with us whose prayers they
confess to be void of exception? They deny not but that it is better to pray
to God then to Saints, why then had they not rather be sure of the first place,
then doubt of the second? Their prayer to Saints may breed a scruple in their
conscience, whether they do well or no. For, if they hear them not, their
prayers are idle words, but they must answer at the day of judgment Matthew. 12.
for every idle word which they shall speak.

As we pray not to Saints departed, so we pray not for Saints or any other
deceased. If they be in heaven, they need not our prayers, if in hell, no
prayers can help them, and we dare not say they are in purgatory, since
purgatory, by the confession of Bellarmine, is a tradition, and not containd in
the scriptures. He writes that there be many things necessary to be known,
which are not contained in the scriptures, he does reckon them up in order, and
he places them so; first, that women were purged from sin, though
uncircumcised: secondly, that children that died before the eight day, were
also purged from original sin: thirdly, many Gentiles in the old testament
were saved: fourthly, that of necessity there be some books which are the holy
scriptures: fifthly, that it must be known which books are the holy
scriptures: sixthly, that the books which we have in our hands are the holy
scriptures: seauenthly, that the scriptures are to be understood: eighthly, that
Mary was a perpetual Virgin: ninthly, that Easter is to be celebrated on the
Lords day: tenthly, that Infants are to be baptized: eleuenthly, purgatory:
But mark his words, he says, many things are necessary to be known, which
are not contained in the scriptures, among those he makes purgatory to be the
eleventh, therefore he affirms, that purgatory is a thing necessary to be
known, and not in the scriptures, and yet as a man that would halte between
two religions, to please us, and not displease the Papists, does lay it upon
Luther, saying, Credit Lutherus purgatorium esse, and tamen asserit purgatorium
non posse probari in sacris literis. Luther says, he belieueth that there is a
purgatory, and yet says, it cannot be proved out of the scriptures. The
question is, whether Bellarmine does not say so as well as Luther. If he do
not: first, why does he not express his own mind to the contrary in that
place? secondly, why does he in that long catalogue of such things as are not
contained in the scriptures reckon purgatory to be the eleventh? He shows
that the tenth tradition or unwritten verity is the baptism of Infants, that
Luther and Calvin hold it lawefull, and yet his self does not refuse that
opinion which they do hold, and the like must be understood concerning
purgatory, that as Luther denies purgatory to be contained in the scriptures,
so does Bellarmine, or else he does contradict himself, which said before that
Pargatorium est vndecimum eorum quae ignorari non possunt, and tamen in
scripturis non continentur, Purgatory is the eleventh of these things, whereof
we may not be ignorant, and yet are not contained in the scriptures. Since
therefore Bellarmine repeating many things which are not contained in the
scripture, of which one to be purgatory, and yet before as I have showed,
grants all things to be contained in the scriptures which are necessary for
our salvation, that we should know them, ye must bear with us De verbo Dei
lib. 2. cap. 11.
if we do not believe purgatory, being no matter of salvation to us to
believe it.

We pray in our mother tongue, what exception do they take against it? Their
private prayers are in English, as it appears by their Jesus psalter, their
Manual of Meditations, and sundry other prayer books which they have printed,
I would know why it might not be as lawful to pray publicly in the same
tongue. Which is more, I have seen the Mass, by them set forth in Spanish,
the Spanish being in one page of the book, and the Latin in the other. In
times past, the English testament was printed with the English in one page, and
the Latin in the other, and licensed to be printed, and publicly sold by King
Philip and Qu. Mary. And now of late our English Seminaries of Rhemes have
published the New Testament in English, with promise also to set forth the old,
why may not the English Bible be published by us as well as by the Seminaries,
and as well be read publicly in our Church as in their houses? But to come to
the point, See Greg. Mart. his proface at large concerning the Scriptures in
English.
Bellarmine confesses those prayers which are in a known tongue to be beter
then those which are not understood, why then should not that which is
inferior give place unto that which is better? God is best pleased when he is
best served, and he is best served where he is prayed unto after the best
manner. Bellarmines words are these: Neque his repugnant scripturae illae:
populus hic labiis me honorat, etc: S^orem lingua, spiritus meus erat, men's
autem sine fructu est: In posteriore scriptura, non reprehenditur oration quae
non intelligitur sed ei anteponitur oration quae intelligitur. In the same
chapter he confesses that the Pope gave license to the whole De verbo Dei
lib. 2. cap. 16
land of Morauia, to have their public service in their own tongue, why
should he deny the same to us? I doubt not but he would dispense with us,
if we would take such a dispensation from him. If it be of it self evil,
his dispensation cannot make it good, and if it be of it self good, and
according to Gods word, it needs not to be strengthened by his dispensation.
As he cannot dispense against Gods word, so Gods word of it self is warranted
without man's dispensation.

They object, that until of late through the West part of the world public
prayers were in Latin, in the Est part in Greek, even among those nations to
whom these languages were no mother tongues. I answer, that when these nations
were first converted, they were subject to the Roman Emperor, which spoke
Latin as his mother tongue, and therefore all endeavored to speak as the
Emperor spoke, although it were but broken Latin, and therefore received
their Leiturgie in Latin. (And as for the East they spoke Greek, as commonly
as the rest did speak Latin) so in Wales their mother tongue is Welsh, in
Cornwall Cornish, In Ireland Irish, yet in all these places the public service
is read in English, and the people have applied themselves to speak English,
because they are subjects to the King of England. But now the Weast part of the
world, which was commonly called the Latin Church, is not subject to any man
that speaks Latin as his proper language, and the Latin tongue has ceased to
be familiar among the people, wherefore then should not their service be now in
the tongue which they understand, as in the beginning it was in the Latin
which they then understood? Godly discretion would think it fit, now we have
the benefit of printing, which in the old time we had not, and we have such
means to advance religion, as our forefathers had not, that every people
should have their Leiturgie, not only in that tongue which they do
understand, as then it was, but also in that tongue which they do naturally
speak and best understand, as now all reformed Churches almost have. And this
consideration moved the reverend Father, Doctor Morgan, now Bishops of Saint
Asaph, and Doctor Goodman, the late Deane of Westminster, to take pains for
the translating and publishing of the Bible in the Welsh tongue, by which their
travails and godly endeavors they have advanced the Ghospel in their own
country. And his Highness shall truly perform the office of a King, if he take
order that all men, women, and children, may be brought to speak English, or
else, that they may have the leiturgie translated, and printed in the Irish
tongue.

It has bin objected in the defense of Latin service, that it is profitable
for them which understand it not, because, say they, public prayers are not
made to the people, but to god which understands, in the behalf of the
people which understand not. Even as if an Advocate should plead before a
Judge which understands, for his Client which is not able to understand the
state of his own cause and business, and yet is as effectually handled by the
Advocate, as if the Client did understand I answer, that it is enough if the
Advocate understand which pleads, because the Advocate pleads alone, but if
the Client should join in plea with the Advocate, it were necessary also that
the Client should understand, because without understanding he could not
plead, and speak for himself. But our parish Churches are ordained to this
end, that not only learned men should resort thither, as in Schools and
Colleges, which do understand Latin, but all ignorant people, for the
sanctifying of the sabbath, and exercise of their religion, that not only the
ministers there should pray for them, as the Advocate alone speaks for his
Client, but they also should pray for their own selves; and this is the
difference between the courts of earthly Judges and the court of heaven. The
people come not to the Church only to be prayed for by the Minister, for so
they may stay at home in their own houses and be prayed for in the Church, but
they come to pray themselves, both for others and for themselves, to join with
the minister in prayer, as the Apostle does teach them saying: Now the God of
patience and consolation grant that Romans 15
ye may be like minded one to another according to Christ Jesus, that ye with
one mind and one mouth may praise God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. But
this they cannot do unless they understand. He that prays and understands
not his own words, may think he prays when he swears, and when he
prays, he knows not that he prays, as the high priest prophesied, but
knew not that he did prophecy, as the parret which laugheth, knows not that
he laugheth, and the Thrushes John 11.
and black-birds sing, but know not that they do sing. But because Bellarmine
has compared praying unto pleading, what kind of plea shall that be, which
neither Client nor Advocate does understand? It cannot be denied but in Queen
Mary's days, in many of our Churches the service was read, but not understood,
n^^ther of the people, nor yet the priest; and so it is now in some countries,
where Sir John Lack latin has the charge of souls, and understands not
the Mass which he reads.

Bellarmine alleges out of Ezra, that he read the law before 2. Ezr. 8
the people, and prayed in a language which they understood not, and yet that
the people did answer AMEN. He did read, says he, in a strange language, that
is, in the Hebrew, for he could not read in the Chalde, because that is a
paraphrase and no text, not in the Syriac, because that translation was not
then extant, and as for the Hebrew, they understood it not, as appears by
these arguments; first, from the story, for after Esdras had read, the Levites
came and interpreted, which had been needelesse if they had understood it
themselves. The second from observation, For the Jews, says he, forgot their
Hebrew tongue being captives seauentie years in Babel, and learned the language
of the land where they dwelt which was Calde, and yet not able to speak it
naturally, they spoke a third kind of dialect which was the Syriac, consisting
partly of the Hebrew, and partly of the Chalde, which language to them became
their mother tongue, as appears by the Syriac words in the ghospel, which are
therefore called Hebrew, because at that time the Hebrews spoke them. I answer
first to the story out of the story. The text has: And Ezra the priest brought
the law before the congregation both of men and women, and of all that could
hear and understand it. Again, he read there in the street that was before
the water gate, from the morning until midday, before men and women, and them
that understood it. Therefore it is evident by the testimony of the holy ghost,
that the people understood that language wherein the law was written and read
unto them. Bellarmine asks what need there was then of an expositour? I
answer, the Levites expounded not the words, but the sense, for the text
says: The Levites caused the people to understand the law, and in the next
verse is explained, how the people were caused to understand the law, not the
words of the law, but the law it self, not the tongue wherein the law was
written, but the meaning of it, for so it follows in the 8. verse: And they
read in the book of the law of God distinctly, and gave the sense, and caused
the people to understand the reading, that is, they preached upon it. And
forasmuch as the story says: they read distinctly, what need was there of
distinct reading to them which understood not the language?

I answer to his observation. Forasmuch as the Chalde and Syriac were but
dialects of the Hebrew, as the Doric and Ionic are but Dialects of the Greek,
and the Scottish tongue is a dialect of the English: it was incredible that the
Jews in their captivity, having among them Prophets and zealous Priests,
their selves being also zealous, and fully assured to return again, should so
forget their tongue, as not to understand their own Bible, so well as the
Dorics understand common Greek, and the Scottish men do understand English.
But which is more, although the manner of the Jews ever has bin when they
were dwelling in strange places, to speak the language of the place where they
dwelt, as I know by my own experience the Jews at Frankefort speak Dutch, of
Prage Bohemish etc: which tongues have no affinity with the Hebrew, yet in all
places their service is in Hebrew, and their custom as it has been, so still
continues, to teach their Children so much Hebrew, as may be sufficient to
understand the Bible, and it is manifest by the story that the Jews in
Babylon did the like.

Last of all. Concerning our prayers, if they do well look over their own
missall or Masse-booke which was used in England according to the custom of
Sarum, and confer it with our Service book, they shall find that there are
few things in it, but they are either taken out of the Bible, or which was
good, in that missal, so that they cannot easily mislike our service book,
unless they will condemn a best part of their own Masse-Booke and the
Bible. So then, they may safely come to our Church, we cannot without
violating our conscience come to theirs, our prayers are in English which all
they understand, their prayers are in Latin which our people understand not;
they pray for the dead without warrant, we for the living, for the which they
confess we have warrant enough, they pray to the dead, which we for just
causes disallow, we pray to the living only, I mean the living God, against
which they take no exception.

Of the Sacraments.
COncerning the number of Sacraments, we will not dispute, for as they define a
Sacrament, there are more than seven, as we define it, there are but two. This
therefore shall not breed any such jar between us, that therefore we should
refuse to communicate together.

Of Baptism.
We hold them which are baptized in the Church of Rome to be so sufficiently
baptized, that they may not be baptized again; neither do they rebaptize them
which have bin baptized in our Church.

Of the Lords Supper.
AS often as we be made partakers of the Lords Table, we 1. Corint. 11
receive the Lords body, because he has said it his own self. We receive it
with reverence and devotion, because it is his body. For we must not, as the
Apostle speaks, eat it unworthily, lest so we be guilty of the Lords body,
neither will we eat our own damnation, for not discerning the Lords body.
But how it is his body we cannot see by the eyes of our bodies, or humane
reason, neither can they, only we discern it by the eyes of faith, and so
ought they to do. Stephen Gardener, and the learned of their Church were wont
to say, it was his body ineffabili modo, after an unspeakable manner, after
such a manner as men's tongues could not utter. And therefore, as the University
of Tiguri puts them in mind, they seem to have forgotten what they said
before when they take upon them to farimodum, that is, Contra testament.
Brentij.
to express in plain terms of logic, and yet clean contrary and repugnant
to the rules of logic, his body to be really, naturally, and substantially
hidden and comprehended under the accidents of bread. It is very strange, both
to express that which they say cannot be expressed, and that the accidents of
bread, can have their being, when the bread it self has no being, in whose
only being their essence and being does consist.

But be it as it is, no man can know more or sooner than God will reveal, what
expositions soever the subtitle and variety of men's wits do devise; this
sacrament is in our Church administered by us as it was by our Savior Christ,
and is set down in the story of the Gospel. I would know therefore what
exception they take against it, why they should not receive it with us? It is
no scruple or bar to their consciences in what sense we do understand it, so
as we deliver it unto them according to the true manner and form of our
Savior Christ his institution. And if they will submit themselves to the laws
of our Church, and receive it at our hands, we will not be ouer-hastie with
them to examine them how they do expound the words, Hoc est corpus meum: This
is my body. For we know they cannot eat it but by faith, and so we will leave
them to Gods mercy, that he would vouchsafe in good time further to satisfy
them, lay open, and reveal his truth unto them.

CHAP. IIII.
Of Scisme.

THey allege we are Scismatikes, because we have made a defection from the
Catholic Church, and withdrawn our necks out of the yoke of obedience to
the head of the Church which is the Bishop of Rome, and that being separated
from the head, we cannot be living members of that mystical body. My answer
is: The head of the Church is Christ, 1. Cor, 11.
and we as members are conglutinate and joined unto that head, and to them
which object that our Savior Christ in his absence must have his Deputy, that
the Deputy or Vicar general of Christ is the Holy Ghost, which has the
government of the Church. Even as Elias ascending up let his mantle down upon
Eliseus, to be with him in his stead: so our Savior departing 2. Reg. 2 Act.
2 Matthew. 28. Act. 20.
from us sent down the Holy Ghost to possess his room, and to abide with us
until the end of the world: Take heed, says the Apostle, to your selves,
and to all the flock whereof the holy ghost has made you ouer-seers; so then
the Holy Ghost has the government of the Church. But, say they, a visible
body must have a visible head proportionably to the body, and therefore some
one man must be over the Church. I deny not but weak men desire a visible
object still before their eyes, as the Israelites when Moses was out of their
sight but a few days, Exodus 32.
would make a calfe to be their governor, rather than they would want one to
be visibly resident among them. And therefore our Savior, because we should not
in his absence commit the like idolatry, did leave the visible Sacrament of
the Eucharist among us saying: This is my body. But yet I do answer that a
similitude must not, as the Schoolmen say, Currere quatuor pedibus: agree in
all things. First therefore, it is not simply necessary that the visible body
should still have a visible head in sight as if it could not stand without such
an head. For God had his Church visible upon the earth before the Papacy, and
before the Incarnation of Christ, but Christ the head of the Church before his
incarnation could not be a visible head. So therefore, as Christ in his Godhead
alone before he was borne, was the head of his Church, though invisible,
likewise is he now in his Godhead and Manhood united together, head of the
church visible, although upon the earth not to be seen. Secondly, the time
has been when there was a long vacancie of the Popedom, by reason of civil
dissension, yet the Church then stood without such an head. Thirdly, no sinful
man is able to discharge such an office as to be ouer-seer of the universal
church. Fourthly, there must be such an influence of necessity from the head
to the body, as cannot possibly be from any man to the Church. Fifthly, the Pope
never was reputed as head of the whole Church; for the East part of the world,
that is, the Greek Church was ever so auerse from the Sea of Rome, that it
could never yet be brought, either to obedience to the Pope, or to join in
rites and ceremonies with his Church, or to be incorporated into that body, or
to use the same leiturgie and form of prayer which that Church uses. All
appellations amongst them have bin to the Patriarch of Constantinople, as to
the highest Bishop. Sixthly, what authority soever the Pope has had over the
Latin Church and West part of the world, it has been given him by humane
constitutions only, and general consent of Princes and States, which they
suffered him to enjoy, during their own good liking, and no longer. And last
of all, our own experience can inform us, that the Catholic princes which
are most of all devoted to the Sea of Rome, will be so far subject as they
think fit, and no further. Charles the fifth, late Emperor and King of Spain,
took prisoner, Clement the Pope, when he resisted his proceedings in Italy,
and Queen Mary made her Cousin Cardinal Pole Archbishop of Canterbury though
the Pope withstood it: neither do the Kings of France, though of the Romish
religion, ever suffer the Popes to bear any stroke in the election of their
Bishops. I wish therefore that they would be better advised before they lay
scisme unto our charge.

Chap. V.
Of Discord, and Inconstancy.

THe usual objections against us were wont to be, that we have sects and
divisions among us. But so had they oftentimes, Eckius against Pighius, Thomas
against Scotus, so had the Apostles Peter against Paul, and Paul against
Barnabas, some were of Paul, some of Apollo, and some of Cephas. We contend
about white and black, round and square, but in matters of religion, we agree.
That concerning the book of common prayer when the mass was first put down,
king Henry had his English Leiturgie, and that was judged absolute without
exception, but when King Edward came to the Crown, that was condemned, and
other in the place which Peter Martyr, and Bucer did approve as very consonant
to Gods word. When Queen Elizabeth began her reign, the former was judged
to be full of imperfections, and a new was devised, and allowed by the consent
of the Clergy. But about the middle of her reign we grew weary of that
book, and great means have been wrought to abandon that, and establish an
other, which although it was not obtained: yet we do, at the least, at every
change of Prince, change our book of common prayers, we be so wanton that we
know not what we would have. I answer, they have done the like, they cannot
deny it, for proof whereof I refer them to the preface which is set before
their own Breuiary, wherein it is specified, how many times their own
Breuiary has been altered.

It is no discredit, either to them, or us, to alter for the better and to
correct that which we find amiss. All faults are not espied at once, neither
is all truth revealed at once. But it is damnable to persevere and continue in
an error after it is found out, and not to embrace a truth after it is
revealed. The Church had a time of growing three hundred years after Christ,
being then watered, and made fruitful by the blood of Martyrs; then the
religion of Rome was found, according to that which Saint Paul does testify in
his Epistle to the Romans, the Bishops thereof Romans 1.
continued zealous, and were commonly martired. The Church had a time of
flourishing three hundred years, which began when Constantine the great
granted peace unto the gospel, and persecution ceased, so long found doctrine
was preached. But the Church afterward began to decay and so went backward
until Gregory the great, in whose time corruption began to creep in, and so
ran over the whole body of the Church, and every christian Kingdom which
were members of that body, so that the whole visible Catholic Church through
the world was mightily deformed. Then Luther in his time began a reformation
again, though he reformed not the whole, yet he reformed some parts, like a
Phygtion, which finding a man's body full of sores, heals some members,
although he be not able to restore the whole to his first integrity. Neither
did Luther reform those parts unto the full, by reason of the shortness of
his life, and the greatness of the cure which he undertook, but left somewhat
to be reformed after him by Calvin and Beza, which as they came after him, so
they saw more truth then was revealed unto him (for it did not please God to
reveal all truth to one man, or in one age.) So then, as a Physician which
being not able to cure the whole body, cures some parts and members, and yet
being prevented by death, does not so perfectly restore those parts which he
cures unto their former strength and agilitie, but leaves his work to be
finished by others: so did Luther by the Church. The Clergy of England
therefore in King Henry's days established religion and ordered their service
book according to that small portion and measure of knowledge which then they
had. In the days of King Edward and Queen Elizabeth, more light was revealed
then before, and those errors which were espied, were amended. And as it was
no shame for us to reform our errors when we espied them; so it must needs
be inexcusable to the Church of Rome to continue in their errors now they are
laid open before them, or to wink at nooneday that they will not see them.
The Lord of his mercy through Jesus Christ, give them and us his grace, that
we may agree together in on truth, and as sheep of one fold, hearken only to
the voice of him which is the great Shepherd of our souls, which is Jesus
Christ. Amen.

The Conclusion.
I Thought it requisite to forbear multitudes of quotations of places, and
allegations of Doctors and Schoolmen, because this Treatise was written for
the instruction of the ignorant. I have, upon purpose, affected brevity,
because my desire was, that every one should read it. Some Latin sentences of
Bellarmine I have produced, that the Adversary might not charge me as if I had
falsified any thing, or dealt otherwise than ingeniously. I have alleged
those places only which were so pertinent to this business which I have in
hand as they could not be well omitted, And I have refrained to handle some
other questions, which peradventure would be very pleasing to the Reader,
because authority has not judged it convenient they should be discussed. Let
it not seem strange which I have written, that the learned Papists fly from
their ancient defenses, and cleave to ours, and that Bellarmine the great
Golias of Rome, in his works which bear a title as if they were written wholly
against us, does in many points hold with us, and in those very points justify
us, wherein he is thought to condemn us, that in very many things he is a
Protestant, or at the least, not a Papist, that the Roman religion is refined,
for it will plainly appear to all judicious and indifferent readers. I have
spoken of this argument more at large, in mine answer to Bellarmines four
books de verbo Dei, and his five books de Christo, which had been published
before this time, had it not been for the great difficulty of printing Latin
books here in London, but are now beyond the Seas to be printed, and I will
observe the like in the rest of his works, which I do intend to answer if God
shall give me life and health, and bless my labors. There be many Jesuits and
Seminaries, dispersed in this land, into whose hands I doubt not but this
book will come, which if they will but remember what Vrim and Thummim ought to
be, in pectore Aaronis, in the hearts of Gods Ministers, if they will read
without partiality, and that I may use their own phrase of speech, speak
sincerely, and in verbo Sacerdotis, what they think, I submit my self to
their censure whether I have delivered a truth or not; and I persuade my self
that it they have that integrity whereof they make profession, they will not
deny one truth to gain many worlds. But thus much have I written at this
time, for the discharge of my conscience, the zeal I bear to the truth, and
the instruction of them which hitherto have not understood themselves. I pray
GOD my persuasion may persuade. His Majesty has professed that he will
establish the truth, if he do not, that I may with reverence and in all duty
use his own words, his books will witness against him, at the latter day.
He may do it, if he be assisting to his Ministers. But he cannot do it,
unless he provide that there be a learned Ministry through the land, that the
learned be preferred before the unlearned, they which labor in the word, before
them which are idle, that they be preferred according to their worth, that they
be sufficiently provided for, that they be countenanced by his Highness, his
Nobles, the gentry, but especially by the Judges the Land, that they have no
rights denied unto them, which of duty they may challenge out of Gods word.
And this his Majesty shall never effect, unless he prefer religion before
policy, remove Gehezi out of Elisaeus his service, abandon flattery, banish
simonie out of the Church, and briberie out of his house and all his Courts.
The Lord continue and increase his zeal, that he may reign over us like
Ezechias, to Gods glory, the advancement of the Gospel, our happiness, the
comfort of his own soul, which he shall one day feel to be more precious
unto him than al his kingdoms.

To the Protestant Reader.
Be it very far from the servants of God that they should mistake me, or
conceive any sinister opinion of my endeavors, as if I dealt too favorably with
the Papists. For they ought to consider of mine intent and purpose, which is
not to exasperate and provoke them to anger, but to persuade the^, which I
cannot do by bitter speeches, neither yet by burdening them with any untruths.
The spirit of meeknes does best become Christ his ministers, and the word of
God has taught me to deal charitablie with all men, but especially to restore
them which have fallen, by gentleness, not to break the bruised reed, nor to
quench the smoking flax. That I am not of their mind this book testifies
sufficiently enough. That I do not make more favorable constructions of their
Doctrine than truth and verity does require, their doctrine it self does
show. How much I descent from them, my Sermon does witness which I preached at
S. Paul's Cross about eight years since and published in print, wherein I
showed that the state of the Papacy was Antichrist. In it I set down, as I
hope, though a brief, yet a full and perfect state of the question; what was
wanting in words, by reason of the shortness of time, was supplied in substance,
I answered all objections out of Bellarmine and Sanders which were of moment,
that it might be an help to others which should aferward deliver the same
again in more words, and larger volume. The God of al wisdom and knowledge
direct their hearts and minds to the true knowledge of his word through Jesus
Christ our Lord. Amen.

FINIS.

