A PLAIN AND FAMILIAR EXPOSITION: Of the Eighteenth, Nineteenth, and Twentieth
Chapters of the Proverbs of SOLOMON.

By JOHN DOD and ROBERT CLEAVER.

PSALM 34. VER. 8. Taste ye, and see how gracious the Lord is, Blessed is the
man that trusts in him. LONDON Printed for Roger Iackson, and are to be sold
at his Shop in Fleetestreete near the Conduit.

1610.

To the Right Worshipful our approved Christian friend, Mistrisse ELIZABETH
WALTER of Wimbleton, Grace Mercy and Peace.
GOod Mistress WALTER, the plentiful fruits of your Christian love toward
us, and many others, do not only bind us to offer up our Prayers and praises
to God for you in private, but also to give some more apparent testimony of
our unfeigned thankfulness unto your self, as being a special instrument of
our good and comfort.

Here therefore we present unto you this small Treatise, not doubting of your
favorable acceptance thereof, when our former VVritings did only pass by
you, you always called them in, and gave them kind entertainment, not only
in your House, but in your heart; and therefore these now that come under your
own Name, and cast themselves upon your favor, cannot be unwelcome. If your
success in Reading, be answerable to our desire and purpose in writing, you
shall not loose your labor. And thus with all thankful remembrance of our
duty, we here commit you to the gracious protection of Almighty God,
beseeching him to make perfect that good work which he has in great mercy
begun in you, and abundantly to recompense all your kindness and goodness
to his Servants, in multiplying his comfort and blessings upon you and yours
for ever.

Your worships much bound and in the Lord to be commanded. JOHN DOD and TO.
CLEAVER.


A Summarie of all the Doctrine collected out of the several Verses of these
three Chapters.
CHAP. 18.
VERSE. I. Doct. Whatsoever any man best loves, that he will with greatest
diligence and providence labor for. Verse II. Doct. It is the root of a
sinful man to be possessed with selfe-liking, and wilfulness in his own
ways. Verse VII. Doct. Evil words are most pernicious to those that speak
them. Verse IX. Doct. A sloathfull person stands in the state of a
spend-thrift. Verse X. Doct. They live in best safety that are most assured of
Gods favor. Verse XIII. Doct. They that are too forward and hasty in speaking,
are apt to fall into absurd lies, when they speak. Verse XIIII. Doct. 1. No
trouble or affliction is too heavy for a cheerful heart to undergo. Doct. 2.
The horror of a terrified conscience, is an importable burden.
Verse XV. Doct. 1. He that would be wise to salvation, must apply both his
heart and ears to Gods holy word. Doct. 2. They that have the best knowledge,
are the most willing to learn more.
Verse XVII. Doct. A bad cause commonly has the advantage at the beginning,
and a good cause prevails in the end. Verse XVIII. Doct. Then a lot is
lawfully used, when it either procures or preserves peace and equity. Verse
XIX. Doct. The more nearly men are knit together, the more grievous the breach
is, when iarres do grow between them. Verse XXII. Doct. They only speed
well in marriage, whom God makes the match for in mercy. Verse XXIII. Doct.
Affliction and a low estate, is a means to bring men to lowly behavior.
Verse XXIIII. Doct. It is in vain for him to expect constant kindness from
others, which is careless to perform duties to others.
CHAP. 19.
VERSE. I. Doct. THey that be small and godly, are in better case then such as
be great and wicked. Verse II. Doct. 1. An heart altogether ignorant, is
altogether corrupt and sinful. Doct. 2, Whatsoever is rashly done, is ill done.
Verse III. Doct. 1. Every man's hurt does grow from his own sin and folly.
Doct. 2. Afflictions often make many wicked men the worse.
Verse IIII. Doct. Fleshly men love only themselves, under pretense of
friendship to others. Verse V. Doct. 1. Howsoever false witnesses prevail
against others, they shall be sure to speed ill themselves. Doct. 2. No lier
can live in any good safety.
Verse VI. Doct. Many pretend much loyalty to Princes and Potentates, which
bear little good will unto them. Verse VII. Doct. Neither consanguinity nor
familiarity will make a fleshly friend firm to him that is in misery. Verse
VIII. Doct. 1. It is aprerogatiue peculiar to the wise and godly, to be owners
of their own hearts. Doct. 2. Every godly wise man is a true friend to
himself.
Verse X. Doct. 1. The liberty of delights and comfortable prosperity, does
nothing belong to the wicked. Doct. 2. All sinners are bondmen, and every good
man is a Prince. Doct. 3. Evil rulers never abuse their authority so much, as
when the godly fall into their hands.
Verse XI. Doct. It makes much for a man's credit to be gentle and peaceable.
Verse XII. Doct. It is expedient for men to be good subjects, even for fear or
hope of the Princes affections. Verse XIII. Doct. The most delectable
commodities of this life, turn many times to be very offensive. Verse XIIII.
Doct. 1. No man can possibly have possessions of equal value with a good
yoke fellow. Doct. 2. The more immediate any good gift of God is, the more
precious it is. Doct. 3. The Lord has a principal hand in all good marriages.
Verse XV. Doct. 1. Sloathfulnesse is a vice very hurtful both to body, soul,
and outward estate. Doct. 2. Unrighteous dealing brings that misery upon men's
heads, which they are most afraid of.
Verse XVI. Doct. So much conscience as any man makes of obedience to Gods
will, so much assurance he has of salvation and safety. Verse XVII. Doct.
Whatsoever good is done to godly men afflicted, is accepted of God as done to
himself. Verse. XVIII. Doct. 1. Correction of children ought not to be
ouer-long deferred. Doct. 2. They show themselves unmerciful Parents, which
exempt their children from due correction.
Verse XIX. Doct. Correction is neither to be given in passion, nor omitted
remissely. Verse XX. Doct. A godly man shall have the greatest benefit of his
piety, and graces, when he draws nearest to his death. Verse XXI. Doct.
Things come not to pass by men's purposes, but by Gods appointment. Ver. XXII.
Doct. 1. Virtue and well-doing is the best ornament that any man can be decked
with. Doct. 2. Poverty is no disparagement to the godly, nor any preferment to
the wicked.
Verse XXIII. Doct. 1. Every good man lives always in safety of his life.
Doct. 2. Godliness procures sufficient provision for men's outward estates.
Doct. 3. Nothing that is hurtful can befall any man that is godly.
Verse XXV. Doct. Though obstinate persons be excluded, yet they are not to be
exempted from due punishment, Verse XXVII. Doct. Whosoever will proceed
constantly in the ways of God, must take heed of seducers. Verse XXVIII.
Doct. 1. A wicked person may easily be made a false witness. Doct. 2. The
greater delight any man takes in sinning, the more greater a sinner he is.
Verse XXIX. Doct. Though wicked men deride the words of God, yet they cannot
escape the execution of them.
CHAP. 20.
VERSE. I. Doct. THey that give themselves to drunkenness, do cast themselves
into many mischiefs. Verse III. Doct. It is a laudable virtue to be of a quiet
disposition, and to avoid contentions. Verse IIII. Doct. 1. Light occasions
will hinder careless men from the doing of necessary duties. Doct. 2. He that
will take his ease when he ought not, shall feel misery when he would not.
Verse V. Doct. 1. Malicious men have further reaches and plots in their heads,
then the world knows of. Doct. 2. There be none so crafty, but others may be
as wise to sift them.
Verse VI. Doct. The best works of unfaithful men be of no value with God.
Verse VII. Doct. 1. Whosoever is sincere and honest, the same is also
righteous. Doct. 2. Faithful Parents have no cause to dread the state of their
children after their decease.
Verse VIII. Doct. A vigilant Ruler is a restraint and terror to vicious
persons. Verse IX. Doct. The best shall have corruptions and sins cleaving to
them, so long as they live. Verse XI. Doct. It concerns the young as well as
the old, to be religious, and to live virtuously. Verse XII. Doct. Our members
and senses are the workmanship and gift of God. Verse XIII. Doct. The abuse of
lawful things is unlawful and hurtful. Verse XIIII. Doct. 1. The Lord does
take notice of all the behavior of men in their trafficking one with another.
Doct. 2. Carnal men direct not their tongues so much to speak truth, as to
seek their own advantage.
Verse XVI. Doct. They that rashly cast themselves into debt, are not so
favorably to be dealt with, as they that fall there-into through necessity.
Verse XVII. Doct. 1. Nothing is so pleasant to the wicked, as that which is
most hurtful. Doct. 2. Though iniquity and wickedness yield pleasuree at the
beginning, yet they will put men to pain in the end.
Verse XVIII. Doct. 1. A man's wisdom serves him for best use, when he will
not rest upon it alone, but be helped by the counsel of others. Doct. 2.
Wisdom and counsel are as needful and available for war, as strength
and power.
Ver. XIX. Doct. 1. It is good wisdom not to trust a slanderer or tell-tale,
with thy secrets. Doct. 2. Both consultation and conversation with flatterers
is to be avoided.
Verse XX. Doct. Rebellious children and such as vilify their Parents, are
subject to some not able mischief and punishment. Verse XXII. Doct. All kind
of revenge is unlawful for Christians. Verse XXIIII. Doct. God has a
provident hand in the disposing of all men's ways. Verse XXV. Doct.
Sacriligeous persons cannot long prosper. Verse XXVI. Doct. It is no cruelty
for the Magistrates sharply to punish lewd and disordered persons. Verse
XXVII. Doct. 1. That only is to be esteemed a life which is sanctified with
grace. Doct. 2. Where God works grace, he also gives knowledge and
understanding.
Verse XXVIII. Doct. The best way for Princes to confirm and strengthen
themselves, is to be good to their subjects. Verse XXIX. Doct. God does adorn
men with several gifts, according to the diversity of their conditions. Verse
XXX. Doct. Severe corrections are sometimes to be used as good medicines
against great sins.
AN EXPOSITION OF THE EIGHTEENTH CHAPTER OF THE PROVERBS.
CHAPTER. XVIII.
Verse 1. For his desire a man will seek, separating himself, and deal in
every matter. FOr his desire a man will seeke] Every man will apply his mind
and endeavor to get that which he affects, separating himself, avoiding all
the lets and impediments which are like to cross his desire, and will deal in
every matter, he will attempt all such courses as may serve for the
accomplishment of his purpose.

Whatsoever any man best loves, that he will with greatest

That which the heart most wishes, whether it be good or bad, the tongue, hand
and head, with all the other members, are ready to procure. Jeremy complained
of the wicked, which delighted in wickedness: that they gave themselves to
fraud Ier. 9. 5.
and falsehood, and took great pains to do wickedly. And Esaias commends the
godly, which set their minds on godliness, that with their souls, they
desired the Lord in the night: and therefore with their spirits within them,
they would seek him in the morning. When Achab had apprehended an hope of
glory and wealth, to be won at Ramoth in Gilead, he presently casts about
how to come by it, and then he soliciteth Iehosaphat to bear him company, and
then he appoints his flattering prophets to give him encouragement, and then
he scorned at Micaiah that foretold the peril, and then he goes on
obstinately rather then resolutely to try the success. And David's principal
care was to please the Lord, and to procure comfort to his own soul, and
therefore he resolved, for that purpose, to walk in the laws of the Lord, and
to banish from him all corrupt and pernicious companions. Away (says he) ye
wicked; for I will keep the commandments of my God. In which examples as well
of the one, as of the other, our text is verified, though in contrary manner.
For both these kings were inflamed with contrary desires, the one of his own
glory, the other of the Lords: both of them separated themselves, the one from
good counsel, the other from bad: both of them practiced that which they
deemed best for their turns, the one contempt against Gods word, the other
obedience to it.

First, it is the nature of love, to make men industrious and painful to
compass that which they covet for the satisfying of their wills, as appears
by general experience.

Secondly, they that be good, and delight in goodness, shall be assisted and
directed by Gods holy spirit in godly proceedings: and they that be sinful
and take pleasure in sin, shall be driven forwards, and prompted by the
suggestions of Satan in mischievous practices.

Confutation of the colorable glosses whereby innumerable guilefull
professors illude their own souls, and deceive the opinion of others. They
think themselves zealous for the truth, and desirous of salvation, but are
idle, and take no pains to purchase grace: they are barren, and bring not
forth the fruits of love: they are careless, and fly not from the baits of
sin.

The leaudest companions are as acceptable to them, as the honestest
Christians: the most infectious speeches displease them no more then the
wholesomest instructions: they are as well contented to be present where the
wickedest practices are played, as where the godliest services are performed.
If the seat of love were in the mouth, and not in the heart, if saying in word
were sufficient to declare a sound affection, without showing the same indeed,
we might believe such men, that they had upright desire (for none are more
forward to brag and boast thereof then they) but since they fail of seeking
and separating, and exercising, which should make them manifest, they must
pardon us though we conceive not so well of them, when we see no better
testimony of piety in them.

Verse. 2. A fool is not delighted with knowledge, but in discovering his own
heart. A Foole] a wicked person destitute of grace and wisdom, and yet highly
conceited thereof, has no delight in understanding, is not desirous to be
truly wise, and therefore regards as little the means whereby he may
attain to wisdom, but in discovering his own heart, in showing by word and
deed, that folly and naughtines which proceeds out of his corrupt and
wretched heart, nothing does satisfy him, but that which is agreeable to his
humors.

It is the note of a sinful man to be possessed with selfe-liking,

Of all men whom the prophets had to deal with, they most complain of those
that were of this disposition, and no man was more troubled with them, as it
seems than Jeremy. When in the name of the Lord he willed them to inquire of
the old way which is the good way, and walk therein, and they should find
rest to their souls, they said, they would not walk therein. When he bid them
take heed to the sound of the trumpet, (that is the word of Ier. 6. 16. 17.
God by his messengers) they said, they would not take heed. When he admonished
them to return every one from his evil way, and make their ways, and their
works good, they said desperately, surely we will walk after our own
imaginations, and do every man after the Ier. 18. 12. 13.
stubbornnes of his wicked heart. And was that good dealing with him in Aegipt,
when they told him expressly, that the word which he had spoken in the name of
the Lord, they would not hear it Ier. 44. 16. 17.
of him, but would do whatsoever thing went out of their own mouth.

First, carnal reason, and worldly wisdom, are of great force

Secondly, the lusts of the flesh do rule and reign in their

Thirdly, pride continually abounds in their hearts, they

Instruction not to like of understanding or instruction the is justified of
her own children. Who has believed Matt 11. 19. Isay. 53.
our report, says the prophet Isay? and yet blessed were they that did beleuee
it, though never so few; and cursed were they that gave no credit to it,
although there were many millions of them.

Conviction of all perverse and obstinate persons, which be us in word and deed
which way their heart is inclined, their leaud and licentious exercises bewray
and discover their inward corruptions. Who hears not their tongues say that
they are unchastly minded, when their lips be usually talking impurely? does
not lust and lewdness issue out of their mouths? And will not immodest and
wanton behavior and dalliances declare as much to men's eyes? Who sees not a
covetous affection showing forth it self by greedy seeking of gain, and
commodity? And does not ambition, and insolency, and garishnes, testify
against proud persons to their faces? So do riot, unthriftiness, and voluptuous
living, perpetually cry out upon Epicures and bellie-gods.

Consolation for them that strive to bring their wills in subjection

Verse. 3. When the wicked comes, then comes contempt, and with the vile
man, reproach. WHen the wicked comes,] when any man becomes wicked, and
waxes sinful, then comes contempt, dishonor and infamy follow fast after
him, his credit is growing into a consumption, how great and many means soever
he has to uphold it: and with the vile man reproach, he that is vicious, and
by ill doing deserves shame, shall be sure to have shame and reproach his
companions: if men dare not speak contemptuously to him, yet they will talk
contemptibly of him, or though they should be afraid to censure him in their
words, yet they will be bold to despise him in their minds. See chap. 11. 2.
and 13. 18.

Verse. 4. The words of an excellent man's mouth, are as deep waters, the
welspring of wisdom, is as a flowing river. THe words,] the wholesome and
fruitful speeches, of an excellent man's mouth, uttered by godly men, and such
as fear the Lord: for to them does the holy Ghost vouchsafe the title of
excellency: as when David says in the Psalms, My goodness extends to the
Saints that are in the earth, and to the excellent. And Psalm. 16. 3.
when Solomon says in this book, The righteous is more excellent then his
neighbor, They are as deep waters, plentiful and copious, such as fail not,
nor can be drawn dry at any time. The Wellspring of wisdom is like a
flowing river, their hearts feed Prou. 12. 26.
their mouths, and thereout, wise, holy, and fruitful words flow
abundantly, as a vehement stream boyleth out of a rich Fountain. See Chapt.
10. 11.

Verse 5. To accept of the person of the wicked is not good, to overthrow the
just man in judgment. TO accept of the person of the wicked] to free him from
punishment, or to show him favor in a bad matter, for his power, parentage,
kindred, friends, wit, wealth, gifts, acquaintance, or to regard any thing
in him, without the cause, is not good, but dangerous and hurtful, it will
draw down the judgments of God upon those Magistrates, or persons whatsoever,
which use such parcialitie: and he speaks in this manner, because there is a
show of wisdom, and policy, for gain and safety, by gratifying of them, in
respect of the bribes which they will give to have their turns served, and the
mischief which they will work to those that proceed severely against them,
to overthrow the just man in judgment, this is the effect, that commonly
insueth upon the favor that is showed to the wicked, and makes the sin
double: In so much as unrighteous malefactors are spared, so much the harmless
and innocent are oppressed: that hand which lifts up him, whom it ought to
beat down, will beat down him, whom it ought to lift up. Either of these
were great offenses alone, but very grievous when they are both conjoined
together. It was a foul fault to seek the release of Barrabas, which had
deserved to die, but to have him delivered, that Christ might be crucified, was
intolerable wickedness: and yet it would have been more notorious and
detestable, if Christ had bin condemned to die, by the practice and persuasion
of Barrabbas, which thing sometimes befalls the members of Christ, by the
instigation of the successors of Barrabbas. The Shechemites adventured to do
that which is here condemned, and therefore they felt the penalty which here
is threatened: they would set up Abimelech to be king, because he was of their
blood, and slew the other sons of Gideon for his sake, and at his request,
but in the end they found it not good to Judge. 9. 45.
accept of the person of the wicked, and to overthrow the just: for they and
their City were destroyed, for taking part with their wicked kinsman, and
offering violence to the righteous children of Gideon. See Chap. 17. verse 15.

Verse 6. A fools lips come with strife, and his mouth calls for stripes.
Verse 7. The mouth of a fool is his own destruction, and his lips are a
snare for his soul. A Fools lips come with strife,] the wicked talk of a
graceles fool, his railing, slandering, lying, backbyting, challenges,
comparings, nipping, and gyrding, do as directly tend to quarrels, or
brablings, as if they had legs to go unto contention: which is especially to
be understood of them that be froward, proud, given to scoffing, and others of
like nature and disposition: and his mouth calls for stripes, the words of
his mouth do provoke, and even call for blows, and punishments, by his desire
upon others, but by desert and effect upon himself. The mouth of a fool is
his own destruction, his unadvised and intemperate speeches bring his own
overthrow, and his lips are for his soul, that matter which his lips do
maliciously or rashly utter, is an occasion and means to intrappe him, to
the hazard of his state, life, and salvation.

Evil words are most pernicious to those that speak them.

Ecclesiastes affirms, that the lips of a fool devour himself. And in
the twelfth Chapter of this book, the evil man is Eccl. 10. 12.
said to be ensnared by the wickedness of his lips; and diverse such sayings
are to be found in the former Chapters, which Prou. 12. 13.
were verified in Doeg, in Haman, and Daniels adversaries, whose tongues were
sharp and keen, to cut their own throats, but blunted by the good hand of
God, that they could not hurt his servants, whom they struck at with their
bitter accusations.

First, the tongue is an edge tool, and requires the skill of

Secondly, the Lord is wont to render such men their own

Thirdly, it is just and righteous with the Lord, to call all ungodly for
every idle word, as our Savior foretells, and then they shall find to
their Mat 12. 36.
endless woe, this Scripture to be fulfilled, that the mouth of a fool is his
own destruction, and his lips are a snare for his soul.

Admonition, to be more afraid of speaking sinfully, then of for ever: though
they work our trouble, or death, as they did Naboths, yet not our destruction,
as they could not do his: but their own evil tongues will effect mischief
against themselves, for punishment of body, and perdition of soul, for ever.
Then if thou would rule thy tongue better, that it draw thee not into such
dangers, thou must not suffer sin to reign in thy life, nor to rule in thy
heart, which will command thy mouth, and ouerrule thy tongue: and the Lord by
his righteous providence does many times give them over to the folly and
violence of their lips, to their shame and misery, which will not be guided
by the wisdom and virtue of his lips, to their glory and happiness.

Verse 8. The words of the talebearer are as strokes, and they go down into
the inward parts of the belly. THe words of the tale-bearer] the malicious
accusatio^s which whisperers do secretly mutter against men behind their
backs, are as strokes, as wounds that are given by weapons: they do them as
much hurt by seeking their infamy, or trouble, or by alienating the minds,
and good opinions of their friends and neighbors from them, as if they had
smitten them with a sword, and they go down into the inward parts of the
belly: they are like unto darts, wherewith men are dangerously wounded,
piercing (as it were) into the very intrailes. See Chapt. 12. verse 18.

Verse 9. Even he that is negligent in his business, is a brother to a waster.
HE that carries himself slothfullie in the works of his calling, being
without all care and endeavor to set forwards his affairs, is brother to a
waster, is like to him that prodigally wastes his substance, as if he were his
own brother, and shall as certainly, though it may be, not so speedily, come
to poverty, as he.

A slothful person, stands in the state of an unthrift.

Though there be some difference in the manner, and degrees of their sinning,
yet the holy Ghost condemns them both to be sinful: and though they walk
in diverse paths, yet they meet together at the last in misery and
wretchedness, answereable to the measure of their misbehauiour and rechlesnes.

First, they that are too backward to serve the Lord in fruitful

Secondly, all is spoiled whatsoever they spend, that which they eat, and
drink, and wear, is none of theirs, by warrant, work with quietness, 2. These.
3. 12.
and eat their own bread.

Thirdly, penury and want is threatened unto them, and executed He that loves
pastime (says he, of the spend-thrift) shall be a poor man: and he that
loves Prou. 21. 17.
oil and wine shall not be rich. And thy poverty, (says he, to the
slothful) comes as one that trauaileth by the way, it makes have Prou. 24.
34.
as a Poast, or swift passenger, and thy necessity like an armed man, with
force and violence irresistably.

Fourthlie, they are seldom patient of poverty, though Let him that stole,
steal no more: but rather let Ephesians. 4. 28.
him labor with his hands, the thing which is good, that he may have to give
unto him that needs.

Fiftlie, great hurt is done, and much redoundeth to the By slothfulness, the
Eccl. 19. 18.
roofes of their houses go to decay, (as the wiseman testifies,) and by the
idleness of their hands, their houses drop thorough. Their mounds and stone
walls are broken down, and their fields Prou. 24. 31.
are ouergrowne with thorns and nettles: by means whereof, those habitations
are ruinated, and grounds become barren which peradventure wasters would have
sold, and thrifty men have bought, (or purchased) before they came to such
desolation.

Instruction for men to inform themselves what business

Every man, of every degree, as well rich as poor, as well mighty as mean,
as well noble as base, must know that he is borne for some employment to the
good of his brethren, if he will acknowledge himself to be a member, and not
an ulcer in the body of mankind.

But if love and duty to men, be not of force enough to persuade thee to
bestow thy time usefully, let providence, and the regard of thine own estate
prevail with thee, that having little, thou may get more: or having much,
thou may preserve that which thou possessest. Or if thou take not that for
a sufficient motive, to induce thee to labor, yet stand in awe of God, and
despise not his will and ordinance, who has enjoined Adam and all Adams
posterity, yet in his loins, to get Genesis 3. 19.
their bread in the sweat of their faces.

And if contemptuously, they will needs devour it, without any travail or
good vocation, they bite at a bayte upon an hook, they shall be sure to
swallowe down his curse therewith. See this point and use more largely
handeled, Chapter, 10. 4.

Verse 10. The name of the Lord is a strong Tower: the righteous runs to it,
and is exalted. THe Name of the Lord] his favor joined with his mighty power,
and faithfulness toward his people, is a strong Tower, as a Fort or Castle of
defense is, for the safety of them that are within it: so he preserves his
from the violence of their adversaries, that would destroy or hurt them: the
righteous, such as be just, and godly, and fear him, run unto it, depend
upon him, and by prayer, and confidence, commit themselves to his protection,
against Satan, sin, damnation, and all manner of dangers both of soul and
body, and are exalted, so kept from the rage of troubles, and the reach of
their enemies, as if they were taken up into an high Turret, or set in some
place aloft, which no enemy could either undermine, or assault, or shoot up
unto.

They live in best safety, that are most assured of Gods favor.

His name here is opposed, and set against all earthly munitions, whether of
wealth, authority, armor, armies, friends, holds, or whatsoever else men
take to be fences for them. This causes him to speak so comfortablie to his
Israel, the whole body of his people, saying: The Eternal God is thy refuge,
and Deuteronomy. 33. 27.
under his arms thou art for ever: he shall cast out the enemy before thee,
and will say, destroy them. And this causes his Israel, his servants, and
faithful ones, to glory so confidentlie in his goodness, saying: I will say
unto the Lord, o mine hope, and my Psalm. 91. 2.
fortress: he is my God, in him will I trust.

First, he is not only mighty, but Al-mightie, and only

Secondly, he is a refuge against one evil, as well as an other,

Instruction to declare our selves righteous, and enjoy the no time is
unseasonable to repair unto it: no place is an impediment to hinder us from
it: no bodily weakness can disable us of it. This journey may be undertaken at
midnight as well as at noone, and we may run apace as we sit in our houses,
and lie in our beds, and the feeblest cripple, may make as good speed as the
swiftest footeman: only let us not make our hearts lame, or our ways
vnpasseable, by infidelity, vain confidence, or evil conversation, with
guiltines of conscience. Faith, and faithful behavior, put agilitie into the
soul, and make passage for it unto Gods presence, without interruption.

This serves also to reprove their folly, and to convince the name of the
Lord for their succor, lest it should be battered, and beaten down upon their
heads, and therefore fly to such fortresses as are founded merely upon their
own fancies. How many do make the flesh their arm, for things concerning
their bodies, and this present life, as is the custom of worldlings? And how
many do trust in lying vanities, as idols, the help of the dead, and prayers
to be made for them when themselves are dead, in the behalf of their souls,
in the life to come, as is the practice of papists? See this point, and other
material uses thereof in the ninth chapter, first verse, and third doctrine.

Verse. 11. The substance of the rich man, is as it were his strong city, and
as a high wall in his imagination. IN the former sentence was declared wherein
the godly seek for safety, and find it, and that is in the name of the Lord:
and in this, wherein the wicked, especially being wealthy, presume of defense,
but fail of it, and that is in their goods and possessions. For they seem a
strong city, which no dangers can vanquish, and an high wall, that no misery
can scale and climb over: but all is in their own imagination, and nothing in
truth: for they are weak and low, and utterly void of power against any kind
of calamities. See chap. 10. 15.

Verse 12. Before destruction the heart of a man is haughty, and before glory
goes lowliness. BEfore destruction] before some grievous calamity, whereby a
man is as it were broken in pieces (as the word imports) with mserie, sorrow,
or shame, the heart is haughty, the mind is puffed up with selfe-liking, and so
grows secure, and careless, and before glory goes lowlines, when a man is
humble in his own eyes, and thinks basely of himself, and reverently of
others, and submits himself to Gods hand, to bear willingly whatsoever he
shall impose upon him, he is in the way to true honor, if he be not advanced
to preferment, yet he shall be refreshed with comfort, and enriched with
graces. See chap. 11. 2. and 16. v. 18. 19.

Verse. 13. He that answers a matter before he has heard it, it is a folly
and a shame to him. TO make answer, or reply to a speech, or at all to speak
of any matter, before a man has thoroughly heard, and fully informed himself
therein, is a rash and indiscreete part, and the evil consequents thereof,
cannot but redound much to his discredit.

They that are too forward and hasty in speaking, are apt to

Festus showed himself scarce sober, and in his right mind, Act. 26. 24.
when he interrupted Paul so rudely in that his divine oration, and charged him
to be beside himself. And it is noted as one of the faults wherewith David was
blemished, that upon Ziba ^. Sam. 16. 4.
his bare accusation, he passed away Mephibosheths maintenance from him, before
Mephibosheth was brought to his answer. But the justice and wisdom of our
Lord Jesus Christ, is praised by way of prophecy for a contrary course in his
proceedings. For so much does Esaias testify, when he says, that the spirit of
the Lord shall rest upon him: the spirit of wisdom, and understanding, the
spirit of counsel, and strongth, the spirit of knowledge, and of the fear of
the Lord, and shall make him prudent in the fear of the Lord; for he shall not
judge after the sight of his eyes (that is, by superficial and slight shows)
neither reprove by hearing of his ears, (that is, by hearsay, and flying
reports) but with righteousness shall he judge the poor.

First, he that will deal wisely, must work by knowledge

Secondly, they that are given to be sudden with their lips,

Reproof of diverse that have nimble and light tongues, and Solomon was very
silly in condemning their course; and if Solomon were endued with knowledge
and understanding, these may worthily be reputed fools without judgment.

And to pass by them that take advantage at a clause of a saying, and
apprehend not the sentence, or stumble at words, not regarding the meaning, as
the malicious cauillers did, which put no difference between the temple of
Christ his body, and the temple of stone) they are hereby controlled, 2. Pet.
2. 12.
and that sharply, which speak evil, as Peter says, of the things which
they know not: and so much more they which not only speak evil, but pass a
sentence of condemnation: which are not only headie to condemn, but also
hasty to inflict punishment upon their innocent underlings. So dealt Pashur
Ier. 20. Act. 23.
with Jeremy, and Ananias with Paul: but so would not Job deal with his
people, though of his own family, though bondmen, Job. 31. 13.
though handmaides, though never so mean and abject: hearing they should have,
and justice they should find: if their cause proved good, their entreaty
should not be bad.

Instruction to follow the precept of Saint James, who admonishes every man to
be swift to hear, and slow to speak. He that is most talkatiue and ready to
object, is always least attentive, and negligent to learn: and he that is
most silent, Job. 32.
until it be time to speak, will like Elihu in the book of Job, be best able
to speak to the purpose, when time requires. By such shall a good cause be
well maintained, falsehood and errors discovered, the truth justified, the
company edified, and their own wisdom and knowledge made manifest to those
that hear them.

Verse. 14. The spirit of a man will bear out his infirmities, but a wounded
conscience who can bear? THe spirit of a man] his heart being in a comfortable
estate by the sight of Gods favor, and the testimony of a good conscience,
will bear out his infirmities, makes him to sustain with patience, and some
cheerfulnes, manifold pains and diseases of the body, and all outward crosses
whatsoever: but a wounded spirit who can bear? but when the soul is cast
down, and as it were broken with the apprehension of Gods indignation, none
can endure the horror and anquish thereof, nor any thing raise it up, and give
comfort to it, but God alone.

No trouble or affliction is too heavy for a patient and cheerful

If necessities, if distresses, if stripes, if prisons, if tumults, had 2. Cor.
6 4.
been of force to make a faithful man to fall, the Apostle Paul would not have
been able to stand so constantly as he did; for all these he patiently
suffered, for the honor of his ministry. And though David's calamities, by
the rapes, incests, murders, and rebellions, committed in his own family, and
even by his own Children, were as grievous and painful, as Psalm. 51. 8.
broken bones: yet when his soul did feel Gods favor and goodness toward
him, he was not out of hope to recover again his former comfort and ioyfulnes.

This might be further exemplified by Job, by Jacob, and many others,
especially those worthy martyrs, whom the Apostle proposes for examples to
the Hebrews, who were tried by mockinges and scourgings: yea more-ouer, by
bonds and prisonment. They were stoned, they were hewn asunder, they were
Heb. 11. 36. 37.
tempted, they were slain with the sword, they wandered up and down in
sheepes-skinnes, and in goates-skinnes, being destitute, afflicted, and
tormented.

First, being justified by faith, and at peace with God, their

Secondly, they look to the end which the Lord does aim

Instruction for them that fear God, not so much to forefeare David found at
Ziglag, when his goods were gone, his City brent, his wives taken captives,
together with his Children, his friends become his foes, and his life in
imminent danger: for they were about to stone him, and yet in all this
extremity, he is said to have comforted himself in the Lord his God. Now he
that Sam. 30. 6.
was so provident for David, to assist his heart with help and power in his
adversity, will not be careless for the rest of his people, as to leave them
destitute of aid and succor in their distresses. If he lay yokes on their
necks, and burdens on their shoulders, he will either make their yoakes and
burdens to be light and easy, or else their necks and shoulders to be strong
and mighty. And therefore so much distemper as any man breaks into in his
afflictions, so much defect he bewrays of the vigor, and fortitude of the
spirit.

But a wounded spirit, etc. The horror of a terrified conscience

The body in his health and strength, with all the delectable things that
sense does delight in, is unable to support, and yield refreshing to the soul
afflicted, as the soul in her peace and tranquillity does animate and cherish
the body diseased. The anguishes and agues of diverse godly men, being
strongly assaulted with fears, and temptations, as of Job, and David, and
Christ especially, do give a clear testimony to the truth of this point:
and the unutterable gripings, and desperate horrors of the wicked, do make it
undoubtedly certain and manifest. How miserably was Balshazzar affrighted,
and racked with terrors in the midst of his cups, at his sumptuous banquet,
notwithstanding the greatness of his power, the majesty of his place, the
largenes of his dominions, the gorgiousnes of his buildings, the plenty of his
plate and treasures, whereof Dan. 5.
much was now before him, and the multitude of his friends, whereof many now
were with him?

It shall be needless here to dilate the case of Caine and Judas, of whom, the
one restleslie pursued himself from place to place on earth, and the other
posted to the tree with all have possible, to rush with speedines into hell.

First, they look upon the angry countenance of God, and apprehend his
irefull indignation, and that is so immeasurablie Fall on us mountains (say
the mighty men, in the Revelation,) hide us, o Rocks, (say the Kings and
Chiefetaines,) Apoc. 6. 16. 17
from the presence of him that sits on the Throne, and from the wrath of the
Lamb. For the great day of his wrath is come, and who can stand?

Secondly, the guilt of sin is a most grievous ulcer for

Thirdly, the continual peril of death, of hell, and condemnation,

Instruction to price the peace of a good conscience at an

Secondly, beware how thou pearce thy soul with known and wilful
trangressions, least thou make a wound therein, which in the end may prove
vnsufferablie painful, and vncurablie desperate. Which mischief, the better
to prevent, let every man often examine his ways, and get pardon for his
sins, and purging from them, before they exulcerate, and break forth into
such pernicious malladies. And it is very needful to profit by, and make
good use of more gentle and mild corrections, that every affliction bring us
to some humiliation, by the finding out of our offenses, and the unfeigned
acknowledgement of them.

Lastly, since the state of them that are laden with the poise of a troubled
conscience, is so full of calamity, so woeful and lamentable, what mercy and
compassion is therefore to be showed unto them? Are they not much to be borne
with, even in their infirmities, pitied, prayed for, and comforted, and not
reproched, despised, and laughed at? Who art thou which shaking thy head at
their fears, doubts, and diffidence, can truly say, I shall never drink
of this cup, this misery shall never fall upon me? And if thou in that state
would not have affliction added to thy self afflicted, then cause not them
to be made more sorrowful, which are already well-neare overwhelmed with
sorrow.

Verse 15. The heart of the prudent possesses knowledge, and the ear of the
wise will seek after understanding. THe heart of the prudent possesses
knowledge,] he that is acquainted with the state of his own soul, and
discerns how precious and fruitful, and needful understanding is, will not
content himself to have wisdom in his ears, or head, or lips, but lays
it up in his heart, as his chief treasure, and the ear of the wise seeks
after understanding: he labors to increase knowledge and grace, adding
daily thereunto, by harkening as much as he may, to all sound and wholesome
instructions.

He that would be wise to salvation, must apply both his My son (says she)
if thou will receive my words, and hide my commandments within thee, and cause
Prou. 2. 1. 2. 3.
thine ears to hearken to wisdom, and incline thine heart to understanding,
then shall thou understand the fear of the Lord, and find the knowledge of
God. There more shall be spoken of this matter.

And the ears of the wise, etc. They that have the best knowledge,

Verse. 16. The gift of a man inlargeth him, and leads him before great men.
THe gift of a man] not the good qualities that are in him, and the graces which
he has received, but the present that he brings, and the reward that he
bestows, inlargeth him, and leads him before great men, makes room for
him, and procures him access to the presence of them that are in high places,
and of great authority, from whom also he gets countenance and favor,
whether his suite be equal, or unlawful. See chap. 17. v. 8.

Verse. 17. He that is first in his own cause is just: then comes his
neighbor and makes inquiry of him. HE that is first in his own cause] he
that is in a controversy, speaks first, before the magistrate, arbitrator,
or any other to whom it belongs to hear the matter, is just, so pleads for
himself, and sets such colors upon his cause, that he seems to be very
righteous: if he be plaintiff, that his informations be equal, and weighty,
if defendant, that his apology is good, and he innocent. Yet is not this to be
understood of every one that has the first place of speech: for righteous men
do many times begin the declaration of the cause, or defense of themselves,
and be found upright and faithful both in the entrance and end of the strife:
but it is meant of false fellows, that respect not what they may warrantably
auerre with truth, but what they can audaciously affirm with impudency. Then
comes his neighbor, and makes inquiry of him, he that in the second place,
or afterward is to make answer unto him, or reply upon him, confuteth his
allegations, detecteth his falsehood, and conuinceth him, of indirect and
naughty dealing.

A bad cause commonly has advantage at the beginning,

So it fell out between Joseph, and his mistress; between Micaiah, and the
false prophets: between Mordecai, and Hamon: between Paul, and Tertullus:
between Christ, and the pharisees: between the Gospel, and popery.

First, wicked men that maintain evil causes, are shameless

Secondly, God in his providence does so dispose of it, that

Instruction to rulers and judges, and every one to whom authority is
committed, to lend the ears as well to the one side as the other, before they
condemn or acquit either of them: and that they proceed as they find the
matter confirmed or confuted by due proofs, and not as they hear it affirmed,
or contradicted by bare words: for our proverb is as true as common: One tale
is good, till an other be heard. And this may also admonish all men to take
heed how they garnish bad causes with artificial colors, as vain women
paint their withered faces to make them seem very fair and beautiful: the
breath of truth will at the last blow upon them, whereby their hew shall be
changed, that every one shall see their deformity, not by having a disfigured
vizage, but a dishonest behavior. Though they thrive in their practices for a
time, yet it is impossible for them to succeed well in their evil ways for
ever: either their neighbors, one man or other, will lay open their falsehood
and faultines to the eyes of the world in the day of their conviction, or else
the Lord will bring their leaudnes to light, before men, and Angels, and all
the world, at the day of judgment.

Verse. 18. The lot causes contentions to cease, and makes a partition
amongst the mighty. HE declares the true, and right use of a lot, by telling
what (...) done, for that which ought to be done: namely, in difficult and
doubtful causes, which cannot otherwise be well determined, and where in
division men cannot agree between themselves what part every one should have,
that then they be satisfied with that which the Lord by lot does after a sort,
award unto them. And he makth special mention of the mighty* that it serves
to compound their controversies, because that when they contend, by reason of
their power, and strength, and stout stomachs, they greatly damnisie one an
other.

Then a lot is lawfully used, when it either procures or preserves

For the avoiding of partiality, wrong, strife, and murmuring, the Israelites
are commanded by Moses, and ordered by Joshua, to inherit the land of Canaan by
lot, according to their families: Numb. 33. 44.
to the more, says he, ye shall give more inheritance, and to the fewer, the
less inheritance. Where the lot shall fall to any man, that shall be his:
according to the tribes of your fathers, ye shall inherit.

When Saul by lot was chosen to be king, there was no occasion 1. Saul. 10*
given, or taken, for ought that we read, that any other should stand up
against him to get the place, or think himself unworthily rejected, that he
was not chosen. And so Matthias, Barsabas forthwith gave place unto him, and
all the rest acknowledged the election to be from the Lord.

First, God himself has instituted and appointed it, his ordinance

Secondly, the hand of his providence has the direction of The lot is Prou.
16. 33.
cast into the lap, but the whole disposition thereof, is of the Lord.

Instruction that we never deal with a lot, but upon just and fit for the
exercise thereof. Beware that it be not friuolously perverted to sports and
trifles, and especially to do wrong and injury, as the soldiers did to
win Christ his vesture, and Haman, in seeking thereby a luckie time to
destroy all the Jews. And whosoever upon serious and weighty affairs shall be
lawfully occasioned to use it, let them commit the success to the providence
of God, by prayer, and submit themselves to his determination, with
contentment. It was found by lot, that Acham by transgressing the commandment
Joshua. 7.
of God, concerning the execrable, and consecrated things, had deserved to die,
and was accordingly to be punished with death: he nothing gainesaied the
testimony of God therein, but yielded himself to be an offendour, and to
suffer the punishment that his offense demerited.

And so much did Jonah likewise, and more then that, (though the Lord more
spared, and miraculously preserved him) for when the lot convicted him to be
the man, Iouah. 1. 12.
for whose sake that boisterous and dangerous storm was raised, himself
passed sentence of death and drowning upon himself, and required the heathen
mariners to do execution.

Reproof of them which inuert this good and useful ordinance,

Verse 19. A brother offended, is harder to win then a strong City: and
their contentions are like the bar of a Palace. A Brother] a natural
brother, a near kinsman, a kind friend, offended, alienated by wrongs
received, or imagined to be done unto him, from him whom he so much affected
before, is harder to win then a strong City, will with more difficulty be
brought to firm and unfeigned reconciliation, then a City well defenced, can
be vanquished and taken. And their contentions, their strife, and suites, are
like the bar of a Palace, strong, and vehement, and must with no less a do
be pacified, whiles their power serves them to pursue one another, then the
mighty iron bars, whereby the gates of a Castle, Fort, or great building,
are shut in, and kept safe, may be broken, or cut in sunder. But this is to be
understood of unregenerate and fleshly men, or of Gods servants so far as
they be carnal, and not otherwise: for it is a commendation that is given to
the godly, by Saint James, that their wisdom which they receive Iam. 3. 17*
from above, makes them peaceable, gentle, and easy to be entreated.

The more nearly men are knit together, the more grievous

Their friendship not so much seames-ript, as torn in the whole cloth: the
sinews of their love are cut in sunder, rather then the skin of it broken.

Examples we have hereof, of those that have bin wicked on both sides, as
Abimelech, and the Sh^^^om^^^^ Ish^osheth, and Abner: Ahashuerus, and Vash^^
first, and Haman afterward: and so in like manner of Abshalom and Amnon.
Experience also may be seen, in such as have been united with the bands of
nature, and disioyned by the difference of religions, though peradventure they
may both make profession of the same, the one in fraud, the other in
faithfulness: Such were Caine and Abell, Esau, and Jacob: Jacobs elder sons
before their conversion, and Joseph.

How extremely the worse of these maligned the better, every man may read,
and how implacable the wicked of them were to the godly, till the Lord by
grace or providence, appeased them, is evident in the Scriptures.

First, when men be of the same blood, and of a contrary the brother betraying
the brother to death: and sometimes the father the son: and sometimes the
Mat. 10. 21.
children rising against their parents, and causing them to die, as our Savior
testifies.

Secondly, where there has been a great league of kindenes, Ahashuerus dealt
with Haman: and then the remembrance of all former familiarities, and
courtesies, do aggrauate the new risen offenses, as David did justly obbraide
Achitophel. There is no surfeit more dangerous and hurtful, then Ps. 55. 13.
14.
to have the stomach annoyed, and overcome of such meats as a man was wont
most to like of.

Instruction to use our brethren and friends with all good respects, Abraham
chose rather to depart from much of his right, then that he would lose any of
his nephew Lots love, or be at a difference with him. And if our friends and
brethren be estranged from us, the harder it is to reconcile their good
affection, the greater diligence is to be used in effecting of it. If we have
trespassed against them, let us confess it: if they have bin misinformed
against us, let us confute it: if ought be doubtful, and is misinterpreted,
let us explain it: and when we have done all that we can do to recover their
good will, by wisdom, meekenes, patience, courtesy, and kindness: let us deal
with the Lord, as Jacob did concerning Esau, that he will bow and incline
their hearts unto us, if their favor and friendship be expedient for us.

Consolation to them that being injuriously entreated with Joseph, when he
was so merciful to his brethren that had been so malicious. Such a spirit had
Moses, that was meek toward Aaron, and Miriam, which had unjustly murmured
against Numb. 12. 13.
him. And such a spirit had Jesus Christ, and the fountain of the same, is he
that pardoned his enemies, and prayed for them, and dyed for them.

Verse. 20. With the fruit of a man's mouth shall his belly be satisfied, and
with the increase of his lips shall he be filled. WIth the fruit of a man's
mouth] with those words which the mouth of a man utters, be they good or
bad, as the tree yields her fruit, be it sweet or sower, shall his belly be
satisfied, he shall be as it were, fed with joy, or sorrow, and with the
increase of his lips, according to those speeches which the lips use most to
deliver, wholesome, or hurtful, as the ground sends forth her crop of corn
or weeds, shall he be filled, he shall either have great welfare, or great woe,
many blessings, or many judgments. Almost the same words are in the 12. chap.
ver. 14.

Verse 21. Death and life are in the power of the tongue, as every one
delights to use it, he shall eat the fruit thereof. THis verse in part,
contains an explication of the former, showing what is that satisfying, and
filling, which is there mentioned, that it extends to all misery, even to
the very death of the wicked, which abuse their tongues to evil, and to all
happiness, eue^ to life it self, and that everlasting, (as is also meant of the
contrary) of the godly, which use their tongues aright, both which are said
to be in the power thereof: that is, the perverting, or well ordering of the
same, is effectual, either for destruction or salvation: and yet this force is
not in the pronouncing of words, but in the affection from which they
constantly proceed, and as every one delights to use it: so he shall eat
thereof. Hypocrites sometimes do make fair shows, but their hearts and
lips accord not together, and therefore their smooth speeches tend not to
life: and godly men sometimes forget themselves, but they take not pleasure in
evil speaking, and therefore they shall not be destroyed, though they may be
corrected. See Chapt. 13. verse. 3.

Verse 22. He that finds a good wife, finds a good thing, and obtains
favor of the Lord. HE that finds a good wife,] which being himself a good
man, has, and sees, and inioyeth the benefit of a good, wise, and faithful
wife, finds a good thing; which shall be for his help and comfort; and
obtains favor of the Lord, receives a testimony of his love, in bestowing
so great a blessing upon him: and so does a godly woman, that finds a good
and gracious husband.

They only speed well in marriage, whom God makes the

Verse. 23. The poor speaks with supplications: but the rich answers
roughly. THe poore] he that is in misery, in peril, in fear, or subjection,
speaks with supplications, submissely, and lowely, to the wealthy and
mighty, beseeching him in humble manner, and reverent terms, especially when
he has any suite unto them. But the rich answers roughly: he that has
abundance of goods, or is in authority, not only rejects the poor
petitioner contemptuously, with a churlish denial, but otherwise also is proud
and insolent in his speeches. Commonly thus it is, but yet not always: for
some of the lowest sort speak disdainfully, and some great personages behave
themselves courteously.

Affliction and a low estate, is a means to bring men to Naomy, and Ruth, the
woman of Canaan, and many others, for precedents hereof, among the Exodus 9. 27
1. King. 20. 32. Hest. 7. 7.
godly: and Pharao, Benhadad, Haman, and diverse of the same crew, for
experience of this, among the wicked.

First, the hearts of them that are wise and godly, are taught

Secondly, even of them that be unregenerate, some be crushed Amaziah, 2.
Chron. 25. 15.
who after his success against the Edomites, disdained to be spoken too,
though of a Prophet, and therefore commanded him silence, and that with
threats of present death, unless he desisted. And foolish Naball, in the
plenty of his goods, and good cheer, was as drunken with pride, as with wine,
and therefore 1. Sam. 25.
he falls to roaring, and bellowing at David, and his equal request which he
vouchsafed so humbly to make unto him, by his messengers. And what marvel is
it that they take on in this manner, when they stand in no fear, neither
need, as they suppose, of any? When they despise, and set naught by all, as
contemptible persons, in comparison of themselves? when they imagine their
depth and wisdom to be nothing inferior to their wealth and riches?

Instruction not to abhor poverty with so grievous detestation, and though
the other seem to smile upon thee with a fleering face, yet being too much
made of, it proves a cruel tyrant. The former makes men many times meek,
and amiable; and the latter causes them to be fierce, and hateful: that
leading them to sobriety, this driving them into a frenzy, insomuch as like
mad men, they fall to rauing, and raging. Yet since most that be low brought,
can for a time crouch unto those that may either help, or hurt them, it is not
to be taken for a certain note of grace and humility, to yield ones self
submissiue to men, in that estate, unless they cast down themselves also before
the Lord. We have showed before, that proud Pharao could entreat Moses to pray
for him in his misery, and ambitious Hama^ could down upon his knees to
Ester, in his peril: and boasting Benhadad, could put a rope about his neck,
and be servant himself to Achab in his overthrow, when his state and life did
lie in Achabs hand.

Reproof of them that being poor, are yet nothing the walk stubbornely
against the Lord, as Moses witnesses, and therefore the Lord will walk
stubbornely against Leuit. 26.
them, as himself does threaten: let them look for seven plagues more, and
seven times greater, until they be either humbled, or destroyed. If they set
themselves to wrestle with him, by despising his judgments, he will either
give their hearts the fall, by working repentance, and humiliation in them, or
their souls and bodies the foil, by executing plagues and damnation upon them.

Verse. 24. A man that has friends, ought to show himself friendly, for a
friend is nearer then a brother. A Man that has friends] which is beloved of,
and receives favors and benefits from others, ought to show himself
friendly, to entertain, hold, and requite their friendship by all good duties.
He is not only to take heed least by any strangenes, and offering of
discourtesies, he lose their likings, but to endeavor by all signs and pledges
of good will, to knit their hearts faster and faster unto him. For a friend, an
unfeigned wel-willer, which bears Christian affection unto him whom he loves,
is nearer then a brother, is more faithful and constant in ministering help
and comfort, then an ordinary kinsman, or mere natural brother.

It is in vain for him to expect constant kindness from others, which is
careless to perform duties to others.

We commonly say, and see it daily to be true, that it is an Naomy and Ruth
were united together in love, and affinity, the Scipture notes how provident
the one was for the good of the other, Ruth laboring to get food for Naomy,
and Naomy seeking to get a good match for Ruth, and both of them employed all
their might, and means, for the preservation of their mutual society, and
welfare.

First, to be lovingly dealt with, and not to deal lovingly, is

Secondly, the kinder any friend is, and not regarded, nor answered again with
kindness, the greater indignity he esteems the contempt of himself to be,
and is the more provoked against him that is so unthankful.

Instruction to neglect no good office, whereby our friends an other
wheresoever. Other vs^s, see chapter. 17. v. 13. and in the nintenth verse of
this chapter.

For a friend, etc The bands of grace, are more sure and firm, then those of
nature.

When David's own brethren who were like to rise by his preferment, envied, and
maligned him, that faithful Jonathan who was to be debased thereby, claue
constantly, and inseparably unto him. And to this purpose tends that promise
of our Savior to them, that for his sake, and the Gospells, should be
disseuered from fleshly brethren, or sisters, or fathers, or moth^rs, Mar^. 10.
29. 30.
that they should be provided of other Christian friends in their places, which
should do much more for them then ever they would. For the fidelity of godly
friends, see chap 17. v. 17. and the instabilitie of carnal kindred, will
appear in the next chapter, Verse. 7.

AN EXPOSITION OF THE NINETEENTH CHAPTER OF THE PROVERBS.
CHAPTER. XIX.
Verse. 1. Better is the poor that walks in his vprightnes, then he that
peruerteth his ways, and is a fool. BEtter is the poore] more happy and
comfortable is the estate of him that is of little wealth, and of small
possessions, and greater respect is to be had of him, that walks in his
vprightnes, indeuoureth constantly to be just and godly, in words and
works, then he that abuses his lips, then the rich that is given to speak
wickedlie, and is a fool, void of grace, and godly wisdom, and full of vice,
and leaudnes. Thus stands the opposition: better is the poor that uses his
tongue aright, and walks vprightlie, and so is wise, then the rich that
abuses his tongue, and walks corruptly, and so is a fool.

They that be small and godly, are in better case then such

Poverty is oftentimes found to be an ornament, and for great commendation, as
it was to the worthy Smirnians in the Revelation of Saint John, and riches
turn to be a reproach, and Reu. 2. 8.
matter of great disgrace, as befell that churlish Naball, in the book of
Samuel. There were many richer men then those 1. Sam. 25. 2.
distressed Saints, whom the Apostle speaks of in the Hebrews, which wandered
up and down in sheeps-skinnes, and goats-skinnes, being destitute, afflicted,
and tormented, wandering in the wildernesses and mountains, Hebr. 11. 37.
and dens, and caves of the earth: how could any be much poorer? and yet no
worldling was so good: for the Scripture testifies, that the world was not
worthy of them.

First, integrity and goodness, do so far surpass all earthly

Secondly, the godly by his graces, though never so mean,

Thirdly, the condition of the persons themselves is very Blessed be the
poor (says he) for yours is the kingdom of God: Luke 6. 20.
but woe be to you that are rich, for you have received your consolation:
Blessed are ye that hunger now, for ye shall be satisfied: but woe be to you
that are full, for ye shall hunger. Blessed are ye that weep now, for ye shall
laugh: but woe be to you that now laugh, for ye shall wail and weep.

Instruction to be most provident, in gaining that which will Lazarus, then to
pamper up the flesh, as did the rich Epicure. Now the state of the one is
known to be blessed, when the time was, when he seemed very miserable: and now
the case of the other is found to be fearful, though once he was thought to be
most fortunate.

Reproof of them that despise the poor, because they reckon them so base and
contemptible, and magnify the rich, because they esteem them so excellent and
honorable. So dealt they in the Apostles time, as Saint James conuinceth them:
they gave all entertainment to the wealthy, though they were persecutors, and
blasphemers, by offering despite to the needy, though they were Gods own
sons, and heirs of his kingdom.

And it is an ordinary thing in all questions and discourses, and that which
the holy Ghost reprehendeth, that the wisdom of the poor is despised, and
his words are not heard: but the sayings of the rich, how frivolous, and
foolish, and false soever they be, are made authenticke: and their actions,
(though never so unlawful) do carry authority with them, are made
warrantable, or necessary precedents, for imitation. Who may contradict, when
the testimony of your betters is alleged for proof? who may dislike, when
the example of the best is brought for practice? And who are these betters?
they that have more money, and less honesty then their neighbors. And who
are these best in the house, best in the Town, best in the Country? they that
have the best livings, though diverse of them live most leaudlie.

Verse 2. Both the mind without knowledge is not good, and he that hasteneth
with his feet sins. TWo vices are here matched together, and reproved
together, as dangerous and hurtful, whereof the one is cause of the other,
which are ignorance, and rashness. Concerning the former, it is said, that
without knowledge, where the sound knowledge of Gods holy will is contemned,
or neglected, the mind is not good: the man is not good. For a part is put for
the whole: whatsoever shows he makes of faithfulness within, all is but
deceivable; his soul (as the original Text has it) is destitute of goodness,
and then, what is there in him, or proceeds from him, that may be called
good? And he that hasteneth with his feet, sins.

The latter is described by a similitude, from him that should headilie run
on blind-folded, and hood-wincked, in a perilous way, that he neither knows,
nor ever saw: as such a one is in danger to dash against stumbling blocks, or
to fall into quicksands, quagmires, mine-pittes, brooks, or ditches: So he
that unadvisedly, and without deliberation, attempteth, and executes matters
of moment, and importance, cannot avoid errors, and inconveniences, yea sins
and transgressions.

An heart altogether ignorant, is altogether corrupt and sinful.

And he that hastneth, etc. Whatsoever is rashly done, is ill done.

We have a proverb, That it is good to look before one leap, which holds
ever true in this case that we now deal in: for many are soon plunged over
head and ears, in misery, or faultiness, through want of foresight in their
affairs. Even when good men would be sudden in their words or actions, and
remiss to seek or take direction, have been found to swerve far from the
right way. And Joshua, and the Elders, in accepting the tale of the Gibeonites:
Eli in condemning Hanna of drunkenness: David, in crediting Ziba, against
Mephibosheth: and Iehoshaphat, in joining twice with the Kings of Israel. It
was said before in the fifteenth Chapter, that without Prou. 15. 22.
counsel, thoughts come to naught: but in the multitude of counselors, there
is stedfastnes.

Verse 3. The foolishnes of a man, overthrows his way, and his heart fretteth
against the Lord. TH foolishnes of a man,] the sinfulnes and ungodly behavior
of the wicked, overthrows his way, draws crosses and judgments upon him,
and causes him to have ill success, and his heart fretteth against the Lord:
though his tongue do not openly blaspheme, yet his heart does secretly murmr
against God, as if he were unjustly, the cause of his calamities. Neither does
he this directly always, and imbittereth himself against the person of the
Lord, but scorneth at his hand, and accuses his proceedings, under the name of
chance, and il luck, and bad fortune, and many times religion is exclaimed
upon, and profession quarrelled at, especially if religious professors dislike
of his irreligious profanenes, do thrive and prosper, when he is plagued and
punished.

Every man's hurt, does grow for his own sin and folly.

And his hurt or afflictions often make many wicked men Caine may be produced
for an example hereof, who being convicted of the Lord himself of that cruel
and unnatural murder, did no way submit or humble himself unto him, nor
craved favor at his hands, but only excepted against the severity of the
sentence, that his punishment Genesis 4. 13.
was greater then he could bear. And what a wholesome conclusion made that
impious miscreant in the book of kings, when in that extreme famine, he said:
Behold, this evil comes of the Lord: shall I attend on the Lord any longer?
And no better is the behavior of those Romish, Antichristian idolaters, whom
the spirit foretold of in the Revelation of S. John, that the Angel pouring
out his vial upon the throne of the beast, and his kingdom waxing dark; they
gnawed their tongues for sorrow, and blasphemed the God of heaven for their
pains, and for their sores, and repented not of their works, to give him
glory.

First, the effect of Gods strokes is like to that of his word, and

Secondly, many are plagued in wrath, and with vengance,

Instruction to take a contrary course in all our troubles and to search, and
try our ways, as we are exhorted in the Lamentations, and to consider how
much less we bear, then we have deserved, and so to justify Gods
proceedings, and condemn out own prouocations: to acknowledge him to be just,
and merciful, and our selves to be wicked, and unworthy of mercy. This will
repress our passions, and make us more patient: this will take away
discouragement, and confirm our comfort: this will direct our tongues to
thankfulness, and preserve our hearts from bitterness. But then we must entreat
the Lord, that when he chastises us, he will teach us in his Psalm. 94. 12.
law: when he inflicteth stripes and troubles upon us, outwardly, he will
infuse humility and wisdom into us inwardly: for he that remains foolish,
cannot understand why he is smitten, nor how the strokes may be stayed: and he
that continues proud, will not cast down himself before the Lord to pacify
his displeasure.

Verse. 4. Riches gather many friends, but the poor is separated from his
neighbor. RIches gather many friends] wealth increased, increases the number
and heap of such as pretend good will, and draws daily new friends. The
persons of men do not this, nor their graces, but their riches. They make many
fetches, they have many gestures, they use many words, and all this while their
hearts are fixed on the goods, as flies seek where honey is, and mice and
rattes will haunt an house where food is to be gotten. So that their love is
to the money, or other substance, though they make semblance of good affection
to the man. But the poor is separated from his neighbor, he that is needy or
afflicted, or in disgrace, is forsaken of all his carnal friends, and
companions, they either turn from him, as a stranger, or against him, as an
enemy.

Fleshly men love only themselves, under pretense of

Verse. 5. A false witness shall not be unpunished, and a forger of lies shall
not escape. A False witnes] either he that does wittingly misinforme the
magistrate, or any other governor, or he that by his unjust testimony goes
about to confirm that which an other has untruly suggested, shall not be
unpunished, but plagued either sooner or late, with some temporary penalty of
shame and misery in this world, or with eternal perdition of soul and body
in the world to come. And a forger of lies, which uses his tongue to
falsehood, how artificially, and with what shows, and colors soever, though
in private, shall not escape, shall not be always free from punishment, though
by flattering of himself, he thinks the sin not dangerous: and though by
means of his wit, and present prosperity, he seems able to preserve
himself in safety.

Howsoever false witnesses prevail against others, they shall

The repetition of this sentence in so many places, does clearly testify the
verity of it. The self same words with this our text, are in the ninth verse
of this chapter: and the same matter in more peremptory words, is in the eight
and twentieth verse of the one and twentieth chapter, where it is said, that a
false witness shall perish.

First, the sin that he commits is very grievous, and the

Secondly, the offendour that is guilty of this sin, is very Prou. 6. 16.
hates, and whom he says his soul abhors.

Thirdly, he requires the magistrate to lay the same punishment Deuteronomy. 19. 21.
And that no compassion be showed unto him, but life for life, eye for eye,
tooth for tooth, hand for hand, foot for foot.

Fourthly, though the magistrate do spare him, and Psalm. 15. 3.
which are to be excluded from everlasting life.

Instruction to oppose the peril of false witnes-bearing to all

And a forger of lies, etc.] No liar can live in any good safety.

Verse. 6. Many sue to the face of the prince, and every man is friend to him
that gives gifts. MAny sue to the face of the prince] they seek the favor
and countenance of them that be in authority, especially if they be also
wealthy, and bountiful. He speaks not here in the commendation of them, as
being loyal in love, for conscience, but for the reprehension of them, as
being submisse in show, for commodity. And every man is friend to him that
gives gifts. He declares in this latter clause, the cause of that which he
had affirmed in the former, why so many sue to the face of the Prince, because
Princes have most to bestow, and every man, every carnal man for the most
part is friend, would be thought a friend to him that gives gifts, that he
might be used as a friend, and have gifts bestowed upon him.

Many pretend much loyalty to Princes and Potentates,

As it was said a little before, that riches gather many friends: so is it
insinuated here, that power gets many subjects, not which reverence
authority, or desire the Princes honor, so much as they gape for their own
private gain, or preferment. Such as Saint Jude does lively describe,
saying, that Jude. 8. 16.
they despise government, and speak evil of them that are in authority, and
yet they have men's persons in admiration, because of advantage.

First, some crouch, and bow, and feign themselves forward David was so dealt
with, and took good observation thereof. As soon as they hear (says he,)
Ps. 18. 44. 45
they obey me; the strangers dissemble with me: the strangers shrink, and
fear in their privy chambers.

And so did Shemei, after that he saw Abshaloms rebellion 2. Sam. 19. 19.
suppressed.

Secondly, others are very officious, presenting themselves Achitophel, all
the time of David's prosperity, before the rebellion of Abshalom.

Thirdly, diverse creep into the favor of mighty men, in Abner, when he was
fallen out 2. Sam. 3.
with Ishbosheth.

Instruction for rulers, and men of authority, to be as wary are ever found
more perfidious and false, then they that seem to be most obsequious and
dutiful. None filche and steal more: none murmr and whisper more: none
back-bite, and disclose secrets more: none break out at last into clamours,
and traduce more: besides, their readiness to conspire, and join with their
gouernorus most mortal adversaries, against them.

Admonitions for inferiors, to propose an other end of obedience,

Verse 7. All the brethren of the poor do hate him: how much more will his
friends depart far from him? Though he be instant in words, yet they will
not. ALl the brethren] the whole kindred, even they which are united with the
nearest bonds of nature; being yet carnal and unnatural, of the poor, of him
that is decayed in his estate, or in disgrace with superiors, though never so
unworthily, do hate him, they loathe and despise him. How much more will his
friends depart from him? Not they which were faithfully affected to him at any
time, and bare him good will in truth, ( for a friend loves at all times, and
a friend is nearer then a brother,) Prou. 17. 17. and 18. 24.
but such his companions as dissembled with him, making profession and show of
love in his prosperity for their own advantage, these in his adversity, go
far from him, cast him off, and withdraw themselves from him, as being
ashamed of his company, and unwilling to take any notice of him, much more to
deal in his cause, or to supply his wants. Though he be instant in words,
albeit he heartily entreat, and earnestly importune them for comfort,
relief, and favor, yet they will not, they will not hear any request or
complaint that he makes, they will not befriend them in any matter of
weight, wherein they may do him good.

Neither consanguinitie, nor familiarity, will make a fleshly

Poverty and afflictions, do minister matter enough of quarrel and breach,
though no wrong be offered, though no fault be committed. What was Jobs
trespass, and wherewith was he to be charged, when his brethren were removed
from him, and his acquaintance were strangers unto him? when his neighbors did
forsake him, and his familiars did forget him? when they that dwelt in his
house, and his maids took him for a stranger; for he was a stranger Job. 19.
13. 14 etc.
in their sight? when he called his servant, but he would not answer, though
he prayed him with his mouth? when his breath was strange unto his wife, though
he prayed her for the childre^s sake of his own body? And what was David's
offense, and the crime whereof Psalm. 38. 11.
he might be convicted, when his lovers and his friends stood aside from his
plague, and his kinsmen stood a far off?

First, in their pride, they take it for a blemish to their blood,

Secondly, in their misrablenes, they fear least a burden

Verse 8. He that possesses his heart, loves his own soul: he keeps
understanding, to find that which is good. HE that possesses his heart,] who
has his mind rightly informed with knowledge and judgment, and orderly
moderateth his desires and affections, loves his own soul, has a due care
of himself, and uses direct means for his salvation, safety, comfort, and
welfare. For to love ones soul in this place, is otherwise taken then in the
Gospel by Saint John, chap. 12. 25. where it is said, that he which loves
his soul, shall lose it, and he that hates his soul in this world, shall
keep it unto eternal life. To love the soul, that is, to be desirous of
reteining this natural life, as rather to deny the truth of God, and forsake
the gospel of Christ, then to make profession thereof, and yield sincere
obedience to it, with hazard and peril: and he shall lose his soul, that is,
forfeit his salvation and happiness, as he that hates his soul, which chooses
to forgo life, rather then the services of God, and a good conscience, shall
keep it unto eternal life, be saved and glorified for ever. He keeps
understanding, not only hears good instructions, but seriously attends to
them, pondereth of them in his meditations, lays them up in his memory,
observes them diligently in the course of his life, and retains them
constantly till the time of his death, to find that which is good, that is the
end which he proposes to him self, and this is the success which he
obtains, that Gods favor shall be confirmed unto him, both by the blessings of
this present life, and by a blessed estate, in that which is to come hereafter.

It is a prerogative peculiar to the wise and godly, to be owners

Fools and graceles persons are otherwise described, when they are said to
have a price in their hand to get wisdom, but they Prou. 17. 16.
lack an heart. And therefore also the Prophet likeneth them to Doves
deceived, as being without an heart. Which sayings are Hos. 7. 11.
not so meant, as if they wanted integrall parts, or reasonable souls of men,
but that they were deuoyd of grace and power, to use and govern the same, as
much as the silly brutish creatures.

First, Satan rules and reigns in all the wicked, as a king, whither he will,
and deal with in what manner he list, without 2. Tim. 2. 26.
any resistance.

Secondly, lust and passion claim a jurisdiction in them, and

Confutation of that erroneous and pernicious doctrine of

Instruction to get wisdom and piety, that we may be capable of this
prerogative, and obtain this inestimable possession, without which, the having
of houses, lands, Lordshippes, kingdoms, and worlds, (if there were many to be
gotten) is nothing comparable.

How great is his power, that can rule his own mind when wrongs and injuries
be offered unto him: that can possess his soul with patience, when troubles
and afflictions be upon him: that can mourn with godly sorrow when there is
cause of heaviness: that can rejoice with Christian gladness, when there is
matter of comfort: that can subdue those corruptions whereunto others are in
bondage: that can bring into Gods presence the vprightnes of his heart, as well
as the gesture of his body, at all holy exercises: that is made able to
dispose of his will, and affections, according as the Lord his word, or works
do call upon him to be affected? But no man can attain to this freedom by
his own power, or by the might of any other creature: the word of God is that
which must put us in possession of it, if ever we will obtain the fruition of
it, as he that did purchase it for us does testify in the Gospel saying; the
truth shall make you free. Neither yet will the word of truth John. 8. 32.
work it, where the force of grace is wanting: for where the spirit 1. Cor. 3.
17.
of the Lord is, there is liberty, says the Apostle. And what then but
bondage, and thraldom is to be found, or looked for, where the spirit dwells
not?

Loves his own soul, etc. Every godly wise man is a true

The wicked are full of corrupt false love, carnally seeking only their own
private advantage, without respect of the benefit of their brethren, and yet
love not themselves well, because they do the work of hatred, in procuring of
their own hurt, and deal with themselves in satisfying lusts of the flesh, as
fond parents do in cockring their children, and exempting Prou. 13. 14.
them from the rod: but those that are endued with grace and wisdom, as they
restrain their sensual desires, so they give a good testimony of their sound
love to themselves by their provident care, both for their present and future
felicity.

Arguments for proof hereof, are not far to be sought, our he keeps
wisdom, and wisdom (according to the measure of it) will keep him from
headines, that he shall do nothing rashly, and from ouersights, that he shall
see what is fit for every season: and from slothfulnes, that he shall not fail
to make good use of all fit opportunities offered.

Secondly, it declares the success wherewith he that keeps he finds
goodness, and that will be found sufficient in time for complete and perfect
happiness, reaching to the person, to his state, his name, or whatsoever
materially concerns him for the present, or perpetually hereafter. For he
enjoys God, the absolute and sovereign good, the author and full fountain
of all goodness, and can any good thing then be detained from him? He cannot be
friendles: for the Lord whose favor is more worth then all men's, does
entirely love him. He cannot be contemptible: for the God of of glory does
dignifie him with the honor of adoption. He cannot be hurt with violence or
peril, for he sits always in the lap, and is borne in the arms of his
omnipotent father. He cannot perish with wants or penury: for the owner of all
things undertakes the feeding and finding of him: His body shall be satisfied
with all needful provision: his heart shall be replenished with all sorts of
graces; and his conscience refreshed with all kinds of comforts. Whiles he
lives, he shall be happy on earth, and when he dies, he shall be blessed in
heaven, and at the resurrection he shall be glorious in the presence of Jesus
Christ, and of his Angels, and people, and so from henceforth and for ever.

Confutation of that blasphemous slander, which is raised his substance, and
macerate his body, and excruciate his mind, and craze his brains, as though
Gods service were nothing else but an exquisite tyranny, and unworthy for any
that regards his own good, to deal with. But from whom proceed these
inuectiues, and calumniations? Even from Satan's bondmen, and prisoners, which
never enjoyed the benefit of liberty: which have been blind from their birth,
and without light all their life, and never knew the pleasure of seeing. Pity
their misery: for the distemper of their souls causes them thus to rave, but
credit not their reports: for there is nothing but falsehood in their sayings.
Ob. But the best men have commonly most afflictions. Answ. And so they have
also the greatest Mark. 10. 30.
comforts: None sustain so great molestations and losses, and none receive so
great a reward, and recompense. None are so much vilified with the tongues of
most men, and none are so much honored in the consciences of all men.

Verse. 9. A false witness shall not be unpunished: and he that speaks lies
shall perish. THis is the same both in words and sense with the fifth verse of
this chapter, saving that there was said, the liar shall not escape, and here
he shall perish: so that it is not only a repetition, but a brief exposition
of that, concluding, that as he shall be surely punished, so he shall be sorely
plagued, even with no lighter strokes, then destruction it self, which no
gain or advantage can be able to counteruaile.

Verse. 10. Pleasure is not comely for a fool: much less for a servant to
have rule over Princes. PLeasure, the affections of joy and delight, the means
whereby they are wrought, and the objects whereon they are settled, as abundance
of wealth, delicious fare, gorgeous apparel, sumptuous houses, costly
furniture, pleasant pastimes, or whatsoever is of like nature, is not comely
for a fool, is not fit for him that is destitute of grace, and good
understanding to have, as neither making for his honor, nor profit indeed,
though highly promoting both in appearance. He will pervert them, and annoy
other men by them, and they will endanger him, and bring much harm and
mischief to him. Much less for a servant to rule over Princes. By servant,
he means such manner of persons as he called fools in the former clause;
namely, men inthralled to their lusts, and unlawful desires: and by Princes,
are understood the godly, who are dignified with a spiritual advancement: so
that he proceeds in extenuating the condition of sinful men, and shows
their unworthiness by way of gradation, that all sorts of desirable things
are too good for them, and much more authority and power over others, but most
of all superiority, with jurisdiction over the righteous.

The liberty of delights, and comfortable prosperity does

When ye see ungodly and impious people waxing iocund, and merry, and their
state appearing prosperous and fortunate, what else do you behold, but the
plants of wild comfort, bearing leaves like to that which springs from
grace, but it wants the nature and virtue thereof. Or at best, it is but as
corn growing upon the top of the house, which no wise man will reckon among
his commodities, nor account an ornament to the place where it grows: it was
never sown by the hand of the Seedes-man, nor ever will be reapt by the sickle
of the Haruest-man.

That rich glutton of whom Christ speaks in the Gospel, Luke 6.
had his estate embroidered, and garnished with all the ornaments of
prosperity, both for goods, good cheer, fine clothing, and all pleasures
that might serve for his contentment, if a sensual Epicure could possibly be
contented, but it sat not handsomely on the fools back, nor was decent for
such a misshapen caitiffe, and therefore he was exceedingly disfigured thereby,
and nothing beautified, and his vglesome deformity remains in the view and
sight of all succeeding posterities.

First, they have no right to comfort, because they are not

Secondly, pleasures and prosperity will make them proud

Thirdly, their own miserable case, and Gods righteous Iac. 4. 9. and 5. 1.
he Gods chosen; or because they are to be damned and destroyed, if they be
reprobates.

Instruction, that in all our plenty, promotions, disports,

But how shall I know that I may be merry and cheerful, that comfort and
gladness belong to me? When thou find salvation confirmed to thee by the
remission of thy sins, and grace, and sincerity, dwelling within thee; Be
glad ye righteous, Ps. 32. 11. and 33. 1.
(says the Prophet) and rejoice in the Lord, and be joyful all ye that are
upright in heart. Rejoice in the Lord, o ye righteous: for it becomes
upright men to be thankful. But as for them that be impious, unrighteous, or
hypocritical dissemblers, let them weep and lament for their sins, and the
danger of their souls: for that is the most seemly exercise which they can
perform. And if they will not addict themselves unto it voluntarily, they
will (in time) be driven unto it by compulsion. Either they must turn their
laughter into mourning, or God will make them to mourn for their laughter.
Their mirth and joy is but momentanie, and for a short season: and better it is
never to be glad, then not to retain matter of gladness for ever. For that
cause among others, Solomon does so basely esteem of the joy and iollitie of
vain persons, saying, Better it is to hear the rebuke of a wiseman, then that
a man should hear the song of fools. For like the noise of thorns under the
pot, so is the laughter of the fool: this is also vanity.

Reproof of them that being least wise and virtuous, are most greedily given
to satisfy their desires and appetites, though being sometimes solicited, they
can never yet be fully satisfied.

Some seek their commodities so greedily, as though the world were made for
nothing else, but to be their possession: others are climing so fast, and
laboring so earnestly to grow great, that if it were possible, they would
mount up to the heavens, and touch the skies with their foreheads, but they
fly with the wings of earthly pride, yea rather of hellish ambition.

An other sort pursue their pleasures and delights so incessantly, as if they
were created for no other use, but to serve their recreations (for so they
would have their masters called, although improperlie) as hawking, hunting,
quaffing, scoffing, dancing, dycing, carding, bowling, and all manner of
unfruitful exercises, which are many more then we can recount, yet not one
above the number of them for which they shall be plagued. Their hearts are
oppressed with the love of sinful delights, which take authority upon them,
and show tyranny to their souls.

The case stands with them for voluptuousnes and pleasures, as it does with
drunkards, and such as have the dropsy, for wine and strong drink: they
thirst continually after that which turns to the bane of their brains, and
whole bodies: nothing is so welcome unto them, as that which is most hurtful
for them. Who use to bestow so much time in these idle actions, as they which
have time little enough to bewail their abominable ways wherein they have
walked, though many more years should be added to their lives, then they have
any grant of?

Servants, etc. All sinners are bondmen, and every good

No promotion can manumisse the former sort, or bring any freedom to them: fot
he calls them servants still, though they be commanders: and no depression
can debase the other, or take away their dignity from then: for he styles
them still by the name of Princes, though subject to servants.

And this same writer Saloman, by the instinct of the same holy spirit, does
in an other book so esteem and speak of either part, as herein this Text;
Folly, (says he) that is, vicious persons whom sin has infatuated, is
set in great excellency, and the rich, (not flowing with earthly possessions,
but stored with heavenly graces,) is set in the low place. I have Eccl. 10.
7. 6.
seen servants on horses, and Princes walking as servants on the ground.

First, the ungodly have sin to their master, as our Savior Whosoever
commits sin, that is, lives John. 8 34.
impenitentlie in the practice thereof, is the servant of sin. And Saint
Peter assigns a cause of this servitude, in that they are 1. Pet 2. 19.
overcome of corruption: and of whom soever a man is overcome, even unto the
same is he in bondage. Now Satan also exercises dominion where sin
reigns: for one of them is subordinate to the other, and hell and damnation
challenge a right in the slaves of sin, and Satan, to own them presently,
and to seize upon them in time to come, by the hand of death, and to hold them
inthralled from thenceforth for ever.

Secondly, the godly are Princes by birth, both by their fathers In steed of
thy fathers Ps. 45. 16.
(says the Lord to her) shall thy children be: thou shall make them Princes
through all the earth. And as their parentage is honorable, so is their
patrimony and possessions ample, and large, they being heirs with God, and
heirs annexed with Christ, the To. 8. 17.
Lord, and heir of all creatures.

We need not to discourse of their princely valor in exploits, and
victories, in conquests, and tryumphs. They subdue the corruptions of their
own hearts, they rule their own minds, Pro. 16. 32.
which is a greater matter then the winning of a City. They overcome the world
by Faith, as S. John declares: the devil is overthrown 1. Ioh. 5. 5.
and vanquished by them, so puissant and valorous are they by his power, that
works all, in all things for them.

Instruction, that we prefer not the worst, with contempt of good affection,
reverent estimation, and friendly usage, because they are not wealthy. Beware
that thou approve not of the wicked man's behavior, nor admire his prosperous
estate, sithence his condition is so servile and contemptible; and take heed
that thou despise not the poor that is godly, nor condemn either the case
that he stands in, or the ways that he walks in, forasmuch as his dignity
is so great and glorious. Whosoever reposeth his own happiness in heaven, and
not in earth, and priceth Gods love to himself above the pomp or riches of
this life, will also give most preferment in his heart, to others that show
themselves to be citizens of heaven, and whom the Lord has chosen to be rich
infaith, and heirs of the kingdom Iam. 2. 5.
which he promised to them that love him: none but fellow-seruants, and such as
are base borne, will honor the drudges and servants of sin, above the sons
and children of God. Which may well serve also to them that fear God, for a
motive to patience in their tribulations and adversity, seeing that all the
crosses which Christians do bear, are nothing else but as it were the
murdering of young noble men in their childhood, that they may be fitted for
glory and excellency, when they shall come to their riper age hereafter.

Over princes, etc. Evil rulers never abuse their authority so

It follows beneath in an other chapter, that when the wicked rise up, that
is, flourish and bear sway, men hide themselves. What men are they which are
driven into that distress? The Prou. 28. 28.
next clause shows by consequent, saying, When they perish, the righteous
increase. And was not this to be clearly seen in Pharaoes tyranny, and the
Egiptians cruelty against the poor Israelites? And was it not as evident in
the violence of the Babilonians against the Jews, when they defiled the women
in Zion, and the maids in the cities of Judah? When the Princes were hanged by
Lam. 5.
their hands, and the faces of the Elders were not had in honor? when they
took the young men to grind, and the children fell under the wood, as the
Prophet in the name of the church complains? And we may spare and pass by
that insolent, proud, and high minded Haman, and his bloody designement, who
(as he thought) having the lives of all Gods people at his disposing, Hest. 3.
13.
was resolute to spare none, but utterly to root out, kill, and destroy every
one, both young, and old, children, and women, in one day, and to spoil them
as a prey.

First, they bear an implacable hatred against them, and ever put enmity
between the seed of the woman, Genesis 3. 15.
and the seed of the serpent. Now when enemies are rulers, and bears are
shepherds, what equity, or safety may of the flock be expected?

Secondly, they envy the felicity and good estate of the righteous

Thirdly, they have for the most part all encouragements to lay loads and
burdens upon their backs: wicked men oppressed,

Instruction to all governors, both domestical and public, together with
Landlords, to find out, and discover to those that walk in a perfect way, as
David did his, and bend their displeasure against slanderers, them that have
proud looks, deceitful persons, and tellers of lies? If this their course be
constantly held, and without partiality, why may it not be said that they do
wisely in a perfect way: that they walk in the vprightnes of their hearts, in
the midst of their houses, or dominions? But if they smile upon the wicked, and
grace them with their best looks, and frown upon the righteous, and browe
beat them with a disdainefull countenance: if they can easily pass by the
foul faults of blasphemers, ruffians, quaffers, quarrellers, gamesters,
picke-thankes, and whoremaisters, and so bitterly aggrauate, and censure the
smaller infirmities of such as otherwise are virtuous, and honest, (who
peradventure, if they had equal hearing, such as Job afforded to the meanest
in his house, would prove themselves not to be culpable at all, but to have
performed some good duty) then their ways tell them that their hearts be
corrupt, and by strengthening the hands of sinners, they show their love to
sin, and by their rigor against the godly, they bewray and manifest their
own ungodliness.

Furthermore, since the proceedings of godless governors are so unjust and
cruel against the people of God, it should Jerusalem and Judah, to be
delivered, though a short time, into the hands of Shishak the king of Egypt,
that being servants to him, they might know the difference between the
service of the Lord, and of the heathen 2. Chron. 12. 8
princes: and will it be an easy burden for us to bear the intolerable yoke
of that Romish Antichrist, to be made the servants of that servant of servants,
who exalts himself so proudly, so above kings, and the greatest potentates?
May we think, that that mankind beast (who has so long time lived by blood,
by the blood of the souls of them that subject themselves to his laws, and
the blood of the bodies of them that resist him) would entreat us with as
great mildnes, as Shishak did Rehoboam, and his people? Nay, as Zenacherib
would have done Hezekiah, and his people? Nebuchadnezzar with his Babilonians,
was far more favorable to Jerusalem, then the pope with his Romanists, would
be to England, if his power served him against the King, and his faithful
subjects. For never any Amalakit^ was more infestious, and full of inveterate
rancour against Jacobs posterity, then the popish idolaters are against those
that are truly religious.

Verse. 11. The understanding of a man, makes him slow to wrath, and it is his
glory to pass by an offense. THe understanding of a man] the heavenly wisdom
of God, which is in the mind of a regenerate person, according to the measure
thereof, withholdeth him from rash and unadvised anger, but not from all anger:
for then it should deprive him of some virtue, and disable him from the
performance of many duties. As the distempered passions of wrath be works of
the flesh, and carefully to be avoided, so are the well governed affections of
anger fruits of the spirit, and seasonably to be exercised. He that is
ouercarried with rage and choler, does want those lovely graces of meekenes,
and patience: and he that is never stirred to any displeasure, is possessed
with stupiditie, and destitute of zeal, and Christian feeling. Now to shun
these vicious extremes on both sides, and observe the laudable mediocritie
between them, these rules may direct us. First, that all our anger be only
for sin, and so we shall best put in practice the Apostles precept, to be
angry and Ephe. 4. 26.
sin not. Then shall we not be teastie with them that be innocent, because we
are incensed by them that are faulty: then shall we never like fumish Balaam
fall out with beasts, and unreasonable creatures, much less be imbittered
against things that are senseless. Secondly, that our anger be measurably
proportioned to the measure of the offense, greatest indignation must be
conceived against the greatest transgressions, though they bring not to us so
great annoyances: and smaller faults should less displease us, though in
private respects they seem to be more for our damage: for every part ought
rather to be tenderly affected at Gods dishonor, then his own detriment.
Thridly, that it be not ouerlong continued, and excessive in time, but bounded
within the limits of a day at the furthest: the Lord would not have wrath
protracted till night, nor the sun to go down upon it. Fourthly, that the
crimes of our familiars, benefactors, kinsfolk, and dearest friends, do make
us more angry then theirs that are not so nearly united to us: that we take to
heart the sin of our child, more then of a brother: and of a yoke fellow,
more then of a child: and our own, more then a yoke fellow, child, brother,
or of any, or all others.

Fiftlie, that the ire and wrath against the sins of our neighbors, draw
not our selves into any sinful behavior against God, as to be fierce and
violent in reuengement, to rail, to revile, to vomit out blasphemies, or
imprecations, etc.

Lastly, that it hinder us not from, but further us to the performance of all
good services, especially in the behalf of the parties delinquent, as to
admonish them, pray for them, and give them direction for reformation of their
transgressions. And it is his glory, it wins him honor and praise, and
that worthily, to pass by an offense, to wink at smaller infirmities, and to
remit greater wrongs, yet not so, as to be silent at Gods dishonor, with the
peril of the soul of the sinner, or at the grieuances which are offered to
himself from them: only the forbearance of revenge, and not of just
reproof, or of due correction, is commended.

Thus thou see both the root, and the fruit, the cause and effect of
lenity and mildnes declared in this sentence.

It makes much for a man's credit to be gentle and peaceable, Joseph has
gained to himself an immortal, and perpetual praise, as is well known to
all, by his facility and readiness to remit the envy and wrongs of his
brethren against him, showing so much mercy and kindness to them for their
preservation, which practiced so much malice and cruelty against him for his
destruction.

And how memorable is that mecknesse of David, who being most unworthily,
despitefullie, and contumeliouslie reproched, and railed upon, by that
rebellious Shemei, did yet bear it so patiently for the present, and
refrained himself from revenging of it afterward, all the time that he lived?

And whereas Festus by taunting Paul so opprobriouslie, and charging him with
madness before king Agrippa and the whole Acts. 26. 24
assembly, thought to have brought him to contempt, who sees not that Paul by
passing by the indignity, without indignation, has graced himself before the
company that then heard him, and all others, which ever since have heard of
him? See Chapt. 12. verse. 16.

Verse 12. The wrath of the king, is like the roaring of a Lion: but his favor
is as the deawe upon the grass. THe wrath of the king] the indignation of a
Prince, or mighty potentate, having authority and power, incensed (not against
the innocent and righteous, but such as were Michaiah, or Elijah, whom Achab
stormed at, but killed not, or though he had killed them, yet he could not have
hurt them, but himself rather, as Ioab did, by slaying of Zachary, and sending
him the sooner to heaven) but against malefactors, rebels, traitors,
contemptuous persons, and transgressors of his wholesome laws, or any whom
God shall put into the magistrates hand, as men of death, for violating his
commandments, is like the roaring of a Lion, which has more courage and
strength, both to roar more hideouslie, and to tear more cruelly: For it is
not understood of them that be taken, and shut up like captives in holes, whom
we may hear, and look upon through grates, and stand near too without peril,
but of such as meet with a prey, either of man or beasts, in the forests, or
open fields, or any where in their own walks. But his favor, his love, and
countenance, especially toward worthy men, is like the deaw upon the grass,
very comfortable or profitable to them, rejoicing their hearts, advancing
their states, preserving, and protecting them from wrongs, as the deaw, or mild
shewres, do refresh the fields, cause grass to grow, and preserve the same,
that the scorching heat of the Sun dry it not up, and cause it to wither.

It is expedient for men to be good subjects, even for fear,

The Apostles, both Paul and Peter, lay a sure foundation for To. 13. 5.
loyalty to be built upon, and ground it in the conscience of Christians, that
for the Lords sake, they should be subject to authority: 1. Pet 2. 13.
but if any be so impious, and deuoyde of religion, that the ordinance of God
be of no force with him, yet good discretion might make him afraid to expose
himself to the displeasure, and severity of the Magistrate, and to induce him
to seek the benefit of his benignity and favor. See chap. 16. v. 14. 15.

Verse. 13. A foolish son is the calamity of his father, and the contentions
of a wife, are like a continual dropping. TWo of the greatest afflictions
which befall the governors in their families, are declared in this sentence.
The former is a foolish son, a sinful, unhappy child, after what sort souer
his leaudnes breaks out, whether by contumacie, and stubbornnes, when he
shall contemn his parents, and despise their precepts, or by riot, and
unthriftiness, when he shall be, as it were a gulf to swallow up all his
fathers labors, and those things which he has been so careful to provide, or
by any other means shall bring shame and destruction upon himself, who is the
calamity of his father, the worker of his woe, and cause of sorrow, for the
loosenes of his life, and at the sight, or foresight (by all probability and
likelihood) of the misery of his death. The other is a contentious wife, whose
brawlings offend the ears, and vex the heart, and sometimes demolish the state
of her husband, and therefore are compared to a continual dropping: they are
as irksome, and hurtful, as for rain to pierce through every part of the
roof, into all rooms of the house, falling on the plancks, and walls, and
stuff, and heads of them that are doing their work, or sitting at their
meat, or lying in their beds, which must needs be both tedious, and noisome,
to ruinate the building, and rotte the goods, and molest the inhabitants, how
this resembles an unquiet woman, and what mischief proceeds from a wicked
wife, we have familiarlie showed. Chap. 12. verse. 4.

The most delectable commodities of this life, turn many

To pass by the specialls here specified, (sithence wife Ps. 128. 3.
and children) are well known to be desirable, (if good) and much desired, in
hope that they will be good, and yet prove often to be so burthenous, as our
Text does testify,) we will exemplify the point in other things which the
world has in great admiration. As strength is greatly esteemed of, and who
would not gladly enjoy it? and yet it were better phrenticke persons, and
mad men to be without it, as that poor possessed person felt, which plucked
his chains asunder, Mar. 5. 4. 5.
and brake his fetters in pieces, and struck himself with stones.

The greater part of mankind does thirst for gold and silver, and money, it
is the earthen God, almost of all the inhabitants of the earth, every worldling
does adore, and worship it, and yet Ezechiel speaks of a time when they shall
cast their silver Ezech. 7. 19.
in the streets, and their gold far from them, being oppressed with fear
and terror.

It is not very delightful and pleasant, even a matter of contentment to most
men's appetites, to sit at full cups of wine and strong drink, with variety,
and abundance of delicious dishes, and such companions as they best like of?
And yet think how Belshazzar that cursed king of Babel, could relish all his
delicates, when he saw the hand writing his ruin and destiny upon the wall:
when the interpretation of it was told him: Dan. 5.
when he beheld the enemy rushing into the house with a naked sword in his
hand, to slay him. And then his pomp, and then his power, and then his
dignity, his large dominions, and ample possessions, though all of them were
such as were admired of all, could yet bring no comfort at all unto him.

First, disappointment is a torment unto them, when they

Secondly, God by a wise providence, will have all worldly

And withal, hereby he supporteth the hearts of his people, that they
should not be discouraged at the prosperity of the wicked, as though they were
preferred before themselves, sithence they bear so heavy burdens of great
unquietness, when they seem to be most fortunate and happy.

Instruction, that no man should satisfy himself in obtaining Heuah thought,
that the very having of her first son had been the getting of a great
substance, and therefore she called his name Cain, that is, a possession: but
poor woman, she was deceived in her expectation (as easily she might be
through want of all experience) for he was so far from being a possession
Genesis 4.
of any worth, as that he dispossessed her of that gracious son Habel, who was
in deed a worthy possession. Whatsoever therefore thou wishest to have made
comfortable to thee, rely not upon too much, as though of it self it could
minister any comfort, how specious, profitable, or pleasant soever it appear,
but sue by prayer to him that gave it, that he would give the joyful fruition
of it. And be admonished by this, to seek principally, and with greatest
industry, things which are above, to labor most for heavenly graces, which
certainly would bring spiritual gladness with them. Get faith rather then
riches, and let thy heart be furnished with the fear of God, more then thy
state and house, with all manner of treasures, and ornaments. Though thy wealth
do vanish, thy strength decay, thy greatness decrease, thy friends forsake
thee, or all these remaining, cannot preserve thy heart from friefes, and
fears, yet thy godliness, thy wisdom, thy love, thy mercy, thy patience, and
the like, will abide with thee, and stand to thee, and suffer no misery to
seize upon thee.

Verse. 14. House and substance are the inheritance of the fathers, but a
prudent wife is from the Lord. IN the former sentence, by a lively similitude,
he showed how noisome a bad wife is, and in this by an other argument, he
makes it appear what a great benefit a good wife is. He Proves it from the
efficient, that the Lord does bestow her, and that in manner differing from
his ordinary and common giftures. Houses, and lands are his gifts also, and so
are riches, and all sorts of commodities, but they are ordinarily, commonly,
and mediately received from ancestors, as fathers, grandfathers, and great
grandfathers, to whom the Lord has given power to get, and keep goods, and a
will to leave them from hand to hand to their posterity. But a prudent wife, a
godly, wise, and virtuous wife, and in like manner, a religious, discreet, and
gracious husband, is from the Lord, made such a one by his grace, and joined to
the yoke fellow.

House and riches, etc. No man can possibly have possession^

This has been handled in the fourth verse of the twelfth chapter, and
remains to be further enlarged in the last chapter.

From the Lord, etc. The more immediate any good gift of God is, the more
precious it is.

The bread which in the wilderness fell daily from the clouds, was far more
notable, then if the Israelites had manured the ground, and been provided for
of corn, and inned an harvest. And the birth of Isaac, of John Baptist, of
Samuel, and the Shunamites son, was far more honorable then if their
mothers had been fertile, and apt to bear children. The handful of meal in
the barrel, and the little oil in the cruse, which 1. King. 17. 16.
were long deked out to the poor widow of Sarepta, were more to be esteemed
of, then all Iezabels plenty of victuals. And so was the oil that was
multiplied to the poor prophets widow, for maintenance, and payment of her
debts, then all 1. King. 4. 2. King. 20.
Achabs treasures. And was not Hezechias miraculous recovery better for him,
then if he had never been sick, or to have been cured by Physicians? And the
same might be said of the raising up of Lazarus, and Christ his healing many,
of manifold John. 11.
maladies, in the Gospel.

For the Lord does by this make manifest his particular providence,

Consolation to those from whom he detaineth such accustomed helps and means
of safety, or sustenance, as others wontedly enjoy, and reserueth them, by
himself, in a peculiar manner to be provided for. In this case are many
seeming wholly forlorn, and utterly destitute of all aid and succor, who may
truly be said to live by faith, not only for salvation, and everlasting life,
for food, apparel, harbor, and lodging, with other needful things
appertaining to this life. Their maintenance cease, their strength fails,
their friends forsake them, their adversaries pursue them, and yet they are not
without comforts, and refreshings. They have nothing to take too, or depend
upon, and yet behold they want nothing. Eliah found the fidelity of this
providence for his food in the time of the great drought and scarcity, when
he could come by no other meat, but that which a raven should minister unto
him, 1. King. 6. 17.
and that kind of creature is seldom a good purueyer, or cater, and yet was
he no day neglected, as being disappoynted either of bread or flesh, for
dinner, or supper. And S. Paul among others, had experience of the same for his
preservation, in the time of his tribulations. We are afflicted, says he, on
every side, yet are we not in distress: in poverty, but not overcome of
poverty. We 2. Cor. 4. 8. 9.
are persecuted, but not forsaken: cast down, but we perish not.

The Lord has a principal hand in all good marriages. A he which finds a
wife (meaning such Prou. 18. 22.
a one as is here specified) finds a good thing, and receives favor of the
Lord. This is evident to be seen in the case of Isaac, and Rebecca: Abraham's
servant was well acquainted with this point, and grounded his prayer upon it,
desiring to know by a sign (which in deed was extraordinary) what wife God
had ordained Gen 24. 14.
for his servant Isaac, and that he had showed mereie on his master. And the
effect was so apparent, that even Laban, and verse. 50. 51.
Bethuel, were driven to acknowledge it directly, and durst not contradict, or
go about to cross it, saying, this thing is proceeded of the Lord: we cannot
therefore say to thee, either evil or good. Behold Rebecca is before thee,
take her, and go, that she may be thy masters sons wife, even as the Lord
has said. Now albeit his hand were more conspicuous then in dealing for
Isaac, and making the voyage of Abraham's messenger so prosperous, yet it is
exercised still, in other godly men's affairs of like nature, though not so
much discerned.

First, by his spirit both men and women are made marriageable,

Secondly, his providence disposes of, and prospers the Elimelech with his
wife and sons were sent into the country of Moab, that Chilion should marry
Ruth? And for Chilion to marry Ruth, that she might be knit both in alliance
and affection to Naomy? And therefore to be so united to Naomy* that she might
bring her with her to Bethlehem? And therefore to be brought to Bethlehem, that
she and her ways might be known to Boaz? And therefore to be known to Boaz,
that Boaz might have due calling to choose her for his wife? Add hereunto her
gleaning in the field, her lighting upon Boaz his field, the humanity which he
did show unto her, the refusal which the other kinsman made of her, do not
all these, and many other circumstances concur together to bring this to
pass, that Boaz should have so good opportunity to enjoy her?

Instruction for them that would speed well, and find good success in their
wooing, and marriages, that they sue to God for his direction and assistance,
before they become suitors unto the parties whom they affect, for the winning
of their affections.

Abraham's Agent for Isaacks match, in his wisdom, saw that to be the best
way for good success, and therefore followed it, and accordingly prospered,
as by the story appears: and if he then were so provident, and prosperous,
for the benefit of an other, ought not every wise man to be as prudent, and to
take the same course, in any matter of like importance, concerning himself?

But withal, let him that desires to have a good wife granted to him, look
well to his own soul, and take heed to his ways, that he may be to her a
worthy husband, and to God a faithful servant: Otherwise, his attempt to
attain her, shall all be frustrate, or her goodness in the end, will make but
little for his comfort. He must please him, and get his favor, (as was cited
out of the former Chapter,) which shall find him so beneficial, as to enrich
him with such a blessing.

It is promised in the Psalms, as a reward proper to them Psalm. 128. 3.
that fear the Lord, and walk in his ways, to make them blessed, that their
Wives shall be profitable, and comfortable, fruitful, and pleasant, like to
the Vines, on the sides of their houses: which falls out when they are well
graced before hand, and so by his goodness put into their bosoms, or afterward
reclaimed from vices, and as it were transformed under their discreet
government.

And so godly men, afflicted with godles wives, are not without hope of their
reformation, for as much as he is no less able, or willing to work grace in
them that are already married, then in those that yet be vnbestowed and single.

Verse 15. Slothfulnes causes heavy sleep to fall, and a deceitful person
shall be affamished. THe dangerous effects of sluggishnes, are here set down,
and described, whereof some are sins, and heedfullie to be shunned, and
others are punishments thereof, and greatly to be feared.

The first is, immoderate and excessive sleeping, whereby men's callings and
labors are neglected, their time lost, and their wits and senses dulled: and
this grows partly from the abundance of humors, by which the head is
oppressed, and partly from the want of cheerfulnes, whereby the heart should
be refreshed: and therefore observe, that all sluggards are lumpish, and like
dead men, saving when they be about the practice or project of some thing
unlawful.

This drowsinesse of theirs, and disposition to sleep, they are charged with,
and challenged for, in the sixth Chapter: How long will thou sleep, o sluggard,
when will thou arise out of Prou. 6. 9.
thy sleep? etc.

The second is deceitfulness, being inferred in the latter clause, as that
which insueth both upon slothfulnes and sleepines. For they that lose their
time, can neither get wealth well, nor keep that which others have formerly
gathered by their travel. Then must they needs fall into indigencie and want,
and being not able to sustain the violence thereof, (for none are so
impatient of poverty, as those who retchleslie throw themselves into it,)
they will live by their wits, and shift for themselves, by falsehood and
indirect courses.

The third, which is the punishment of all the former, is famine, and miserable
necessity, which their fraud and deceitfulnes does double upon them, and not
prevent, or diminish. Or if it fall out that some by wrongful dealing are
helped in their state for a time, yet it turns to their greater hurt, and
deeper decay in time following: or if they thrive even to their lives end, by
their unjust and fraudulent practices, yet they shall rue it in the worlds
end, for the miseries and plagues that will come upon them, as Saint James
does testify.

The sense therefore of the sentence is this: Slothfulnes causes Iam. 5. 1.
men to be sleepie and deceitful, and he that is deceitful, sleepie, or
slothful, shall be affamished.

Slothfulnes is a vice very hurtful both to body, soul, and

Affamished, etc. Unrighteous dealing brings that misery

What thing is so dreadful, grimme, and horrible, to all worldly men, as
penury and need? Gods wrath is not: the devil is not: death is not:
damnation is not: hell is not, (though all these in time will be,) for do they
not provoke Gods anger, and make themselves a prey to the devil, and cast
themselves into the mouth of death, damnation, and hell it self, to purchase
profits, and keep of poverty? And yet mistaking their way, the faster, many
would run from it, through the bypath of craft, and injustice, the more
have they make toward it, till at last they be devoured of it. See Chapt. 10.
Verse. 4. and 12. V. 27.

Verse 16 He that keeps the commandment, keeps his soul: but he that
despises his ways, shall die. He that keeps the commandement] which in the
integrity, and vprightnes of his heart, observes the law of the Lord, to walk
in the same, although he cannot fulfill it, beaking it as little as he can,
though he cannot obey it so fully as he would, and is humbled for his faults,
when he sees his sins, and tra^sgressions, keeps his soul, himself, a part
being put for the whole, he preserves the life both of his soul and body,
from an untimely death, and eternal destruction, not by the merit of his
obedience, but by the mercy of God, that rewards him for it: But he that
despises his ways, makes no account how, or after what sort he does live,
nor has care to be directed by the prescript rule of the holy word of God,
shall die, shall certainly perish, and be destroyed for ever, at the last,
though peradventure he be spared for a season.

Thus stands the opposition: He that keeps the commandment, and regards
his ways shall live: but he that breaks the commandment, and despises his
ways, shall die.

So much conscience as any man makes of obedience to

They that have great care to show themselves obsequious, and faithful unto
him, have great cause to look for protection and blessedness from him: they
that are more remiss in performing those duties which his commandments
require, must needs be more abridged of that comfort which his promises do
offer: and they which refuse to submit themselves to the authority of his
word, or to do him any service at all, must well understand, that they are not
to expect from him any preservation, or favor at all, but rather punishments
and vengeance. Let us us attend to the testimony of David, who speaks his
knowledge, and that by the experience which himself found in this case.
Because (says he) I kept the ways of the Lord, and did not wickedlie against
my God, (for all his Laws were before me, Ps. 18. 21. 22. etc.
and I did not cast away his commandments from me: I was upright also with
him, and have kept me from my wickedness) therefore the Lord ^^warded me
according to my righteousness, and according to the pureness of my hands in his
sight. With the godly, thou will show thy self godly; with the upright man,
thou will show thy self upright. With the pure, thou will show thy self pure;
and with the froward, thou set thy self to wrestle. Thus thou will save
the humble (or poor people) and wilt cast down the proud looks.

First, nothing is more acceptable, or better pleasing to the For what says
Samuel to Saul, touching this same point? Has the Lord greater pleasure in
burnt offerings, and sacrifices, as when the voice of the Lord is obeyed?
Behold to obey, is better then sacrifice: and to hearken, is better then the
fat of rams. But rebellion is as the sin of witchcraft, and transgression
is wickedness, and as idolatry.

Secondly, they that are believers, and obedient, have Jesus Christ for their
mediator, and redeemer, and how then can 2. Pet. 28.
but they be saved? but to them which be disobedient at the word, he is a stone
to stumble at, and a rock of offense, and how then can it be that they should
not perish?

The Lord himself is the keeper of them that serve him, his eyes are over the
righteous, and his ears are open to their prayers: but Ps. 34. 15. 16.
the angry face of the Lord is against them that do evil, to cut off their
remembrance from the earth.

Lastly, the promises and blessings of life, salvation, and happiness, Luke 11.
28. Deuteronomy. 28. 1.
are all assured to them that hear the word of God, and keep it: to them that
diligently obey the voice of the Lord their God, and observe and do all his
commandments: and the threats for death, destruction, and misery, are
directed against those that shall despise his ordinances, and whose soul
abhors his laws, so Leuit 2^. 14. 15
that they will not do all his commandments, but break his covenants.

Instruction to deal soundly for our selves, and make clear any man seem to
himself Gal. 6. 3. 4.
that he is somewhat, when he is nothing, deceiving himself in his
imagination, but admonishes every man to prove his own work, and then he
shall have rejoicing in himself only, and not in an other. All the evidence
that many have of their salvation is this, that their acquaintance, who yet are
unacquainted with their hearts, and the course of their behavior, commend them
for Christians, and hope well of them: and so their whole comfort stands in the
opinions which their neighbors conceive, and not in any assurance that
themselves obtain. And diverse conclude of their own safety, by no other
argument, but only the sight of other men's perils: that their life and
condition must needs be good, because the course and case of so many leaud
persons appears so bad: and so the very foundation of their confidence, is
nothing else but a sandy comparison. 2. Terror for impious profane persons,
which bless themselves, when God curses them; which arrogate the promises of
life, when he denounces the threats of death: which have a root of bitterness
Dau. 20 19.
in them, and say, peace shall be to me, although I walk according to the
stubbornnes of mine own heart. If they persisting in this their stubbornnes,
and perpetual peace, Gods servants walking faithfully before him, shall find
eternal misery: for he is as just to execute his threatenings, as kind and
gracious to perform his promises. Now it is impossible for Gods children to
perish, as it is for his own nature and being to fail, and therefore behold
the damnable state of these presumptuous miscreants. If they will be blasphemers,
if they will be scoffers at religious exercises; If they profane the holy
sabbath, which the Lord has instituted to be sanctified: if they will despise
the authority of their governors: if they will be proud, and high minded: if
they will be unmerciful and cruel: if they will be unchaste and filthy, or
intemperate drunkards, or covetous earth-wormes, or false singered, or false
tongued, or allow themselves in any kind of vicious behavior, let them
proceed in their leaudnes, and God will proceed in his righteousness: their
security will bring them no safety, the more they contemn his words by
sinning against them, the more he will glorify his words, by manifesting the
justice, and verity of them. And this may also serve to admonish all to
beware, how they, neglecting the commandments so strictly to be observed, in
steed thereof, prescribe to themselves a worship which the brain of man Mat
15. 9. Col. 2. 20.
has invented, and the will of man embraced, without warrant of, and therefore
contrary to the word and will of the Almighty. As these are not to be numbered
among the Atheists, because they be not so impudently impious as they be, so
neither are they to be reckoned among true worshippers, because they want that
humility, and vprightnes which they have. For superstition in gendred by
pride, and sound religion gotten by grace, are so opposite, and contrary one
to the other, that no man can possibly have in him the habit of them both
together. And if the keeping of the commandments be of such importance for the
tranquillity of the conscience, to give satisfaction thereto for the certainty
of salvation, then dissembling Christians also, and fruitless professors of
the Gospel, must needs be void of all sound comfort. For though they speak
of goodness, yet they only speak, and practice not: and though they hear the
voice of God, yet they be hearers only, Iam. 1. 22.
and not doers of the word, as S. James says, deceiving their own souls:
whereas the promise is made to them which are not forgetful hearers, but doers
of the work, that such shall be blessed in their deeds. For where knowledge,
profession, and transgression, concur together, the sin is the greater,
because it is scandalous, and wilful, and the burden thereof the heavier,
because the heart is more privy to it self of guiltines, and apprehensiue of
punishment.

Verse. 17. He that gives freely to the poor, lends unto the Lord, and the
Lord will repay him his reward. HE that gives freely] which out of his
compassion and mercy, without any carnal, or corrupt respect of his own
advantage, ministers food, apparel, harbor, or any kind of help and
comfort, by word, or deed, to the poor, to them that are in affliction, of
what sort soever, especially if they be Gods faithful servants, or seem to be
such, lends to the Lord, not that he is beholden to us, or receives any
benefit at our hands: for what can we give that he lent not to us, nor is his
own, nor in his power, to take, and dispose of, to whom he will, without our
leave? but he is pleased so to accept of our beneficence to our brethren, as if
himself were thereby gratified, and had a good turn done to him: for men are
many times pleasured by that which is lent them in their need, and are glad to
buy the use thereof with loan, and therefore it is Ps. 112. 5.
noted as a work of mercy from a good man, not only that he bestows gifts,
but also that he lends freely. So then God vouchsafes to repute that which
is paid unto him, though imperfectly too, and scarce by the halues, to be as
it were, a courtesy and kindness from us, as if some thing of ours were
delivered to him. And the Lord will repay him his reward: he will as faithfully
recompense the merciful man, as if he were bound thereto, and as an honest
borrower will be careful to pay that which he owes. For of his grace he
makes himself a debtor, to them which are more in his debt, then their body,
and soul, and all that they have is worth.

Whatsoever good is done to godly men afflicted, is accepted

So far is he from casting off, and disclaiming his people in their poverty,
and tribulations, as that at no other time in this life, he does more
professedly acknowledge them, and publish the tenderness of his affection
toward them. As what greater testimony can there be of love and kindness, then
this, that their enemies be his enemies: their friends his friends: their
benefactors so graced and esteemed of, as if they were become his creditors. We
have seen in some other place before, that he which oppresses the poor,
reprocheth him that made him, but he Prou 14. 31.
honors him that has mercy on the poor.

And our Savior himself professes, that he presently observes every where,
all the mercy that is showed by any to his poor servants: and how he will
requite the same hereafter, in calling them as blessed ones to the fruition,
with him, of his Mat. 25. 34. etc.
celestial kingdom, and why he will render them so great a reward, because
they fed him in his hunger, gave him drink in his thirst, and clothed him
being naked, etc: and after what manner they performed these duties unto him,
by exercising the same toward one of the least of his brethren.

First, he is obeyed therein, requiring such care to be had of

Secondly, the parties thus relieved are the sons of God, appears: and what
tender-harted father, or well affected brother, would not gratefully take the
succor and relief that is ministered to his dear children, or brethren in
their necessities?

Thirdly, they are nearer to our Lord Jesus Christ, then one brother is to
another, or child to the father: for they are members of him, flesh of his
flesh, and bone of his bones, and as much regarded of him, as the apple of his
eye: and therefore he is interessed in the favor that the least or feeblest of
them shall find at any time.

Encouragement for men to bestow willingly, cheerfully, and

If they would have their states sufficiently provided for, and their hearts
cheerful during life, and their consciences comfortable at their death, and
souls and bodies happy and glorious for ever, the^ let them so employ their
portion, and all the ability that is in them, that men may receive protection,
relief, counsel, comfort, or some refreshing from them, and they may expect
this munificent and kingly retribution from the Lord.

Reproof of their folly, which misguiding their affairs without When thou
make a dinner, or a supper, call not thy friends, nor thy brethren, nor thy
kinsmen nor thy rich neighbors, lest they bid thee Luke 14. 12. 13. 14.
again and a recompense be made thee. But when thou make a feast, call the
poor, the maimed, the lame, and the blind. And thou shall be blessed, because
they cannot recompenco thee: for thou shall be recompensed at the resurrection
of the just.

Ob. But must men be careless of their states in providing for their salvation?
Is all to be done for the soul, and nothing for the house? What shall I leave
my Children?

Answ. Providence for thy everlasting state, does nothing impair thy present
state, and thy liberality does augment, and not diminish thy childrens
prosperity. Is the Lord so barren of wisdom, or destitute of power, as that
he cannot enrich the one, but he must impouerish the other? Or that he cannot
help the father, without hurting the child? Ps. 112. 2. etc.


A godly man is described in one of the Psalms, to be merciful, and full of
compassion, and righteous. But how then goes the world with him and his
posterity? His seed shall be mighty upon the earth, the generation of the
righteous shall be blessed. Riches and treasures shall be in his house, and his
righteousness remains Ps. 37. 25. 26.
for ever. And to the same purpose it is said in another Psalm. I have been
young, and am old: yet I never saw the righteous forsaken, nor his seed
begging bread. But he is ever merciful, and lends; and his seed enjoys
the blessing.

Consolation to Gods afflicted children, which are in wants, or

Does not our Savior intimate as much, when he recounteth not only the
variety of afflictions which he sustained in his members, but likewise the
readiness of comforters to relieve him? When he was hungry, some fed him: when
he was thirsty, some gave him drink: when he was naked, some clothed him:
when he was sick, some visited him: when he was in prison, some came unto
him: still as his need required, so were they pressed with remedies to succor
him.

Verse 18. Correct thy son while there is hope, and let not thy soul spare,
which is to kill him. COrrect thy son while there is hope,] chastise thy
children of either sex, both by tongue and hand, with rebukes and stripes,
being yet young and tender, and not grown stubborn, stiffenecked,
incorrigible, and past hope of amendme^t, before they are accustomed to evil
ways, or have learned to despise the admonitions, menacings, rods, and
scourges of parents. And let not thy soul spare: beware that thy fond
affection withhold thee not from doing this necessary duty, which is, to kill
him, least thy too great indulgency to them, and cockering of them, turn to
their destruction.

Correction of children ought not to be ouerlong deferred. So expedient and
behouefull it is for the child to be truly nurtured, that Salamon gives
word, for every loving, wise, and discreet parent, that he will chasten his
son betime. Prou. 13. 24.


First, opportunity, and hope of good success, which our text puts us in
mind of, should be a motive to us to avoid delay. The unreasonable wild
creatures be tameable when they are young, and tender plants are flexible, and
may easily be bowed hither and thither: and evils at the beginning may with
less difficulty be cured, and remedied.

Secondly, the manner of Gods dealing with his children, is the best precedent
for our dealing with ours, and he permits none of his to escape too long,
before he humble them, and take down their hearts, either by outward crosses
and troubles, or by inward tears and sorrows, or by some such means as may
best serve to make them fear and obey him. And as he foreseeth and works,
so godly men also feel and enjoy the great benefit, and profitable effects
that follow upon the same. It is good, (says the Scripture,) both to trust,
and to wait for the salvation of the Lord. And then, It is good for a man that
he bear the yoke in his youth. He sits alone, and keeps silence,
because Lam. 3. 27.
he has borne it upon him.

Instruction to induce our selves to the discharge of this duty,

Let need therefore and love, and hope prevail with us, and hasten our
diligence to help them. But the strokes of the twigges be painful and sharp
to their tender flesh: and so are Alloes, and some other medecines for the
worms, unpleasant also and bitter to their taste, and yet for safeties sake,
and preservation of their health, we will give them thereof to eat, whiles
they suck on their mothers breasts. And why then should we speak, and do so
much against them, in seeming to plead and deal for them, saying, they know
not yet what correction means: their own discretion will teach them to amend
their faults hereafter: their own rod will beat them in time, and learn them
more wisdom, etc. The smart of correction may make them to know the meaning
of correction: and they are the more likely to be discreet for the amendment
of their faults hereafter, if Gods discipline be used to them before: and it is
best to be so instructed by the parents rod in childhood, that they be not
whipped with any rods of their own in riper age.

To kill him, etc. They show themselves unmerciful parents,

Verse. 19. Being in great wrath, remit the punishment: but if thou let him
escape, yet apply chastisement again. IN the former sentence was declared the
necessity of correction, for the preue^tion of destruction, or danger of
children, and what is the fittest season to begin it, even in their childhood.
Now in this he admonishes every man to take heed that he mar it not, or
hinder the good effect thereof by his own distemper. And therefore it is said,
Being in great wrath, when thou art in an angry mood, and burnest with fury,
and hot displeasure, remit the punishment, let pass for that time the
punishment of the party offending. But if thou let him escape, yet apply
chastisement again. Nevertheless, though for that time, and perhaps for that
fault thou let him go free, yet leave him not so to himself, nor suffer him
to go on still unpunished, but when thou art more calm, and as occasion
shall be offered, take him in hand, and chastise him.

Correction is neither to be given in passion, nor omitted James speaks
pertinently, though not particularly, when he says, The wrath of Iam. 1. 20.
man, does not execute the righteousness of God, which every one that inflicteth
any punishment upon an other, ought to do. When Number. 20. 10.
the troublesome Israelites had driven Moses that meek servant of God into a
passion, by vexing of his spirit, even he, for Ps. 106. 33.
the time was not in case, so much as to reprehend them in that manner as
became him, but spoke unadvisedly with his lips, both in rating of them, and
neglecting to sanctify the Lord. And yield that David might warrantably have
proceeded against 1. Sam. 25.
Naball for his unthankful, churlish, insolent, and contemptible behavior,
yet what work would he have made in his rage, when for one man's fault he was
resolved to murder a whole family?

First, a man in his distemper can hardly keep measure in violence, beyond all
bonds of moderation.

Secondly, being in that sort moved, and kindled with ire, the

Thirdly, wrath and immoderate anger disfigure the face of a

Instruction not to be sudden and hasty to strike our underlings

Reproof of them, that can neither fight nor chide, but only

Verse. 20. Hear counsel, and receive instruction, that thou may be wise
at thy latter end. Having in the premises given precepts to parents and
governors, he now conuerteth his speech to children, and such as in the
Scripture come under the name of children, that is to say, all Gods people, to
whom he does offer himself as a father, being ready to teach and direct them.
And the first lesson that he gives unto them is, that they should hear
counsel, lend an ear, and harken diligently with attention, to wise, and
wholesome doctrines and admonitions: the second, that they receive instruction,
or correction, for the word signifies both: that is, to submit themselves to,
and make use of, and profit by, reproves, threatenings, or chastisements. And
the reason of this exhortation, is both from the motive that should persuade
them thereunto, and the end that they should propose to themselves therein, and
the happy success which they should find thereby, that they may be wise in
their latter end, that their wisdom may be manifested, and they reap the
fruit thereof in their old age, or whenever they are ready to depart out of
the world, not but that he would have men to be wise also before, but to note,
that all that time their heavenly wisdom will stand them in best steed.

A godly man shall have the greatest benefit of his piety and

At the first they seem burdenous, and troublesome, in respect of the
afflictions whereby they are often accompanied, as seed time, in appearance,
does only devour and swallow up men's corn, and exact their labor and
travel, but afterward they show themselves comfortable and precious, as the
beautiful sight of harvest, does declare the commodity of seed time. The
wicked is pursued in his misery: but the righteous has Prou 14. 32.
hope in his death, says Solomon. Mark the upright man, and behold Ps. 37. 37.
the just: for the end of that man is peace, says David in the Psalms. And
when was the state of the wise virgins made known to be Mat. 25.
better then that of the foolish, not when they took their lamps, or lighted
their lamps, or provided their oil, or went forth together, or waited
together, but when the bridegroom came.

First, at their latter end the faithful have greatest store and

Secondly, then have they greatest need and use thereof, of Satan, both which
would stir up all the infidelity that remains in them, to discourage their
hearts, were they not so well armed with the spirit of God, and a good
conscience.

Thirdly, then are they best seasoned with humility, and patience,

Fourthly, then they approach apace toward their rest, and Jesus Christ, their
blessed Savior.

Instruction to make our whole life, by listening to this Moses, or rather the
Lord himself, conuinceth the hypocryticall Israelites, neglecting so weighty,
and needful a duty, to be utterly destitute of all heavenly wisdom. They
are, says he, a nation Deuteronomy. 32. 29.
void of counsel, neither is there any understanding in them: O that they were
wise, then would they understand this: they would consider their latter end.
Ob. But they shall meet with many troubles. Answ. And they shall escape out of
all troubles. Ob. But most men in these days will think them to be fools,
and such as know not what is good for themselves. Answ. But all men shall one
day know them to be wise, and such as have chosen that which is best for
themselves, when the testimony of Christ, and their own happy condition
shall give them commendation of wisdom before all the world. Nay, they are
fools, and know not what is good for themselves, which purchase present
delights, with their future calamities, like riotous spend-thrifts, wasting all
their patrimony at one banquet, or losing their whole inheritance at one game.
Such are the covetous, the ambitious, the voluptuous, and all those that are in
bondage to any deceitful lusts, and vanities. They pay dear for their
wealth, though they get it, and for their preferments, and for their pleasures,
and for whatsoever they compass, with a burden to their conscience, and hazard
of their souls.

Many judge them wise, and praise them for their policies now, which by sight
and experience of their miseries, will condemn their folly hereafter; and
themselves most pressed with punishments, will more then any other, bewail
their own wilfulnes and madness.

This then, to conclude, is wisdom, worthy to be so called, and that which
will besteed a man at his latter end, rather to have a Legacy bequeathed to
himself in Christ his will, then to bequeath great portions to others in his
own will: and to have assurance of joys and glory to go unto, then a
remembrance of pleasures, and dignities, which he must depart away from.

Verse 21. Many devises are in the heart of man: but the counsel of the Lord
that shall stand. Many devises are in the heart of man,] sundry thoughts are
in their minds, of hopes, and doubts, and desires, and so they toss matters
too and fro in their imaginations, how they may avoid that which they fear,
and accomplish that which they desire, and yet seldom bring them to any
effect, or when they do, it is not by force of their plotting or forecast. But
the counsel of the Lord it shall stand; his will shall take place, whatsoever
he has determined shall succeed, whether men's likings be to it, or against it.

Things come not to pass by men's purposes, but by Gods

There is a marvelous agreement and consent of the Prophets, and holy writers
in this matter, though we will produce the testimony only of one or two, for
confirmation thereof: as that of David directly witnessing the same truth, as
clearly, and expressly as our Text has it. The Lord breaks the counsel Ps.
33. 10. 11.
of the Heathen, and brings to naught the devises of the people. The counsel
of the Lord shall stand for ever, and the thoughts of his heart throughout all
ages.

And how far different from this in sense, and substance, is that in the
Lamentations? Who is he that says, and it comes Iam. 3. 37. 38.
to pass, and the Lord says it not? Out of the mouth of the most high
proceeds not evil and good?

First, his will is Imperial, by which the whole world, both

Secondly, it is eternal and immutable, and not possibly

Thirdly, it is absolutely holy, wise, and righteous, that he

It is puissant, powerful, and mighty, which neither man,

Instruction, that as near as we can, we purpose those things blessed, and
whatsoever he does shall prosper: And why? For his delight Psalm. 1. 2. 3.
is in the law of the Lord, and in that law he meditateth day and night.

Reproof of their folly that oppose their practices to Gods

As Saul would have defeated David of his kingdom, seeking to sley him before
he should obtain it: and the malicious Jews and Gentiles, would have
bereaved Christ of his glory: hoping as they prevailed to take away his life,
so by the hands of Soldiers, to stop him from rising again: and and the
idoltarous papists would have suppressed the Gospel, attempting by fire and
faggot, to deter every man from the profession of it. But what says the Lord
concerning all these devises?

Why do the Heathen rage, and the people murmr in vain, against the Lord,
and against his anointed? He that dwells in the heavens shall laugh: the
Lord shall have them in derision.

The Consolation for Gods people, against whom the purposes of the wicked,
with all their wits and forces are bent. See Chap. v. 1. 9.

Verse 22. The desire of a man is his goodness: and a poor man is better then a
liar. THe desire of a man,] that which every man ought most to wish and labor
for in himself, and to esteem and commend in others, is his goodness, his
piety and religion toward God, his mercy, truth, and upright dealing
toward men, and not a greatestate, and earthly pomp, and he that in this
manner does good, and is faithful and true, though he be poor, not having
store and abundance of outward possessions, is better, in happier case, and
more regarded of God, and good men, then a liar, then an impious, unprofitable,
and false man, though he be never so wealthy.

Virtue and weldoing, is the best ornament that any man can Paul in effect
does say as much, and confirms the same, when he declares, that the
kingdom of God, consists not in meat and drink, and then, not in rich and
costly apparel, neither money, nor any other corruptible thing, but in
righteousness, and peace, and joy in the holy Ghost. For whosoever in these
things serves Christ, is acceptable to God, and approved of men.

And that exhortation which Ecclesiastes infers, as the scope of his whole
book, and he is the very quintessence extracted out of the same, makes
directly for the point. Let us hear the end of all: Fear God, and keep his
commandments: for this is the whole man, or whole of the man, without which,
Eccl. 12. 13.
all that man is, or man has, is nothing else but vanity.

First, unless this were so, it would not be so often and earnestly
commanded of God, as a matter of principal weight and moment: neither would
the Scriptures commend it so much, as giving preferment to the same above all
other things in the world.

Secondly, the price that was paid for it, and the parties Christ which was
given for redemption, was also shead to purchase grace for us. And it is a
prerogative peculiar to Gods children, and Christ his spouse, to be endued
therewith, as it is said in the Revelation: To her was granted, that she
should be arrayed with pure fine linen, Reu. 19 8.
and shining; for the fine linen is the righteousness of Saints.

Thirdly, the rare and singular effects which it works, being

Instruction, for every one with greatest dilgence to labor James terms it,
which may occasion vain men to despise him, and the hidden man of his heart
vncorrupt with faith, love, mercy, meeknes, humility, and other graces of the
spirit, is not a little set by of God, neither Iam. 2. 2.
would God have him lightly regarded of his people, and though an other wear
on the outside upon his back, gay clothing, as 1. Pet. 3. 4.
silks, sattens, veluets, gold, silver, pearls, and precious stones, and be
as richly clad as ever was Solomon, yet if within the inside, in his soul, he
be tattered and torn, with the rags and patches of pride, envy, cruelty,
covetousness, impuritie, and other damnable lusts, the eyes of the Lord will
abhor him, and he allows not his servants to admire him.

And as much may be said concerning all other excellency, profits, and
pleasures, that without the fear of God, and a good conscience, they are
vanity of vanities, and only vanity, Eccl. 2. 1.
they are nothing but vanity, and vexation of spirit. If therefore we would not
be censured for vain persons, let us labor for that which is better then
vanity.

Reproof of those that think goodness not good enough for pride is a chain, as
the Prophet Ps. 73. 6.
says, and cruelty covers them as a garment: and others resign over
themselves wholly to other manner of delights, that all of them love nothing so
much as sin, nor loath any thing so much as goodness.

And a poor man, etc. Poverty is no disparagement to the

Men are not to be esteemed of according to their state, but their honesty and
worthiness. He began this chapter with the same matter, and in the first verse,
the same point is confirmed, where it is said, that better is the poor which
walks in his vprightnes, then he that abuses his lips, and is a fool. And
in the twelfth Prou. 12. 26.
chapter: the righteous is more excellent then his neighbor. And in
Ecclesiastes: Better is a poor, and wise child, then an old, and foolish Eccl.
4. 13.
king, which will no more be admonished. There is in appearance, great odds
between an old man, and a child; between one that has such princely
treasures, and the other that is so bare and poor: between the high dignity
of an ancient king, and the low abiection of a poor boy: and yet if such a
mean inferior be wise and teachable, he is in better case by the testimony
of this text, then a mighty superior that is foolish and wilful.

First, God honors them that are virtuous, though

Secondly, he has exercised the dearest of his servants with Elijah and Paul,
and Christ himself, which he would never have done, if it could have made them
vile and miserable: and he has bestowed on the worst of his enemies these
earthly riches, as on Achab, Jeroboam, and Balshazzar, which they should never
have gotten, if they would have made them honorable and happy. For the uses,
see chapter. 12. v. 26. and the first verse of this chapter.

Verse. 23. The fear of the Lord leads to life, and he that is endued
therewith, shall remain satisfied, and shall not be visited with evil. THe
fear of the Lord] sound piety and religion, a reverence of his majesty,
joined with an unfeigned love thereof, leads to life, is by gods free goodness,
according to his promise through Jesus Christ, rewarded with a blessed and a
comfortable life in this world, and a glorious, and eternal life in the world
to come, and he that is endewed therewith, shall remain satisfied: the man in
whom this holy fear dwells, shall neither live in miserable want, nor in
fear or danger thereof, but shall lodge satisfied, as the word signifies,
shall constantly have competent provision, in the night he shall not care for
the day following, nor this day be doubtful how he shall do tomorrow, but he
by whose providence he is sustained at one time, will not fail to minister
whatsoever is needful at all times.

And shall not be visited with evil, shall not be plagued with hurtful
calamities, and yet sometimes tried with sharp adversities: and so are the two
former promises touching life, and plenty, to be understood, that they are
secured only from a cursed death, or penury, which are punishments of sin,
and signs of Gods displeasure.

Every godly man lives always in safety of his life. An untimely Christ had
lost his sufferings, and died in vain, without any benefit to his people, if
he had left them in a perishable estate, and not delivered them from the power
of death.

Consolations of this nature were familiar with him, and flowed continually out
of his gracious lips: I am the resurrection, John. 11. 25. 26
and the life: he that believes in me, though he were dead, yet shall he live.
And whosoever lives, and believes in me, shall never die. Ioh. 5. 24.
Verily, verily, I say unto you, he that hears my word, and believes in him
that sent me, has everlasting life, and shall not come into condemnation, Luke
20. 38.
but has passed from death unto life. He is not the God of the dead, but of
them which live: for all live unto him. See chap. 11. 19.

Shall remain satisfied, etc. Godliness procures sufficient

The Lord does not only undertake for the salvation of his peoples souls, but
he is also provident for their bodies. He that diligently, and principally
seeks the kingdom of God, and his Mat. 6. 33.
righteousness, shall be sure to have all other needful things, as food, and
apparel, and the like, ministered unto him. The Lord purposes, as he
promises, and will undoubtedly perform it, Ps 34. 9. 10.
when he says, Fear ye the Lord ye his Saints: for nothing wants to them
that fear him. The lions do lack and suffer hunger, but they which seek the
Lord shall want nothing that is good.

They are the children whom his providence does specially and fishes, and
serpents, and wicked people, how much more will he exceed in goodness toward
his own sons and daughters?

Secondly, godly men are industrious and diligent in their a diligent hand
makes rich: Prou. 14. 22.
and in all labor there is abundance, as diverse texts of Scripture do testify.

Thirdly, godliness brings contentment, and their mind is 1. Tim. 6. 6.
that to be enough for them (for so God does make it to be) which others would
murmr at, as an incompetent, and Phil. 4. 11. 12.
too short a pittance for their hungry appetites. I have learned says Paul,
in what state soever I am, therewith to be content. And I can be abased, and I
can abound: every where in all things, I am instructed, both to be full, and to
be hungry, and to abound, and to have want. See chapter. 10. v. 3.

Not visited with evil, etc. Nothing that is hurtful can befall

When poverty would turn to his annoyance, he may be well assured that he
shall never be poor: when sickness would be noxious, and harmefull, his health
shall be continued: and the like may be said, of disgraces, of molestations, of
loss of friends, or whatsoever may be incommodious unto him.

The testimony of the Prophet, being in substance Gods Ps. 119 165.
promise, is of large extent, saying, they that thy law shall have great
prosperity, and they shall have none hurt. And the speech of Eliphas to Job,
is of no small force, when he says, He shall deliver Job. 5. 19. 20.
thee in six troubles, and in the seventh, the evil shall not touch thee. In
famine, he shall deliver thee from death: and in battle, from the power of the
sword. Thou shall be hid from the scourge of the tongue, and thou shall not be
afraid of destruction when it comes.

First, every one that fears the Lord, is greatly beloved of guarding of
them. He is neither heedles of them in the day, nor sleepy in the night, nor
remiss in looking to them at any time. He sees and fore-seeth, because he
fore-appointeth all things that shall befall them: he knows, and
fore-knoweth, the event of every thing that comes to pass, whether it will
be helpful, or hurtful; whether it will be for their benefit, or hinderance;
whether it will be for their safety, or peril; their credit, or reproach;
their peace, or trouble; their comfort, or sorrow. No future effect can
formerlie be hidden from him, because he has not alone the disposing of
actions, or of things that are to fall out, but likewise of the success, and
issues thereof. Then consider whether it be likely that he will allow poison to
be ministered to his darling in steed of Physic, when he is not ignorant that
it would certainly kill him, or mischief to light upon the righteous for their
destruction, or to do so much as the least harm unto them.

Secondly, the holy Angels are ministering spirits, attending on the people of
God, and their office is to look well unto them, every where, and at all
times, so long as they serve him: for so are they commanded by the Lord.
Unless then they would become sinful against God, and turn devils (which
they cannot do, because they stand by virtue of election) they must needs be
faithful to Christians, and watchful for their safety. And therefore the
spirit of God gives his word for their fidelity, and promises to the godly
good protection and safeguard by their ministry, in this manner: There shall
Ps. 91. 10.
none evil come unto thee, neither shall a^ie plague come near thy
tabernacle. For he shall give his Angels charge over thee to keep thee in
all thy ways. They shall bear thee in their hands, that thou hurt not thy
foot against a stone.

Instruction, to set our selves to fear the Lord, and to seek

Will it be an Armor against weapons, a storehouse against wants, a
preservation against diseases, a deliverer from death? Will it work our
indemnitie, and save us harmless from the poison and venom of pains and
griefs, and losses, and of all sorts of crosses, troubles, and afflictions?
why live we so much without it, and may so easily have it? why make we no
more reckoning of it, sithence it is so precious, profitable, and necessary?

Beside the desire of Gods glory and favor, which ought principally to be
regarded: beside the respect of life eternal, which is most earnestly to be
sought for: our health, our safety, our peace, our plenty, and every thing of
this nature, might be forcible motives to allure us to religion, seeing the
Lord is pleased to make it so beneficial unto them.

Consolation to them who have embraced this holy fear of God, who faithfully
obey and please him, they have immunitie, not from adversities: (for few are
afflicted with so many troubles as they are tried with: few so much depraved,
maligned, and molested as they be) but from all plagues, and perils, and
miseries.

They are alike safe in every place, even in the mids of their mortal
enemies, as among their kindest friends: and likewise at all seasons, as well
when they are most practiced against, as when nothing is intended to their
hurt: when they lie in the bottom of adversity, as when they sit in the top
of prosperity. For these cannot separate them from the love of God, nor the
hope of salvation, nor the conscience of welldoing. Romans 8. 28.


And to conclude, we know that all things work together for the best, to
them that love God, says the Apostle.

Verse 24. The slothful hides his hand in his bosom, and will not put it to
his mouth again. Solomon has often told us the nature and quality of the
slothful, and the misery and want, which of force they must endure, by means
of their sluggishnes, notwithstanding because the number of them does daily
increase, and this hurtful vice grows stronger, and more violent in them, he
contenteth not himself with so many aduertisements, which he has already
given us, but to the end that we may take more heed of it, or else be more
inexcusable, and judged worthy of greater penury: he repeateth here again
the mischief that it works in him over whom it gets dominion, describing
the same by an hyperbolicall, or excessive kind of speaking, saying, that he
hides his hand in his bosom, not setting it to work, but withholding it from
labor, and will not put it to his mouth again: to avoid the cold, and for
love of ease, he holds it in a warm place, and though the distance be but
small between the bosom and the mouth, yet he is unwilling to bring it from
the one to the other, so much as to feed himself: for though he do it
(compelled thereunto by necessity) yet he does it with difficulty and grief,
as it is said in an Prou. 26. 15.
other chapter.

Not that he sets so little by his meat; for none are so hungry after
honey, as the idle Drones: but it is a torment unto them to take any pains
for it: their desire is, that others should travel for them, and put their
meat into their mouths also, if shame would permit it.

So then, the hands of lazy persons are as it were bound with the love of
ease, which they prefer before matters of profit and necessity; especially
concerning the soul, and the spiritual food thereof, even the word of God;
whereby ouely it is to be sustained.

Verse 25. Smite a scorner, that the foolish may beware: and reprove the
prudent, and he will understand knowledge. SMite,] either put to death, if
thou be a magistrate of that authority, and the cause so require, or otherwise
punish according to thy place, the scorner, a refractary person, him that
contemns and derideth all admonitions and instructions, one, of whom there
is no hope of amendment: for a scorner is in the highest degree of
transgression, that the foolish, Psalm. 11.
such as through simplicity and ignorance are carried forewards to evil, may
beware, may be better brought to a sight of their faults, and the danger
thereof, and penitently reform their ways.

And reprove the prudent, give an easy rebuke to him that has wisdom, and
he will understand knowledge: he shall not need to be smitten, as the
scorner, nor be brought to see others punished, as the foolish, but an
admonition or reproof will sufficiently work upon him, both for information
and reformation.

Though obstinate persons be excluded from good counsel, Rebuke not a scorner,
does here command Prou. 9. 8.
to smite a scorner: and this of Solomon, that stripes should be laid upon
him, is nothing contrary to that of Christ, that Mat. 7.
pearls should not be cast before him.

An iniunction for this proceeding, is expressly given by the Lord himself in
the Law; That man that will do presumptuouslie, not hearkening unto the
Priest (that stands before the D^ut 17. 12 13.
Lord thy God to minister there) or unto the Judge, that man shall die, and
thou shall take away evil from Israel. So all the people shall hear, and
fear, and do no more presumptuouslie.

First, the ruler stands charged with their crimes, until he

Secondly, the place, (whether it be family, if the contempt Thou shall take
away evil from Israel.

Thirdly, though the contemptuous person smitten, be nothing When the scorner
is punished, he that is simple waxes wise, etc. Prou. 21. 11.


Fourthly, by the execution of Gods justice upon these stiffenecked and
vnreclaimeable rebels, they are made less insolent, and triumphant in their
wicked courses, they shall find small cause to glory in their successes.
Whereas through the want thereof, they grow arrogant, and audacious, and
outrageous, and take upon them to be strikers of others.

Reproof of them that are too favorable, too impudent, and godles scorners,
giving them liberty to live as they list, permitting

Many parents so train up their children, that they are imboldned by their
example and allowance, to contemn all that God or man speaks against their
sensual and enormous behavior. And many masters make their houses kennels of
desperate ruffians, and sties of swinish drunkards, giving them a tolleration,
or encouragement rather, to beray their families, with their impious, filthy
and vicious behavior. Ob. It is bootles to correct them, there is no hope of
their amendment, no severity will serve the turn to tame them. Answ. Yet it
is not bootles to obey God, who commands thee to smite them: and he can turn
their punishment to the profit of others, that they by the benefit thereof,
may escape unpunished: and this is worth the pains, and this will ouerpoise
all their murmurings, that thou do discharge thy duty, righteousness is
exercised by thine hand. The Lord plagu^th many whom his plagues convert not,
and yet he strikes not one stroke in vain, because his justice is exalted,
his name is honored, and his people are either awed, or else comfortable by
the same.

That wise men must sometimes be rebuked, and how useful it will be unto them
for increase of their graces, see chapter. 9. v. 8. 9.

Verse. 26. A leaud and shameful child, spoyleth his father, and chaseth away
his mother. A Leaud and shameful child] one that is graceles, and given to
riot, and other sinful ways, whereby his parents and friends are made
ashamed, spoileth his father, does him as much harm, as if he brake into his
house, and robbed him, or came as an open enemy to make spoil of all that he
has: and many spare not their parents state in deed, but either filch away
their goods, and set them in debt and arreareages, by their wastfulnes, and
chaseth away his mother, so alienateth her affection from him, by his rude and
rebellious behavior, that she flies, as it were, his presence, and is glad
when she is out of his sight: and sometime grows to that unnatural
inhumanitie, and more then barbarous and sauadge outrage, that he drives her
out of his presence by railing and bitter speeches, yea expels her out of
the house, and turns her out of doors, when once he comes to his
inheritance. See chapter. 10. v. 1.

Verse. 27. Leave off, my son, to hear any more the instruction that causes
thee to err from the words of knowledge. Leave off, my sonne] though in former
times when thou wast the disciple of deceivers, and the child of wrath, thy
care was open, and ready to hear such lessons as poisoned thy heart, yet now
that thou art become the scholar of me wisdom, and begotten to be my child,
as being Gods child, now desist from that hurtful and pernicious course, cease
to hear any more the instruction, that pestilent and infectious counsel and
doctrine, which is delivered for instruction, and carries a show of truth and
wisdom, and yet will cause thee to err from the words of knowledge, either
perverting thy mind with erroneous opinions, or corrupting thy heart with
sinful affections, or deprauing thy ways with leaud and wicked behavior, so
that either thou shall not understand the words of knowledge, the heavenly
doctrines of Gods holy word, whereby sound knowledge is obtained, or else wilt
be enticed to transgress them.

Whosoever will proceed constantly in the ways of God,

Our Savior Jesus Christ, giving many picked and choice precepts for true
happiness, in his sermon on the mount, and uttering not a word, that tended not
directly thereunto, does single out this as a matter of no small importance,
saying, Beware of false prophets, which come to you in sheep clothing, but
inwardly Mat. 5. 15.
are ravening woules. And S. Paul does strictly admonish the Ephesians, that
they should not be children wavering, and carried Ephesians. 4. 14.
about with every wind of doctrine, and by the deceit of men, and with
craftines whereby they lie in wait to deceive.

That the word and spirit of God should be the pilot of their consciences, and
not suffer their hearts, without stern, or ancre, to be committed to the
subtle blasts of the false Apostles: and like men of wisdom and discretion,
they should keep their stock of grace and truth, and not like silly boys
fall to gaming with the cogging corrupt teachers, and so lose their patrimony.
And S. Peter mingled precepts with promises, to the three thousand whom he
converted together, teaching them, not only the way to salvation by faith in
Christ, but the means of perseverance in the same, with due care of
themselves, and to that end he besought them, and exhorted them, saying, Save
your selves from this froward generation. Act. 2. 40.


First, deceivers are marvelous cunning, and wily in their

There is no cause so vile and bad, but they by painting and varnishing of it,
can make it seem very just and good: neither is there any so equal and right,
but they, by casting the mire of calumniations upon it, can make it look as
though it were wrongful and naught. Their speeches are charms and
enchantments, as the Apostle says, O foolish Galathians, who has bewitched
you, that ye should not obey the truth?

When Eve would give ear to Satan, he made her believe that the Lord himself
was not well minded toward her, and her husband, in restraining them rom
eating of any fruit, and that he in good will did seek their welfare, in
persuading them to take their liberty, and break his commandment.

Secondly, man's nature is subject to error, and his soul very

Reproof of their temeritie and rashness, which being confident Christ, against
the ministry of God, against the ministers of God, against the worship of
God, against the people of God, all shall be heard whatsoever they say. Ob. But
themselves are sound and settled in the truth, and therefore they are in hope of
doing good, but not in peril of receiving hurt. Answr. This is true, if they
be sufficiently qualified with gifts fit for such an employment: if they have a
calling thereunto, the Lord setting them on work: and if upon the sight and
sense of their own corruptions, they seek assistance and preservation from
heaven, otherwise they are like to work no better a cure upon others, then an
healthy man does by blowing upon the diseased, nor yet may expect better
safety to themselves, then he that is whole gets from the breath of the
infected. How many professing hostility against poperte, have turned papists
by reasoning with papists? And how many are declined and fallen to Brownisme by
taking upon them to reduce the Brownists? ^he shewers of hurtful conferences,
which have almost extinguished their zeal, and drawn them into many evil
ways which before they were afraid off.

Instruction to avoid evil company as much as we may, if A companion of
fools shall be made worse, says he, in the thirteenth chapter. v. 20. where
thou may see more concerning this use.

Verse. 28. A wicked witness mocketh at judgment, and the mouth of the
ungodly swalloweth up iniquity. A Wicked witnesse] a witness of Belial, as it
is in the Hebrew text, one that the devil himself, and his own wicked
disposition subborneth to periure and deal corruptly, mocketh at judgment,
not only gives in false evidence, but does the same of set purpose,
maliciously, and without any fare, making no more account eitheir of right
causes, or of magistrates that are placed to execute justice, or of God
himself that will punish false witnesses, then of a jest, or things to be
laughed at. And the mouth of the ungodly will swallow up iniquity. This he
alleges as a reason of that his untruth and falsehood in witnes-bearing,
because he is desperately sinful and bad in all his behavior. His mouth,
himself vile wretch, yet the mouth is mentioned because of the allegory,
swalloweth up iniquity, commits all villainies, with as great delight and
pleasure, as drunkards do strong drink, or gluttons delicious meats.

A wicked person may easily be made a false witness.

He that is disordered in his ordinary behavior, will make no bones to give a
false testimony before the magistrate. Iezabel had that in her head to help
her husband with, so soon as ever she knew the cause of his passionate
coffeehouse, and undertook forthwith to bring Naboths vineyard to his hand:
for it seems that she had made trial of such men's service before that time:
and therefore writes to the elders and nobles of Israel prescribing whom they
should employ, sons of 1. King. 2. 10.
Belial, vnthristie persons, dissolute rake-hells: and what they should appoint
them to say, that Naboth did blaspheme God, and the king, not once making
doubt, but that such might quickly be provided, and would in that manner be
directed, and so it fell out accordingly. And the hie priests, and other
adversaries of Christ knew well that so many leaud fellows conuersing with
them, false witnesses were not far to be sought, nor hard to be found, but
would be there present, and made ready for their turn with few hours
warning.

First, all that live inordinately, and lead a wicked life, bear

Secondly, such as maintain the foulest matter, are usually

Thirdly, they are destitute of the fear of God, they dread

Instruction for judges and all other governors to be very Belials son, but
that as an obedient child, he will apply himself to Belials business?

His mouth swalloweth up, etc. The greater delight any man

Notorious and heinous offenders are thereby described in the fourth chapter
almost after the same manner as in this place, but somewhat more largely, and
clearly: They cannot Prou. 4. 15. 16
sleep except they have done evil, and their sleep departs, except they
cause some to fall. For they eat the bread of wickedness, and drink the wine
of violence. And Zophar foretelling the plagues and miseries that are ready to
lay hands on a cruel man, and one that is ripe for destruction, says, that
wickedness was sweet in Job. 20. 12 13
his mouth, and he hid it under his tongue, and favored it, and would not
forsake it* but kept it close in his mouth. He took it for a dainty morsel,
and fed upon it, and relished it so well, that he was willing continually to be
chewing of it.

First, the more delight a man takes in sin, with greater

Secondly, his affection to wickedness conuinceth him to be To. 8. 5.
carnal and fleshly: for they that are after the flesh savor the things of
the flesh. Yea such a one is not only fleshly, but flesh it self, in full
proportion, which is odious and loathsome to the Lord. For though they that
have the spirit do sometimes slip into sins, yet they hate them, and
mourn for them, and reioce not in them.

Thirdly, his heart is the harder, and further from repentance, are past
feeling, and remorse, when they give themselves to work wickedness with
greedines. See chapter. Ephesians. 4. 19.
10. 23.

Verse. 29. But judgments are prepared for these scorners, and stripes for the
back of fools. THe behavior of these contemptuous persons was declared in
the former sentence, and their recompense follows in this: for all their
cunning and scorning speeches, judgments, punishments, many, and of diverse
sorts: for the plural number notes the multitude and variety of them: are
prepared for scorners, not only appointed, but ready to be executed upon
them, either by the magistrate, or else by the Lord himself, in this life, or
in that which is to come, or in both. And stripes for the back of fools,
sharp and severe plagues, resembled by the scourging of bondmen, are in a
readiness both for the souls and bodies of these malicious and incorrigible
fools, which shall not lightly be chastened, but grievously, and extremely
tormented, to their destruction. For the Mat 25. 41.
preparation does argue some exquisite torture, as fire prepared Isay. 30. 33.
for the devil and his Angels: and Tophet prepared of old for that cursed king
of Assure, etc.

Though sinful men deride the words of God, yet they cannot

The less account they make of them, the more speedily, and fearfully they
shall be plagued for their contempt, as will better appear in the first chapter.

AN EXPOSITION OF THE TWENTIETH CHAPTER OF THE PROVERBS.
CHAPTER. XX.
Verse 1. Wine is a mocker, and strong drink is raging, and whosoever is
deceived thereby, shall not be wise. WIne needleslie, or immoderately taken, is
a mocker, makes him a mocker which intemperately abuses it: and strong drink
is raging, causes them that are ouer-gone therewith, to brawle, contend,
break forth into outrage, and go together by the ears. And whosoever is
deceived by it, enticed by the color, or taste of it, to exceed in it, by
drinking too often, or too much, shall not be wise: either with divine
wisdom, or humane, but show himself a fool, and reap the fruit of his
folly.

They that give themselves to drunkenness, do cast themselves

The woe; the sorrow, the murmuring, the rednes of eyes, and other Prou. 23. 29.
evils reckoned up, in the three and twentieth Chapter following, do manifest
this, and our present Text, does yield us arguments enough, and strong enough,
for further proof of the same.

As first, they are made mockers, they scurrilly in their cups David complained
that the drunkardes made Ps. 69. 12.
Songs of him, and became malicious persecuters.

And let it be considered whether any one kind of people be more impious and
impudent blasphemers, and adversaries to all piety, then they whose greatest
travels abroad, are to Tauerns, and tipling-houses, and ordinary exercises at
home, to drink healths, and show their manhood, nay worse then beast-hood, in
subduing their fellows with force of the flagon, and offering sacrifice to
Bacchus in the Cellar.

Secondly, they are made furious, and ragefull, being inflamed murmurings,
those contentious, and those needless wounds, which are specified in the other
chapter. Drunken quarrels are common almost at all drunken meetings, and the
original of most frayes, will be found to be among many carrowses.

They are made foolish, for as Hosea says, wine, and new wine, do Hos 4. 11.
good desires, by means whereof, they show themselves to be both silly and
sinful. Their brains are drowned, their wits are dulled, their
understandings decayed, and their whole souls filled full of lusts, and leaud
affections. And to proceed yet further, to other effects of their Foolishnes,
they bring diseases upon their bodies, they bring necessity upon their
estates, they bring reproach upon their names, they bring confusion into their
houses, they bring the curse of God upon themselves in every thing here, and
stop up their own way from everlasting life hereafter. For Drunkards are in
the number of those unrighteous, which 1. Cor. 6. 10.
the Scripture says, shall not inherit the kingdom of God.

Instruction to be the more afraid of this sin, because it is so be secure and
careless thereof, it proves a venomous serpent, as well for craft as cruelty.
It came stealing upon Noe, (whom all the world could not seduce) and bit him
so, as that his wicked son Cham insulted over him, and his godly sons Shem
and Iaphet, were sorry to see him in such a case. Wherefore our Savior by way
of a caveat, does prescribe one preservative against it, and that is a
provident care, and constant circumspection, that we fall not into it, saying,
Take heed to your selves, least at any time Luke 21. 34.
your hearts be oppressed with surfeiting and drunkenness. Which does admonish
us to be wary, what company we frequent, or else, we are altogether heedlesse
of our own safety: for commonly the ambushes of this vice, whereby so many
are circumuented, do lie in contagious company.

Neither will it suffice thee to decline the society of them that are of bad
note, but thou must be watchful also over thy self, and thy appetite, in
feasting with men of better account: Diverse are wounded where they suspected no
peril, and many ouercharged with prouocations and healths, where nothing in
show, but sobriety is professed. As it is a shame for the one to make such
indecent challenges, so it is neither disgrace to refuse them, nor discurtesie
not to answer them. And Saint Paul does add yet an other preservative to the
former, and gives direction how we may keep our bodies from this
intemperancie, and that is, by storing our selves with grace, which will surely
defend the whole man. Be not drunken (says he) with Ephesians. 5. 18.
wine, wherein is excess, but be filled with the spirit, etc.

Verse 2. The fear of the King is like the roaring of a Lion: he that
provoke him to anger, sins against his own soul. THe fear of the King,]
his wrath, which strikes a terror into their hearts, with whom he shows
himself offended, is like the roaring of a Lion, very fearful and dangerous:
he that provoke him to anger, which incurreth his indignation by
disobedience, or any ill demeanor, sins against his own soul: not only
defiles his soul, with the tra^sgression of Gods holy Law, but puts his
life in great peril, and exposes the same to the sentence of death. See chap.
16. 14.

Verse 3. It is an honor for a man to cease from strife, but every fool will
be meddling. IT is an honor for a man] it makes for his praise, and procures
the tongues and hearts of men to give him a good testimony, to cease from
strife, either not to enter into it at all, if upon good conditions, without
wrong to Justice, or righteous causes meet to be maintained, he may be freed
from it, or else to break off, and put an end thereto, with as much celeritie
as may be convenient: but every fool will be meddling: such as are unwise on
the other side, do love contentions, and delight to be stirring and striving
upon every slight occasion. Thus stands the opposition: It is a man's honor
to cease from strife, and every wise man will endeavor to keep himself quiet:
but is a man's reproach to be contentious, yet every fool will be meddling.

It is a laudable virtue to be of a quiet disposition, and to avoid it is a
man's honor to cease from strife, do nothing differ in sense from these
elsewhere, that it is a man's glory to pass by an offense. Prou. 19. 11.
And if they be pronounced blessed by the Son of God, which are peacemakers,
and compose controversies between others, Mat. 5. 9.
then they are no less, which be peace-keepers, and as much as in them lies,
abandon all controversies themselves.

First, there is a concurrence, and union of many excellent Prou. 13. 10.
because only by pride, man makes conte^tious: and fortitude, because no man
attaineth to this, but by conquest of himself, and he that Prou. 16. 32.
subdueth his own mind, is better then he that wins a City. Neither do
men grow to be such, by a natural valor, humility, or wisdom, but
spiritual and heavenly, as it is said concerning one of these, and to be
understood of all, the wisdom that is from above, is peaceable, gentle, easy
to be entreated, etc.

Secondly, great and admirable is the benefit that proceeds from Peace and
Concord, and manifold mischiefs hereby prevented: The heart has more rest,
the State has more safety, the credit is better preferued, then by brawles,
and suites, and needless oppositions, which do interrupt all Godly and
Christian meditations and exercises, and cause much uncharitable dealing,
vexations, expenses, and infamy, in so much that he compares the beginning of
strife to a breach made in the Sea bank, where through the waters break, and
drown up a whole Country. See Chap. 17. v. 14. and 13. v. 10. Doct. 2.

Verse. 4. The slothful will not plowe because of Winter, wherefore he shall
beg in Summer and have nothing. THe slothful will not plowe because of
Winter,] Here is a description of a tender and fearful sluggard. In deed
winter is cold, and the weather then sometimes biting, but yet it is a season
meet for plowing, which because the air is nipping and sharp, he lets
alone, by which manner of speech is meant, that a small matter will easily stay
an idle person from following his calling, Wherefore he shall beg, shall be
driven to seek relief at other men's hands, in Summer, in harvest when his
neighbors that took pains in due time, are reaping of their commodities, and
enjoy plenty, which will be the greater eyesore and harts-griefe unto him,
because it is in the nature of sluggards to be envious, and have nothing: he
shows the cause of his begging, namely penury and need, when all his
substance is consumed: and sometimes it falls out also by Gods righteous
providence, to be the success of his begging, that no man shall be moved with
compassion toward him, to minister any, or at least sufficient food or
apparel unto him.

Light occasions will hinder careless men from the doing of

It was said in the former Chapter verse. 24. that it was more then the
slothful was willing to do, to pluck his hand out of his bosom, and put it
to his mouth again.

Wherefore he shall beg, etc. He that will take his ease when he ought not,
shall feel misery when he would not.

Verse. 5. The counsel in the heart of a man is like deep waters, but a man of
understanding will draw it out. THe counsel in the heart of a man,] the secret
intent of his mind and purpose of his heart, which is like deep Waters, is by
some diverse times so cunningly hidden, and closely concealed in the secret
corners and bottom of the soul, that it is a hard matter to sound or perceive
the same. But a man of understanding will draw it out, he that is endued with
wisdom and discretion, will discover and apprehend what practices are in hand,
and what matters are like to be attempted. So it comes to pass often, but
not always, nor necessarily, because good men are not seldom circumuented by
the wiles and crafty devises of the wicked.

Malicious men have further reaches and plots in their heads

Be a valiant Son in law, says Saul to David, and fight the Lords
battles, and I will give thee my Daughter to Wife: but Saul thought, says
the Text, my hand shall not be upon him, but the 1. Sam. 18. verse. 17. 25.
hands of the Philistines shall be upon him. And again, I desire no dowry for
my Daughter, says he, but an hundredth fore-skins of the Philistines to be
avenged on the Kings enemies: but what moved him to offer such great kindness
unto David? Why, Saul thought says the holy Ghost, to make David fall into the
hands of the Philistines. When Abshalom had a mind to raise a rebellion at
Hebron, and to conspire against the State and life of the King his own Father,
what pretense had he of going thither, and drawing company unto him? He had
forsooth, a vow to be performed 2. Sam. 15. v. 7.
at Hebron, and that with as much devotion, and great solemnity as might be.
When Herod had a full resolution to go to Bethlehem, that he might murder
Jesus Christ, he desires to be informed of the wisemen where he might be sure
to Math. 2. verse. 8.
find him, to the end that he might repair to the place, and worship him.

First, corrupt nature has poisoned the hearts of all men unregenerate with
guile and subtlety in such sort as that the Prophet makes a grievous complaint
thereof, saying, The heart is deceitful Ier. 17. verse. 9.
and wicked above all things, who can know it? Neither are Gods own people,
no not the best of them free from that venom of hidden craft lurking secretly
in their souls, whereby themselves are many times beguiled. Did David once
dream, or had the least doubt that he should be so far carried away with
wanton looks, and wicked lusts, as thereby to fall into so foul adultery, and
murder? And would Peter believe, though Christ did speak it, that there would
be found such cowardice in him, that he should forsake and for-sweare his own
Master, whom he bragged so much that he would stand to so manfully, and dye
with?

Secondly, malice does always bear craft and false-hood Ioab would embrace
Abner, and Amasa, when he intended to slay them, and Judas would needs kiss
our Savior Christ, when his purpose was to betray him.

Thirdly, Satan does inspire, and learn them his skill of deceit,

Instruction to shake off this sin of guile and dissimulation, Ishmael the
Son of Nethaniah so fraudulently to surprise and massacre that charitable
Gedaliah and his company, who little suspected any peril from him: and Ier.
41. v. 1. 2.
it was too much security of Gedaliah not to mistrust Ishmael, especially being
forewarned by Iohanan of the practice in hand, and the purpose of his coming.

But a man of understanding, etc. There be none so crafty, but

Fishes by long lines or nets are drawn from the bottom of Rivers: and
Mariners with their plummets use to sound the depth of the Sea it self, and
no man's heart is utterly bottomeles, though it be far and hard to pierce to
the bottom thereof. They that preached Christ of envy, would not tell the
people Phil. 1. verse. 15.
what was the motive of their preaching, and yet Paul was able to discover it.
And they that heard Ezechiel so negligently without conscience of obeying,
professed not their worldly affections, Ezech. 33. v. 31.
that their hearts went after their covetousness; (for they came to him, as
people used to come, they sat before him, they heard his words, and praised
his sermons) yet Ezechiel could convince them of hypocrisy.

First, the Lord himself knows all their intents, thoughts,

Secondly, he has variety of means whereby he does impart etc. which now and
then bewray the mischief which they conceive in their minds. And sometimes by
extraordinary revelation, as Jeremy confesses, saying, The Lord has taught
me, and I know it, even then thou shewedst me their practices. But I was like a
Lamb, or Bullock Ier. 11. v. 18. 19.
that was brought to the slaughter, and I knew not that they had devised thus
against me, saying, let us destroy the tree with the fruit thereof, and cut him
out of the Land of the living, that his name may be no more in memory. As
craftily as Jeroboam had contrived the matter, to send his wise disguised to
Abijah the Prophet, yet Abijah informed by the Lord knew who she was, and why
she came, before she set a foot within his door. In like manner was Gehesi
found out by Elishah, and Ananias 1. King. 14. v. 6
with Sapphyra by Peter, and others by other of his servants.

Instruction to embrace this wisdom and understanding which Saul to be so
often defeated of his purposes against David, that he could never succeed to
make a dispatch of him: and what was the let and impediment? The watchful eye,
and mighty hand of God, which was always his shield, and present refuge, but
means there were beside, which Saul in coffeehouse declares in the worst
manner, saying, He is subtle and 1. Sam. 23. v. 22.
crafty: and David in thankfulness acknowledges in the best, saying, By thy
Commandments thou have made me wiser then Psalm. 119. v. 98.
mine enemies.

Terror for them that harbor evil thoughts and affections

Verse. 6. Many men will boast every one of his goodness, but who shall find a
faithful man? MAny men,] Proud and vainglorious persons which are many,
Will boast every one of his goodness, will publish and set abroad the
commendable qualities which they take to be in themselves, and the kindness
and benefits which they perform to others: but who can find a faithful man?
The interrogation does import an impossibility, that faithful men are not only
rare, but none at all: yet his meaning is not absolutely that there are none
faithful for that would contradict other Scriptures, which have testified of
the uprightness of sundry good men by name, and described the integrity of
others which are not particularly mentioned) but that among these braggers,
which are so foreward to magnify themselves, and celebrate their own praises,
there is not one faithful man to be found, which does good with a good
conscience, in singleness of heart toward God, and love and compassion to his
brethren.

The best works of unfaithful men be of no value with God. Men never gather
Grapes of Thorns, nor Figs of Thistles. A Math. 7. 16. 18.
good Tree cannot bring forth evil fruit, neither can an evil Tree bring
forth good fruit. The Pharisees were known both in Jerusalem, and through out
all the land, to give much alms to the poor, to fast, to pray, to do
diverse things which the world admired, and for the same had them in great
estimation, and yet because the men were naught, and their hearts were naught,
all those glorious painted works were sinful and loathsome. Our Savior
tells us of many that will seek acquaintance of him, for prophesying in his
name, and casting out of Devils by his name, and doing many great works in his
name: and yet he will profess that he never knew them, but bid them depart
from him, Math. 7. v. 22.
as being workers of iniquity.

First, whatsoever proceeds from an unregenerate and fleshly

Secondly, all the works of the wicked do want good seasoning

Thirdly, the hearts of hypocrites and graceless men, by occasion by the
boastes which they make of their goodness: and by Luke 18. v. 11. 12
the example of the Pharise glorying how just he was, how much he gave, how
often he fasted, and what duties he discharged: whereas every good service
uprightly performed by the Godly, will cause them the more to see their
unworthiness, and to be humbled. When David and his subjects had liberally
contributed toward the building, and beautifying of the Temple, he breaks
out into the praises of the Lord, and debasement of himself, and his, saying,
Who am I, and what is my people that 1. Chro. 29. v. 14.
we should be able to offer willingly after this sort? for all things come of
thee, and of thine own hand have we given them. When Isaiah had used his lips
and his tongue, as faithfully as he could in the ministry of God, and for the
benefit of the Church, yet at the sight of Gods glory, and his own vileness
he cries out, Woe Jsa. 6. verse. 5.
is me, for I am undone, because I am a man of polluted lips.

Instruction to take heed to thy self in all thy ways, that Jesus Christ in
due time will proclaim the same to all the world: and in the mean time cause
their goodness so to be regarded of them that be good, that the less praise
they seek, the more they shall find, and that reverence which they neither
aimed at, nor looked for, shall without their suing or seeking be offered unto
them. He that is sound in his soul, and upright in his dealing cannot be
without honor, whosoever he be that depraueth him: and every one that is
hollow hearted and wicked, shall bear the shame of his iniquity, what pretenses
soever he makes of mercy, justice, and piety, and how many soever applaude
him: whomesoeuer the Lord sees to be naught, he reputeth for naught, and will
show to be naught, and after a season bring him to naught.

Verse. 7. He which walks in his uprightness is just: and blessed shall his
children be after him. HE which walks in his uprightness,] that without
dissimulation, constantly indeuoureth to obey the will of God, laboring to
know all that the Lord requires at his hand, and as much as he can perform, all that he knows, and that with desire to glorify him, and likewise with hope
to be rewarded himself, is just, perfectly righteous by the merits of Christ
without him, and righteous by the work of Gods holy spirit within him: And
blessed shall his children be after him. It shall both go well with himself
while he lives, (for so much is intended in this sentence, though not expressly
mentioned) and with his posterity also who shall succeed him. So does he
usually bless his servants, but not at all times, some being otherwise
recompensed, and not in this manner: for many Godly men have no children at
all, and others leave such behind them, as prove unhappy and graceless.

Whosoever is sincere and honest, the same man is also righteous. John
undertakes to make this good, and lays it down as an infallible verity,
saying, Little children, let no man deceive you, he that does righteousness
1. Joh. 3. verse. 7.
is righteous. Likewise David in the Psalms, according as Solomon does here,
makes the just and faithful to be all one in that his consolatory
acclamation: Be glad ye righteous, and Psalm. 32. v. 11.
rejoice in the Lord, be joyful all ye that are upright in heart. But what can
be clearer then Gods own testimony for Job, and that to the Devil, his most
mortal adversary? Have thou not considered Job. 1. verse. 8.
my servant Job, how none is like him in the earth? An upright and just man one
that fears God and escheweth evil.

First, there is never uprightness of heart and behavior, but

Secondly, as he is fully righteous which has fullness of grace,

Thirdly, were it not that all the Godly were verily righteous, Jesus Christ:
for what correspondency would there be between the head which is absolutely
just, and the rest of the members utterly unjust. Neither would there be any
meet proportion, but a direct opposition between member and member, between
those which are wholly holy above in the heavens, and such as are merely
unholy beneath in the earth. These parts would no better accord together, then
those of the Image which Nebuchadnezzar beheld in his dream, whose head was of
fine gold, his Dan. 2. verse. 32.
breast and his arms of silver, his belly and thighs of brass, his legs of
iron, and his feet part of iron, and part of clay.

Fourthly, no happiness belongs to any saving to the just, it blessed are
they that are Psalm. 119. v. 1. 2.
upright in their way, and walk in the law of the Lord. Blessed are they that
keep his testimonies, and seek him with their whole heart.

Consolation for poor Christians much clogged and yoaked David had his slips
and frailties, and failed of duty in diverse matters, as in his passionate heat
purposing and swearing to destroy Nabals whole family: in passing such a rash
sentence against Mephibosheth, to pass away all his maintenance from him: in
being too too indulgent to his ungracious Sons, Ammon, Abshalom, and
Adonijah, and yet the Lord passes by all these, and others of the like nature,
and says, David did that 1. King. 15. v. 5.
which was right in the sight of the Lord, and turned from nothing that he
commanded him, all the days of his life, save only in the matter of Vrijah
the Hittite. Let the Devil then rage, and wicked men rail, and charge thee
with hypocrisy, arrogance, presumptuousnesse, disloyalty, heresy, lolardie,
or with whatsoever else an hellish brain may invent, or a virulent mouth can
vomit out, yet thy heart and ways deposing for thine integrity, that thou
seruest God as well as thou can, and desire to do it far better if thou
could, be not dishartened at all their slanderous calumniations.

Reproof of them that are only sayers in cases of Christianity, not always
righteous, has never yet attained to be righteous at all.

Blessed shall his children, etc. Faithful parents have no cause

Themselves are righteous, as here the wisdom of God does directly pronounce
them: and the generation of the righteous shall Psalm. 112. verse. 2.
be blessed, as besides this present Text, diverse other places of Scriptures
do evidently testify. If the Lord reckon them for theirs, as he will if they
be his, he will also for their sakes, through Christ, and in his own love
provide sufficiently for them: If otherwise (especially if they are nothing
guilty of their sins, by misgouernment, or neglect of prayers for them) what
have they to do to enter into Gods judgments, and to disquiet their hearts
about the punishments, which he has hereafter to inflict upon his rebellious
enemies, and the adversaries of his people? See Chap. 13. 22.

Verse. 8. A King that sits on the Throne of judgment chaseth away every one
that is evil. A King,] The supreme Magistrate principally; and others also of
great authority, sitting upon the Throne of justice, executing his office
faithfully, chaseth away every evil one, affrighteth lewd malefactors, and
either cutteth them off, or otherwise punishes them, or they amend their
ways, or fly out of his jurisdiction, or at the least from his presence, with
his eyes, by looking into causes, and taking knowledge of offenses, whether it
be by sight or hearing, and therewith also he daunteth the wicked that appear
before him, his looks and countenance being terrible unto them.

A vigilant ruler is a restraint and terror to vicious persons. Jobs life that
he was not a man given to be so stern and austere, but that honest men might
find good contentment in his company, ( for the ear that heard him speak,
did bless him, and the eye that saw him, gave witness to him: he delivered
the poor that cried, and the fatherless, and him that had none to help him:
the blessing of such as were ready to perish came upon him, and he caused the
Widows heart to rejoice: he was the eyes to the blind, and the Job. 29. v. 11.
12.
feet to the lame, and a Father to the poor) yet disordered young men durst
not endure the sight of him, they hid themselves from his presence. And such
was the severity of his government against Verse. 8.
vagabonds and vile persons, that they were compelled to flee into the dark,
desolate, and wast wilderness. They were chased Job. 30. v. 3. 5. 6.
forth from among men, they shouted at them as at a Thief. Therefore they
dwelt in the clifts of Rivers, in the holes of the earth and Rocks. Neither
was this his sharp proceeding only against those that were young and wanted
wisdom, or such as were beggarly, and wanted power, but he brake the jaws of
the unrighteous Chap. 29. 17.
of what estate soever, and plucked the pray out off his teeth.

First, he is armed with Gods authority, whose substitute he

Secondly, the Lord has set him up, and put the sword into for the punishment
of evil doers, and the praise of them 1. Pet. 2. v. 14.
that do well: he is the Minister of God to take vengeance on them Romans 13.
verse. 5.
that do evil.

Thirdly, a guilty heart makes men timorous, and ready always

Instruction to subjects and inferiors that if they would stand many times,
deal very corruptly. And this the Lord expects at their hands, that as
himself is impartial, and respects no man's person in his judgments, but
every man speedeth according to the equity of his cause, and not the quality of
his estate, such should they be, and deal in theirs, defending the innocence
of the meanest, and doing them right, and censuring the wickedness of the
mightiest, and making them taste of justice, which is indeed, to chase away all
the evil with their eyes.

Reproof of many in high places, that eye the best and most

Verse 9. Who can say, I have cleansed my heart, I am pure from sin? Who can
say,] Who can truly and with good warrant affirm, I have cleansed my heart, I
have utterly, and for ever freed my self from all unlawful desires, delights,
purposes, cogitations and motions. He begins at the heart, because it is the
Fountain, or at least the Cesterne from whence corruption flows; which yet
must be understood of his own natural power, and not of grace: and of
perfection, and not of sincerity: for the Prophet does truly profess that he
had cleansed his heart, though in his temptation it seemed to be in vain, Psa.
73. 13.
which he did by the spirit of God, and in part, and by degrees, I am clean
from sin; my nature soul and ways are all pure, nothing can be laid to my
charge, for unlawful thoughts, unrighteous actions, unfruitful speeches, good
duties at any time omitted, or sinful works ever committed: meaning by that
interrogation, that no man has power so to walk, nor any reason so to boast.
Notwithstanding, this is nothing against that saying of S. Paul: Who shall lay
any thing to the charge of Gods Romans 8. 33.
chosen? It is God that justifies. For he there speaks of that innocence
that the godly attain unto by remission of their sins in Gods presence, who
having received satisfaction for them, from Christ, imputed them to him, and
fully acquitteth them: and Solomon here speaks of another matter, that no man
is thoroughly purged from original corruption, and the impure humors that
issue out of it. Neither let any man object that of S. John, Whosoever is borne
of God sins not: for he speaks not 1. Joh. 3. 9.
in that place of the practice, but the dominion of sin, that a regenerate
man yields not obedience unto it, as a slave to his Master, but is taken
captive, or receives a wound, as a Soldier from his enemy.

The best shall have corruptions and sins cleaving to them,

As every son of Adam, saving Christ our Savior, is, or has been defiled
by generation and conception, so none of them can wash any part of their
filthiness without his help, neither may any look for an absolute purity in
earth by his assistance: for that, in his holy wisdom, he reserved as a
prerogative, proper unto his own person, not admitting of any copartner
therein. Here upon certainty of his ground, he proposes the point by way of
demand, making a challenge to all the world, knowing that no man could ever
step forth, and justly say; I am entirely innocent, I was never culpable: or
at this time, I am as good as I ought to be, and as Gods law requires. And in
Ecclesiastes upon like assurance, he affirms the same, with an asseueration,
saying, Surely there is no man just in the Eccl. 7. 20.
earth, that does good, and sins not. And S. James coming behind Iam. 3, 2,
very few in sanctification, and holiness of life, does yet profess this
against himself, as well as others, In many things we sin all: as if he
should have said, we children of men, we elect, we Christians, we Disciples of
Christ, we Apostles, we that are counted chief among the Apostles, we all, and
every one of us, in diverse things do fail of our duties.

First that conflict which is between the flesh and the spirit, Gal. 5. 17.
of none that has more prevailed against the flesh by mortification, or showed
forth better fruits of the spirit by vivification then Paul, and yet he
complains, that When he would do good, Romans 7. 19. 21.
evil was present with him: that he did not the good which he would, but the
evil which he would not, that did he.

Secondly, our Savior directs so many as may call God Forgive us our debts:
and the blessedness of Abraham and David, and all that ever Christ Romans 4. 6.
has redeemed with his blood, consists in the remission of sins, which
makes it apparent that every child of God is daily attainted with the
guiltiness of sin.

Thirdly, how comes it to pass, that all men are obnoxious

Confutation of the Papists, which ascribing to the death of Christ, the
beginning of justification, do impute the perfection of it to their own
worthiness by infused grace, whereby they think themselves able to fulfill
the law of God: and more then that to add an ouer-plus by works of
supererogation, which may go for payment of their fellows debts: and so they
do not only deliver themselves from damnation, but are become petty
Saviors, or pieces of Saviors to others. Which are to be pitied for their
ignorance, and rated for their presumption, taking upon them to be Christ his
fellows, not knowing that Gods law requires an exact obedience, with fullness
of love perpetually, beyond all that any mere man since Adams fall, could
possibly perform. And it serves also to overthrow the heretical opinions,
and to pull down the proud conceits of the Catharists or Puritanes, which brag
of such a perfection of purity already attained unto, as that they need no
further to be purged from corruptions.

Instruction for every man to look warily to himself, that he

Verse 10. Diverse Waights, and diverse measures, even both these are
abomination to the Lord. Diverse Waights,] one heavier, another lighter, and
diverse measures, one greater, another less, to buy with the greater weight,
and greater measure, and to sell by the less or lighter, or with a just weight
and measure to sell to the wiser sort, and with the unjust to the simpler,
whom they may easily deceive, both these, and all such kind of crafty and
covetous dealing, are abomination to the Lord, such abominable iniquity as
the Lord will surely and sharply revenge, and punish. See cap. 11. ver. 1.

Verse 11. Even a child will make known by his conversation, whether he be
pure, and whether his work be right. NEither young, nor old can so lie hid, but
that they will by one means or other, at one time or other, bewray what manner
of persons they are, and what manner of deeds they do. If any may be
unknown, and not made manifest in both those respects, surely those of younger
years are most likely to be they, who are not tried in such dealings, nor in
so many matters as men of riper age, and yet here it is taught, that even a
child, a yongling, being yet tender, and not grown to man's estate, will make
himself known by his conversation, by his behavior, by his gestures, by his
speech, by the course of his practices, whether he be pure, whether there be
uprightness, and plain meaning in him, without dissimulation, or gross and
professed lewdness, and whether his work be right, whether that which he
presently does, be with an honest mind performed, and whether he be like to
take a good course in the rest of his life to come. For even young Plants
declare by their growing and budding, what trees they will prove to be, and
what fruit they will bear hereafter; so little ones often show betimes, what
expectation is to be had of them: they minister matter of hope, or fear to
them that converse with them, and desire to see grace and piety in them. This
is a duty laid upon every child, so soon as he is of any discretion, and
capable of instruction, that he should enter forthwith into the good way, and
walk constantly therein, howbeit we confess that many fail therein, either
through want of good education, and bringing up, or yielding afterward to the
lusts of youth, decline and fall away from this towardliness, which at the
first appeared in them.

It concerns the young as well as the old, to be religious,

Pertinent to this purpose is the exhortation of the Prophet, Psalm. 148. v. 12.
calling upon young men and maidens, also old men and children, that they
should praise the name of the Lord. And so is that question and answer, which
is made for their direction, in another Psalm, after this manner: Wherewith
shall a young man redress Psalm. 119. 9.
his ways? In taking heed thereto, according to thy word.

First, being godly they are sure, as well as the ancient, to be a poor, and
wise child before an old and foolish King: beside the notable example of
Joseph, David, Samuel, Eccles. 4. 13.
Josiah, John Baptist, and others, as Timothy by name, whom the Apostle
advises by that means to preserve his reputation, saying, Let no man despise
thy youth, and be unto them that believe an example, in word, in conversation,
in love, in spirit, in faith, and in 1. Tim. 4. 12.
pureness.

Secondly, the remembrance of that goodness which is exercised

Thirdly, on the other side, they which live vitiously when Zophar truly
testified: His bones are full of the sin of his youth, and it shall lie down
with him in the dust: Neither Job 20. 11.
will it be buried and consumed there, but accompany the soul also to hell,
and accuse it before Gods judgment seat, and there cause them to be condemned
and destroyed for ever.

Instruction to domestical Governors, Ministers and Schoolemasters, Timothy, to
season him so timely with the word of the Lord, that by their industry he knew
the holy Scriptures of a child, and therefore did so much good to many, and
most to himself when he was a man. And if it lie upon parents so carefully to
educate their children, and Governors must look so narrowly to the ways of
their youth, how much more ought they of the elder sort, having misspent many
years in the service of sin, and are not yet reclaymed from their wicked
ways, to bestirre themselves for reformation before it be too late. Their
danger should terrify their hearts, and drive them to take a better course,
least they perish ere they have well thought that they are in peril: and their
sottishnes should make them ashamed of their sluggishnes, which have suffered
boys, and wenches, and children to go before them in wisdom and honesty:
and withal there is cause that hope should help them forwards in godly
endeauours: for if grace be given to them that are so young, and of less
capacity, (beside the manifold vanities that youth and childe-hoode are
subject unto) to purify their hearts and rectify their works, it will not be
denied to them, who are more apprehensiue of understanding, and may be better
able to govern their affections, and order their ways, if they faithfully
seek it.

Confutation of that pernicious error, which too many, both the men of Sodom
compassed Genesis 19. 4.
Lots house round about, from the young even to the old, all the people from
all quarters. And they were burnt up with fire and brimstone, and destroyed
as well as others. And how came it to pass that the children spedde so ill
which mocked Elisha, saying, Ascend thou bald-head, ascend thou bald-head? Why
did he curse them in the name of the Lord, if children might safely say, and
do whatsoever them listed? Did not the slaughter of two and forty of them
made by two bears, openly declare the wrath and indignation of the Lord
against them? But for all this, so they will think still, and so they will live
still, and therefore such we must leave to themselves, and let them take as
they shall find one day, only we may tell them what the Scripture says unto
them in this case: Rejoice o young man in thy youth, and let Eccles. 11. v. 9.
thine heart cheer thee in the days of thy youth, and walk in the ways of
thine heart, and in the sight of thine eyes; but know for all these things God
will bring thee to judgment.

Verse. 12. The Lord has made both these, even the ear which hears, and the
eye which sees. HIs meaning is, that the Lord has formed the whole man, all
the parts of his body, though he names only these two, as the seats and
instruments of those noble senses of hearing, and seeing, which are mentioned
with them, and these, together with all the rest, he enableth and quickneth to
do their office.

Our members and senses are the workmanship and gift of

No art can make them, nor all the power of all creatures, if they should unite
their strength together, were sufficient to fashion so much as a Finger, or
Toe, or any other limme, and put feeling into it. The honor hereof the Lord
does challenge to himself in that speech of his to Moses: Who has given the
Exodus 4. ver. 11.
mouth to man? or who has made the dumb, or the deaf, or him that sees, or
the blind? Have not I the Lord?

First, it is not in the power of creatures to do smaller matters Matthew. 5. v.
36.
cannot change into white, and that which is white they cannot turn into
black: now he that is not able to do the less, will less be able to do the
greater.

Secondly, if any part of man, or of other living creatures, or of plants, or
of any natural body, or substance might be made without Gods own hand, he
should cease to be an absolute creator, and creatures that could do these
feats would become demy-creatours.

Instruction to depend upon him for the preservation of our Understand ye
unwise among the people: and ye stoles when Psalm. 94. v. 8. 9.
will ye be wise? he that planted the ear, shall he not hear? or he that
formed the eye, shall he not see? But that we may enjoy the right use of our
senses our selves, and not have them infectious and noisome to our souls, and
may also render to him due praise for them, actually by them, it shall be
needful to have recourse to him, and seek his help, that as they were
created by his hand, and are depraved by our corruptions, so he would again
repair the same, and sanctify them to spiritual services. For otherwise a
man quick sighted in earthly things, may be stark blind in heavenly, and he
that has a ready ear to listen unto men's speeches, may be utterly deaf at
the Counsels of God. And that caused Moses to obraide the carnal Israelites
in the wilderness with such a palpable senselessenesse, saying unto them: Ye
have seen all that the Lord did before your eyes, Deuteronomy. 29. v. 2. 3. 4
in the land of Aegipt, unto Pharao, and unto all his servants, and unto all
his land: the great temptations which thine eyes have seen, those great
miracles, and wonders, yet the Lord has not given you an heart to perceive, and
eyes to see, and ears to hear, unto this day.

Consolation for them that profitably exercise their souls and Christ, then
they can have by virtue of possession, and therefore he will look always
better unto them for protection and defense, then they at any time can do, and
therefore not only their bones are kept by him, that not one of them shall be
broken for their heart, but likewise the hairs of their head are numbered, that
none of them shall miscarry. Keeping themselves therefore in his favor, they
may bouldly expect safety, or though sometimes they be sick, sore, lame,
wounded, maimed, deprived of sight, decayed in their hearing, or subject to
other like impediments, yet such is the tender care of their heavenly Father
toward them, that he will be more provident for their recuring, then any
parent: and such is his skill and power, that he is more able to repair, and
heal them, then any, or all the Chirurgions, and Physicians through the whole
world. If the maladies therefore of any good man do prove sometimes incurable,
and cannot be helped, it proceeds not from the defect of his love, as though
he neglected to do them good: nor from any want of ability in him, as though
it were beyond his power to recure them: (for it is always easy with him to
recure that which himself did make) but from his holy wisdom knowing the
continuance of bodily infirmities to be healthful for their souls, till that
perfect restitution, and reparation be made of life, limbs, and senses at the
glorious Resurrection.

Confutation of those that ascribe all the members of the body, David had an
heart that understood more, and an eye that pierced further, when he yields to
the Lord the honor as well of his conception, as of creation, saying: Thou have
covered me in my Mothers womb. I will praise Psalm. 139. v. 13.
thee: for I am fearfully, and wonderfully made. My bones are not hid from
thee, though I was made in a secret place, and fashioned beneath in the earth.
Thine eyes did see me, when I was without form: for in thy book were all
things written, which in continuance were fashioned, when there was none of
them before.

Verse. 13. Love not sleep, least thou come unto poverty: open thine eyes, and
thou shall be satisfied with bread. Love not sleep,] Though God grant thee
liberty to take thy rest, and to refresh thy weary body with sleep, yet love
it not, delight not too much in it, give not thy self unto it, nor use it
excessiuely, nor otherwise give over thy self to slothfulness: for under
immoderate sleep which is one exercise thereof, he comprehends all the rest,
least thou come to poverty, this he alleges as a reason, why he would not
have men to be too sleepy and slothful, because such idleness begets and
brings forth beggary. Open thine eyes, be watchful, and diligently apply thy
business in thy calling: for many are too wakefull for plays, and cards, and
dice, and dancing, and drinking, and other disorders: and thou shall be
satisfied with bread, it shall go well with thee, and by thine honest labors
and industry, thou shall possess, if not abundance of all things needful
for thine estate, yet enough, and so much as thou shall be content with, and by
Gods blessing find very sufficient.

The abuse of lawful things is unlawful and hurtful. Moderate Luke 14.
with that, they showed themselves unthankful to the Lord, and more injurious
to their own souls, though they neither stole the Oxen, nor took the Farms
by violence, nor committed Fornication. And who can deny eating, drinking,
marrying wives, and giving in marriage, buying, selling, planting, and building
to be things in themselves allowable, yea profitable, yea necessary for every
man's life, for public society, and for the general good of mankind? And yet
when the old world would drown it self in them, it was by Gods righteous
judgment drowned also for them: and for the same causes among others Luke 17.
v. 26. 27
was Sodom destroyed, and by the like shall destruction take occasion to come
suddenly on the wicked at the end of the world, before the resurrection.

First, sin hides it self more closely in the practice of things

Secondly, when men are fallen into sins of this nature, it is

Instruction to be wary and watchful in all our ways, to keep S. Paul gives
in one of his Epistles, requiring that they which have Wives be as though they
had none: 1. Cor. 7. 29. 30.
and they that weep, as though they wept not: and they that rejoice, as though
they rejoiced not: and they that buy, as though they possessed not: and they
that use this world, as though they used it not.

Confutation of them that think the lawfulness of any matter

Verse. 14. It is naught, it is naught, says the buyer: but when he is gone
apart, he boasts. IT is naught, it is naught,] Albeit the ware cheapened be
good, and well worth the price demanded by the seller, yet the covetous buyer,
to the end he may get it better cheap, whiles he is bidding money for it,
dispraiseth it to the uttermost: but when he is gone apart, he boasts, after
he has bought the thing, and behind the sellers back, he praises his
bargain, both for the goodness of the commodity, and for the good peny-worth
which he had therein. And hereby in like manner the disposition and behavior
of the seller is to be understood, which is as forwards to extol, and set out
that which is badde, as the other to find fault with that which is good. For
if they be both false and wicked, as this testimony concerns none other, they
will depart with their own with no more truth, and equity, then they seek to
come by an other man's, and the Lord does as much look into, and loath the
injustice of the one, as of the other.

The Lord does take notice of all the behavior of men in their trafficking one
with an other.

In this place he marketh and reports what speech passes between them while
they are together, and what they say of their bargain after they are departed
asunder. In Hosea he observes, and relates what practices they use to beguile
one the other, and with what affections also they do it, saying, He is a Hos.
12. verse. 7.
Merchant, the balances of deceit are in his hand: he loves to oppress. In
Amos he fore-seeth, and discloseth what purposes they have of false-hood, and
injustice, and how greedy they are to fall to it, being desirous, if they
could, to chase away, and shorten the Lords own Sabbaths, and Holy Days, that
they might be about this sinful business. And therefore, say they, When
will the new Moon be gone, that we may sell corn? and the Amos. 8. v. 5. 6.
Sabbath, that we may set f^rth corn and make the measure small, and the price
great, and falsify the waights by deceit? That we may buy the poor for
silver, and the needy for shoes: and sell the refuse of the Wheat.

First, the persons buying, selling, and bargayning are his, and

Secondly, the merchandise and wares which are bought and

Thirdly, the ordinance of bargayning and traffic is his, and

Fourthly, his law is obeyed, or transgressed, and either service

Instruction for us to take notice of his presence at our bargayning, money or
goods with iugling tricks, and deceitful breath. If thy dealing be not
allowable to be used to the greatest, attempt not to offer it at any time to
the meanest; and if it would not be found justifiable being sifted by the
wisest, thou hurtest thy self in practicing of it to the simplest. For who is
so great, and whom does the matter so nearly concern as the Lord? And who
has so much understanding as he which undertakes to redress the wrongs of
those that are soonest beguiled? It is good discretion to fear the Pillery,
and to keep thy self out of the Magistrates danger, by shunning those
offenses whereby thou might incur such punishment: and is it wisdom to
be careless of hell fire, and to cast thy self into the hands of God, that he
should be provoked to plague thee for thy fraudulent courses?

Reproof of them that seldom or never use any commerce Every man hunteth his
brother with a Mica. 7. 2.
Net. Custom has made falsehood so familiar with Chap-men and Tradse-men, and
those which use to cheapen other men's wares, or have ought to set to sale, and
utter of their own, that they know not how to chaffer without it: they would
stand mute, unless it directed them how to parle together. Who, among hundreds
does not demand above the worth of that which he has to sell? And who among
thousands does offer at first according to the value of that he is about to
buy? And both be convicted of untruth, before they depart asunder, and yet
neither of them ashamed thereof, as if it were allowed for a point of good
thrift, to lie for advantage. For after they have contended a while about the
matter, the one inlargeth his offer, and pays more then (he protested) he
ever would give for it, and the other abateth of that he demanded, and sells
for less then (he swore) he could afford it. Ob. They are driven so to
vnder-bid, and ouer-aske by necessity: for otherwise men keep off, and not
ask or give in any proportion according to the value of the commodity. Answ.
Yield that, and be it that thou art otherwise like to be bid too little, will
that therefore warrant thee to demand too much? And what though it be prized
at too great a rate, and hoysted up too high, will that justify thee, if
contrary to thy knowledge, thou extenuate it overmuch, and debase it too low?
No offer, nor demand from others, does bind thee to sell cheaper, or buy
dearer then is equal, without thine own consent, and how dare thou then
seek to ward off the needless fear of a small hinderance to thine estate,
with the committing of a manifest and great offense, against the Lord and thine
own conscience? But be it thou must necessarily sustain some loss by tying
thy self to plain dealing, because thou will not defile thy self with
untruth, and craftines, yet will the conservation of thine innocence and
uprightness, be gain sufficient to counteruaile, and ouerpoyse it.
Notwithstanding all that is spoken, and preached, and written against this
enormous mis-demeanour, yet what is to be found any where more frequent and
common then it is every where? As though God were to be worshipped only in the
Church, and at holy assemblies on the Sabboath days, and the Devil to be
served in shoppes, and at evil meetings on Market days. No man almost does
think it a sin, or is ashamed to be taken with a lie in this case, though he
stand upon the reputation of his truth and honesty, and accounts it a
dishonor to be reproved in any other matter.

Consolation for them that mean, and speak, and deal faithfully Abraham and
the Hittites, for gestures, words, and equity Genesis 23.
on both parts, and the memorial thereof is, and shall be continued in the
Scriptures, and Church of God to the end of the world, so commendable, and
acceptable a thing it is to speak uprightly.

Carnal men direct not their tongues so much to speak truth,

That is naught by their testimony, which they would get for naught, though
they think it to be good: and then it is praiseworthy, when they may gain
praise by the having of it. The lip of the truth, as it is said in an other
place, will be stable for ever, Prou. 12. 19.
and a lying tongue, but for a moment. Where see the point handled more at
large.

Verse 15. There is gold, and a multitude of precious stones: but the lips of
knowledge are a precious Jewel. THE hability, and conscience, and use of
fruitful speaking is here commended by Comparison, being preferred before
those things which are of greatest estimation in the world, there is gold,
great store of it, in Mines, in Coin, in Plate, in Chains, and Ornaments, and
diversely used, and much desired, and set by, and a multitude of precious
stones, great variety of rich gemmes, as Diamonds, Carbuncles, Rubies, Iaspers,
Saphires, Emerauds, etc. and many of the several sorts of these, but the lips
of knowledge, the mouth, and lips of a godly wise man, uttering that sound and
holy knowledge which dwells in his heart, are a precious Jewel, surmount,
and are more worth then all the treasures before mentioned, and therefore more
to be accounted of. See chap. 10. ver. 20.

Verse 16. Take his garment that is surety for a strange man, and make him give
a pledge that undertakes for a strange woman. TAke his garment,] receive a
sufficient pawn of him, and provide for thine own indemnity, that thou be not
defrauded of that which thou lendest, and if no better security can be given
thee, receive and keep his Cloak or Gown, or Coat, that is surety for a
stranger, which gives his word for such as he ought not: for some unacquainted
with us, may be undertaken for in their distresses, when their need does
justly require that help, which we cannot of our selves minister unto them,
and yet may procure by our word, at another man's hand: and some well known
unto us, and of our nearest kindred, may be strangers in this case, yea the
better known, the more unfit that we should promise for them, having
experience of their insufficiency, or unfaithfulness. And make him leave agage
that undertakes for a strange woman. A strange woman in the Scriptures, is
usually, and every where, for ought we remember to the contrary, taken for an
harlot, or whorish woman; the sense seems to be, that if any man would offer
to give his word for an Harlots debts, or take up ought in his own name to
bestow on a Whore, he should not be taken, nor have any thing lent unto him,
without a morgage, or competent pledge, or such sound specialty, as will
certainly counteruaile the sum which he is bound for. The liberty and
limitation of suretiship has been somewhat more spoken of in the eleauenth
Chap. ver. 15.

They that rashly cast themselves into debt, are not so favorably

In the behalf of the poor and needy, who were driven to borrow for relief
of themselves and their families, the Lord gives that charge to the wealthier
sort: If thou shall receive to pawn the garment of thy neighbor, restore it
unto him before the Exodus 22. 26.
Sun goes down: for that only is his covering, that is his garment for his
skin: wherein shall he sleep? Therefore when he cries to me, I will hear
him, for I am merciful. And here against lavish and unadvised sureties, and
borrowers, he warranteth men, yea he persuades them, yea he lays a
commandment upon them, and repeateth the same in the self same words Prou.
27. 13.
in the Chapter following, that they take their garments for pledges. And as
here he directs the creditors what they should do, so hereafter he
foretells such manner of sureties what they must look for: but in the way of
admonition, to the end they should prevent the perrill and trouble. Be not thou
of them, says he, that touch the hand, nor among them that are surety Prou.
22. 26.
for debts. If thou have nothing to pay why causest thou that he should take
thy bed from under thee?

First, as it is a duty to be pitiful, and ready to help them

Secondly, by hard conditions and rough entreaty they may be

Thirdly, who knows the good effects which may ensue upon

Instruction not only to shun and have in detestation, that all sureties:
for many dealt seriously, though imprudently, when they gave their bonds with
purpose to make that good which the debtor himself should fail of, but their
estates are decayed since, as well as the principals that they cannot perform
it: and to those thus already afflicted, it were inhumane to add affliction by
extremity. And many running headily into this sin, when they were ignorant,
do now discern the danger of it, and do unfeignedly bewail having gotten
understanding: unto these therefore, being humbled for their fault, and
submitting themselves, the more lenity and mercy is to be showed. And many,
though themselves be as foolish, false, and unthrifty as ever they were, yet
have wives, and children more innocent and harmless, who must of necessity,
fall into great wants and calamities, if they be pursued with rigor. And these
are somewhat to be spared, though not for their own sakes, yet for their
families.

Verse 17. The bread of deceit is sweet to a man: but afterward his mouth
shall be filled with gravel. THis whole sentence is allegorical, wherein
unlawful gain is resembled to food, the delight that it first brings to
the pleasant taste of delitious meats, the mind to a man's mouth, and the
mischiefs that follow to grit, or little stones, which are very offensive to
the teeth. The bread of deceit, all manner of maintenance, or commodities,
craftily, cruelly, or by any unjust means compassed, and gotten, is sweet to a
man, makes a worldling and an unrighteous person joyful and glad: but
afterward either in his life time, or at his death, or in the world to come,
his mouth shall be filled with gravel, some great and grievous miseries shall
befall him. For either his conscience will stinge and bite him, and so he shall
be vexed with fears and horrors, or else the hand of God will inflict
punishment and plagues upon him, and so he shall be ouer-whelmed with anguish
and torments.

Nothing is so pleasant to the wicked, as that which is most

By this unlawful lucre his neighbor is wronged, his own conscience
burdened, his soul and body both in danger to be destroyed, and that for
ever; and yet it is for his tooth, it more delights him then his dinner. It
has been always and every where to be found, that the baits of sin are
more delectable to fleshly men, then the blessings of God. See Chap. 9. ver. 17.

But afterward, etc. Though iniquity, and wickedness yield

The Devil stroweth sugar on the top of his cup of sin, to encourage them
that drink thereof, to take a good draught, but he mingleth poison in the
bottom, which working their destruction, will turn to be as bitter as gaul.
Our great Grandmother Euah tasted thereof, and felt this to be true by woeful
experience, being deceived by the fair color, and delicious relish of the
forbidden fruit, and by Satan's false testimony, making her believe that
disobeying the commandment of God, she should purchase to her self some rare
and singular happiness. And all seemed to be so, until she had vndoneal by
drawing her husband into the same transgressio^ with her. And Judas no doubt,
thought that he had made a good match, when he recovered the favor of the high
Priests, and principal men, and gained such a sum of money by selling of his
Master, but the only beginning of the misery which followed, did soon swallow
up all the delight that went before. We might prove the point most clearly by
instancing in several kinds of sins, and showing the event of particulars,
but one or two may suffice for many. Concerning Prou. 5. 3. 4.
Whoredom, thus testifies Solomon: The lips of a strange woman drop as an
honey comb, and her mouth is more soft then oil: But the end of her is bitter
as Wormwood, and sharp as a two edged sword. And against drunkenness this
admonition he gives: Prou. 23. 31. 32.
Look not thou upon the Wine when it is read, and when it shows his color
in the cup, or goes down pleasantly. In the end therit will bite like a
Serpent, and hurt like a Cockatrice. See Chap. 9. verse 18.

Verse. 18. Establish thy thoughts by counsel, and by prudent advise make
war. HE gives in these words a caveat, that no man should lean too much on
his own judgment, nor too suddenly resolve on enterprises, without mature
deliberation, and sound direction. Establish thy thoughts by counsel, that
thy purposes be not variable, and unconstant, and that thy proceedings be not
without prosperous success, and so uncomfortable: make as sure work as thou
can, both to confirm thy mind, and to manage thine affairs in the best
manner, and therefore communicate thy matters with such thy friends as are
both wise, and faithful. And look well to this that Gods holy word be one,
and the chief, even best regarded, and most obeyed of all thy counsailours, so
that nothing be practiced, or hearkened to, against it. And by prudent advise
make war, especially in all matters of weight, of which sort war is,
(wherein the estates of Countries, and the lives of many persons are hazarded)
let nothing be rashly attempted, but all things well considered of, and
consultation had with men of piety, understanding, skill, and experience.

A man's wisdom serves him for best use, when he will not

By prudent advise make war, etc. Wisdom and good counsel

If there be much armor, and little policy: if many resolute Soldiers to
fight, and few discreet Captains to lead: if they have strong bodies, and
weak judgments, a great army may be easily vanquished of a small company.
Though a field were full of armed Giants, and every one of them a Goliath, yet
if they were blind, and deprived of their eyesight, who had cause to stand in
fear of them? and of whom among all their enemies, had they not reason to
stand in fear? And who be blinder in their bodies, then they, that be rash and
led with proud conceits, and selfe-liking, are in their minds? Now let us
see what other Texts of Scripture do accord with this, for the confirmation of
this point. In the four and twentieth Chapter of this book, it is said: A wise
man is strong: for a man of understanding Proverb. 24. 5. 6.
increases his strength. For with counsel thou shall exercise thy war, and
in the multitude of them that can give counsel, there is health. And in
Ecclesiasticus there is a saying not much different from this in sense and
meaning: Better is wisdom then Eccl. 9. v. 16. 18.
strength, though the wisdom of the poor be despised, and his words not
heard. Better is wisdom then weapons of war, and one that swarueth from it
destroys much good.

First, success and victory are not according to the forces of A King, says
he, Tsal. 33. 16. 17.
is not saved by the multitude of an host, neither is the Mighty man delivered
by great strength. An horse is a vain help, and shall not deliver any by his
strength. Now whom will he best prosper, but those which are most serviceable
unto him? And who perform such acceptable service, as they which have
understanding, and seek understanding, which are able to give counsel, and
yet in the humbleness of their spirits, and sight of their own wants, are
diligent and studious to learn counsel.

Secondly, the use of wisdom and faithful advise, for matters Achabs
destruction, and caused him to be slain and perish 1. King. 22.
at Ramoth in Gilead? His contempt of the Prophet Micaiahs counsel, who
foretold him of the danger ensuing. And for that voyage also was good King
Iehoshaphat blameworthy, and worthily blamed by the Prophet Iehu. 2. Chron.
19. verse. 2. We read of nothing wherewith that worthy Josiah might be taxed in
any sort, but only this that he was too aduenturous to encounter in battle
with the King of Aegipt, without warrant, and contrary to that counsel which
Necho gave him from the 2. Chron. 25. 22.
mouth of the Lord, to the loss of his life, and the sorrow and woe of all his
subjects. It finds out the fittest times for truces, peace, leagues, and what
conditions are to be offered, or yielded unto, with other things of like
nature. It directs to the best means of advantages, of places, and other
opportunities yet just and honest, for the fortifying of themselves, and
weakening of the enemy, yea for the winning of the victory, and vanquishing of
the enemy. And further also it proceeds to teach how after this, the victory
is to be used, to whom mercy is to be shown, and to whom severity, who is to
be spared, and who is to be smitten, etc.

Reproof of them that are not called to war or private contentions
Nebuchadnezzar of Babel in all men's opinions for that time, was most happy and
fortunate, which by his prowess, and valiant exploites, made himself famous
in all those parts of the world, he enlarged his Dominions, and possessions,
that no man in his age was so mighty, puissant, and renowned as ^e, and yet all
this tended to his own destruction, and in the end, to the ignominy, ruin,
and subversion of his family, as the Prophet testifies. Because thou have
spoiled many Nations, all the remnant of the people shall spoil thee, because
of men's blood, and for the wrong done in the Land, in the City, and unto all
that dwell therein. Ho, he that coueteth an evil covetousness to his house,
that he may Hab. 2. verse. 8.
set his nest on high to escape from the power of evil. Thou have consulted
shame to thine own house, by destroying many people, and have sinned against
thine own soul.

Instruction for every one to confirm himself in the spiritual battle
against Satan, and his own sinful nature, by holy wisdom, with the advice
and assistance of his Godly, judicious, and faithful teachers, and brethren.
For the enemies of our souls are of all others the most crafty, and mighty,
our misery the greatest, if we be conquered; and our victory the happiest, if
we overcome; which we may undoubtedly expect to do, if we choose this heavenly
wisdom for our leader, and yield our selves accordingly to be directed, and
governed by it. It is no malice to be implacable, and to bear a deadly grudge
against those adversaries: neither is it cruelty to kill and slay them, and to
do as much hurt unto them, as with all our might we shall be able. And
therefore it is good providence to strengthen our selves to this conflict, by
the best means we can, and we can have no better then the counsel of God out
of his holy word, nor any good at all, besides those which his word does
prescribe, and they are all spiritual.

Verse. 19. With him that goes about as a slanderer, disclosing a secret, and
with him that flattereth with his lips join not thy self. ALbeit it is a good
thing to take counsel, yet it is not safe for a man to communicate his
affairs to all sorts of persons: for if a secret be not kept, counsel is
made frustrate. Wherefore he gives a caveat to beware, among others, of two
kinds of people especially, whereof the first are slanderers, and
tale-tellers, whom (as he did in the eleauenth Chapter verse. 13.) he resembles
to Pedlers, who mingle sundry sorts of wares together, and go from place to
place to utter those things which they have received from others, for that
they tell that to this man, which they heard of that, and wander hither and
thither to gather up tales to tell wheresoever they come, and commonly report
them otherwise, and far worse then they heard them, neitheir is there any
thing that they can conceal, what dangers or mischiefs soever the disclosing
of it will procure.

Of the second kind are flatterers, such as will speak fair, and gloze with
their tongues, pretending love, and professing good liking, when they do only
sound thee to be made acquainted with thy purposes.

It is good wisdom not to trust a slanderer, or tel-tale with

They that complain of others to thee, will not be sparing to complain of
thee to others: and he that will deal treacherously with one man, may be
doubted that he will scarce deal truly with any man. And therefore the Lord by
the Prophet, does admonish his people to take heed of such, as like Thorns
and Briars have used to scratch with hand, or tongue, or other means how near
so ever they are united unto us. The best of them, says he, is a Briar, and
the most righteous of them is sharper then a Thorny hedge. Trust ye not a
friend, neither put ye confidence in Micab. 7. v. 4. 5.
a Counsailour: keep the doors of thy mouth from her that lies in thy bosom.
David was so far from admitting such manner of persons to his Counsel, as
that he would not permit them to dwell in his Court, nor, (if they were
convicted of that crime, though closely committed) suffer them at all to live
in his Kingdom, but vowed to destroy him that privily should slander his
neighbor. See Chap. 11. verse. 13.

Both consultation, and conversation with flatterers is to be

That which is offered to their ears, is not only lost, but perverted, to the
hurt of him that speaks: and that which proceeds from their lips,
notwithstanding it seem most plausible, is very pernicious to him that
hears. The Prophet David knew and felt much evil and mischief by them to
his grief and pain, and the Spirit of God knew, and saw more guile and
treachery in them to their own woe and destruction, when David by the
inspiration of the Spirit does lay such villainy to their charge, and passes
such an heavy sentence against them by way of prediction, or imprecation, both
tending to one purpose. They speak deceitfully every one with his neighbor,
Psalm. 12. v. 2. 3.
flattering with their lips, and speaking with a double heart. The Lord cut
off all flattering lips, and the tongue that speaks great things.

First, their fair speeches when they show themselves most stomach, and
bowels. They inchant men's ears and hearts and make them too much conceited of
themselves, and so to loose the comfort and reward of their weldoing, when they
do well, and hinder them from repentance for their faults, and so compel them
to be plagued for their evil doings, when they do evil.

Secondly, every flatterer for the most part is double tongued, Achitophel with
David, and Judas with Christ, according as the one is complained of, and the
other foretold of, in the Psalms: The words of his mouth were softer then
butter, yet war was in his heart: his words Psalm. 55. 21.
were more gentle then Oil, yet they were swords. And add hereunto, that many
times by society and conference with them whom they will afterward betray,
they know their minds, they have fished out their purposes, they are acquainted
with their faults, they have matter from their words, or actions, to work
upon.

Instruction not to give encouragement to such manner of us with more dangerous
weapons, and will not spare with their keen tongues to bring our names into
infamy, and to wound our consciences, which ought to be much more dear unto
us, then either money, or our heart blood. But he that would not be torn with
the tallants, and preyed upon with the beakes of flatterers, must be careful
that he make not himself a carrion by ambition; for every proud man is willing
to hear himself praised, and then flatterers must needs be the welcomest
guests to his table, and he shall be the sweetest morsel for their teeth.

Reproof of their folly, which contrary to this wise lesson of Achabs false
Prophets, prescribe to them that which they prescribe to him, and tell them
that it is a duty meet to be done, whatsoever of themselves they are desirous
to do. Of these there were many in Esayes time, and against them he makes
this complaint: It is a rebellious people lying children, and children that
would not hear the law of the Lord; which say unto the Seers, see not:
Prophecy not unto us right things; Esa. 30. 9. 10.
but speak flattering things unto us: Prophecy errors.

Verse 20. He that curses his father or his mother, shall have his light put
in extreme darkness. HE that curses his father or mother,] which utters
imprecations, railing and reuiling speeches, scoffs and jests, or any manner
of dispitefull words against both his parents, or either of them, to their
face, or behind their backs, or after what sort soever he declares by his
words the bitterness of his heart, to bring them to contempt, and to profess
how lightly and basely he esteems of them, shall have his light put out in
extreme darkness, all his prosperity, which in the Scripture is often
compared to light, shall be turned into woe and misery, which is usually
termed by the name of darkness. And this he shows shall not be ordinary,
and such an affliction as common faults are corrected withal, but exceeding
grievous and fearful, as appears by the Fpithete extreme, or as it is in
the Hebrew text, the blacknes of darkness.

Rebellious children, and such as vilify their parents are subject

Fear, shame, torment, death, and destruction continually pursue them, and
will at length overtake and apprehend them, and never leave till they have
haled them into hell, and accompany them there for ever, unless they repent
the sooner. These are numbered among the damned crew* in the law, against whom
the judgment of God is denounced with the consent and acclamation of the
people. Cursed be he that curses his father, and his Deuteronomy. 27. 16.
mother: and all the people shall say, Amen.

First, such plagues are due unto them, and justly deserved, considering

Secondly, beside the indignity offered to parents, the greatness justifying
the penalty that is due for the same. Why (says he) do Mat. 15. 3, 4.
ye transgress the commandment of God by your tradition? For God has
commanded, saying, Honor thy father and mother: and he that curses father or
mother, let him die the death. If it be a fault for servants (whose tongues God
has not so strictly bound to the good behavior) to answer again to their
Governors: if wives which may be bolder with their husbands, are not yet
allowed to be malapert, as Michol was with David, but must reverently speak to
them, and of them, as was Saraes demeanor toward Abraham, then it will prove
an odious crime, and brutish doggednesse, for children to snarle and bark at,
or inueigh against their parents.

Thirdly, the righteousness of God will not suffer them to If there be any
that curses his father, or his mother, he shall die the death: seeing he has
cursed his father and his mother, Leuit. 20. 9.
his blood shall be upon him. And though men would seem more merciful then
he, and judge it cruelty to execute this sentence so sharply, yet he often
compels them to it, by putting such unnatural malefactors into their hands
for other facts, as Rapes, Robberies, Murders, Treasons, and such like
offenses, and so they are cut off, as well the one as the other, by the sword of
justice. And albeit they should not this way be brought to their end by a
violent death, as it cannot be denied but that many escape either those crimes
or punishments, yet certainly his own hand will bring them to a miserable
death, that they shall die a a cursed death, and be swallowed up of eternal
death.

Instruction for all children to beware of contumelious speeches, to harbor a
disloyal thought against thy Sovereign, under whom thou live, nor so much
as to whisper any thing to his dishonor: and it is dangerous to conceive a
base opinion of those, out of whose loins and bowels thou have descended, or
to suffer thy tongue, thine eye, or thy mind to contemn them. He that gives
this admniotion, Curse not the King, no not in thy Eccl. 10. 20.
thought, neither curse the rich in thy bed chamber: for the Fowls of the
heaven shall carry the voice, and that which has wings shall declare the
matter: the same is the Author of this threatening: The eye that mocketh his
father, and despises the authority of his Proverb. 30. 17.
mother, the Ravens of the Valley shall pick it out, and the young Eagles
shall eat it. Would thou then have a bright estate, a comfortable estate,
fear parents in thy heart, honor them in thy words, obey them in thy deeds,
and reverence them in thy gestures. If thou have failed in former times, amend,
and reform it now, and hence forwards: and if they be gone, that thou can
not perform these duties unto them, be humbled before God, and repent whiles
yet thy light burns, that thou may prevent, and stay that hideous
darkness of terror and plagues, which otherwise will ouerwhelme thee. And
Parents are likewise to be exhorted; so to look to their own ways, and so to
educate and train up their children, that they may minister help and not be an
hinderance unto them for the ordering of their hearts, lips, and actions. And
therefore by conversation it concerns them to be their patterns and
precedents, and by their government to be their guides and directions, neither
using rigor, as if they were Tyrants over them, nor too much remissness, as
though they were but equals and fellows with them. S. Paul gives a precept to
Fathers, that they provoke not Col. 3. 21.
their children to anger lest they should be discouraged, does not mean that
they should suffer them to live without all controlment, and be altogether
regardlesse of them. Neither is it enough for fathers and mothers to take
authority over their sons and daughters, unless there be also concord,
peace, and good agreement between themselves. For there will be partaking, if
they grow to division, and they that are on the mothers side, must maintain
her cause by impugning the father: and they that take the Fathers part, must
justify his dealing by dispraising the Mother, and it will be very difficult
to cleave to them both, or speak well of them both, when there is nothing but
civil war in the family.

Verse. 21. An heritage is hastily gotten at the beginning, but the end thereof
shall not be blessed. AN heritage,] Lands, goods, money, offices, or
promotions, and the like, is hastily gotten at the beginning, is of many wicked
men quickly achieved by evil means, but the end thereof shall not be
blessed, the issue of it shall be unhappy and cursed, partly in this respect
that it is a snare to their souls, and stops their way from eternal life,
and partly in this, that it is like to be as badly spent as it was ill gotten,
and he that rose up to wealth so suddenly, may as suddenly, or by leisure fall
into want, as it is said, that a man with a wicked eye hastes to riches, and
Prouer. 28. v. 22:
knows not that poverty shall come upon him. And the thoughts of the diligent
do surely bring abundance: but whosoever is hasty, Prouer. 21. v. 5.
comes surely to poverty, and partly in this that it brings them many
perturbations and troubles whiles they retain it. See Chap. 10. v. 22. and 12.
27.

Verse. 22. Say not, I will recompense evil, wait on the Lord, and he will
save thee. SAy not, I will recompense evil,] Be so far from revenging thy
self in deed, for injuries done unto thee, as not in words to threaten, or
in mind to purpose any vengeance. But wait on the Lord, commend thy cause
unto him, and stay his leisure till he deliver thee, and he will save thee, he
says not, he will revenge thee, and plague them, though he will do so,
unless our adversaries repent, yet he would not have us so much to think of,
or desire that, as to put our trust in him, referring our selves wholly to that
which seems him good to do, without desiring hurt to them which do us hurt:
defense and salvation to our selves is that which we must seek for, and pray
(as our Matthew. 5. v. 44*
Savior both did, and taught) that our enemies may rather be pardoned then
punished. Now these words are added to the former, both as a reason thereof,
and an answer to an objection that might be urged, or at least conceived
against the Precept in the first clause: If I revenge not wrongs, I shall be
undone with wrongs, every man will boldly tread upon me. Nay, says he, there
is no such peril, the Lord will take the cause into his hand, and help thee,
and though it be not so apparent at first, yet thou shall perceive it at last
that he is thy protector, it being his office to defend the innocent, and
oppressed. And whereas it is said that he will save such as wait upon him, it
is not so to be understood, that he will always deliver them that are wronged
from their present molestations and troubles, that the adversary shall be
compelled to surcease his practices: for many are vexed and pursued as long as
they live, and yet depend upon God with says and patience: but though they
continue in afflictions till their death, yet herein they find him true of his
promise that he makes them overcome their enemies, and adversities, and are
victorious by faith and patience, and thereby obtain eternal salvation, to
the which the children of God ought principally to aspire.

All kind of revenge is unlawful for Christians.

The law, and the Gospel, Moses, Christ, and the Apostles consent together in
the forbidding of it, and in many places prohibit it. As in Leuiticus, Thou
shall not avenge, nor be mindful Leuit. 19. v. 18.
of wrong against the children of thy people, but shall love thy neighbor as
thy self. So in Matthew, Ye have heard that it has Matthew. 5. 38 39.
been said, an eye for an eye, and a tooth for a tooth, but I say unto you,
resist not evil, but whosoever shall smite thee on the right cheek, turn to
him the other also, etc. that is, rather undergo a second injury then with a
revenging hand requite the first. And this is the sense of that place, which at
the first sight seems otherwise: for the Lord would not have us when we have
sustained any wrong, to pull an other upon our selves, sithence it is a sin
not to take heed of an injury foreseen, when it may be prevented. ^^r Christ
himself, and after him Paul, when they were strooken upon one cheek, did not
turn the other, but did greatly find fault with, and complain of the
violence that was offered unto them. So in the Epistle to the Romans,
Recompense to no man Romans 13. 17. 19.
evil for evil. Dearly beloved, avenge not your selves, but give place: for
it is written, Vengeance is mine, I will repay, says the Lord.

First, it is an usurpation of Gods office, as the Text last alleged

Secondly, it is a wrong to the party on whom it is executed;

It is pernicious to the revenger himself, who receives much made to take a
shameful foil.

Instruction to bear injuries patiently, and according as our Text in hand
does both counsel, and command us, to commit our causes to him that judges
righteously, and will not permit any of his to be endamaged by their confidence
reposed in him: he will surely hear them, and help them, and recompense all
their sufferings with comfort and blessings. Thus doing, a man shall make his
cause, and not mar it: he shall get the advantage of his enemy, and not lose
it: David knew this to be the safest way for his preservation, and therefore
accordingly followed it.

They that seek after my life, says he, lay snares, and they that Psalm. 38.
12. 13.
go about to do me evil, talk wicked things, and imagine decent
continually. But I as a deaf man heard not: and am as a dumb man which
opens not his mouth. Thus am I as a man that hears not, and in whose mouth
there are no reproves. For on thee, o Lord, do I wait; thou will hear me,
my Lord, my God. And our Savior Jesus Christ did not only practice the same,
as the best remedy against his own persecutions, and troubles, but as S. Peter
witnesses, Left us an example also that we should follow 1. Pet. 2. 21. 23.
his steps. Who when he was reviled, reviled not again: when he suffered, he
threatened not, but committed it to him that judges righteously.

Reproof of fierce men, which have impotent affections, boldness desperately
to expose themselves to the manifest peril of their lives, to the wrath of
God, to the torments of hell, and to eternal damnation: this is their
boldness, and this is the Devils hardiness, who is their Captain and leader,
but neither for his honor, nor theirs. And this serves also for the
reprehension and terror of other sorts of reuengers, and such as do it by
railing, reuiling, clamours, false accusations, threatenings, cursings, or any
kind of malicious speeches: and of them in like manner whose hearts are
imbittered, and wish much mischief, though they be silent through fear, and
say but a little: for God does hate such as have bloody mouths, and bloody
hearts, as well as those which have bloody hands.

Verse. 23. Diverse waights are abomination to the Lord, and deceitful balances
are not good. Diverse Waights are abomination to the Lord,] The Lord does hate
the sin which is committed by making of greater and smaller Waights and
Measures, whereby men are defrauded of their right, and as he detesteth the
sin, so will he plague the sinner, and make him taste of his displeasure, And
deceitful Balances are not good. Balances by which men use to deceive, as
being too little, or too great, or any way fraudulent, Are not good, neither be
they allowed as lawful and warrantable, but condemned as unjust and sinful,
neither bring they any profit to those that use them, though for a time they
seem gainefull unto them, but turn to their hurt and detriment, as at last
they shall find in their Estates, or Consciences. See Chapter 11. verse 1.

Verse. 24. The steps of man are of the Lord: And what does a man understand
of his way? THe steps of man are of the Lord,] The Lord by his providence
has the appointment of the cogitations, purposes, actions, and speeches of all
men, together with the successes, and events of all that they deal in, their
goings out, their commings in, their mouings, and sturrings are not by their
own strength, but by the power and will of the Almighty: a child that cannot
go alone, but is borne in arms, has not so much assistance from the Nurce or
keeper, to uphold him, or to teach him how to go, or set his foot forwards,
as the wisest, or strongest receives from God. And after a special manner by
his grace and spirit, he directs and guides the hearts and ways of his
people for his own services, and their salvation. And what does a man
understand of his way? Who has wisdom and knowledge of himself rightly to
order his affairs, and to discern the effects and issues of that which he
takes in hand, and to foresee the things which shall befall him?

God has a provident hand in the disposing of all men's ways.

Albeit many refuse to obey his commandment, yet they cannot chose but do
that which he wills, being constrained thereto by the force of his power,
though not persuaded by the authority of his word. Jeremy was well assured of
this, and therefore both speaks it confidently to the Lord himself, who
knows and teaches the certainty thereof, and writes the same for the use of
his people, that they might receive instruction and consolation thereby. O
Lord, says he, I know that the Ier. 10. verse. 23.
way of man is not in himself, neither is it in man to walk or to direct his
steps.

Is not this evident in the restraint of the cruel, whose purposes and power
seem to conspire together against the innocent, the one in the sight of sense,
being matchable with the other, and yet they can effect nothing that may annoy
or hurt them. Esau in his own quarrel minded to have done much against Jacob,
and Balaam for hire to have spoken much against Israel, and yet nothing was
done or said by either of them, but that which was for the comfort of the
parties against whom they practiced. And whence but from this comes it, that
malicious men are made benefactours to their enemies, and those whom they
hate. As Pharao detesting the Hebrews, to train up Moses an Hebrew and by
whom the Hebrews were to have deliverance: the Aegiptians retayning the
Israelites to be enriched by their labors, to give away their goods for the
enriching of the Israelites: Haman (envying that mean office of a porter which
Mordecai had, that he should so much as sit at the Kings gate, yea maligning
his life, and grieuing that he had any being among men, so long, as till that
dismal day, when he expected that at the furthest both he, and all the other
Jews should be slain) to be a directer, and to give advise how Mordecay
should be dignifyed, how the Kings favor to him should be published in the
City, and that in most solemn manner, and with his greatest honor? See Chap.
16. verse. 9.

Verse. 25. It is a snare for a man to devour that which is sanctified, and
after the vows to call back. IT is a snare for a man,] This sacrilege
described in the words following, is passing dangerous, tending to the
destruction of the party committing it, as the food under the net, or within
the compass of the grinne, does to the slaughter of the Birds, and the bait
upon the hook to the death of the Fish, to devour that which is sanctified, to
pervert those things which are by Gods ordainance appointed for his services,
from the right use of them, to his own private gain, and commodity. When this
Scripture was written, diverse things were unlawful for any to eat, but for
the Priests and Levites only, unless it were in case of necessity, as the
show bread, and sundry oblations in the Temple, and tithes, and first fruits of
trees, etc. Now he alludeth thereunto, and comprehends under these all other
things of like use, and destinated to the same maine end, to serve for his
worship. And it is not only sinful and perilous to rob God of those
things which himself does challenge, or his servant have dedicated to him,
but to detain, or seek to recover again that which our selves have
voluntarily couenanted with our lips, or hearts to give unto him, or to any good
uses. And therefore he says, after the vows to call back, either to wish the
vow unmade, or to withold the thing which in heart has been vowed, or in
speech promised to him.

This God forbids in his law, where he says: If thou have Deuteronomy. 23. v. 21.
vowed a vow unto the Lord, defer not to pay it: for the Lord thy God will
require it of thee, and it will be a sin in thee; but if thou abstainest from
vowing, it shall not be a sin.

Sacrilegious persons cannot long prosper.

They may thrive apace, and enrich themselves at first, as other sinners do by
committing of other sins, but as all iniquity will bring misery at the last,
so will this in a special manner, and that to many with great speed. Achan
had the gold and silver Josh. 7.
which should have been delivered to the Lords treasury, but he could not
hold it: he got it, but could not keep it: but lost thereby his own goods,
and ouer-turned his family, and forfaited his life.

Ananias and Saphyra kept back but a part of that money

First, it is an unworthy thing, and an heinous offense to take Christ,
salvation, and whatsoever may make us happy.

Secondly, this fearful impiety is pursued with an horrible Ye are cursed
with a curse, says the Lord by Malachy: for ye have spoiled me, even this
whole nation.

Terror for them that maintain their own estates, by that which use to pay
some for all, a little for much, scarce the one half for the whole, or the
worst for the best, or by one means or other, beguile them. If it be a crying
sin (as by S. James his Iam. 5. 4.
testimony it is) to defeat men's hirelings of their pay, which have reaped
their fields, and helped to inn their corn, which serves only for the
nourishment of the body, how can the spoil of Gods haruest-men be silent, and
not cry aloude for vengeance, when they that labor about the food of his
peoples souls be deprived of their stipend? And how much better is the
behavior or estate of those which convert to their own purses, or uses, such
money or lands, as have been bequeathed toward the relief of the poor, or
for maintenance and repair of Churches, which are places most commodious for
the assembly of congregations to the worship of God? Let all these bethink
themselves that they are in a snare, though yet they feel not themselves
entangled: full little know they how soon the curse may work their ruin.

Instruction to such as have offended, to stay the plague whereunto through
ignorance, by taking away things consecrated to the Lord, he shall then bring
for Leuit. 5. 15. 16.
his trespass offering unto the Lord a Ram without blemish out of the flock,
with two sheckels of silver, by thy estimation after the sheckel of the
Sanctuary, for a trespass offering. So he shall restore that wherein he has
offended in taking away of the holy things, and shall put the fifth part more
thereto, etc. And let Sabbath breakers also be admonished to reform their
ways, though we declared not their perrill before: for they devour that which
is sanctified: they abuse consecrated time (which God has set apart from
common uses for his own worship) to the fulfilling of their lusts, in serving
of their carnal pleasures or profits. Finally it concerns every m^n to be
wary that he grow not weary of well doing, as to recall, or neglect, or
grudgingly to perform his promise made for contribution for merciful, or
religious uses, when his hability serves to fulfill them. His word passed to
man for such purposes is after a sort in the nature of a vow made to God, who
will require the performance of it: and it had been safer for them not to have
spoken, then not to be as good as their word: and not to have begun at all,
rather then to leave off with offense. The admonition given by Ecclesiastes is
to be received as not altogether impertinent to this point, especially in
regard of the reason and equity of it. When thou have vowed a vow to God, says
he, defer Eccl. 5. 3, 4.
not to pay it: for he delights not in fools: pay therefore that thou have
vowed. It is better that thou should not vow, then that thou should vow,
and not pay it.

Verse 26. A wise King scatters the wicked, and turns the Wheel over them.
A Prudent Governor is in this sentence compared to a skillful Husbandman: for
as the Husbandman winnoweth or fanneth the corn, to the end the chafe may be
severed from the pure grain: so a Wise King, or godly Magistrate scatters
the wicked, breaks the knot of drunkards, gamesters, thieves, robbers,
seditious persons, and other malefactors, and turns the Wheel over them,
inflicteth sharp punishments upon them, as they used in those countries to
beat out the hard corn with a Cart wheel, as may appear by the testimony of
the Prophet Isaiah, who resembling the Lords moderate and wise proceedings to
that course which the Thresher takes in dealing with his corn, says: Fitches
are not threshed with an iron instrument, Isa. 28. 27. 28.
neither shall a Cart wheel be turned about upon the cummin, but the Fitches
are beaten out with a staff, and cummin with a rod. Bread corn when it is
threshed, he does not always thresh, neither does the Wheel of his Cart still
make a noise, neither will he break it with the teeth thereof.

It is no cruelty for the Magistrate sharply to punish lewd and

It is the work of a wise King so to do, and commended as a fruit of his
wisdom. Gods word requires it, and the best Princes have laudably practiced
it: yea they knew it to be so necessary a duty, that some of them before they
came to their Crown, have after a sort vowed to perform it, as David for
example, when he said, Betimes will I destory all the wicked of the Psalm. 101.
8.
land, that I may cut off all the workers of iniquity from the City of the
Lord. But who was so handled by him? Upon whom did he execute such a
punishment? First, upon the Messenger that brought him news of Saul's death
(which might have seemed very acceptable to him) for that he confessed himself
to have a 2. Sam. 1. 16.
hand in the killing of him: and afterward upon Baanah and Rechab, who brought
him news of the death of Ishbosheth, 2. Sam. 4.
whom they had murdered: now every one of these thought to gratify him, and
expected a reward from him, for certifying him that his enemies were slain,
and the Kingdom was come into his hands, and therefore he that would not spare
them, in all likelihood would be as severe against others that were as bad as
they.

First, the Lord the righteous Judge of all the world, by his

Secondly, due and well seasoned severity toward grosses and invested with
his authority, are by the sentence of the Lord himself condemned to death.
That man that will do presumptuously, Deuteronomy. 17. 12. 13.
not hearkening to the Priest (that stands before the Lord thy God to
minister there) or unto tho Judge: that man shall dye, and thou shall take away
evil from Israel. So all the people shall hear, and fear, and do no more
presumptuously.

Reproof of them which either hinder the proceeding of justice

Secondly, and therefore also it serves for the encouragement 2*
of Princes and good Judges, and other righteous Magistrates to harten
themselves, and not to be troubled at libels, or murmurings, or any seditious
inuectiues that are made against them, by word, or writing for this cause: for
he that does commend them, will likewise defend them; and he that says, they
be wise will make them appear to be so, by the good effect of their wise
dealing. He will undertake the prorection of their persons, of their estates,
and of their honors, whatsoever is plotted, attempted, or divulged against
them, if they will be faithful in his service (whereof this is not the least
part) to fan the chafe from his Corn, and weed the nattles out of his
Garden, and free his flock from hurtful Wolves and Foxes.

Verse. 27. The light of the Lord is the breath of man, and searches all the
bowels of the belly. THe light of the Lord,] that grace which out of his love,
he works by his word, and infuseth by his spirit, is the breath of man, the
very life and felicity of a Godly man, and searches all the bowels of the
belly; finds out most deep and secret things: it causes him to know the
hidden counsels of God, and the state of his own soul; for as the word is a
discerner of the thoughts, and intents of the heart, so it informs the man in
Heb. 4. 24.
whom it dwells with the Nature and quality of the same, that he may judge
himself with righteous judgment, discovering his corruptions to be
corruptions, and his graces to be graces, that he shall neither approve of the
one sort as if they were virtues, nor condemn the other for illusions: or at
least (though sometimes Gods children in temptations do fail on both sides)
yet they be easily reduced from their error by the ministry of the word, or
by wholesome conference with Godly Christians: whereas the hearts of the wicked
wanting this light, are like dark Chambers locked up from themselves, that
they could never look into them (for the word which we translate bowels,
does signify Chambers) and they do with no more sound understanding
apprehend, either the mysteries of salvation, or the constitution of their own
souls, then with their bodily eye they can see what is in their intrailes and
belly.

That only is to be esteemed a life which is sanctified with Paul gives that
testimony of voluptuous persons, who make show to be alive, and alive like,
and of all others seem most to enjoy the benefit of life: and that which by
occasion is spoken of one sex, is true of both when he says, She that lives
in pleasure is 1. Tim. 5. 6.
dead while she lives, And what on the contrary side has he to say for that
light of God, that quickening grace which is in the regenerate? Thus I live, yet
not I now but Christ lives in me, and in Gal. 2. 20.
that I now live in the flesh, I live by faith in the Son of God, who has
loved me, and given himself for me.

First, sin where it has dominion, does slay the soul, and Christ, was
condemnable and received sentence of condemnation by the word of God, before
his departure hence, and here is the execution of the first death, and there of
the second: The curse takes hold and kills, so soon as the transgression is
committed, as was the case of our first parents, whom God threatened that they
should die in the day that they eat of the Genesis 2. 17*
forbidden fruit: and so they did: for although the soul was not then taken
away, nor deprived of the natural faculties, yet was it so deformed, and the
natural powers of it so corrupted, as that they were both dead persons, til
the Lord by the promise of Christ, the seed of the woman, restored them.

Secondly, where God shows his love, and bestows his spirit, there he
quickneth their souls, and gives them a part in the first resurrection: he
illuminateth their minds, he governs their wills, he sanctifies their
affections, he directs their deeds, he guides their words, he frames all
the good motions of the inward man, and the Christian conversation of the
outward man: so that for their present help and comfort, and their future hope
and happiness, he is all in all unto them.

Instruction above, all things to seek it, because it is better

Consolation to every one that has obtained it, whatsoever his estate, and
condition be otherwise: for he may truly say with that Prophet, Thy loving
kindness is better then life, that my lips may praise thee, When the natural
life is afflicted, this is cheerful, Psalm. 63. 3.
and will revive it with comfort: when the natural breath is endangered, this
is safe, and will also be a defense for that: when the natural breath is
departed, this still remains, and in time will attain the restitution of
that again.

Where God works grace, he also gives knowledge and

His spirit is not pleased to dwell in a dark habitation, such a room is fit
for Satan, the devil is the Prince of darkness: but the Lord does ever
kindle a light in the souls of those whom he does inhabit, that they shall
see his presence, and know his will, and be made acquainted with his heavenly
counsels. The certainty hereof is grounded upon his own own testimony in the
Psalm, where he says, The secret of the Lord is reueiled to them Psalm. 25. 14.
that fear him: and it is his covenant to give them understanding. and upon
his promise in the Prophet: I will put my law in their inward parts, and write
it in their hearts: and they shall all know me Ier. 31. 33. 34.
from the lest of them to the greatest of them, says the Lord, and upon the
large accomplishment thereof in the new testament, as as Saint Paul
Witnesses: The things which eye has not seen, neither ear has heard,
neither came into man's heart, are, which 1. Cor. 2. 9. 10.
God has prepared for them that love him. But God has reueiled them to us by
his spirit: for the spirit searches all things, yea, the deep things of God.

First, thereby he declares his love and goodness, which he Ephesians, that
they may be able to comprehend with all Saints what is the breadth, and length,
and depth, and height: and to know the love of Christ, Ephe. 3. 18. 19.
which passes knowledge, that they might be filled with all fullness of God.

Secondly, without this no man can perform any good duty to God in due manner,
so well as our servants can do our most difficult works, in the darkest
nights, without any light: and therefore if we at our charges allow Candle to
them that belong to us, for mere trifles in comparison of his weighty
services, will not he make his Sun to shine upon those that labor for his
glory, sithence it is so easy for him to cause it, without expenses?

Thirdly, the way wherein he has appointed his people to

Verse. 28 Mercy and truth preserve the King: for his throne shall be
established with mercy. MErcy] pity and compassion toward such as are
oppressed, and mildness and lenity toward penitent offenders, and benignity
and kindness, so far as opportunity serves to show the same, toward all loyal
subjects: and truth, administration of Justice, whereby every one has his due:
good men, encouragement: evil men, correction: and all men the inioyment of
those things which are their own, and by right appertain unto them: preserve
the King, procure the safety of person, state, and honor, both of Kings, and
all other great personages in authority: for his throne, his kingly dignity and
power, whereof the throne is a sign and representation, shall be established,
made the more sure; and continued the longer to himself or his posterity, by
mercy, associated with truth and righteousness: for as here he expresses
that, and intends the other, so elsewhere he expresses the other, and that
is intended, as Chap. 16. v. 12. It is an abomination for Kings to commit
wickedness: for the throne is established by justice.

The best way for Princes to confirm and strengthen themselves,

This did David forethinke of, when he knew that he should be King, before he
possessed the scepter of the Kingdom: and therefore does covenant with God,
and conclude with his own heart, that when he should sit upon the throne, he
would govern his people in such uprightness, as he, and his might sit a
long time upon it: and this profession he makes hereof: I Psalm. 101. 1
will sing mercy and judgment: unto thee O Lord will I sing. And there is
another sentence of this book, that consents with this in sense directly,
and with no great difference of words, which manifestly confirms the point
in hand: A King that Prou. 29. 14.
judges the poor in truth, his throne shall be established for ever.

First, God exalts, and depresseth, he sets up, and plucketh

Secondly, no might, or munition, no Warlike skill, or arms,

Thirdly, the Lord out of his goodness, in love to his people, will

Verse. 29. The glory of young men is their strength, and the honor of the
aged is the grayhead. THe glory of the young is their strength,] It is an
ornament unto them, and praise for them to be strong, valiant, and full of
agility and courage, if they use these gifes well, and exercise them profitably
in their callings, and for the good of the common wealth wherein they line: for
otherwise, if they be boisterous, violent, and given to fighting and
quarrelling, especially, if they imbolden themselves therewith, to robberies,
or such like villainies, they are no more commendable in them, then is the
strength of great Bears, or other wild beasts which are noisome and hurtful:
Goliath, and Og, and the Anakims, and other Giants were tall men, yea huge and
strong, and yet are neither praise worthy, nor praised: and the honor of the
aged is the grayhead, the white hairs which publish their aunciency, and the
multitude of years which they have lived, do bring credit and reverence unto
them, so that they be garnished with gravity, wisdom, and other virtues, as it
is said, Old age is a crown of Glory, when it is found in the way of
righteousness. Chap. 16. v. 31.

God does adorn men with several gifts according to

Some are decked with judgment, and wisdom, some are armed with fortitude
and power, some excel in one grace, and some in another. I have written unto
you fathers, says S. John, because ye have known him that is from the
beginning. 1. John. 2. 14.
I have written unto you young men, because ye are strong, and the word of God
abides in you, and ye have overcome that wicked one. And as several ages have
their several ornaments for them* that are Godly, so have several states: or
at least the Lord does qualify his people with virtues and graces, such as are
fit for their present estates: and therefore Saint James incourageth the
brother of low degree to rejoice in that he is exalted: again him that is
rich, in that Jam. 19. 10*
he is made low. That poor Christians should comfort themselves, in their
spiritual promotion, and the wealthy in their gracious humiliation.

First, thereby the Lord does set forth the riches of his

Secondly, it is expedient for the common good both of should be variety of
gifts among men, and some to excel in one kind, and some in another. It was
commodious for Israel that David was puissant, warlike, and victorious against
his enemies: that God had girded him with strength Psalm. 18.
to battle, and taught his hands to fight: so that he could break a Bow of
Brass with his arms: And it was a great benefit to them that Solomon was
wise, wealthy, and peaceable, and freed the land from wars and troubles. S.
Paul bestowed well near a whole Chapter in this Argument, to the Corinthians,
in declaring, and proouing, and amplifying of the matter. To one (says he) is
given the word of Wisdom, to another the words of Knowledge, to another the
gifts of Healing, to another diversities of tongues: some are Apostles, some
are Prophets, some Teachers, some workers of miracles, some helpers, some
Governors, etc.

Instruction that no man be proud and high-minded, for mystical body of
Christ be discontented with those indowments, where with grace has qualified
them, or disdain that their fellow brethren should in any respect be made
equal or superior to them, when it is for the public good of many? Let young
men therefore, how fresh in wit or strength soever they be, yet honor, and not
despise the ancient, who by long experience and observation are of deeper
judgment and better able to give counsel, though they be weaker in body, and
have defects in their senses: and let the aged give countenance and good
encouragement to them of younger years, if they be honest and virtuous, and
not scorn them as green heads, and unskillful, if they be ingenuous and
teachable: for albeit they have less understanding to speak and give
direction, yet they may have greater power to practice, and put matters in
execution: as the one sort will serve for the eyes and tongues of the
Commonwealth, to find out, and declare what is meet to be done, so will the
other for feet and hands to go to the places whither they shall be sent, and
to perform the services whereunto they shall be called.

Verse 30. The blewnesse of the wound serves to purge the evil, and the
stripes within the bowels of the belly. THe blewnesse of the wound,] sharp
corrections and severe punishments which are argued by the effects, or fignes
thereof, serves to purge the evil, is the ordinance of God, together with
rebukes and instructions, to draw diverse persons that will not otherwise be
reclaimed out of their sins, and the stripes within the bowels of the belly,
such strokes as pierce inwardly, and make the heart to ache: not that in
chastising it is lawful to strike so hard, or so much, or to use such rods, or
scourges as will pierce into the intrailes: for that were to endanger life, and
to put to death, but he shows the manner how the evil is cured, where the
correction takes good effect, that it enters into the inward parts, affects
the soul with sorrow and fear, and not only the body with pain and smarte:
that the mind is no less touched with it then the flesh. In this sense was
the same word used in the seven and twentieth verse, The light of the Lord
searches into the bowels, or chambers of the belly.

Severe corrections are sometimes to be used, as good

These are to be inflicted by all sorts of Governors, Ecclesiastical, Civil,
and Domestical, but in such different manner, as the diversity of their
places, and callings does require. Saint Jude does direct the Church, as to
have compassion on some, and win them with lenity and mildness, Jude 23.
so to save others with fear, and with her sharp censures to pluck them out
of the fire. And in the law, the Magistrate was prescribed, that if the
offender were worthy to be beaten, he should cause him to lie down, and to be
beaten before his face, according Deuteronomy. 25. 2. 3.
to his trespass, unto a certain number. Forty stripes he might cause him to
have, but not past. And as touching parents and such as rule in families, we
shall not need to produce any testimonies, having in the former chapters in
sundry places met with texts for that purpose.

First, the Lord has in his ordinance appointed the same for a help and
remedy against strong corruptions, and they

Secondly, he gives a blessing thereto in due time, for the saving of the
souls, and amendment of the ways of his Elect S. Paul required to be 1. Cor.
5. 5.
laid that fearful penalty of excommunication, that he should be delivered
over to Satan, and excluded out of the Church, until he repented. It
appears that he was wakened thereby, that he was terrified with fear, that
he was pierced with sorrow: for the Apostle afterward informs the
Corinthians, that it was sufficient for him that he was rebuked of many: So
that contrariwise they ought rather to forgive him, and comfort him, least the
same should be swallowed up with overmuch heaviness. And for corporal
punishment, why may not the Master expect the same blessing upon it for his
servant, and the Magistrate for his subject, which the Father has a promise
of, for his Son, it being annexed to a Precept in this manner: Withold not
correction from the Prouer. 23. v. 13.
child: if thou smite him with the rod he shall not dye. Thou shall smite him
with the rod, and shall deliver his soul from hell?

Thirdly, howsoever the work of correction be unpleasant Zachary speak of,
for the reforming of false Prophets, and insufficient Ministers, saying. When
any shall yet prophecy, his Father and Mother that begat Zach. 13. v. 3. 4.
him, shall say unto him, thou shall not live: for thou prophecyest lies in the
Lord: and his Father and his Mother that begat him, shall thrust him through
when he prophecyeth. And in that day shall the Prophets be ashamed every one of
his vision, when he has prophesied, neither shall they wear a rough garment
to deceive. But he shall say, I am no Prophet: I am an husbandman: for man
taught me to be an husbandman from my youth up. And one shall say unto him,
what are these wounds in thine hands? Then shall he answer, thus was I
wounded in the house of my friends.

Instruction to them to whom is committed the office of some, so much as is
requisite, and in such manner as may best help the working of it. Never to
correct but when there is just cause, nor any other persons, but such as are in
fault: for it is as great an injury to inflict punishment upon the innocent,
and such as are guiltless, as it is an absurdity to apply a corrosiue, or
launcing knife to the sound and whole parts of the body. Surely it is not good
to condemn the just, nor that Prouer. 17. v. 26.
Princes should smite such for equity. And as care is to be had that the just
be not punished, because that were to make a wound, and not to heal one, so is
it not meet that the wicked should be spared, least they perish by their
malady of sin through want of so necessary a medicine: but let a right end be
always proposed, and moderation and justice used, rather to heal his
sinful heart that does offend, then to ease his wrathful stomach that is
offended. And let them also be admonished, whose ulcers of vicious behavior
are to be tented with the rod of correction, that they take not the outward
application of stripes, or other punishments to be sufficient for their curing.
The humors that do feed their sores, do issue from their souls, whatsoever
their faults be, and therefore they must have Godly sorrow, and humiliation
applied inwardly unto them, or else all the strokes that light upon their
bodies, will do more hurt to convince them of obstinacy, then work any good
for their amendment. And so after man has done with chastisements, they
provoke God to begin with plagues, and curses: and then their bodily pain
which they made not better use of, will be a foregoer of their spiritual
torment, from which they shall never be delivered. Happy therefore is he that
strikes his heart with Godly internal grief or fear, when God or Man does
smite his flesh, with external afflictions or scourges: for that short and
momentary smart and mourning is made a means of his reuocation, and so by
consequent of his perpetual comfort and blessedness.

FINIS.

