A SVB-POENA FROM THE STAR CHAMBER OF HEAVEN.

A Sermon preached at Paul's Cross the 4. of August. 1622.

With some particular Enlargements which the limited time would not then allow.

By DAN. DONE, Master of Arts, and Minister of the Word.

August. Confess. lib. 8. cap. 12. Toll, Lege: Toll, Lege. LONDON, Printed by
Augustine Mathewes for John Grismand, and are to be sold at his Shop in Paul's
Alley at the Sign of the Gunne. 1623.

Honoratiss. Dominis. IOHANNI COM* DE HOLDERNESSE, VICECOM. HADDINGTON, ET
BARON DE KINGSTON AD THAMESIN, etc.
ET DOMINO HENRICO HOBART, MIL. ET BARONET. CAPIT. JUST. DOMINI REGIS DE BANCO.
NEC NON

VIRO VERE REVERENDO MVLTIS QVE NOMINIBVS COLENDO IOHANNI DONE DOCTORI IN
SACRA THEOLOG. ET DECANO ECCLESIae DIVI PAVLI LONDON.

DANIEL DONE HAS SVAS QVALESCVNQVE MEDITATIONES HVMILLIME. D. D. D.

To the Reader.
COurteous Reader, I have in the Title Page of this Book rendered a sufficient
reason of the Excrescencie of this Sermon. Yet for thy more particular
satisfaction, understand, that from the Beginning of it to the 52. Page, I
preached it word for word, as it is Printed. Now because many at the Cross had
run into Desperate Debts, Borrowed so much Time of the Auditory, as they
never meant to repay: therefore I resolved to content my self with a brief
Paraphrasticall Explication of the Particulars that remained, and so, to keep
my self out of Deot: rather then Borrow what I thought I should never r^p^y.
Since, being solicited to Publish what I then Preached: that each Part might
enjoy its just Proportion for the Exact Composition of the whole, I have
enlarged my self in Those last Particulars: and Commend my Pains therein to
thy Candid Interpretation. If thou meet with any Faults in the Print, they are
I dare promise but Literal, and such as will scarce puzzle the most
Illiterate. Correct them, if thou please, with thy Pen. If there be any thing
amiss either in the Method, or Matter: thy Friendly Information shall be
Thrice acceptable. In the mean time, I advise Thee to Read with understanding,
to Remember what thou do Read: And the Lord give thee grace to practice what
thou do remember. Farewell.

Thine in Christ, DAN. DONE.

A SVBPOENA from the Star Chamber of Heaven.
LVKE 3. 9. Now is the Axe laid unto the root of the the trees: every tree
therefore not bringing forth good fruit, is hewn down, and cast into the
fire.
THis Text at the first blush, appears like it self, bearing a face of utter
ruin and destruction: parallel unto that of the Edomites, Psa. 137. 7. Down
with it, down with it, even to the ground. It begins with the Axe, and
ends with Fire, two merciless instruments of ruin and destruction. The
former makes work for the latter; the Axe for the Fire: for the Axe is laid
unto the root of the tree, that the tree being cut down, may be cast into the
fire. The entrance into this Text does something resemble that into Paradise:
there was a flaming sword, Genesis 3. 24. here Genes. 3. 24.
a fearful Axe: yet both far different for their ends: that was forcibly to
drive Man back from the way, but this is forcibly to drive man into the way
unto the Tree of life: that, whilst he seriously considers his fearful
estate, how that his transgressions have made him like a Tree, unto the root
whereof an Axe is laid to hew it down, that it may be cast into the fire, he
may presently turn unto God, and in due time bring forth fruits meet for
repentance, lest he also be hewn down by the Axe of Gods wrath, and so
perish for ever.

This sacred Writ may not unfitly be tearm^d a Subpoena, sent from the
Star Chamber of Heaven, the high Court of Almighty God, and served by John the
Baptist, Gods especial Bayliffe, upon certain Pharisees and Sadduces that
came unto his Baptism: wherein is given them to understand, that they must
not, as formerly they had done, content themselves with an outward form of
repentance, a seeming godly sorrow for their sins: but must manifest the
truth thereof in bringing forth fruits worthy repentance, making their
appearance out of hand before almighty God in all holiness and righteousness
of life under pain of both temporal and eternal destruction. Now this
Subpoena is expressed by way of Parable, or Metaphor, wherein God is resembled
unto an Husbandman, or Gardener traversing his ground, with an Axe in his hand,
having this resolution in his heart, not to suffer any Tree to grow in his
Orchyard, that does not bring forth good fruit, but to cut it up even at the
very root, and to make of it fuel for the fire. The whole World is Gods
Orchard: the men in the world are the trees of this Orchyard: that man which
brings not forth the good fruit of good living, the Lord will utterly root
up out of the land of the living: for, Now is the Axe laid unto the root of the
trees; every tree therefore not bringing forth good fruit, is hewn down, and
cast into the fire.

For the resolution of this Writ* may it please you to take three things into
your consideration.

1. The parties whom it summons and concerns, expressed,

1. Indefinitely, (...), trees. 2. Universally, (...), every tree.
2. The thing required of every tree, and that is, (...) to bring forth good
fruit.

1. We must (...), bring forth, there is a production. 2. We must (...), bring
forth fruit, there is a fructification. 3. We must (...), bring forth good
fruit, there is a qualification.
3. The Penalty, in case the parties prove delinquent, and that is set down,

1. as intended, in the first words, Now is the Axe laid unto the root of the
trees. 2. as inflicted, in the words following, Every tree therefore not
bringing forth good fruit, is hewn down, and cast into the fire.
In the Penalty, as intended, observe,

1. the Instrument for the performing of it, (...), an Axe. 2. the Application
of it, (...), it is laid to the trees. 3. the Place or part unto which it is
applied, (...), unto the root of the trees.
4. the Time of laying this Axe unto the root of the trees, (...), now, now is
the axe laid unto the root of the trees.

In the penalty, as inflicted, we have to observe,

1. The Duplicitie of it.

1. an excision, (...), is hewn down. 2. an exustion, (...), is cast into the
fire.
2. The Certainty of it, intimated in the tense, wherein it is expressed: It
is not said, The tree which brings not forth good fruit, shall be hewn
down, and cast into the fire, but is hewn down, and cast into the fire, it
being as certain as if it were already inflicted.

3. The Generality, or large extent of it, no tree shall escape, for (...),
Every tree not bringing forth good fruit, is hewn down and cast into the fire.

These are the particulars obseruable in this text; I have here as ye see,
Magnum in paruo, a little world of matter in a few words; Singula verba suam
haben^ Bullinger in 3. Matthew.
epitasin, each word has his weight, and is not lightly to be passed over:
therefore something of every thing, plainly of all: I pray God as profitably
unto all.

And first of the Parties, whom this The first general Part.
Writ does summon and concern; indefinitely, (...), trees: not natural, but
metaphorical; for by trees is meant men. And let not this Metaphore seem
strange: for as he did that was our Saviors Mark^ 3. 24.
patient for the recovering of his eyesight, so may we see men, (...), like
trees. It is the allusion of that renowned Heathen, that Man is planta inuersa,
Aristotle.
a tree turned vpside down: his head is the root, his body the trunk, his
arms and legs the maine branches, his fingers and toes the lesser bough^s,
his skin the bark, his soul the life of the whole. And in the sacred
Scripture, we find it a familiar metaphor, to express Man by a tree: Either
make the tree good, and his Matthew. 12. 33.
fruit good; or the tree corrupt, and his fruit corrupt: for the tree is known
by the fruit. Where by tree is meant man; by fruit, his works: both Jews and
Gentiles are by Saint Paul termed trees, Romans 11. Romans 11.
the Jew a good O live tree, the Gentile a wild O live tree, Not to multiply
instances, let one place speak for all. The Prophet David describing the state
of Psalm. 1^.
the child of God, he shall be (says he) like a tree planted by the rivers of
waters. Thus man is a tree, cuius radix, voluntas: folium, cogtatio: flos*
sermo: fruct us, opus, says Ludolphus: his will is the Devita Christi.
root, his thought the leaf, his speech the flower, his work the fruit.

Now as of Trees, some are high and lofty, as the Cedars; some low, as the
shrubs: so of Men, some are high and mighty, like the Cedars of Lebanon, and
the Oaks of Basan, public men, men of eminent place in Civil and
Ecclesiastical government: some low like shrubs, private men, men of inferior
note and condition: This Subpoena concerns not only some one tree
particularly, a princely Cedar, or petty shrub; but indefinitely, (...), trees,
that is, any trees: yea universally, (...), every tree: not only Genera
singulorum, some Princes, some Priests, some People: but singula generum, all
Princes, all Priests, all People. So that you cannot say unto me, as the
Apostles unto our Savior, when he Matthew. 26. 22.
told them that one of them should betray him, Is it I? or, is it I? or as the
high Priests to Judas, Matt 27. 4. What is it to us? For as our Prognosticators
in the Frontispice, and Title page of their Almana^ks, that they are calculated
for the Meridian of some particular Town, or City, but may serve generally for
the whole Country: So may I say of this Subpoena, though it was particularly
served upon the Jews that came to be baptized of John in the river of Jordan;
yet it concerns all, both Jews and Gentiles* for whose sins our blessed
Savior shed forth the Jordan of his precious blood: And therefore God does send
me, though the meanest of those that minister and serve at his Altar, to serve
this Subpoena upon every one here present: Clamo and mihi ipse, I except not my
self: Non enim tam improbus sum, vt curationes aeger obeam, sed tanquam in
eodem valetudinario jaceam de communi malo vobiscum colloquor, remedia
communico. As Seneca most sweetly, and more particularly to his Lucilius, Ep.
27. Seeing therefore it is directed to every one of us, let every one of us in
the fear of God, as we tender the good of our own souls, hearken with
reverence and attention what God in this Writ requires of us; and the Lord of
his mercy give us grace and power to perform it.

That which God in this Writ requires The second general part.
of us, is, (...), to bring forth good fruit.

1. We must (...), bring forth, there is a Production.

2. We must (...), bring forth fruit, there is a fructification.

3. We must (...), bring forth good fruit, there is a qualification.

First for the Production, Every tree 1. A Production.
must (...), bring forth. This verb (...) is a word of action: and action: is
the life of the world. The Celestial creatures have their continual motion,
the Sublunary are estated in alteration Officiosum boc animal Deus creauit, and
naturalis est sibi exercitiorum instantia: otium vero in natural. Obest enim
inertia cunctis corporis membris, nulli autemvt anime: E^ nam^ cum continuo sit
naturaliter mobilis ociari non patitur. Aqu in loc^.
Man the great worlds little sum, has an active soul infused into an
organicall body: nothing is more natural unto him then to be in action. Sloth
is not more the bane of the body, then of the Soul: for the Soul (says
Aquinas) being always naturally mooueable, cannot endure to be out of action.
A garment out of wearing, is subject to the Mead: Iron not used, contracteth
rust; standing waters, corruption. The wheel that lies still, is a fit Loome
for the Spider to work in. Otium puluin^r Satanae.
When man is idle, out of action, the Devil is ready at his elbow to press
him for his Soldier. What is the reason that many do so lust after their
Dalilahs, offer so much incense unto Venus, and sacrifice so often to her
Shrine? Is it not because they are Idle? For as our learned Postiller has
observed it, Unchaste folly is for the most part Doctor Boys.
begot of an idle brain, and hatched in a lazy body. Otia dant vitia. Men in
doing nothing, learn to do nothing but eui^l: yea, like soft wax, they are
then capable of any impression, fit to do the Devil any service. Singularly
commendable therefore is that Discipline which The Preachers Travels.
is practiced in Cassan, a principal city in Parthia: there no idle person is
permitted to live among them. Sure I am in Gods vineyard none must stand idle.
Adam even in his innocence must dress and keep the garden of Eden. Man is
borne Gene. 2. 15.
to labor as the sparkles that fly upward, says Job It is every man's Calling
to Job 5. 7.
work, to eat his bread in the sweat of his brows; but to be idle, neither
Church nor Gene. 3. 17.
Comonwealth affords any such Calling. In both some labor, some look over,
but none must look on, standing like ciphers to make up a number, or fill up a
room: God will not allow such dead trees any room in his Orchard: none must
be dry and barren, but all bearing Trees, Every tree must (...) bring forth.

All Trees must be bearing Trees, 2. A Fructification.
Trees that bring forth: but this is not all: there must be fructification as
well as production. Every Tree must (...) bring forth Fruit. We read that our
Savior, going from his lodging in Matthew. 21. 19.
Bethany unto the City of Jerusalem, saw a Fig tree in the way, went unto
it, and finding nothing thereon but Leaves, left it not as he found it, but
cursed it; so that it presently withered away. My beloved, understand the
Moral, for Christ knew well enough, it was not the time of the year for the
Fig tree to bring forth fruit: no, Non Ludolph. de vita Christi.
ficus, sed sidem, non fructus arboris, sed fructus operis quaesiuit. He sought
not for Figs but for Faith, not for the fruit of the Tree, but for the fruit
of Works. It is not with God as it is with Man: Though we will not suffer dead
Trees to stand in our grounds, but will dig them up by the roots, and have
them carried forth to the Fire; yet we will suffer many trees and plants to
grow in our grounds, not because they bring us forth any fruit, or are
otherwise profitable unto us, but because they adorn and beautify the ground
with their pleasing variety. But God, as he will not suffer a dead stock to
cumber his Orchard; so he cannot endure fruitles and unprofitable Trees, such
as grow pro forma tantum, only for fashions sake, that are all for leaves and
flowers, but nothing for fruit. It is not the carrying of a Bible under the
arm, It is not the frequent repayring unto Gods Temple to hear his Word, that
makes a sound and acceptable Christian in the sight of God: for though Happy
is that house, and blessed always that Congregation, wherein Martha
complains of Mary: as says Falix domus and beata semper congregatio vbi de
Maria Martha conqueritur. Sermon. de Vnginis Assumpt.
Saint Bernard: Though it be a joyful sight and a blessedness to the
beholding eye, when men and women are so Reliously affected as they can find
in their hearts to sequester themselves from their worldly cares to go to Gods
Church; yet who is ignorant that this may be done for half ends, and sinister
respects, to have our brains swimming in knowledge, and our tongues tipped with
the Scripture Dialect, that so we may beget an opinion of our holiness in
others, and the better work out our more private ends. It is not therefore I
say, sufficient that we be frequent hearers of the Word, unless we be doers
also: It is not a formal conformity, in passages of Piety, it is not the
turning up of our eye unto heaven, it is not a volubility of discourse in cases
of Christianity that will serve the turn, all this is but a mere flourish,
but a bringing forth of leaves and flowers; whereas God will have every Tree
(...) to bring forth fruit.

And though nothing but Fruit, yet 3 The Qualification.
not any fruit will serve his turn: it must not be (...) sed (...): bad, but
good. Every tree must (...) bring forth good fruit, the fruits of holiness
and (...)tification.

The (...) (...) which is here translated Bonum (...) (...)fie pulchrum be(...)
we must bring (...) ^t must be beautiful in the (...) of Men: and good in the
sight of God: our fruit must be beautiful ^n the sight of Men; for our lives
must so shine before men, that they may see our good Works, and glorify our
Father which is in heaven. Our Matthew. 5. 16.
fruit must be also good in the sight of God; for he will not be put off with
counterfeit piety: with him it is no better then double impiety: for so shall
we find it in our reckonings at the last day. Both then must go together: we
live here in the sight of God and Man, and therefore must with Saint Paul,
herein exercise our selves, that we may have a good Conscience void of
offense Acts 24. 16.
toward God and toward man. Most true it is, Only good fruit is ever
beautiful, but that which is only beautiful, is never good. Indeed the
Pharisees had their fruits, such as were beautiful, full of beauty unto the
eye, they had their Almes-deedes, their Prayers, their Matthew. 6.
Fastings, excellent works, excellent fruits of Piety, at the first blush
beyond all compare, not to be paraleld, they being presented unto the eye of
the world in so absolute and complete a form: But were they as they appeared
to be? Certainly nothing less: for our Savior making a narrow search into
the nature of them, found that they were nothing better then the fruit which
Solinus reports to grow in Sodom, which is in show like other fruit, but
being touched there is a strange discovery, Extimae cutis ambitio fuliginem
fauillaceam cohibet, the outward rine or skin is but a case that is full of
filthy soyly embers, and stinking ashes: So their outward piety was but a case
to cover their inward impiety; their fruits carried a fair gloss, seemed by
their outside to side with the best: but All is not gold that glisters: within
they were full of pride, vain glory, and hypocrisy: men did see what they
did, and thereby happily did glorify God; but what they did, was only to be
seen of men, and therein they did dishonor God. Indeed such fruits ordinarily
go for current with man, because he receives direction for his Judgment, as
he is informed by his outward senses. But it is not so with God: his Allseeing
Eye, piercing the most inward and secret parts, he prizeth every thing
according to the inward worth, and judges of the works of piety, as they
proceed from the inward purity; so that he will not be satisfied with false
and counterfeit fruits: Such Wares are not warrantable, not marchantable with
God; he requires truth in the inward parts: he will Psalm. 51. 6.
have every tree, (...), to bring forth fruit, not only outwardly beautiful,
but inwardly good and sound.

Every man, as ye have heard, is a tree, every branch of a good tree brings
forth good fruit, so must each part of man: our Hearts must be fruitful, in
sanctified thoughts, and holy desires: our tongues must bring forth gracious
words, such as may magnify Gods holy name, and minister grace and comfort unto
others: our Hands must work the things that are good in the sight of God and
man: our Feet must walk in the ways of peace: in a word, we must give all
our members servants unto righteousness Rom 6. 19.
in holiness; Abounding in the fruits of the Spirit, in love, peace, long
suffering, Galat. 5. 22.
gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness, patience, and in every good work,
that may make us perfect men in Christ Jesus. For this were we elected before
the world: God the Father did choose us in Ephesians. 1. 4.
Christ his Son before the foundations of the world, that we should be
holy, and without blame before him in love. For this were we created into the
world, whereas all things were made to serve for the use of man, man was made to
serve his Maker: For this end were we redeemed out of the world: For Christ
delivered Luke 1. 74.
us from the hands of our enemies that we might serve him without fear, in
holiness and righteousness before him all the days of our life. For this
purpose does God sanctify us in this world with his Holy Spirit: I will put my
Spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my Ezekiel. 36. 27.
Statutes, and ye shall keep my judgments and do them. And for this shall we
be glorified in the world to come: Come ye blessed of my Father, take the
Inheritance Matthew. 25. 34.
of the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world, for I was
an hungered, and ye gave me meat, etc. Thus will God crown the holy lives of
his servants with an eternal weight of glory: Such honor shall have all his
Saints, which are fruitful in good works: not that they do by their fruits of
holiness, No man can merit heaven.
and works of piety, merit so glorious a remuneration: alas, what can we
plead for by way of merit at Gods hand? seeing when we have done all that we
can do, yea, that we are commanded to do, which is more then we can do, we
are but unprofitable servants, Luke 17. 10.
says our Savior. And what is the reward for unprofitable servants, which God
will render unto them at the last day? Why, this is their fearful Sentence,
Cast ye the unprofitable servant into Matthew. 2^. ^^.
utter darkness, there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth. No, my
beloved. Eternal life is not of man's merit, but of the mere gift of God
through Jesus Romans ^. ^^.
Christ our Lord: As a reverend religious Prelate of our Church has observed,
Doctor King, (...) of London.
we may read of a Mercy-seat in the Temple of God, but never hear of a Steole
of Merit, but in the Chapel of Antichrist. Indeed God does in many places of
his Scripture promise the kingdom of heaven to all that lead a religious and
holy life; but this his promise is not grounded upon a foresight of any merit
in man, but proceeds merely from the free grace and bounty of God, who herein
deals with us, as a loving and bountiful father with his child, promising
him some gift of great worth, for the performance of some small piece of
service, happily for making unto him a leg, or the like: that so by his
bounty he may bring his child on willingly to tender that reverend respect,
which otherwise of duty he is bound to do. Holiness of life and conversation
is that which God strictly commands and accordingly requires from every
Christian: It is (as you have heard) the end of our Election, Creation,
Redemption, Sanctification, (...), to bring forth good fruit. If we search the
Bible from the beginning to the ending, we shall find this to be the very pith,
the marrow, the maine subject, and life thereof: yet behold the great goodness
of God, what he might command and compel us unto, in the name of our
Sovereign Lord and maker, he does (considering our weakness and infirmity)
entreat and woo us unto, in the language of a loving and bountiful Father. As
S. Augustine most Sermon. 3. de verbis Domini.
sweetly, Nobis praemia repromittit, vt nobis obsequia debita seruitutis
extorqueat, he does make unto us a promise of remuneration, to draw us to the
performance of that service which in duty we owe unto him in the whole course
of our life and conversation: Vt quos nolle seruire conspicit sponte, suorum
beneficiorum possit promissionibus inuitare, that whom he sees will not freely
serve him of his own accord, he might lovingly and friendly inuit, by
promising a reward.

This does God, to make it known Why God does promise a revvard to good
vvork^s.
and manifest unto the sons of men, 1. how sweet and pleasing a savor the
sacrifice of our holy Obedience does bring forth good fruit here on earth; such
as labor for the inward sanctity, and lead a holy and religious course of
life. And 3. that they shall be Sun of Gods grace and bounty may yet more
clearly and freely reflect its beams upon the eyes of your understanding, I
hold it not unfitting before we proceed any further in a word or two to remove
out of the way the opinion of Man's merit, which like a thick mist and dark
cloud the enemies of the cross of Christ, have cast before it, to the great
obscuring and impayring of the glorious splendour thereof. It is a point, I take
it, well worth the time, and may justly plead for your Christian attention.
Sure I am, it makes much for the promoting of Gods glory, and the furthering
of our own Good: for when we seriously consider the insufficiency of our own
works to save us, we may learn a point of true wisdom, not to lean upon the
broken staff of our own Merits, which will surely deceive us, but wholly to
rely upon the loving mercies of God, which are sure, and will never fail us.
Thus Gods shall be all the glory, and ours all the good.

I am not ignorant, that many of our modern Divines have not a little studied
this point, and left the fruits of their learned Labors unto the broad eye of
the world, that who so list may look into them, and receive satisfaction to
the full; for nothing of substance can be super-added unto that, which they
have already set forth: yet I think it not amiss, considering the present
occasion, to borrow a little handful out of the liberal harvest of their
labors, and present you with a taste of their fruits dressed after my own
fashion: I doubt not but it will be pleasing unto some, I hope and pray that it
may be profitable unto all. Happily I may herein seem to some to make an
impertinent digression from my text; but who so well weighs the drift of the
Holy Ghost, shall find, and consequently bear me witness, that I do not beg
my Theme, pick a quarrel with that which the text of it self will not seem
to afford and offer. That which God in this Writ requires of us, is the
bringing forth of good fruit: this is the maine thing intended in this text,
and pressed upon pain of Gods furious wrath, and fiery displeasure for ever,
signified in being cut down, and cast into the fire. As if he had said more
fully, yet briefly and plainly thus: If ye bring forth good fruit, ye shall be
saned: but if ye do not bring forth good fruit, ye shall be damned. Now, the
not bringing forth of good fruit, being the meritorious cause of our
Damnation, (as you shall hear afterward) one would think on the contrary,
that the bringing forth of good fruit, is a meritorious cause of our Salvation.

That we cannot by way of Merit challenge so magnificent a remuneration, as God
out of his great goodness does bind himself by promise to confer upon the
Sons of Men for their pious and godly conversation, may be plainly
demonstrated unto you by diverse particulars I will at this time contract my
self in five. In every Work to make it meritorious there are Our works
numeritorious for five Reasons.
five things requisite.

1. Gratuitie. 2. Utility. 3. Propriety. 4. Purity. 5. Paritie.
1. That Work which does merit any thing at Gods hand must of necessity be
opus Gratuitum, a free will Offering, a work of Gratuitie, and in no wise due
for any other cause or respect. Seeing then we owe of duty unto God whatsoever
we are or have; undoubtedly whatsoever we do, can merit nothing at Gods hand.

2. There must be Utility, that Good which we do, to make it meritorious,
must be profitable and commodious unto him, at whose hands we merit any thing.
But no action of ours of what strain soever it be, can bring any benefit, any
commodity unto God: for as Eliphaz said unto Job, May a man be Job 22. 23.
profitable unto God as he that is wise may be profitable unto himself? Is it
any thing to the Almighty that thou art righteous? or is it profitable to him
that thou make thy ways upright? His Interogation does argue a strong
negative resolution: as if he had said in a word, No man's righteousness can
be any way profitable unto God: and therefore we can merit nothing at Gods
hand.

3. In that by which we merit any thing we must have an absolute propriety; it
must be our own. Now Good works, Good fruits are not our own, they are Gods:
we cannot of our selves so much as Will, much less work that which is Good,
for it is God that works in us both the will and the deed: Therefore Phil. 2.
13.
we can merit nothing at his hand.

4. There must be a Purity, our works must be performed according to that
absolute Perfection and Purity which God in his revealed will requires of us:
they must be vindicated and freed from all uncleanness and imperfection,
which no man so long as he lives in the flesh can undertake for the best and
choicest fruit he brings forth: for even our best actions, were they narrowly
scanned, in some thing or other Carnis putredinem sapiunt, as Calvin notes,
do savor and relish of the Corruption Lib, instit. de Justif. fidei, Cap. 10.
of the Flesh: happily they have leaned to some sinister respect, or have not
been performed with such sincerity and alacrity as God requires.

5. To make our works meritorious, there must be a Paritie, there must be
some proportion and equality between that Good we do, and the reward we
receive for it: Now what Parity, what Proportion between our works which are
but temporal and finite, and the reward which is eternal and infinite: The
Natural Philosopher, and any one that is not a mere natural, will tell us
that Finiti ad Infinitum nulla est proportio, there is no proportion between
that which is finite and that which is infinite. Therefore our choicest fruits,
our best works being defective in every one of these five particulars which
ought necessarily to concur for the making of them meritorious, it is strange
there should live in this great light of the Gospel any that dare attempt such
a work of darkness as to stamp man's works with the Character of Merit.
Sure I am in the Word of God we cannot so much as find the Word Merit Indeed
God does very frequently in the Sacred Scripture promise a reward to the godly,
and hence they fondly collect that the godly do merit by the holiness of
their lives: as if between reward and merit there were a mutual relation, that
no reward is given but upon a presupposed merit. For answer whereunto, I may
tell them, as our Savior the Sadduces, That they err not knowing the
Scriptures: for as the Learned Matthew. 22. 19.
have observed, that which by Saint Matthew is termed (...) a Reward, is Math. 5
46. Luc 6 32.
by Saint Luke termed (...), Grace, favor or thanks; to signify unto us,
that when God rewards the righteousness of men, the reward is not to be
ascribed to any worth or dignity in the Creature, but wholly to the benignity
of the Creator: not to any desert or merit in Man, but unto the mere grace and
mercy of his Maker. For as Saint Paul 2 Ephesians. 8. 9. a place worth the 2 Ephesians.
8. 9.
noting, By Grace we are saved through Faith, and that not of our selves; it is
the gift of God: not of works, lest any man should boast himself. The Caese
being so clear, we may be bold to affirm that most blasphemous is the
practice of the Papists who both in Pulpit and Press so stiffely contend to
enthronize the imperfect, impure works of sinful man in the Chair of
Merit, in which nothing by right but the holy and perfect obedience of the
Son of God can sit. My beloved, I dare confidently affirm it for truth, and
you may boldly take it upon that term, that no Mortal by building him up a
Babel of his merits can ever reach Heaven: Heaven being a transcendent, too
high for the short reach of humane merit. The fairest face has some Mole or
Freckle: the soundest Pomegranate, some rotten Kernel: Corruption is a great
part of the best: yea the best even from their conception are wholly overrun
with corruption, from which they can never be thoroughly purged till the soul
and the body by death be parted and put asunder: by reason whereof even our
best actions are stained, our best fruits we bring forth are foulely
blemished, and will not endure the Just eye of heaven to behold them as they are
in themselves: the serious consideration of this made the Prophet David thus
pray unto God: Enter not into judgment with thy servant, for Psalm. 143 2.
no flesh is righteous in thy sight: Therefore my beloved, instead of standing
like Proud Pharisees upon the tiptoes of of our own goodness, let us with the
Penitent Publican truly humble our selves before the throne of his Sacred
Majesty for our manifold transgressions which bring us under the curse of the
Law: for the manifold sinful imperfections and blemishes even in the best
fruits that ever we brought forth, for which we stand guilty before him: Let
us reject the menstruous and rotten rags of our own righteousness, wholly
Esa. 64. 6.
relying upon the loving mercies of our heavenly Father, which he has set
forth unto us in his Son Jesus Christ, who himself alone by his most perfect
and all-sufficient obedience has merited our redemption from the wrath to
come, and purchased for us a Kingdom that cannot be moved. This has he done
for Heb. 12. 28.
us: but how? under condition of our new obedience; of putting off the old
Man, and putting on the new: of forsaking the crooked paths of Sin, and
following the straight way of Righteousness: So that being redeemed and bought
with the price of the Lamb, we must not think we may live according to the
lusts of our own hearts and whatsoever seems good in our own eyes, for this
is nothng else but a trampling of the blood of Christ under our feet, a turning
of the grace of God into wantonness, the only way to make our selves
incapable of that inestimable bounty of our blessed Redeemer: No, no; such as
are Justified by the blood of Christ, and have any saving portion in his bitter
death and passion, are also sanctified by his blessed Spirit unto all holy
obedience, to bring forth good fruit, the fruit of good living: This is the
true Character and cognizance of such as are of the household of Faith: For as
the tree is known by the fruit: so is Faith made manifest James 2. 18.
by the works of righteousness. The bringing forth of good fruit is via
Regia, the Kings, yea every Christians highway wherein he must walk, if he
make any account to attain unto that Spiritual Caanaan, to be a free Denizon
of the holy Jerusalem, that city above, the mother of the elect. For as among
the Antique Romans, the two Temples of Virtue and Honor were so contrived,
that none could have access unto the latter, unless he did take the former
in his way: So it is with us, God in his eternal decree has set down this
resolution, which like the Laws of the Medes and Persians will admit of no
alteration, that none shall obtain the life of Glory, but such as live in the
state of Grace: The penny is paid only to such as labor in Gods Matthew. ^0. 2.
vineyard. The Crown of righteousness is laid up only for those that fight a
good fight, and finish up the course of their lives 2. Tim. ^. 6, 7.
in the faith of Jesus Christ. Hence that of the Prophet David, Eschew evil
and Psalm. ^^ 27.
do good, and live for ever. To draw up all in a word, though we can never be
saved for bringing forth good fruit, yet we can never be saved without it, such
is the necessity thereof: Sola fides justificat, sed non solitaria. It is a
common, a known position, Only faith does justify us, but not faith alone:
only faith does justify, as the Instrument by which we apprehend and lay hold
on the Obedience of Christ, the only meritorious cause of our salvation; but
not faith alone, that is, a barren, a dead faith, a faith without fruits; for
that is no saving, no justifying faith: and therefore every tree must bring
forth Haeretici bodiecons^^^a carnis dederunt, and doctrinam Ba ^am tenuerunt,
-- nec ipsas Dei leges aut mada^^ esse ad salutem necessaria, sola fide omnes
sal^ari. -- Vt via^ spi^ituale dest^u^rent, omnem de peccatis and virtutibus
saen^m d^ct^n^m venena^s suis dogenatibus infeceru^t -- ^egando vllam bon^r^^
op^rum veram iu^li^am, aut ad salutem necessariam, and consequenter omnia in
Sola si^e collocando. Stapl. promptuar. Mot. in Domi^^. 7. Pentecostes.
good fruit.

This is the Doctrine we Preach and Press. See then by the way, the impudent
malignitie of our broad-mouth'd adversaries, the brats of Romish Babylon, in
traducing and branding our Protestant Ministers for Solifidian Preachers, such
as in their Sermons are al for faith, and nothing for fruits. Thus like cursed
Vipers they vent out the venom of their malice upon us, of purpose to bring our
persons and doctrine into contempt with their hood-winkt Proselites, and all
because we will not with them beyond truth, add to the worth of good works,
and detract from the sole efficiencie of Christ his obedience. Maugre their
virulent malice, this is our abundant comfort, that besides the testimony of
our own clear consciences, which are unto us as many Conscientia miss testes.
millions of witnesses: those many learned and religious Treatises of our
Churchmen, which have undergone the Press, and are at this present extant:
that little world of Christian people by our ministry fed to their everlasting
happiness, those many holy and blessed Angels always present at our solemn
sacred Assemblies: and God himself, who is all in all, and above all, will
subscribe to our white Innocence, and their black Impudence.

Oh my beloved, I would to God all of us, both Priests and people, could as
generally wipe away this their foul and false aspersion, by bringing forth of
good fruit, as by our general preaching and professing the necessity thereof.
But alas, the never too much to be lamented misery, whilst out of our zeaie to
Gods glory, we labor to maintain the sacred prerogative of Christ his
obedience, and labor to pull down those proud pillars of merit which our
Adversaries of their own heads have erected to the honor of man's worthless
works, and the dishonor of God, we carelessly neglect, and scarce so much as
once think upon that which is Gods chiefest glory, and the life of our
Christian profession, bringing forth good fruit.

I remember I have read this censure of the Roman State, Omnium bonorum
principum imagines in vno posse exculpiannulo, that the pourtratures of their
good Princes might be cut out within the compass of a little ring. Oh my
beloved, is it not as justly to be feared, that the like may be as truly
affirmed of us? So small is the number of those in this our Sardis, which have
given up their Revel. 3. 4.
names unto Christ, (if we may take the liberty to censure the tree by the
fruit) that should the Lord send forth a Jeremy Ierem 5. 1.
to make inquisition for a man, that is, a good man, one that like Job truly
fears Job 1.
God, and is fruitful in all holiness, he would return, if not with a non,
yet with a vix est invent us, scarce is such a creature found. Good men being
like little veins of gold in great and mighty mountains of ground; or like
the gleaning Esaias 7.
of the ears of corn after the harvest is past, or the gathering of grapes
the vintage being ended: they lie but scattering and very thin, one in a
city, two Ierem. 3. 14.
in a tribe, whereas Romish Idolaters, counterfeit Professors, and impudent
transgressors, such as are not ashamed to glory in ungodliness, and prostitute
their deeds of darkness unto public notice, are the greatest part, yea, very
near the whole number of such as are called Christians.

Not to speak of that Antichristian Spawne and Popish fry, though not one of
the least and lightest burdens under which, as the labor of her womb this our
Land groaneth. Proceed we unto the second sort; and who is there so blind or
deaf that does not behold or hear, how plentifully this our Sion is
furnished, yea rather how lamentably be pestered with a numerous brood of Apish
professors, and Mocke-Christians, as I may term them, such as in outward
appearance might seem deservedly to b^^^e^stred in the roll, and ranked in the
number of true Nathaneels, but are John 1. 47.
indeed as rank false and perfidious, as Ioab, or Judas They would seem by
the An outside singularly commendable if th^^ ^side (...) an^ v^^table.
preciseness of their habit, and demureness of behavior, to be truly
mortified to the world. To give them their due, which our English Proverb will
not deny the Devil himself: they will reprove sin, refrain from swearing,
celebrate the Saboth, yea many hours of the week days in hearing of the
Word, laboring if they like the Preacher to digest it in their memories by
penning and mutual conference: in a word (oh the sanctity of the Devil) they
will pretend a great deal of fair and religious dealing, seem to be Gods
white children: but (oh the Deuillishnes of these Saints) does it not plainly
appear, that they are little better then Devils transformed into 2. Cor. 11.
14.
Angels of light? fell and cruel Wolves covered and clothed in Sheep skins,
making Religion to serve but for a Stalking horse, wearing Christ's Livery for
their own conueniency, that so they may the more safely and vnsuspectedly
compass their secret vnsacred ends? has not Time the mother of Truth
revealed this for a truth, that there are none more unjust in their dealings,
none more covetous, deceitful, full of pride, envy, hatred, malice, and all
uncharitableness then they, though they take upon them a more strict
profession of Christ then ordinary?

In a word, as the Trojans were never more damnified, th^n when Aeneas did put
on harness like unto theirs, breaking into the midst of their troops like a
member of their army: So the true Nathaneels of our Israel, yea godliness it
self never received more disgraceful affronts, then have bin and are
continually most unhappily occasioned by the counterfeit piety of these so
common hypocritical professors. As Judas betrayed Matthew. 26. 49.
Christ into the hands of his enemies; so these have and do continually betray
the holy calling of Christianity, and the sincere Professors thereof unto the
sharper tongues of lewd-liuing Libertines, and ungodly Atheistes; yea, of many
framed of a more sober, honest and tractable temper, to be scourged and lashed
with terms of disgrace: for let a man out of a holy reverence unto the sacred
Majesty of God, make conscience of an Oath: let him out of a sincere heart be
careful to sanctify the Sabbath of the Lord in all holy and religious
exercises: let him vow himself to all sobriety and temperance, and be zealous
for the Lord of Hosts in reproouing ungodliness. In a word, let him heartily
desire, and accordingly truly endeavor to keep a good conscience in all
things both toward Acts 24. 16.
God and man, not partaking in the sinful courses of these wicked times, but
laboring so far forth as in him lies, according to that measure of grace he
has received, to live within the limits and compass of an holy profession, it
is reputed but preciseness, he is ordinarily derided under the name of a
Catharist or Puritan, and of the most hated and detested as much, if not more,
then a treacherous bloody Papist, or damnable Atheist. Thus the seeming-Saints
of our age, by their ouer-hasty running after Christ for sinister respects,
have cast the true Nathaneels of our Israel behind hand in their just credit
and estimation: John 1. 47.
the world measuring the feet of all professors by the Last of these false
professors.

And not only does counterfeit piety, Hypocrisy thus flourish to the great
contempt and reproach of sincere professors: but in the third place we may
observe, that all ungodliness has advanced it self and taken heart. Iniquity
has put on a brow of brass, and Impiety like a shameless strumpet, attended
by Impudency, has taken up her standing in every street, and corner of Court,
City, and Country: Ambition, base flattery, perfidie, drunkenness,
covetousness, prodigality, pride, lechery, luxury, injustice, theft, murder,
adultery, fearful swearing, and perjury, contempt of the Manna and Ministers
of Gods holy Word; and what seldom heard-of crimes in former ages, are not the
familiar minions and darlings of these Times! It is a tedious task, and would
prove but an irksome discourse to trouble your ears with a particular
enumeration of all the sins that roost, yea reign in this Land: for it may
be truly said of it, as the Poet in his Epigramme unto Caesar concerning his
Theater:

Quic quid fama canit, donat arena tibi Martial.
There is almost no sin so peculiar to any foreign Country, which is not
presented to the life upon the stage of this Land: and there is almost no
person of what place or fashion soever that does not act his part in them more
or less. Thus ungodliness is become an Epidemicall disease: like a Contagious
leprosy it has infected and run over the whole Body of this Land; and no
part more then this City: in so much that it may truly be said of us as the
Prophet of the Jews, We are a sinful Esa. 1. 4. 5. 6.
Nation, a people laden with iniquity: The whole head is sick, the whole
heart is heavy, from the sole of the foot to the crown of the head there is
nothing whole therein but wounds, and swellings, and sores full of corruption.
And which does consummate our iniquity, though we are so desperately sick of
sin that we lie even at the door of death, and there be scarce so much as
a thresh-hold between us and eternal destruction; yet who is there that with
patience will suffer the Preacher, Gods Deputy-Physician for the good of his
soul, so much as to lay his finger upon those his cankred sores of sin, which
suffered to run on their course, will vncurably corrupt, and irrecouerably cast
away the whole man both body and soul. Sin, especially that which ordinarily
thrusts it self into the service of any calling, and like the silver Shrines
of Diana, brings in Acts 19. 24.
any emolument, or reuenew, must have a Protection, must not be touched. The
corrupt courses of those which appertain to Courts of Justice, the
sacrilegious practice of Church-robbers, fraudulent and unconscionable dealing
in private commerce; these and the rest of your bosom and best beloved sins
prove but vnplausible, but harsh Themes for a Preachers inuectiue. Sure I am,
we may speak it feelingly, we are sensible of no less: for deal we
ingeniously and faithfully in reproving the corruptions of the time? do we lay
open your beloved sins unto the life? our labors are entertained with
laughter, and our fidelity requited with a world of neglect and injury. Are not
these the fruits that call this our land their mother soil? I would to God
they did not: I dare presume ye will all pass your words that I have
delivered nothing but truth: and I may safely add, nothing to that which might
have been delivered for truth: for like those whom Moses sent to spy out the
land of Canaan, I have cut down but Numb. 13. 23.
a Branch, with a Cluster of the Grapes that grow in this our Eschol, and have
brought with me but a Sample of that cursed fruit this land in great plenty
affords. O that we who have so liberally participated of the superabundant
love and bounty of God, should thus above measure abound in iniquity. The time
was (O that we had the grace seriously to consider it) the time was, when we
were without Christ, and were aliens Ephe. 2. 12, 13
from the Commonwealth of Israel, and were Strangers from the Covenants of
Promise, and had no hope, and were without God in the world: but now, through
the Mercy of the Almighty, we who were once a far off, are made near by
the Blood of Christ, that so we might be no more strangers and Forraigners, but
Citizens with the Saints, and of the Householde of God. Again, whereas other
Nations do ride Iam tua resagitur paries cum proximus ardet.
even up unto their horsebridles in blood, have their Corne-fieldes
depopulated, their Towns unpeopled, their nearest kindred, and dearest
acquaintance most cruelly butchered, and their whole country exposed to the
injury of Arms. We through the great Goodness of God, sit every man under
his own Vine in peace: The Lord of his mercy continue it long amongst us:
whereas other Nations suffer the famine of the Word, or at least have it served
out unto them mingled with the Cockle and Darnell of Popish errors and
traditions: We, God be thanked, have the Word most plentifully and purely
preached among us; yea such plenty of the word we enjoy, that like the
Israelites, we are crop sick, and loath that heavenly Manna, which our
forefathers in the time of Popery and persecution so much longed after. I pray
God this bring not a scarcity of spiritual Bread amongst us. Whereas others
have been st^aitned for the ordinary sustenance of nature, and wasted with
misery, hanging up their harps upon the trees, and translating the sorrows of
their souls into mournful ditties, and so ending their miserable lives: Our
Garners on the Psalm. 144. 13, 14.
contrary, have been full and plenteous with all manner of store: Our sheep
have brought forth thousands, and ten thousands in our streets: our oxen have
been strong to labor, we have no leading into captivity, no complaining in
our streets. In a word, no Nation under the Sun can prescribe and plead a
greater portion of the immense Treasury of Gods mercy and favors, then ours:
the least of all which should for ever bind every one by way of thankfulness
to consecrate himself both soul and body unto the service of his so benign
and bountiful a God, in all holy obedience, and newness of life, to bring
forth good fruits, the fruits of holiness and sanctification: But alas, we are
so far from bringing forth this good fruit, that on the contrary, we are
barren in all goodness, and only fruitful in the damnable works of
darkness, sucking in sin, as fishes do water; like swift Dromedaries,
running with full speed into all ungodliness, Prou. 10. ^3.
making it a pastime to do wickedly: neue^ so much as once dreaming of that
dreadful day of account, that great and terrible Assizes of the Lord, wherein
he will execute his wrath and vengeance upon the children of disobedience. O
my beloved, let us take heed we be not deceived. This is the will of God,
says the Apostle, even your sanctification: 1 These. 4. 3.
now the will and pleasure of God is not barely propounded unto man as a thing
arbitrary, or of no great consequence, whether performed or not: for as with
bountiful promises, so with fearful penalties, it is in sacred Scripture
frequently pressed, the Lord as he has a Gerizim, Deuteronomy. 11. 29.
for blessing, so he has an Eball for cursing. As he will most graciously and
liberally recompense all such as work righteousness, with an immarcessible
crown of glory: so he will most severely and terribly reward all workers of
iniquity with an unmerciful weight of misery. They which like good trees bring
forth good fruit in due season, their leaf shall not wither, says the
Psalmist, they shall Psalm. 2.
flourish for ever: But they which, do not bring forth good fruit, shall be
like the chafe which the wind scatters away from the face of the earth, they
shall perish for ever: so says the Baptist here in my text, Every tree not
bringing forth good fruit, is hewn down, and cast into the fire, which is
the third general Part obserueable in this sacred Writ, The third general
part.
the penalty attending delinquents, such as perform not what God in this Writ
requires.

The Penalty is here expressed, 1. as God premonisheth before he punishes.
intended. Now is the Axe laid unto the root of the trees, 2. As inflicted,
Every tree not bringing forth good fruit, is hewn down, and cast into the
fire. A Merciful Method, and well beseeming the God of Method, who is full of
mercy: though our sins be so numerous and heinous, that like unto that of
Cains, they do even call and cry unto Genes. 4. 10.
God for present vengeance: though our iniquities be so enormous, and grown to
so great a height, that they reach up unto Heaven, and even pull God out of his
Mercy-Seate, to enter into Judgment with us, to empty out the full Vialls of
his wrath upon us to our present fearful confusion: yet, Oh the goodness of
God, he deals not with us sinful miscreants according to our deserts, and
as many a merciless Creditor with his Debtor, who covertly without the least
noise procures an Execution against him, and serves it upon him, happily to
his irrecouerable undoing, not so much as once fore-acquainting him with his
Resolution, that so he might in time think upon some honest course for
prevention.

No, my beloved, though man's ways are full of cruelty, yet Gods ways are full
of mercy: He would have all the world to know, that he is not delighted in the
death of a sinner, but had rather he Ezekiel 13. 23.
should turn from his wickedness, and bring forth fruit worthy of repentance,
and so live for ever: and therefore, as Jonathan shot three arrows to
forewarne David of Saul's displeasure, that he 1. Sam. 20.
might the better provide for his saftie: so almighty God first in mercy
proclaims his wrath and indignation, before in Justice he proceed to
Execution. First, he is pleased to foretell us that for our transgressions, for
our not bringing forth good fruit he intends a severe penalty against us,
before such time as he suffer it to be inflicted upon us: that Praemoniti.
Praemuniti.
so we being forewarned of that fearful evil which from God is like to befall
us for our falling away from God, we might in time make our peace with him, and
so prevent the execution of his wrath. For the more effectual performance
whereof, that we may the more carefully and speedily address our selves,
proceed we according to our propounded method, to take some punctual notice of
the fearfulness of his fury displaied in the particulars of the penalty. Now
is the Axe laid unto the root of the trees: Every tree therefore not bringing
forth good fruit, is hewn down and cast into the fire.

Each word (as you have heard) bears a part and every part does most
evidently demonstrate the Greatness of Gods wrath and indignation against us,
and is of power to imprint Characters of terror in our hearts, were they as
hard as rocks of Adamant.

To take up the words as they lie in their order.

First, behold the Lord of Hosts is already up in arms, and his wrath, like
Iehu the Son of Nimshi after Iehoram marches most furiously after us: yea 2
King. 9. 10.
to our greater terror it has already wrought it self within distance; for
Now, even Now is the axe laid unto the root of the trees. Secondly, consider we
the instrument apprehended for the execution of his wrath, it is not Culter
Sarmentarius, a pruning knife, but Securis Musculus in locum.
excisionis, a ruining Axe. Thirdly, this ruining Axe is not vibrata,
brandished Gorthan in locum.
or shaken over the trees, but posita, it is put, laid close to the trees.
Fourthly, this ruining Axe is not laid ad truncum aut ramos, to the body or
boughs of Bullinger.
the trees, but ad radicem, to the fountain of life, the root, which once hurt
or cut, de tota arbore actum est, the whole tree does perish, and is past all
hope of shooting forth again. Such is the penalty here intended, and is
pronounced, as inflicted. Every tree not bringing forth good fruit, is hewn
down, and to make it more fearful, is cast into the fire.

There was a custom among the ancient Romans that their Consuls had as
Ensigns of their authority bundles of rods, and an Axe carried before them:
(...) the (...) of Justice to cut them off in case they proved incorrigible,
and would not be reformed with any favorable correction. In like manner
Almighty God has his Pruning knife, and his Axe: Having planted his Ground
with Trees, and not finding them fruitful according to his expectation, like
an expert and careful Gardener with his pruning knife he shreddeth and pareth
off the luxuriant branches, and uses all such means for their fructification,
as in his heavenly wisdom he apprehends most prevalent and effectual. Thus
for many a year with Quamdiu Ipes est remedii, stercoratione aut putatione
subuenitur arborum vitiis: caeterum vltimae desperatio (...) indicium est
quoties Secu^is adn^ouetur radi i. Bull.
much patience expecting their improuement, at length the season of fructifying
being come, wherein he resolved to put a period to his patient expectation, he
walks toward his Plantation with an Axe in his hand, resolved if after his
so great care and cost he find any Trees that do not bring forth good fruit,
to cut them up by the roots and cast them by for the Fire.

In a word or two, to add a little more light unto the darkness of the
letter. This Axe laid unto the root of the Trees does signify nothing else but
the vengeance of God which hangs over our heads ready to fall suddenly Nesp
vero n^^u^ est securim and glad^^m in Scripturis son^ pro grau^ dei vindicta.
Idem ibid.
upon us to our fearful confusion. My beloved, does not the cloudy and heavy
countenance of these Times promise and presage as much? Certainly take we a
true Inuentory of our general Apostacy from all godliness and piety, we
cannot look for less. I but the Lord is merciful and Gracious, slow to anger
and abundant in Goodness and Exodus 34. 6.
truth, reserving mercy for thousands. True my beloved, and have we found him
less? Do not all those gentle and more favorable courses he has taken for
reclaiming us from our sinful courses speak as much? May not the Lord
justly expostulate and reason the case with us, as he did with his beloved
Vineyard. Esai 5.
He has Planted us in a most pleasant and fruitful soil: he has encircled
and hedged us round about with his loving mercies: and what could he have added
more unto that which he has already done? How often, how long has he labored
for our conversion by the preaching of his Word: Sermon upon Sermon, with
extraordinary earnestnes and importunity knocking at the doors of our hearts,
that hearing him we might open unto him, and he enter in unto us: He I say, who
only is able to Psalm. 51. 10.
create in us clean hearts, and make us fruitful in all holiness. And to
make his Word the more powerful for our conversion, how often has he actuated
it by many temporal afflictions, which he has inflicted upon us: as
inundations of waters, dearth of corn, loss of our fortunes, loss of our
faithful friends, and such as had deepest interest in our affections:
sometimes scourging us with the refractarinesse and disobedience of those which
through natural or civil reference are nearest and dearest unto us: sometimes
making these houses of clay (our mortal bodies) Hospitals for pestilentiall
and painful diseases: sometimes suff^ring the high-priz'd treasure of our
reputation to be rifled by wretched Shimeyes. But alas, what has all this
pruning prevailed? What good work have these and the like afflictions wrought
upon us! Happily for the present they have a little humbled us, and wrung out
of us a repentant tear, with a protestation of new obedience, of bringing
forth better fruit for the time to come then formerly, we had done: but this
repentance of ours has been as the Prophet speaks; but as a Morning cloud,
Hos 6. 4.
and as the morning dew it has gone away; like Dogs we have quickly
returned to 2 Pet 2. 22.
our own vomit, and instead of bringing forth Vuas, grapes, we have brought
Esaias 5. 4.
forth Labrucas, wild grapes: our grapes are grapes of gall, our clusters be
bitter, our wine is poison of dragons, and the cruel Deuteronomy. 32. 32, 33.
gall of Aspes. My beloved, will God, think we, suffer himself to be thus
deluded from time to time? Are we sure he will always look upon us with a
favorable aspect, and never shut up his loving kindness in displeasure? O let
us beware of carnal security: it is as dangerous and fearful an evil, as
the soul imbarqued in the body can meet with, whilst sailing in the Sea of
this world. Certainly, if his so many gentle and merciful visitations will not
reclaim us from our dissolute courses, but we will still frequent our old
sinful haunts, drawing iniquity with cartropes, and sin with ^he cords of
vanity, he will lay aside all lenity, and deal with us more roughly ^^sa
patientia (...)or.
and severely. It is not a pruning-knife, some favorable affliction, some
fatherly correction shall serve the turn: for (behold) he has put an axe
into the hand of the destroying Angel, not like Abimelech, to cut down some
boughs Judge. 43.
from the trees: no, he has given him a straight charge, a strict commission,
if he find any tree, any man that brings not forth good fruit, to hew him
down even at the very root: that is, by death to root him out of the land of
the living, which is the first particular penalty, the Excision. Every tree
not bringing forth The first penalty an Excision.
good fruit, (...), is hewn down.

Do but consider, I beseech you the fearfulness of this penalty. True.

-- Aequa lege necessitas, H^^ Carm. lib. 3 Ode 1.

Sortitur insigneis and imos:
Omne capax mouet vrna nomen.
What man lives and shall not see death? Psalm. 89. 47. Hebr. 9. 27.
There is a Statute for it, Statutum est omnibus semel mori. It is appointed
unto all men once to die. Death is Gods Sergeant, ^ui^^s^i conti^it (...)
^estat. S^^. Ep. 1^0.
unto whose arrest the whole suruiuing race of Adam is subject, as well the
godly as the ungodly: and therefore it is not here said, that he which brings
not forth good fruit, shall dye; but shall be hewn down; to signify the
fearfulness of that death which shall befall him. The godly man, he that
brings forth good fruit, shall die: but he is happy in his end: for that he
departs this life in the sweet peace of conscience, which he has obtained
through faith in Christ's blood, whereby he is reconciled unto God, and sealed up
unto the day of redemption: so that the misery of death is unto him the death
of all misery, and his last end the beginning, Dies isle quem tanquam extremum
reformidas aeterninatalis est. Sen. Ep. 1^2.
the birth day of eternity. And therefore laetus lethu^ excipit, come Death
when it will come, it is truly and heartily welcome, and finds him ready and
willing with much unfeigned joy to entertain the stroke which shall separat his
soul and body, that so being freed from the prison of his body, he may enter
into his masters joy, and be Matthew. 2^. 21.
crowned with glory and happiness in the highest heavens. In regard whereof,
when Jusius dum per m^ntem evita tollitur, non exciditur, sed ia vberius solum
transfertur. Fran. Luc. Br^giens in locum
by Death he is taken out of this life, he cannot be said to be hewn down, but
rather transplanted into a more fruitful soil. On the other side, the ungodly
man, that brings not forth good fruit, but is barren in all goodness, and
only fruitful in the damnable works of darkness, he shall die, but a death far
different from that of the righteous: for being besotted with the pleasures of
sin, and having his affections fast glewed to the things of this world, when
Death arresteth his Body, his Soul will depart out of it like sawdust grated
out of the belly of an hard Oak, with much labor and striving: so unwilling
and loath it will be to break up house, and bid farewell unto the world. Yea,
for as much as he never endeavored to keep a good Conscience toward God and
man, therefore his guilty Conscience, like the evil Spirit which vexed Saul,
shall most 1 Samuel 16. 14.
fearfully wrack and torture him, and a wounded spirit who can bear? says
the Prou. 18. 14.
Prouerbialist: and thus in the anguish and bitterness of his Soul he shall be
broken Job 24. 20.
like a tree: the Axe of Death shall cleave and rent his soul and body asunder
with all violence and terror, he shall be hewn down, says my Text.

But is this all? shall this Tree thus felled, there lie and rest and rot where
it falls? I mean, shall his soul and body thus parted, so perish, as that
he shall cease ever to have a being any more, and consequently a feeling of any
further misery? Certainly, though sinful man be likevnto the beasts that
perish, yet he does not perish like the beasts, whose bodies are turned into
ashes, and their spirits vanish as soft air, and are no more. No, his soul is
an immortal substance, and his body, though in the eye of a carnal Sadducee,
it seems so to perish, as that it shall never have a being any more; yet it
shall at the last day by the power of God be restored to its just proportion:
for after Death there must come a Judgment particular of the Soul, when it
departs from the body; general, of Soul and body at the general
resurrection. So that this fearful hewing down is but as the Prologue to a
more tragical and fearful Scene: it is but (...), the beginning of sorrows,
the forerunner of more fearful torments. For after the axe of Death has with
all violence, cleft and rent his Soul and Body in sunder, after that (...),
he is thus hewn down, it follows in the next place, (...), he is cast
into the fire, he is thrown headlong into the flames of Hell.

And this second penalty, his exastion, is The second p^naltie, an Exustion.
indeed principally that which causes his dissolution to be so comfortles and
full of terror. For when the hand of God lies heavy upon him to hew him down
by death, it is not the separation of his soul and body that does so much
trouble him, nor the leaving his beloved world that does so much afflict him,
no, nor the cruel gnawings of his guilty conscience that do so wrack and
torture him, otherwise then joined with the present apprehension of being cast
into this fire, which he then foreseeth will most certainly befall him after his
dissolution. And no marvel, if the apprehension thereof strike such ^ dread
and terror into his departing Ethic. 1 ^9.
soul: for what Aristotle that heathen oracle of learning said of the natural
death of the Body, as one who saw no farther then the twilight of Nature would
give him lean, may more truly be auerred of this second penalty, that it is
(...), the most terrible of terribles. As Zeuxis that excellent painter
desiring to draw Junocs picture exactly, viewed all the Agrigentine Virgins with
a curious eye, picked out sieve of the choycest Pieces Nature did afford amongst
them, out of which, for the composition of her picture, he abstracted and
expressed with his pencill what he apprehended more accurate and excellent,
either for proportion or beauty: So the liueliest resemblance can be framed of
this fearful penalty, is by presenting unto our fantasy all the torments that
ever seized upon the sons of Adam in this valley of misery; and out of them to
make choice of such as are most exquisite, acrimonious, and intolerable, and
out of these, if it were possible to extract a Quintessence, and to inflict
this quintessence of torment upon one man: and yet when we have done all this,
this all is as nothing: we shall have framed but a dull, a weak Idea of this
penalty. For the Eye has not seen, the Ear heard, nor has it entered into the
Heart of Man, as what joys God has prepared 1 Cor. ^. 9.
for those that love him, so what sorrows he has laid up for those that leave
him. And therefore as the Painter presenting the sorrow of the father of
Iphigenia, when she was to be sacrificed, drew him with his face covered, as
confessing his Art insufficient to express in his visage a grief of that
degree: so being at this time, according to my propounded Method, to present so
terrible and fearful a penalty, as to be cast into hell fire, my best course,
I confess, were to cast over it the veil of silence, as being best co^scious
of my own insufficiency, for a task of such transcende^cy. Yet unwilling my
particular weakness should frustrate the general expectation of so Honorable
an Audience: And fearing my silence in a point of such importance may occasion
some to slight their own ruin and neglect their speedy reformation: For such
is naturally our slavish disposition that (notwithstanding all the gracious and
glorious promises of the Gospel) unless the terrors of the Law be punctually
propounded unto the understanding, and so reflect and beat upon the
Conscience, we walk without either fear or wit in the ways of vngod^inesse,
and as if we had taken a liberal Dosis of Opium, are cast into a Spiritual
Lethargy, and fall into Hell before we so much as dream of Damnation.
Therefore a word or two more particularly for the description of the
fearfulness of this particular penalty: For I intend not, though the case
might justly require it, to entertain you with a particular discourse of the
several punishments, wherein all the powers and parts of each damned Wretch to
his greater terror shall have their share; as those Positive of intolerable
cold, the Worm that never dies, palpable darkness, the horrid aspect of the
Devils, and infinite more, the least of all which is most horrible, too heavy
for Nature to Pector^ g^^eroso non tam molestu^ estrerum augugustia premi, quam
abundantia and gloria priuari. Stapl. promp. mor. Mali non tantu^ dolebunt de
ipso tormento, quam quod repellentur a tali consortio. Ludolph. Si nulla
externa poena torqueret haec sola sufficer^t. Mestreth ex Chrylost.
sustain in her greatest strength. Neither will I speak of the perpetual
privation of the blessed vision of a most glorious God, and happy society of
the holy Angels and glorified Saints: a penalty by all Divines both antique
and neotericke determined to be more terrible and fearful, then all the
Positive miseries Hell, yea ten thousand Hells can afford. The large and
learned labors of Others concerning these particulars shall at this time save
me a labor. I would gladly draw toward a conclusion, and therefore must
desire so much favor as that I may confine my self unto this in my Text, as
being most frequent in the Scripture, and of a Positive torment the most
fearful and intolerable. Ex vngue Leonem. I shall in it give you, as it were
the length of Hercules foot, and so leave you to guess at the full pourtaiture
of his whole body. The Tree which brings not forth good fruit shall be hewn
down and cast into the fire.

There are three things that do more Hell fire most fearful for three causes.
punctually discover unto us the fearfulness of this Penalty.

The first is the Extremity of it. Many are the torments which cruel Multa
sunt ab hominibus excogitata supplic^^, sed nullum acu^us, nullum vchementius,
nullum acrius igut. Bella^ de gem Columb. lib. 2. cap. 2.
Tyrants the Devils Engineers have framed in the forge of their hellish
invention to make poor Nature suffer: But of all; there is none more acute,
none more vehement, none more acrimonious then that which is effected by Fire;
and yet for extremity of heat, so infinite are the degrees whereby this Hell
fire surpasses our Hea^th fire, that the most expert Mathematician is unable
to take their true distance. Nebuchadnezzars Furnace, though heated^ seven
times more then ordinary, yet it compared with the extreme heat and fervor of
this Fire is but as the Chillwarmth of the Sun in an extreme cold Winters
day, or as the mere picture of Fire unto the Fire which is Pictured: this Fire
burns in such extremity, that in it the least moment of Pain will swallow
up whole Ages of forepast pleasures.

Secondly, the fearfulness of this Penalty Universality of it: this
terrible Fire burns not a singer only, or a hand, or a foot, but the Math.
10. 28.
whole body, yea, the whole man both body and soul. For as both like Simeon
and Leui have been brethten in the evil of Sin: So both shall be brethren
in the evil of suffering, both shall be tormented in this Flame, be cast into
this Fire.

Thirdly, the fearefulnes of this Penalty Perpetuity of it. Though the whole
man be extremely and terribly tortured, yet it were some comfort if this
acrimonious Penalty might have either some end or some ease. In Corporal
griefs it is an experimental Maxim, and ministers some comfort unto the sick
Patient, a Disease the sharper N^mo potest ^alde d^lere and di^ Seneca ^p 78.
Praceps mo^bus alterum facie^, aut exu^gu^tu^ aut exting^et. Ibid.

Do'or qu^ ineitation, to cuius in aliena^ione fluporemque conuerlitu^ hoc
itaque solatum est vasti do^oris quod necesse est desinas illum sentire si
nimis sensiris. Senec. Ibid.


the shorter: the more violent, the less permanent. It is impossible (says
Seneca) for a man to be in great pain and a great while in pain: for either
it will suddenly leave Him, or He suddenly leave it. And if neither his Disease
be suddenly taken from him, nor he from his desease; yet certainly his Pain
cannot long continue in extremity, but will at length be translated into a
stupiditie; it will produce a Stupefaction and numnesse in the parts it
affects: and so the Party ouersensibly affected cease to be sensible of
his grief.

Again a violent and virulent Disease though it be a long time ere a man can
wholly shake it off and bid it farewell, sometime not till his last of time,
(Diseases Silongus est, habet intercapedinem, dat refectiom locu^^ multum
temporis donat, necesse est vt exurgat and desimat. Jdem ibidem.
commonly coming on Horseback, but going away on foot) yet it is no small
comfort unto the sick Patient that it comes but by fitts: it does not keep a
continual Term in his body but has sometimes its recesses and Vacations: it
does not always sit in commission; sometimes it has an intermission, and
leaves Man to himself to recollect his scattered spirits, and repair the
ruined and crasie walls of his earthly Tabernacle, whereby he is the better
enabled to hold out against the furious assaults thereof.

Besides, there are diverse artificial Confections which the skillful in
Physic are able to prescribe and prepare, if not for the extirpation of his
disease, yet at least for the remission and mitigation of his Pain: there are
lenitiues to assuage and quallifie the raging madness thereof. Howsoever at
length that Catholic Esculapius Doctor Death will one day visit the perplexed
Patient, and give him a diet drink that will undoubtedly cure him of all his
griefs. Thus, I say, though a man be infested with a disease that does
extremely plague and torture him, yet he has these comfortable hopes and
helps to sustain him in it: either He and his Disease will suddenly take
their last farewell one of an other; or if it continue any time with him, it
will in process of time, through extremity of pain, produce a stupefaction, or
admit of some friendly intermission, or at least of some gentle remission, to
make it the more supportable: howsoever, the Patient and his pain must one day
part, and then there is an end of all his sorrows. But alas, it is not so
here, he that is cast into this fire, is not capable of the least of all these
comforts: for the extremity of his pain is perpetual, his torments are both
endless and easeles.

It was indeed the opinion of Origin August. lib, 21. de Ciuitate Dei, Cap 17.
and his Disciples, that all the damned, yea, even the Devils themselves,
should one day be absolved from their pains, Tanto inuenitur erra^e d^formus,
and contra Des ve^b^ peruersius, quanto sibi videtur sentire ^lementius August.
ibidem.
and received into the soci^tie of the Saints: which though it be a very
merciful opinion, yet it is a very foul error, and has bin therefore justly
exploded by the Church, as contradicting both reason, and plain text of
Scripture. Reason requires a corresponde^cy between the reward of
righteousness, and the wages of iniquity: that as he which like a good tree
brings forth good fruit, shall be removed from earth to heaven, there to
inherit everlasting felicity: so he which like a bad tree, does not bring
forth good fruit, should be cut down from off the face of the earth, and cast
into perpetual misery. And the sacred Scripture does plainly inform us that
Exinferno nulla redemptio, from Hell there is no redemption: As none can go
from Heaven to Hell, so none can go from Hell Luke 16. 26.
to Heaven; No, their heaviness is continual, their plague desperate, and
cannot be cured. The breath of the Lord like a river of brimstone, does kindle
the Esaias 30. 33.
fire of Hell; and being once kindled, it never either of it self goes out,
or can be put out: for it is fire everlasting and Math. ^5. 41 Esaias 66. Exodus
3. 2.
unquenchable: and whosoever is call into it, like Moses bush, shall be burned,
but never consumed: he shall there continue eternally both body and soul in
unspeakable misery. The extremity of his pain shall not produce in him the
least stupefaction: for he shall be eternally and totally perfectly sensible of
this fire. His pain shall not admit of the least intermission, or remission
there shall not be the least moment of time, but in which he shall feelingly
confess, I am most extremely and fearfully tormented in this flame. He shall
not obtain so much as a drop of cold water in the eternity of his extremity,
to cool the tip of his tongue.

It is no small content unto one that is afflicted with a violent burning Fever,
that he can turn and tumble himself too and fro in his bed in a vain hope of
ease: But He that is cast into this fire, shall be no more able to move
himself, then a Tree that is hewn down and cast into the fire. For seeing
that Jiqui ^^erunt ^^c (...) D^mand ^^^unt vincu^^d^r^m pent^^, (...) ligatu
^^nibus and pedibus mittentur in panan^ aeternam. Guil. Paris. Math. ^2.
E^t^liquod so^ amen (...) s^c^^ habuisse doloris. Job 16. 12.
through his dissolute course of life he often broke the Chain of Gods
Commandments: he shall therefore by Gods commandment be fast tied hand and
foot wit^ such chains as he shall not be able to break: thus bound he shall
be cast into Hell.

And whereas in Misery it is accounted some Comfort to have Company: He that
is cast into this Fire, shall indeed have Company, but such as (like Jobs
friends) will prove unto him but miserable comforters: their company shall be
so little for his consolation, as that it shall much conduce for the augmenting
his affliction. For (not to speak of the horrid aspect of his Tormentors, and
the fearful howlings of the Tormented) he shall then see those in hell with
him, of whose damnation himself was the procuring cause: and this shall add
infinitely to his pains: for as He, who by his godly counsel, and religious
conversation has bin an instrument, to convert others unto God, shall shine as
the stars in the firmament, D^n. 12. 13.
have a peculiar reward of glory above others: so He who by his wicked and
lewd conversation has occasioned the fall of others, shall for it, besides his
more general pains, have some more special torment inflicted upon him: so
that the very sight of such for whose sake he sustaineth his peculiar torments,
shall bring no small affliction to his Soul. And hence it was (as Divines have
observed) that Dives being in Hell fire, requested Abraham to dispatch Lazarus
Luke 16. 27, 28.
to his Fathers house, to premonish his Brethren, that they might not come into
that place of Torment: not for any good he intended toward his Brethren, (for
Hell is as far from Charity, as Heaven from Envy) but out of fear lest his
pains should be augmented through their presence, he having corrupted them
by his bad example.

In a word, Sicut nihil in Coelo desideratur Simon Pauli Sucrinensis.
quod non inuenitur: it a nihil in inferno inuenitur quod desideratur: as in
Heaven there is nothing desired which is not found: so in Hell there is nothing
found which is desired. He that Dabitur miseris vita mortalis, mori^ntur and
semper erunt. Cassiodorus. Revel. 9. 6.
is cast into Hell fire, shall seek Death, but shall not find it: he shall
desire to dye, but Death shall flee from him: Hell shall desire ease, but be
so far from the least hope of obtaining it, that whether the present pain
he sustaineth in such extremity, by virtue of this fire, or the present
thought of the perpetuity thereof be his greatest affliction, it is hard to
determine.

I am not ignorant, that this penalty is Paradoxicall to natural Reason: for
first, it being a Position in Phylosophie, That the Agent is more Noble then
the Patient, how can this Fire which is generally held Corporeal, afflict the
Soul which is Spiritual? Again, this Fire being of a devouring Esaias 33. (...)
nature, how can it burn the Body; and not at length consume and reduce it to
nothing, the body being naturally as combustible as Chafe? Here indeed is
Saint Paul's (...): as Simonides in another case: so must I confess in this,
Quo diutius mecum cogito, ^omi^us inuen^o: The more I seek into it, the more I
am to seek in it: It is a great Mystery, a Gordian Knot, which natural
Reason cannot untie. What Sa^nt Augustine for the former Quaere, Fit miris, s^d
veris (...), D^^, cap. 10.
modis, may also satisfy for the latter. That this Corporeal Fire does
afflict the Soul, which is Spiritual: that it continually burns the Body,
but never consumes it, is not more strange then true. The same Father, for the
settling, Non(...) nibus v^uere ^^^st one s^^e (...)ne, -- p^^ (...)um (...)
Creator^s, ib. c. 9.
of our Faith in this point, instanceth in diverse Creatures, and more
particularly the Salamander, that does miraculously live in the fire without
being consumed. Man's weakness is unable to determine the power of God, it
exceeding all that we can possibly apprehend. These therefore being ineffable
Mysteries, are not to be measured by the scantling of natural Reason. Our best
course is to believe it here, lest for our unbelief we be made to feel it
hereafter.

But it may be replied, That to punish Man eternally, who sinned but
temporally, may argue God of Injustice, and Cruelty. Saint Gregory does
excellently well demonstrate the Equity of this Penalty. Iniqui cum fi^^
de^qu^^^^, quia cum fine vixe^un^^ nam volui^sen^ v^que si po^u ^^nt ^^e (...)
viue^, vt p^ssent sin^ (...) p^^^^^^ Ostendunt enim quodm p^cca^o s^mp^^ ^^^^e
c^p unt, qui nurqua^ de, inunt pec^are d^m v^num, Greg. ^ Dialog

Ad ^^^^^icti i^di^^^ s^ntentiam per^^^^, vt ^^^quam ^^ cant s^^p^^^^, qu^ i^
men, in ^^c v^^^ nu^qu^m v^luit ^^^^e p^ccato* and nullus deturn ^^q^^terminu^
v^t^^^^, ^ui quam d^vi (...)uit (...) Greg. 3. lib. Moral.


The wicked, says he, sin but for a time, because they live but for a time:
By their good wills they would never dye, that they might ever sin: For they
show they would ever live in Sin, because they never leave sinning so long
as they live. And therefore, as he elsewhere speaks: * It stands with the
Justice of God, to visit man with a perpetual Penalty, who if he might
would live perpetually in Iniquity. Besides, Man in sinning offends an
Infinite Majesty, and therefore in all equity deserves an infinite misery,
to be afflicted with endless torments. But why doe^ stand disputing upon the
equity of this penalty? as if it were a fit thing to call God to an account for
his Judgments

Certainly though they be secret, yet they can never be unjust, for as Abraham
Genesis 18. 25.
unto God; Shall not the Judge of all the world do right?

We see then the fearfulness of that Penalty which God will after this life
inflict upon sinful man: he shall be cast into Hell fire, there to be
tormented extremly, to be extremely tormented totally, to be extremely and
totally tormented eternally. O what an eating torment is but the aching of a
Tooth? What a sharp and piercing pain to hold but a finger in the fire: but
to be all on fire of Hell? to have no part free? for the whole man to be
nothing else but a torment in extremity, and so to continue without the least
hope of ease world without end? We cannot but apprehend and confess an
intolerable an inexpressible penalty.

But to what purpose do I labor to set forth the fearfulness of this
penalty? When we speak of these things, do we not participate of Cassandraes
blessing? Though we speak the truth and nothing but the truth, yet as the
Prophet complains, Who will believe our report? Esaias 53. 2.
Or at least who will be reformed by it? If we consult with the extraordinary
sinnefulnesse of this age wherein we live, the horrible security of many, and
those outrageous and unheard of villainies every where practiced and perpetrated
even in the eye of the Sunn, it will plainly appear that the greatest part of
mankind take Hell fire to be but Inane terriculamentum, a silly Scarcrow to
keep man in awe and order, an Old wives fable, a mere Poetical fiction: so
little does it prevail with them for their reformation: Certainly, My beloved,
were our belief in this point as sound and our Meditation thereon as Serious
as our living is sinful; O, what a holy and blessed change would it work
both in our consciences and conversation.

Tully writes of one Damocles a Parasiticall Tuscul. lib 5.
Courtier, that though placed in the Seat-royall of Dionysius his Sovereign,
and presented with a banquet of the choycest rarities, and to wrap up the whole
History in a word, liberally furnished with whatsoever his heart could desire
for the accomplishment of his conceited happiness, yet when bestowing his eyes
about him he espied a glittering Sword hanging over his head in a Horse hair
ready to cleave and spilt him in twain every moment. Which as the former, was
done at the command of Dionysius to let him see his e^rour, that he behold his
happiness in a false Glass. The ^ust fear of his imminent danger did so
captiuate his freer iollitie, that he then began extremely to loath what
before he did so entirely love: his delicate iuncates were unto him but as
unsavory viands, and his del^ghtfull objects but as music in a time of
mourning: he then had rather part with his happiness upon even terms, then
purchase it at so dear a price. In like manner though naturally we are
i^finitly delighted in following the lusts of our own hearts, and repute it
the only happiness that can befall v^ freely to disport our selves in all
licenciousnesse: Yet if we did but deliberately weigh our own case, as indeed
it nearly concerns us so to do, Laying the pleasures of sin which can
last but for a little season in one Scale and the Penalty for sin which will
hold out to eternity in the other; if we did but seriously consider that the
wrath of God is revealed from Heaven against Romans 1. 18.
all ungodliness and unrighteousness of men, as the Apostle speaks: that the
Lord has whet his Sword, and bent his Bow, and has made his instruments Psalm
7. 12. 13.
ready to wound the hayrie Scalpe of him that goes on in his wickedness, as
the Prophet David speaks. That the axe of his wrath is already laid unto the
root of the Trees, and that he is resolutely determined that those Trees,
those Men which bring not forth good fruit shall be hewn down and cast into
the fire, into Hell Fire, there to be extremely and totally tormented
eternally, it would beget in our hearts a mortal hatred even of our bosom and
best beloved corruptions, and work with us even in the midst of our sinful
pleasures as the Handwriting upon the Wall with Belshazzar Dan. 5. 6.
in the midst of his Iollitie: it would cause our countenance to be changed,
our thoughts to trouble us, the joints of our loins to be loosed, and our
knees to smite one against the other: it would make us with the Iailor to
tremble and and fall before the Ministers of God, and Acts 16. 29. 30.
say, Sirs what shall we do to be saved? Oh, it is a terrible and fearful
thing Raro antecedentem scelestum deseruit pede paena claudo. Car. lib 3. ode 2
to fall into the hands of the living God. Though he has leaden heels, yet
he has iron hands. Sero sed serio, He is indeed Tarditatem vindictae Supplic
ij grauitate compensat.
slow to proceed in Judgment, but when he comes, as come he will, he strikes
home, and lays it on heavily. Therefore, my Beloved, let us take heed The
certainty of the pen^l^^^.
we do not dally with God, and slight his terrible Judgments, as if they did
nothing concern us: for that the Lord will render vengeance unto the children
of disobedience, and visit the iniquities of impudent and impenitent sinners
with the intolerable eternal torments of hell fire, is a truth as clear as
that God is truth: we have it delivered from his own mouth, and recorded under
his own hand: his sacred Word endited by the Holy Ghost, has most clearly
revealed it unto us; and questionless, we may venture to take his word and
build upon it: for God is not as man Numb. 23. 19.
that he should lie, neither as the son of man that he should repent: has
he said, and shall he not do it? and has he spoken, and shall he not
accomplish it? Certainly, Heaven and Earth shall sooner pass away, Luke 16. 17.
says our Savior, then the least jot or title of the Law shall fall. And
therefore the penalty here threatened, shall most certainly be inflicted. Yea,
to intimate the undoubted certainty thereof, it is not here said in the
future Tense, The tree which brings not forth good fruit, shall be hewn
down and cast into the fire, but is ^ewen down and cast into the fire: it
being as certain, as if it were already inflicted: So he which believes not,
is already John 3. 18.
condemned, says our Savior. The Law has already denounced the Sentence of
malediction against the Sinner, Cursed is he that confirms not all the Deuteronomy.
27. 26.
words of the Law to do them: And what the curse of the law is, is not unknown
to the veriest Babe in Christianity: it is the eternal destruction of body
and soul in hell fire. So that there is nothing wanting unto the certainty of
this Penalty, but a more solemn declaration, and a real execution thereof:
which shall be then effected, when the Son of man our Lord Jesus Christ shall
come in the clouds in his Glory accompanied with all his holy Angels, to judge
the quick and the dead: then shall he pronounce that dreadful Sentence of
condemnation, Discedite a me maledicti, Matthew. 25. 41.
Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire, which is prepared for the
Devil and his Angels, and then shall it be put into execution, for they shall
go into everlasting torments, verse 46

And let no man delighting in impiety The Generality or exte^^ of the Penalty
delude his own soul with a vain hope of impunitie; let him not think to
escape the judgment of God, whilst he commiteth Romans 1 32.
such things as are worthy of death: for the Lord is a powerful and an
impartial Judge: Who can stand before his wrath? or who can abide the
fierceness of his wrath? His wrath is powered out like fire, and the very Rocks
are broken by him, says the Prophet. King Nebuchadnezzar, though a most
puissant Prince, a great Tree, as the Scripture styles him, Dan. 4. 11.
strong and high unto heaven, in whose boughs the Birds of the air did build
their nests, yet saw in a Vision a Watcher, a holy One coming down from Verse
14.
Heaven, who cried alowd Succidite arborem, Hew down the Tree and Destroy it.
Tophet is prepared for the Esaias 30. 33.
King, says the Prophet Esaias. Though his excellency mount up unto the heavens
and his head reach up to the clouds, yet shall he perish for ever like his own
dung, says Job. Job 20. 6. 7.


Regum timendorum in proprios greges,
Reges in ipsos imperium est Iouis, Her. Carm. lib. 3. Ode, 1.

Clari Gygant ^o triumpho,
cunsta supercilio mouentis.
God has an irresistable power over the most Commanding Princes: By him Kings
reign, Princes, Nobles and all the Pro 8. 15. 16.
Judges of the earth do rule, says Solomon the greatest Prince that ever
ruled upon the earth. At his foot stool the mightiest Monarchs must lay down
their Crowns and make their appea^ance before his most dreadful presence,
subm^ting themselves to be censured and sentenced and suffer according to their
demerits. God spares none though never so mighty: yea, for that respect he
deals more sharply with them. For as Hieronimus Guadalupe^sis upon this Text
observes, The more Potent a man Quanto quisque potentior sinon ferat f^uctum
tonto maiori d^gnus est supplicio, qui ^occasio est multis non ferendi bonos
fructus. Scilicet in vulgus manout exempl^ regentum. Claudianus.
is, if he do not bring forth good fruit, the greater punishment he
deserves, because He is an Occasion unto many of their not bringing forth good
fruit: Men ordinarily suffering themselves to be directed and lob-led by the
example of their Superiors, like the Spaniard that held his neck awry because
Alphonso of Arragon his king was wry neckt.

It is no man's Greatness that can shelter him from the smoking shower of Gods
wrath. Even that Mitred man of Sin, which treads Scepters under his feet,
and exalts himself above all that is called God, though he plead both a
canonizing and a confounding power, yet He also shall one day be brought before
the Bar of Gods Justice, to be arraigned for all his Abominations, wherewith
he has infatuated and besotted both himself and Gods Inheritance, and shall
drink of the dregs of Gods wrath cup, the promerited reward of his works.

And let no hood-winkt Catholic deride this peremptory assertion, as
proceeding from a distempered brain: for I know what I say: If his Holiness
cannot procure his own immunitie from the pains of Purgatory, as for example,
Pope Innocentius the third, De Gemitu Columbae, li. 2. c. 9.
who as Bellarmine writes, is to continue there till Doomes day: much less
shall he be able by his pretended power to deliver himself from hell fire. Now
if these lofty Cedars of Lebanon, and sturdy Oaks of Basan cannot avoid the
stroke of the Axe, but shall be hewn down and cast into the fire, what shall
become of the lesser trees, the lower shrubs? Certainly, God will be impartial
in his judiciary proceedings: his eye will spare none. Tribulation and anguish
upon Every Romans ^9. 11, 12. (...).
soul of man that does evil, of the Jew first, and also of the Gentile. With
him there is no respect of persons: for as many as have sinned without the Law,
shall also perish without the Law: and as many as have sinned in the Law, shall
be judged by the Law. God will wound the hairy scalpe Psal^ (...)1
of Every one that goes on in his wickedness, says the Prophet David. The
soul Ez^kiel 18. 4
that sins shall dye. Indeed the Gibeonites could gull Captain Joshua with
Joshua (...), 5.
their old shoes, their moldy crustes, and thread bare garments, and so save
themselves from his sword: But God has oculum in Sceptro, as he is omnipotent,
so he is omniscient: he is (...), the Psalm. 13^, 3.
Hearts searcher: he knows us all, and all our ways too well to be deceived
by us. It is not the wearing of a Gyges Cic. Os^ic li. 3.
Ring can keep us out of Gods sight: for there is nothing that has a being in
nature, which is not the object of his eye. If I say, Surely the darkness
shall Psalm. 1 39. 11. 12
cover me, even the night shall be a light about me; yea, the darkness hides
not from thee, but the night shines as the day; the darkness and the light
are both alike to thee.

In a word, when the Lord shall call the sons of men to a particular account
for their tr^nsgressions, then va^a salus hominum, as says the Psalmist, Man's
help is all but in vain. Though hand join in hand, says Solomon, the wicked
Prou. 11. 25.
shall not escape unpunished: that is* (says our English Gloss) Though they
make never so many friends, or think themselves never so secure, yet they
shall not escape. It is not the fantastical treasure of the Saints
Supererogatiue works under his Holiness lock and key can serve the sin^ers
turn in that day: for the Wise Virgins could not lend any Math. 25. 6.
Oil, lest they should lack for themselves. It is not any man's Potency can be
his Protection: for the most powerful Monarch is but as a Potters vessel,
easily broken into sheards and shiuers with the least touch of Gods iron rod.
Revel. 2. 27.
It is not the subtle pate of the deepest Politician can pr^uaile for any man.
For the wisdom of the world is but foolishness 1 Cor. 1. 20. Esaias 29. 14.
with God. I will destroy the wisdom of the wise, and will cast away the
understanding of the prudent, says the Lord. No course can be taken to
disappoynt God of his revenging purposes: for as the Prophet has it, The
flight shall perish Amos 2. 14, 15, 6.
from the swift: and the strong shall not strengthen his force: neither shall
the mighty save his life: nor he that handles the bow shall stand: and he
that is swift of foot shall not escape, neither shall he that rides the horse
sane his life: And he that is of a mighty courage among the strong men, shall
flee away naked in that day, says the Lord. So that without any Omnis sine
^^rson^rum exceptione, sin excusationum algatione, si^e a^i cuius cuasion^.
Gorth in lo^^.
personal exception, without any excusiue allegation, without any particular
ones evasion, Every tree, every man not bringing forth good fruit, the fruits
of holin^sse and sanctification, shall be hewn down, and cast into the fire.

Every tree not bringing forth Good fruit: Many in their own account pass for
current Christians, and are persuaded they shall go for no less with God, when
they are called to give up their accounts unto him, if they do not bring forth
bad fruit: if like the proud Pharise Luke 18 11.
they can but plead for themselves, Not guilty as other men, Extortioners,
unjust, adulterers: If they can say, We are no Drunkards, no Swearers, no
spendthrifts, no grinders of the Poor, and the like: If like Saint John's
Herb, which (as Cooks report) being put into the pot, procures nor good nor
hurt to the pottage: so if they do no hurt, though they never do any good; if
they be honest harmless men, as they are commonly styled, such as neither
meddle nor make with others: but live quietly, (it is no matter for
religiously) among their Neighbors, all is well: they hope in God to go to
Heaven as sure as the best. Alas, poor miserable wretches, how palpably, how
grossly they deceive themselves, Ixion-like embracing a Cloud instead of Juno:
like Camelions feeding upon the ayer^e hope of that happiness they shall never
find. Indeed, Not to do evil is commendable; but not to do good, is
culpable, is condemnable. Cast the unprofitable servant into utter Math. 25. 30.
darkness: there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth: And here in my
text, Every tree not bringing forth good fruit shall be hewn down, and cast
into the fire. We do not read that the Rich Luke 16.
man in the Gospel dispoyled Lazarus of any thing whereof he was possessed:
yet because he did not open unto him the bowels of compassion, and cause to be
tendered unto him wherewith to sustain him in his want: therefore Hell mouth
was opened to swallow him up unto everlasting torments.

Now the reason is this, we read in 1. John 3. 4.
John, that (...). Sin is the transgression of the Law: and the transgression
of the Law is Sin, and the wages of Sin is Death. Now the Lords Mandates
are as well Affirmative, for the ensuing of Good, as Negative, for the
eschewing of Evil: and the Affirmative as well as the Negative under the Curse
require exact obedience. So that, He is no less liable unto the Laws
malediction Quiomittit facienda, which omitteth things to be done, then Qui
facit omittenda, He which does things to be omitted. The last and great
Assizes will fully and plainly resolve this case, determine this point. Matt.
25 41.
for, Then shall the Son of man say unto the Goats on the left hand, Depart
from me ye cursed into everlasting Fire prepared for the Devils and his
Angels: Here is the Curse. Hear we the Cause: It follows, For I was an
hungered, and ye gave me no meat: I thirsted, and ye gave me no drink; I was
naked, and ye clothed me not: Sick and in prison, and ye visited me not.
Where we may see the bare omission of the good works of mercy the procuring
cause of perpetual misery: ratifying the Position in my Text, that every Tree
not bringing forth good fruit shall be hewn down and cast into the fire.

Now if Every Tree not bringing forth forth good fruit shall be thus served:
how fearfully shall it fare with those trees that do not only not bring
forth good fruit, but also bring forth bad fruit? Si sola omissio eternoigne
punitur, Di^^yst^^ Certh(...) in loc^^
vitiosa actio quid meretur? If the bare omission and neglect of a pious office
be punishable with everlasting fire: what does a vicious action deserve? Si
sterilitas condemnatur, continuata impietas, foeda delectatio, affectuosa
peccati prosecutio quam dire torquebitur? If sterilitie and barrenness be
condemned: how direfully shall continued impiety, wallowing with delight in
the stinking puddle of iniquity, an affected prosecution of all ungodliness
even with greediness be tortured and tormented? If those shall be thrust Non
mi^oris est criminis h^^^^i tollere, qu^ ^um possi^ and habes indigen ibus
de^egare. Ambr. ^n quedam Ser.
into Hell that have not relieved the poor and needy in their want and
misery; what shall be come of such as lay violent hands upon their Patrimony?
If such neglect the performance of Religious duties whether toward God or Man
are guilty of everlasting damnation; How shall they escape the dreadful
judgment of God which like the unrighteous Luke 184.
Judge fear nor God, nor man: but live in the wilful breach of their Makers
Laws? If such shall most certainly be condemned as are only barren in
goodness: what shall be come of those that are also fruitful in the damnable
works of darkness? If the Fig tree for not bringing forth good M^th. 21.
19.
fruit must be cursed, how shall the Vines of Sodom and Gomorrha escape Deuteronomy.
32. 32, 3^.
which bring forth bad fruit, fruit bitter as Gall, Deadly as the poison of
Dragons.

O Consider this all ye that forget Psalm. 50. ^2.
your God, that forget your own good in being strangers from the life of God,
least the Lord in his wrath hew you down, and there be none to deliver you.
For if God spared not his blessed Angels, nor his beloved Israel when they
brought forth the cursed fruit of rebellion and disobedience: how shall he
spare us that are but dust and ashes: Worms and not Men: by Nature mere aliens
from the Common wealth of Israel, and strangers from the covenants of promise:
seeing in lewdness of life and Conversation we are nothing inferior to the
Collapsed Angels or rejected Israelites?

My beloved, I must ingeniously acknowledge with the Prophet Jeremy, Puer sum,
et nescio loqui, I am Jeremy 1. 6.
but a child and know not how to speak: fitter like an Auditour to sit at
Gamaliels feet, then like a Doctor in Moses chair. Yet seeing the Acts 22. 3.
Matt. 23. 2.
Lord has called me to this place, and put his word into my mouth: I beseech
you suffer with all patience and reverent attention, a word or two of
premonition and exhortation. It may please God so to magnify his strength in
my weakness, as to make the words which he has taught me effectually
powerful for the reformation of your lives, and conse quently for the
everlasting salvation of your Souls and Bodies.

Shall every tree not bringing forth good fruit be hewn down and cast 1
Clergy
into the fire? O lay this unto heart with me ye Chariots and horsemen of
Israel, ye that are of the house of Aaron and the Tribe of Leui, my beloved
fellow laborers in the work of the Ministry. Let us consider that the Lord
has committed unto us the dispensation of his Word, that 1 Cor. 4. 1. 1. Pet.
1. 23.
most precious and immortal seed whereby Christ may be conceived in us, and
we become spiritual Fathers of many 1. Cor. 4. 15.
Children in Christ. O then let every one of us in the fear of God, according
to the Talent wherewith we are entrusted, so labor in the Word to be found
faithful dispensers of the Word, f^eding the flock of Christ concredited to
our charge with sauory food in season, and out of season, that we may become
fruitful in 2. Tim. 4. 2.
begetting children unto Christ for the enlarging of his Kingdom. Let us
remember that the Church is Gods vineyard, the People his plants, and we the
Ministers his hired servants, to labor in his vineyard that it may yield forth
fruit unto the Lord. And though John Baptist may have a back-friend in Herod's
court, yet let us not be put to silence, or discourag^d, but boldly with a
heart strike with the Sword of the Spirit at the head of that Serpent Sin, in
whoms^euer we see it: remembering that we are Ambassadors for Christ, 2 Cor.
5. 20.
One who is able to maintain his cause even against the Devil himself. But
above all, let us labor to put life into our labors, by bringing forth the
fruit of good living, that so we may the better win our people to entertain
the si^cere Profession of the Truth, and save our own Souls at the day of the
Lord Jesus. For as Saint Bernard most Sermon de Sancto Benedicto Abbate.
sweetly, Sermo vivus and efficax Operis est, plurimum faciens suadibile quod
dicitur, dum monstrat factibile quod suadetur: We shall easily persuade the
people to practice what we preach, when what we preach, we practice. In a
word, let us remember, that as there it a Vae mihi si non euangelizavero, a woe
unto the Minister if he do not labor in the Gospel: so there is a vae mihi
si non been vixero, a woe unto the Minister if he do not live according to the
Gospel: for every Tree that brings not forth good fruit, the fruit of good
living shall be hewne down and cast into the fire.

In the next place think upon this ye People of this place, of this City, 2.
Laytie.
of this Land. Sure I am, there is no Nation under the Celestial Poles,
prof^ssing the faith of Christ over which the Lord has placed so Learned, so
Laborious, so Religious a Clergy as over This. Consider how in it ye are blessed
of God, that so ye may bless God when ye consider of it: Bless God? but
how! why, bless him in Sacrificing unto him the Calves of your lips: Bless
Hosca 14. 2.
him in consecrating unto him the short remnant and remainder of your lives:
Bless him in a reverend estimation of his holy Ordinances: In a word, Bless
him in your singular love unto those that are over you in the 1 Thessalonians. 5. 12,
13.
Lord, that are dispensers of his sacred mysteries: least ye be hewn down
and cast into the fire.

And do ye not so? I would to God I could pass by you concerning these
particulars, especially the latter, without apprehending any just cause for
your general reprehension. It is a Sore I no more but touched, but named
before, intending in this place to handle it more at large, and to apply unto
it a corroding Plaster, if it were possible, to draw away the malignant
quality wherewith it is so much infested: that it is even swo^ne up as high as
Heaven, to the pulling down (as is justly to be feared) upon this Land, a
sudden Babel of confusion, without some speedy reformation.

I doubt not but there are some Galathians Gal. 4. 15.
amongst us that would pluck out even their own eyes, to do Paul good. That
there is some Zareptan, that 1 Kings 17.
would even hazard the hastening her own hunger-staruing to communicate unto
Elishaes necessities: for whose sakes, I am persuaded, the Lord has been many
ways gracious unto this Land, and suspended the infliction of his fearful
judgments which for our sins we have long since justly deserved. But alas,
all these Some, these Galathians, these Zareptans are but a small Sum, scarce
to be called a number, in respect of those that are contrarily affected. For as
it was the sin of Jeroboam, with which he is branded unto 1 Kings 12. 3.
posterity by the Spirit of God, that he made Priests of the lowest and basest
of the People: so it is a sin may be seen and read in great characters.
upon the foreheads of most in this Land, that they make Priests the lowest and
basest of People: the lowest, by depriving them of their allotted Maintenance;
the basest, by prosecuting them with all irreverence. Not to speak of the
former, and therein of those violent, maleuolent, vnchristian-like courses
wherein they are very frequent, and fruitful for the dispoyling, and robbing
us of those revenues God out of his holy wiscome has set apart, and
consecrated for the maintenance of those that minister and serve at his Al^ar,
that so they might make the Levites to stoop unto them, and hang upon their
sleeves like beggars for their Alms and voluntary contributions. How
unreasonably do they load the Prophets of the Lord with all the injuries and
indignities their deuilish malice can invent? The sacred title of our thrice
honorable Function is but a term of disgrace in the mouths of these scoffing
Ismaels, whose malignant spleen is such, that they will not stick to strike at
us with the sword of their virulent tongues, even in the face of the world, as
we walk in the open streets. Nay, such is the height of their impudency, that
they will not forb^are to offer violence unto the honor of our Calling, even
before Gods own face, even in the Sanctuary it self, which has always bin
reputed a place of privilege, as if they would out-beard and out-braue
almighty God himself. Is it possible such a high-handed disrespect and
contempt should reign where the Gospel of Christ is so plentifully, and so
sincerely preached?

But I do the less marvel at it, when I call to mind the base usage wherewith
the Son of God, that High Priest for ever Hebr. 6. 20.
after the Order of Melchisedeck, our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, was
saluted in the days of the flesh: He was in the world (says the beloved
Evangelist) John 1. 10. 11*
and the world was made by him, and the world knew him not. He came unto his
own, and his own received him not. Nay, they did not only not receive him,
but did, as ye may read at large in the History of his life, prosecute and
persecute him with a world of indignities, even unto the death. Now the
Disciple is not Math. 10. 24, 25
above his Master, nor the servant above his Lord. It is enough (says our
Savior) for the disciple to be as his master is, and the servant as his Lord.
If they have called the master of the house Beelzebub, how much more them of
his household? Our Lord has drunk unto us out of this bittercup, and we must
resolve to pledge him round. O thrice happy we, if we could so apprehend it,
that he is pleased to accept us into his sufferings. For if we suffer with
Christ, we may be assured 2. Tim. 2. 12.
we shall also reign with Christ. But unhappy all those whose delight to
grieve our spirits by their disrespectiue carriage and unconscionable courses,
shall make us to be called Great in the kingdom of heaven: yea, thrice unhappy
and accursed, if they break not off this their sinfulness by a more
sanctified and conscionable course of life. We are indeed but weak Earthen
vessels, as the Apostle 2 Cor. 47.
styles us. We are sinful men, men full of sin, and therein not unlike your
selves: let him that is among you with out sin cast the first stone at us.
Yet John 8. 7.
consider that we are your Spiritual fathers; 1 Cor. 4. 15. Reu^l. ^. 1.
that we are the Angels of God, and Ambassadors for Christ. If we be 2 Cor.
5, 20.
your Fathers, where is our honor? What though Elisha be bald? shall the
children of Bethel call him Baldpate unpunished? No, two Bears come out of 2
Kin. 2. 22, 23.
the Forest, and tare them in pieces. What though Noah be drunken? shall his
son Ham mock and deride him without a curse? No, Canaan is cursed, Genes. 9.
25.
a servant of servants shall he be unto his brethren. If we be Angels of God
and Ambassadors for Christ, where is that homage and reverence you owe unto us
in the name of our Lord and Master? Will an earthly Prince, which is but a
piece of clay, take to heart as done to himself, whatsoever indignity is
offered unto his Ambassadors? And will not Almighty God be sensible of that
dishonor which is daily done unto his Ambassadors?

I have heard credibly related, how superciliously and contemptuously the
Palsgraues Country has looked upon their Clergy. In what case that Country
now stands, I suppose the remotest Christian Region is not ignorant. I will
not presume peremptorily to determine that this one sin has been the
procuring cause of so fearful a Judgment. Thus much I am sure of, that the
contempt of the Messengers of 2 C^^on. 36 1^
God cost Jerusalem a desolation. God is so tender over his Prophets, that he
will not have them so much as touched: he has reproved even Kings for their
sakes. So sensibly he is affected with the wrongs they sustain, that he
takes them as done to Himself. Do ye rob them of their Tithes? Ye have robbed
Malac 3. 8.
me, says the Lord. Do ye neglect and despise them? Ye despise me, says
Christ, Luke 10. 16.
and him that sent me, even God the Father. And will not the Lord revenge these
wrongs? Yea, has he not already in some measure punished this land for them?
Have not the Coals your Forefathers have stolen from Gods altar, set their
neasts on fire, brought a curse upon their substance, that it has not thriued
unto a third generation? yea, whilst they and you have denied God his Tenth
part, has not God taken away your Nine parts, and given you only a Tenth?

Again, has not the Lord taken unto himself many conscionable and painful
Ministers, which according to the course of nature might have lived long, to
have bin worthy Instruments for your everlasting good, because ye have so
undervalued them, and set so low an estimate upon them? But alas, my Beloved,
these are but flea bitings if compared to the remoouing of our Candlestick
from amongst Revel. 2. 5.
us: and is it not justly to be feared, that he has even at this present some
such work in hand? I pray God he has not. But say he do continue the light of
his Gospel amongst us: yet what benefit can accrue unto us by this light, if we
be taken from it, and cast into utter darkness? ^his God can do, and will
do, if we do not bring forth better fruit: for every tree that brings not
forth good fruit, shall be hewn down and cast into the fire. O consider of
this, all ye whose greatest glory is to be the scourge of the Clergy; lest
that High Priest Christ Jesus take you in hand, and ye be made to howl
eternally in Hell, for contemning his Substitutes, his low Priests here on
earth. Let the Word of the Lord, and the Ministers thereof be precious in your
sight, that you and your posterity may be precious in the sight of the Lord.
Have those that are over you in the Lord, and labor amongst you in singular
love, if not for their own sakes, yet for their Masters sake, and for their
works sake, considering how like Candles they consume and waste themselves
away to light you in the way unto perpetual happiness. Give unto them double
honor, and cut them not short of their due reverence and maintenance, lest the
Lord in his fury cut you off from the state of mercy, lest ye be hewn down
and cast into the fire.

I have, I suppose, not a little exceeded your expectation, I am sure, my first
intention in giving so much way unto this last particulars extention: but the
time I have borrowed of you in it, I will God willing, repay you to the full in
the rest that follow.

Shall every tree not bringing forth good fruit be hewn down and cast into the
fire?

My Honorable Lord, I will give you 3 The Lord Mayor.
but a word, take heed God do not one day give you a blow. He has ordained
you a Magistrate under his Majesty, and has put the Sword of Justice into
your hand. I would desire you to take notice, that he has also an Axe in his
hand: therefore like a good tree bring forth good fruit in that place wherein
he has set you: be the Orphans father, and the Widows husband: be of a good
courage, and be zealous for your great Lord and Master, your Maker the Lord of
hosts: protect and countenance the good; correct and cut down the bad, lest the
Lord hew you down and cast you into Hell fire.

Ye Reverend Judges of the Land, and 4 Judges and Lawyers.
all ye that travel in the Study and Practice of the Law, remember there is a
dreadful Judge above you, even the Lord of Heaven and Earth, who will one day
call all of you to a strict account for all your courses. Therefore like good
trees bring forth good fruit in your several places, as you will answer it at
the Bar of his Tribunal. Let neither the fear of greatness, nor unrighteous
Mammon; let neither private spleen, nor particular affection so prevail with
you, as to interturbe and ouerturne the course of Justice: but walk uprightly
and conscionably, as having the fear of God before your eyes, lest he hew you
down and cast you into hell fire.

All ye that exercise your selves in Civil 5 Tradesmen.
commerce, come hither and consider what I shall say unto you. What will it
advantage you to be Lords over the whole world, and to loose your own souls?
Luke 9. 25.
Therefore so Sell and Buy, and Ba^ter, that ye make not shipwreck of a Good
Conscience, and loose the kingdom of heaven into your Bargains: that is, deal
honestly and sincerely with all men, as it becomes the Servants of Christ: and
do not go about cunningly to entrap any with terms of Equivocation, and to
cheat them with false Wares, Measures, and Weights: for these things are an
abomination unto the Lord. But above all things, take heed of that most
frequent and most fearful custom of swearing worth and credit into your
Commodities; lest while ye labor to make them marchantable, and good
penny-worths with man: ye loose your credit and your penny, that is, your
Crown of Glory with God. Think upon it, for believe it the time will come,
when the Lord shall weigh you in his Balance, Da^ 9, 25.
as he did Belshazzar, and shall, if he find you too light, separate you from
the Kingdom of Heaven as far as the East is from the West, and the North
from the South: for every Tree that brings not forth good fruit, shall be
hewn down and cast into the Fre.

In the next place ta^e notice of this all ye, whom the Lord has linked
together 6 Married fo^ke.
in Holy and Honorable Matrimony: that so ye may bring forth fruit beseeming
so holy and so honorable an estate. Make conscience of performing those
several Offices and respects God in his Sacred Word requires of you one
toward another. Be Careful Religiously and Constantly to observe and pay
those Solemn vows ye made before God and Men at the Solemnization of your
Nuptials. More particularly and principa^l^ seeing Genesis 2. 24.
God has made you One of Two, suffer not the Devil to make you Two of One: but
live peaceably, discreetly, and loyally together: nourish mutual affection,
and possess your vessels, that 1 Thessalonians 4. 4.
is, your bodies in holiness and honor: and keep your selves one to another
H^b 13. 4
as undefiled members of Christ's Body, free from lusting after strange flesh,
least ye be hewn down and cast into the Fire.

Again, shall every Tree not bringing forth good fruit be hewn down and cast
into the fire?

Consider this all ye whom the Lord has blessed with the fruit of the Womb,
least this temporal blessing prove 7 Parents.
your eternal bane. Think it not enough that ye bring forth children into
the world, and provide for them an earthly inheritance: unless ye also bring
them up unto the Lord, and so fit them for the Kingdom of Heaven. Alas, what
is their first generation more then their Corruption? for they are shaped in
wickedness Psalm. 51 5.
and conceived in sin: and so poor Infants, Damnati antequam nati, they are
damned before their mothers are delivered: and being so, what is your Temporal
provision unto them, though never so plentiful: if after their joy in this
World (if they know any) they be so far from knowing any in the next, that on
the contrary they lie howling in Hell flames for ever? If therefore you truly
love your Children, for their sakes undertake a second labor, and bring forth
this good fruit of your Fatherly love toward them, once more travel in pain
of them, but as Paul did of the Galathians, till Gal. 4. 19.
Christ be formed in them: labor that they may be begotten a new in Christ by
1. Pet. 1. 23.
the immortal seed of the Word, and be made heirs of the Kingdom of
Heaven. Let it be your care, whatsoever it cost, to have them brought up even
from their Childhood in the fear of God. That when they leave this world,
they may attain unto the Land of everlasting life, there to reign with Christ
world without end. And if you will not do thus much for their sakes, at least
do it for your own sakes. For know, to bring forth this good fruit of true
fatherly affection, to be careful for the Spiritual welfare of your
Children, and to promote and further it to the utmost of your power, is a duty
God strictly inioyneth. And if through neglect hereof your Children Ephesians. 6. 4.
rebel against God, he will require their blood at your hands. For as God does
visit the sins of the Fathers upon the Children: So he does visit the sins
of the Children upon the Fathers. For an instance remember Old Eli: when his 1.
Sam. 2.
Sons trespassed against God, He did not sharply reprove and correct them:
but suffered the^ to run on in their Sins: and this was his ruin: In a word,
remember the Iudge^t here threatened in my Text, and be moved thereby to bring
forth the good fruit of true Fatherly affection: instruct your Children in the
fear of the Lord: reprove and correct the^ when they offend the Lord: least
the Lord hew you down and cast you into the fire.

In like manner ye Children, remember the Rock out of which ye 8 Children.
were hewn, the Stock whereof ye are stemmes: your Parents from whom, next
under God, ye have received your natural being. Oh wound not their tender
hearts with your untoward carriage and rebellious courses, the only course to
accelerate and hasten their heads to the grave: but like good Children, bring
forth the good fruit of filial fear and affection, that ye may exhilarate
and rejoice their Souls to the prolonging of their days. Reverence them
inwardly in your hearts, and outwardly in your Behavior: yield unto them all
dutiful obedience in the Lord, least ye pluck their Curse upon your heads, and
the Lord hearing it, hew you down and cast you into the fire. 9 Masters of
families.


Ye that have the care of Servants committed to your charge, bring forth the
Good fruit of Good Masters in your several Families: do unto your Servants
that which is just and equal, Col. 4. 1.
knowing that ye also have a Master in Heaven. Command them not but in the
Lord, and that lovingly. Allow them a befitting competency, be it in matter of
ind^ment for the Back, or aliment for the Belly; and do not withold their
wages from them. But above all, instruct them in the knowledge and fear of
God, as well by your examples, as precepts: and allow not their profanation of
the Lords Sabaths the least Conniuence: Least the Lord hew you down and cast
you into the fire.

And ye that are Servants, serve your 10 Servants.
Masters faithfully both in word and deed: and observe them with all
respective reverence, and submit your selves unto them to obey them in the
Lord, least the Lord hew down you also, and cast you into the fire.

In a word, to draw toward a conclusion, give me leave to draw out an Ear
or two of the Corn we have already inn'd: for I fear growing too voluminous
and large, in particularizing farther. Ye have heard how gracious and
bountiful a God the Lord has vowed to show himself unto all those that
submit themselves unto his laws, and labor to serve him faithfully in
bringing forth good fruit: in leading a holy and religious course of life:
that he will reward and crown their holy endeauours with an eternal weight of
Glory in the kingdom of Heaven. Ye have likewise heard how severe and
terrible a Judge he will reveal himself unto all such as run disobedient
and rebellious courses, that he will wound the hayrie Scalpe of every one that
goes on in his wickedness: yea, that he will hew down and cast into the
fire every Tree not bringing forth good fruit. If therefore the sweet
blessings of Gerizim, the loving mercies of God cannot work upon our
rebellious hearts, to reclaim us from our wicked ways: let the bitter
cursings of Eball, the dreadful terrors of the Law make us fear to offend:
least the Lord in his wrath deliver us up unto a reprobate mind, and in that
fearful estate hew us down: that is, by a violent Death rent our Souls and
Bodies a sunder: and cast us both soul and body into the fire, to be
intollerably and eternally tormented in the flames of Hell. My beloved, as God
is Jealous of, so he is Zealous for his glory: if he be not glorified a nobis,
of us by our conversion: he will be glorified de nobis upon us, by our
confusion: if we do not turn unto him, he will turn us into Hell: ^or it is a
conclusion so ratified, as never to be repealed: that Every one whether Jew or
Gentile, bond or free, high or low, rich or poor: Every tree not bringing
forth good fruit, shall be hewn down and cast into the fire. O then, let
every one of us make a diligent search into his own bosom, and judge
himself, least he be judged of the Lord. Let us dissect and rip up that body
of sin which is within us; not only that Natural corruption, which we have
all alike succ^ssiuely received from our first Parents, but also those personal
transgressio^s which every man has made himself guilty of, more or less.
Then having faithfully laid open our sinfulnes, let us look on it with a
loathing eye and a lamenting heart: unfeignedly deploring the time wherein to
our just damnation, had we our deserts, we have not only brought forth no
fruit, but also naughty fruit, fruit cursed and abominable: and herein, not
only dishonored God our selves: but also, to our further damnation, drawn
others to do the like by our lewd examples: for which, let us go with faith in
the blood of Jesus Christ to the throne of Grace, imploring mercy at the hands
of our heavenly Father, who is ready and willing to embrace with the arms of
his mercy, al such petitioning him for grace in the Name of his Son: and let
us for the time following, entertain this settled resolution into our hearts,
faithfully to labor in the reformation of all those faults we lament: And which
is the consummation and perfection of our repentance, let us crown our holy
resolutions by putting them into action: by bringing forth fruit worthy
amendment of life, as it is in the verse before my Text, or as it is here in my
Text, by bringing forth good fruit, by leading in our several places and
callings a right holy and religious course of life. For it is not a bare
entertainment of better courses into our thoughts, of dead, of naked purposes:
nor an outside of Religion, an outward conformity to the service of God, will
preserve us from the wrath to come: the former being but a bringing forth of
good leaves, the latter but of good flowers, or if of fruit, but of such as is
false and counterfeit: No, we must either bring forth good fruit, that is, as
ye have heard, Fruit not only outwardly beautiful and good in the eye of man,
but also inwardly good and sound in the sight of God, or we must undergo the
wrath of God be hewn down, and cast into the fire. Such fruit must every Tree
bring forth, and that

1. Properanter, presently. 2. Abundanter, plentifully. 3. Perseueranter,
perseuerantly.
First, we must bring forth good fruit We must bring forth good fruit 1.
Presently.
properanter, presently; it is a task we must take in hand out of hand: as
much is implied in the letter of my text, Every tree, (...), not bringing forth
good fruit, that is, Now, presently (for it is a word of the present tense, and
does urge a present task) shall be hewn down and cast into the fire. This
Speed is emphatically pressed in the first words of my text, Now is the axe
laid unto the root of the trees; as if the Baptist had more largely delivered
himself thus: It is no delaying the time of your turning unto God: he has
tarried your leisure so long, that he is resolved to attend you no longer:
therefore look to your selves, God will now be but a word and a blow: for he
has already taken his Axe, the instrument of death, into his hand: yea he has
already lifted up his arm to strike: nay more, he has so far set forward
his blow, that he has even laid his Axe to the root of the trees, resolutely
determining to make his blow, to hew you down out of hand, and cast you into
the fire, if ye do not presently repent, and bring forth fruit worthy
amendment of life. O then, my beloved, I beseech you let us consider, that now
only is the time of making or marring our fortunes for ever. Alas, what is our
life but a blast? Spiraemus, expiramus: we breath, and instantly our breath is
gone. So it is, that no man living can assure unto himself the least moment of
time beyond that which he does at the very instant enjoy. Indeed the Devil, to
lead us on in our sins, would persuade us, that Nature has sealed unto us a
long Lease of our lives; and that we need not as yet trouble our heads with
repentance; there will be time enough for that hereafter. But the truth is, we
hold this fading breath but as Gods Tenants at will. He may and will, if it
please him, without the least warning take it away from us. But suppose we may
live long, and repent time enough hereafter, for that poenitentia vera nunquam
sera, True repentance P^nitentia ser^, r^^o vera.
is never too late: yet are we sure we can repent when we please? No, True
repentance is the gift of God, and it is just with him to deny it that man at
his death, which has so carelessely neglected it throughout the whole course
of his life.

So that in a word, in mora (...), it is but a folly, yea extreme madness to
dally and delay the time of our conversion, considering the imminent wrath of
God, and our own frailty. Sure I am, As the tree falls, so it lies; as Death
leaves us, so Judgment finds us. Let us therefore even Now, whilst it is
called to day, begin to work out our salvation with fear and trembling: When
the night of Death comes, no man can work. Let us Now, whilst the
acceptable little time of salvation lasts, unfeignedly repent, and call upon
God for mercy. Let it suffice that we have spent the time past upon the lusts
of our own hearts, in brining forth the corrupt fruit of the flesh, in
drunkenness, in swearing, in profaneness, in pride in uncleanness, and the
like: Let us Now begin to awake out of sin, and to walk in newness of life:
lest the Lord do suddenly before we so much as dream of it hew us down, and
cast us into the fire.

Secondly, we must bring forth good 2 Plentifully.
fruit abundanter, plentifully. It is the Encomium Christ gives his Spouse the
Church, that she is an Orchard full of Cant. 4. 14.
sweet fruits. And Saint Paul assirmeth of the Romans, that their faith was
published Romans 1. ^. Romans 15. 14.
throughout the whole world. and Romans 15. I am persuaded, says he, that ye are
full of goodness, and filled with all knowledge; and of the Thessalonians he
affirms, that their faith did grow exceedingly, and their love 1 Thessalonians 1. 3.
did generally abound. My beloved, th^se and the like testimonies of the Saints
are recorded for our imitation. The plain truth is, God cannot away with
starueling trees, such Professors as are Non-proficients. If therefore we mean
to avoid the stroke of his axe, and to be freed from the torme^^s of hell fire
thretned in my text, we must like good trees thrive in our spiritual estate, we
must increase and grow in grace and goodness, we must abound in every good work
that may make us perfect m^ in Christ Jesus; we must bring forth good fruit
pletifully

And good reason has God to require it at our hands, considering the
extraordinary VVe^ G^d ^^pecteth at our hands bringing forth of good fruit
plentifully.
cost and care he has bestowed upon us to this end and purpose. For first as
has bin said before, he has bin pleased pure seed of his Word in no place so
plentifully as in this land in no place of this land so plentifully as in this
City.

Again, that it might take deep root Tum pater omnipoten^ s^cundis (...)
ether, etc. Virg. 2. G^org.
sweet fructifying showers from heaven: and to infuse a quicken^ng power into
the ground of our hearts: he has caused the Sun of Peace, Pax (...) vites,
and suc^os codi^ (...) derect v(...) Tib. lib. 1. leg. 1. 3
the Mother of Plenty, for these many years to shine upon us. In a word, what
medicinal courses has he neglected, which in the judgment of man might
conduce to the furthering of our fruitfulnes? He has pared off our riotous
Twigs, and lopped off our luxuriant Branches, ripped up our Rind, opened our
Roots: that is, he has scourged us with sundry kinds of Crosses and
Afflictions, that thereby he might call us back from wandering abroad after
the bewitching pleasures of Sin, to serve Him the only true and everliving
God, with a sound and upright heart in all holiness of life and conversation.
All which laid together, we have no reason to think, that praying unto God in
the Church once a week, the hearing of a Sermon once a month, a strict
observation of the Saboth once a quarter, a Receiving of the Sacrament once in
six months, a Feasting of the poor once a year will serve the turn. No,
God will not be satisfied with such a Barren and Dwarfling Obedience: he will
not be contented with the Gleanings of Harvest, with here a Bery, and there a
Bery, as it was with the shaken Olive Tree, Esaias 17. No, Every tree must bring
forth good fruit plentifully: for, Unto whom soever much is given, of him Luke
12. 48.
shall be much required, says our Savior.

So that it does stand us every one in hand accordingly to endeavor the real
answering of Gods just expectation, lest in the day of his wrath, we have the
d^eper share in his just indignation. For Quanto mayor gratia, tanto amplior
postea Quo clari^r lux (...) and gra^^ae (...) gra(...) paenas mund^^n
gratitud* nem sibi accel^rate. Chem^^t.
peccantibus poena, says Saint Chrysostom. God will at the Last day
proportion out the punishment of a sinner according to the means of grace he
has afforded him in the time of his sinning* At the worlds great Sessions it
shall go harder with Chorazin and Bethsaida, then with Tyrus and Sidon: it
shall go harder with Capernaum, then with Sodom: because God did more abound
in the means of grace to Chorazim, Bethsaida, and Capernaum, then to Tyrus,
Sidon, and Sodom. Seeing therefore it has pleased God to deal so liberally
with us in the means of Grace: let us in the name of God endeavor in some
proportion to answer his bounty in our measure of grace. Let us labor to be
full of the sweet fruits of the Spirit: Let us labor to be strong in the
Faith, and (as Saint Peter speaks) 2 Pet. 1. ^ etc.
With our Faith let us join Virtue; with Virtue, Knowledge; with Knowledge,
Temperance; with Temperance, Patience; with Patience, Godliness, with
Godliness, Brotherly Kindness; and with Brotherly Kindness, Love. In a word,
let us labor to abound in every good work, that may make us pleasing and
acceptable unto God: let us bring forth good fruit, Abundanter, Plentifully.

Thirdly and lastly, lest all our labor 3 Perseuerantly.
prove but in vain, we must bring forth good fruit Perseueranter,
Perseuerantly. For to what purpose is it, if a Soldier at the first onset
courageously encounter with the Enemy: and before he has obtained the victory,
throw away his Arms? Or what does it profit a Mariner to commit himself to
the Sea, and to enjoy the benefit of a fair gale of Wind even unto his desired
Ports mouth: if then the wind do turn, and so turn him back again before
he can thrust into the Port? Happily thou have been just, and have done that
which is lawful and right, as it is in Ezec. 18. 5. Ezekiel. 18.
More particularly, as the Prophet there expresses himself, Thou have not
eaten upon the Moun aines, nor lift up thine eyes unto Idols, nor defiled thy
neighbors wife, nor oppressed any, but have restored to thy Debtour his
Pledge: thou have spoiled none by violence; thou have given thy Bread to the
Hungry, and covered the Naked with a Garment; thou have not given forth upon
Usury, neither taken any Increase: thou have withdrawn thy hand from
iniquity, and executed true Judgment between man and man: thou have walked
in Gods Statutes, and kept his Judgments to deal truly. Thus far have thou
gone, and in these good courses thou have continued a long time, and in so
doing have done well: But tell me, what will all this thy righteousness
avail thee, if afterward thou shall fall away from God, and entangle thy self
again 2 Pet. 2. ^0.
in the filthiness of the world, like the Dog that returns to his own
vomit, and the Sow that is washed, to her wallowin the mire? If the righteous
turn away Ezekiel. 18.
from his righteousness, and commits iniquity, shall he live? says the
Lord. No, All his righteousness that he has done, shall not be mentioned: In
his trespass that he has trespassed, and in his sin that he has sinned,
in them shall he dye. Ezekiel. 18. Yea, It had been better for him never to have
acknowledged the way of Righteousness, (as the Apostle 2 Pet. 2.
speaks) then after he has known it, to turn from the holy Commandment
delivered unto him: For the latter end of that man, is worse then the beginning.

If therefore thou would make sure work for the good of thy Soul, and store
up comfort for thy self against the day of death, and that great day of wrath:
then thou must not rely upon thy former righteousness, as the Rich man in the
Gospel did upon the store he Luke 12. 19.
had treasured up in his Barnes: and say, Soul take thine ease, and freely
disport thy self hence-forward in the delights of sin; for thou have already
brought forth good fruit plentifully, which will serve thee for many years.
No, thou must bring forth good fruit Perseuerantly: for it is not here said,
every tree, Quae non fecit, which has not brought forth good fruit: but every
tree non faciens, not bringing forth good fruit shall be hewn down and cast
into the fire: So that fecisse non sufficit, it suffices not formerly to have
brought forth good fruit, unless thou continue in so doing perseuerantly.

No man, says Christ, putting his Luke 9. 62.
hand to the Plough, and looking back, is fit for the Kingdom of Heaven. Sola
perseuerantia Bernardus.
singularis summi regis est filia, (says a Father) ea enim sola est haeres
regn^ Coelorum: Perseverance is the only Daughter of the King of Heaven, for
she only is H^ire to the Kingdom of Heaven. therefore says our Savior to his
Disciples, Qui perseuerauerit, Matthew. 24. 13
h^ that cont^nueth to the end shall be saved: and to the Church of Smyrna,
Revel 2. 10.
Be thou faithful unto the death, and I will give thee a Crown of Life. And
upon these terms does Saint Paul assure himself, and every faithful
Christian a Crown of righteousness: I have fought a good fight, and have
finished my 2. Tim* 7. 8.
course; I have kept the faith. Hence forth is laid up for me the Crown of
righteousness, which the Lord the righteous Judge shall give me at that day:
and not to me only, but unto all them also that love that his appearing. The
absolute necessity of this Perseverance for all such as expect the Happiness
of a better life, has so deeply, sunk into the thoughts of Gods Children in
all ages, that they have constantly resolved to suffer the bitterest torments
the pregnant malice of the Devil and his Factors could inflict upon them;
rather then to loose the blessed hope of their Heavenly inheritance. If
therefore we respect our Future Ha^pinesse, let us not be like the plant
Epheme^on, which does spring and flourish, and fade in a day: but as the Olive
tree flourish^th and fru^^ i^eth all the year long. so let us continue in
bringing forth good fruit perseuerantly. To be short, the way to Heaven though
it be Narrow yet it is Long: and our life at the Longest but Short. Let us
therefore, that we may the better compass so great a Journey, get up betimes
out of our beds of Sin, even in the morning of our age, at the first hour of
the day; and quickly make our selves ready, that so we may set forth betimes
toward the Celestial Canaan. And when we have once set our feet in the way
of righteousness, the direct and only Rode to that Holy City, If at the end
of our lives, when we can travail no longer, we would rest in Abraham's
bosom: let us labor to imitate him in his iourneying unto the terrestrial
Canaan: that is, let us eundo pergere, still be going forward Genesis 129.
from grace to grace, whatsoever Remoraes do encounter us in the way,
whatsoever afflictions do befall us having our eyes fixed upon those heavenly
joys, whereof the troubles and afflictions of this life are not worthy. The
older we grow in years, the more let us grow in goodness: Let our Works, our
Love, our Service, our Faith, our Patience be like the Thyatirians, Revel. 2.
19.
more at the last then at the first. Thus like good Trees, bringing forth good
fruit presently, plentifully, perseuerantly; we shall at length be brought by
him who is Alpha and Omega Revel. 1. 8.
the beginning and the ending, unto the beginning of that unspeakable
Happiness which shall have no ending.

But happily you will reply in the words of Saint Paul, (...)? 2 Cor. 2. 16.
who is sufficient for these things? Is not our Father an Amorite, and our
Mother a Hittite! The best of men by Nature is no better then a Br^ar, a Micha
74. Math. 7.
Thorn, a Thistle. And do men gather Grapes of Thorns, and Figs of
Thistles* Ex Spinis non nascitur Rosa. Such as is the Tree, such is the Fruit.
It Is true: And therefore to bring forth Good fruit presently, plentifully,
perseuerantly, we must be ingrafted into the true Vine, and abide in it. I am
that Vine, says Christ, and ye are the branches. John 15. 5.
He that abides in me, and I in him, the same brings forth good fruit: For
without me ye can do nothing. If a man verse. 6.
abide not in me, he is cast forth as a branch that is withered, and men
gather them, and cast them into the fire, and they are burned. But how are we
ingrafted into Christ? by Faith. How do we abide in Him? By Love. How does He
abide in us? by his Holy Spirit: through whose gracious opperation we are
enabled to bring forth the good fruits of the Spirit: Now for as much as no Arm
of Flesh can command this Faith, this Love, this Holy Spirit,

Therefore

O LORD GOD, we do here in all humility address our selves unto thy divine
Majesty, entirely desiring thee in mercy to look down from Heaven upon us
miserable wretches here on earth. We acknowledge, O Lord, and thou know,
that of our selves we have no power to order our ways aright unto thee: for
we are a crooked generation, a people by nature the children of wrath: so that
if thou should leave us to our selves, we must look for no less, then like
fruitless Trees to be hewn down, and cast into the fire. But, good God,
remember that thou art our Creator, and we thy Creatures: that thou art our
Father, and we thy children. Oh, neglect not the work of thine Hand; neither
suffer us thy children to perish: but look upon us in the sweet compassions of
a tender hearted Father: for the blood of Christ pardon all our sins past:
throw behind thy back those cursed fruits we have hitherto continually
brought forth to the dishonor of thy Great and Glorious Name, that they may
never be laid unto our charge: and enable us for the time to come to do what
thou requirest, and then require what thou will, and we will do it. O Lord
stretch forth thine hand, and engraft us by a true and lively Faith into the
Body of thy Son Jesus Christ. Dwell in us, O heavenly Father, and blessed
Son by thy holy Spirit: that by the gracious and powerful operation thereof,
like good trees we may bring forth good fruit, that we may every day more and
more abound and increase in grace and goodness, till we come to be perfect
men in Christ lesus. Graciously hear us, most merciful Father, and grant us
whatsoever thou know to be good for us, and that for thy Son and our
Savior Jesus Christ his sake. To whom with thee and the blessed Spirit, be
ascribed of us and of all thy Saints, all praise power and Glory for ever. Amen.

FINIS.

