SIX SERMONS UPON SEVERAL OCCASIONS, PREACHED before the King, and elsewhere:
By that late learned and reverend Divine JOHN DONE, Doctor in divinity, and
Dean of S. Paul's, LONDON.

Printed by the Printers to the University of CAMBRIDGE:

And are to be sold by Nicholas Fussell and Humphrey Mosley, at their shop in
Paul's Churchyard.

1634.

TWO SERMONS PREACHED BEFORE KING CHARLES, Upon the xxvi verse of the first
Chapter of GENESIS.

By Dr. DONE DEAN OF PAVLS.

Printed by the Printers to the University of CAMBRIDGE.

MDCXXXIIII.

Genesis 1. 26. And God said, Let us make man in our image, after our
likeness.
NEver such a frame so soon set up, as this in this chapter: For, for the thing
it self, there is no other thing to compare it with; for it is all, it is the
whole world. And for the time, there was no other time to compare it with; for
this was the beginning of time, In the beginning God created heaven and earth.
That earth, which in some thousands of years men could not look over, nor
discern what form it had (for neither Lactantius, almost three hundred years
after Christ; nor S. Augustine, more then a hundred years after him, would
believe the earth to be round) That earth, which no man in his person is ever
said to have compassed till our age: That earth, which is too much for man yet
(for as yet a very great part of the earth is unpeopled) That earth, which, if
we will cast it all but into a Map, costs many months labor to grave it; nay,
if we will but cast a piece of an acre of it into a garden, costs many years
labor to fashion and furnish it; all that earth: And then that heaven, which
spreads so far, as that subtle men have, with some appearance of
probability, imagined, that in that heaven, in those manifold Spheres of the
Planets and the Stars, there are many earths, many worlds, as big as this
which we inhabit: That earth and that heaven, which spent God himself,
Almighty God, six days in finishing, Moses sets up in a few syllables, in one
line, In principio, In the beginning God created heaven and earth. If a Livie
or a Guicciardine, or such extensive and voluminous authors had had this story
in hand, God must have made another world, to have made them a library to hold
their books, of the making of this world. Into what wire would they have drawn
out this earth! Into what leaf-gold would they have beat out these heavens! It
may assist our conjecture herein, to consider, that amongst those men, who
proceed with a sober modesty and limitation in their writing, and make a
conscience not to clog the world with unnecessary books; yet the volumes which
are written by them, upon the beginning of Genesis, are scarce less then
infinite. God did no more but say, Let this and this be done; and Moses does no
more but say, that upon Gods saying it was done. God required not Nature to
help him to do it; Moses required not Reason to help him to believe: The holy
Ghost hovered upon the waters, and so God wrought; The holy Ghost hovered upon
Moses too, and so he wrote: And we believe these things to be so, by the same
Spirit in the mouth of Moses, by which they were made so in Gods hand: Only
(Beloved) remember, that a frame may be thrown down in much less time then it
was set up. A child, an ape can give fire to a cannon; and a vapor can shake
the earth: and when Christ said, Throw down this Temple, and in three days I
will raise it, they never stood upon the consideration of throwing it down;
they knew that might be soon done: but they wondered at the speedy raising of
it. Now, if all this earth were made in that minute, may not all come to the
general dissolution in this minute? Or may not thy acres, thy miles, thy
shires shrink into feet, and so few feet, as shall but make up thy grave? when
he who was a great lord must be but a cottager, and not so well; for a cottager
must have so many acres to his cottage: but in this case, a little piece of an
acre, five foot, is become the house it self, the house and the land; the grave
is all: lower then that, the grave is the land, and the tenement, and the
tenant too. He that lies in it, becomes the same earth that he lies in; they
all make but one earth, and but a little of it. But then raise thy self to a
higher hope again: God has made better land, the land of promise; a stronger
city, the new Jerusalem; and inhabitants for that everlasting city, us, whom
he made, not by saying, Let there be men; but by consultation, by deliberation;
God said, Let us make man, etc.

We shall pursue our great examples, God in Divisio.
doing, Moses in saying, and so make haste in applying the parts. But first
receive them: and since we have the whole world in contemplation, consider in
these words, the four quarters of the world, by application, by fair and just
accommodations of the words. First, in the first word that God speaks here,
Faciamus, Let Us, in the plural, (a denotation of diverse persons in the
Godhead) we consider our East, where we must begin, at the knowledge and
confession of the Trinity: for though in the way to heaven we have traveled
beyond the Gentiles, when we come to confess but one God (the Gentiles could
not do that) yet we are still among the Jews, if we think that one God to be
but one person. Christ's name is Oriens, Zech. 6. 12.
the East; if we will be named by him, (called Christians) we must look to this
East, the confession of the Trinity: there is then our East in the Faciamus;
Let Us, Us make man: And then our West is in the next word, Faciamus hominem:
Though we be thus made; made by the council, made by the concurrence, made by
the hand of the whole Trinity: yet we are made but men; and man but in the
appellation in this Text; and man there is but Adam; and Adam is but earth, but
red earth, died red in blood, in blood, in soul, the blood of our own souls. To
that West we must all come, to the earth; The sun knows his going down:
even Psalm. 104. 19.
the sun, for all his glory and height, has a going down, and he knows it.
The highest cannot divest mortality, nor the discomfort of mortality. When you
see a cloud rise out of the Lue. 12. 54.
west, straightway you say, There comes a storm, says Christ: When out of the
region of your West, (that is, your latter days) there comes a cloud, a
sickness; you feel a storm: even the best moral constancy is shaken. But
this cloud, and this storm, and this West there must be; and that is our second
consideration. But then the next word designs a North, a strong and powerful
NOrth, to scatter and dissipate these clouds: Ad imaginem and similitudinem;
that we are made according to a pattern, to an image, to a likeness, which God
proposed to himself for the making of man. This consideration, that God did not
rest in that preexistent matter, out of which he made all other creatures, and
produced their forms out of their matter, for the making of man; but took a
form, a pattern, a model for that work: This is the North-winde that is called
upon to carry Cant. 4. 16.
out the perfumes of the garden, to spread the goodness of God abroad: this is
that which is intended in Job; Fair weather comes out of the Job. 37. 22.
North. Our West, our declination is in this, that we are but earth; our North,
our dissipation of that darkness is in this, that we are not all earth: though
we be of that matter, we have on another form, another image, another
likeness. And then whose image and likeness it is, is our Meridionall height,
our Noon, our South-point, our highest elevation; In imagine nostra, Let us
make man in our image. Though our sun set at noon, as the prophet Amos Amos
8. 9.
speaks; though we die in our youth, or fall in our height; yet even in that
sunne-set we shall have a noon: for this image of God shall never depart from
our soul, no not when that soul departs from our body: And that is our South,
our Meridionall height and glory. And when we have thus seen this East, in the
Faciamus; that I am the workmanship and care of the whole Trinity; and this
West, in the Hominem; that for all this, my matter, my substance is but earth;
But then a North, a power of overcoming that law and miserable state, In
imagine; that though in my matter the earth, I must die; yet in my form, in
that image which I am made by, I cannot die: And after all, a South, a
knowledge that this image is not the image of angels themselves, to whom we
shall be like; but it is by the same life by which those angels themselves were
made, the image of God himself: when I have gone over this East, and West, and
North, and South here in this world, I should be sorry, as Alexander was, if
there were no more worlds. But there is another world, which these
considerations will discover and lead us to, in which our joy and our glory
shall be to see that God essentially, and face to face, after whose image and
likeness we were made before. But as that Pilot, which has harbored his ship
so far within land, as that he must have change of winds, in all the points
of the compass, to bring her out, cannot hope to bring her out in one day: so
being to transport you by occasion of these words, from this world to the next,
and in this world, through all the compass, all the four quarters thereof; I
cannot hope to make all this voyage to day. To day we shall consider our
longitude, our East and West; and our North and South at another tide and
another gale.

First then we look toward our East, the fountain Oriens.
The creation was in the East, and there our next world began too: there the
gates of heaven opened to us, and opened to us in the gates of death: for our
heaven is the death of our Savior, and there he lived, and died there, and
there he looked into our West, from the East, from his terrasse, from his
pinnacle, from his exaltation (as himself calls it) the Cross. The light which
arises to us in this East, the knowledge which we receive in this first word of
our text, Faciamus, Let us (where God, speaking of himself, speaks in the
plural) is the manifestation of the Trinity; The Trinity, which is the first
letter in his Alphabet, that ever thinks to read his name in the Book of life;
the first note in his Gammut, that ever thinks to sing his part in the
Triumphant Church. Let him have done as much as all the worthies, and suffer as
much as all natures martyrs, the penurious Philosophers; let him have known as
much as they pretend to know, Omne scibile, all that can be known; nay, and
In-intelligibilia, In-investigabilia (as Tertullian speaks) un-understandable
things, unrevealed decrees of God: let him have writ as much as Aristotle writ,
or as is written upon Aristotle (which is multiplication enough) yet he has
not learned to spell, that has not learned the Trinity: he has not learned
to pronounce the first word, that cannot bring three persons into one God. The
subject of natural Philosophers, are the four elements, which God made: the
subject of supernatural Philosophy, Divinity, are the three elements which
God is; and (if we may so speak) which make God, that is, constitute God,
notify God to us, Father, Son, and holy Ghost. The natural man, that
hearkens to his own heart, and the law written there, may produce actions that
are good; good in the nature, and matter, and substance of the work: he may
relieve the poor, he may defend the oppressed; but yet he is but as an open
field: and though he be not absolutely barren, he bears but grass. The godly
man, he that has taken in the knowledge of a great and powerful God, and
enclosed and hedged in himself with the fear of God, may produce actions better
then the mere nature of man, because he referres his actions to the glory of
an imagined God: but yet this man, though he be more fruitful then the former,
more then a grassie field, is but a ploughed field, and bears but corn, and
corn (God knows) choked with weeds. But the man that has taken hold of God, by
those handles, by which God has delivered and manifested himself, in the
notions of Father, Son, and holy Ghost; he is no field, but a garden, a
garden of Gods planting, paradise, in which grow all things good to eat, and
good to see (spiritual refection, and spiritual recreation too) and all
things good to cure: he has his being, and his diet, and his physic there, in
the knowledge of the Trinity: his being, in the mercy of the Father; his
physic, in the merits of his Son; his diet, his daily bread, in the daily
visitations of the holy Ghost. God is not pleased, not satisfied with our bare
knowledge that there is a God; for, it is impossible to please God without
faith: and Hebr. 11. 6.
there is no such exercise of faith in the knowledge of a God, but that reason
and nature will bring a man to it. When we profess God in the Creed, by way of
belief, Credo in Deum, I believe in God; in the same article we profess him to
be a Father too; I believe in God the Father Almighty: and that notion, the
Father, necessarily implies a second person, a Son. And then we profess him
to be maker of heaven and earth: and in the creation the holy Ghost, the Spirit
of God, is expressly named: so that we do but exercise reason and nature in
directing our selves upon God: we exercise not Faith (and without faith it is
impossible to please God) till we come to that which is above nature, till we
apprehend a Trinity: we know God, we believe in the Trinity. The Gentiles
multiplied gods; there were almost as many gods as men that believed in them;
and I am got out of that throng, and out of that noise, when I am come into the
knowledge of one God: but I am got above stairs, got into the bedchamber, when
I am come to see the Trinity, and to apprehend not only, that I am in the
care of a great and powerful God, but that there is a Father that made me, a
Son that redeemed me, a holy Ghost that applies this good purpose of the
Father and Son upon me, to me. The root of all is God. But it is not the way
to receive fruits, to dig to the root, but to reach to the boughs. I reach for
my creation, to the Father; for my redemption, to the Son; for my
sanctification, to the holy Ghost: and so I make the knowledge of God a tree of
life unto me, and not otherwise. Truly it is a sad contemplation to see
Christians scratch, and wound, and tear one another with the ignominious
invectives and uncharitable names of Heretic and Schismatic, about
ceremonial and problematicall, and indeed but critical verbal controversies;
and in the mean time, the foundation of all, the Trinity, undermined by those
numerous, those multitudinous ant-hills of Socinians, that overflow some parts
of the Christian world, and multiply every where. And therefore the adversaries
of the Reformation were wise in their generation, when, to supplant the credit
of both those great assistants of the Reformation, Luther and Calvin, they
impute to Calvin fundamental error in the divinity of the second person of
the Trinity, the Son; And they impute to Luther a detestation of the word
Trinity, and an expunction thereof, in all places of the Liturgy, where the
Church had received that word: They knew well, if that slander could prevail
against those persons, nothing that they could say, could prevail upon any good
Christians. But though in our Doctrine we keep up the Trinity aright; yet God
knows, in our Practice we do not: I hope it cannot be said of any of us, that
he believes not the Trinity: but who amongst us thinks of the Trinity,
considers of the Trinity? Father and Son do naturally imply and induce one
another, and therefore they fall oftener into our consideration; but for the
holy Ghost, who feels him, when he feels him? who takes knowledge of his
working, when he works? Indeed our Fathers provided not well enough for the
worship of the whole Trinity, nor of the holy Ghost in particular, in the
endowments of the Church, and consecrations of the Churches, and possessions in
their names: what a spiritual dominion in the Prayers and worship of the
people, what a temporal dominion in the possessions of the world, had the
Virgin Marie, Queen of heaven, and Queen of earth too! She was made
joynt-purchaser of the Church with the Son, and had as much of the worship
thereof as he, though she paid her Fine in milk, and he in blood: And, till a
new sect came in her Sons name, and in his name, the name of Jesus, took the
Regencie so far out of that Queen-mothers hands, and sued out her sons
liverie so far, as that, though her name be used, the Virgin Marie is but a
Feofee in trust for them; all was hers. And if God oppose not these new
usurpers of the world, posterity will soon see S. Ignatius worth all the
Trinity in possessions and endowments; and that sumptuous and splendid
foundation of his first Temple at Rome, may well create a conjecture and
suspicion. Travel no farther; Survey but this City, and, of their not one
hundred Churches, the Virgin Marie has a dozen: The Trinity has but one;
Christ has but one; the holy Ghost has none. But not to go into the City,
nor out of our selves, which of us does truly and considerately ascribe the
comforts that he receives in dangers or in distresses, to that God of all
comfort, the Comforter, the holy Ghost? We know who procured us our
presentation, and our dispensation: you know who procured you your offices, and
your honors: Shall I ever forget who gave me my comfort in sickness? who gave
me my comfort in the troubles, and perplexities, and diffidencies of my
conscience? The holy Ghost, the holy Ghost brought you hither; The holy Ghost
opens your ears and your hearts here. Till in all your distresses you say,
Veni Creator Spiritus, Come holy Ghost; and that you feel a comfort in his
coming: you can never say, Veni Domine Jesu, Come Lord Jesus, come to
judgment. Never to consider the day of judgment, is a fearful thing; but to
consider the day of judgment without the holy Ghost, is a thousand times more
fearful.

This seal then, this impression, this notion of the Trinity, being set upon
us in this first plural word of our Text, Faciamus, Let us (for Father, Son,
and holy Ghost made man) and this seal being reimprinted upon us in our second
Creation, or Regeneration, in Baptism, (man is baptized in the name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost) this notion of the Trinity,
being our distinctive character from Jew and Gentile; this being our
specificall form; why does not this our form, this soul of our Religion
denominate us? why are we not called Trinitarians, a name that would embrace
the profession of all the persons; but only Christians, which limits and
determines us upon one? The first Christians, amongst whose manifold
persecutions, scorn and contempt was not the least, in contempt and scorn were
called Nazaraei, Nazarites, in the mouth of the vulgar; and Galilaei,
Galileans, in the mouth of Julian; and Judaei, Jews, in the mouth of Nero, when
he imputed the burning of Rome (his own art) to them; and Christiani,
Christians, so that (as Tertullian says) they could accuse Christians of
nothing, but the name of Christians: and yet they could not call them by their
right name of Christians, which was gentle, quiet, easy, patient men, made to
be trodden upon; but they gave them diverse names in scorn, yet never called them
Trinitarians. Christians themselves amongst themselves were called by diverse
names in the Primitive Church, for distinction; Fideles, the Faithful; and
Fratres, the Brethren; and Discipuli, Disciples; and after, by common custom
at Antioch, Christians: and after that (they say, by a council which the
Apostles held at the same City, at Antioch) there passed an express Canon of
the Church, that they should be called so, Christians: And before they had this
name at Antioch, first by common usage, after by a determinate Canon, to be
called Christians, from Christ; at Alexandria, they were called (most likely
from the name of Jesus) Jesseans. And so Philo Judaeus, in that book which he
writes de Jessaeis, intends by his Jesseans, Christians. And in diverse parts of
the world, into which Christians travel now, they find some elements, some
fragments, some relics of the Christian religion, in the practice of some
religious men, whom those Countries call Jesseans, doubtlesly derived and
continued from the name of Jesus. So that the Christians took many names to
themselves for distinction (Brethren, Disciples, Faithful) and they had many
names put upon them in scorn (Nazarites, Galileans, Jews, Christians) and yet
they were never by custom amongst themselves, never by commandment from the
Church, never in contempt from others, called Trinitarians, the profession of
the Trinity being their specific form, and distinctive character. Why so?
Beloved, the name of Christ involved all: not only because it is a name that
has a dignity in it, more then the rest (for Christ is an anointed person, a
King, a Messiah; and so the profession of that name conferres an unction, a
regal and a holy unction upon us, for we are thereby a royal priesthood) but
because in the profession of Christ, the whole Trinity is professed. How often
does the Son say that the Father sent him! And how often that the Father
will, and that he will send the holy Ghost! This is life eternal John 17. 3.
(says he) to know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have
sent; and sent with all power in heaven and in earth. This must be professed,
Father and Son; and then no man can profess this, no man can call Jesus the
Lord, but by the holy Ghost: So that as in the persecutions in the Primitive
Church, the Martyrs which were hurried to tumultuary executions, and could not
be heard for noise, in excusing themselves of treason, and sedition, and crimes
imputed to them, to make their cause odious, did use in the sight of the people
(who might see a gesture, though they could not hear a protestation) to sign
themselves with the sign of the Cross, to let them know for what profession
they died; so that the sign of the Cross, in that use thereof, in that time,
was an Abridgement and a Catechism of the whole Christian religion: So is the
professing of the name of Christ, the professing of the whole Trinity. As he
that confesses one God, is got beyond the mere natural man; And he that
confesses a Son of God, beyond him: so is neither got to the full truth,
till he confess the holy Ghost too. The fool says in his heart, There is no
God: The fool, says David; the emphaticall fool, in the highest degree of
folly: But though he get beyond that folly, he is a fool still, if he say,
There is no Christ; for Christ is the wisdom of the Father: And a fool still,
if he deny the holy Ghost. Etiam Christiani nomen superficies est, is
excellently said by Tertullian; The name and profession of a Christian, is but
a superficial outside, sprinkled upon my face in Baptism, or upon my outward
profession in actions, if I have not in my heart a sense of the holy Ghost,
that applies the mercies of the Father, and the merits of the Son to my soul.
As S. Paul said, Whilst you are without Christ, you are without God; It is an
Atheism (with S. Paul) to be no Christian: So whilst you are without the holy
Ghost, you are without Christ. It is Antichristian to deny, or not to confess
the holy Ghost. For as Christ is the manifestation of the Father, so the holy
Ghost is the application of the Son. Therein are we Christians, that in the
profession of that name of Christ, we profess all the three Persons: In Christ
is the whole Trinity; because, as the Father sent him, so sent he the holy
Ghost: And that is our specific form; that is our distinctive character from
Jew and Gentile, the Trinity.

But then is this specific form, this distinctive character, the notion of the
Trinity, conveyed to us, exhibited, imprinted upon us in our creation in this
word, this plural word, in the mouth of our own God, Faciamus, Let Us, Us. It
is here, and here first. This is an intimation, and the first intimation of the
Trinity from the mouth of God, in all the Bible. It is true, that though the
same faith, which is necessary to salvation now, were always necessary, and so
in the old Testament they were bound to believe in Christ, as well as in the
new, and consequently in the whole Trinity; yet not so explicitly, nor so
particularly as now: now Christ, calling upon God, in the name of the Father,
says, I have manifested thy Name unto the men which thou gave me out of John
17. 6.
the world. They were men appropriated to God, men exempt out of the world: yet
they had not a clear manifestation of Father and Son, the doctrine of the
Trinity, till Christ manifested it to them. I have manifested thy Name, thy
name of Father and Son. And therefore the Jewish Rabbis say, that the
Septuagint, the first Translatours of the Bible, did disguise some places of
the Scriptures, in their translation, lest Ptolomey (for whom they translated
it) should be scandalized with those places: And that this text was one of
those places, which, (say they) though it be otherwise in the copies of the
Scriptures which we have now, they translated Faciam, and not Faciamus: that
God said here, I will make, in the singular, and not, Let us make man, in the
plural; lest that plural word might have misled King Ptolomey to think that
the Jews had a plural religion, and worshipped diverse gods. So good an
evidence do they confess this text to be, for some kind of plurality in the
Godhead.

Here then God notified the Trinity; and here first. For though we accept an
intimation of the Trinity, in the first line of the Bible, where Moses joined
a plural name, Elohim, with a singular verb, Bara; and so in construction it
is Creavit Dii, Gods created heaven and earth: yet besides that, that is rather
a mysterious collection, then an evident conclusion of a plurality of persons:
though we read that in that first verse, before this in the 26; yet Moses writ
that, which is in the beginning of this chapter, more then 2000. years after
God spoke this that is in our text: so long was Gods plural before Moses his
plural; Gods Faciamus before Moses Bara Elohim. So that in this text begins
our Catechism: here we have (and here first) the saving knowledge of the
Trinity. For, when God spoke here, to whom could God speak, but to God? Non
cum rebus creandis, non cum re nihili, says Athanasius, speaking of Gods first
speaking, when he said of the first creature, Let there be light. God spoke not
then to future things, that were not. When God spoke first, there was no
creature at all to speak to: when God spoke of the making of man, there were no
creatures. But were there any creatures able to create, or able to assist him
in the creation of man? who? Angels? some had thought so in S. Basils time; and
to them S. Basil says, Suntne illi? God says, Let us make man to our image;
and could he say so to Angels? Are Angels and God all one? or is that that is
like an Angel, therefore like God? It was sua ratio, suum verbum, sua
sapientia, says that Father: God spoke to his own word and wisdom; to his own
purpose and goodness: And the Son is the word and wisdom of God; and the
holy Ghost is the goodness and the purpose of God, that is, the
administration, the dispensation of his Church. It is true, that when God
speaks this over again, in the Church (as he does every day, now this minute)
then God speaks to his Angels, to the Angels of the Church, to his Ministers:
he says, Faciamus, Let Us, Us both together, you and we, make a man: join mine
ordinance (your preaching) with my Spirit (says God to us) and so make man:
Preach the oppressor, and preach the wanton; and preach the calumniatour, into
an other nature; make that ravening wolf, a man; that licentious goat, a man;
that insinuating serpent, a man by thy preaching. To day if you will hear his
voice, hear us; for here he calls upon us to join with him for the making of
man. But for his first Faciamus, which is in our text, it is excellently said,
Dictum in senatu, and Rupertus.
soliloquio: It was spoken in a senate, and yet in solitariness; spoken in
private, and yet publicly spoken; spoken where there were diverse, and yet but
one, one God, and three persons.

If there were no more intended in this plural expression, Us, but (as some
have conceived) that God spoke here in the person of a Prince and Sovereign
Lord; and therefore spoke, as Princes do, in the plural, We command, and we
forbid: yet S. Gregory's caution would justly fall upon it, Reverenter
pensandum est, It requires reverent consideration, if it be but so: for God
speaks so, like a King, in the plural, but seldom, but five times (in my
account) in all the scriptures; and in all five, in cases of important
consequence. In this text first, where God creates man, whom he constitutes his
Viceroy in the world; here he speaks in his Royal plural: And then in the
next Chapter, where he exempts man's term in this vice-regencie to the end of
the world, in propounding man means of succession; Faciamus, Let us make him a
helper: there he speaks in his Royal plural. And also in the third Chapter,
in declaring the heinousness of man's fault, and arraigning him, and all us in
him, God says, Sicut unus ex nobis, Man is become as one of us, not content to
be our Viceroy, but our selves: there is his Royal plural too: And again, in
that declaration of his justice, in that confusion of the builders of Babylon,
Descendamus, Confundamus, Let us do it. And then lastly, in that great work of
mingling mercy with justice, which (if we may so speak) is Gods masterpiece,
when he says, Quis ex nobis? Who will go for us, and publish this? In these
places, and these only (and not all these neither, if we take it exactly
according to the original; for in the second, the making of Eve, though the
vulgar have it in the plural, it is indeed but singular in the Hebrew) God
speaks as a King, in his Royal plural still. And when it is but so,
Reverenter pensandum est, says that Father, It behooves us to hearken
reverently to him, for kings are images of God; such images of God, as have
ears, and can hear; and hands, and can strike. But I would ask no more
premeditation at your hands, when you come to speak to God in this place, then
if you sued to speak with the King: to speak with no more fear of God here,
then if you went to the King under the conscience of a guiltiness toward him,
and a knowledge that he knew it. And that is your case here; sinners, and even
manifest sinners: for even midnight is noon in the sight of God; and when your
candles are put out, his sun shines still. Nec quid absconditum a calore ejus
(says David) Psalm. 19. 6.
There is nothing hid from the heat thereof: not only no sin hid from the
light thereof, from the sight of God; but not from the heat thereof, not from
the wrath and indignation of God. If God speak plurally, only in the majesty
of a sovereign Prince, still Reverenter pensandum, that calls for reverence.
What reverence? There are national differences in outward reverence and
worships: some worship princes, and parents, and masters, in one; some in
another fashion: children kneel to ask blessing of parents, in England; but
where else? servants attend not with the same reverence upon masters in other
nations, as with us: Accesses to their princes, are not with the same
difficulty, nor the same solemnity in France, as in Turkey. But this rule
goes through all nations, that in that disposition, and posture, and action of
the body, which in that place is esteemed most humble and reverent, God is to
be worshipped. Do so then here. God is your Father; ask blessing upon your
knees; pray in that posture: God is your King; worship him with that worship
which is highest in our use and estimation. We have no Grandes, that stand
covered to the King: where there are such, though they stand covered in the
Kings presence, they do not speak to him for matters of grace, they do not sue
to him: so, ancient Canons make difference of persons in the presence of God:
where and how this and this shall dispose of themselves in the Church of God,
dignity, and age, and infirmity will induce differences. But for prayer,
there is no difference: one humiliation is required of all: As when the King
comes in here, howsoever they sat diversely before, all return to one manner of
expressing their acknowledgement of his presence: so at the Oremus, Let us
pray, Let us all fall down, and worship, and kneel before the Lord our maker.

So he speaks in our Text: not only as the Lord our King, intimating his
providence and administration; but as the Lord our maker; and then a maker so,
as that he made us in a Council; Faciamus, Let us: and that he speaks as in
council, is an other argument for reverence. For what trust or freedom soever
I have by his favor with any Counselor of state; yet I should surely use
another manner of consideration to this plurality in God, to this meeting in
Council, to this intimation of a Trinity, then to those other actions, in
which God is presented to us singly, as one God; for so he is presented to the
natural man as well as to us. And here enters the necessity of this
knowledge, O portet denuo nasci; without a second birth, no salvation: And so
no second birth without Baptism, no Baptism, but in the name of the Father,
Son, and holy Ghost. It was the entertainment of God himself, his delight,
his contemplation, for those infinite millions of generations, when he was
without a world, without creatures, to joy in one another, in the Trinity, as
Gregory Nazianzene, and a Poet as well as a Father, as most of the Fathers
were, expresses it:

-- Ille suae splendorem cernere formae
Gaudebat --
It was the Fathers delight to look upon himself in the Son,

-- Numenque suum triplicique parique
Luce nitens --
And to see the whole Godhead, in a threefold and equal glory. It was Gods
own delight, and it must be the delight of every Christian, upon particular
occasions to carry his thoughts upon the several persons of the Trinity. If I
have a bar of iron, that bar in that form will not nail a door: If a sow
of lead, that lead in that form will not stop a leak: If a wedge of gold, that
wedge will not buy my bread. The general notion of a mighty God, may less fit
my particular purposes: But I coin my gold into current money, when I apprehend
God in the several notions of the Trinity; That, if I have been a prodigal
son, I have a Father in heaven, and can go to him, and say, Father, I have
sinned, and be received by him; That, if I be a decayed father, and need the
sustentation of my own children, there is a Son in heaven, that will do more
for me then my own children (of what good means or good nature soever they be)
can or will do; If I be dejected in spirit, there is a holy Spirit in heaven,
which shall bear witness to my spirit, that I am a child of God: And if the
ghosts of those sinners, whom I made sinners, haunt me after their deaths, in
returning to my memory, and reproaching my conscience with the heavy
judgments that I have brought upon them; If after the death of my own sin,
when my appetite is dead to some particular sin, the memory and sinful
delight of those passed sins, the ghosts of those sins haunt me again: yet
there is a holy Ghost in heaven, that shall exorcise these, and shall
overshadow me. The God of the whole world is God alone, in the general notion,
as he is so, God; but he is my God most especially, and most appliably, as he
is received by me in the several notions of Father, Son, and holy Ghost.

This is our East; here we see God, God in Occidens.
making of us. But then my West presents it self; that is an occasion to humble
me, in the next word: he makes but man; a man, that is, but Adam, but Earth. I
remember 4. names, by which man is often called in the scriptures: and of these
four, three do absolutely carry misery in their significations; three to one
against any man, that he is miserable: One name of man is Ish; and that they
derive a sonitu; Man is but a voice, but a sound, but a noise: he begins the
noise himself, when he comes crying into the world; and when he goes out,
perchance friends celebrate, perchance enemies calumniate him, with a diverse
voice, a diverse noise. A melancholic man is but a groaning; a sportfull man,
but a song; an active man, but a trumpet; a mighty man, but a thunderclap:
every man but Ish, but a sound, but a noise. An other name is Enosh. Enosh, is
mere calamity, misery, depression. It is indeed most properly oblivion; And
so the word is most elegantly used by David, Quid est homo? where the name of
man is Enosh: And so that which we translate, What is man, that thou art
mindful of him? is indeed, What is forgetfulness, that thou should
remember it; that thou should think of that man, whom all the world has
forgotten? first man is but a voice, but a sound: but because fame and honor
may come within that name of a sound, of a voice; therefore he is overtaken
with another damp, man is but oblivion: his fame, his name shall be forgotten.
One name man has, that has some taste of greatness and power in it, Gheber;
and yet, I that am that man (says the Prophet, for there that name of man
Gheber is used) I am the man that has seen affliction by Lam. 3. 1.
the rod of Gods wrath. Man Ish is so miserable, as that he afflicts himself,
cries, and whines out his own time; and man Enosh, so miserable, as that others
afflict him, and bury him in ignominious oblivion: and man, that is, Gheber,
the greatest and powerfullest of men, is yet but that man, that may possibly,
that may justly see affliction by the rod of Gods wrath. And from Gheber, he
made Adam, which is the fourth name of man, indeed the first name of man, the
name in this text, and the name to which every man must be called, and refer
himself, and call himself by; earth, and red earth.

Now God did not say of man, as of other creatures, Let us, or let the earth
bring forth herbs, and fruits, and trees, as upon the third day; Now let the
earth bring forth cattle and worms, as upon the sixth day, the same day that
he made man: Non imperiali verbo, sed familiari manu, says Tertullian; God
calls not man out with an imperious command, but he leads him out with a
familiar, with his own hand. And it is not, Fiat homo, but, Faciamus; not, Let
there be, but, Let us make man. Man is but an earthen vessel. It is true: but
when we are upon that consideration, God is the potter: if God will be that, I
am well content to be this: let me be any thing, so that that I am be from my
God. I am as well content to be a sheep as a lion, so God will be my shepherd;
and the Lord is my shepherd: to be a cottage, as a castle; the house, as a
city, so God will be the builder: and the Lord builds, and watches the city,
the house; this house, this city, me: to be rye, as wheat, so God will be the
husbandman: and the Lord plants me, and waters, and weeds, and gives the
increase: and to be clothed in leather, as well as in silk, so God will be the
merchant: and he clothed me in Adam, and assures me of clothing, in clothing
the lilies of the field; and is fitting the robe of Christ's righteousness to
me now this minute: Adam is as good to me, as Gheber; a clod of earth, as a
hill of earth, so God be the potter.

God made man of earth, not of air, not of fire. Man has many offices, that
appertain to this world, and whilst he is here, must not withdraw himself from
those offices of mutual society, upon pretense of zeal, or better serving God
in a retired life. A ship will no more come to the harbor without ballast,
then without sails: A man will no more get to heaven without discharging his
duties to other men, then without doing them to God himself: Man lives not by
bread only, says Christ; but Luke 4. 4.
yet he lives by bread too: every man must do the duties, every man must bear
the encumbrances of some calling.

Pulvis es, Thou art earth: he whom thou treadest upon, is no less; and he
that treads upon thee, is no more. Positively, it is a low thing to be but
earth: and yet the low earth, is the quiet center: there may be rest,
acquiescence, content in the lowest condition: But comparatively, earth is as
high as the highest. Challenge him that magnifies himself above thee, to meet
thee in Adam; there bid him, if he will have more nobility, more greatness
then thou, take more original sin then thou have. If God have submitted thee
to as much sin, and penalty of sin, as him; he has afforded thee as much, and
as noble earth as him. And if he will not try it in the root, in your
equality in Adam; yet, in another test, another furnace, in the grave, he
must: there all dusts are equal. Except an epitaph tell me who lies there, I
cannot tell by the dust; nor by the epitaph know, which is the dust it speaks
of, if another have been laid there before, or after, in the same grave: nor
can any epitaph be confident in saying, Here lies; but, Here was laid: for so
various, so vicissitudinarie is all this world, as that even the dust of the
grave has revolutions. As the motions of an upper sphere imprint a motion in a
lower sphere, other then naturally it would have; so the changes of the life
work after death. And as envy supplants and removes us alive; a shovell
removes us, and throws us out of our grave, after death. No limbeck, no
weights can tell you, This is dust royal, this plebeian dust: no commission,
no inquisition can say, This is catholic, this is heretical dust. All lie
alike, and all shall rise alike: alike, that is, at once, and upon one command.
The saint cannot accelerate, the reprobate cannot retard the resurrection. And
all that rise to the right hand, shall be equally kings; and all at the left,
equally what? the worst name we can call them by, or affect them with, is
devil: and then they shall have bodies to be tormented in, which devils have
not. Miserable, unexpressible, unimaginable, macerable condition, where the
sufferer would be glad to be but a devil; where it were some happiness, and
some kind of life, to be able to die; and a great preferment, to be nothing!

He made us all of earth, and all of red earth: our earth was red, even when it
was in Gods hands: a redness that amounts to a shamefastness, to a blushing
at our infirmities, is imprinted in us by Gods hands: for this redness is but
a conscience, a guiltiness of needing a continual supply, and succession of
more and more grace: and we are all red, red so, even from the beginning, and
in our best state. Adam had, the angels had thus much of this infirmity, that
though they had a great measure of grace, they needed more. The prodigal
child grew poor enough after he had received his portion: and he may be
wicked enough, that trusts upon former or present grace, and seeks not more.
This redness, a blushing, that is, an acknowledgement that we could not
subsist with any measure of faith, except we pray for more faith; nor of grace,
except we seek more grace, we have from the hand of God: and an other redness
from his hand too, the blood of his Son; for that blood was effused by
Christ, in the vail of this ransom for us all, and accepted by God in the vail
thereof for us all: and this redness is in the nature thereof as extensive, as
the redness derived from Adam is: both reach to all; so we were red earth in
the hands of God, as redness denotes our general infirmities: and as redness
denotes the blood of his Son, our Savior, all have both. But that redness
which we have contracted from blood shed by our selves, the blood of our own
souls, by sin, was not upon us when we were in the hands of God: that
redness is not his tincture, not his complexion: no decree of his is writ in
any such red ink. Our sins are our own, and our destruction is from our selves.
We are not as accessaries, and God as principal in this soul-murder: God
forbid. We are not as executioners of Gods sentence, and God the malefactor in
this souldamnation: God forbid. Cain came not red in his brothers blood out of
Gods hands; nor David red with Vriahs blood; nor Achitophel with his own; nor
Judas with Christ's, or his own. That that Pilate did illusorily, God can do
truly, wash his hands from the blood of any of those men. It were a weak plea
to say, I killed not that man; but it is true, I commanded one who was under my
command, to kill him: It is rather a prevarication, then a justification of
God, to say, God is not the author of sin in any man: but it is true, God
makes that man's sin, that sin. God is innocence: and the beams that flow
from him, are of the same nature and color. Christ, when he appeared in
heaven, was not red, but white; his hand, his head, and hairs too: he, and that
that grows from him; he, and we, as we come from his hands, are white too: his
angels, that provoke us to the imitation of that pattern, are so in white; two
men, two angels stood by the apostles in white Acts 1. 10.
apparel: the imitation is laid upon us, by precept too: At all times let thy
garments be Eccles 9. 8.
white; those actions, in which thou appearest to the world, innocent. It is
true that Christ is both; My beloved is white and ruddy, says the Cant. 5. 10.
Spouse: but the white was his own; his redness is from us. That which
Zipporah said to her husband Moses in anger, the Church may say to Christ in
thankfulness, Vere sponsus sanguinum, Thou art truly a bloody husband to me;
Damim, sanguinum; of bloods, bloods in the plural: for all our bloods are upon
him. This was a mercy to the militant Church, that even the triumphant Church
wondered at it. They knew not Christ, when he came up into heaven in red; Who is
this that comes in red garments? Isa. 63. 1.
wherefore is thy apparel red, like him that treads in the wine press? They
knew he went down in white, in entire innocence; and they wondered to see him
return in red: but he satisfies them; Calcavi, You think I have trodden the
wine press, and you mistake it not: I have trodden the wine press: and Calcavi
solus, and that alone: All the redness, all the blood of the whole world is
upon me: and as he adds, Non vir de gentibus; Of all people there was none
with me; with me so, as to have any part in the merit; so, of all people there
was none with me: without me so, as to be excluded by me, without their own
fault, from the benefit of the merit. This redness he carried up to heaven;
for by the blood of his cross came peace, both to the things in heaven, and
the Col. 1. 21.
things on earth. For the peccabilitie, that possibility of sinning, which is
in the nature of the angels of heaven, would break out into sin, but for that
confirmation, which those angels have received in the blood of Christ. This
redness he carried to heaven; and this redness he has left upon earth, that
all we, miserable clods of earth, might be tempered with his blood: that in his
blood, exhibited in his holy and blessed Sacrament, our long robes might be
made white in the blood of the Lamb: that, though our sins be robes, habits
of long continuance in sin; yet, through that redness which our sins have
cast upon him, we might come to participate of that whiteness, that
righteousness, which is his own: We; that is, all we: for, as to take us in,
who are of low condition, and obscure station, a cloud is made white, by his
sitting upon it; He sat upon a white cloud: so, to let the highest see, that
they have no whiteness, but from him, he makes the throne white by sitting
upon it: He sat upon a great white throne. It had been great, if it had not
been white: white is the color of dilatatio^; Goodness enlarges the throne.
It had not been white, if he had not sat upon it. That goodness only which
consists in glorifying God, and God in Christ, and Christ in the sincerity of
the truth, is true whiteness. God has no redness in himself, no anger
toward us, till he considers us as sinners. God casts no redness upon us,
inflicts no necessity, no constraint of sinning upon us: we have died our
selves in sins as red as scarlet, we have drowned our selves in such a red
sea. But as a garment that was washed in the Red sea, would come out white, (so
wonderful works has God Psalm. 106. 22.
done at the Red sea, says David) so does his whiteness work through our red,
and makes this Adam, this red earth, Calculum candidum, that white stone, that
receives a new name, not Ish, not Enosh, not Gheber; no name that tastes of
misery, nor of vanity; but that name renewed and manifested, which was
imprinted upon us in our elections, the sons of God; the irremoveable, the
undisinheritable sons of God.

Be pleased to receive this note at parting, that there is Macula alba, a spot,
and yet white, as well as a red spot: a whiteness, that is an indication of a
leprosy, as well as a redness. It is whole-Pelagianisme, to think nature
alone sufficient; half-Pelagianisme, to think grace once received to be
sufficient; super-Pelagianisme, to think our actions can bring God in debt to
us by merit, and supererogation, and Catharisme, imaginary purity, in
canonizing our selves as present saints, and condemning all that differ from
us, as reprobates. All these are white spots, and have the color of goodness;
but are indications of leprosy. So is that, that God threatens, Decorticatio
ficus and albi rami; that Joel 1. 7.
the fig tree shall be barked, and the boughs thereof left white. To be left
white without bark, was an indication of a speedy withering. Ostensa
candescunt, and arescunt, says S. Gregory of that place: the bough that lies
open without bark, looks white, but perishes. The good works that are done
openly to please men, have their reward (says Christ) that is, shall never
have reward. To pretend to do good, and not mean it; to do things good in
themselves, but not to good ends; to go toward good ends, but not by good
ways; to make the deceiving of men thine end, or the praise of men thine end;
all this may have a whiteness, a color of good: but all this is a barking of
the bough, and an indication of a mischievous leprosy. There is no good
whiteness, but a reflection from Christ Jesus, in an humble acknowledgement
that we have none of our own; and in a confident assurance, that in our worst
estate we may be made partakers of his. We are all red earth. In Adam, we would
not; since Adam, we could not avoid sin, and the concomitants thereof,
miseries; which we have called our West, our cloud, our darkness. But then we
have a North, that scatters these clouds, in the next word, Ad imaginem; that
we are made to another pattern, in another likeness then our own. Faciamus
hominem. So far we are gone, East and West; which is half our compass, and
all this days voyage: for we are struck upon the sand, and must stay another
tide and another gale for our North and South.

FINIS.
THE SECOND SERMON PREACHED BEFORE KING CHARLES, Upon the xxvi verse of the
first Chapter of GENESIS.

By Dr. DONE DEAN OF PAVLS.

Printed by the Printers to the University of CAMBRIDGE.

MDCXXXIIII.

Genesis 1. 26. And God said, Let us make man in our image, after our
likeness.
BY fair occasion from these words, we proposed to you the whole compass of
man's voyage, from his launching forth in this world, to his anchoring in the
next; from his hoysing sail here, to his striking sail there: in which compass
we designed to you his four quarters: first, his East, where he must begin,
the fundamental knowledge of the Trinity (for that we found to be the
specification and distinctive character of a Christian) where, though that be
so, we showed you also, why we were not called Trinitarians, but Christians:
and we showed you the advantage that man has, in laying hold upon God in these
several notions; That the prodigal son has an indulgent father; that the
decayed father has an abundant son; that the dejected spirit has a Spirit
of comfort to fly to in heaven. And as we showed you from S. Paul, that it was
an Atheism to be no Christian: (Without God, says he, as long as without
Christ) so we lamented the slacknesse of Christians, that they did not
seriously and particularly consider the persons of the Trinity, and especially
the holy Ghost, in their particular actions: And then we came to that
consideration, whether this doctrine were established, or directly insinuated,
in this plural word of our text, Faciamus, Let us make man: and we found that
doctrine to be here, and here first, of any place in the Bible: and finding God
to speak in the plural, we accepted (for a time) that interpretation which
some had made thereof, That God spoke in the person of a Sovereign Prince, and
therefore (as they do) in the plural, We: And thereby having established
reverence to Princes, we claymed, in Gods behalf, the same reverence to him;
that men would demean themselves here, when God is spoken to in prayer, as
reverently as when they speak to the King. But afterward we found God to speak
here not only as our King, but as our Maker, as God himself, and God in
council, Faciamus: And we applied thereunto the difference of our respect to a
person of that honorable rank, when we came before him at the councel-table,
and when we came to him at his own table; and thereby advanced the seriousness
of this consideration, God in the Trinity. And farther we sailed not with our
Eastern wind. Our West we considered in the next word, Hominem; That, though
we were made by the whole Trinity, yet the whole Trinity made us but men, and
men in this name of our text, Adam; and Adam is but earth: and that is our
West, our declination, our Sunset. We passed over the four names, by which
man is ordinarily expressed in the scriptures; and we found necessary misery
in three of them; and possible, nay, likely misery in the fourth, in the best
name. We insisted upon the name of our text, Adam, earth; and had some use of
these notes; first, That if I were but earth, God was pleased to be the potter;
If I but a sheep, he a shepherd; If I but a cottage, he a builder: So he work
upon me, let me be what he will. We noted, that God made us earth, not air,
not fire; that man has bodily and worldly duties to perform, and is not all
spirit in this life. Devotion is his soul: but he has a body of discretion
and usefulness to invest in some calling. We noted too, that in being earth we
are equal: we tried that equality, first in the root, in Adam; there if any
man will be nobler earth then I, he must have more original sin then I: for
that was all Adams patrimony, all that he could give. And we tried this
equality in another furnace, in the grave; where there is no means to
distinguish royal from plebeian, nor catholic from heretical dust. And
lastly we noted, that this our earth was red; and considered in what respect it
was red, even in Gods hands; but found that in the bloud-rednesse of sin, God
had no hand; but sin, and destructions for sin, were wholly from our
selves: which consideration we ended with this, that there was Macula alba, a
white spot of leprosy, as well as a red: and we found the overvaluation of our
own purity, and the uncharitable condemnation of all that differ from us, to
be that white spot. And so far we sailed with that Western wind, and are
come to our third point in this our compass, our North.

In this point, the North, we place our first Aquilo.
clime; nor is the North always a type of happiness in the scriptures. Many
times God threatens storms from the North: but even in those Northern storms,
we consider their action, that they scatter, they dissipate those clouds which
were gathered, and so induce a serenitie. And so fair weather comes Job 37. 22.
from the North. The consideration of our West, our low estate, that we are but
earth, but red earth, died red by our selves; and that imaginary white, which
appears so to us, is but a white of leprosy: this West inwraps us in heavy
clouds of murmuring in this life, that we cannot live so freely as beasts do;
and in clouds of desperation for the next life, that we cannot die so
absolutely as beasts do. We die all our lives; and yet we live after our
deaths: These are our clouds; and then the North shakes these clouds. The
North-winde drives away the Prove. 25. 13.
rain, says Solomon. There is a North in our text, that drives all these tears
from our eyes. Christ calls upon the North as well as the Cant. 4. 16.
South, to blow upon his garden, and to diffuse the perfumes thereof.
Adversity, as well as prosperity, opens the bounty of God unto us; and
oftentimes better. But that is not the benefit of the North, in our present
consideration: but this is it, that first our Sun sets in the West. The
Eastern dignity which we received in our first creation, as we were the work
of the whole Trinity, falls under a Western cloud, that that Trinity made us
but earth. And then blows our North, and scatters this cloud; that this earth
has a nobler form then any other part or limb of the world: for we are made
by a fairer pattern, by a nobler image, by a higher likeness. Faciamus; Though
we make but a man, Let us make him in our image, after our likeness.

The variety which the holy Ghost uses here in the pen of Moses, has given
occasion to diverse, to raise diverse observations upon these words, which seem
diverse, Image and Likeness; as also in the variety of the phrase: for it is
thus conceived and laid, In our image; and then, After our likeness. I know
it is a good rule that Damascen gives, Parva non sunt parva, ex quibus magna
proveniunt; Nothing is to be neglected, as little, from which great things may
arise: If the consequence may be great, the thing must not be thought little.
No Jod in the scripture shall perish; therefore no Jod is superfluous: if it
were superfluous, it might perish. Words, and less particles then words, have
busied the whole Church.

In the Council of Ephesus, where Bishops in a great number excommunicated
Bishops in a greater; Bishop against Bishop, and Patriarch against Patriarch;
in which case, when both parties had made strong parties in Court, and the
Emperor forbore to declare himself on either side for a time, he was told,
that he refused to assent to that which 6000 Bishops had agreed in: the strife
was but for a word, whether the blessed Virgin might be called Deipara, The
mother of God, for Christipara, The mother of Christ; which Christ all agree to
be God. Nestorius and all his party agreed with Cyril, that she might be. In
the Council of Calcedon, the difference was not so great, as for a word
composed of syllables. It was but for a syllable, whether Ex or In. The
heretics condemned then, confessed Christ to be Ex duabus naturis, to be
composed of two natures, at first; but not to be In duabus naturis, not to
consist of two natures after. And for that In, they were thrust out. In the
Council of Nice, it was not so much as a syllable made of letters; for it was
but for one letter; whether Homoousion, or Homo^usion, was the issue. Where the
question has not been of diverse words, nor syllables, nor letters, but only
of the place of words, what tempestuous differences have risen! How much has
sola fides and fides sola changed the case! Nay, where there has been no
quarrel for precedencie, for transposing of words, or syllables, or letters,
where there has not been so much as a letter in question, how much does an
accent vary a sense! An interrogation or no interrogation, will make it
directly contrary. All Christian expositours read those words of Cain, My
sin is greater then can be pardoned, Genesis 4. 13.
positively; and so they are evident words of desperation. The Jews read them
with an interrogation, Are my sins greater then can be pardoned? and so they
are words of compunction and repentance. The prophet Micheas says, that Mich.
5. 3.
Bethlehem is a small place: The Evangelist S. Matthew. 2. 6.
Matthew says, No small place. An interrogation in Micheas mouth reconciles
it; Art thou a small place? amounts to that, Thou art not. Sounds, voices,
words, must not be neglected: for Christ's forerunner, John Baptist, qualified
himself no otherwise; he was but a voice: and Christ himself is Verbum; The
Word is the name even of the Son of God. No doubt but Statesmen and
Magistrates find often the danger of having suffered small abuses to pass
uncorrected. We that see State-businesse but in the glass of story, and
cannot be shut out of chronicles, see there, upon what little objects the eye
and the jealousy of the State is oftentimes forced to bend it self. We know in
whose times in Rome a man might not weep, he might not sigh, he might not look
pale, he might not be sick, but it was informed against, as a discontent, as a
murmuring against the present government, and an inclination to change. And
truly many times, upon Damascens true ground, though not always well applied,
Parva non sunt parva; Nothing may be thought little, when the consequence may
prove great. In our own sphere, in the Church, we are sure it is so; great
inconveniences grew upon small tolerations. Therefore in that business, which
occasioned all that trouble which we mentioned before, in the Council of
Ephesus, when S. Cyril wrote to the Clergy of his diocese about it, at first
he says, Praestiterat abstinere, It had been better these questions had not
been raised: but (says he) Si his nugis nos adoriantur, If they vex us with
these impertinences, these trifles: And yet these, which were but trifles at
first, came to occasion Councels; and then to divide Council against Council;
and then to force the Emperor to take away the power of both Councels, and
govern in Council by his Vicar general, a secular Lord sent from Court. And
therefore did some of the Ancients (particularly Philastrius) cry down some
opinions for heresies, which were not matters of faith, but of philosophy; and
even in philosophy truly held by them who were condemned for heretics, and
mistaken by their Judges that condemned them. Little things were called in
question, lest great things should pass unquestioned: and some of these upon
Damascens true ground (still true in rule, but not always in the application)
Parva non sunt parva; Nothing may be thought little, where the consequence may
prove great. Descend we from those great spheres, the State and the Church,
into a lesser, that is, the conscience of particular men, and consider the
danger of exposing those vines to Cant. 2. 15.
little foxes; of leaving small sins unconsidered, unrepented, uncorrected.
In that glistering circle in the firmament, which we call the Galaxie, the
milkie-way, there is not one star of any of the six great magnitudes, which
Astronomers proceed upon, belonging to that circle: it is a glorious circle,
and possesses a great part of heaven; and yet is all of so little stars as
have no name, no knowledge taken of them: So certainly are there many Saints in
heaven, that shine as stars, and yet are not of those great magnitudes, to
have been Patriarchs, or Prophets, or Apostles, or Martyrs, or Doctors, or
Virgins; but good and blessed souls, that have religiously performed the duties
of inferior callings, and no more. And as certainly are there many souls
tormented in hell, that never sinned sin of any of the great magnitudes,
Idolatry, Adultery, Murder, or the like; but inconsiderately have slid, and
insensibly continued in the practice and habit of lesser sins. But parva non
sunt parva; Nothing may be thought little, where the consequence may prove
great. When our Savior says, That we Matthew. 12. 36.
shall give an account for every idle word in the day of judgment, what great
hills of little sands will oppress us then! And if substances of sin were
removed, yet what circumstances of sin would condemn us! If idle words have
this weight, there can be no word thought idle in the Scriptures: And therefore
I blame not in any, I decline not in mine own practice, the making use of the
variety and copiousnesse of the holy Ghost, who is ever abundant, and yet
never superfluous in expressing his purpose in change of words. And so no doubt
we might do now in observing a difference between these words in our text,
Image, and Likeness; and between these two forms of expressing it, In our
image, and, After our likeness. This might be done. But that that must be
done, will possess all our time; that is, to declare (taking the two for this
time to be but a farther illustration of one another; Image and Likeness, to
our present purpose, to be all one) what this image and this likeness imports;
and how this North scatters our former cloud; what our advantage is, that we
are made to an image, to a pattern; and our obligation to set a pattern before
us in all our actions.

God appointed Moses to make all that he made, by a pattern. God himself made
all that he made, according to a pattern. God had deposited and laid up in
himself certain forms, patterns, Ideas of every thing that he made. He made
nothing, of which he had not preconceived the form, and predetermined in
himself, I will make it thus. And when he had made any thing, he saw it was
good; Good, because it answered the pattern, the image; Good, because it was
like to that. And therefore though of other creatures God pronounced they were
good, because they were presently like their pattern, that is, like that form
which was in him for them: yet of man, he forbore to say that he was good;
because his conformity to his pattern was to appear after in his subsequent
actions. Now as God made man after another pattern, and therefore we have a
dignity above all, that we had another manner of creation then the rest: so
have we a comfort above all, that we have another manner of administration then
the rest. God exercises another manner of providence upon man, then upon other
creatures. A sparrow falls not without God, says Matthew. 10. 29.
Christ: yet no doubt God works otherwise in the fall of eminent persons, then
in the fall of sparrows; for ye are of more value then many sparrows, says
Christ there of every man: and some men single, are of more value then many
men. God does not thank the ant, for her industry and good husbandry in
providing for her self. God does not reward the foxes, for concurring Judge. 15.
4.
with Samson in his revenge. God does not fee the lion, which was his
executioner upon the 1. King. 13. 24
Prophet which had disobeyed his commandment; nor those few she-bears, which
slew 2. King. 2. 24.
the petulant children who had calumniated and reproached Elisha. God does not
fee them before, nor thank them after, nor take knowledge of their service: But
for those men that served Gods execution upon the idolaters of Exodus 32. 25.
the golden calf, it is pronounced in their behalf, that therein they
consecrated themselves unto God; and for that service God made that Tribe, the
Tribe of Levi, his portion, his clergy, his consecrated Tribe: So, Quia
fecisti hoc, Genesis 22. 16.
says God to Abraham, By my self I have sworn, because thou have done this
thing, and have not withheld thy son, thine only son: that in blessing I
will bless thee, and in multiplying I will multiply thee. So neither is God
angry with the dog 2. Pet. 2. 22.
that turns to his vomit; nor with the sow, that after her washing wallows in
the mire. But of man in that case he says, It is impossible for Hebr. 6. 4.
those who were once enlightened, if they fall away, to renew themselves again
by repentance. The creatures live under his law, but a law imposed thus, This
they shall do, this they must do: Man lives under another manner of law, This
you shall do, that is, This you should do, This I would have you do. And, Fac
hoc, Do this, and you shall live; disobey, and you shall die: but yet the
choice is yours; choose you this day life or death. So that this is Gods
administration in the creature, that he has imprinted in them an instinct, and
so he has something to preserve in them: In man, his administration is this,
that he has imprinted in him a faculty of will and election, and has
something to reward in him. That instinct in the creature God leaves to the
natural working thereof in it self: but the freewill of man God visits and
assists with his grace, to do supernatural things. When the creature does an
extraordinary action above the nature thereof (as when Balaams ass spoke) the
creature exercises no faculty, no will in it self; but God forced it to that
it did. When man does any thing conducing to supernatural ends, though the
work be Gods, the will of man is not merely passive. The will of man is but
Gods agent; but still an agent it is, and an agent in another manner then the
tongue of the beast. For the will considered as a will (and grace never
destroys nature; nor, though it make a dead will a live will, or an ill will a
good will, does it make the will no will) might refuse or omit that it does. So
that because we are created by another pattern, we are governed by another law,
and another providence.

Go thou then the same way. If God wrought by a pattern, and writ by a copy,
and proceeded by a precedent; do thou so too. Never say, There is no Church
without error; therefore I will be bound by none, but frame a Church of mine
own, or be a Church to my self. What greater injustice then to propose no
image, no pattern to thy self to imitate; and yet propose thy self for a
pattern, for an image to be adored? Thou will have singular opinions, and
singular ways, differing from all other men: and yet all that are not of thy
opinion, must be heretics; and all reprobates, that go not thy ways. Propose
good patterns to thy self, and thereby become a fit pattern for others. God (we
see) was the first that made images; and he was the first that forbad them: he
made them for imitation; he forbad them, in danger of adoration. For, what a
baseness, what a madness of the soul is it, to worship that which is no
better, nay, not so good as it self! Worship belongs to the best: know then thy
distance and thy period, how far to go, and where to stop. Dishonor not God
by an image, in worshipping it; and yet benefit thy self by it in following it:
There is no more danger out of a picture, then out of a history, if thou
intend no more in either then example. Though thou have a West, a dark and a
sad condition, that thou art but earth, a man of infirmities, and
ill-counselled in thy self: yet thou have here a North, that scatters and
dispells these clouds, that God proposes to thee in his Scriptures; and
otherwise, images, patterns of good and holy men to go by. But beyond this
North, this assistance of good examples of men, thou have a South, a
Meridionall height, by which thou see thine image, thy pattern, to be no
copy, no other man, but the original it self, God himself: Faciamus ad
nostram; Let us make man in our image, after our likeness.

Here we consider first, where the image is; Meridies.
man God has imprinted this his image; and then, what this image conferres and
derives upon man, what it works in man. And as when we seek God in his essence,
we are advised to proceed by negatives (God is not mortal, not passible:) so
when we seek the image of God in man, we begin with a negative, This image is
not his Body. Tertullian declined to think it was; nay, Tertullian inclined
others to think so; for he is the first that is noted to have been the author
of that opinion that God had a body: yet S. Augustine excuses Tertullian for
heresy: Because (says he) Tertullian might mean, That it was so sure that
there is a God; and that God was a certain, though not a finite essence; that
God was so far from being nothing, as that he had rather a body. Because it
was possible to give a good interpretation of Tertullian, that charitable
Father would excuse him of heresy. I would S. Augustines charity might
prevail with them that pretend to be Augustinianissimi, and to adore him so
much in the Roman Church, not to cast the name of Heresy upon every problem,
nor the name of Heretic upon every inquirer of truth. S. Augustine would
deliver Tertullian from heresy, in a point concerning God; and they will
condemn us of heresy, in every point that may be drawn to concern, not the
Church, but the Court of Rome; not their doctrine, but their profit. Malo de
misericordia Deo rationem reddere, quam de crudelitate; I shall better answer
God for my mildness, then for my severitie. And though anger toward a
brother, or a Racha, or a Fool, will bear an action; yet he shall recover less
against me at that bar, whom I have called weak, or misse-led (as I must
necessarily call many in the Roman Church) then he whom I have passionately
and peremptorily called heretic: for I dare call an opinion heresy for the
matter, a great while before I dare call the man that holds it an heretic: for
that consists much in the manner. It must be matter of faith, before the matter
be heresy; but there must be pertinacie after convenient instruction, before
the man be an heretic. But how excusable soever Tertullian be herein, in S.
Augustines charity, there was a whole sect of heretics an hundred years
after Tertullian, the Audiani, who over literally taking those places of
Scripture, where God is said to have hands, and feet, and eyes, and ears,
believed God to have a body like ours; and accordingly interpreted this text,
that in that image, and that likeness, a bodily likeness, consisted this
image of God in man. And yet even these men, these Audians, Epiphanius (who
first took knowledge of them) calls but schismatics, not heretics: so loath is
charity to say the worst of any. Yet we must remember them of the Roman
persuasion, that they come too near giving God a body in their pictures of
God the Father: and they bring the body of God, that body which God the Son
has assumed, the body of Christ, too near in their Transsubstantiation: not
too near our faith (for so it cannot be brought too near to our sense, so it
is as really there as we are there) not too near in the ubi; for so it is
there, there, that is, in that place to which the Sacrament extends it self:
for the Sacrament extends as well to heaven, from whence it fetches grace, as
to the table from whence it delivers bread and wine: but too near in modo; for
it comes not thither that way. We must necessarily complain, that they make
religion too bodily a thing. Our Savior Christ corrected Marie Magdalenes
zeal, where she flew to him in a personal devotion; and said, Touch me not,
for I am not yet ascended John 20. 17.
to my Father. Fix your meditations upon Christ Jesus, so as he is now at the
right hand of his Father in heaven, and entangle not your selves so with
controversies about his body, as to lose real charity for imaginary zeal;
nor enlarge your selves so far in the pictures and images of his body, as to
worship them more then him. As Damascen says of God, that he is
Superprincipale principium, A beginning before any beginning we can conceive;
and praeterea aeternitas, an eternity infinitely elder then any eternity we
can imagine: so he is superspiritualis Spiritus, such a Superspirit, as that
the soul of man, and the substance of angels, is but a body compared to this
Spirit. God has no body, though Tertullian disputed it, though the Audians
preached it, though the Papists paint it: and therefore this image of God is
not in the body of man that way.

Nor that way neither which some others have assigned, That God, who has no
body as God, yet in the creation did assume that form which man has now, and
so made man in his image, that is, in that form which he had then assumed. Some
of the ancients thought so; and some other men of great estimation in the
Roman Church have thought so too. In particular, Oleaster, a great officer in
the Inquisition of Spain. But great inquirers into other men, are easy
neglecters of themselves. The image of God is not in man's body this way.

Nor that third way which others have imagined, that is, that when God said,
Let us make man after our likeness, God had respect to that form, which in the
fullness of time his Son was to take upon him upon earth. Let us make him now
(says God) at first, like that which I intend hereafter my Son shall be: for
though this were spoken before the fall of man, and so before any occasion of
decreeing the sending of Christ; yet in the School a great part of great men
adhere to that opinion, That God from all eternity had a purpose, that his
Son should become man in this world, though Adam had not fallen; Non ut
medicus, sed ut Dominus, ad nobilitandum genus humanum, say they: Though Christ
had not come as a Redeemer, if man had not needed him by sin, but had kept
his first state; yet as a Prince, that desired to heap honor upon him whom he
loves, to do man an honor by his assuming that nature, Christ (say they)
should have come: and to that image, that form which he was to take then, was
man made in this text, say these imaginers. But (alas!) how much better were
wit and learning bestowed, to prove to the Gentiles that a Christ must come
(that they believe not) to prove to the Jews, that the Christ is come (that
they believe not) to prove to our own consciences, that the same Christ may
come again this minute to judgment (we live as though we believed not that)
then to have filled the world, and torn the Church with frivolous disputations,
Whether Christ should have come if Adam had not fallen! Woe unto fomentours of
frivolous disputations. None of these ways: not because God has a body, not
because God assumed a body; not because it was intended that Christ should be
born, before it was intended that man should be made, is this image of God in
the body of man: nor has it in any other relation respect to the body; but,
as we say in the School, arguitive, and significative; that because God has
given man a body of a nobler form then any other creature, we infer, and
argue, and conclude from thence, that God is otherwise represented in man then
in any other creature: and so far is this image of God in the body above
that in the creatures, that as you see some pictures, to which the very tables
are jewels; some watches, to which the very cases are jewels; and therefore
they have outward cases too; and so the picture and the watch are in that
outward case, of what meaner stuff soever that be: so is this image in this
body, as in an outward case, so as that you may not injure nor enfeeble this
body, neither by sinful intemperance and licentiousness, nor by inordinate
fastings or other disciplines of imaginary merits, while the body is alive;
for the image of God is in it: nor defraud the body of decent burial and due
solemnities after death; for the image of God is to return to it. But yet the
body is but the outward case, and God looks not for the gilding, or
enamelling, or painting of that; but requires the labor and cost therein to be
bestowed upon the table it self, in which this image is immediately, that is,
the soul: and that is truly the ubi, the place where this image is. And there
remains only now the operation thereof, how this image of God in the soul of
man works.

The sphere then of this Intelligence, the gallerie for this picture, the arch
for this statue, the table and frame and shrine for this image of God, is
inwardly and immediately the soul of man: not immediately so, as that the soul
of man is a part of the essence of God; for so essentially Christ only is the
image of God. S. Augustine at first thought so; Putabam te, Deus, corpus
lucidum, and me frustum de illo corpore: I took thee, O God (says that Father)
to be a globe of fire, and my soul to be a spark of that fire; thee to be a
body of light, and my soul to be a beam of that light. But S. Augustine does
not only retract that in himself, but dispute against it in the Manichees. But
this image is in our soul, as the soul is the wax, and this image the seal. The
comparison is S. Cyrils; and he adds well, that no seal but that which printed
the wax at first, can fit that wax, and fill that impression after: no image,
but the image of God, can fit our soul; every other seal is too narrow, too
shallow for it. The magistrate is sealed with the Lion; the Wolf will not fit
that seal: the magistrate has a power in his hand, but not oppression. Princes
are sealed with the Crown; the Mitre will not fit that seal. Powerfully and
graciously they protect the Church, and are supreme heads of the Church; but
they minister not the Sacraments of the Church: they give preferments, but they
give not the capacity of preferments: they give order who shall have, but they
have not Orders by which they are enabled to have that they have. Men of
inferior and laborious callings in the world are sealed with the Cross; a
Rose, or a bunch of Grapes will not answer that seal: ease and plenty in age
must not be looked for without crosses, and labor, and industry in youth. All
men, Prince and people, Clergy and Magistrate, are sealed with the image of
God, with a conformity to him; and worldly seals will not answer that, nor
fill up that seal. We should wonder to see a mother in the midst of many sweet
children, passing her time in making babies and puppets for her own delight. We
should wonder to see a man, whose chambers and galleries were full of curious
masterpieces, thrust in a village-fayre, to look upon sixpenie pictures and
three-farthing prints. We have all the image of God at home; and we all make
babies, fancies of honor in our ambitions. The masterpiece is our own, in our
own bosom; and we thrust in countrey-fayres, that is, we endure the distempers
of any unseasonable weather, in night-journeys and watchings; we endure the
oppositions, and scorns, and triumphs of a rival and competitour, that seeks
with us, and shares with us. We endure the guiltiness and reproach of having
deceived the trust which a confident friend reposes in us, and solicit his
wife or daughter. We endure the decay of fortune, of body, of soul, of honor,
to possess lovers pictures; pictures that are not originals, not made by that
hand of God, Nature; but artificial beauties: and for that body we give a
soul; and for that drug which might have been bought where they bought it, for
a shilling, we give an estate. The image of God is more worth then all
substances; and we give it for colors, for dreams, for shadows.

But the better to prevent the loss, let us consider the having of this image;
in what respect, in what operation this image is in our soul: for whether this
image be in those faculties, which we have in Nature; or in those
qualifications which we have in Grace; or in those super-illustrations, which
the blessed shall have in Glory, has exercised the contemplation of many.
Properly this image is in nature; in the natural reason, and other faculties
of the immortal soul of man; for thereupon does S. Bernard say, Imago Dei uri
potest in gehenna, non exuri; till the soul be burnt to ashes, to nothing
(which cannot be done, no not in hell) the image of God cannot be burnt out of
the soul; for it is radically, primarily in the very soul it self: and whether
that soul be infused into the elect, or reprobate, that image is in that soul:
as far as he has a soul by nature, he has the image of God by nature in it.
But then the seal is deeper cut, or harder pressed, or better preserved in some
then in others, and in some other considerations then merely natural:
therefore we may consider man, who was made here to the image of God, and of
God in three persons, to have been made so in Gods intendment three ways: Man
had this image in Nature, and does deface it; he has it also in Grace here,
and so does refresh it; and he shall have it in Glory hereafter, and that
shall fix it, establish it. And in every of these three, in this Trinity in
man, Nature, Grace, and Glory, man has not only the image of God, but the
image of all the persons of the Trinity, in every of his three capacities. He
has the image of the Father, the image of the Son, the image of the holy
Ghost, in nature; and all these also in grace; and all these in glory too. How
all these are in all, I cannot hope to handle particularly, not though I were
upon the first grain of our sand, upon the first dram of your patience, upon
the first flash of my strength: But a clear repeating of these many branches,
that these things are thus, that all the persons of the heavenly Trinity are
(in their image) in every branch of this humane Trinity in man, may (at least
must) suffice.

In nature then, man, that is, the soul of man, has this image of God; of God,
considered in his unity, entirely, altogether in this, that this soul is made
of nothing, proceeds of nothing. All other creatures are made of that
preexistent matter which God had made before; so were our bodies too, but our
souls of nothing: now not to be made at all, is to be God himself; only God
himself was never made. But to be made of nothing, to have no other parent but
God, no other element but the breath of God, no other instrument but the
purpose of God, this is to be the image of God; for this is nearest to God
himself (who was never made at all) to be made of nothing. And then man
(considered in nature) is otherwise the nearest representation of God too: for
the steps which we consider, are four; First, Esse, Being; for some things
have only a being, and no life, as stones: Secondly, Vivere, Living; for some
things have life, and no sense, as plants: and then thirdly, Sentire, Sense;
for some things have sense, and no understanding; which understanding and
reason man has with his being, and life, and sense; and so is in a nearer
station to God, then any creature, and a livelier image of him (who is the root
of being) then all they; because man only has all the declarations of beings.
Nay, if we consider Gods eternity, the soul of man has such an image of that,
as that, though man had a beginning, which the original, the eternal God
himself had not; yet man shall no more have an end, then the original, the
eternal God himself shall have. And this image of eternity, this
post-meridian, this afternoon eternity, that is, this perpetuity and
after-everlastingnesse is in man, merely as a natural man, without any
consideration of grace: for the reprobate can no more die, that is, come to
nothing, then the elect. It is but of the natural man that Theodoret says, A
King built a city, and erected his statue in the midst of that city; that
is, God made man, and imprinted his image in his soul. How will this King take
it (says that Father) to have this statue thrown down? Every man does so, if
he do not exalt his natural faculties, if he do not hearken to the law written
in his heart, if he do not run, as Plato, or as Socrates, in the ways of
virtuous actions; he throws down the statue of this King, he defaces the image
of God. How would this King take it (says he) if any other statue, especially
the statue of his enemy should be set up in his place? Every man does so too,
that embraces false opinions in matter of doctrine, or false appearances of
happiness in matter of conversation; for these a natural man may avoid in
many cases, without that addition of Grace which is offered to us as
Christians. That comparison of other creatures to man, which is intimated in
Job, is intended but of the natural man. There speaking of Behemoth, that is,
of the greatest of creatures, he says in our Translation that He is the chief
of Job 40. 19.
the ways of God: S. Hierom has it, Principium; and others before him,
Initium viarum Dei; that when God went the progress over the world in the
creation thereof, he did but begin, he did but set out at Behemoth, at the best
of all such creatures; He. All they were but Initium viarum, The beginning of
the ways of God: but, Finis viarum, the end of his journey, and the eve, the
vespers of his Sabbath, was the making of man, even of the natural man.
Behemoth and the other creatures were vestigia, says the School. In them we
may see where God has gone; for all being is from God: and so every thing that
has a being, has filiationem vestigii, a testimony of Gods having passed
that way, and called in there: but man has filiationem imaginis, an expression
of his image; and does the office of an image or picture, to bring him whom it
represents, the more lively to our memories. Gods abridgement of the whole
world was man; reabridge man into his least volume, in pura naturalia, as he is
but mere man, and so he has the image of God in his soul.

He has it as God is considered in his unity; for as God is, the soul of man
is, indivisibly, impartibly, one entire. And he has it also as God is notified
to us in a Trinity: for as there are three persons in the essence of God; so
are there three faculties in the soul of man. The attributes, and some kind of
speculation of the persons in the Trinity, are, power to the Father, wisdom
to the Son, and goodness to the holy Ghost. And the three faculties of the
soul have the images of these three: the Understanding is the image of the
Father, that is, Power; for no man exercises power, no man can govern well,
without understanding the natures and dispositions of them whom he governs: and
therefore in this consists the power which man has over the creature, that man
understands the nature of every creature; for so Adam did when he named every
creature according to the nature thereof: and by this advantage of our
understanding them, and comprehending them, we master them; and so,
Obliviscuntur quod natae sunt, says S. Ambrose: the lion, the bear, the
elephant, have forgot what they were born to; Induuntur quod jubentur, they
invest and put on such a disposition and such a nature as we enjoin them and
appoint them: Serviunt ut famuli (as that Father pursues it elegantly) and,
Verberantur ut timidi; they wait upon us as servants, who, if they understood
us, as well as we understand them, might be our masters; and they receive
correction from us, as though they were afraid of us, when, if they understood
us, they would know that we were not able to stand in the teeth of the lion,
the horn of the bull, in the heels of the horse; and, Adjuvantur ut infirmi,
they counterfeit a weakness, that they might be beholding to us for help; and
they are content to thank us, if we afford them rest, or any food, who, if they
understood us as well as we do them, might tear our meat out of our throats;
nay, tear out our throats for their meat. So then in this first natural
faculty of the soul, the Understanding, stands the image of the first person,
the Father, Power.

And in the second faculty, which is the Will, is the image, the attribute of
the second person, the Son, which is Wisdom: for wisdom is not so much in
knowing, in understanding, as in electing, in choosing, in assenting. No man
needs go out of himself, nor beyond his own legend, and the history of his own
actions for examples of that, That many times we know better, and choose ill
ways. Wisdom is in choosing or assenting.

And then in the third faculty of the soul, the Memory, is the image of the
third person, the holy Ghost, that is, Goodness. For to remember, to recollect
our former understanding, and our former assenting, so far as to do them, to
crown them with action, that is true goodness. The office that Christ assigns
to the holy Ghost, and the goodness which he promises in his behalf is this,
that he shall bring former things to our remembrance. John 14. 26.
The wise man places all goodness in this faculty, the Memory: properly
nothing can fall into the Memory, but that which is past; and yet he says,
Whatsoever thou take in hand, remember the end, and Ecclus 7. 36.
thou shall never do amiss. The end cannot be yet come, and yet we are bid to
remember that. Visus per omnes sensus recurrit, says S. Augustine: as all
senses are called sight in the Scriptures (for there is Gustate Dominum, and
Audite, and Palpate; Taste the Lord, and Hear the Lord, and Feel the Lord; and
still the Videte is added, Taste and see the Lord) so all goodness is in
remembering; all goodness (which is the image of the holy Ghost) is in bringing
our understanding and our assenting into action. Certainly (beloved) if a man
were like the King but in countenance, and in proportion, he himself would
think somewhat better of himself, and others would be the less apt to put
scorns or injuries upon him, then if he had a vulgar and course aspect: with
those who have the image of the Kings power (the Magistrate) the image of his
wisdom (the Council) the image of his goodness (the Clergy) it should be so
too; there is a respect due to the image of the King in all that have it. Now
in all these respects, man, the mere natural man, has the image of the King
of kings; and therefore respect that image in thy self, and exalt thy natural
faculties, emulate those men, and be ashamed to be outgone by those men who had
no light but nature. Make thine understanding, and thy will, and thy memory
(though but natural faculties) serviceable to thy God, and auxiliarie and
subsidiarie for thy salvation: for though they be not naturally instruments of
grace, yet naturally they are susceptible of grace, and have so much in their
nature, as that by grace they may be made instruments of grace, which no
faculty in any creature but man can be. And do not think that because a
natural man cannot do all, he has nothing to do for himself.

This then is the image of God in man, the first way, in Nature; and most
literally this is the intention of the text. Man was this image thus; and the
room furnished with this image, was paradise: but there is a better room then
that paradise for the second image (the image of God in man by Grace) that is,
the Christian Church: for though for the most part this text be understood de
naturalibus, of our natural faculties; yet Origin, and not only such
allegorical expositours, but Saint Basil, and Nissen, and Ambrose, and others,
who are literal enough, assign this image of God to consist in the gifts of
Gods grace, exhibited to us here in the Church. A Christian then in that second
capacity, as a Christian, and not only as a Man, has this image of God, of
God first considered entirely. And those expressions of this impression, those
representations of this image of God in a Christian by grace, which the
Apostles have exhibited to us, that we are the sons of God, the seed of God,
the offspring of God, and partakers of the divine nature, (which are high and
glorious exaltations) are enlarged and exalted by Damascen to a further height,
when he says, Sicut Deus homo, ita ego Deus; As God i^ man, so I am God, says
Damascen; I, taking in the whole mankind (for so Damascen takes it out of
Nazianzen; and he says, Sicut verbum caro, ita caro verbum; As God was made
man, man may become God) but especially I; I, as I am wrought upon by grace in
Christ Jesus. So a Christian is made the image of God entirely. To which
expression S. Cyril also comes near, when he calls a Christian Deiformem
hominem, man in the form of God; which is a mysterious and a blessed
metamorphosis and transfiguration: that, whereas it was the greatest trespass
of the greatest trespasser in the world, the devil, to say, Similis ero
Altissimis, Isa. 14. 14.
I will be like the Highest; it would be as great a trespass in me not to be
like the Highest, not to conform my self to God, by the use of his grace in the
Christian Church. And whereas the humiliation of my Savior is in all things to
be imitated by me, yet herein I am bound to depart from his humiliation; that,
whereas he being in the Phil. 2. 6, 7.
form of God, took the form of a servant; I, being in the form of a servant,
may (nay, must) take upon me the form of God, in being Deiformis homo, a man
made in Christ, the image of God. So have I the image of God entirely in his
unity, because I profess that faith which is but one faith, and Ephesians. 4. 5.
under the seal of that Baptism which is but one Baptism. And then, as of
this one God, so I have also the image of the several persons of the Trinity,
in this capacity as I am a Christian, more then in my natural faculties.

The attribute of the first person, the Father, is Power: and none but a
Christian has power over those great tyrants of the world, Sin, Satan,
Death, and Hell. For thus my power accrues and grows unto me: first, Possum
judicare, I have a power 1. Cor. 6. 5.
to judge; a judiciarie, a discretive power, a power to discern between a
natural accident and a judgment of God, and will never call a judgment an
accident; and between an ordinary occasion of conversion, and a temptation of
Satan: Possum judicare. And then, Possum resistere, which is another act Ephesians.
6. 13.
of power: when I find it to be a temptation, I am able to resist it. And
Possum stare (which is another) I am able not only to withstand, but to stand
out this battle of temptations to the end. And then, Possum capere; that which
Christ proposes for a trial of his disciples, He that is able to receive it,
Matt. 19. 12.
let him receive it: I shall have power to receive the gift of continency
against all temptations of that kind. Bring it to the highest act of power,
that with which Christ tried his strongest Apostles; Possum bibere calicem, I
shall be able to drink of Matt. 20. 22.
Christ's cup, even to drink his blood, and be the more innocent for that; and
to pour out my blood, and be the stronger for that. In Christo omnia Phil. 4.
13.
possum; there is the fullness of power: In Christ I can do all things; I can
want, or I can abound; I can live, or I can die. And yet there is an extension
of power beyond all this, in this, Non possum peccare; 1 John 3. 9.
being born of God in Christ, I cannot sin. This that seems to have a name of
impotence, Non possum, I cannot, is the fullest omnipotence of all: I cannot
sin; not sin to death, not sin with a desire to sin, not sin with a
delight in sin; but that temptation that overthrows another, I can resist; or
that sin which being done, casts another into desperation, I can repent. And
so I have the image of the first person, the Father, in Power.

The image of the second person, whose attribute is Wisdom, I have in this,
that wisdom being the knowledge of this world and the next, I embrace nothing
in this world, but as it leads me to the next: for thus my wisdom, my
knowledge grows: first, Scio cui credidi, I know whom I have believed; 2. Tim.
1. 12.
I have not mislayed my foundation; my foundation is Christ: and then, Scio non
moriturum; my foundation cannot sink: I know that Christ being Romans 6. 9.
raised from the dead, dies no more: again, Scio quod Romans 8. 27.
desideret spiritus; I know what my spirit, enlightened by the Spirit of God,
desires: I am not transported with illusions and singularities of private
spirits. And as in the attribute of Power we found an Omnipotence in a
Christian; so in this there is an Omniscience. Scimus quia omnem scientiam
habemus; 1. Cor. 3. 1.
there is all together: We know that we have all knowledge; for all S. Paul's
universal knowledge was but this, Jesum crucifixum: I determined not to know
1. Cor. 2. 2.
any thing, save Jesus Christ, and him crucified. And then the way by which he
would proceed and take degrees in this wisdom, was, stultitia praedicandi, 1.
Cor. 1. 21.
the way that God had ordained: When the world by wisdom knew not God, it
pleased God by the foolishness of preaching to save them that believe. These
then are the steps of Christian wisdom: my foundation is Christ; of Christ I
enquire no more but fundamental doctrines, him crucified; and this I apply to
my self by his ordinance of preaching. And in this wisdom I have the image of
the second person.

And then of the third also in this, that, his attribute being goodness, I, as
a true Christian, call nothing good, that conduces not to the glory of God in
Christ Jesus; nor any thing ill, that draws me not from him. Thus I have an
express image of his goodness, that Omnia cooperantur in bonum; Romans 8. 28.
all things work together for my good, if I love God. I shall thank my fever,
bless my poverty, praise my oppressor; nay, thank, and bless, and praise
even some sin of mine, which by the consequences of that sin, which may be
shame, or loss, or weakness, may bring me to a happy sense of all my former
sins; and shall find it to have been a good fever, a good poverty, a good
oppression, yea, a good sin. Vertit in bonum, says Joseph to his brethren;
You thought evil, but Genesis 50. 20
God meant it unto good: and I shall have the benefit of my sin, according to
his transmutation; that is, though I meant ill in that sin, I shall have the
good that God meant in it. There is no evil in the Amos 3. 6.
city, but the Lord does it: but if the Lord do it, it cannot be evil to me. I
believe that I shall see bona Dei, the goodness of the Lord in the land of the
living; Psalm. 27. 13.
that is, in heaven: but David speaks also of signum in bonum; Show me a token
of good: and God will show me a present token of future good, an inward
infallibility, that this very calamity shall be beneficial and advantageous
unto me: and so as in nature I have the image of God in my whole soul, and of
all the three persons in the three faculties thereof; the understanding, the
will, and the memory: so in grace, in the Christian Church, I have the same
images of the power of the Father, of the wisdom of the Son, of the
goodness of the holy Ghost, in my Christian profession. And all this we shall
have in a better place then paradise (where we considered it in nature) and a
better place then the Church, as it is militant (where we considered it in
grace) that is, in the kingdom of heaven (where we considered this image in
glory) which is our last word.

There we shall have this image of God in perfection: for if Origin could lodge
such a conceit, that in heaven at last all things should ebb back into God, as
all things flowed from him at first; and so there should be no other essence
but God, all should be God, even the devil himself: how much more may we
conceive an unexpressible association (that is too far off) an assimilation
(that is not near enough) an identification (the School would venture to say
so) with God in that state of glory! Whereas the sun by shining upon the
moon, makes the moon a planet, a star as well as it self, which otherwise
would be but the thickest and darkest part of that sphere: so those beams of
glory which shall issue from my God, and fall upon me, shall make me
(otherwise a clod of earth, and worse, a dark soul, a spirit of darkness) an
angel of light, a star of glory, a something that I cannot name now, not
imagine now, nor to morrow, nor next year; but even in that particular, I
shall be like God: that as he that asked a day to give a definition of God, the
next day asked a week, and then a month, and then a year; so undeterminable
would my imaginations be, if I should go about to think now, what I shall be
there: I shall be so like God, as that the devil himself shall not know me from
God, so far as to find any more place to fasten a temptation upon me, then
upon God; nor to conceive any more hope of my falling from that kingdom, then
of Gods being driven out of it: for though I shall not be immortal as God, yet
I shall be as immortal as God. And there is my image of God, of God considered
all together, and in his unity in the state of grace.

I shall have also then the image of all the three persons of the Trinity.
Power is the Fathers; and a greater power then he exercises here, I shall have
there: here he overcomes enemies, but yet here he has enemies; there, there
are none: here they cannot prevail; there they shall not be. So Wisdom is the
image of the Son; and there I shall have better wisdom: the spiritual
wisdom it self is here: for here our best wisdom is, but to go toward our
end; there it is to rest in our end: here it is to seek to be glorified by God;
there it is that God may be everlastingly glorified by me. The image of the
holy Ghost is Goodness. Here our goodness is mixed with some ill; faith mixed
with scruples, and good works mixed with a love of praise, and hope of better
mixed with fear of worse: there I shall have sincere goodness, goodness
impermixt, intemerate and indeterminate goodness; so good a place, as no ill
accident shall annoy it; so good company as no impertinent, no importune
person shall disorder it; so full a goodness, as no evil of sin, no evil of
punishment for former sins can enter; so good a God, as shall no more keep us
in fear of his anger, nor in need of his mercy; but shall fill us first, and
establish us in that fullness in the same instant, and give us a satietie that
we can wish no more, and an infallibility that we can lose none of that, and
both at once. Whereas the Cabalists express our nearenesse to God in that
state, in that note, that the name of man and the name of God, ADAM and
JEHOVAH, in their numerall letters are equal: so I would have leave to
express that inexpressible state, so far as to say, that if there can be
other worlds imagined besides this that is under our moon, and if there could
be other Gods imagined of those worlds, besides this God to whose image we are
made, in Nature, in Grace, in Glory; I had rather be one of these Saints in
this heaven, then one of those Gods in those other worlds. I shall be like the
angels in a glorified soul, and the angels shall not be like me in a glorified
body.

The holy nobleness and religious ambition that I would imprint in you for
attaining of this glory, makes me dismiss you with this note, for the fear of
missing that glory; that, as we have taken just occasion to magnify the
goodness of God toward us, in that he speaks plurally, Faciamus, Let Us, all
Us do this; and so poures out the blessings of the whole Trinity upon us, in
this image of himself, in every person of the three, and in all these three
ways which we have considered: so when the anger of God is justly kindled
against us, God collects himself, summons himself, assembles himself, musters
himself, and threatens plurally too: for of those four places in Scripture, in
which only (as we noted before) God speaks of himself in a royal plural, God
speaks in anger, and in a preparation to destruction, in one of those four
entirely, as entirely he speaks of mercy but in one of them, in this text;
here he says merely out of mercy, Faciamus, Let Us, Us, all Us, make man: and
in the same plurality, the same universalitie, he says after, Descendamus and
confundamus, Genesis 11. 7.
Let Us, Us, all Us, go down to them and confound them, as merely out of
indignation and anger, as here out of mercy. And in the other two places,
where God speaks plurally, he speaks not merely in mercy, nor merely in
justice in neither; but in both he mingles both: so that God carries himself so
equally herein, as that no soul, no Church, no State may any more promise it
self patience in God if it provoke him, then suspect anger in God if we conform
our selves to him. For from them that set themselves against him, God shall
withdraw his image in all the persons and all the attributes: the Father shall
withdraw his power, and we shall be enfeebled in our forces; the Son his
wisdom, and we shall be enfatuated in our counsels; the holy Ghost his
goodness, and we shall be corrupted in our manners, and corrupted in our
religion, and be a prey to temporal and spiritual enemies, and change the
image of God into the image of the beast. And as God loves nothing more then
the image of himself in his Son, and then the image of his Son Christ Jesus
in us; so he hates nothing more then the image of Antichrist in them in whom he
had imprinted his Sons image; that is, declinations toward Antichrist, or
concurrences with Antichrist, in them who were born, and baptized, and
catechized, and blessed in the profession of his truth.

That God, who has hitherto delivered us from all cause or color of
jealousies or suspicions thereof in them whom he has placed over us, so
conform us to his image in a holy life, that sins continued and multiplied by
us against him, do not so provoke him against us, that those two great helps,
the assiduitie of preaching, and the personal and exemplarie piety and
constancy in our Princes, be not by our sins made unprofitable unto us: for
that is the height of Gods malediction upon a nation, when the assiduitie of
preaching and the example of a religious Prince does them no good, but
aggravates their fault.

FINIS.
A SERMON Upon the xix verse of the ii Chapter of HOSEA.

By Dr. DONE DEAN OF PAVLS.



Printed by the Printers to the University of CAMBRIDGE.

MDCXXXIIII.

Hosea 2. 19. And I will marry thee unto me for ever.
THe word which is the hinge upon which all this text turns, is Erash: and
Erash signifies not only a betrothing, as our later translation has it, but a
marrying; and so it is used by David, Deliver me my wife Michal, whom I 2. Sam.
3. 14
married: and so our former translation had it, and so we accept it, and so
shall handle it. I will marry thee unto me for ever.

The first marriage that was made, God made; and he made it in Paradise: and of
that marriage, I have had the like occasion as this, to speak before, in the
presence of many honorable persons in this company. The last marriage which
shall be made, God shall make too, and in Paradise too, in the kingdom of
heaven: and at that marriage, I hope in him that shall make it, to meet, not
some, but all this company. The marriage in this text has relation to both
those marriages. It is it self the spiritual and mystical marriage of Christ
Jesus to the Church, and to every marriageable soul in the Church: and it has
a retrospect, it looks back to the first marriage; for to that the first word
carries us, because from thence God takes his metaphor and comparison,
Sponsabo, I will marry: and then it has a prospect to the last marriage; for
to that we are carried in the last word, In aeternum, I will marry thee unto
me for ever. Be pleased therefore to give me leave in this exercise, to shift
the Scene thrice, and to present to your religious considerations three
objects, three subjects: first, a secular marriage, in Paradise; secondly, a
spiritual marriage, in the Church; and thirdly, an eternal marriage, in
Heaven: And in each of these three, we shall present three circumstances;
first, the persons, Me and Tibi, I will marry thee; and then the action,
Sponsabo, I will marry thee; and lastly, the term, In aeternum, I will marry
thee to me for ever.

In the first acceptance then, in the first, the secular We lay nothing upon
you but things Act. 15. 28.
necessary; so we call nothing necessary, but that which is commanded by God.
If in heaven I may have the place of a man that has performed the commandments
of God, I will not change with him, that thinks he has done more then the
commandments of God enjoined him. The rule of marriage for degrees and distance
in blood, is the law of God; but for conditions of men, there is no rule at all
given. When God had made Adam and Eve in Paradise, though there were four
rivers in Paradise, God did not place Adam in a Monastery on one side, and Eve
in a Nunnerie on the other, and so a river between them. They that build walls
and cloisters to frustrate Gods institution of marriage, advance the doctrine
of devils, in forbidding of marriage. The devil has advantages enough against
us, in bringing men and women together: it was a strange and superdevilish
invention, to give him a new advantage against us, by keeping men and women
asunder, by forbidding marriage. Between the heresy of the Nicolaitans, that
induced a community of women (any might take any) and the heresy of the
Tatians, that forbad all (none might take any) was a fair latitude. Between the
opinion of the Manichaean heretics, that thought women to be made by the
devil; and the Colliridian heretics, that sacrificed to a woman, as to God,
there is a fair distance. Between the denying of them souls, which S. Ambrose
is charged to have done; and giving them such souls, as that they may be
priests, as the Peputian heretics did, is a fair way for a moderate man to
walk in. To make them gods, is ungodly; and to make them devils, is devilish:
to make them mistresses, is unmanly; and to make them servants, is unnoble: to
make them, as God made them, wives, is godly, and manly too. When in the Roman
church they dissolve marriages in natural kindred, in degrees where God
forbids it not; when they dissolve marriage upon spiritual kindred, because my
grandfather christened that woman's father; when they dissolve marriage upon
legal kindred, because my grandfather adopted that woman's father, they
separate those whom God has joined so far, as to give them leave to join in
lawful marriage. When men have made vows to abstain from marriage, I would
they would be content to try a little longer then they do, whether they could
keep that vow or no: And when men have consecrated themselves to the service of
God in his Church, I would they would be content to try a little further then
they do, whether they could abstain or no: But to dissolve marriages made after
such a vow, or after orders, is still to separate those whom God has not
separated. The persons are He and She, man and woman: they must be so much; he
must be a man, she must be a woman: and they must be no more; not a brother and
a sister, not an uncle and a niece. Adduxit ad eum, was the case between Adam
and Eve; God brought them together: God will not bring me a precontracted
person; he will not have me defraud another: God will not bring me a
misbeleeving, a superstitious person; he will not have me drawn from himself:
But let them be persons that God has made, man and woman; and persons that God
has brought together, that is, not put asunder by any law of his; and all such
are persons capable of this first, this secular marriage.

In which our second consideration is the action, Sponsabo; where the active is
a kind of passive: I will marry thee, is, I will be married to thee; for we
marry not our selves. They are somewhat hard driven in the Roman church,
when, making marriage a sacrament, and being pressed by us with this question,
If it be a sacrament, who administers it? who is the Priest? they are fain to
answer, The Bridegroom and the Bride, he and she are the Priest in that
sacrament. As marriage is a civil contract, it must be done so in public, as
that it may have the testimony of men: as marriage is a religious contract, it
must be so done, as that it may have the benediction of the Priest. In a
marriage without testimony of men, they cannot claim any benefit by the Law;
in a marriage without the benediction of the Priest, they cannot claim any
benefit of the Church: for how matrimonially soever, such persons as have
married themselves, may pretend to love and live together; yet all that love
and all that life is but a regulated adultery, it is not marriage.

Now this Institution of marriage had 3 objects: First, In ustionem, it was
given for a remedy against burning; and then, In prolem, for propagation, for
children; and lastly, In adjutorium, for mutual help. As we consider it the
first way, In ustionem, every heating is not a burning; every natural
concupiscence does not require a marriage: nay, every flaming is not a burning;
though a man continue under the flame of carnal temptation, as long as S. Paul
did, yet it needs not come presently to a Sponsabo, I will marry. God gave S.
Paul other physic, Gratia mea sufficit, grace to stand under that temptation:
and S. Paul gave himself other physic, Contundo corpus, convenient disciplines
to tame his body. These will keep a man from burning; for, Vri, est desideriis
vinci; desideria pati, illustris est and perfecti: To be overcome by our
concupiscencies, that is to burn; but to quench that fire by religious ways,
that is a noble, that is a perfect work. When God, at the first institution of
marriage, had this first use of marriage in his contemplation, that it should
be a remedy against burning, God gave man the remedy, before he had the
disease: for marriage was instituted in the state of innocence, when there was
no inordinatenesse in the affections of man, and so no burning. But as God
created Rheubarb in the world, whose quality is to purge choler, before there
was any choler to purge: so God, according to his abundant forwardness to do
us good, created a remedy before the disease, which he foresaw coming, was
come upon us. Let him then, that takes his wife in this first and lowest sense,
In medicinam, but as his physic, yet make her his cordial physic, take her
to his heart, and fill his heart with her; let her dwell there, and dwell there
alone: and so they will be mutual antidotes and preservatives to one another,
against all foreign temptations. And with this blessing bless thou, O Lord,
these whom thou have brought hither for this blessing: make all the days of
their life, like this day unto them: and as thy mercies are new every morning,
make them so to one another: and if they may not die together, sustain thou the
surviver of them in that sad hour, with this comfort, that he that died for
them both, will bring them together again in his everlastingnesse.

The second use of marriage was, In prolificationem, For children: And
therefore (as S. Augustine puts the case) to contract before, that they will
have no children, makes it no marriage, but an adultery. To deny themselves to
one another, is as much against marriage, as to give themselves to another. To
hinder that by physic, or any other practice; nay, to hinder that so far, as
by a deliberate wish or prayer against children, consists not well with this
second use of marriage. And yet in this second use we do not so much consider
generation, as regeneration; not so much procreation, as education; nor
propagation, as transplantation of children: for this world might be filled
full enough of children, though there were no marriage; but heaven could not be
filled, nor the places of the fallen angels supplied, without that care of
childrens religious education, which from parents in lawful marriage they are
likeliest to receive. How infinite and how miserable a circle of sin do we
make, if, as we sinned in our parents loins before we were born, so we sin in
our childrens actions when we are dead, by having given them either example or
liberty of sinning! We have a fearful commination from God, upon a good man,
upon Eli, for his not restraining the licentiousness of his sons: I will do
a thing in Israel, 1. Sam. 3. 11
says God there, at which both the ears of every one that hears it shall
tingle: and it was executed; Eli fell down, and broke his neck. We have also 1.
Sam. 4. 18
a promise of consolation to women, for children: She shall be saved in
childe-bearing, says the Apostle: 1. Tim. 2. 15
but, as Chrysostom and others of the ancients observe and interpret that
place (which interpretation arises out of the very letter) it is, Si
permanserint; not, If she, but, If they, if the children continue in faith, and
charity, and holiness, with sobriety. The salvation of the parents has so
much relation to the childrens goodness, as that, if they be ill by the
parents example or indulgence, the parents are as guilty as the children. Art
thou afraid thy child should be stung with a snake, and will thou let him play
with the old serpent, in opening himself to all temptations? Art thou afraid to
let him walk in an ill air, and art thou content to let him stand in that
pestilent air, that is made of nothing but oaths and execrations of
blasphemous mouths round about him? It is S. Chrysostomes complaint,
Perditionem magno pretio emunt, salutem nec dono accipere volunt: we pay dear
for our childrens damnation, by paying at first for all their childish
vanities, and then for their sinful insolences at any rate; and we might have
them saved, and our selves to the bargain (which were a frugall way, and a debt
well hedged in) for much less then ours and their damnation stands us in. If
you have a desire, says that blessed Father, to leave them certainly rich,
Deum iis relinque debitorem; Do some such thing for Gods service, as you may
leave God in their debt. He cannot break; his estate is inexhaustible: He will
not break promise, nor break day; He will show mercy unto thousands, in them
that love him, and keep his commandments. And here also may another shower of
his benedictions fall upon them, whom he has prepared and presented here; Let
the wife be as a fruitful Ps. 128. 3.
vine, and their children like olive-plants. To thy glory, let the parents
express the love of parents, and the children, to thy glory, the obedience of
children, till they both lose that secular name of parents and children, and
meet all alike, in one new name, all saints in thy kingdom, and fellowservants
there.

The third and last use in this institution of secular marriage, was, In
adjutorium, For mutual help. There is no state, no man in any state, that
needs not the help of others. Subjects need Kings; and if Kings do not need
their subjects, they need alliances abroad, and they need counsel at home. Even
in paradise, where the earth produced all things for life, without labor, and
the beasts submitted themselves to man, so that he had no outward enemy; and
in the state of innocence in paradise, where, in man, all the affections
submitted themselves to reason, so that he had no inward enemy; yet God, in
this abundant paradise, and in this secure innocence of paradise, even in the
survey of his own works, saw, that though all that he had made, was good, yet
he had not made all good; he found thus much defect in his own work, that man
lacked an helper. Every body needs the help of others; and every good body
does give some kind of help to others. Even into the ark it self, where God
blessed them all with a powerful and an immediate protection, God admitted
only such, as were fitted to help one another, couples. In the ark, which was
the type of our best condition in this life, there was not a single person.
Christ saved once one thief at the last gasp, to show that there may be late
repentances: but in the ark he saved none but married persons, to show, that he
eases himself in making them helpers to one another. And therefore when we come
to the Posui Deum adjutorium meum, to rely upon God primarily for our helper;
God comes to the Faciam tibi adjutorium, I will make thee a help like thy self:
not always like in complexion, nor like in years, nor like in fortune, nor
like in birth; but like in mind, like in disposition, like in the love of God
and of one another, or else there is no helper. It was no kind of help, that
David's wife gave him, when she spoke by way of counsel, but in truth in scorn
and derision, to draw him from a religious act, as the dancing before the ark
at that time was. It is no help, for any respect, to slacken the husband in his
religion. It was but a poor help that Nabals wife was fain to give him, by
telling David, Alas, my husband is but a fool, like his name; and what will you
look for at a fools hand? It is the worst help of all, to raise a husband by
dejecting her self; to help her husband forward in this world, by forfeiting
sinfully and dishonourably her own interest in the next. The husband is the
helper in the nature of a foundation, to sustain and uphold all; the wife in
the nature of the roof, to cover imperfections and weaknesses: the husband in
the nature of the head, from whence all the sinews flow; the wife in the nature
of the hands, into which those sinews flow, and enable them to do their
offices: the husband helps as legs to her; she moves by his motion: the wife
helps as a staff to him; he moves the better by her assistance. And let this
mutual help be a part of our present benediction too: In all the ways of
fortune, let his industry help her; and in all the crosses of fortune, let her
patience help him; and in all emergent occasions and dangers, spiritual or
temporal, O God, make speed to save them; O Lord, make haste to help them.

We have spoken of the persons, Man and Woman, Him and Her; and of the action,
first, as it is physic, but cordial physic; and then for children, but
children to be made the children of God; and lastly for help, but true help,
and mutual help: there remains yet in this secular marriage, the term how
long, for ever; I will marry thee for ever. Now though there be properly no
eternity in this secular marriage, nor in any thing in this world, (for
eternity is only that which never had beginning, nor ever shall have end) yet
we may consider a kind of eternity, a kind of circle, without beginning,
without end, even in this secular marriage: for first, marriage should have no
beginning before marriage; no half marriages, no lending away of the mind in
conditional precontracts before, no lending away of the body in unchaste
wantonness before. The body is the temple of the holy Ghost; and when two
bodies by marriage are to be made one temple, the wife is not as the chancell,
reserved and shut up, and the man as the walks below, indifferent and at
liberty for every passenger. God in his temple looks for first fruits from
both; that so, on both sides, marriage should have such a degree of eternity,
as to have had no beginning of marriage before marriage. It should have this
degree of eternity too, this quality of a circle, to have no interruption, no
breaking in the way, by unjust suspicions and jealousies. Where there is
spiritus immunditiei, as S. Paul calls it, A spirit of uncleanness, there will
necessarily be spiritus zelotypiae, as Moses calls it, A spirit of jealousy.
But to raise the devil in the power of the devil, to call up one spirit by
another spirit, by the spirit of jealousy and suspicion, to induce the spirit
of uncleanness where it was not, if a man conjure up a devil so, God knows who
shall conjure it down again. As jealousy is a care, and not a suspicion, God
is not ashamed to protest of himself, that he is a jealous God. God commands
that no idolatry be committed, Thou shall not bow down to a graven image;
Exodus 20. 5
and before he accuses any man to have bowed down to a graven image, before any
idolatry was committed, he tells them that he is a jealous God; God is jealous
before there be any harm done. And God presents it as a curse, when he says,
My jealousy shall depart from thee, and I will be Eze. 16. 42.
quiet, and no more angry; that is, I will leave thee to thy self, and take no
more care of thee. Jealousy that implies care, and honor, and counsel, and
tenderness, is rooted in God; for God is a jealous God, and his servants are
jealous servants, as S. Paul professes of himself, I am jealous over 2. Cor.
11. 2
you with a godly jealousy. But jealousy that implies diffidence, and
suspicion, and accusation, is rooted in the devil; for he is The accuser of the
brethren.

So then this secular marriage should be In aeternum, eternal, for ever, as to
have no beginning before, and so too, as to have no jealous interruption by the
way; for it is so eternal, as that it can have no end in this life. Those whom
God has joined, no man, no devil can separate so, as that it shall not remain
a marriage so far, as that, if those separated persons will live together
again, yet they shall not be new married; so far, certainly, the band of
marriage continues still. The devil makes no marriages: he may have a hand in
drawing conveyances; in the temporal conditions there may be practice; but the
marriage is made by God in heaven. The devil can break no marriages neither,
though he can by sin break off all the good uses, and take away all the
comforts of marriage. I pronounce not now, whether adultery dissolve marriage
or no: It is S. Augustines wisdom to say, When the Scripture is silent, let me
be silent too: and I may go lower then he, and say, Where the Church is silent,
let me be silent too; and our Church is so far silent in this, as that it
has not said, that adultery dissolves marriage. Perchance then it is not the
death of marriage; but surely it is a deadly wound. We have authors in the
Roman church, that think Fornicationem non vagam, that such an incontinent
life, as is limited to one certain person, is no deadly sin: but there are
none, even amongst them, that diminish the crime of adultery. Habere quasi non
haberes, is Christ's counsel; to have a wife, as though thou had none, that
is, for continency and temperance, and forbearance, and abstinence upon some
occasions. But, Non habere quasi haberes, is not so: not to have a wife, and
yet have her; to have her that is another, this is the devils counsel. Of that
salutation of the Angel to the blessed Virgin Mary, Blessed art thou amongst
women, we may make ever this interpretation, not only that she was blessed
amongst women, that is, above women; but that she was Benedicta, Blessed
amongst women, that all women blessed her, that no woman had occasion to curse
her. And this is the eternity of this secular marriage, as far as this world
admits any eternity, that it should have no beginning before, no interruption
of jealousy in the way, no such approach toward dissolution, as that
incontinencie, in all opinions, and in all Churches, is agreed to be. And here
also, without any scruple of fear, or of suspicion of the contrary, there is
place for this benediction upon this couple: Build, O Lord, upon thine own
foundations, in these two, and establish thy former graces with future; that no
person ever complain of either of them, nor either of them of one another; and
so he and she are married in aeternum, for ever.

We are come now, in our order proposed at them. But yet your patience may
perchance last to a word of each of these three circumstances, the persons, the
action, the term, both in this spiritual and in the eternal marriage.

First then, as in the former part, the secular marriage, for the persons
there, we considered first Adam and Eve; and after, every man and woman, and
this couple in particular: so in this spiritual marriage, we consider first
Christ and his Church, for the persons; but more particularly, Christ and my
soul. And can these persons meet? In such a distance, and in such a
disparagement, can persons meet? The Son of God, and the son of man? When I
consider Christ to be Germen Jehovae, the bud and blossom, the fruit and
offspring of Jehovah, Jehovah himself; and my self, before he took me in hand,
to be, not a potters vessel of earth, but that earth of which the potter might
make a vessel if he would, and break it if he would, when he had made it: when
I consider Christ to have been from before all beginnings, and to be still the
image of the Father, the same stamp upon the same metal; and my self a piece
of rusty copper, in which those lines of the image of God, which were imprinted
in me, in my creation, are defaced, and worn, and washed, and burnt, and ground
away by my many, and many, and many sins: when I consider Christ in his
circle, in glory with his Father, before he came into this world, establishing
a glorious Church when he was in this world, and glorifying that Church, with
that glory which himself had before, when he went out of this world; and then
consider my self in my circle, I came into this world washed in mine own tears,
and either out of compunction for my self, or compassion for others, I pass
through this world, as through a valley of tears, where tears settle and swell;
and when I pass out of this world, I have their eyes, whose hands close mine,
full of tears too: Can these persons, this image of God, this God himself, this
glorious God, and this vessel of earth, this earth it self, this inglorious
worm of the earth, meet without disparagement?

They do meet, and make a marriage: because I am not a body only, but a body
and soul; there is a marriage, and Christ marries me. As by the Law a man might
marry a captive woman in the Deuteronomy. 21. 12
wars, if he shaved her head, and pared her nails, and changed her clothes:
so my Savior having fought for my soul, fought to blood, to death, to the
death of the cross for her; having studied my soul so much, as to write all
those epistles, which are in the New Testament, to my soul; having presented my
soul with his own picture, that I can see his face in all his temporal
blessings; having shaved her head, in abating her pride; and pared her nails,
in contracting her greedy desires; and changed her clothes, not to fashion her
self after this world; my soul being thus fitted by himself, Christ Jesus has
married my soul; married her to all the three intendments mentioned in the
secular marriage: First, In ustionem, Against burning; that, whether I burn my
self in the fire of temptation, by exposing my self to occasions of temptation;
or be reserved to be burnt by others in the fires of persecution and
martyrdom; whether the fires of ambition, or envy, or lust, or the
everlasting fires of hell offer at me, in an apprehension of the judgments of
God; yet, as the Spirit of God shall wipe all tears from mine eyes, so the
tears of Christ Jesus shall extinguish all fires in my heart: and so it is a
marriage, In ustionem, a remedy against burning. It is so too, In
prolificationem, For children. First, Vae soli, Woe unto that single soul that
is not married to Christ, that is not come into the way of having issue by him,
that is not incorporated in the Christian Church, and in the true Church; but
is yet either in the wilderness of idolatry amongst the Gentiles, or in the
labyrinth of superstition amongst the Papists. Vae soli, Woe unto that single
man, that is not married to Christ in the sacraments of the Church; and, Vae
sterili, Woe unto them that are barren after this spiritual marriage: for that
is a great curse in the Prophet Jeremie, Scribe virum istum sterilem, Jer. 22.
30.
Write this man childlesse; that implied all calamities upon him. And as soon as
Christ had laid that curse upon the fig tree, Let no fruit grow on thee Matt.
21. 19
henceforward for ever, presently the whole tree withered: if no fruit, no
leaves neither, nor body left. To be incorporated in the body of Christ
Jesus, and bring forth no fruits worthy of that profession, is a woeful state
too. Vae soli: First, Woe unto the Gentiles not married to Christ: and, Vae
sterili, Woe unto inconsiderate Christians, that think not upon their calling,
that conceive not by Christ: but there is a Vae pregnanti too, Woe unto Matt.
24. 19
them that are with child, and are never delivered; that have sometimes good
conceptions, religious dispositions, holy desires to the advancement of Gods
truth; but, for some collateral respects, dare not utter them, nor bring them
to their birth, to any effect. The purpose of his marriage to us, is, to have
children by us: and this is his abundant and his present fecunditie, that
working now by me in you, in one instant he has children in me, and
grandchildren by me. He has married me In ustionem, and In prolem; Against
burning, and for children: but can he have any use of me, In adjutorium, For a
helper? Surely, if I be able to feed him, and clothe him, and harbor him (and
Christ would not condemn men at the last day for not doing these, if man could
not do them) I am able to help him too. Great persons can help him over sea,
convey the name of Christ, where it has not been preached yet: and they can
help him home again, restore his name and his truth, where superstition with
violence has disseized him: and they can help him at home, defend his truth
there, against all machinations to displant and dispossess him. Great men can
help him thus: and every man can help him to a better place in his own heart,
and his own actions, then he has had there; and to be so helped in me, and
helped by me, to have his glory thereby advanced, Christ has married my soul.
And he has married it In aeternum, For ever; which is the third and last
circumstance in this spiritual, as it was in the secular marriage. And here
the Aeternum is enlarged. In the secular marriage it was an eternity
considered only in this life; but this eternity is not begun in this world,
but from all eternity, in the book of life, in Gods eternal decree for my
election; there Christ was married to my soul. Christ was never in minority,
never under years; there was never any time, when he was not as ancient as the
Ancient of days, as old as his Father. But when my soul was in a strange
minority, infinite millions of millions of generations before my soul was a
soul, did Christ marry my soul in his eternal decree: so it was eternal, it
had no beginning. Neither does he interrupt this, by giving me any occasion of
jealousy by the way, but loves my soul as though there were no other soul, and
would have done and suffered all that he did for me alone, if there had been no
name but mine in the book of life. And as he has married me to him In
aeternum, For ever, before all beginning; and In aeternum, For ever, without
any interruptions: so I know, that whom he loves, he loves to the end; and that
he has given me, not a presumptuous impossibility, but a modest
infallibility, that no sin of mine shall divorce or separate me from him:
for that which ends the secular marriage, does not end the spiritual; not
death: for my death does not take me from that husband; but that husband being
by his Father preferred to higher titles and greater glory in another state, I
do but go by death, where he is become a King, to have my part in that glory,
and in those additions, which he has received there. And this has led us to
our third and last marriage, our eternal marriage, in the triumphant Church.

And in this third marriage, the persons are the The marriage of the Lamb
Apoc. 19. 7, 9.
is come, and blessed are they that are called to the marriage supper of the
Lamb, says S. John, speaking of our state in the general resurrection. That
Lamb who was brought to the slaughter, and Isa. 53. 7.
opened not his mouth, and I, who have opened my mouth, and poured out
imprecations and curses upon men, and execrations and blasphemies against God,
upon every occasion; that Lamb which was slain from the beginning, and I, who
was slain by him who was a murderer from the beginning; that Lamb which took
away the sins of the world, and I, who brought more sins into the world,
then any sacrifice but the blood of this Lamb could take away; this Lamb and
I (these are the persons) shall meet and marry, there is the action.

This is not a clandestine marriage, not the private seal of Christ in the
obsignation of his Spirit; and yet such a clandestine marriage is a good
marriage: nor is it such a parish-marriage, as when Christ married me to
himself at my baptism, in a Church here; and yet that marriage of a Christian
soul to Christ in that sacrament, is a blessed marriage: But this is a marriage
in that great and glorious congregation, where all my sins shall be laid open
to the eyes of all the world; where all the blessed Virgins shall see all my
uncleanness, and all the Martyrs see all my tergiversations, and all the
Confessors see all my double dealings in Gods cause; where Abraham shall see
my faithlesnesse in Gods promises, and Job my impatience in Gods corrections,
and Lazarus my hardness of heart in distributing Gods blessings to the poor:
and those Virgins, and Martyrs, and Confessors, and Abraham, and Job, and
Lazarus, and all that congregation, shall look upon the Lamb, and upon me, and
upon one another, as though they would all forbid those banes, and say to one
another, Will this Lamb have any thing to do with this soul? And yet there and
then this Lamb shall marry me, and marry me In aeternum, For ever; which is
our last circumstance.

It is not well done to call it a circumstance; for the eternity is a great
part of the essence of that marriage. Consider then how poor and needy a
thing all the riches of this world, how flat and tastlesse a thing all the
pleasures of this world, how pallid, and faint, and dilute a thing all the
honors of this world are, when the very treasure, and joy, and glory of
heaven it self were unperfect, if it were not eternal: and my marriage shall
be so, In aeternum, For ever. The Angels were not married so; they incurred an
irreparable divorce from God, and are separated for ever; and I shall be
married to him In aeternum, For ever. The Angels fell in love, when there was
no object presented, before any thing was created; when there was nothing but
God and themselves, they fell in love with themselves, and neglected God, and
so fell In aeternum, For ever. I shall see all the beauty and all the glory
of all the Saints of God, and love them all, and know that the Lamb loves them
too, without jealousy on his part, or theirs, or mine; and so be married In
aeternum, For ever, without interruption, or diminution, or change of
affections. I shall see the sun black as sackcloth Reve. 6. 12, 13, 14.
of hair, and the moon become as blood, and the stars fall, as a fig tree
casts her untimely figs, and the heavens rolled up together as a scrowl: I
shall see a divorce between princes and their prerogatives, between nature and
all her elements, between the spheres and all their intelligences, between
matter it self and all her forms, and my marriage shall be In aeternum, For
ever. I shall see an end of faith, nothing to be believed that I do not know;
and an end of hope, nothing to be wished that I do not enjoy; but no end of
that love, in which I am married to that Lamb for ever: yea, I shall see an
end of some of the offices of the Lamb himself: Christ himself shall be no
longer a Mediator, an Intercessour, an Advocate, and yet shall continue a
Husband to my soul for ever: where I shall be rich enough without jointure, for
my Husband cannot die; and wise enough without experience, for no new thing can
happen there; and healthy enough without physic, for no sickness can enter;
and (which is by much the highest of all) safe enough without grace, for no
temptation that needs particular grace can attempt me. There, where the Angels,
which cannot die, could not live, this very body, which cannot choose but die,
shall live, and live as long as that God of life that made it. Lighten our
darkness, we beseech thee, O Lord, that in thy light we may see light:
illustrate our understandings, kindle our affections, pour oil to our zeal,
that we may come to the marriage of this Lamb, and that this Lamb may come
quickly to this marriage: and in the mean time bless these thy servants, with
making this secular marriage a type of the spiritual, and the spiritual an
earnest of that eternal, which they and we by thy mercy shall have in that
kingdom, which thy Son our Savior has purchased with the inestimable price
of his incorruptible blood. To whom, etc.

FINIS.
A SERMON Upon the xliiii verse of the xxi Chapter of MATTHEW.

By Dr. DONE DEAN OF PAVLS.



Printed by the Printers to the University of CAMBRIDGE.

MDCXXXIIII.

Matthew. 21. 44. Whosoever shall fall on this stone, he shall be broken; but on
whomsoever it shall fall, it will dash him in pieces.
Almighty God made us for his glory, and his glory is not the glory of a
tyrant, to destroy us, but his glory is our happiness: he put us in a fair
way toward that happiness, in nature, in creation; that way would have
brought us to heaven, but there we fell, and, if we consider our selves,
irrevocably: he put us after into another way, through many hedges and plowed
lands, through the difficulties and encumbrances of all the ceremonial Law;
there was no way to heaven but that: after he brought us a cross way, by the
cross of Christ Jesus, and the application of his Gospel; and that is our way
now: and if we compare one way of nature, and our way, we went out of that way
at the towns end, as soon as we were in it: Adam died as soon as he lived, and
fell as soon as he was set on foot: if we compare the way of the Law and ours,
the Jews and the Christians, their Synagogue was but as Gods farm, our Church
is as his dwelling house. Locavit vineam, He let out his vine to husbandmen;
and then Peregre profectus, He went into a far country, he promised a
Messiah, but deferred his coming a long time. But to us Dabitur regnum, A
kingdom is given: here is a good improvement, and the lease changed into an
absolute deed of gift: here is a good enlargement of the term; he gives,
therefore he will not take away again: he gives a kingdom, therefore there is
a fullness and an all-sufficiencie in the gift. And he does not go into a far
country, but stays with us, to govern us Vsque ad consummationem, Until the
end of the world.

Here therefore God takes all into his own hands, and he comes to dwell upon us
himself; to which purpose he plows up our hearts, and he builds upon us: Vos
dei agricultura, and Dei aedificium; You are Gods husbandry, and Gods
building. Now of this husbandry God speaks familiarly and parabolically many
times in Scripture, of this building particularly and principally in this
place: where having intimated unto us the several benefits we receive from
Christ Jesus, in that appellation as he is a stone, he tells us also our
dangers, in misbehaving our selves toward it; Whosoever shall fall upon this
stone, he shall be broken. Christ then is a stone, and we may run into two
dangers; First, we may fall upon this stone, and then this stone may fall upon
us: but yet we have a great deal of comfort presented unto us, in that Christ
is presented unto us as a stone: for there we shall find him, first to be the
foundation stone; nothing can stand which is not built upon Christ: Secondly,
to be Lapis angularis, A corner stone, that unites things being most disunited:
Thirdly, to be Lapis Jacob, The stone which Jacob slept upon: Fourthly, to be
Lapis Davidis, The stone which David slew Goliath with: Fifthly, to be Lapis
Petra, Such a stone as is a rock, as no waters or storms can remove or shake.
These are benefits, Christ Jesus is a stone, no firmness but in him; a
fundamental stone, no building but upon him; a corner stone, no piecing nor
reconciliation but in him; David's stone, no revenge, no anger but in him; and a
rockie stone, no defense against troubles and tribulations but in him: and upon
this stone we fall and are broken, and this stone may fall upon us, and grind
us to powder.

First, in the Metaphor that Christ is called a stone, the firmness is
expressed: forasmuch as he loved his own which were in the world, In finem
dilexit eos, says S. John, He loved them to the end, John 13. 1.
not for any particular end, for any use of his own, but to their end Qui erant
in mundo, says Cyril, ad distinctionem Angelorum; he loved them in the world,
and not Angels: he loved not only them who were in a confirmed estate of
mutual loving of him too, but even them who were themselves conceived in
sin, and then conceived all their purposes in sin too; them who would have
no cleansing but in his blood, and when they were cleansed in his blood, their
own clothes would defile them again; them, who by nature are not able to love
him at all; and when by grace they are brought to love him, can express their
love no other way, but to be glad that he was betrayed, and scourged, and
scorned, and nailed, and crucified; and to be glad, that if all this were not
already done, it might be done yet; and to long and to wish, if Christ were
not crucified, to have him crucified now (which is a strange manner of
expressing love) these men he loved, and loved to the end; men, and not Angels,
Ad distinctionem mortuorum, says Chrysostom: not only the Patriarchs who
were departed out of the world, who had loved him so well, as to take his word
for their salvation, and had lived and died in a faithful contemplation of a
future promise, which they never saw performed; but those who were the
partakers of the performance of the promises; those, in the midst of whom he
came in person; those, upon whom he wrought by his piercing doctrine and
powerful miracles; those, who for all this loved not him, he loved, Et in
finem, he loved them to the end. It is much he should love them in fine, at
their end; that he should look graciously at last; that when their sun sets,
their eyes faint, his sun of grace should arise, and his East should be
brought to their West; that then, in the shadow of death, the Lord of life
should quicken and inanimate their hearts; that when their last bell tolls, and
calls them to their first and last judgment, which to this purpose is all one;
for the passing bell and the Angels trump sound but one note: Surgite qui
dormitis in pulvere, Arise ye that sleep in the dust, which is the voice of the
Angels; and, Surgite qui vigilatis in plumis, Arise ye that cannot sleep in
feathers, for the pangs of death, which is the voice of the bell, is in effect
but one voice: for God at the general judgment shall never reverse any
particular judgment formerly given: that God should then come to thy bedside
Ad sibilandum populum suum, as the Prophet Ezechiel says, to hiss softly for
his child, to speak comfortably in his ear, to whisper gently to his
departing soul, and to drown and overcome with this soft music of his all the
clangour of the Angels trumpets, all the horror of the ringing bell, all the
cries and vociferations of a distressed, and distracted, and scattering family;
yea, all the accusations of his own conscience, and all the triumphant
acclamations of the devil himself: that God should love a man thus in fine, at
his end, and return to him then, though he had suffered him to go astray
before, is a great testimony of an inexpressible love. But this love is not in
fine, in the end; but in finem, to the end. He leaves them not uncalled at the
first, he leaves them not unaccompanied in the way, he leaves them not
unrecompensed at the last. That God, who is Alpha and Omega, First and Last,
that God is also Love it self; and therefore this Love is Alpha and Omega,
First and Last too. Consider Christ's proceeding Matt. 14. 17
with Peter in the ship, in the storm: First he suffered him to be in some
danger in the storm, but then he visits him with a strange assurance, Noli
timere, Be not afraid, it is I: any testimony of his presence rectifies all.
This puts Peter into that spiritual confidence and courage, Jube me venire,
Lord bid me come to thee; he has a desire to be with Christ, but yet stays
his bidding: he puts not himself into an unnecessarie danger, without
commandment; Christ bids him, and Peter comes: but yet, though Christ were in
his sight, and even in the actual exercise of his love to him, so soon as he
saw a storm, Timuit, He was afraid; and Christ lets him fear, and lets him
sink, and lets him cry* but he directs his fear and his cry to the right end:
Domine, salvum me fac; Lord, save me; and thereupon he stretched forth his hand
and saved him. God does not raise his children to honor and great estate, and
then leave them, and expose them to be subjects and exercises of the malice of
others, neither does he make them mighty and then leave them, ut glorietur in
malo qui potens est, that he should think it a glory to do harm: he does not
impoverish and dishonor his children, and then leave them unsensible of that
doctrine, that patience is as great a blessing as abundance. God gives not his
people health, and then leaves them to a boldness in surfeting; nor beauty,
and then leaves them to a confidence, and opening themselves to all
solicitations; nor valor, and then leaves them to a spirituous
quarrelsomnesse: God makes no patterns of his works, nor models of his houses;
he makes whole pieces, and perfect houses: he puts his children into good
ways, and he directs and protects them in those ways; for this is the
constancy and perseverance of the love of Christ Jesus to us, as he is called
in this Text a stone.

To come to the particular benefits, the first is, that he is Lapis
fundamentalis, A foundation stone: for other foundation can no man lay, then
that is laid, 1. Cor. 3. 11
which is Jesus Christ. Now when S. Augustine says (as he does in the 2 and 3
places) that this place of S. Paul to the Corinthians is one of those places,
of which Peter says, Quaedam difficilia, There are some things in S. Paul hard
to be understood; S. Augustines meaning is, that the difficulty is in the next
words, how any man should build stubble or hay upon such a foundation. And
therefore to place salvation or damnation in such an absolute decree of God, as
should have no relation to the fall of man, and reparation in a Redeemer, this
is to remove this stone out of the foundation; for a Christian may well be
content to begin at Christ: if any man therefore have laid any other foundation
to his possession of great places, alliance in great families, strong practice
in courts, obligations upon dependants, acclamations of people; if he have laid
any other foundation, for pleasure and contentment, care of health and
complexion, delight in discourse, cheerfulness in disportings, interchange of
secrets, and such other small wares of court and cities as these are: whosoever
has laid such foundations as these, must needs do as that General did when he
besieged a town, who compounded to take it to mercy upon a condition, that in
sign of subjection they should suffer him to take one row of stones from their
walls; whereupon he took away the lowest row, the foundation, and so ruined and
demolished the whole walls of the city: so must he that has these
foundations, that is, these habits, divest the habit, root out the lowest
stone, the general and radical inclination of these disorders: for he shall
never be able to watch and resist every particular temptation, if he trust
only to his moral constancy; no, nor if he place Christ for the roof, to
cover his sins, when he has done them: his mercy works, by way of pardon
after, not by way of an Obstante, and privilege, to do a sin beforehand; but
beforehand he must be in the foundation, in our eye, when we undertake any
particular action; in the beginning, for there he is to be in the first place,
Lapis fundamentalis. And then after we have considered him in the foundation,
as we are there all Christians, he grows to be Lapis angularis, to unite those
Christians which seem to be of diverse ways, diverse aspects, diverse
professions, together. As we consider him in the foundation, there he is the
root of faith; as we consider him in the corner, there he is the root of
charity. In Esaias he is both together, a sure foundation, and a corner Isa. 28.
16.
stone, as he was in that place of Esaias Lapis probatus, I will lay in Sion a
tried stone; and in the Psalm, Lapis reprobatus, a stone that the builders
refused; in this consideration he is Lapis approbatus, a stone approved by all
sides together.

Consider first what diverse things he unites in his own person, that he should
be the son of a woman, and yet no son of man; that the son of a woman
should be the Son of God; that man's nature and innocence should meet
together; a man that should not sin; that Gods nature and mortality should
meet together, be God that must die: briefly, that he should do and suffer many
things, impossible as man, impossible as God; thus he was a cornerstone, that
brought together natures naturally incompatible: Thus he was Lapis angularis, a
cornerstone, in his person.

Consider him in his offices, as a Redeemer, as a Mediator, and so he has
united God to man, rebellious men to jealous God; yea, such a corner stone, as
has builded heaven and earth, Jerusalem and Babel together; thus in his
person, and thus in his offices.

Consider him in his power, and he is such a cornerstone as he is the God of
grace, and love, and union, and concord; such a cornerstone as is able to
reconcile and unite (as he did in Abraham's house) a wife and a concubine in one
bed, a covetous father and a wastfull son in one family, a severe magistrate
and a licentious people in one city, an absolute Prince and a jealous people
in one kingdom, law and conscience in one government, scripture and tradition
in one Church. If we will but consider Christ Jesus the life and soul of all
our accounts, and all our purposes; if we would mingle that sweetness and
supplenesse, which he loves, and which he is, in all our undertakings; if in
all our controversies (book-controversies and sword-controversies) we would fit
them to him, and see how near they would meet in him, that is, how near we
could come to be friends, and yet both sides good Christians: then we placed
this stone in the second right place: who as he is a cornerstone, reconciling
God and man, in his own person; and God and man, in reconciling mankind in his
office: so he desires to be a cornerstone in reconciling man and man, and
setting peace amongst our selves, not for worldly ends, but for this respect;
that we might all meet in him to love one another, not because we made a
stronger party by that love, not because we made a sweeter conversation by
that love; but because we meet closer in the bosom of Christ Jesus, where we
must all at last either rest all together, or else be all together eternally
thrown out, or be eternally separated and divorced one from another. Having
then received Christ as a foundation stone, we believe aright; and for the
cornerstone, we interpret charitably the opinions and accounts of other men:
the next is, that he is Lapis Jacob, a stone of rest and security to our
souls. When Jacob was in his journey, he took a stone, and that stone was his
pillow; when that he slept all night, and rested upon the stone, he saw the
ladder that reached from heaven to earth: it is much to have this egresse and
regresse to God, to have a sense of being gone from him, and the desire and
means of returning to him. When we do fall into particular sins, it is well
if we can take hold of the first step of this ladder, with that hand of David,
Domine respice in testamentum, Psalm. 74. 10.
O Lord consider the covenant: if we can remember God of his covenant to his
people and to their seed, it is well. That is more, if we can clamber a step
higher on this ladder, to a Domine labia mea aperi, if we can come to open our
lips in a true confession of our wretched condition, and of those sins by
which we have forfeited our interest in that covenant; it is more, and more
then that too, if we can come to that, Inebriabo me lacrymis, if we overflow
and make our selves drunk with tears, in a true sense and sorrow for those
sins; still it is more then all these, if we can expostulate with God in an
Vsque quo Domine? How long Lord shall I take counsel within my self, having
weariness in my heart? These steps, these gradations to God do well. War is
a degree of peace, as it is the way to prayer; and this colluctation and
wrestling with God, brings a man to peace with him: But then is a man upon the
stone of David, when in a fairer, and even, and constant religious course of
life, he enters into sheets every night, as though his executours had closed
him, as though his neighbors next day were to shroud and wind him in those
sheets, and lies down every night, not as though his man was to call him up the
next day morning to hunt, or to the next days sport business, but as though
the Angels were to call him to the resurrection. And this is our third benefit,
as Christ is a stone, we have security and peace of conscience in him. The
next is, that he is Lapis David, the stone with which he slew Goliath, and with
which we may overcome all our enemies. Sicut baculus crucis, ita lapis Christi
habet typum, says Augustine; David's sling was a type of the cross, and the
stone was a type of Christ. We will choose to insist upon spiritual enemies,
sins. And this is the stone that enables the weakest man to overthrow the
strongest sin, if he proced as David did. David said to Goliath, Thou come
to me with a sword, with a spear, and with a shield; but I come unto thee in
the name of the God of hosts, of Israel, whom thou have railed upon. If thou
watch the approach of any sin, any giant sin that transports thee most, if
thou apprehend it to rail against the Lord of hosts, in that there is a loud
and active blasphemy against God in every sin; if it desire to come with a
sword, or a spear, persuasions of advancement if thou do it, threatenings of
dishonor if thou do it not; if it come with a shield, with promises to cover
and palliate it if thou do it: if then this David, thy attempted soul, can put
his hand into his bag, as David did, (for, Quid cor hominis nisi sacculus Dei?
man's heart is that bag in which God lays up all good directions) if he can
take into his consideration his Christ Jesus, and sling out his works, his
commandments, his merits; this Goliath, this giant sin will fall to the
ground. And then as it is said of David there, that he slew him when he had no
sword in his hand; and yet in the next verse, that he took his sword and slew
him with that: so even by the consideration of that which my Savior has done
for me, I shall give this sin the first deaths wound, and then I shall kill
him with his own sword; his own abomination, his own foulness shall make me
detest him: if I dare but look him in the face, if I dare call him, I come in
the name of the Lord, if I consider him, I shall triumph over him: Et dabit
certandi victoriam, qui dedit certandi audaciam; That God who gave me courage
to fight, will give me courage to overcome.

The last benefit, which we consider in Christ as he is a stone, is, that he is
Petra, A rock: the rock gave water to the Israelites, and he gave them honey
Number. 20. 11.
out of the stone, and oil out of the rock. Now when S. Paul says that our
fathers drank of the same rock, as we heard, that rock was Christ, so 1. Cor.
10. 4
that all temporal and spiritual blessings to us, and to our fathers, were
all conferred upon us in Christ: But we consider not now any miraculous
production from the rock, but that which is natural to the rock, that it is a
firm defense to us in all tempests, in all afflictions, in all tribulation. And
therefore Laudate Dominum habitationes petrae, Isa. 42. 11.
says the Prophet, You that are inhabitants of this rock, you that dwell in
Christ, and Christ in you, you that dwell in earth, in this rock, praise ye the
Lord, bless him, and magnify him for ever. If the son shall ask bread of
the father, will he give him a stone, as is Christ's question? Yes, O blessed
Father, we ask no other: answer to our petition; no better satisfaction to our
necessity, when we say, Da nobis hodie panem, Give us this day our daily
bread, then that thou give us this stone, this rock, thy self in the Church for
our direction, thy self in thy sacraments for our refection; what hardness
soever we find there, what corrections soever we receive there, all shall be
of easy digestion and good nourishment to us: thy holy Spirit of patience
shall command these stones to be made bread, and we shall find more juice,
more marrow in these stones, in these afflictions, then worldly men shall do in
the softness of their oil, in the sweetness of their honey, in the
cheerfulness of their wine: for as Christ is our foundation, we believe in
him; and our corner stone, we are at peace with all the world in him: as he is
Jacobs stone, giving us peace in our selves; and David's stone, giving us
victory over all our enemies: so he is a rock of stone; no affliction, no
tribulation shall shake us. And so we have passed through all the benefits
proposed to be considered in the first place.

It is some degree of thankfulness to stand long II Part.
in the contemplation of the benefits which we have received, and therefore we
have insisted thus long upon this first part: But it is a degree of spiritual
wisdom too, to make haste to the considerations of our dangers, and therefore
we come now to them: we will fall upon this stone and be broken; this stone may
fall upon us and grind us to powder. And in the first of these, we may
consider, Quid frangi, Quid cadere; What that falling upon this stone is, and
what it is to be broken upon it; and then the latitude of this, Vnusquisque,
that whosoever falls so, is so broken. First then because Christ loves us to
the end, therefore some will never put him to it, never trouble him till then.
As the wise man said of Manna, that Wisd. 16. 25
it had abundance of all pleasures in it, and was meet for all tastes, that is
(as Expositours interpret it) that Manna tasted to every man like that which
every man liked best: so has this stone Christ Jesus abundance of all
qualities of stone in it; and it is such a stone to every man, as he desires it
should. Unto you that believe, says S. Peter, he is 1. Pet. 2. 7.
a precious stone; but unto the disobedient, a stone to stumble at: for if a
man walk in a gallerie, where windows and statues and tables are all of marble,
yet if he walk in the dark, or blinde-folded, or carelessly, he may break his
face as dangerously against that rich stone, as if it were but brick: so though
a man walk in the true Church of God, in that Jerusalem, which is described in
the Revelation, whose foundation, and gates, and walls are all precious stone;
yet if a man bring misbelief, all his religion is but a part of civil
government and order: if a man be scandalized at that humility, that patience,
that poverty, that lowliness of spirit, which the Christian religion inclines
us unto; if he will say, Si rex Israel, If Christ will be King, let him come
down from the cross, and then we will believe in him; let him deliver his
Church from all crosses, first of doctrine, then of persecution, and then we
will believe him to be King: if he will say, Nolumus hunc regnare, We will
admit Christ, but we will not admit him to reign over us, to be King; if he
will be content with a Consulship, with a Colleagueship, that he and the world
may join in government, that we may give the week to the world, and the sabbath
unto him, and the night to our licentiousness; that of the day we may give the
forenoon to him, and the afternoon to our pleasures; if this will serve Christ,
we can be content to admit him: but Nolumus regnare, We will not admit of his
absolute power, that whether we eat or drink, or whatsoever we do, we must be
troubled to think on him, and respect his glory in every thing; if he will
say, Praecepit Angelis, God has given charge to his Angels, and therefore we
need not look to our own ways; he has locked us up safe, and lodged us safely
under an eternal election, and therefore we are sure of salvation: if he will
walk thus blindely, violently, wilfully, negligently in the true Church, though
he walk amongst the saphires, and pearls, and chrysolites which are mentioned
there, that is, in the outward common and fellowship of Gods saints; yet he may
bruise, and break, and batter himself as much against these, as against the
stone gods of the Heathen, or the stone idols of the Papists: for first, the
place of this falling upon this stone is the true Church: Qui jacet in terra,
He that is already upon the ground, can fall no lower, till he fall to hell;
but he whom God has brought into his Church, if he come to a confident
security that he is gone far enough in these outward acts of religion, he
falls, though he be upon this stone. This is the place of the true Church; the
falling it self (as far as will fall into one time of consideration now) is a
falling into some particular sin, but not of such as quenches our faith; we
fall so as we may rise again: S. Jerome expresses it so, Qui cadit, and tamen
credit, He that falls and yet believes, revocatur per poenitentiam ad salutem,
that man is reserved by Gods purpose to come by repentance to salvation: for
this man that falls here, falls not so desperately, as that he feels nothing
between him and hell, nothing to stop at, nothing to check him by the way:
Cadit super, he falls upon something, he falls not upon flowers, to wallow and
tumble in his sin; nor upon feathers, to rest and sleep in his sin; nor
into a cooling river, to disport and refresh and strengthen himself in his
sin: but he falls upon a stone where he may receive a bruise and pain upon
his fall, a remorse of that sin that he is fallen into. And in this fall our
infirmities appear three ways: the first is, Impingere in lapidem; for though
he be upon the right stone, in the true religion, and have life enough, yet
Impingimus meridie, (as the Prophet says) Even Isa. 59. 10.
at noon we stumble: we have much more light by Christ being come, then the
Jews had, but are sorry we have it: when Christ said to us, for the better
understanding of the Law, He that looks and lusts, has committed adultery; he
that covets, has stolen; he that is angry, has murdered; we stumble at
this, and we are scandalized with it, and we think that other religions are
gentler, and that Christ has dealt hardly with us, and we had rather Christ
had not said so, we had rather he had left us to our liberty and discretion,
to look, and covet, and give way to our passions, as we should find it most to
conduce to our ease and to our ends: and this is Impingere, to stumble, and not
to go on in an equal pace, and not to do the will of God cheerfully. And a
second degree is, Calcitrare, to kick and to spurn at this stone, to bring some
particular sin and some particular law into comparison, to debate thus; If I
do not this now, I shall never have such a time; if I slip this, I shall never
have the like opportunity; if I will be a fool now, I shall be a beggar all my
life; and for the law that shall be against it, there is but a little evil for
a great good, and there is a great deal of time to recover and repent that
little evil. Now to remove a stone that was a landmark, and to hide and cover
that stone, was all our fault in the Law: to hide the will of God from our own
conscience with excuses and extenuations, this is Calcitrare, as much as we can
to spurn the stone, the landmark out of the way: but the fullness and
accomplishment of this is in the word of the text, Cadere. He falls as a piece
of money into a river; we hear it fall, and we see it sink, and by and by we
see it deep, and at last we see it not at all: so no man falls at first into
any sin, but he hears his own fall, there is a tenderness in his own
conscience at the beginning, at the entrance into a sin, and he discerns a
while the degrees of sinking too, but at last he is out of his own sight, till
he meet this stone, some hard reprehension, some hard passage of a sermon, some
hard judgment in a Prophet, some cross in the world, something from the
mouth, or something from the hand of God, that breaks him, he falls upon this
stone and is broken. So that to be broken upon this stone, is come to this
sense, that though our integrity be lost, that we be no more whole and entire
vessels; yet there are means of piecing in again: though we be not vessels of
innocence (for who is so? and for that, Enter not into judgment with thy
servant) yet we may be vessels of repentance, acceptable to God, and useful to
his service; for when any thing falls upon a stone, the harm which it suffers
is not always or not only according to the height that it falls from, and
that violence that it is thrown down with. If their fall, who fall by sins of
infirmity, should refer only to the stone they fall upon, the majesty of
God being wounded and violated in every sin, every sinner would be broken in
pieces and ground to powder. But if they fall not from too far a distance, if
they lived within any neernesse, any consideration of God, if they have not
fallen with violence, taken heat and force in the way, grown confident in the
practice of their sins they fall upon; if this stone sink and stop at Christ,
this shall break them, break their force and confidence, break their
presumption and security, but yet it shall leave enough in them for the holy
Ghost to revet to his service; yea, the sin it self Cooperatur ad bonum, as
the Romans 8. 28.
Apostle says, the very fall it self shall be an occasion of rising: And
therefore if S. Augustine seem to venture far, it is not too far, when he
says, Audeo dicere, It is boldly said, and yet I must say it, Vtile esse,
cadere in aliquod manifestum peccatum; A sinner falls into his advantage, that
falls into some such sin, as he being manifested to the world, manifests his
own sinful state to his sinful conscience too; it is well for that man that
falls so, as that he may thereby look the better to his footing ever after:
Dicit Dominus, Susceptor meus es tu, says S. Bernard; That man has a new
title to God, a new name for God. All creatures (as S. Bernard says) enlarge
this meditation, can say, Creator meus es tu, Thou give me meat in due
season; all men can say, Redemptor meus es tu, Thou art my Redeemer: but only
he which is fallen, and fallen upon this stone, can say, Susceptor meus es tu;
only he who has been overcome by a temptation, and is restored, can say, Lord
thou have supported me, thou have recollected my shivers, and reveted me; only
to him has this stone expressed both abilities of stone; first, to break him
with a sense of his sin, and then to give him rest and peace upon it. Now
there is in this part this circumstance more, Quicunque cadit, Whosoever falls;
where the Quicunque is Vnusquisque; Whosoever falls, that is, Whosoever he be,
he falls: Quomodo cecidisti de coelo Lucifer? says Isa. 14. 12.
the Prophet Isaiah; the Prophet wonders how Lucifer should fall, having no
body to tempt him, for so many of the Ancients interpret that place, of the
fall of the Angels; and when the Angels fell, there were no other creatures
made: but Quid est homo, aut filius hominis? Since the father of man, Adam,
could not, how should the sons of man, which inherit his weakness, and
contracting more and more, contribute their temptations to another, hope to
stand? Adam fell, and he fell a long, afar off, for he could see no stone to
fall upon, when he fell; their Messiah was no such Messiah, no such means of
reparation proposed or promised: when he fell, the blessed Virgin, and the
forerunner of Christ, John Baptist, fell too; but they fell prope, near hand,
they fell but a little way, for they had this stone in a personal presence,
and their faith was always awake in them; but yet he and she and they all fell
into some sin: Quicunque cadit, is, Vnusquisque cadit; Whosoever falls, is,
Whosoever he be, he falls; and whosoever falls too, as we said before, is
broken, if he fall upon something, not to an infinite depth; if he fall not
upon a soft place, to a delight in sin, but upon a stone, and this stone
(none harder, sharper, raggeder then this) not to a diffidence or distrust in
Gods mercy; he that falls so, and is broken so, comes to a remorsefull, a
broken and a contrite heart, he is broken to his advantage, left to a
possibility, yea, brought to a nearness of being pieced again by the word and
sacraments, and other the medicinal meditations of Christ in his Church.

We must end only with touching upon the III Part.
third part, Upon whom this stone falls, it will grind him to powder: where we
shall only tell you, Quid conteri, what this grinding is; and then, Quid
cadere, what the falling of this stone is. And briefly, this grinding to powder
is, to be brought to that desperate and irrevocable estate in sin, as that no
medicinal correction from God, no breaking, no bowing, no melting, no mending
can bring him to any good fashion: when God can work no cure, do no good upon
us by breaking us, not by breaking us in our healths (for we will attribute
that to weakness of stomach, to surfeit in digestion) not by breaking us in our
estates (for we will impute that to falsehood in servants, to oppression of
great adversaries, to iniquity of judges) not by breaking us in our honors
(for we will accuse for that, factions and practices and supplications in
court) when God cannot break us with his corrections, but that we will
attribute them to some natural, some accidental causes, and never think of
Gods judgments which are the true causes of these afflictions: when God cannot
break us by breaking our backs, by laying an heavy load of calamities upon us;
nor by breaking our hearts, by putting us into a sad and heavy, but fruitless
sorrow and melancholy, for these worldly losses: then he comes to break us by
breaking our necks, by casting us into the bottomless pit, and falling upon us
there in his wrath and indignation. Comprimam eos in pulverem, says David, I
will beat them as dust before the wind, and tread them as flat as the clay in
the street; and the breaking thereof shall be as the breaking of a potters
vessel, which is broken without any pity, no pity from God, nor shall any
pity them: the Prophet says further, There is not found Isa. 30. 14.
a sheard to take fire from the hearth, but incapable of one drop of Christ's
blood from heaven, or of any tear of contrition in themselves; not a sheard to
fetch water at the pit. I will break them as a potters Jer. 19. 11.
vessel, Quod non potest instaurari, says God in Jeremiah: There shall be no
possible means (of those means which God has ordained in his Church) to
recompact them again, no voice of Gods word shall draw them, no threatening of
Gods judgments shall drive them, no censure of Gods Church shall fit them, no
sacrament shall cement and glue them to Christ's body again: in temporal
blessings he shall be unthankful, in temporal afflictions he shall be
obdurate; and these two shall serve as the upper and nether millstone, and so
shall grind the reprobate sinner to powder.

Lastly, this is to be done by falling upon him; and what is that? I know some
expositours take it to be but the falling of Gods judgments upon him in this
world: there is no grinding to powder: All Gods judgments here (for any thing
we can know) have the nature of physic in them; and no man is here so
absolutely broken in pieces, but that he may be reunited. We choose to follow
the Ancients in this, that the falling of the stone upon the reprobate, is
Christ's last and irrevocable falling upon him in his last judgment, that when
he shall wish that the hills might fall and cover him, this stone shall fall
and grind him to powder. He shall be broken, and be no more found, says the
Prophet Dan. 11. 19.
Daniel: yea, he shall be broken, and be no more sought, no man shall consider
him what he is now, or what he was before; for that stone which in Daniel was
cut out without the hand, which was a figure of Christ, who came without
ordinary generation, when that great image was to be overthrown, broke not an
arm or leg, but the whole image in pieces; and it wrought not only upon the
weak parts, but it broke all the clay and the iron, the brass, the silver, the
gold: so when a stone falls thus, when Christ comes to judgment, he shall not
only condemn him for his clay, his earthly covetous sins; not for his iron,
his revengefull and oppressing and rustie sins; nor for his brass, his
shining and glistering sins, which he has filed and polished: but he shall
fall upon his silver, his gold, his religious, his precious sins, his
hypocritical hearing of sermons, his Pharisaicall giving of alms, and as well
his subtle counterfeting of religion, as his Atheistical opposing of religion:
this stone Christ himself shall fall upon him, and a shower of other stones
shall oppress him. Sicut pluit laqueos, says David, As God rained snares and
springs upon them in this world, abundance of temporal blessings, to be
occasions of sin unto them; so pluet grandinem, he shall rain such
hailstones upon them, as shall grind them to powder: there shall fall upon
him the natural law, which was written in his heart, and did rebuke him when
he prepared for a sin; there shall fall upon him that written law which cried
out from the mouths of the Prophets in these places to avert them from sin;
there shall fall upon him those sins that he has done, and those sins
which he has not done, if nothing but want of opportunity and means hinder
him from doing them; there shall fall upon him these sins which he has done
after another dehortation, and those which another has done after his
provocation: there the stones of Nineve shall fall upon him, and of as many
cities as have repented, with less proportions of mercy and grace then God
afforded him; there the rubbish of Sodom and Gomorrah shall fall upon him, and
as many cities as their ruin might have been example to him: all those stones
shall fall upon him; and, to add weight to these, Christ Jesus himself shall
fall upon his conscience with unanswerable questions, and grind his soul to
powder: but He that overcomes, his soul Revel. 2. 11
shall not be hurt by the second death. He that comes to remorses early and
earnestly after a sin, and seeks by ordinary means his reconciliation to God
in his Church, is in the best estate that man can be in now: for howsoever we
can say now, that repentance is as happy an estate as innocence; yet
certainly every man feels more comfort and spiritual joy after a true
repentance for a sin, then he had in that degree of innocence which he had
before he committed that sin: and therefore in this case also we may easily
repeat those words of S. Augustine, Audeo dicere, I dare be bold to say, that
many a man has been the better for some sin. Almighty God, who has given
us civil wisdom to make use of our enemies, give us also this heavenly wisdom
to make that use of our particular sins, that thereby our wretched condition
in our selves, and our means of reparation in Christ Jesus, may be manifested
unto us: To whom, etc.

FINIS.
A SERMON Upon the xxii verse of the v Chapter of JOHN.

By Dr. DONE DEAN OF PAVLS.



Printed by the Printers to the University of CAMBRIDGE.

MDCXXXIIII.

John 5. 22. The Father Judges no man, but has committed all Judgment to the
Son.
WHen our Savior Christ forbids us to cast pearls before swine, we understand
Matthew. 7. 6.
ordinarily in that place, that by pearls are understood the Scriptures: and
when we consider the natural generation and production of pearls, that they
grow bigger and bigger by a continual succession and devolution of dew, and
other glutinous moisture, that falls upon them, and there condenses and
hardens, so that a pearl is but a body of many shells, many crusts, many
films, many coats enwrapped upon one another: to this scripture that we have in
hand, does that Metaphor of pearl very properly appertain; because our Savior
Christ, in this chapter undertaking to prove his own divinity and godhead to
the Jews, who acknowledged and confessed the Father to be God, but denied it of
him, he folds and wraps up reason upon reason, argument upon argument, that all
things are common between the Father and him, that whatsoever the Father does,
he does; whatsoever the Father is, the Son is: for first, he says he is a
partner, a copartner with the Father in the present administration and
government of the world; My Father works hitherto, John 5. 17
and I work: well, if the Father ease himself upon instruments now, yet was it
so from the beginning? had he a part in the creation? yes: What John 5. 19
things soever the Father does, those also does the Son likewise. But does
this extend to the works properly and naturally belonging to God, to the
remission of sins, to the infusion of grace, to the spiritual resurrection
of them that are dead in their iniquities? yes, even to that too: For as the
John 5. 21.
Father raises up the dead, and quickens them, even so the Son quickens
whom he will. But has not this power a determination and expiration? shall it
end at the least when the world ends? no, not then; for God has given him
authority to execute John 5. 27.
judgment, because he is the Son of man. Is there then no Supersedeas upon
the commission? is the Son equal with the Father in our eternal election,
in the means of our salvation, in the last judgment, in all? In all. Omne
judicium, God has committed all judgment to the Son; and here is the pearl
made up: the dew of Gods grace sprinkle upon your souls, the beams of Gods
Spirit shed upon your souls that effectual and working knowledge, that he who
died for your salvation, is perfect God as well as perfect man, fit and willing
to accomplish that salvation.

In handling then this judgment, which is a word that embraces and comprehends
all, all from our election, where no merit, no future actions of ours were
considered by God to our fruition and possession of that election, where all
our accounts shall be considered and recompensed by him, we shall see first,
that judgment belongs properly to God; and secondly, that God the Father, whom
we consider to be the root and fountain of the Deity, can no more divest his
judgment, then he can his godhead; and therefore in the third place we
consider, what that committing of judgment, which is mentioned here, imports;
and then, to whom it is committed, to the Son; and lastly, the largeness of
that commission, Omne, All judgment, so that we cannot carry our thoughts so
high or so far backwards, as to think of any judgment given upon us in Gods
purpose or decree, without relation to Christ; nor so far forwards, as to
think there shall be a judgment given upon us, according to our good moral
dispositions or actions, but according to our apprehension and imitation of
Christ. Judgment is a proper and inseparable character of God; that is first:
the Father cannot divest himself of that; that is next: the third is, that he
has committed it to another: and then the person, and that is his delegate,
his only Son: and lastly, his power is everlasting, and that judgement-day
that belongs to him, has and shall last from our first election, through the
participation of the means prepared by him in his Church, to our association
and union with him in glory; and so the whole circle of time, and before time
was, and when time shall be no more, makes up but one judgement-day to him, to
whom the Father, who judges no man, has committed all judgment.

First then, judgment appertains to God, it is Vindicta mihi, Vengeance is
mine, I will repay, says the Lord. It is so in civil things too, for God
himself is proprietarie of all; Domini est terra and plenitudo ejus, The earth
is the Lords, and all that is in and on the earth; your silver mine, and your
gold mine, says the Prophet, and the beasts upon a thousand mountains are
mine, says David: you are the usufructuaries of them, but I am proprietarie.
No attribute of God is so often iterated in the Scriptures, no act of God so
often inculcated as this judge and judgment, no word concerning God so often
repeated: but it is brought to the height in that place of the Psalm, where we
read, God judges among the gods, the Psalm. 82. 1.
Latin Church ever read it, Deus dijudicat deos, God judges the gods
themselves: for though God say of judges and magistrates, Ego dixi, Dii estis,
I have said, You are gods (and if God say it, who shall gainsay it?) yet he
says too, Moriemini sicut homines; the greatest gods upon earth die like men:
and if that be not humiliation enough, there is more threatened in that which
follows, Ye shall fall like one of the princes: for the fall of a prince
involves the ruin of many others too, and it fills the world with horror for
the present, and dominions with discourse for the future: but the farthest of
all is, Deus dijudicabit deos, even these judges must come to judgment: and
therefore that Psalm which begins so, is concluded thus, Surge Domine, Arise O
God, and judge the earth: if he have power to judge the earth, he is God; and
even in God himself it is expressed, as a kind of rising, as some exaltation
of his power, that he is to judge. And that place in the beginning of the
Psalm, many of the Ancients read in the future, Dijudicabit, God shall judge
the gods; because the frame of the Psalm seems to refer it to the last
judgment. Tertullian read it Dijudicavit, as a thing past: God has judged in
all times, and the letter of the text requires it to be in the present,
Dijudicat. Collect all, and judgment is so essential to God, as that it is
coeternall with him: he has, he does, and he will judge the world, and the
judges of the world. Other judges die like men, weakly; and they fall (that is
worse) ignominiously; and they fall like princes (that is worse) fearfully and
scornfully; and when they are dead and fallen, they rise no more to execute
judgment, but to have judgment executed upon them: the Lord dies not, he
falls not; and if he seem to slumber, the martyrs under the altar awake him
with their Vsque quo, Domine? How long, O Lord, before thou execute judgment?
and he will arise and judge the world, for judgment is his. God puts down
one, and sets up another, says David: where has he that power? why, God is
the Judge, not a judge, but the Judge, and in that right he puts down one,
and sets up another.

Now for this judgment which we place in God, we must consider in God three
notions, three apprehensions, three kinds of judgments. First, God has
Judicium detestationis; God does naturally know, and therefore naturally detest
all evil: for no man in the extremest corruption of nature is yet fallen so
far, as to love or approve evil, at the same time that he knows and
acknowledges it to be evil. But we are so blind in the knowledge of evil, that
we needed that great supplement and assistance of the Law it self to make us
know what was evil. Moses magnifies, and justly, the Law; Non appropinquavit,
says Moses, God came not so near to any nation as to the Jews: Non taliter
fecit, God dealt not so well with any nation as with the Jews; and wherein?
because he had given them a Law: and yet we see the greatest dignity of this
Law to be, that by the Law is the Romans 3. 20.
knowledge of sin; for though by the law of nature written in our hearts,
there be some condemnation of some sins; yet to know that every sin was
treason against God, to know that every sin has the reward of death and
eternal death annexed to it, this knowledge we have only by the Law: now if
man will pretend to be a judge, what an exact knowledge of the Law is required
at his hands! for some things are sins to one nation, which are not so to
another; and where the just authorite of the lawful Magistrate changes the
nature of the thing, that which is naturally indifferent, is necessary to them
who are under his obedience: some things are sins at one time, which are not
so at another, as all the ceremonial Law created new sins, which were not
sins before that Law was given, nor since it expired: some things are sins
in a man now, which will not be sins in the same man to morrow; as when a man
has contracted a just scruple against any particular action, it is a sin to
do it during the scruple; and it may be a sin in him to omit it, when he has
digested the scruple. Only God has Judicium detestationis, he knows and
therefore detests evil: and therefore flatter not thy soul with a Tush, God
sees it not; or, Tush, God cares not; does it disquiet him, or trouble his rest
in heaven, that I break his sabbath here? does it wound his body, or draw his
blood there, that I swear by his body and blood here? does it corrupt any of
his virgins there, that I solicit the chastity of a woman here? are his
martyrs withdrawn from their allegiance, or retarded in their service to him
there, because I dare not defend his cause, nor speak for him, nor fight for
him here? Beloved, as it is a degree of superstition, and an effect of an
indiscreet zeal perchance, to be too forward by making indifferent things
necessary, and so to imprint the nature and sting of sin, where naturally it
is not (for certainly it is a most slipperie and irreligious thing to be too
apt to call things merely indifferent, and to forget that even in eating and
drinking, walking and sleeping, the glory of God is intermingled; as if we
knew exactly the presence and foreknowledge of God, there could be nothing
contingent or casual; for though there be a contingencie in the nature of the
thing, yet it is certain to God) so if we consider duly wherein the glory of
God might be promoted in every action of ours, there could scarce be any action
so indifferent, but that the glory of God would turn the scale, and make it
necessary to me at that time: but then private interests and private respects
create a new indifferency to my apprehension, and call me to consider that
thing as it is in nature, and not as it is conditioned with the circumstance of
the glory of God; and so I lose that judicium detestationis, which only God
has absolutely and perfectly, to know, and therefore to detest evil. And so he
is a Judge. As he is a Judge so, judicat rem, he judges the nature of a thing;
he is so too, that he has judicium discretionis, and so judicat personam: he
knows what is evil, and he discerns when thou committest that evil. Here you
are fain to supply defects of laws, that things done in our country may be
tried in another; and that in offenses of high nature, transmarine offenses
might be enquired and tried here: but as the Prophet says, Who has measured
the waters in the hollow Isa. 40. 12.
of his hand, or meted out the heavens with a spanne? who comprehended the dust
of the earth in a measure, or weighed the mountains in a scale? so I say, Who
has divided heaven into shires or parishes, or limited the territories or
jurisdictions there, that God should not have and exercise judicium
discretionis, the power of discerning all actions in all places, when there was
no more to be seen nor considered upon the whole earth, but the garden of
Paradise? for from the beginning, Deliciae ejus esse cum filiis hominum, Gods
delight was to be with the sons of men; and man was only there. Shall we not
diminish God or speak too vulgarly of him, to say that he hovered like a falcon
over Paradise, and that from the height of heaven the piercing eye of God saw
so little a thing as the forbidden fruit, and what became of that? and the
reaching ear of God heard the hissing of the serpent, and the whispering of
the woman, and what was concluded upon that? shall we think it little to have
seen things done in Paradise, when there was nothing else to divert his eye,
nothing else to distract his counsels, nothing else done upon the face of the
earth? take the earth now as it is replenished, and take it either as it is
torn and crumbled in rags and shivers, not a kingdom, not a family, not a man
agreeing with himself; or take it in that concord which is in it, as all the
kings of the earth set themselves, and all the rulers of the earth take counsel
together against Psalm. 2. 2.
the Lord; take it in this union, or this disunion; in this concord, or this
disconcord; still the Lord that sits in the heavens discerns all, looks at
all, laughs at all, and has them in derision. Earthly judges have their
districtions, and so their restrictions; some things they cannot know: what
mortal man can know all? some things they cannot take knowledge of, for they
are bounded: no cloud, no darkness, no disguise keeps him from discerning and
judging all our actions: and so he is a Judge too. And he is so lastly, as he
has Judicium retributionis: God knows what is evil, and he knows when that
evil is done, and he knows how to punish and recompense that evil. For the
office of a judge who judges according to a law, being not to contract nor to
extend that law, but to know what was the true meaning of the lawmaker, when he
made that law; God has this judgment in perfection, because he himself made
that Law by which he judges. When he has said, Stipendium peccati mors est,
Every sin shall be rewarded with death; If I sin against the 1. Sam. 2. 25
Lord, who shall entreat for me? who shall give any other interpretation, any
modification, any Non obstante upon his Law in my behalf? when he comes to
judge me according to that Law which himself has made, who shall think to
delude the Judge, and say, Surely this was not the meaning of the Lawgiver,
when he who is the Judge, was the Lawmakers too.

And then as God is Judge in all these three respects, so he is a Judge in them
all Sine appellatione, and Sine judiciis: man cannot appeal from God: God needs
no evidence from man. For the appeal first, to whom should we appeal from the
Sovereign? wrangle as long as we will, who is chief Justice, and which County
has jurisdiction one over another? I know the chief Justice, and I know the
Sovereign court; the King of heaven and earth shall send his ministering
spirits, his Angels, to the womb and bowels of the earth, and to the bosom
and bottom of the sea, and earth and sea shall deliver Corpus cum causa, all
the bodies of the dead, and all their actions, to receive a judgment in his
court; when it will be an erroneous and frivolous appeal to call to the hills
to fall down upon us, and to the mountains to cover and hide us from the
wrathful judgment of God.

He is Judge then, Sine appellatione, Without any appeal from him; he is so too
Sine judiciis, Without any evidence from us. Now if I be wary in my actions
here, incarnate devils, detractours and informers cannot accuse me: if my sin
come not into action, but lie only in my heart, the devil himself, who is the
Accuser of the brethren, has no evidence against me. But God knows the heart:
Does not he that pondereth the heart, understand Prove. 24. 12
it? where it is not in that faint word which the vulgar edition has expressed
it in, Suspector cordium, that God sees the heart; but the word is Fochen, that
is, every where to weigh, to number, to search, to examine; as the word is used
by Solomon: again, The Lord weighs the spirits: and Prove. 16. 2.
it must be a steadie hand and exact scales that shall weigh spirits: so though
neither man nor devil, nay, nor my self give evidence against me; yea, though I
know nothing by my self, I am not thereby justified. Why? where is the further
danger? in this which follows there, in S. Paul, He that judges 1. Cor. 4. 4.
me is the Lord: and the Lord has means to know my heart better then my self.
And therefore S. Augustine makes use of those words, Abyssus Psalm. 42. 9.
abyssum invocat, One depth calls up another, the infinite depth of my sins
must call upon the infinite depth of Gods mercy: for if God who is a Judge in
all these respects, Judicio detestationis (he knows and abhorres evil) and
Judicio discretionis (he discerns every evil person and every evil action) and
Judicio retributionis (he can and will recompense evil with evil) and all these
Sine appellatione (we cannot appeal from him) and Sine judiciis (he needs no
evidence from us) if this Judge enter into judgment with me, not only not I,
but not the most righteous man, nay, nor the Church, whom he has washed in his
blood, that she might be without spot or wrinkle, shall appear righteous in
his sight.

This then being thus, that judgment is an inseparable Fons deitatis, the root
and spring of the whole deity, how is it said that the Father judges no man?
not that we should conceive a weariness or retiring in the Father, or a
discharging of himself upon the shoulders and labors of another, in the
administration and judging of this world; for as it is truly said that God
rested the seventh day (that is, he rested from working in that kind, from
creating) so it is true that Christ says here, My Father works yet, and I
work; and so it is truly said here, The Father judges no man; it is truly
John 8. 5.
said by Christ too, of the Father, I seek not mine own glory, there is one
that seeks and judges; still it is true that God has Judicium
detestationis. Thy eyes are pure eyes, O Lord, and cannot behold iniquity,
says the Prophet: still it is true that he has Judicium discretionis; Because
they committed Jer. 29. 23.
Villainy in Israel, even I know it, says the Lord: still it is true that he
has Judicium retributionis; The Lord kills, and makes alive; he brings 1.
Sam. 2. 6.
down to the grave, and brings up: still it is true that he has all these
Sine appellatione; for go to the sea, or earth, or hell, as David makes the
distribution, and God is there: and he has them Sine judiciis, for our
witness is in heaven, and our record on high. All this is undeniably true; and
besides this, that great name of God by which he is first called in the
Scriptures, ELOHIM, is not inconveniently derived from Elah, which is jurare,
to swear. God is able as a Judge to minister an oath unto us, and to draw
evidence from our own consciences against our selves: so that then the Father
judges still, but he judges as God, and not as the Father. In the three great
judgments of God, the whole Trinity judges. In the first judgment before all
times, which was Gods judiciarie separating of vessels of honor from vessels
of dishonor, in our election and reprobation; In his second judgment, which
is in execution now, which is Gods judiciarie separating of servants from
enemies, in the seals and in the administration of the Christian Church; And in
the last judgment, which shall be Gods judiciarie separating sheep from goats
to everlasting glory or condemnation: In all these three judgments all the
three persons of the Trinity are Judges. Consider God all together, and so in
all outward works all the Trinity concurres, because all are but one God: but
consider God in relation, in distinct persons, and so the several persons of
the Trinity do some things which the other persons of the Trinity are not
interessed in: the Son had not generation from himself, so as he had from the
Father; and the holy Ghost, as a distinct person, had none at all; the holy
Ghost had a proceeding from the Father and the Son, but from the Son a
person, who had his generation from another, but not so from the Father. Not to
stray into clouds or perplexities in the contemplation, God, that is, the whole
Trinity, judges still; but so as the Son judges, the Father judges not,
for that judgment he has committed. That we may husband our hour as well,
and rescribe as much as we can for our two last considerations, the Cui and the
Quid, To whom, and that is to the Son; and what he has committed, and that
is all judgment; we will not stand much upon this, more needs not then this,
that God in his wisdom foreseeing that man by his weakness would not be able
to settle himself upon the consideration of God and his judgments, as they are
merely spiritual and heavenly, out of his abundant goodness has established
a judgment, and ordained a judge upon earth like himself, and like our selves
too: that as no man has seen God, so no man should go about to see his
unsearchable decrees and judgments, but rest in those sensible and visible
means which he has afforded, that is, Christ Jesus speaking in his Church, and
applying his blood unto us in the sacraments unto the worlds end. God might
have suffered Abraham to rest in the first general promise, Semen mulieris,
The seed of the woman shall bruise the serpents head: but he would bring it
nearer to a visible, to a personal covenant, In semine tuo, In thy seed shall
all nations be blessed: he might well have let him rest in that appropriation
of his promise to his race; but he would proceed further, and seal it with a
sensible seal in his flesh, with circumcision. He might have let him rest in
that ratification, that a Messiah should come by that way: but he would refresh
it by a continual succession of Prophets till the Messiah should come. And now
that he is come and gone, still God pursues the same way, How should they
believe except they hear? And therefore God evermore supplies his Church with
visible and sensible means, and knowing that the natural inclination of man,
who when he cannot have or cannot comprehend the original and prototype,
desires to satisfy and refresh himself with a picture and representation: so,
though God has forbidden us that slipperie, frivolous, and dangerous use of
graven images; yet he has afforded us his Son, who is the image of the
invisible God, and so more proportional to us, more apprehensible by us: and
so this committing is no more but that God (in another form then that of God)
has manifested his power of judging. And this committing, this manifesting, is
In Filio, In his Son.

But in our entrance into the handling of this, we ask only this question, Cui
Filio? To which Son of God is this commission given? not that God has more
sons then one, but because that one Son is his Son by a twofold
filiation; by an internal and expressible generation, and by a temporary and
miraculous incarnation: in which of these rights is this commission derived
upon him? does he judge as he is the Son of God, or as he is the son of
man? I am not ordinarily bold in determining points (especially if they were
fundamental) wherein I find the Fathers among themselves, and the School in
it self, and reverend Divines of the Reformation amongst themselves to differ:
But yet neither am I willing to raise doubts, and leave the auditorie
unsatisfied and unsettled. We are not upon a lecture, but upon a sermon, and
therefore we will not multiply variety of opinions. Sum up the Fathers upon
one side in S. Ambrose mouth, and they will say with him, Deditutique
generando, non largiendo, God gave his Son this commission then, and when was
that then? then when he begat him, and then he must have it by his eternal
generation, as the Son of God. Sum up the Fathers now on the other side in
S. Augustines mouth, and there they will say with him, that it is so clear and
so certain, that whatsoever is said in the Scripture to be committed or given
to Christ, belongs to Christ as the son of man, and not as the Son of God,
as that the other opinion cannot be maintained, and at this distance we shall
never bring them to meet: but take in this rule, Judicium convenit ei ut homo,
causa ut Deus; God has given this commission to Christ as man; but Christ had
not been capable of this commission, if he had not been God too: and so it is
easily to be reconciled. If we shall hold simply to the letter of the text,
Pater dedit, then it will seem to be committed unto him in his eternal
generation, because that was a work of the Father only, and in that generation
the holy Ghost had no part: but since in this judgment which is now committed
to him, the holy Ghost has a part; (for, as we said before, the judgment is
an act of the whole Trinity) and that is as he is man; for, Tota Trinitas
univit August.
humanitatem, the hypostaticall union of God and man, in the person of Christ,
was a work of the whole Trinity.

Taking it then so settled, that the capacity of this judgment, and (if we
may say so) the future title to it, was given to him as God, by his essence, in
his eternal generation, by which Non vitae particeps, sed vita naturaliter
est, We cannot say that Christ has life, but that he is Life, and the Life;
for whatsover the Father is, He is, excepting only the name and relation of
Father; the capacity, the ability is in him eternally, before any imaginable,
any possible consideration of time. But the power of the actual execution of
this judgment, which is given and is committed, is in him as man; because, as
the same father says, Ad hominem dicitur, Quid habes quod non accepisti? when
S. Paul says, What have thou that thou have not received? he asks that
question of man; that which is received, is received as man. For Bellarmine in
a place where he disposes himself to quarrel at some form of words of Calvin's,
though he confess the matter to be true, and (as he calls it there) Catholic,
says, Essentiam genitam negamus, We confess that Christ has not his essence
from his Father by generation. The relation and filiation he has from his
Father; he has the name of Son, but he has not the execution of this
judgment, by that relation, by that filiation: still as he is the Son of
God, he has that capacity; as the son of man, he has the execution. And
therefore Prosper, that follows S. Augustine, limits it (perchance too
narrowly) to the flesh, to the humanity; Ipsa, non ipse, erit Judex, quae sub
judice stetit; and ipsa judicabit, quae judicata est: where he places not this
judgment upon the mixed person (which is the safest way) of God and man, but
upon man alone. God has appointed a day in which Act. 17. 31.
he will judge the world in righteousness; but by whom? By that man whom he
has ordained. God will judge still, but still in Christ: and therefore says
S. Augustine upon those words, Arise O God Psalm. 82. 8.
and judge the earth, Cui Deo dicitur, Surge, nisi ei qui dormivit? What God
does David call upon to arise, but that God who lay down to sleep in the grave?
as though he should say, says S. Augustine, Dormivisti judicatus a terra,
surge and judica terram: so that to collect all, though judgment be such a
character of God as God cannot divest; yet the Father has committed such a
judgment to the Son as none but he can execute.

And what is that? Omne judicium, All judgment, that is, Omne imperium, omnem
potestatem: It is presented in the name of judgment, but it involves all. It
is literally and particularly judgment in S. John; The Father has given him
authority to John 5. 27.
execute judgment: it is extended into power in S. Matthew; All power is given
to me in heaven and Matt. 28. 18
in earth: and it is enlarged as far further, as can be expressed, in another
place of S. Matthew; All Matt. 11. 27
things are delivered me of my Father. Now all this our Savior Christ Jesus
exercises either Per carnem, or at the least In carne; whatsoever the Father
does, the Son does also In carne, because now there is an inseparable union
between God and humane nature: the Father creates new souls every day in the
inanimation of children, and the Son creates them with him. The Father
concurres with all second causes, as the first moving cause of all in natural
things. And all this the Son does too, but this is In carne; though he be in
our humane flesh, he is not the less able to do the acts belonging to the
godhead: but Per carnem, by the flesh instrumentally he executes judgment,
because he is the son of man. God has been so indulgent to man, as that
there should be no judgment given upon man, but man should give it.

Christ then having all judgment, or (to refresh your memories) those three
judgments which we touched upon before, first the judgment of our election,
severing of vessels of honor and dishonor; next, the judgment of
justification here, severing friends from enemies; and then the judgment of
glorification, severing the sheep from the goats: and for the first, of our
election, as if I were under the condemnation of the Law for some capital
offense, and going to execution, and the kings mercy expressed in a sealed
pardon were presented me, I should not stand to enquire what moved the king to
do it, what he said to any body else, what any body else said to him, what he
saw in me, or what he looked for at my hands; but embrace that mercy
cheerfully and thankfully, and attribute it only to his abundant goodness: so
when I consider my self to have been let fall into this world, In massa
damnata, under the general condemnation of mankind, and yet by the working of
Gods Spirit I find at first a desire, and after a modest assurance, that I am
delivered from that condemnation; I enquire not what God did in his
bedchamber, in his cabinet-counsel, in his eternal decree; I know that he
has made Judicium electionis in Christ Jesus; and therefore that I may know
whether I do not deceive my self, in presuming my self to be of that number, I
come down and examine my self, whether I can truly tell my conscience that
Christ Jesus died for me; which I cannot do, if I have not a desire and
endeavor to conform my self unto him: and if I do that, there I find my
predestination, I am a Christian, and I will not offer before my master Christ
Jesus: I cannot be saved before there was a Savior; in Christ Jesus is omne
judicium, all judgment; and therefore the judgment of election, the first
separating of vessels of honor and dishonor, in election and reprobation, was
Jesus Christ.

Much more evidently is the second judgment of our justification, by means
ordained in the Christian Church, the judgment of Christ. It is the Gospel of
Christ which is preached unto you there, it is the blood of Christ which is
presented unto you there; there is no other name given under heaven whereby you
may be saved, there are no other means given wherein salvation should be
applied in his name, but those which he has instituted in his Church: so that
when I come to the second judgment, to try whether I stand justified in the
sight of God or no, I come for that judgment to Christ in his Church. Do I
remember what I contracted with Christ Jesus, when I took the name of a
Christian at my entrance into the Church by Baptism? do I find that I have
endeavored to perform those conditions? do I find remorse when I have not
performed them? do I seek the message of remission of sins, from the mouth of
his minister? have I a true and sound consolation without shift, or disguise,
or flattering of my conscience, when I receive the seal of his pardon in the
sacrament? Beloved, not in any moral integrity, not in keeping the conscience
of an honest man in general, but in using well the means ordained by Christ in
the Christian Church, am I justified: and therefore this judgment of
justification is his too.

And then the third and last judgment, which is the judgment of
glorification, that is easily agreed by all, that it appertains to Christ. Idem
Jesus, The same Jesus that ascended, shall come to judgment: Videbunt quem
pupugerunt. Every Apoc. 1. 7.
eye shall see him, and they also which pierced him. Then the son of man
shall come in glory, and he as man shall give the judgment for things done or
omitted toward him as man, for not feeding, for not clothing, for not
harboring, for not visiting. The sum of all is, that this is the overflowing
goodness of God, that he deals with man by the son of man, and that he has
so given all judgment to the Son, as that if you would be tried by the first
judgment, Are you elected or no? the issue is, do you believe in Christ, or
no? if you would be tried by the second judgment, Are you justified, or no?
the issue is, do you find comfort in the application of the word and
sacraments of Christ Jesus, or no? If you would be tried by the third
judgment, Do you expect a glorification or no? the issue is, are you so
reconciled to Christ Jesus now by hearty repentance for sins past, and by a
detestation of occasions of future sins, that you durst welcome that Angel
that should come at this time, and swear that time should be no more, that your
transmigration out of this world should be this minute, and that this minute
you could say unfeignedly and effectually, Veni Domine Jesu, Come Lord Jesus,
come quickly, come now? If this be your state, then are you partakers of all
that blessedness which the Father intended to you, when for your sakes he
committed all judgment to the Son.

FINIS.
A SERMON Upon the xv verse of the viii Chapter of JOHN.

By Dr. DONE DEAN OF PAVLS.



Printed by the Printers to the University of CAMBRIDGE.

MDCXXXIIII.

John 8. 15. I Judge no man.
THe rivers of Paradise did not all run one way, and yet they flowed from one
head. The sentences of the Scripture flow all from one head, from the holy
Ghost, and yet they seem to present diverse senses, and to admit diverse
interpretations: in such an appearance does the text differ from that which I
handled in the morning. And as heretofore I found it an usual and acceptable
labor, to employ our evening exercises upon the vindicating of such places of
Scripture, as our adversaries of the Roman Church had detorted in some points
of controversy between them and us, and restoring those places to their true
sense (which course I held constantly for one whole year) so I think it an
usual and acceptable labor now, to employ for a time these evening exercises,
to reconcile some such places of Scripture as may at first sight seem to differ
one from another. In the morning we saw how Christ judged all; now we are to
see how he judges none, I judge no man.

To come then to these present words, here we have the same person Christ
Jesus; and has he not the same office? is not he Judge? certainly though he
retain all his other offices, though he be the Redeemer, and has shed blood,
in value satisfactorie for all our sins; though he be our Advocate and plead
for us in heaven, and present our evidence to that kingdom, written in his
blood, sealed in his wounds: yet if he be not our Judge, we cannot stand in
judgment. Shall he be our Judge, and is he not our Judge yet? long before we
were, he was our Judge, at the separation of the elect and reprobate in Gods
eternal decree: was he our Judge then, and is he not still? still he is
present in his Church, and cleares us in all scruples, rectifies us in all
errors, erects us in all dejections of spirit, pronounces peace and
reconciliation in all apprehensions of his judgments, by his word, by his
sacraments: was he, and is he, and shall he not be our Judge still? I am Job
19. 25.
sure my Redemer lives, and he shall stand at the last day on the earth; so
that Christ Jesus is the same to day, and yesterday, and for ever, before the
world began, and world without end; sicut erat in principio, as he was in the
beginning, he is, and shall be ever our Judge.

So that then these words are not de tempore, but de modo: there was never any
time when Christ was not Judge; but there were some manner of judgments, which
Christ did never exercise. And Christ had no commission which he did not
execute, for he did all his Fathers will. First, In secularibus, in civil and
criminal businesses, which belong merely to the judicature and cognizance of
the world, Judicat neminem, Christ judges no man. Secondly, Secundum carnem, so
as they to whom Christ spoke this, who judged (as himself says here) according
to fleshly affections, Judicat neminem, He judges no man. And thirdly, Ad
internecionem, so as that upon that judgment a man should despair of any
reconciliation, any redintegration with God again, and be without hope of
pardon or remission of sins in this world, Judicat neminem, He judges no man.
First, Christ usurps upon no man's jurisdictions; that were against justice.
Secondly, he imputes no false things to any man; that were against charity.
Thirdly, Christ induces no man to desperation; that were against faith: and
against justice, against charity, against faith, Judicat neminem.

First then, Christ judges not in secular judgments, Master, bid my brother
divide the inheritance with me, (as S. Augustine says) the party thought his
cause to be just, and he thought Christ to be a competent Judge in the cause;
yet Christ declines the judgment, disavows the authority, and he answers,
Homo, quis me constituit judicem? Luke 12. 14.
Man, who made me a judge between you two? That general which we had in the
morning, Omne judicium, The Son has all judgment, here is an exception of
the same Judges making: for in secular judgment Nemo constituit, He had no
commission; and therefore Judicat neminem, He judges no man: he forbore in
civil, he forbore in criminal matters too. For when the woman taken in
adultery was brought before him, he condemned her not: he undertook no office
of a Judge, but of a sweet and spiritual counselor, Go and sin no more;
for this was his element, his tribunal.

When then Christ says of himself with such a pregnant negative, Quis me
constituit judicem? may not we say so too, to his pretended Vicar the Bishop of
Rome? Quis te? Who made you a judge of kings, and that you should depose them
in criminal causes? or who made you proprietour of kingdoms, that you should
dispose of them as of civil inheritance? when to countenance such a pretense,
they detort places of Scripture not only perversely, but senselesly,
blasphemously, and ridiculously (as ridiculously as in their pasquils) when in
an undiscreet shamelessness, to make their power greater then it is, they make
their fault greater then it is too, and fill their histories with kings deposed
by Popes, which in truth were not deposed by them (for in that they are more
innocent then they confess themselves) when some of their authors say that
the Primitive Church abstained from deposing of the Emperors, only because
she was not strong enough to do it; when some of them say that all the
Christian kingdoms of the earth may fall into the Church of Rome by faults in
those princes; when some of them say that de facto the Pope has already a
good title to every Christian kingdom; when some of them say the world will
never be well governed till the Pope himself puts himself in possession of all
(all which several propositions are in several authors of good reputation
amongst them) will he not endure Christ's own question, Quis to constituit? Who
made you a judge of all this? if they say Christ did, did he it in his
doctrine? it is hard to pretend that: for such an institution as that must have
very clear, very pregnant words to carry it. Did he do it by his example and
practice? we see he abstained in civil, he abstained in criminal causes. When
they come to their last shift, that Christ did exercise judiciarie authority,
when he whipped merchants out of the temple, when he cursed the fig tree, and
damnified the owner thereof, when he destroyed the herd of swine (for there,
say they, the devil was but the executioner, Christ was the Judge) to all these
and such as these, it is enough to say all these were miraculous and not
ordinary: and though it might seem half a miracle, how that Bishops should
exercise so much authority as he has done, over the world; yet when we look
nearer, and see his means that he has done all this by, by massacres, and that
of millions, by withdrawing subjects from their allegiance, by assassinating
and murdering of princes; when we know that miracles are without means, and we
see the means of his proceedings, the miracle cease: howsoever that Bishop,
as Christ's Vicar, can claim no other power then was ordinary in Christ, and so
exercised by Christ; and so Judicat neminem, In secular judgment Christ judges
no man; and therefore that Bishop, as his Vicar, should not.

Secondly, Christ judges no man by calumny, manifest verum: but that we may
see our danger and our duty, what calumny is, and see how to avoid it
actively, and how to bear it passively, I must by your leave stop a little upon
it.

When we would present to you that monster, slander and calumny, though it be
hard to bring it within any compass of a division, yet to take the largeness
of the School, and say that every calumny is either direct or indirect, that
will comprehend all; and then a direct calumny will have three branches;
Either to lay a false and unjust imputation; Or else to aggravate a just
imputation with unnecessarie, but heavy circumstances; Or thirdly, to reveal a
fault which in it self was secret, and I by no duty bound to discover it. And
then the indirect calumny will have three branches too; Either to deny
expressly some good that is in another; Or to smother it in silence, when my
testimony were due to him, and might advantage him; Or lastly, to diminish his
good parts, and say they are well, but not such as the world esteems them to
be. Collect them again (for that is all we are able to do) that he is a direct
calumniatour, that imputes a false crime, that aggravateth a true crime, that
discovers any crime extrajudicially; That he is an indirect calumniatour, that
denies another man's sufficiencies, that conceals them, that diminishes them.
Take in some of S. Bernards examples of these rules, that it is a calumny to
say, Doleo vehementer, I am sorry at the heart for such a man, because I love
him, but I would never draw him from such and such vice; or to say, Per me
nunquam innotuisset, I should never have spoken of it; yet since all the world
talks of it, the truth must not be disguised; and so take occasion to discover
a fault which no body knew before, and thereby, as the same Father says, Cum
gravamine and tarditate aggredi maledictionem, to cut a man's throat gravely and
soberly, and so much the more perswasively, because he seems and pretends to do
it all against his will. This being the rule, and this being the example, who
amongst us is free from the passive calumny? whom amongst us has not some
other man calumniated? nay, who is free from the active part? which of us has
not in some of these degrees calumniated some other?

But those of whom Christ makes this exception here, that he judges no man as
they judge, were such calumniatours as David speaks of, Sedens adversus fratrem
tuum loquebaris, Thou satest and Psalm. 50. 20
spakest against thy neighbor: as S. Augustine notes upon that place, Non
transitory, non surreptionis passione, sed quasi ad hoc vacans; Not by chance
and unawares, not in passion, because he had offended thee; not for company,
because thou would be of their minds, but as though thy profession would
bear thee out in it, to leave the cause, and lay an aspersion upon the person,
so thou art a calumniatour. They eat up my people like Psalm. 53. 5.
bread, as David says in Gods person: and upon those words of the same
Prophet, says the same Father, De caeteris, When we eat of any thing else, we
taste of this dish, and we taste of that. Non semper hoc olus, says he; We do
not always eat of one sallet, one meat, one kind of fruit; sed semper panem;
whatsoever we eat else, we eat bread: howsoever they employed their thoughts or
their wits otherwise, it was ever one exercise of them to calumniate Christ
Jesus. And in that kind of calumny, which is the bitterest of all, they
abounded most, which is, in scorn and derision. David and Job, who were
slander-proof in a good measure, yet every where complain passionately, that
they were made a scorn, that the wits made libels, that drunkards sung songs,
that fools and children of fools derided them: and when Saul was in his last,
but worst agony, and had abandoned himself to a present death, and prayed his
armor-bearer to kill him, it was not because the uncircumcised should not kill
him, for he desired death, and he had their deadly arrows already in his
bosom; but it was (as it is expressed there) lest the uncircumcised should
come and abuse him; he was afraid of scorn, when he had but a few minutes of
life. Since then Christ judges no man, as they did, Secundum carnem, neither
Secundum carnem ejus, according to the outward appearance (for they thought no
better of Christ then he seemed to be (as some Fathers take that phrase) Nec
secundum carnem suam, nor according to his own fleshly passions, as some others
take it; judge not you neither. First, Judge not that ye be Matt. 7. 1.
not judged, that is, (as Ambrose interprets it well enough) Nolite judicare de
judiciis Dei, When you see Gods judgments fall upon a man, do not you judge
that that man sinned more then you; when you see another man born blind, do
not you think that he or his father had sinned, and that you are only derived
from a pure generation; especially Non maledicas surdo, Speak not evil of the
deaf that Lev. 19. 14.
hears not, that is, as Gregory interprets it (if not literally, yet
appliably and usefully) Calumniate not him who is absent, and cannot defend
himself. It is the devils office to be Accusator fratrum: and though God do not
say in the Law, Non erit, yet he says, Non eris criminator; It is not plainly,
There shall be no informer: for as we dispute, and Levit. 19. 16
for the most part affirm in the School, that though we could, we may destroy
no entire species of the creatures which God made at first, though it were a
tiger or a viper, because this were to take one link of Gods chain out of the
world; so such vermin as informers, may not for some good use that is of them
be taken away: though it be not, Non erit, There shall be none; yet it is at
least by way of good counsel to thee, Non eris, Thou shall not be the man, thou
shall not be the informer: and for resisting those that are, we are bound, not
only not to burn our neighbors house, but to help him, if casually his house
fall on fire: we are bound, where we have authority, to stop the mouths of
other calumniatours; where we have no authority, yet (since as the north wind
drives Pro. 25. 23.
away rain, so an angry countenance drives away a backbiting tongue) at least
to deal so with a libeller, with a calumniatour: for he that looks pleasantly,
and hearkens willingly to one libell, makes another, occasions a second.
Always remember David's case, when he thought he had been giving judgment
against another, he was more severe, more heavy then the law admitted: the Law
was, that he that had stolen the sheep, should restore fourefold; And David's
anger was kindled, says the 2. Sam. 12. 5.
text, and he swore, As the Lord lives, that man shall restore fourefold: Et
filius mortis, and he shall surely die. O judicis effluentem justitiam! O
superabundant and overflowing justice, when we judge another in passion! But
this is Judicium secundum carne^, according to which Christ judges no man: for
Christ is Love, and that non cogitat malum, Love thinks no evil any way; the
charitable man 1. Cor. 13. 5.
neither meditates evil against another, nor believes easily any evil to be in
another, though it be told him.

Lastly, Christ judges no man Ad internecionem, he judges no man so in this
world, as to give a final condemnation upon him here; there is no error in
any of his judgments, but there is an appeal from all his judgments in this
world, there is a verdict against every man; every man may find his case
recorded, and his sin condemned in the Law; and in the Prophets there is a
verdict, but before judgment God would have every man saved by his book, by
the apprehension and application of the gracious promises of the Gospel to his
case, and his conscience. Christ judges no man so as that he should see no
remedy but to curse God and die, nor so as that he should say his sin were
greater then God could forgive: For God sent not his Son into the world to
condemn the world, but that the world through him might be John 3. 17.
saved.

Do not then give malicious evidence against thy self, do not weaken the merit,
nor lessen the value of the blood of thy Savior, as though thy sin were
greater then it is. Does God desire thy blood now, when he has abundantly
satisfied his justice with the blood of his Son for thee? what have thou
done? have thou come hypocritically to this place, upon collateral reasons,
and not upon the direct service of God, not for love of information or
reformation of thy self? if that be thy case, yet, If a man will hear my word,
says Christ, and believe it not, I judge him not, he has one that judges
him; and who is that? The word that I have spoken, the same shall judge him: it
shall, but when? It shall judge him, says Christ, at the last day: for till
the last day, the day of his death, no man is past recoverie, no man's salvation
is impossible. Have thou gone further then this? have thou committed scruples
of diffidence and distrust of Gods mercy, and so tasted of the lees of
desperation? It is true, Perpetrare flagitium, est mors animae; sed desperare,
est descensus ad inferos; In every sin thy soul dies, but in desperation it
descends into hell: But yet, Portae inferni non praevalebunt, The Matt. 16. 18
gates of hell shall not prevail against thee. Assist thy self, argue thine own
case; desperation it self may be without infidelity, desperation as well as
hope is rooted in the desire of happiness. Desperation proceeds out of a fear
of God, and horror of sin: desperation may consist with faith thus far,
that a man may have a true and faithful opinion in the general, that there is
remission of sins to be had in the Church, and yet have a corrupt imagination
in the particular, that to him in this sinful estate that he is in, this
remission of sins shall not be applied; so that the resolution of the School
is good, Desperatio potest esse ex solo excessu boni, Desperation may proceed
out of excess of that which is good in it self, from any excessive
over-fearing of Gods justice, from an excessive over-hating thine own sins.
Et virtute quis male utitur? can any man make so ill use of so great virtues as
the fear of God and hatred of sin? yes, they may: so forward a weed is sin,
as that it can spring out of any root: and therefore if it have done so in
thee, and thou thereby have made thy case the harder, yet know still, that
Objectum spei est arduum and possibile, The true object of hope is that which
is hard to come by, yet possible to come by. And therefore as David said, By my
God have I leapt over the wall, so by thy 2. Sam. 22. 30.
God thou must break through the wall, through this wall of obduration which
thou thy self have begun to build about thy self. Feather thy wings again,
which even the flames of hell have touched in these beginnings of desperation;
feather them again with this text, Neminem judicat, Christ judges no man so as
a desperate man judges himself: do not make thy self believe that thou have
sinned against the holy Ghost, for this is the nearest step thou have made unto
it, to think that thou have done it: walk in that field, in the Scriptures of
God, and from the first flower at the entrance, the flower of Paradise, Semen
mulieris, the general promise that the seed of the woman should bruise the
serpents head, to the last word of that Messiah upon the cross, Consummatum
est, that all that was promised for us, is now performed; and from the first to
the last thou shall find the savor of life in all those flowers: walk over
the same alley again, and consider the first man Adam in the beginning, who
involved thee in original sin, and the thief upon the cross, who had
continued in actual sins all his life, and sealed all with the sin of
reviling Christ himself, and a little before his expiration, and yet recovered
Paradise that day; and see if thou can make any shift to exclude thy self.
Receive the fragrancie of all these cordialls, Vivit Dominus, As the Lord
lives, I would not the death of a sinner; Quandocunque, At what time soever a
sinner repents, and of this text, Neminem judicat, Christ judges no man to
destruction here; and if thou find after all these antidotes a suspicious
air, a suspicious working in that Impossible est, that it is impossible for
them who were once enlightened, if they fall away, to renew them again by
repentance; sprinkle upon that wormwood of Impossible est, that Manna of
Quorum remiseritis, Whose sins ye remit, they are remitted; and then it will
have another taste of thee, and then thou will see that that impossibility
lies only upon them who are utterly fallen away into an absolute apostasy and
infidelity, that make a mock of Christ, and crucify him again, as it is
expressed there; who undervalue and despite the Church of God, and those means
which Christ Jesus has instituted in his Church for renewing of such as are
fallen. To such it is impossible, because there are no other ordinary means
possible: but that is not thy case, thy case is only a doubt that those means
that are shall not be applied to thee. And even that is a slipperie state, to
doubt of the mercy of God to thee in particular: this goes so near making thy
sin greater then Gods mercy, as that it makes thy sin greater then daily
adulteries, daily murders, daily blaspheming, daily profaning of the sabbath
could have done. And though thou can never make that true in this life, that
thy sins are greater then God can forgive; yet this is a way to make them
greater then God will forgive.

Now to collect both our exercises, and to conject both texts, Christ judges
all men, and Christ judges no man; he claims all judgment, and he disavows
all judgment; and they consist well together. He was at our creation, but that
was not his first scene. The Arians, though they say, Erat quando non erat,
There was a time when Christ was not, (intimating that he had a beginning, and
therefore was a creature) yet they will allow that he was created before the
general creation, and so assisted at ours. But he was infinite generations
before that, in the bosom of his Father, at our election; and there in him was
executed the first judgment of separating those which were his, the elect from
the reprobate: And then he knows who are his by that first judgment, and so
comes to his second judgment, to seal all those in the visible Church with the
outward mark of his Baptism, and the inward mark of his Spirit. And those whom
he calls so, he justifies, sanctifies, and brings them to this third judgment,
to an established and perpetual glory; and so all judgment is his. But then
to judge out of humane affections and passions, by detraction and calumny, as
they did to whom he spoke at this time, so he judges no man, so he denies
judgment. To usurp upon this jurisdiction of others, or to exercise any other
judgment then was in his commission, as his pretended Vicar does, so he judges
no man, so he disavows all judgment: to judge so as that our condemnation may
be irremediable in this life, so he judges no man, so he forsweares all
judgment. As I live, says the Lord of hosts, and, As I have died, says the
Lord Jesus, I judge none. Acknowledge his first judgment, thy election in him;
cherish his second judgment, thy justification by him; breathe and pant after
the third judgment, thy crown of glory for him: intend not upon the right of
other men, which is the first; defame not, calumniate not other men, which is
the second; lay not the name of reprobate in this life upon any man, which is
the third judgment that Christ disavows here; and then thou shall have well
understood and well practiced both these texts, The Father has committed all
judgment to the Son, and yet The Son judges no man.

FINIS.

