THE TVVO-FOLDE TRIBVTE OR TWO SPECIAL DVTIES COMMANDED BY OUR Lord and
Savior JESUS CHRIST to be rendered: The first of Subjects to their Caesar, the
second of Christians to their God: for the better furtherance of the one in his
Regal Dignity, and of the other in his Evangelical Ministry.

EXPLANED IN TWO SERmons and now published.

Anno. 1613.

By RICHARD EBVRNE.

1. PETER. 2. 17. Fear God: Honor the King.



London Printed by Felix Kyngston for William Welby. 1613.

TO THE RIGHT REVEREND AND WORTHILY HONORED Father in God, JAMES by Divine
proui dence Lord Bishop of BATH and WELLS, in Christ Jesus our Lord all Health
and Happiness.
A Twofold necessity (Honorable and my very good Lord) inforceth me to offer
to the commmon view this my Twofold Tribute. The one is the desire I have of
the public good of that Church and Country wherein I have hither to had my
being and biding: the other is the Deuoire I bear to the private good of such
as have sometimes desired, and somewhile expected, that I should farther both
gratify and satisfy them with some thing of that Argument, wherein I have
formerly and somewhat plentifully labored.

To the which scope for so much as the latter, but the greater part of this my
little (but laborious work) does wholly tend, both having one Author, and one
Argument, and this being but as an Accession to the first building, and a new
Supply to an old Charge, I have much desired that both might have but one
Patron: assured that passing under your Lordships honorable name, as the
other has been, so this will be shielded from the injury and the envy both
of the covetous and contentious: and vouchsafed with men of godly knowledge and
sound Judgment the better acceptance, and with men of good place and great
authority, the grauer consideration. Which favor that your Lordship will, of
your great Love to learning, and good liking to all such endeavors, as tend to
the glory of God and benefit of his Church, the Honor of the Kings most
excellent Majesty and bettering of his subjects, easily vouchsafe me nothing
doubting at all: commending these my second labors also; to your Lordships
protection, and your good Lordship to the protection of the Lord of Heaven and
earth, I do humbly rest,

Your Lordships in the work of the Lord and service of his Church ever to be
commanded RICHARD EBVRNE.

THE FIRST SERMON.
MATH. 22. 21. Give therefore to Caesar, the things which are Caesar's: and give
unto God, those things which are Gods.
WHEREFORE at this present (well-beloved in the Lord) I take in hand this text,
you will easily conceive I suppose, if you call to mind The 5. of August
that this day is the Annual Commemoration of our Sovereigns deliverance from
the hands of his enemies: who having long since, viz. in. An. D. 1600, in
Scotland Anno. 1600.
on this day the fifth of August, by Gods mercy, and that with great difficulty
escaped the vile trecheries and bloody villainies of the Gowries intended and
attempted against him, has made it an ordinance in all his Dominions, See the
discourse thereof printed. An. 1603. by V. D. Book of prayers and thanksgiving
for the 5. of August. Psalm. 144 ^0.
that during his life on that day, for that benefit special and public
Thanksgiving be rendered to God his shield, and protector, which so graciously
and miraculously saved his anointed, and delivered him from the power and
peril of the sword. Thereunto to stir up our ready hearts, and incite our
willing affections and dutiful dispositions the more, I have made choice of
this Text which speaks of that duty, which we as subjects and Christian
subjects owe to our Sovereign and most Christian Sovereign.

In handling whereof look not beloved, that I should tie my self ouerstrictly
to the words of my Text, which infer in general terms A double duty, one
to God, another to the Prince. My purpose is rather for this time, deferring
wholly the former, and omitting no small part of the latter, to insist (by Gods
assistance) only upon these two points. First to show you in part what these
things The parts of this sermon.
are, which properly are Caesar's, that is, what that duty is, which to Caesar
we must yield: then secondly, to deliver you some special reasons and motives,
why we should so do.

To begin withal, I must entreat you to preconceiue Who is understood by the
name, Caesar. Joseph. Antiqu. iudaic. lib. 8. capit. 2. Abulens. in Matthew. 22.
quaest. 90.
thus much of the sense of the word Caesar, that as the Kings of Egypt in
ancient time, were always called Pharaohs, and of Philistia, Abimelech: so the
Roman Emperors were ever called Caesar's: under which as a general title
befitting mighty Princes, any Prince in our text, is, or may be understood:
and, that in particular, we by that name, may specially understand our
gracious Sovereign. Who neither as the Rhagusians to the Turk, paying pension
to any: nor as Bologna from the Pope, expecting protection from any: nor as the
Knights of Malta and of the Castilian, holding in see and fealty of any: nor as
the Dukes of Venice to the Colleges of seven and ten, and to the signiority of
Gentlemen (God and his own conscience excepted) being countable to any: but
being for right, a king; for dignity, an absolute Sovereign; and for largenes
and variety of dominions imperial; truly meriteth the title of Caesar. And
therefore whatsoever I shall in general terms deliver, as the duty of subjects
toward their Prince, my desire is, that you will so conceive me, and so apply
it, as speaking of our own duty, unto our most high and mighty Prince James,
who is By the grace of God, of great Britain, France and Ireland King,
Defendor of the Faith, and next under God within his Majesty's Dominions, over
all persons and estates, in all causes as well ecclesiastical as temporal
Constit. eccles. Canon. 1. and. 36.
(all foreign power, title, and jurisdiction being utterly excluded and
wholly cut off) supreme Governor.

This premissed for clearing of the Text, I come now forthwith to my first
point proposed, which is to note unto you, according to our text which says
Reddite, give to Caesar, in part what is that duty, and what be those things
which must be yielded and given to Caesar.

And to this purpose I say, That as there were six steps 6. Branches of
Allegiance. 2. Chron. 9. 18.
to the throne of Solomon, so there be 6. parts of this duty, 6. several
payments of this Tribute to Caesar, that is, 1. Fear, 2. Honor, 3. Obedience,
4. Tribute, 5. Defense, and 6. Prayer: and as about the King himself six
things may be observed, namely, 1. The sword carried before Romans 13. 4. Psalm.
21. 3. and 45. 6. 2. Chron. 9. 17. 1. King. 2. 15.
him; 2. The Crown of pure gold upon his head, 3. The Scepter of
righteousness in his hand, 4. The throne of royal Majesty under him; 5. His
Person upon it; and with these and above all these 6. The Lord God of Heaven,
who has thus exalted him: so by these 6. things we may be put in mind of
these 6. several payments of this Tribute, the sundry parts of our sixe-fold
duty unto him. For The sword exacteth fear; the Crown imports honor, the
Scepter requires Obedience; the Throne expects Tribute; the Person deserves
defense; and the Lord commands Prayer. Each of which that we may yet better
conceive; of each a little: as God me shall assist, and time permit.

1. Fear is to be given to Caesar. It is the duty of subjects 1. Fear.
to fear their King, so teaches Humanity, so teaches Divinity. For
humanity, Periander says; Fear Periander. Prou. 24. 21.
Princes: for Divinity, Solomon says, Fear the Lord and the King. Prou. 24.
If I be a master, does God say, where Mal. 1. 6.
is my fear? If I be a master, may the King say, where is my fear? Be ye
afraid of the sword, says Job cap. 19. for the Job. 19. 29.
sword will be avenged of wickedness. And why? for, says S. Paul, Romans 13.
He into whose hand it is committed by Roman. 13. 4.
God, bears not the sword for naught. It is not put into his Roman. 13. 4.
hand only for a show. No, but he is the minister of God to take vengeance on
him that does evil. According whereunto Prou. 16. 14.
it is that Salomo^ faith, The wrath of the King is as messengers of death,
Pro. 16. And again, The kings wrath is like the roaring and 19. 12.
of a Lion. Worthy the noting to this purpose is the speech which the second of
those squires of the body made before Darius and his nobles, wherein
discoursing of the 1. Esdr 4. 2.
power of a King, and the cause why he ought to be feared, he says: Though men
rule by land and Sea, and over all things The power of a King.
in them, yet is the King greater, for he rules all things, and is Lord of
them. If he bid the^ make war one against another, they do it. If he send them
against the enemy they go, and break down mountains and walls, and towers.
They kill and are killed, and do not pass the Commandment of the King. If he
bid kill, they kill: if he say spare, they spare. If he bid smite, they smite:
if he bid make desolate, they make desolate. If he bid build, they build: if
he bid cut off, they cut off. etc. Fear we therefore the sword, the powerful
sword of Caesar. A good The good effects of loyal fear.
subject fears blame as much as pain, reproach as much as torment; and
dishonor as much as death. This fear carries one eye of the subject upon the
Princes sword, that he never provoke it: the other eye upon the offense, that
he never commit it. This fear as the best porter at the Princes gate, keeps
traitors out of the Kings court, and treachery out of the subjects heart. This
fear, as ballast preserves the ship from being ouerblowne of the wind,
keeps the soul of the subject that it be not ouerthrown by others flattery,
or her own presumption. This fear, as a bridle, curbs us from all
disobedience: and as a nail fastened by the Masters of the assembly, fixes us
firm in our duties. This fear therefore let us give to Caesar, for to Caesar
we owe it.

2. Unto Fear Honor is to be adjoined. And seeing 2. Honor.
as among earthly creatures man is most eminent: as among the elements, fire is
most excellent: and as among the celestial lights, the sun is most splendent,
so Caesar among the sons of men is most orient; who will not (since honor
is, as the Philosopher says, a testimony of excellency) Aristotle.
give honor to Caesar, least he bear false witness, not against his
neighbor, nor against Caesar, but against God who has exalted Caesar, and
brought him to Honor? least he seem to degenerate from nature, which in all
honors the more excellent? least he break the Canon of the Apostle, Romans
13. Give honor to whom ye owe honor: Romans 13. 7.
Least he transgress Gods express Commandment that says Exodus 20. Honor
thy Father: by which note and name, Exodus 20. 12.
the King of the land, because he is Pater Patriae, i. Father of the whole
country, is specially signified? least as Jeremy of some Lament. 4. They
reverenced not the face of the Lamen. 4. 16.
Priest, so some complain of him, He reuerenceth not the face of the Prince;
the greater crime of the two. For, the Priest was a figure of Christ, the King
is a figure of God. If Nebuchad. King of Babel setting up a dead Image, could
Dan. 3. 1.
so prevail with his ungodly subjects, that at the sound of his musical
instruments, they did fall down to it, and gave it such honor as God
condemns: shall not Jehovah the King of Heaven, setting up not a dead, but
(as Menander Menander.
calls a King) his living image, prevail with all his godly subjects, at the
sweet harmony of the sacred Scripture sounding out of S. Peter's mouth as a
principal Herald, Regem honorate, Honor the King, to give him that Honor, 1.
Pet. 2. 17.
which he has commanded: The Philosopher compares the King to a Father, to a
Physician, to a Pylot, and to a pastor: the causes are apparent. And does not
God in holy Scripture give him in manner the same titles? yea, and almost all
the titles of honor in heaven and earth? And why? but to teach us, that as the
son honors his Father, the sick his Physician, as the mariners regard
their. Pilot, the flock their shepherd, so and much more should subjects
honor their Caesar, and people regard their prince. God and men having so
honored Caesar, let all our people honor him. Let Hester not presume into the
presence of Hest. 5. 1. 2.
the great Ahashuerosh till he hold out the golden Scepter. Let Ioab, though
the General of the Army, give David 2. Sam. 12. 27.
the honor of the victory. Let even Nathan the Prophet, and Sadoc the high
Priest make obeisance before my Lord 1. King. 1. 23.
the King, with their face to the ground. In a word as Ioachim et. ver. 39. 40.
the High Priest, and the ancients of the children of Israel said unto Judith,
for the benefits that God by her had Judith. 15. 8. 9.
showed to his people, so let the reverend Fathers of the Church, the truly
Honorable Nobility of England, the grave Judges and Magistrates of the
Commonwealth, in honor of our most worthy and glorious King, King James, for
the benefits which God by his most excellent Majesty has done to his
Dominions, say, Thou art the exaltation of our land: thou art the glory of our
Israel: thou art the rejoicing of our nation. Thou have done much good unto our
country, and God is pleased therewith. Blessed be thou therefore of the
Almighty Lord for evermore: and let all the people say Amen.

Being thus affected for honoring of Caesar, we shall be the better prepared
for the next duty, which is Obedience: 3. Obedience.
which since it is unjust to require of inferiors, as the Husband of the wife,
the Father of the son, the Master of the servant, and not to give it to the
Superior, namely every subject to his Sovereign, since that is true in the
public estate, which Aristotle avouches in a private, By Aristotle. in Oecon.
how much the more diligently any, obey so much the greater favor they find:
since that (as he says) the Obedience of the Citizens, is the felicity of the
city: since S. Paul for this duty, would have a Memorandum: and since S. Peter
would have us perform this duty not only to the King himself, Tit. 3. 1. 1.
Pet. 2. 13.
but also to such as are sent of him; let us all give Obedience to Caesar, and
render due subjection unto the Lords anointed.

But do examples more prevail then reason? The whole world swarmeth with
examples of Obedience. For, Examples.
among the Insecta, the Amazonian Bees obey their Foeminine Bees. Beasts.
Monarch: among the beasts of the field, the flocks follow their leader, and
the herds their head: among the fowls of the air, the Cranes attend their
guide and watcher: Fowls.
among men, the servant obeies his master; the son his Father; and the wife
her husband: More in man, the Men.
body obeies the soul. Also the celestial spheres, notwithstanding Spheres.
their proper peculiar motions, be circumuolued by the first Moveable. The
Angels, which excel in strength Angels.
be obedient to the commandment of God: and yet more, The son of God, (all
whose actions are our instructions) Son of God.
performed in all his life most absolute Obedience. Obedience Philip. 2. John.
6. 38. and, 4. 34. Math. 26. 54.
coming into the world, obedience being in the world, and obedience going out
of the world. Wherefore then being compassed with such a cloud of examples, let
us casting off all impediments obey Caesar as we ought, We must obey Caesar.
1. Readily. Genes. ^2.
let us yield him our full obedience. Let us obey Caesar, readily, sincerely
and generally. Readily without delay, what he commands must forthwith, as
Abraham to God, be performed. Sincerely without grudging, or any 2. Sincerely.
Colos. 3. 22.
sinister affection: not with eye-seruice as men pleasers, but in singleness
of heart, as serving the Lord and not man. Generally not what likes us only,
not in one or two 3. Generally.
things but as becomes us in every thing. For that which the Reubenites and
others said to their Joshua, we must say Josh. 1. 16.
to our Caesar: All that thou command us, we will do, and whithersoeuer
thou sendest us we will go: only the Lord our God be with thee, so that thou
command us nothing against God. Acts 4. Acts. 4. 19.


The fourth duty or thing due to Caesar is tribute, which of right as well as
custom is due to the Crown. 4. Tribute.
Concerning which when I consider, that many times Caesar's eyelids do not
slumber, that our eyes may safely Benefits from Caesar.
sleep: that Caesar's sword cutteth off thieves, that subjects may enjoy their
goods: that Caesar's Scepter curbeth Adulterers, that we may keep our wives,
our daughters, our maidens in chastity: that Caesar's government is our
safe conduct to pass the high ways, wide heaths, thick woods, wild
mountains and plains, without danger either to our purses from thieves, or to
our lives from cutthroats; that Caesar's royal navy at Sea, and mighty forces
sometimes at home, sometimes abroad, do beat off the enemy from inuading our
land, wasting our country, spoiling our goods, rifeling our treasures, burning
our houses, sacking our cities, forcing our wives, deflouring our daughters,
dashing out the brains of our tender babes, tormenting our selves with cruel
death, taking away from us the word of God, which, as Elies daughter 1. Sam. 4.
22.
in law said of the taking of the Arc, would be the departure of glory from
Israel: my mouth cannot, but out of the abundance of my heart, speak of the
sovereign minister of God among us, as S. Paul has long before spoken from
God himself for the Ministers of his Church, Quis militat proprijs stipendijs,
etc. Who goes a warfare 1. Cor. 9. 7.
at any time at his own cost? Who planteth a vineyard, and eats not of the
fruit thereof? or, Who feeds a flock, and eats not of the milk of the
flock? 1. Cor. 9.

If David entering into a serious consideration of Gods Others gratuitie. Psalm.
116. 12.
benefits bestowed upon him, breaks out into this question, What shall I
render unto the Lord for all his benefits toward me? If the Israelites, so
soon as Joshua had divided unto them the cities which the Lord had given them,
presently gave Joshua an inheritance, a city for an inheritance, Josh. 19. 49.
a city which himself did ask, even Timnah-Scres in Mount Ephraim: If Rivers
go into the place whence Eccles 1 7. Heb. 6. 7.
they return and go: If the earth receiving seed returns a croppe, are our
hearts (my beloved) like to David's heart? or rather are we not more unthankful
then the Israelites? more unnatural then the waters? more ungrateful then the
earth? if in consideration of these infinite benefits which we daily receive
from Caesar, we be not ever most willing, and that with cheerfulness (for as
God, so surely Gods Vicegerent loves a cheerful giver) to return ^: Cor. 9.
7. Necessity of tribute.
tribute, (which Cicero calls the synewes of war, and Vlpian the nerves of
the Commonwealth, as without which there was never, that any part of the
Scripture can show, any well ordered estate) as a pledge of our thankful
hearts to the throne and person of Caesar.

Desires any to hear a commandment for it? The Commandment of God for it.
blessed Apostle says expreslie, Give to all men their duty, and namely,
tribute to whom ye owe tribute, custom to Romans 13. 7.
whom custom. And that we may know to whom we owe it, of it especially and
most properly, I call to witness Saint Matthew, Saint Mark, and Saint Luke:
the Lord Jesus Matthew. 22. 21. Mark 12. 17. Luke 20. 25.
says as our text is, Give to Caesar those things which be Caesar's. Is any so
wicked to detain this? To take from a private man it is theft; to take from the
Church it is Sacrilege; to take or detain from the Prince it is Peculatus:
that is robbing of the Royal treasure, the treasure that should be employed to
the common good. He (says Solomon) Prou. 28. 24.
that robs his father and mother, and says it is no transgression, is the
companion of a man that destroys: He, may we say, that detaineth tribute, or
other duties from Caesar, being the father of the Country, and says, it is no
transgression, is the companion of a man that destroieth his Country: and he
little considers what that means, Non furaberis, Thou shall not steal.
Exodus 20. 15.


Is any so unreasonable that without examples, he will Examples of God. Exodus
30. 14.
not yield to reason? They abound. Before there was any King in Israel to take
tribute, the Lord himself took a tribute: when they had Kings, the flower of
all their Kings had for their tribute a peculiar office. David, the pattern
David. 2. Sam. 20. 24. Solomon. 1. Reg. 4. 6. Gods people. Nehem. 5. 4.
of piety, over the tribute set Adoram: and Solomon, the mirror of wisdom
placed over the tribute Adoniram. When they were under the Kings of the
Gentiles; there were amongst the people of God, that upon their lands and their
vineyards borrowed money for the Kings tribute. When the blessed Virgin went
great with child with the The blessed Virgin Marie. Luke 2. 4.
Savior of our souls, in the depth of winter, she traveled from Nazareth in
Galilee, to Bethlehem in Judah to perform this duty to the under-officers of a
Lieutenant to an Heathen Prince. Finally, when the Son of God conuersed And of
the Son of God. Matthew. 17. 24.
with the sons of men, Peter was asked, if his Master paid not tribute? who
presently taking tribute of an unreasonable creature, that tribute for himself
and Peter might be paid, bound all reasonable men, though they do it with some
difficulty, to perform this duty to Caesar. Wherefore I conclude this point
with Saint Ambrose, Si Ambros. in locum.
censum filius Dei soluit, quis tu tantus es, qui non putas esse soluendum? 1.
If the Son of God paid tribute or subsidy, what so great a man art thou,
which think thou ought not to pay?

We come now to the fifth part of our duty, and that is 5. Defense.
defense, due to the person of Caesar: which duty binds every subject Caesar
has, to his power and according to his place, to defend his royal person from
all injuries. This duty requires every subject. 1. To reveal all foreign
complots: so that if any know, that the King of Aram 2. King. 6. 8.
with his servants are consulting against Israel, he must with Elizeus make
known unto Caesar even the words that the King of Aram speaks in his privy
Chamber. 2. To detect all domestical conspiracies: so that if any know that
Bigthan and Teresh do seek to lay hands on Ahashuerosh, Heste 1 2. 21.
he must presently with Mardocheus and Hester certify the King of the matter.
Farther, if the service of any time be fitting, that they diligently attend
him, as that band of men did Saul, whose heart God had touched, that 1. Sam.
10. 26.
so no wicked hand may touch the Lords anointed. If any perceive any
appearance of evil to be near unto him, that they with David's men, and with
the true hearted people, 2. Sam. 21. 27. 2. Sam. 18. 3. Lament. 4. 20.
be careful that his Highness being worth 10000. of us, the light of our
Israel, and the breath of our nosethrils, come not into any peril. And to be
short, if in the least distress (the Lord keep him from all distress) his
soul desires any thing which might do it good, that they do with all
alacrity and celeritie provide it, and hazard (if need should be) as the
three Worthies for the life of David, even 5. Sam. 23. 15.
their own lives. Assured that as they fought from heaven, even the Stars
fought in their courses against Sysera Judge. 5. 20.
and his people, enemies of God, and the River, even that ancient River Kishon
swept them away: so heaven and earth, and all creatures in them both, shall
fight with them against, and sweep away as filth in the street, all such as
be his enemies, and seek or desire the hurt of his soul. So, even so let al
thine and his enemies perish O Lord: Verse. 31.
but they that love him and his royal issue, shall be as the Sun when he
shines in his might.

To the last place I reserved Prayer for Caesar, not as the 6. Prayer.
least, but as the chiefest duty we owe unto Caesar. The other be intended
wholly to the King, this is directed immeadiatly unto God. Fear is in regard
of the Sword, Honor, in respect of the Crown: Obedience, because of the
Scepter: Tribute, for the Throne, and Defense, to the Person; but Prayer, to
the Founder and Protector of Caesar. And little do all the former prevail to
Caesar's happiness without this last, without prayer. Prayer, I say, beloved,
which springs from the holy Ghost; which, as says Saint Paul, makes request
for us with sighs that Romans 8. 26.
cannot be expressed: Prayer, which is the messenger of the faithful soul to
God: for the prayer of him that humbles Ecclesiasticus 35. 17.
himself, says the son of Syrach, goes through the clouds, and cease
not, till it come near, and will not depart, till the most High have respect
thereunto: prayer, which is the odours in the golden violl, offered upon the
Revel. 8. 3.
golden Altar, which is before the Throne: Prayer, whereunto Saint Paul
exhorts Christians before all 1. Tim. 2. 1.
duties; whereunto he exhorts generally for all men, specially for Kings.
For Kings, and that as partly we may gather, and partly the same Apostle does
show, in respect of themselves, and of our selves. 1. Of themselves, Pray for
Kings in respect, 1. of themselves, because of their cares. Heb. 6. 1. Their
perils.
in respect of the greatness of the care and troubled thoughts which they
take; for in great dominion is ever great care, making many times the Kings
sleep to depart from his eyes? In respect of the perils to the which they are
subject, because in the King, the enemy has Neroes wish, all the heads of the
people upon one body; and therefore as did the King of Aram, the enemy often
commands his Captains to fight only against the King. In respect of the 1.
King. 22. 31. The difficulty of their charge,
difficulty of the right bestowing rewards, and inflicting of punishments,
there being smooth Absalons, dogged Doegs, blackmouthed Shimijes, bloody handed
Ioabs, false hearted Shibaos, shameless harlots, as well as friendly
Ionathans, true hearted Ionadabs, faithful Nathans, valiant Abners, constant
Mephiboseths, and honest matrons: so that Solomon himself had need to pray 1.
King. 3. 9. The good that issues from them to all.
for wisdom, For who is able to judge this mighty people? And in respect of
the abundant good which descends from the Royal Majesty to the whole estate,
which is such, that as the Sun is a resemblance of the Deity in the frame of
the world, giving light, heat and life to all things, so the Sovereign of
every estate is a pattern of the great God, from whom our whole estates, our
laws to live by, and all our comfort in our several courses do proceed.

2. Of our selves, That we may lead under them a quiet 2. Of our selves. 1.
Tim. 2. 2.
life, without any insurrections at home; and a peaceable life, without any
invasion from abroad; in all godliness, that it may be said of our land, as
Jacob once said of Bethel, Genes. 28. 16.
Surely the Lord is in this place, and this is none other but the house of God:
and in honesty, that the name of the Lord be not blasphemed among the
Gentiles, among the Mahumetanes, among the Papists, and other enemies of the
Gospel through us, but that as Christ said, Our light may so shine before men,
that they may see our good Matthew. 5. 16.
works, and glorify for them our Father which is in heaven.

This duty being thus necessary, let us perform it. Pray Prayer is needful.
we for Caesar. It is needful for him, easy for us, and profitable for both.
He needs our prayer, and therefore as Darius highly respected the sacrifices
and prayers of the Esra. 6. 6.
Priests of Israel for his life and for his sons: so let us assure our
selves, our Cyrus does no less, what say I no less? does much more desire our
prayers for himself, and his Queen, for the Prince, and the rest of their
royal issue. I need no better nor other argument of his Majesty's desire in
this behalf, then his special Edict for observation of this day the 5. of
August, which of purpose in his holy zeal and pious devotion, he has
consecrated during his whole life, thoroughout all his dominions unto prayer
and thanksgiving for him and his. Let every one therefore that loves Caesar
pray for him.

This is a duty with great facility to be done. If thy Easy.
purse be so poor, that it can pay no tribute to Caesar: if thy body be so
feeble, that it can do nothing for the defense of Caesar; yet if thy heart be
not leaud and wicked; if thy mind be not deuoid of all piety and Christian
duty, thy tongue may, and thy heart will daily and often, publicly and
privately pray for Caesar.

Pray we then for him, it is very profitable for both: The Profitable.
prayer of a righteous man (as says S. James and shows it by the example of
Elias, chap. 5.) avails much with James 5. 16.
God, if it be fervent. It helps, when all other helps do fail, against all
calamities, against sickness, against death, against enemies, and what not? By
it was Peter delivered Act. 12. Isni. 38. Josh. 3. and 10. 12 1. King. 4. 33.
out of prison. Hezekias restored to health, Israel had the victory: by it the
waters of Iordane were divided, the Sun stood still, the dead were raised to
life, and the living have been saved from sundry dangers. If Paul exhorted 1.
Tim. 2. 2.
to pray for Nero (for he was Caesar when Paul so wrote) a man so wicked, that
he murdered his mother that bare him, slew his Tutor that bred him, and was
natures monster. If the Prophets Jeremy and Baruch commanded Ier. 29. 7.
Baruch. 1. 11. 2. King. 24.
to pray for the life of the King of Babel, who yet had wasted Judea with fire
and sword, besieged and taken Jerusalem, burned the Temple, slain and carried
captive of 2. Pet. 1. 21.
the people innumerable etc. What would that holy spirit, by whom both the
Prophets and Apostles did write, that English, Scottish, Irish, and others
under the subjection or protection of his most gracious Majesty, should do for
this our good, our godly, our religious and most virtuous King, who has
established peace among us, united the divided, confirmed the Gospel, and
adorned the Temple of the Lord amongst us? Let us therefore pray for his
excellent Majesty and for his, that God would build his house as the house of
David, establish his throne as the throne of Solomon, and make their days upon
earth, as the days of heaven.

And not only let us pray, which respects the time present We must also
render to god praise and thanksgiving. Heb. 13. 15.
and to come, but also (for that is a principal part of prayer, and respects
likewise the time past, which we ought not to forget) let us praise God. Let
us offer unto him the fruit of our lips confessing his name. Let us present
unto him the sweet odours and spiritual incense Psalm 50.
of our hearts remembering his benefits. Let us render unto him the sacrifice,
the true, lively and most acceptable sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving,
extolling his unspeakable mercy and goodness unto us, and our Nation.

First in driving far from us all those evils and dangers which our hearts
did fear, and our enemies did hope, at the setting of that Queen Elizabeth.
Causes why to be thankful.
most Orient Star, which long before had shined over us, would fall upon us.
2. In preparing for us, and placing over us, not a child, but a man: yea a
mirror of men: not a mean Prince, but a mighty Potentate: not a Captain,
but a king, that had long before learned to hold the Scepter, and by the
experience of many years, had gotten skill to guide the raines of regal
regiment. 3. In bringing to us not an enemy but a friend; not an hater but a
lover; not only a favorer, but a furtherer, but a learned, a zealous and
mighty defender both by word and sword of the ancient and apostolic, the holy
and catholic religion long since planted amongst us. 4. In preserving among
us, and before he came among us (as this day bears witness) the life and
person of him his anointed, and our Sovereign from the malice and fury, the
snare and violence, the sword and assault of all rebels and traitors, of all
enemies and wicked ones, which either privily or openly at home or abroad have
wished, intended, or attempted any evil unto his soul. 5. In a word in
pouring upon us so many, so great, so diverse, and so excellent benefits and
blessings, both spiritual and temporal, the sum whereof my tongue cannot
easily tell, much less can my heart conceive the greatness and worthiness of
them, which we by means of his Majesty's happy, hopeful, peaceable and
pious reign over us do abundantly enjoy.

If it be our duty for every benefit we receive at the 1. Tim. 4. 4.
hand of God: if we ought even for the meat that we eat, and for the clothes
that we put on, and for whatsoever other particular blessing or good thing we
receive of God (and what have we which we have not of him received?) 1. Cor. 4.
7.
to render unto him praise and thanks, to laud and magnify his name: how much
more for these so many, so manifold and inestimable benefits upon his Majesty
for us, and upon us by his Majesty powered and bestowed plentifully and
admirably.

And since as God himself says, This is the very honor that he expects at
our hands: since as the Kingly Prophet tells us, it pleases God better then
the oblation of many Psalm. 50. 23.
fatted beasts, or the smell of much incense: and since as the Apostle S. Paul
teaches us, this, even this giving of thanks 1. Tim. 2. 3.
for all men, and namely or specially for Kings is a thing good and acceptable
in the sight of God our Savior: let every one of us in particular say with
David, quid retribuam Domino? Psalm. 116. 12.
etc. That is, What shall I render unto the Lord for all the benefits he has
done unto me, and namely, in placing over me so good, so gracious, and so
worthy a King? and resolve with David, I will take the cup of salvation, and
call upon the name of the Lord, I will offer to him the sacrifice of
thanksgiving. And let us all say, as the Queen of Sheba 2. Chron. 9. 8.
did concerning King Solomon, 2. Chron. 9. Blessed be the Lord thy God (O
King) which loved thee, to set thee on his throne, in the stead of the Lord thy
God: because thy God loves our land, to establish it for ever, therefore has
he made thee King over us, to execute judgment and justice.

The second general part.
HItherto have I showed you (beloved in the Lord) our duty to Caesar
consisting in six things, viz. Fear, Honor, Obedience, Tribute, defense and
Prayer. Now let us consider also according to my promise, as God shall assist,
and time permit me, some motives and inducements to this duty. And to that
purpose that we may never slide; either by the corruption of our own heart, or
the persuasion of men, or suggestion of the Devil, I will (since the wisest
either of Kings or men affirms that a threefold cable is not easily broken)
show you a fourefolde cord, which may (well kept and observed) ever hold the
whole heart Eccles. 4. 12.
and soul of every subject in love and Allegiance to his Sovereign; the
several twists whereof are these, viz.

1. The ordination of Caesar. 2. The haynousnesse of the crime of disloyalty
against Caesar. 3. The punishments of that sin. 4. The rewards of Loyalty and
dutifulness to Caesar.
The Ordination of Caesar.
is he that ordains Caesar to be Caesar, and sets him upon his throne.
This is evident by many proofs of holy Scripture, general and particular.
General, partly negative and partly affirmative.

1. Negative, as where Christ said unto Pilate, Thou Ioh. 19. 11.
could have no power at all against me, except it were given thee from
above. And the Apostle unto us all, There is no Romans 13. 1.
power but of God. To whom agrees the Psalmist when he sings thus: Promotion
comes neither from the East, nor Psalm. 75. 7.
from the West, nor yet from the South. And why? For God is the Judge: He
puts down one, and sets up another.

2. Affirmative, for By me (says the uncreated wisdom Prou. 8. 15.
of God) do Kings reign, and Princes decree justice. The name of God be
praised, (says Daniel the Prophet chap. Dan. 2. 21.
2.) for Wisdom and strength are his. He changes times and seasons: he
sets up Kings, and takes them away. And the blessed Apostle in the place
before alleged tells us directly, that. The powers that be, are ordained of
God. To Romans 13. 1.
these we may add the words of the wiseman, speaking to all rulers in this
sort, Give ear ye that rule the nations, and Wisd. 6. 23.
glory in the multitudes of people: for the Rule is given you of the Lord, and
power by the most high.

Particular, which do consist in God his immediate designement of diverse unto
kingdoms, as of Saul, whom by the hand of Samuel he anointed to be Head over
his 1. Sam. 10. 1.
people: and whom by the same Prophets mouth he testifies to the people, that
he had chosen to be King over them. Of Hazael and of Iehu, appointing his
servant Elijah to Verse. 24. 1. Kin. 19. 15. 16
anoint the one of them King over Syria, the other over Israel. According
whereunto Daniel tells Nebuchad. that great King of Babel, which yet knew not
God, That the Dan. 2. 37.
God of Heaven had given him a Kingdom, power, and strength and glory: and
had delivered not the men only that dwelled on the face of the earth, but also
the very beasts of the field, and the fowls of the heaven, into his hand, and
made him ruler over them all. Likewise for Solomon the son of David, the
Queen of Sheba can tell us, that it was the Lord 2. Chron. 9. 8.
God of Israel that had set him on his throne in his steed to be King over his
people: and both for Solomon and David his Father, David himself the man after
Gods own heart, does most plainly testify in this sort; The Lord God chose
me 2. Chron. 28. 4.
before all the house of my Father, to be King over Israel for ever: among
all the sons of my Father he delighted in me, to make me King over his
people: and even so of all my sons he has chosen Solomon my son, to sit
upon the throne of the Kingdom of the Lord. Thus it is most manifest that
Caesar is ordained to be Caesar by God: and therefore unto him, as unto the
ordinance of God, we ought to yield whatsoever is Caesar's, lest in rejecting
him, we reject God.

Iam. 1.
goodness does flow?

be Gods ordinance; For who are evil, if Saul, if Hazael, if Nebuchadnezzar
were not? and the generals extending to all, do necessarily comprehend both
good and evil. Yet farther, and more fully to clear this doubt, we must
understand (beloved in the Lord) that there is Malum culpae, and Malum Poenae,
an evil of crime, and an evil of pain. The evil of crime is sin, the
evil of pain is the punishment of sin: the evil of crime is not of God.
God being all sufficient needs it not; being most holy commands it not; being
most righteous approues it not: in a word, he hates and accurseth it in all
in this world, and in all the impenitent will condemn it eternally in the
world to come. But the evil of pain, being the punishment of sin, is thrown
from the throne of God upon the heads of wicked men. In this sense, says God,
I the Lord form light and create darkness: Isai. 45. 7.
I make peace, and create evil: and the Prophet of God, Shall there be evil
in a city, that is, punishment for evil, Amos. 3. 6.
and the Lord has not done it? And in this sense we must understand, that as
a good King comes from the right hand of Gods mercy, so an evil from the left
hand of Gods justice. For the sins of the people, he gives an evil Prince,
I gave thee a King in mine anger: and he makes the hypocrite to reign. For
the sins of the people he suffers Hose. 13. 11. Job. 34. 30.
a good King to fall, as appears by David numbering the people. For the sins
of the people he takes a good 2. Sam. 24. 1.
Prince clean away, according to that of Solomon, For the transgressions of
the land, there are many Princes thereof, and Prou. 28. 2.
yet more is that which Samuel threatened, If ye do wickedly, ye shall perish,
both ye and your King. According to these it 1. Sam. 12.
is, as I take it, that Ashur is called the rod of Gods wrath and the staff in
their hands, his indignation: That God terms Isai. 10. 5.
Nebuchad. his servant, and Cyrus his anointed: That Ier. 27. 6.
Attila King of Goths, and Vandales, that somewhiles sacked Rome, called
himself Flagellum Dei, that is. The scourge of God, and Tamberlaine himself
Iram Dei, that is the wrath of God.

Since therefore every Prince, every King both good and bad, is of God, either
as a blessing or as a plague, as S. Peter commands servants to be subject to
their masters, 1. Pet. 2. 18.
not only, If they be good and courteous, but also to the froward: so I advise,
and so I acknowledge all subjects ought to be subject and obedient to their
Princes with all fear and reverence, not only being good and gracious, but
also though they be cruel and wicked, and in so doing they shall best make it
appear, that they obey, and do their duty in singlenes of heart and for the
Lords sake.

The hainousnes of disloyalty.
Caesar. The greatness of which crime, though but slightly considered, is of
no small force to retain every man within the bounds of his duty. For whereas
a well governed and peaceable kingdom resembles the frame of the world, yea
the kingdom of heaven; where the holy Angels and blessed Saints glorifying God
day and night, live in bliss; a rebellious, seditious and disloyal people
resemble not only the Chaos, but even hell it self, where is no order, but
everlasting horror and confusion. So that well said the Greek
Historiographer, In Rebellion is all kind of evil. Thucidides.
For it is not one sin, but the sink of all sins, and the sea of all
mischiefs, would you see at once the seven capital sins? This is (as one
observes very well) the very channel whence they do flow. For is not
ambitious Pride, or proud Ambition the first sparkle of that fire? Does not
Envy blow the coal? Does not Wrath daily increase the flame? And come not at
length all things thereby into the noisome ashes of Sloth, Gluttony and
Drunkenness? Farther, Peacemakers are blessed, why? They shall be called (says
our Math. 5. 9.
Savior) the children of God, Cursed therefore are Peacebreakers, and above
all they that break the public peace, they are, and they must be called the
Children of the Devil. If it be sweet and comely to die for the country, a
Seneca.
Maxim among the very Heathen, what is it then but odious, but ignominious and
loathsome to seek the hurt and Exodus 20.
ruin of the country? and if to honor and obey the Father of our flesh, the
parents of our being, be a thing commendable and grateful with God and man:
what may the dishonor and disloyalty done to the Father of the Country, and
parents of our well being be, but abominable and hateful unto all? The fact
of the Giants in the old world, that attempted to fight against God, has ever
been held a famous impiety, but that sin do all they commit, that either
secretly as Traitors, or openly as Rebels, oppose against the Prince: for,
says the Apostle, he that resists the power, resists the ordinance of God.

In other sins among men, the purpose or intent, so Romans 13. 1. The intent of
evil in this case punishable.
there do no act follow, is nothing: but in this sin not God only, but also
man takes such notice thereof, that the old Proverb, Thought is free, has no
place. For as God expressly forbids even such thoughts of heart, Eccl. 10.
Curse not the King, no not in thy thought, for, (mark well the reason) the
fowls of the Heaven shall carry thy voice, Eccles. 10. 20. Wisd. 20. 1.
and that which has wings shall declare the matter. By which we are taught,
that he who caused the dumb beast speaking with man's voice to forbid the
foolishnes of the Prophet, 2. Pet. 2. 16.
he, who discovered Bessus his parricide by the chattering of swallows: even
he can cause any foul of Heaven, Plutarch.
and any creature upon earth, to reveal and revenge mutinous, seditious and
treacherous thoughts against Caesar: so Wisd. 5. 17.
even the laws of men, both ancient and modern, both civil and common,
punish it, as well as the fact, and that with death. Whereof (but that I may
not forget the righteous and most deserved execution of them that laid the
powder, and would have lighted the match, in the late monstrous Gunpowder
treason, who though they did but Gunpowder treason. 1605.
intend the mischief, and it (as God would) touched not any yet died for it;)
what has been practiced or enacted at home, not to relate, we may have,
besides that ancient story divine related and approved by the spirit of God: I
mean the attainder of the two Eunuchs Hest. 2. That went about, and were
contriuing how to lay hands on the King Ahashuerosh, in whose indictment though
there was no Hest. 2. 21.
fact found, but only a will, a purpose, a plot to have done it, yet they died
for it, and died as justly as Mordecai was justly honored and highly rewarded
for the discovery: we may have (I say) out of the French Annals a notable
president French Annalls.
or two. As, of that Norman Gentleman who confessed to a Friar, that he had had
a thought to kill Francis the first of that name. Who though he had changed
his mind, repented his intent, and asked pardon for the crime, yet the friar
reporting it unto the King, and the King referring it to the Parliament of
Paris, was by the grave senate of that high court condemned unto death. And
whereas in most cases the law of nations excuses mad men from punishment
(madness it self being so great a plague) yet when Capito, a man raging mad,
drew his sword upon Henry the son of Francis the King aforenamed, he was
therefore executed. So great detestation is there in the hearts of all good
subjects of the least show of violence to ye Lords anointed.

The punishment of such sin.
prepared for such it appears by that of the Apostle, They that resist shall
receive to themselves damnation. Of the greeuousnes Romans 13. 2.
of ye judgment we may be assured by the heynousnes of the crime. Farther since
the law requires that offenders pay life for life, eye for eye, tooth for
tooth, hand for hand, foot for foot, burning for burning, wound for wound,
stripe for Exo. 21. 23. 24.
stripe, etc. What wounds, what burning is he worthy to endure that is guilty
of this crime? How many feet, how many hands, how many eyes, how many lives is
he worthy to lose, which offends those feet of whom so many thousand feet;
those hands of whom so many thousand hands; those eyes of whom so many thousand
eyes; that life whereon so many thousand lives depend? But because he has not
so many feet, so many hands, so many eyes, so many lives, therefore is he
punished of God and man. 1. Of man, in house, in lands, in offices, in death,
in burial, in name, and in posterity. I need not give instances of these. Who
knows not, that houses, lands and preferments are taken from such? that pains
and torments are laid upon such? Hest 8. 1. 2. Sam. 16. 3. 1. King. 2. 26.
Ier. 22. 18. Prou. 10 7. Bb. Chapter Ser. in Psalm. 105. p. 60.
that a violent and terrible kind of death is prepared for such? that burial
is denied unto such? and their name is infamed, and their blood tainted? And,
as one has said excellently well, well worthy are they to feel the full
measure of Vengeance upon earth, and to incur an universal detestation among
men, to have all the hatred of the earth powered upon them and theirs, to be the
outcasts of the common wealth, and the Maranathaes of the Church, yea, and
their names for ever to be an abhorring to al flesh, nothing in this kind is
too much.

2. Of God such are also many times punished, howsoever By God.
for a time, they may or do escape the hand of man, and that externally,
internally, and eternally.

Externally by means which man cannot use. The nation 1. Eternally.
and kingdom, says God by his Prophet Jeremy, which will not serve
Nebuchadnezzar, King of Babel, the same Ier. 27. 8.
nation will I visit with the sword, and with the famine, and with the
Pestilence. So punished he Miriam for murmuring Numb. 12. 10.
against Moses with leprosy as white as snow: Corah, Dathan and Abiram for
open rebellion, with the earths et. 16. totum.
opening her mouth and swallowing up quick, them and all that they had: and
Absalon with his own mule to draw him, and his own hear on a great thick
oak to hang him. 2. Sam. 18. 9.


Internally, he punishes such with the sting of a guilty conscience. A good
Conscience (says Solomon) is a continual feast. But such as will not obey for
conscience sake, 2. Internally. Prou. 15. 15. Romans 13. 5. 1. Pet. 2. 13.
such as will not submit themselves for the Lords sake, are by the Lord
deprived of this good, and tormented with an evil conscience. And that this is
a fearful punishment we may learn of the wise man, who says, A fearful
thing Wisd. 17. 10.
it is, when malice is condemned by her own testimony: which says another,
is more then a 1000. witnesses; and, a Conscience that is touched, does ever
forecast cruel things.

This sting of conscience be those Furies whereof the Poets; those accusing
thoughts whereof the Apostle, that Romans 2. 15.
never dying worm whereof the evangelical prophet, and Christ himself in the
Euangell, do speak: that book Isai. 66. 24. Mar. 9. 44. Revel. 20. 21.
whereof Saint John says, that it shall be opened when the earth and heaven
shall fly away from his face that shall sit on the great throne. This when
they are abroad, makes Leuit. 26 36.
them shake at the fall of a leaf: This when they be within, makes them
fly, though none pursue them. This writing Prou. 28. 1. Dan. 5. 5.
in their hearts like the handwriting which Belshazzar saw upon the wall, when
they are in the height of their pride, will cause their countenance to be
changed, and their knees to smite one against another. This if they cut but the
lap of the Princes garment, will touch them at the heart; This as it 1. Sam.
24. 6. Genesis 4. 13.
did Cain for his brothers blood, will much more for their lieges life, if it
be annoyed or shortened by them, make their own hearts to think, and their own
mouths to say, that Their sin is greater, then that it can be forgiven them.
This, as Math. 27. 34.
it did Judas, will make their souls to abhor the reward of iniquity, their
hands to cast it down, and their tongues to proclaim that they have betrayed
innocent blood. This, (though like Judas, they had faith to work miracles, or
like Ahitophell, they can give counsel, as if one had asked at the oracle of
God) will make their own hands to dispatch Acts 1. 18. 2. Sam. 16. 23.
them of their wicked life, and to end their sinful and accursed days.

These Judgments of God are fearful, and who trembles not to hear them? Yet
know (beloved) there 3. Eternally.
is another more grievous then any of these, yea, more intolerable then all
these; and that is Gods eternal judgment, the fire of hell, which such,
without repentance, and great repentance, shall not escape. Lucifer for
rebellion fell from heaven, Adam for disobedience Genes. 3. 24. Ephesians. 2. 3.
was cast out of Paradise, and such for disloyalty shall be shut out of the
kingdom of God. If it seemed grievous 2. Sam. 14. 32.
unto Absalon, lying in Jerusalem not once in two years term to see King
David's face, how grievous shall it be for all rebels, traitors: etc. (dying
without repentance) neither to come into the new Jerusalem, nor to see the face
of God for ever. And if it be a grievous thing to lie fettered in a prison for
a few days, oh how grievous will it be for the ungodly, of whom rebels,
traitors, malignant subjects etc, be in the first rank) to be turned into
hell, and there to lie bound hand and foot in everlasting Iud. verse. 6.
chains under darkness, world without end? Would thou know the sharpnes of
these pains? Christ tells thee they go into sire, and what pain more
grievous and intolerable, then of burning? Would thou know what time it
Math. 25. 41.
does last? He calls it everlasting: and in eternity what end? or what hope
of any end? would thou know the company they shall there have? he
foretells that too, that is, the Devil and his Angels, and worse what can be?
would thou have it yet farther expressed unto thee? assure thy self that as
the joys of the godly purchased by the obedience of the son of God, are such
as the eye of mortal man has not seen, his ear has not heard, nor can
enter into his heart: so also, the pains and torments prepared 1. Cor. 2 9.
for the wicked, and preordained for the children of disobedience.

The rewards of the loyal.
our selves faithful and loyal to our Caesar in thought word and deed: so
have I the rather deferred to the last place, in hope that your ears filled,
dulled happily with the former; might be refreshed, and your minds and
attention quickened again and stirred up to the hearing of this point
especially.

The reward of loyalty I distinguish as its contrary I have done, into a
twofold state, that is from man, from God, and general and particular.

1. General to all, darkely signified in Nebuchadnezzars 1. From Man. Dan. 4.
7.
dream under the parable of a tree. The Boughs whereof were fair, and the
fruit thereof much. In it was meat for all: the beasts of the field rested
under the shadow of it, and the fowls of heaven dwelt in the boughs of it:
more plainly expressed by Isaiah, cap. 32. That man, viz. the Prince of the
Isai. 32. 1.
country, shall be as a hiding place from the wind, and as a refuge for the
tempest, and as rivers of waters in a dry place, and as the shadow of a great
rock in a weary land. Wherefore as Jeremy willed the Israelites to seek the
prosperity of the city, Ier. 29. 7.
whether they were carried, so I beseech all subjects to seek the prosperity
of the Caesar, under whom they are governed: and Ieremies reason may induce
them for in the peace thereof, they shall have peace, in his prosperity they
shall have prosperity: and in his glory they shall have glory.

2. Particular, as safety, honor, preferment, riches, a good name both alive
and dead, etc. Wherein if every particular man's merit be not of that moment, or
there is not that opportunity to have every well deserving person known unto
Caesar, and therefore Caesar cannot say with Ahashuerosh (though Caesar be as
bountiful and as grateful as Ahashuerosh) what honor and dignity has been
given to Mordecai for this? Yet the hope in which every Hest. 6. 3.
good subject does dwell to be well respected as time and place may serve: and
the private good which every particular party to him and his duty may, and
daily does draw out of that large fountain and inestimable treasure last before
remembered, flowing and issuing unto all, cannot be but a rich reward and an
ample recompense of all service, honor, obedience and other duty whatsoever
loyally done, and faithfully performed to Caesar.

Besides all this, such shall be rewarded of God externally, 2. From God.
internally, and eternally.

Externally, with the blessings in Gods law promised to Externally.
such as shall observe and keep his commandments, whereof, Obedience, and
Loyalty to the higher powers is Deuteronomy. 28. 3. 4^. etc.
one of the chief. Blessed shall thou be in the City, and blessed also in the
field: Blessed shall be the fruit of thy body, and the fruit of thy ground:
the fruit of thy cattle, and increase of thy kine, and the flocks of thy
sheep. Blessed shall be thy basket and thy dough. Blessed shall thou be when
thou come in, and blessed also when thou go out, and e.

Internally, with the peace and benefit of a good Conscience, which is a
continual feast, or most delicious banquet Internally. Prou. 15. 15.
to the soul. What melody to this? and what comfort to be compared unto it?
when others wring their hands for grief, this will make thee clap thine hands
for joy: when others tremble thou shall triumph. This will make thee to sleep
quietly, to wake cheerfully: to be alone without Romans 2. 15. et 8. 16.
fear, and with others without distrust: in thine affairs confident, and in
thy recreations cheerful. If rebels should be behind thee, and traitors before
thee, as the Ammonites and the Aramites were before Ioab and behind him, yet 2.
Sam. 10. 9.
by the benefit here of might thou resolve with Ioab. Be strong, and let us
be valiant for our people, and for the cities of our God: and let the Lord do
that which seems him good in his eyes: and encourage others as the man of God
did his servant saying; Fear them not: for they that be with us, are 2. King.
6. 16.
more then they that be with them.

Eternally, when after our loyalty to our Sovereign here on earth, the
Sovereign of all Princes shall advance us to Eternally.
be, to dwell, to live and to reign for ever in that great city the holy
Jerusalem, where of the Divine eagle, or Egle of Divines in the clearnes of his
sight beholding the goodlinesse Revel. 21. 20.
and the glory thereof, has said, that it is of pure gold like unto clear
glass: that the streets thereof do shine like unto a stone most precious,
even as a Jasper stone, clear as crystal: that the foundations are garnished
with all manner of precious stones: the 12. gates are 12. pearls: the 12.
Porters are 12. Angels: that the glory of God, and the lamb is the light
thereof: that so pure and undefiled it is, that in it is nothing but holiness:
and there enters into it no unclean thing, nor whatsoever works abomination
or makes lies. The Records whereof is the book of life: the water whereof is
a kind of Aqua vitae as clear as crystal, proceeding out of the throne of
God, and of the lamb: and the immunities or privileges whereof are such, that
by the benefit of them there shall be no more curse, no night no need of
candle, nor of the light of the sun or stars. Such, and so great are the
things which God has prepared for them that obey him, and in him, and for him
the Lords anointed, their Caesar.

And now (beloved in the Lord) having according to The Conclusion.
my purpose and promise for the former part of my text, showed you what be the
things, which as Caesar's, we ought to give to Caesar, namely Fear, Honor,
Obedience, Tribute, Defense, and Prayer, and having confirmed the same with
special motives and inducements, I do for this present, Acts 20. 32.
commend you to God, and to the word of his grace, which is able to build you
up, and make you perfect, that you may in these and all other duties perform
from time to time that which is wel-pleasing in his sight.

Beseeching the same God, through the merits of his dearest son, by the
operation of his holy and all sanctifying spirit, so to rule our hearts and
work in us, that we being holy and acceptable in his sight, and our prayers
fervent and faithful; they may pierce the heavens, and so prevail with God as
they may thence bring judgments, as fire upon Caesar's enemies, but as the dew
of Divine grace, blessings manifold upon Caesar and his true subjects: That so
his most sacred Majesty may long, religiously, and happily reign over us here
on earth: and that in the end, and without all end, he with us and we with
him, may live and reign together in the everlasting kingdom of Heaven.

Amen.
FINIS.
A SERMON PREACHED AT HENGSTRIDG IN THE COVNTIE OF Somerset, the 16. of August,
upon. Matthew. 22. 21.

CONCLVDING A FORMER SERMON Preached there the fifth day of August upon the
same text.

By RICHARD EBVRNE Vicar there.

PROVERB. 20. 25. It is a destruction for a man to devour that which is
sanctified, and after the vows to enquire.



London Printed by Felix Kyngston for William Welby. 1613.

To the Reader.
COurteous and Christian Reader, I had a purpose to have seconded my first
labor, The Maintenance of the Ministry, in such sort as it might have
satisfied thine expectation, and that title at full: but partly discouraged by
want of time and means fit for a work of that weight; partly detained by hope
that (as I had heard) some one far more able and ancient, would ease me
thereof, I do for the present, present thee again with this sermon, which as a
supply to my former treatise; may so much further thee, (if thou take some
small pains in perusing and conferring both that by both thou may have as it
were one sufficient volume of this Argument, and I the less need hereafter
to labor any farther therein. If thereby I prevail with thee so much that
thou acknowledge the same for truth, and conform thee to the practice, I have
a great part of my desire: or if I may but occasion some or other more learned
and able to perform what I have but rudely informed, I shall account my labor
not wholly lost, I have abounded in quotations, and other men's observations for
Ornament to the work, Authority with the learned, direction to the unlearned,
and protection for my self: which if thou use well, will inform thee at full,
that I am neither alone, nor from the ancient, nor with the worst.

Touching the Argument or subject of my labor in this my Sermon, if any shall
think it not so fit for the pulpit as the pen, let him know, There can be no
more fault in me to preach thereof, then in Moses, in the Prophets, and in the
Apostles, so often, so much and so diversely to speak and write thereof. They
feared not (as Rulling. Decad. lib. 5. Sermon. 10.
one well notes of Moses) lest in handling that matter, they should be accused
of greedy desire or covetousness: neither need I. That imputation may with
better right and reason, be retorted upon them, which after all our preaching
and teaching of doctrine so necessary, urged so often, by so many, in so sound
and effectual manner, as might make even the stones of the street to hear, an
heart of Adamant to relent, and a brow of brass to blush at this sin: and
for all our preaching and publishing of other doctrines most holy, most
necessary, most sweet, and comfortable, for which they are not able to yield us
sufficient recompense with all 1. Cor. 9.
that they have, (for what are their carnal things to our spiritual?) Do yet
suffer us to live in all needinesse and contempt; and making due provision and
supply for the wants of the meanest of themselves, pass by us as not worthy
the looking on.

Touching the means by which our distresses and wants may be relieved, it may
happily seem hard or strange to some, that I intimate the off-cutting of
customs, prescriptions, exemptions, etc. But whosoever shall well and thoroughly
consider of this business, shall well perceive, that if ever there be a
sincere intent and settled purpose to effect this so holy, so necessary, so
just, and so great a work, it must this way, and none other be effected. For
whereas our estate cannot be bettered, but either by restoring us that which
indeed, and properly is our own, which once we had, and which was
unadvisedly, and unjustly taken from us; or else by allotting and bestowing
upon us some things that we never had. To expect the latter, that is, that we
should have either sufficient stypends added in all places, where need is, unto
that which we already have, or that our gentlemen, patrones or parochians
should lay us out so much of their fineable lands and temporal livings, as
might increase our gleeb in that measure, as might supply the want and room of
our tithes, by their customs, prescriptions, etc: which held, is neither
probable, possible nor reasonable. It rests therefore, that by the means
which I have mentioned especially, this must, if ever, be effected. Thence is
the maine cause of the disease and evil, and thence according to the old
Maxim, Sublata causa, tollitur effectus, must come the cure and remedy: much
help I grant may be had by Impropriations, but neither can they wholly be
restored, nor is the hurt they do, so great, so common and general, as of the
former.

Does it seem improbable, that ever this great and good work should be
effected, and as a case desperate, a matter past hope?

This may do so to some, but to me it does not. For first, when I consider,
that it is much easier to repair some Churches, then to endow all, and yet do
perceive that time has been, that all our Churches, the whole land thorough,
have been endowed both with convenient gleebe and their full tithes in kind,
I persuade my self, if we had that true zeal to the Church, and unfeigned love
to religion, that the first Christians (which so endowed our Churches) had,
that the ruins, rents and maymes of our Churches might with facility and
celerity enough be repaired and amended: the rather for that, as in ruins and
rubble of old buildings, there rests in the place, matter convenient and
sufficient for performance thereof.

2. When as I do find, that for long ago, in time of darkest popery, one man
alone, one bishop of the land, I mean that famous Bishop Grosthead then Bishop
of Lincoln could and did obtain of the Pope, being yet scant his friend,
power and authority both to institute vicaridges in Churches impropriate* where
none were, and where such were as seemed too slenderly provided of sufficient
allowance, to augment the same as to him should seem expedient. The coppie of
which letters papal I have for the worthiness thereof, as in Matthew. Paris I
find them recorded, Matthew. Paris.
here inserted.

Innocentius Episcopus etc. Cum sicut accepimus in tua ciuitate et Diocaesi,
nonnulli religiosi et alij collegiati ecclesias parochiales in proprios vsus
obtineant, in quibus nimis exiles, aut nullae taxatae sunt vicariae.
Fraternitatituae per authoritatem summam mandamus, quod in ijsdem ecclesijs de
ipsarum prouentibus vicarias instituas, et institutas exiles adaugeas vice
nostra: prout iuxta consuetudinem patriae secundum Deum videris expedire, non
obstantibus si praedicti exempti sint, aut alias muniti Apostolicis priuilegijs
sieve indulgentijs, per quae idimpediri vel differri possit. etc. in English
thus: Innocentius Bishop, etc. For So Much as we are credibly informed, that
within your City and Diocese many religious and other collegiate persons do
hold parochial Churches unto their own proper uses, in the which vicaridges
either too small and slender, or none at all are settled. Unto your Brother hood
by our special and supreme authority we do command, that in the said
Churches of the prouentions, and emoluments of the same, These two things duly
and well performed, would very much amend the poor and wretched estate of our
clergy.
vicaridges you do institute, and such as being already instituted, * are
slender, and not sufficiently endowed, you do on our behalf augment:
according as after the custom of the country to the Honor of God, you shall
see it to be expedient: Notwithstanding that any the persons aforesaid be
exempt, or otherwise fensed with Apostolical privileges or indulgences, by
which the same might be hindered or differred. And whosoever shall you
contradict or withstand therein, that you do by censures ecclesiastical, by
virtue of our power Apostolical to you committed, them punish and condignely
repress. Dated at L. vij. Kalend. of October. in the year of our Popedom the
viij. which was, says our English history Anno. Dom. 1252. This memorable
monument finding, which he good man did execute Cum effectu, I do reason thus
with my self. If this one good Bishop in the days of utter darkness could
obtain of the Pope, though scant his friend, authority to repair the
Churches of his Diocese in this sort, for the better sustentation of blind
Mass priests, why may it not be possible that the most reverend Archbishops
and other grave, wise and zealous in the land, might by some good means best
known to their own wisdoms, provide and settle maintenance in their Churches
for the learned, able, and worthy preachers of the Gospel.

3. The very state of the time present does so necessarily require some
alteration to be made, some augmentation of our maintenance to be yielded, that
he that shall deny it, may justly be thought to speak against all reason and
conscience. For why must our paies, our stipends, our portions alone stand now
as they did for an hundred years ago? And why are we alone unworthy that
favor which is affoorded (and iusty too) unto laborers, servants, artisans,
and to whom not? will they tell us, things done cannot be undone? Humanum est
errare, in errore vero perseuerare, diabolicum.

4. Besides which (though the state of times were alike) there ought some other
manner of consideration to be had of our clergy men that now are, then
heretofore there was or seemed to be needful. For respecting learning and
sufficiency, our clergy are not (God be thanked) as heretofore, (even our
enemies being judges) blind and unlearned bussards, idolatrous and massing
priests, of whom little more was expected, then to be able to turn their
Portuise, or to read plain english, nor are they now like Ieroboams priests
taken out from amongst the lowest and dregs of the people, for whom that they
had, or that they got in the ministry (their deserts considered) was enough,
if not too much: But a great number of them now are (and long or this, if due
provision for them had been made, many more there would have been) learned
and worthy men: men whose education and time spent, whose friends expenses and
great charge before they come into the ministry: men whose present labors
and assiduous pains in their ministry, do both deserve and require better
regard. What comfort shall they find for the time present, and what reward
shall they reap for the time past if their best preferment be so little: and
their highest pitch so low? Can they continue and maintain their studies with
nothing? or is it intended so soon as they are placed, they shall, for lack of
means to maintain them and their studies scoller-like, give over their
studies, and betake themselves to idleness or drudgerie?

Vox Daemonis, non hominis, a speech not befitting the mouth of a Christian. 1.
Tim. 4. 3.
Neither will I stand to prove that we ought to have such maintenance
provided us, as may suffice for us and our families too, if we be disposed to
enter that state of life, which is as free and as fit for us, as for any other
estate of men: but refer them that make a question thereof to the practice of
the first and best times, in which (for our own Church) they may see, if they
will not be blind, that the provision they made for their Curch-men, was
every where such, as was both able for, and befitting only a married clergy:
and not fear to conclude, that until the like be made for our Clergy, in
some measure, which in many places by the one half at least is wanting, our
people have not done their duty in this behalf, but do show themselves
unworthy of such worthy men as the Lord does send unto them, and unworthy of
the Gospel and gladtidings of salvation, which they preach among them.

Thus Christian Reader, having imparted unto thee in part and in brief, what
has induced me to the hope I have, to see at length the cause I handle in my
succeeding Sermon, better respected, whereof thou may read more what I have
written otherwhere, as one zealous for the house of God, whose stones it
pittieth me to see still lying M. Minist. cap. 7. et. 10.
in the dust, praying God to put into the heart of our thrice noble, gracious
and religious King (into whose hand he has put the sword of Sovereign
authority) not only a good inclination and forward disposition this way, but
also an irreuocable and irresistable resolution to execute his supreme power
for the reformation of this evil, and extirpation of this shame of our Church,
and disgrace of our Nation. I pray thee for our Lord Jesus Christ's sake, and
for the love of the spirit, that thou would Romans 15.
strive with me by prayers to God for me, that I may be delivered from them
which are disobedient and evil minded men, and that this my service and labor
for the Church and house of God in our land, may be accepted of the Saints.
Which God for his Gospel sake vouchsafe. Amen.

Thine ever in the Lord R. Eb.

THE SECOND SERMON.
MATH. 22. 21. Render unto God, those things that be Gods.
Our blessed Savior Luke 12. 42.
Luke 12. notes it to be the office of a faithful and wise steward, and
disposer of the mysteries of God, as Paul calls him 1. Cor. 4. 1.
1. Cor. 4. to give unto the household their due portion, in due season; which
Erasm. Epist. ad Iod. Ionam.
says a great clarke, consists in these points promere cum res postulat;
cuique promere quod est accommodum, and promere quod satis est, that is, in
delivering the meat of the word at a fit hour; in delivering that which is
good and wholesome; and in delivering that which is sufficient. For Galen. de
Sanitate ^uenda. lib. 1. page 65.
in our corporal food we observe these three things, First, a fit time to
eat in; Secondly the good quality, and Thirdly the convenient quantity of
our food: otherwise it is not dispensatio, a disposing, Bern. de. Co^^ sid.
lib. 3.
says Saint Bernard, but Dissipatio, a wasting, having heretofore to dispose
unto you, the meat laid up in this garner, and the little wheat I found in
this vallie, how I dispensed it unto you then, either in regard of the due
season, or in respect of the quality of that I delivered, vos ipsi iudicate,
you must be judges. But least I should have been offensive in the quantity I
made an end, Bern. super Cant. ser. 36.
Vbi finis non erat, where was no end, as they are enforced to do, that are,
as was the high Steward of this family, when he said. Ioh. 16. 12.
Multa ha^beo dicere quae non potestis portare modo: I have yet many things to
say unto, but ye cannot bear them away now; straightened either with the
deepenes of the matter, or (as I then) with the shortness of the time,
wherefore since now by course we are returned, as the Son to his place, I to
speak, and you to hear, Bern. de. Council. lib. 1.
recurrat stibus ad suam materiam, let my tongue return to that part of my
text where then I left, without any long repetition of that is past, saving
only thus far, vt recolant qui audierant, and discant qui non aderant, that
is, that they may call the whole to mind which heard it, and they may learn
somewhat thereof which heard it not, that it may please you to remember that I
divided this my text into a twofould duty. A duty A brief repetition of the
former sermon
to Caesar and a duty to God. The duty to Caesar in the words formerly
handled, wherein I observed, first the particulars of that duty to be these
six: fear, honor, obedience, tribute, defense and prayer: secondly, I added
some motives to the performance of this sixe-fould duty, and they were
principally four. viz. The ordination of Caesar, the heinousness of the crime
of disloyalty against Caesar; the punishments of that sin from God and man,
and the rewards of loyalty externally, internally and eternally, to them that
faithfully walk in the performance of these duties to Caesar.

It remains now, that by your accustomed patience I The latter part of the
text now to be handled.
should speak of the other duty, the last in the text, but in practice not
the least, that is, our duty to God, in these words Reddite quae sunt Dei,
Deo, that is, Give unto God, the things that are Gods. Of which they being
many, some spiritual, some temporal, the shortness of our ordinary time, not
permitting me to speak of both sorts, leaving wholly the former, though the
principal, as which are so commonly handled by others, that Augustine
Magis desiderant lectorem, quam expositorem, that is, there want readers
rather then expositors for them: I will, (as either more proper to the state of
my text which Aug. in locum Sermon. 129. Idem Tom. 10. Homil. 48. And. Hispan
reg. decim. 4. Scourge of Sacrelidge. D. 8. a. and H. 5. a. fig. 8. Abulens. in
Mat. 22. qu. 101. Glos. ordin.
in the judgment even of the ancients deuotes unto us, of our temporal
things, the goods of this life, what sort or what part there of is due to
Caesar, and what to God, or more pertinent to my present purpose, which is most
to insist upon that point which is least known, and to urge that hardest,
which is worst observed) spend my speech in declaring unto you, what temporal
things are due to God. For as it is a thing already granted and lately taught
you. That besides the fear, the honor, the obedienee and the other like
duties that we owe to Caesar, we owe him also a part of our goods; we must
yield him Tribute, custom and other like, so it cannot be denied, and shall
presently be taught you. That besides the spiritual duties, which we owe to
God, as faith, fear, love, trust, hope, etc. We do owe him also a part of our
temporal goods, to be employed in his service, that so, as he is Lord of all,
of our selves body and soul, and of all that we have, life and goods, so by
all, and with all, he may for all be glorified.

And to this purpose directly, as I take it, tends our text. The state and
summary sense of the text.
For question being moved, not, what things were due to Caesar? but, whether
this one thing, reddere censum, to pay him tribute, were lawful or not? our
Saviors answer is, not to the general, but to the special, Pay, Give to
Caesar these things, viz. tribute, custom, etc. which are Caesar's, as a part
of his crown, and a necessary appurtenance to his imperial dignity, and a
part of your loyal duty, and faithful service to Caesar, and as for God, who
has his things severed from Caesar's, and Abulens. in Mat. quest. 102.
ought not to be wronged for righting of Caesar, render to him also those
things, vix. his hallowed and consecrated things, his appropriated dues and
sacred portions of your goods, which by law of God, and ordinance
ecclesiastical are his, and which without wrong to him, and ruin to his
Church, cannot from him be taken or detained.

The text that I may by Gods gracious assistance with the more plainness for
your understanding, the more ease for my proceeding, and the more brevity for
the time, explicate unto you, I do, a little inuerting the order thereof,
divide into three parts. First, the things commanded, The division of the text.
Secondly, The commandment: and Thirdly, the reason of the commandment.

1. The things commanded are to be considered, first, in their nature, what
manner of things they are, namely things temporal: Secondly, in their number,
for the word is plural things, how many they are, or how many sorts thereof.

2. The commandment has three branches, that is to say. First, the person
commanding. Secondly, the persons commanded, and Thirdly, the form of the
commandment.

The person commanding, personally is Christ the son of God, and withal, for
as much as he is, the wisdom of the father, God himself.

The persons commanding, particularly, and the^ the Jews, the Pharisees etc.
that moved the question, but generally and indefinitely under their person,
all men, both Jews and gentiles, all Christians.

The form of the commandment, Give, respects

2. things viz the matter, what, the things of God. manner how. And this has
an extent to the 1. mind, wherewith, give freely without grudging, or any
sinister and mercenarie respect. 2. hand, how, give fully without diminution.
3. time, when, give readily, duly, without delay or have.


3. The reason of the commandment or fact required, why we ought to give to
God such things, and that is, because they are Gods, for it is just and meet,
that we render to every one quod suum est, his own.

We have now the whole sum and particulars of the text: of which, and of
every of which, briefly and in order. He that has ears to hear, let him
hear. The things required, a part of our temporal goods.


1. The things required in their nature are temporal, or, if I may use the
same word the Apostle does 1. Cor. 9. 11.
(...) fleshly or carnal, such as pertain to the use of the body, and this
present frail and transitory life. Of which both life and goods, since the
Lord is author, for he it is in quo viuimus, mouemur and sumus. Act. 17. Act.
17. 28. 1. Tim. 6. 17. 1. Chr. 29. 11.
in whom we live, move, and have our being, and which Psalm. 24. 1. and. 50. 10.
gives us all things abundantly to possess: and likewise owner as of whom in
Capite, we do hold whatsoever we have, for Greg. de. dec. passim. Rebuff. de.
dec. quest. 2. fig. 2. E. P. Sermon. on. Genesis 14. 20.
Domini est terra, and Plenitudo eius, that is, The earth is the Lords, and all
the plenty and furniture thereof, it is just and meet that in Greg. de. dec.
passim. Rebuff. de. dec. quest. 2. fig. 2. E. P. Sermon. on. Genesis 14. 20.
Signum vniuersalis Dominij, in token of his sole, supreme and vndependant
Dominion over all, and interest unto all, some part of the things of this
nature also, be as his Andr. Hisp. reg Calvin. in. dec. 1. Hebr. 7. 4.
Sacrum vectigal, Sacred tribute or portion, reserved for and rendered unto him.
Offerimus Deo Bona, etc. We offer unto God our goods (says Iren. lib. 4. cap.
34.
Irenaeus) as tokens or testimonies of our thankfulness for that we receive
of him: knowing it to be most true, that (as long ago Orig. in. Number. 18.
Homil. 11.
observed Origin) He which worshipeth God? Fenton. Sermon. on. pro. 20. 25. page
19. House. Sermon. 2. on. Mat. 21. p. 18
must by gifts and oblations acknowledge him Lord of all.

Add to these the use and end whereunto our God has assigned and reserved
these things, namely, not for his own spending, for our Psalm. 50. 13. God
maintains the ministers of his Church at his own charge.
God eats not the flesh of calves, nor drinks the blood of goats, but for
the use and sustentation of his peculiar servants the selected ministers of the
Church and temple. That so, being always to have, that he might rightly in
public be honored, priests and ministers of his own choice, he might have
also De suo, of his own goods, wherewith to feed, keep and sustain them.
This I take to be clear by Gods own speech unto Moses, when having set his
mark upon diverse things, calling them 1. Numb. 18.
mine offerings, my hallowed things, etc. he adds, verse. 8.
These have I given to the Sons of Leui. Why? uers. 21.
for the service which they do me in the tabernacle, and verse. 31.
it is your wages, which I give you for your service* which words do plainly
show; That God would, that such as attend him, from age to age, should receive
their maintenance as his pay, and not as men's: as from his hands and not from
man's, in lieue of the wages and reward which for their service, it was fit and
necessary that he their Lord and master and not men, should find and allow
them. Whereupon he says, not to the people (the manner of speech is very
remarkable) You shall give the^ your offerings, for the service which they do
you: but Ego dedi, I have given the^ mine offerings for the service which they
do unto me, as if he should say, These things are mine, not yours. To me you
shall pay the^, that as mine, not as yours, they may receive the^; and so I may
pay them with mine own hands, and of mine own goods, and not they serve me, or
I retain them, at others cost, That they have, of me they have it, and not of
you. The same in effect has the blessed Apostle. 1. Cor. 9. where he says,
Ita constituit Dominus, etc. 1. Cor. 9. 14.
So has the Lord ordained, for the time of the Gospel, no less then for the
times before and under the law, that Qui euangelium praedicant, ex euangelio
viuant: that is, they which preach the Gospel, should live of the Gospel,
Theophilact. in 1. Cor. 9.
non ex Discipulorum facultatibus, sedex euangelio, that is, not upon the
Disciples goods, but upon their own, gotten by preaching of the Gospel Idem.
Faem. Mon. in the conclusion O. 2. a.
Neque enim inquit, tu his alimonium subministras, The number or part of the
things demanded. The Leuits Lot.
sed propria quaedam industria ipsos alit. For (says the Apostle) it is not
thou that give them maintenance, but it is their own industry, that is the
preaching of the Gospel, that feeds and maintains them; and so they be not
beholding to men for their sustenance; but to God: and they do live, not on
other men's goods, but on their own.

2. We see the nature of the things demanded. Let us search also their number.
Things they are, therefore more then one, or of one sort. Take we the words in
the present time when Christ spoke them, we shall soon find, that the things
of God were many, as, Number. 35. Josh. 21.
1. many goodly towns and cities which their suburbs. 2. Exodus 25. 2. and.
35. 5. Leuit. 2. 3. 10. and. 6. 16. and. 7. 10. 29.
Offerings of sundry sorts. 3. Leuit. 19. 24. and 23. 10.
First fruits of all things. 4. Exodus 13. 1. and. 22. 29. and. 34. 19. Numb.
3. 13.
First borne of man and beast. 5. Numb. 6. ^0. Leuit. 27. 2.
Vows of sundry sorts. 6. Leuit. 27. 14. Numb. 5. 10.
Consecrated things, man or beast, house or ground. 7 Numb. 5. 8.
Things lost: and with all these and above all these. 8. Number. 18. 21.
The tithes of all things. Whereupon we may well note by the way. If such
plentiful and honorable maintenance, by the law of God, in Gods wisdom,
were allotted to the priests and Levites of the law, no man of understanding
may deny, that as great a portion at the least, does in all equity Downam.
Ser. o^. 1. Tim. 3. 1. De consecr. did. i. c. Tabernaculu^ Tho. 2. 2ae. q.
arg. 8. Lud. viu. De Contrit. fol. 122. faem. Mon. O. 4. a Gods portion n^w in
time of the Gospel. 1. Tithes personal and prediall.

q Aug. de. rect. cath. conuersat. Idem. Sermon. de Temp. 219. Idem. de. verb.
Apost. Sermon. 47.
that as we are more bound unto the Lord in all duties of thankfulness since
the Messiah exhibited, then they to whom he was only promised: and as in the
same respect the ministry of the Gospel far excels the priesthood of
the law, so the portion which is due from us to God, and from him to his
ministers, ought to be answerable, at least little inferior. But if we
restrain the words to the time ensuing, that is, the time of the Gospel, they
will be found to be in plurality too, of more sorts then one. There belong yet
to God.

1. Decimae rerum omnium, the tithes of all things, tam personales quam
praediales, as well personal as prediall o vnusquisque de qualicunque ingenio
vel artificio viuit, ex inde deo decimas persoluat. Every man (says S.
Augustine) by what means or trade soever he lives, must thereof pay the tenth
to God. He ought to consider, that All is of God that he lineth by, whether it
be the land or the sea, or whatsoever else, and that if God had not given it
him, he had had nothing. Aug. Sermon. de. Temp. 219. Glos. in c. quicunque. 26.
q. 7. Hostiens. in. Su^. Barba. consil 49. And. His. reg. Decim. 10. Anthon.
Butr. in cap. Paro chiano^. C. 16. q. 1. R^uertmini.
Quod si decimas non habes fructuum terrenoru^, quod habet agricola, quodcunque
te pascit ingeniuns, a deo est, and inde decimas expetit, vnde viuis. If
(happily then) thou have no tithes of the fruits of the earth, as has the
husbandman, yet know that whatsoever means to live by thou have, it is all of
God, and (therefore) of that thou do live by, does he demand his tithes. De
militia (igitur) de negotio, de artificio read decimas. Therefore Pay thou thy
tithes, be it of warfar, of trade, or of handicraft. De dec. c. 23. Ibid. cap.
ad. Apostolicae. Extra. cod. c. in aliquibus. item. c pastoralis.
Fidelis enim homo, de omnibus, quae licite potest acquirere, decimas erogare
tenetur, for every faithful man is bound of all that he lawfully gets to lay
out the tenth to God. Sieve proueniant Rebuff. de dec. quest. 3. fig. 29. 30.
epraedio vel pecore, vel ex artificio, industria, scientia, militia,
negociatione, vel ex quolibet actu licito, that is, whether they do arise
(says a great Lawyer) of the ground, or of the cattle or of any trade,
industry, science, warfarre, traffic, or any other lawful act or employment
whatsoever.

2. As once the Lord had cities and suburbs for the sons of Leui, so has
he now, and no less necessarily ought he to have, houses of habitation and
lands adjacent for the eommodious aboade of the servants of his son, which
are justly called the gleebe or temporalities of the Church, because being of
old given up As appears in sundry old and ancient charts, donations and
records.
Deo and ecclesiae, to God and the Church, and most solemnly devoted and
consecrated ad pios vsus, to holy and religious uses, do rest (but where
Sacrilege has prevailed) in the hands of God, and tenure of the Church and
churchmen, Act. 5. Fulk. ibid.. 7.
neither can be alienated from them without impiety and certain peril of Gods
curse and theirs, which even Capit. Carul. lib. 6. c. 284.
with like terms bestowed them, and in the firmest manner they could,
confirmed them unto the Church.

3. Thirdly, there belong yet to God Oblationes populi, the oblations or
offerings of the people, which having a 3. Offerings.
ground and beginning no less ancient then the Act. 4. 34. Tertul. in. Apol.
cap. 39.
very first and best age of the Christian world Deuteronomy. 16. 17.
at least, cannot but by very perpetuity and antiquity prove themselves to
be both due and also acceptable to the Lord.

4. If any being in trouble of mind as 3. Sam. 1. 10.
Hanah; in 4. Vows.
fear of enemies, as Psalm. 66. 12.
David; in danger of sickness as Esaias 38. 1.
Hezechia, or in any other distress, calamity or adversity shall Genesis 28.
20. Judge 11 30. 2. Sam. 15. 7.
vow unto God any part of his goods, and Numb. 30. 3. Deuteronomy. 23. 21.
bind his soul upon it, to give the same unto the Lord, or to the Church, if
the Lord shall be merciful unto him, and rid him out of thrall; it is out of
all question, that the thing, so vowed Number. 30. Leuit. 27. Eccles. 5. 3.
holy unto the Lord, and the use thereof belongs accordingly unto the Church.

5. Generally and in a word, whatsoever a thing it be, that any of his free
heart, religious custom, or through duty has given, offered, vowed, or
consecrated unto God, And. Hispan. reg. dec. 6.
it is no longer common or profane, but Leuit. 27. 9. 10
holy to the Lord: and the right, property and possession thereof is, and from
thence-foorth becomes merely and wholly his. The power and liberty which God
from the beginning of times reserved to himself to take, and permitted to all
men to give, and for exercise and signification of their piety to God, to
alienate from themselves some part of the worldly goods he has blessed them
withal, is neither ceased nor altered, but as a moral duty belonging to all
times, and to all men, requiring them Prou. 3. 9.
To honor the Lord with their substance, is in force still.

The second general part of the Text.
FRom the things commanded, let us come to the commandment, wherein I have
already prescribed unto my The commandment.
self these three considerations, viz. The person commanding. 2. The persons
commanded, and 3. the form of the Commandment.

1. The person commanding is Christ, whose person, he being the Mat. 28. 20.
author of the Gospel, the 1. Cor. 1. 24. Collos. 2. 3.
very wisdom of the father, and John 3. 2.
a teacher come from God, may inform and confirm us two things, the one is,
that this commandment is the mind of God, the will of our heavenly father.
The doctrine is infalliblie true.
Worthy therefore and necessary of all men to be credited, received and
obeyed, in as much as the father himself, having from heaven proclaimed of him
Luke 9. 35.
ipsum audite, hear him, has sealed all his doctrine for heavenly, and his
precepts for perfect and authentical, wherefore as this very doctrine, the
words of my text, did, for the present, stop the mouths of his very
adversaries, and made them all, having nothing to say there against, Mat. 22.
22.
much to wonder, such grace was in his lips, such majesty in the words of
his mouth: so, and much more then so, ought the same words to settle and
satisfy the mind and judgment of all those that profess themselves his
disciples, and favorers of his Gospel.

The other is, that this precept pertains directly and This doctrine
pertains directly to the time of the Gospel.
properly to the time of the Gospel, no less the^ of the law, and is a part,
if not a fundamental part, and very Original of that evangelical ordinance
of the Lords mentioned by Saint Paul. 1. Cor. 9. where he says 1. Cor. 9. 14.
Bulling. dec. 5. Sermon. 10.
Ita dominus constituit vt qui euangelium praedicant, ex euangelio viuant, that
is, So has the Lord (Jesus) ordained, and made it an everlasting law for the
time of the Gospel, that they which preach the Gospel, should live of the
Gospel. And therefore says our Savior testifying it, God has Sua, some
temporal things even now that be his, as well as Caesar: some certain things
whereof a man may say, These be Caesar's, and These be Gods, let such as like
not the particulars before named and claimed to be Gods, show us from Christ
his mouth, or from his Apostles at the least, what those things be, whereto God
may make claim.

For mine own part, I give more credit to Saint Augustine, who alleging and
so expounding this text, Aug. Tom. 10. Homil. 48. and. in Psalm. 146. C. 16. qu.
1. C. Reuertimini.
says, Caesari census, decimae deo, that is, Tribute belongs to Caesar, Tithes
to God: and asks If tithes be not paid, how God has those things that be
Gods: and to Saint Origin who writing upon our Saviors words. Matthew. 23. These
ought ye to have done, and yet not to leave the other undone: Origin. in Math.
23. Abulens. ibid. quest. 56.
expounds that to be a moral precept, no less for the use of all
Christians, then of the Jews; and accounts that by these words, our Savior
gave his approbation for payment of tithes in time of the Gospel. Likewise
unto Saint Chrysostom upon the same place, saying Chrysostom. in Math. Hom. 41.
Iustitiam, miserecordiam and fidem propter gloriam suam, mandauit Deus, sed
decimas propter sacerdotes, that is, Justice, mercy and faith has God
commanded for his own glory, but tithes for his priests sake. To Hier. in
Malac. 3. 11.
Saint Hier. who upon Malachiah 3. where God bids us bring all the tithes into
his barn, says, Ecclesiae Populis praeceptum est dare decimas, that is, The
payment of tithes is a precept that ought to hold in the people of the
Christian Church no less then among the Jews. And in a word, to Gualf. Strab.
de reb. Eccles. capit. 87. Houend. part. 2. cap. de dec.
all the ancient writers and Church, which (as otherwhere at large M. Min. c.
6. Carlt. Treatise of Tithes.
I have showed) from the very time of the Apostles, even unto our present
days, no many until the time and depth too of all corruptions, for the
saluing of the Popes sacrilegious attempts, gaine-saying, have most constantly
held. That they are Gods, and C. de dic. c. 14. Parochianos. Ridi. vicu. p. 164.
non ab hominibus sed ab ipso domino insitutas esse, that is, have not their
institution from men, but from the Lord himself: then to thousands of such as
without the authority of the word, and judgment of the ancients, presume to
obtrude unto us for the contrary, either other men's late vpstart opinions, or
their own bare assertions, improbable collections. More, for that no man can
hitherto show (as Gualt. Homil in Math. 23. Ze^per. de legib. lib. primo.
Rebuff. de deo. qu. i. fig. 13. 14. faem Mon. n. i. b. Hooker. polit. Eccles.
lib. 5.. 7. 9. Carlt. ir. of tithes c. 5. page 25.
others well observe) that the law of tithes was ever yet abrogated by God: and
lastly, seeing the Church of God has, for many ages past, consecrated them to
God for the service of the Church, and so b bound her self to the payment of
them, and invested God with the possession of the^, I hold it to be a point
altogether out of question, that they be Gods proper inheritance; so that it is
utterly vain and superfluous, now to doubt and inquire whether they be a
matter of divine right? and, double sacrilege to take them away from God, whom
God and man have made his.

As for the gleebe of the Church, the offerings and vows of the people, which
with Tertul. in apolog. Cap. 39. Semel Deo dicatum non est ad vsus humanos
vlterius transferendum. Decet. de reg. Iuris. 6.
Tertull. we may call Deposita Pietatis, the very pledges and testimonies of
piety and devotion, it is so out of all controversy that * Things once
consecrated to God, and dedicated to holy uses, may not return to profane
usage, nor be alienated from God to man any more; that no House. Sermon. i. on
Mat. 22. p. 20 Fent. Sermon. on. prou. 20. 25. page 15. Down. Sermon. on. 1. Tim.
3. 1.
Divine I think will contradict it. If the thing be abused, the use is to be
reformed, but the property is still the Lords, and no man can take it from
him. The law is plain for it Leuit. 27. Leuit. 27. 28. Capit. Carul. lib. 6.
cap. 285.
Nothing separated from common use, may be sold nor redeemed, which law being
moral as well as judicial, in as much as it ever was, is, and shall be
lawful for man to offer, give, and vow unto the Lord his God, can be no less
in force to us since Christ, then it was to the Church of God before Christ.
The practice is as clear. Number. 16. The Number. 16. 38.
Censors once offered to the Lord might not be put to common use again, but
must be reserved to the use of the Tabernacle, as holy to the Lord by the
oblation thereof. And when as we do read Act. 5. Down. vbi. supra
Anan. and Saphira his wife in the time of the Gospel to be no less liable
to the speedy vengeance and dreadful indignation of God for taking again to
themselves a part of that themselves had consecrated to God, g Dan. 5.
then was 2. Mac. 3.
Belshazzar for polluting the holy vessels, or C. decimae. 16 qu. 1. 6. Tua.
glos. C. Omnes. de. maiorit. and obed. C. cum quis. arg. l. assumptio. ff. ad
municipia. Rebuff de dec. qu. 5. fig. 25. Andr. Hispan. reg. dec. ^. 11.
Corset. in tract. de pot. reg. q. 37.
Heliodorus for inuading the treasure of the temple in time of the law, let us
assure our selves, that we have as little liberty now as then, to set fingers
upon the things of God: and are as nie unto cursing. But heerof hereafter.

2. The persons commanded are indefinite, Give ye. And The persons commanded.
indeed the person commanding having authority over all, the commandment
must by consequence extend unto None exempted.
all, i neither Jew nor Gentile, pagan nor Christian, can claim exemption.
None so mighty that is greater, nor any so mean that he is less, then a
subject to God and his ordinance. And therefore as every subject Caesar has
must give to Caesar, that which from him is or may be due, the things of
Caesar: so every servant God has, must yield unto God, that which from him to
God is or may be due, the things of God. The citizen or townesman, has no more
freedom then the countriman; the tradesman or artificer then the plowman; the
merchant or mariner then the landman; the lawyer, physician or any other like,
then the husbandman: but as 1. Cor. 4. 7.
all have received of God, so must they all give to God: and as they are all
under God, so must they Orig. in Number. Homil. 11.
De datis and muneribus, out of his own gifts and benefits bestowed on them,
honor God, for 1. Chr. 29. 14. Not townsmen, tradesmen, artificers, etc. Vide
the M. Min. p. 81. and 32
all is of him.

I know it well, that men of that fashion, I mean townsmen, tradesmen,
artificers, etc. presume much of their liberty and immunitie this way. But
till they have proved. 1. That they owe less subjection unto God, the^ the
others. 2. That they have not from God their worldly goods as well as the
other: and 3. That they have less need and use of the Church and minister
then the others, they shall never be able to prove any more exemption then
others.

Which yet since such for the most part, will needs practice, and against all
right and reason, law of God and man retain, most just and right it is, Math.
7. 2.
that with what measure they meat to others, with the same they should be
measured unto again: which is very often For in towns generally are the
weakest ministers, save where by some extraordinary supply they are relieved.
Nor yet the poorer sort.
fulfilled unto them by heap, while, as they defraud God of his carnal
things, they also are defrauded of their spiritual: and as they leave his
ministers hungry and needy for the body, so they remain hungry and needy, and
in a manner destitute of sustenance for their souls.

If any will pretend poverty and plead want, let him know, that even Luke 21. 3.
Deuteronomy 16. 17.
the widows mite was accepted and received too; and remember, that God will
have every man, poor and rich, to give to him Eccles. 35. 10. Leuit. 12.
according to the gift of his hand, that is, as his ability is, be it much or
little; and will have none to appear 1. Cor. 12.
before the Lord empty: that so he may be honored of all, without respect of
persons, and he receive his due from all, who gives to all Pro vt vult, even as
he will.

Wherefore all cauils, delays, and excuses laid aside, Ambr. Ser. de Quadrag.
c. quicunque. 1. in 16. q. 7.
quicunque recognouerit in se, quod fideliter decimas non dederit, modo emendet
quod minus fecit. First, whosoever shall remember himself, that he has not
heretofore paid his tithes and other duties faith fully, let him hence forward
amend that wherein he has failed, and carefully perform unto the Lord that
which he, in this behalf expects and exacteth at his hand.

And for so much as the Magistrate Romans 13. 4.
bears not the sword for naught, nor fits in the seat of God in vain, we
must observe, that as it is his duty, to be like a good captain in the field
foremost in action; and as a good ruler in house, example to the rest; for the
Magistrate should be Lex animata, that is, the very law it self alive, that
men in him might see by deeds, what they hear and learn from him and his
laws by words; so it is his duty in this very point; First carefully to
render for his own part Andr. Hisp. reg. dec. 11. Cerset. in tract. de potest.
reg. q. 37.
out of that he possesses quae Dei, sunt Deo, that is, to God the things that
are Gods. Secondly, then by good and wholesome Laws and ordinances, having not
only vim directiuam a force directive for all, (so they are rather counsels
then Laws) but also vim coactiuam, a force coactiue for the bridling and
enforcing of some, to provide (as far as in him lies) that such as be under
his command may do the same.

Wherefore let such as be in authority (as it becomes the Isai. 49. 23.
nursing Fathers of the Church, and Basil. Daron. page 43.
them that count it An admonition unto Magistrates.
a principal part of their charge, to cherish good pastors) set before their
eyes the religious example of good king 2. Chro. 31. 4. Down. Sermon. on 1. Tim.
3. 1.
Hezekiah, who to the end the Priests and Levites might be encouraged in the
Law of the Lord, took a strict and due course that the tithes of all things,
and other portions belonging to God and his Priests, might justly be restored
and duly paid unto them: imitate the true zeal of that godly Ruler, Nehem.
13. 8.
Nehemia, who would not endure the alienation of one chamber of the Priests, to
the private use of Thobijah, and that never rested, till he had Nehe. 10 34.
restored to the Priests, and Levites of the house of God all their tithes,
offerings and other duties, that so, being duly provided for, they might not
forsake the house of God any more: and pace in the steps of that thrice
renowned and religious Emperor Constantine the great, which Herm. Gigas.
confirmed unto the Church the tithes of all things, and Zepper. de polit.
eccles. lib. pri. capit. 21. Zozom. hist. eccl. lib. 2. c. 4. Eusebius. de vit.
Constable. lib. 2. c. 36. et. lib. 10. c. 5. An Admonition to the Parliament.
restored unto it all such lands, fields, houses, etc. As in former times, the
time of peace, had been given to the Church, and in latter days, days of
persecution, had been taken from it again.

And our Parliaments I would beseech in the name of God, to be careful to avoid
that imputation which S. Paul lays upon the Jews, Romans 2. 21.
Thou abhorrest idols (says he) and do thou commit sacrilege? And Down.
sermon. on. 1. Tim. 3. 1.
let them consider, that if not to the full restitution of all impropriations,
(which at the dissolution of Abbeys justly ought and View of. L. page 169.
easily might have been made) they still remain deeply obliged, and for the
not restoring thereof the whole land stands in an high degree obnoxious to
the judgment of God: yet their sin cannot be little, which not restoring
them, have not provided for every such impropriated Church, a fit Vicaridge at
the least, so sufficiently endowed; First, with part of the gleeb, secondly
tithes as well great as small, and thirdly, other profits of the Church, that
so the vicar might be able: first, to do divine service, secondly; to inform
the people, and thirdly to keep hospitality, according to the very tenor and
letter of their own laws, enacted upon due and mature consideration of the
equity and necessity of such a course An. 15. Ric. 2. cap. 6. an. 4. Hen. 4.
cap. 12.
in time of Othobon. c. Quoniam de Appropriationibus Ecclesiarum
palpable blindness, as well An 1. Edu. 6. cap. 14.
as of better eye sight, As appears in the common forms of the Ordinations
of Vicaridges.
and intent and mind of even such as at first attempted that evil: that so
the people defrauded of their tithes, etc. might not with double sacrilege be
defrauded also of the food of their souls whilst left to the courtesy and
conscience of the Constit. eccles. can. 45. and. 46.
exempted Impropriator, which for the most part, is cruel, careless; and
covetous, they are committed to the refuse of the Clergy, such as will be hired
for least, Reynold in Obad. Ser. 2.
as if the old Proverb, best is best cheap were no longer true, but the new
practice, best cheap is best, were the right rule. And that little is the
Clergy of our land, specially the inferior Ministry of our Church beholding
unto them, which after so many spoils and injuries done thereunto, cannot
obtain so much only, as to have that remainder which is left, to be paid in
specie, or to be disburdened of those, or at least of some of those pretended
Rid. view. p. 160.
exemptions Carlet epist. dedic. House. on Math. 21. Sermon. 1. page 44.
hard customs, unreasonable compositions, pernicious prescriptions, and Ridl.
view of L. p. 113. 115.
odious prohibitions, wherewith it is daily more and more depressed and
impouerished, as if either that estate alone had already, and could not but
have, an Omnia been, or we alone, that be of the ministry, above all other
members of this commonwealth, were either no part of their charge, or not
worthy to be respected, righted and relieved.

Lastly, let Lawyers and Jurors, upon whose pleading and Ad admonition to
Lawyers and Jurors.
verdict those things do too often much depend, take heed that they do not
rashly and partially give away those things from God. The cause and right is
Gods, and therefore they must know, that in striking a poor Minister, and
wresting from him his tithes, and other dues, through his side they strike, and
wrong not the Church only, but God also, of whom we hold originaly, and in
Capite whatsoever is the Churches. It will ill excuse the one, that they plead
for their fee, and therefore must make candida de ^igris, et de candentibus
atra, Ovid. Metam. lib. 11. fab. 8.
of nothing something, like the Heathen Orators, which counted it their glory
Tull. de Orat. lib. primo. Erasm. Apotheg. lib. 8. Licost. Apoth. page 105.
to cast a mist before men's eyes, and make a bad cause seem good: nor acquit
and justify the other, that Foem. Monar.
they do gratify men of their own fashion, and do for them as they would be
done for in like case. These causes no less then any other should be handled
sincere et candide with all sincerity and indifferency. And reason it were
Ridl. view of page 133.
considering how much is already by sundry sacriledges, by pretense of law, by
alteration of times, and other vijs and modis injuriously taken from God and
the Church, they should favorably interpret the Laws to the good of the
Church, and restoring unto God, that which indeed is Gods, rather then, as
adding affliction to the afflicted, and trampling upon those that be already
under foot, make our burden still more and more heavy, as if there were a
continual and general conspiracy of the laity against the Clergy: they did
all thirst for that little as yet left us: held it a ruled case (the Foem.
Monar. n. 4. a. Rid. View of page 185.
modern practice makes it seem probable) that whatsoever cause comes into the
common Law for tithes, must go against us: and would teach us by often and
woeful experience, that Foem. Monar. n. 8. b.
we were better loose all, then sue for any, where the matter must come through
their hands. Howsoever, credible it is, that if those kind of persons were all,
and always as able and careful to make demonstration of Science and
conscience, as their place and charge requires they should be, it would go
better on our side, then often it does, and the old proverb Adag. Eras. page
161.
ouem lupo, not be so often verified, as now it is.

I come now to the third thing in the commandment, the form, which the very
word Give does inform us to be 3. The form of the commandment.
twofold, that is first for matter, what we must give? secondly; for manner,
how we must give?

For the matter, what must we give to God? Quae Dei sunt, those things that be
Gods, the very things themselves, every thing in his kind. And this I take to
be a point much to be respected, I mean, that men ought to give to We must
give to God his things in their own kind. M. Min. cap. 4.
God, not what pleases themselves, a little som-what in steed of that is his,
but they ought to lay him down the very thing it self, as it does arise, and
pay him his due in specie, that is, in its own kind.

In the Genesis 4. et 14. et. 28. et. 35. Israelies.
time of nature, Godly people observed it to the Examples of Patriarchs.
true God, as is evident. Genesis 4. et. 14. et. 28. et. 35.

The Jews in time of the Law continually did so, to the Priests and Levites
of that time. Examples and proofs thereof abound, as may easily and at large,
appear to him that has the leisure to peruse, which I have not to recite,
these places, Exodus 22. Number. 18. Nehem. 10. Mal. 3. etc.
Ezod. 22. Numb. 18. 2. Chron. 31. Nehem. 10. Malachy 3. Matthew. 23. Luke 18. 1.
Corin. 9. and other more.

And it is most certain Ridl. view of page 161. Heathens.
that for some ages of the Christian Christians.
world, howsoever now as tares into corn, ruins into an house, and rents into
a Garment, a very contrary practice be crept in, Christians generally observed
the like in time of the Gospel.

The heathen likewise, directed no doubt not only by natures light, but Carl.
treat. of tithes. cap. 2. fol. 10.
also by direction and tradition from the ancient Patriarks Noah and others,
performed the same unto those they took to be Gods; witness Plin. lib. 12. c.
14. e^ 20. et lib. 18. cap. 2.
Pliny speaking of the Romans, Sabeans and Ethiopians: and Festus.
Festus generally of all nations.

And very reason may assure and teach us this to be the best course that Rebuf.
de. dec. qu. 1 fig. 2. 4. 5. Idem. de congr. port. page 385. fig. 81. C. i. de
Prebend. in 6. Clem. ^. de in. patron. Willet. in Synop. contr. ^. qu. 6.
can be, the speediest, surest, easiest and safest manner of payment that may
be: and which is the thing of most special note, of all other courses, it is
least subject to alteration, because howsoever the prizes of things do rise
and fall, and daily change, yet the things themselves change not. And therefore
Hooker. pol. eccl. lib. 5.. 56.
nature which is Communis omnium pareus, one unto all, must needs be the most
indifferent standart betwixt God and man, the minister and people, that can be.
This way we should not be enforced A course very preposterous and unreasonable.
sore against our will, and to our great grief and loss, to take for our
goods, not, as al our parishoners may for theirs, that is, as things are now
worth, but as they were worth an hundred years ago: nor be compelled, will
we, nill we, to take money of others exceeding cheap for that, which presently
for our own necessaries, we must buy of others exceeding dear. A course so
against all sense and conscience, that if it were urged upon any but God and
his ministers, would have been righted (as reason were) full long ago; and
such a course, as if they that urge it and hold it most against us Foem. Man.
^. 8. a
should be tied unto but a little while, and enforced to endure in their own
lands, farms, corn and cattle, they would soon cry out with open mouth to
be intolerable, and not suffer their eyes to sleep, or their eyelids to
slumber, till they had found out a remedy for it.

Redemption of tithes in some cases may be tolerable.
I deny not, but that if men be desirous to redeem their tithes, and to pay
money in steed thereof, this may lawfully be done. Provided always that it be
with the free will, and unconstrained consent of the present Incumbent.
Secondly, that the redemption be reasonable, that is, Carlt. treat. of tithes
c. 5. fol. 26 Nouel. constable. collat. 2.
answerable at least to the present value of the thing it self redeemed.

My Prouiso has sufficient warrant. For it is grounded first upon the law of
God, by which no redemption of any thing consecrate, or of any tithe, was
permitted, but so as the party would pay for it. How? Leuit. 27. 12. 20. 30.
as the priest himself should value it, and adding a fifth part of the price
more for amends: secondly upon our own ecclesiastical Law, which is Lind^.
Prouinc. lib. 3. de dec. et ob. passim, Exigantur decimae, et prout expedit,
ecclesiae persoluantur, si Rector ita maluerit: Nisi parochiani velint pro
talib. competentem facere redemptionem; idque ad valorem decima, modo ne in
fraudem et damnum ea fiat ad commodum eccl. scilicet ad just. valorem, vel
amplius.
full of clauses to this purpose: and in practice whereof, the Church being
then the stronger side, we may easily conceive would admit no other redemption
of tithes but such, as it took to be beneficial and profitable, not
prejudicial and hurtful to it self. And to the same do Rebuff. de dec. q.
13. f. 35. C. Veniens. de Transact. Transactio super dec. futur. quamdiu viuit
Curatus valet, sed eo mortus extinguitur reg. iur. ant. 54. Duaren. de Benef.
et minist. eccles. lib. 8. c. 1.
others well agree, where they signify and determine that the Act of the
present Incumbent, as who has but the use, and not the m inheritance of that
is Gods, ought not to prejudice the right and liberty of his successor.

This being the law of God before Christ, and of the Church since, grounded
also upon great reason and equity, as Matthew. 17. 12
That we do to others, as we would others should do to us, that we 1. These. 4.
6.
defraud not, nor oppress any man, much less not God nor his Churh. That we
Reg. iur. ant. 206.
take not from any man his goods against his will, or without, just and
compotent satisfaction, we may clearly conclude, that then only do men give
God the things of God, what is his right and due, as they ought, when as we
(his ministers) are free and at our own choice, to take, as in ancient time we
were, either money, or if that we dislike, our own in kind. No man, no man, I
There is as great reason and cause we should improve our livings, as other men
do their lands.
am sure, is able to show just cause why we alone (the Clergy) ought not to
have our own in kind, or the full value thereof, as well as first, our
predecessors formerly have had; secondly our selves in diverse things; and
thirdly, our neighbors (the Laity) on every side us, rich and poor, in every
thing continually have.

There be that will tell us of customs, compositions, prescriptions, Customs,
Praescriptions, etc. in case of tithes proved unlawful.
etc, To the contrary.

The very name of Cicer. 2. Tuscul.
Custom is of great force* and prescription has a peculiar might: so that
Galen. de sanit. t^end. lib. 1. page 33. et lib. 5. p. 336. Aug. ad Ian. lib. 1.
as in men's bodies, he that leaves a thing accustomed does many times hazard
his health; so in men's estates, he that breaks a custom, does oftentimes
prejudice their right. But yet I hope no wise man, much less any good Divine
will affirm, that in all things the very color of a Custom is enough, and
that all that must needs always be lawful and good, which can be proved to be
a Custom. For then in vain did God charge his people that Leuit. 18. 30.
they should not do any of these abominable customs which had been done
before Leu. 18. The son of God did not well Matthew. 15. 3.
to reprove the Pharisees Matthew. 15. for observing the Traditions, that is,
the ancient customs of their elders: and the good Fathers of the Church have
greatly erred in teaching us that Aug. de vnic. bapt. lib. 2. Cipr. ad Pomp.
Isidor. in synon. lib. 2. Distinct. 8. veritate.
Ratio et veritas Consuetudini praeponenda: that is, Reason and verity, are to
be preferred before use and custom.

Presuming therefore that we shall easily thus far agree, Andr. Hisp. de
Dec. ca. 8.
That against the word of God no custom can hold: That Council. Sardicen.
Canon. 1. Duaren. de Benef. lib. 5. cap. 3.
Mala Consuetudo non minus quam pernitiosa corruptela, funditus eradicanda est:
that is, An evil custom in the body politic, no less then a pernicious
corruption, or dangerous disease in the body natural, ought utterly and
speedily to be rooted out. That custom Decret. lib. 1. tit. 4. de consu. cap.
vltim.
to the end it may hold for a Law, ought to be agreeable to reason, and as our
An. 32. H. 8. cap. 7. in praef.
own Law well gives the term laudable and good: and that Aug. de Baptis.
paruul. Tertul. de Virg. velandis. Senec. de vera. vita.
Veritate manifestata non est sequenda consuetudo, quia Dominus non Dixit, Ego
sum consuetudo sed ego veritas, that is, The truth being manifested, we are
not to follow the custom but the truth, because the Lord said not, I am the
custom, but I am the truth: I doubt not to make it clear, that these
customs, prescriptions etc. Whereof now we speak, in as much as by them the
Church is abridged and debarred of a great part of the full value of her
tithes, are contrary to the word of God, repugnant to reason, and equity, and
nothing less then laudable and good. For,

1. The word of God requires of us expressly Number. 18. Mal. 3. 8.
Deeimam 1. God requires the full tenth.
the tenth, and not any other part. Now it is most evident, in all true sense
and natural construction: that as he goes not a journey, that goes but a mile
or two of the way, and not the whole: he does not do a work, that does but a
part thereof,, and not the whole: he pays not a sum of money, that paies but
some half, or a quarter thereof, and not the whole: Andr. His. reg. Dec. 9.
Ridl. view page 148. Foem. Mon. n. 7. b No example in the Bible to the
contrary. Ridl. view of page 141.
So he paies not Decimam that paies but the 20. 40. or the hundredth part
thereof, and not the whole.

2. There can no one instance be given out of the word of God, either that Gods
people paid, or God accepted for the tenth some other thing, money or
money-worth, less in value then the tenth; and so any custom for the thing it
self. And when as our Savior speaking of the Pharisees which Matthew. 23. 23.
Luke. 11. 42.
tithed their mint, annis, cummin, rue, et omne olus, and every other herb,
says, This they ought not to have left undone, he signifies not obscurely
that this manner of Tithing, viz. in kind, and without Diminution, even for
those smaller things, much more then for the greater, was in use until his
time, and, was a manner of tithing just and lawful.

How precise God was in this point, we may not obscurely gather by this, that
he prohibited any man so much Leuit. 27. 33.
as to change the tithe, a good for a bad, or a bad for a good, without a
penal augmentation of it. This being Gods law then, seeing he Mal. 3. 6.
is the same God still; the tithe is his right still, and the use of them is
like necessary still, how can it be probable, that he should now approve such
Martial. epigr. l. 5. Homer. Ili. 6
a Glaucus exchange or alteration, as taking away the thing in kind, leaves in
lieu thereof not the half, not the fourth, yea many times not the tenth part
that it is worth. And when as he pronounces him directly accursed Mal. 1. 13.
that offers (having better in store) the torn, the lame, the sick, and
denies flatly to accept it, what likelihood is there, he can be pleased to
have for his fair, goodly and sound portion the tenth, a modicum so bad, and
so little, that in comparison thereof, the smallest, weakest, and worst in
kind were a rich oblation?

I will grant (though with fair probability I may deny it, and Calu. in
locum.
as some judicious writers do restrain that law to vows and oblations only)
that God permitted any of his people Deuteronomy. 14. Deuteronomy. 14. 24.
in some one case to sell the tithe and make it in money, and so to come with
that money in his hand unto the house of the Lord. But that is so far from
making against me, that it does not a little confirm that I do affirm. For
first, that was but in one case only, which with us comes not in use:
Secondly, he was bound to bestow Verse. 26.
the same money, the whole money again upon such commodities as he had sold, and
so to bring that newly bought, the thing in kind, and the same kind unto the
house of God. Whereupon I may well infer, That if our people will, or do,
(some prescriptiom, or custom allowing them that favor in more cases then
one, and in such cases too, as Gods Law did not) make money of the tithe, and
sell that is ours, they ought at least to pay us in steed of that tithe, the
whole money they make thereof. Which if they did, (and out of all question,
most of our customs and prescriptions intended no other) we could well be
content they should have that choice which properly belongs unto us: and it
should little grieve us that they from whom it comes, had that is ours, for
their money before any other, while as we have of them for it, as any other
would give.

3. The word of God most strictly forbids any Deuteronomy. 27. 17. By them the
ancient bounds are removed.
to remove the ancient bounds. Which if it ought to be observed religiously
twixt man and man, I see not, why it ought not as duly at the least be
observed twixt God and man. For is it not meet that God should have quae Dei
sunt, those things that be his, to be as safe unto him as any man? Now it is
most evident, that this he has not, where and whenever men give to God not
very nominis Decimam, as Andr. Hispan. reg. decim. passim.
the Canonist terms it, the very tenth, but in steed thereof some less part,
as the twentieth or fortieth. For God having set his bounds at Deciman, the
tenth, it is by this means removed, and set shorter a great deal. If it be
sin Cicer. Parad. 3
transilire lineas, to pass the bounds, this cannot be but sin? And if it
were a sin in us clergy men, if we would not be content to pitch at
Decimam, but would go beyond that, and (without any just recompensation) take
up the fifth, seventh or eighth, why shall it not be in the laity to go on
the other side, a great deal more? I take it in Gods commandments, we ought
to turn aside Deuteronomy. 12. 32.
neither to the right hand, nor to the left.

4. The word of God disclaimeth utterly Leuit. 19. 35. Deuteronomy. 25. 13. Ezekiel. 45.
10. Prou. 11. 1. and 16. 11. and 20. 16.
false waights and false measures as an abomination to the Lord. Against which
if he do offend, that delivers unto his neighbor less then just weight and
just measure, yea Pulton. Ab. weight. Nu. 14. By them God has false weight and
false measure made him.
though the difference be not much; which way can he be cleared and justified
that obtrudes unto the Church of God, and to God himself less (by half and
more many times) then his tenth, which God as his due demands to be measured
and weighed out unto him? Offer such dealing unto the King, Mal. 1. 8.
will he accept it? when a subsidue is given him, thus much of the pound, may a
man pay less then the full grant? The tenth is (as we may say) Gods subsidue,
or as others more properly term it Calvin. in Heb.
Sacru^ vectigal, his sacred tribute, demanded by God from the beginning, and
long since even by men also, granted and consecrated to God, is it not reason
then he should be as truly and justly paid it, as any mortal man?
To promise one thing and perform another, is no upright man? dealing: and
being offered to God, what is, if that be not to Galath 6. 7.
mock God?

5. The word of God forbids us utterly Leu. 19. 13. Mal. 3. 5. 1. These. 4.
6. By them the Church is oppressed, and God defrauded.
to oppress or defraud any man, But what more evident oppression can there be,
then to take away from men their goods 1. against their will 2. without due and
competent satisfaction, which even Ahab would not offer 1. King. 21. 2.
unto Naboth, though he had a mind and a great mind, to his vineyard: and
what more manifest fraud, then that under color of customs, prescriptions,
etc. made by them that were nor Duaren. de Benef. lib. 8. c. 1. Fent. Sermon. on
pre. 20. 25. p. 49.
Domini the Lords and absolute owners, nor scant Fee-Farmors, but only Tenants
for the Time of that they past away in perpetuum as is pretended, we their
successors, should be barred of our right claim there to, deprived of a great
part of our maintenance, and God leese his true and ancient inheritance?

If these courses be justifiable and good, and shall continue, The dangerous
inconuenie^ce of these. Whether I cast a doubt without cause, might appear if
particular notice were duly taken of that the church has lost within these
60. years. Foem. Monar. in the concl. n. 8.
then verily is both God and his Church in a miserable case. For it is
possible, and probable too that it will so come to pass; it is possible I say,
that within a few ages, God shall have no tithes in kind left him to maintain
his Church and ministers withal. All, as already in many places the most part
is, will be turned into customs, prescriptions etc. It will be no hard matter
sometime by fear, sometime by flattery, sometime by force, and sometime by
fraud to circumuent, or overtake many a poor, simple and harmless man. And
if a finger thus once gotten into that which is Gods, shall, upon a little
continuance be allowed for hould-fast good enough to pluck it from the Church,
and to disinherit God of his right, let all that have any fear of God, any
love to religion, or conscience to the good estate of the Church, judge what
may thereof at length ensue.

6. Further the word of God requires, that he that 1. Cor. 9.
preaches the Gospel, do a live of the Gospel, and teaches, nothing more
pregnantly, that the minister of the word being 1. Tim 5. 16.
worthy of double honor, ought Romans 10. 14. Math. 10. Galat. 6. 6. Deuteronomy. 12.
19.
condignely and liberally to be maintained, yea so agreeable even to all good
reason and conscience is this, that (as Preface to the great Bible. The
minister cannot possibly have due maintenance so long as these do stand.
some have well observed) Those mothers are houlden to be less cruel that
kill their children as soon as they are borne, then they that withdraw from
their pastors necessary liuelyhood and support, fit for their estates. But that
it is, not possible for him to have where such customs, proscriptions, etc. do
prevail For by means of them so much of his living is continually taken away,
that the remainder is altogether insufficient and unfit for him: and so
contrary to the law of God and nature, 1. Tim. 5. 18. 1. Cor. 9. 9. Deuteronomy. 25.
4.
The mouth of the ox that treads out the corn, is mousled, and Math. 10. 10.
The labourer is denied his reward.

Upon this ground in the time of the law, the unreasonable customs and
injurious usurpations of the people of those times were broken and contemned.
For it is not to be denied that even in those times, while as idolatry and
profaneness had gotten the upper hand, many had usurped upon the tithes,
first fruits, etc. and for long time (time enough to make a custom) paid
either none at all, or very little, insomuch that the house of God thereupon
Neh. 10. 39.
was forsaken, yet neither 2. Chro. 30. 5.
that good king Hezekiah, nor Neh. 10. 39. and 13. 10.
that good ruler Nehemiah would take such alienatition, usurpation,
prescription, or custom of non payment, or small payment for a lawful
prescription, a laudable custom, or a sufficient bar against God and his
priests, and so leave them, as in a case remedylesse, and a disease incurable,
in their pitiful poor estate: but knowing, that Right does never rotte: and
that F^m. mon. in the concl. n. 8.
A custom of sinning does not extenuate, but aggrauate sin, restored fully
unto them, whatsoever had formerly been taken away, and was by law of God and
ancient right, found to be theirs.

7. The time of the ancient fathers Ridl. view. page 145.
was free from such The ancient fathers knew them not.
corruptions, which as yet had not gotten among them, either name or being. But
yet what they would have esteemed of them, if in their days they had been, it
is not hard to conjecture. For when as they stick not to affirm Aug. de december
chord. cap. 12. Math. 5. 20.
that our righteousness does not exceed the righteousness of the scribes and
Pharisees, if we pay not our tithes as they did, and they Luke 18. 12.
paid decimam the full tenth of all that they possessed, or but our bare tenth
and nothing over: and when as question being made, Quid est decimas fideliter
dare? what is it to pay tithes truly? they Ambr. Sermon. de. Quadrages.
answer, vt nec peius, nec minus aliquando offerat de grano, aut de vino, aut
de fructibus arborum, aut de pecudibus aut de horto, etc. that is, A man does
then pay his tithes faithfully and justly, when as he does pay of every thing
tithe-able, the very thing it self in kind, as his corn, wine, fruits, etc.
and of them neither such as is bad and naught worth, nor that which is less
then the tenth for the tenth. And when in their terms they Aug. Sermon. de.
Temp. ser. 219.
observe a most exact opposition between decimam and nouem parts; the tenth
and the nine parts, decimam and centesemam, the tenth and the hundredth part,
they show plainly enough that they would never have acknowledged (as even
common sense does consent) that they did pay decimam their tithe justly and
faithfully, which should in stead thereof pay a less portion by a great deal.

8. We want not also the consent even of some of our Some learned Papists
reject them.
greatest adversaries in religion, who moved with the clearenesse of this
truth, as far as they dare for fear of their God the Pope, sometimes speak
on our side very confidently in this sort: Andr. Hispan. reg. dec. I. etc.
Qui non persoluunt decimas, non obstante aliqua consuetudine, imo verius
vsurpatione and violenta occupatione, filij sunt perditionis, etc. They
whosoever they be, that pay not their tenth, any custom, or as I may more
truly term it, any usurpation, and violent occupation thereof,
notwithstanding, are children of perdition. But Bellarmine more fully and
freely, Bellar. Tom. 1. contr. 5. lib. 1. cap. 25. Tho. 2. quodl. argu. 8.
Ludou. viuald. de co^trit. fo. 123
Certum est praeceptum de soluendis decimis, qua part diuinu^ and natural
est, non posse vlla lege humana vel consuetudine contraria aboleri: ac proinde
certum est ecclesiam habere ius petendi decimas, etiam vbi consuetudo est vt
non solua^tur; In hoc nim omnes Theologi and Canonistae conueniunt, that is:
Certain it is that the precept of paying tithes so far as it is divine and
natural, cannot by any mane law or contrary custom be abolished: and
therefore it is also certain that the Church has right to demand tithes, even
where there is a custom that they should not be paid; for hereupon al Divines
and Canonists do agree. I cannot speak more plain then he does: only let
this be specially noted out of him, that a custom de non soluendis decimis for
none payment of tithes is nothing: and that, if we may take his word, who was
intimus eorum consilijs, ama^ that knew their mind as much as any man, it is
not his opinion alone, but that all their Divines and Canonists hold the same.

9 They are directly contrary to the law eccesiasticall, The law
ecclesiastical condemns them.
which says expressly Lindw. de. dec. et obl. cap. Quoniam propter verb.
consuetud. Innoc. extra: de dec. c. in aliquib. Greg. c. cap. ex part. de
consu. Andr. hisp. reg. dec. 1. et est notabile. C. quicunque. 16 quaest. 7.
Hostiens. tit. de decimis. Ridl. view of. page 148.
In decimis realibus non valet consuetudo, vt soluatur minus decima part, that
is, In predial tithes custom holds not, that less then the tenth part should
be paid, and again, In eo autem quod non soluantur decimae, vel minus plene
soluantur, nulla valet consuetudo, that is, But in this, that no tithes (for
any thing) should be paid; or that less then the full tenth should be paid
for the tenth, no custom holds. And this is confirmed by the perpetual
practice of the same law, in that to this day (howsoever it be crossed, and
denied) it is due proceeding by common law, it allows plea for all tithes, for
the full tenth, and for tithes in kind, any custom, etc. notwithstanding:
and by this Axiom or general principle thereof, Non est mos in non decimando:
that is, There is no custom for not tithing, and tithe they do not, which
either pay nothing, or that which is as good as nothing. To these I add the
censure it gives of prescriptions in particular, and that is, praescriptio res
odiosa, quia iuri alterius detrahit, that is, Rebuff. de dec*
prescription q. 14 fig. 11. et. q. 15. fig. 16. There is no equity nor reason
in them.
in it self is an odious thing: why so? because it is prejudicial to another
(Gods or the Churches) right.

10 They are contrary to the rule or law of equity, which Decret. lib. 1.
Tit. 4. de consuetud. c. vlt.
approoues only such customs, etc. as are laudable, and good, agreeable to
reason, etc. But what can be less reasonable then, Faem. Monor. in the
conclusion.
To take away a goose, and stick up for it a feather? or what more evil then
to take from men their goods against their will? and that without 1. King. 21.
2.
any reasonable satisfaction? Is it a thing laudable and good, to pinch and
pare away the profits of the ministers living in such a sort, as in all
reasonable men's knowledge and understanding, he cannot possibly in any good
sort live of the rest? Is this to do Math. 7. 12. Note this well.
as they would be done unto? If there were any such custom, that the rate or
price to be paid for any thing titheable, should be double, or ten times the
value of the tithe, (the odds and inequality offered unto us, For where our
tithe is well worth two or three shillings we have for it but two or three pence
and for four pe^ce or twelve pe^ce at the least, we have but an half penie.
Item in rates of grounds where it ye elds now per an. hundred marks or hundred
-- pou^ds, we have happily ten or twelve shillings for the tithe thereof after
the old value, where reason would our rates should rise as well as your rent.
More, in many places there is a custom, that for pasture ground let to rent,
we take for tithe the tenth penny of the rent; a course very equal and easy,
and of long practice as may appear. Lindw. de dec. cap. Quoniam prepter.. de
Nutrimentis. verb. diuidenda est. in gloss. Yet because it is some times a
little more commodious to the Church then the tithe, as now a days it is paid,
can be, Lord how often is it denied us, how hardly can we enjoy it what repining
and grudging against it?
is many times no less) would they acknowledge it to be a custom laudable and
good? grant that because it is a custom, it ought not to be broken? and not
think it fit, and seek to have it abated, and reduced to reason and
equality? And why not we likewise to have the contrary to be increased and
amended? If we should offer them for their goods, their corn, their cattle
and other like, as their fathers and grandfathers did sell the like, would they
not say, we were either mad or senseless? yet (the matter weighed in equal
balance) there is as little reason, and as small cause why they should do it
to us, as we to them? If they of whom we receive such pay, were bound to sell
to us (as their forefathers did to our predecessors) what we needed to buie at
the like rate, there were yet some indifferency. But that they shall be free
from us, and we only inthralled unto them, agrees neither with conscience and
equity, nor with that benefit and liberty which all others do enjoy. If a
man should offer to a servant such wages, or to a labourer such pay, as for
many years past, men of that rank See the state of An. 25. Edu. 3. cap. 2.
An. 12. Ric. 2. cap. 4. An. 23. Hen. 6. cap. 13, etc.
used to take, he should be condemned as deuoide of sense and conscience: but
the like is offered us, we must take for our tithes but as they were worth,
one or two hundred years ago, and have but such pay for our service, such
wages for our labor, as was given then, when men might have lived better
therewith then now with five times as much: and yet we must be thought
unreasonable that grudge there against; and not they, that preferring custom
before conscience have not reason to increase it answerable to the times: as if
we only of all people in the land, could live at Other inconveniences. They be
the maine cause of the bad estate and needinesse of our clergy. Their original
erroneous and evil.
the old rates, and our estate alone were such as did not rise and fall, as
other men's does.

Hereupon it comes to pass, 1. that many of us, namely such whose living
consists most upon personal tithes, or upon the smaller prediall tithes, do
live more like beggars then ministers, 2. should starve for very hunger, if we
could not relieve our selves some other ways, and 3. the more our parishoners
do prosper, flourish and increase in wealth (as at this present, in these
Halcion days of all peace and plenty) the more do we decay and pine in
need.

11 Further if we look unto their Original what is it but error and
corruption? They took their beginning and form Alex. Hal. part. 3. qu. 51. 3.
Tho. 22. ae. q. 87. ar. 3. See the view of l. page 143. and 161
from Papists persuaded most vainly that whatsoever it pleased the Pope to
approve, was lawful and good: and they have increased and gotten head by Pet.
Marc. loc. com. class. 4. C. 13. 18. Zanch. de. Rede^. lib. 1. Cap. 19.
Protestants resolved, though faslely, That tithes are not now de iure diuino,
and that the maintenance for the minister may be raised any other way. Besides
these, but builded upon one or other of these, we may impute no small part of
their being and increase to the Ridl. view of law. p. 132. l. 14. Tertul. de
virg. Veland.. 1. Neuend. part. 2. C. de dec. eccles.
negligence and simplicity of such on the one side, as not foreseeing or not
regarding what might in time to come thereof ensue: and to the craftiness or
covetousness of such on the other side, as knowing how to make use of others
weakness, cared little so they gained, what any else, God or man did loose.
Their beginning being no better, and their breed so bad (which thing I take to
be so clear and evident that it needs no demonstration) as the tree once known
to be naught, we are assured the Math. 7. 17. Luke 6. 43. They are a kind of
impropriations. See more page 29. 30. Whether of the two is the worse, may be
doubted.
fruit cannot be good: so these springing from causes so bad, they the effects,
can be none other then evil.

12 Lastly, view these and consider of them well, and you shall see they are
none other, then so many petty and particular impropriations. And therefore
unless they be lawful and good, these cannot be justifiable: and except they
be no sacrilege, no spoil nor mayme to the Church, no bane to the ministry,
no hindrance to the Gospel, no decay to learning, no hurt to the people, these
are, and must needs be.

Neither is it easy to say, whether of the two is to the Church the more
injurious, and dangerous. That the easier may he discern, which shall first
observe, First, That although Impropriations in their proper place, give to the
Church the greater mayme; yet those are but in some places only, but these in
all. For there is scant a parish, what say I a parish? scant a house in a
parish, the whole land thorough, where some or other of these hale not somewhat
from the Church. Secondly, Impropriations are at their stay, They can take from
the Church no more then already they have (and of them any more to be made,
howsoever many a greedy and sacrilegious minded patron either desire or
attempt it, we have I trust no cause to fear, but to hope rather that both
the which is very great already, for whereas the whole number of parish
Churches in England and Wales is, at this day, but 9284. of them 3895. are
impropriated. vide Camdens Britt. page 162.
number and Which is so violent and extreme, that in many places it has
devoured so much of the profits of the Church, that scant the, yea scant yea or
some times the seventh or eighth part thereof remains to the Church.
force of them shall in time, and in short time too, be weakened and abated)
but these do daily more and more incroach upon the Church: and such way, or
rather so many ways are made to the increase both of their number, and their
strength, that unless some good and speedy remedy be provided, we may justly
presage and fear, that as creeping ulcers the body, and moathes a garment,
they will in time eat out and utterly spoil the Church. Thirdly,
Impropriations in diverse places might yet be As in regard of competie^ce.
tolerable, if the Churches thereof had the rest of their fruits and profits
paid them in as good and ample manner, as at the time of the dismembring
thereof they had (for it would be a matter of no great difficulty to show by
diverse probable demonstrations, that then the remainder was paid in kind, or
by such rates, as were equivalent thereunto, and that all or most of those
customs, prescriptions, etc. have sprung up since.) But now these coming in
upon the other, like a new disease to an old malady, and both sorts together
making their assault, For of that which by the Impropr. is left, the Parishnor
in these days by his customs, prescriptions, etc. bereaueth the Incumbent
usually of the one half at least.
how the poor Church is pulled down, and made unable to uphold and relieve him
that should have her whole means, it is lamentable to see, but miserable to
feel. Fourthly, Also some of our impropriations, howsoever a mayme to
particular Churches, are yet quodammodo the Churches still, because they are
Reynold. in Obad. ser. 2.
converted to the sustentation of such, as either are, or in time to come may
be Churchmen: but these serve wholly and only to the use of Lay men.

All which if they of the lay sort, that do so much dislike with
impropriations (and there is scant a man of understanding in any parish,
specially where they are, if his own hand be not in the sin, that does not)
did well consider, they would, I am persuaded, the sooner disclaim, and even
of their own accord break of these vile practices, least that should be
verified in themselves, which Saint Paul objected to others, Romans 2. 1.
Romans 2. Thou that iudgest or blamest another, do, the name only changed,
even the self same thing, wherein they must needs be the more inexcusable,
because it lies more in every particular andriuate man's power to remedy and
remove these then the other.

And thus you see that these customs, prescriptions, exemptions and other like
corruptions, are consonant neither to the word of God, the judgment of the
ancient, the law ecclesiastical, nor rule of equity: That their ground and
original is vicious, and all their fruits and effects, to the Church and
religion of the Church very pernicious, and therefore ought to be to all good
men odious; and as Math. 15. 13.
evil plants which our heavenly father has not planted, of every man to his
power and place, be rooted out.

But what? do I then condemn and reject all customs, Custom is good for the
manner of tithing.
compositions, etc? no, in no wise. The custom of every place, De modo
decimandi, for the manner of tithing, which in diverse places is diverse, is
exceeding necessary Lindw. de dec in Gloss. verb. vniformis: Idem C. Quoniam
propter. verb. consuetud. Rebuff. de decim. qu. 13. fig. 49. 50 Hostiens. in
sum e. tit. fin. q. 16. Ridl. view. p. 148
and commendable: and the due and inviolable observation thereof is the
certain means and direct way to conserve peace, and avoid contention betwixt
pastor and people.

Likewise if for some of the smaller tithes, by reason they are not so easily
always to be known and laid out, as the greater, there were some custom or
composition that the parishnor should pay for them ad valorem terrae, after the
rate of the ground from time to time. Or if for each particular of that sort
(for in them is the most difficulty of tithing) there were a several rate or
value certain, so it were proportionable to the thing and alterable with the
time: such a custom or composition might be See the like in another case
Pulton. Ab. title. Justice of P. number. 66.
tolerable for both sides and grievous to neither; men that love quietness
would better be pleased to be at a certain rate, then an uncertain reckoning:
yet so God should one way or other have his just tenth still. And no reasonable
man could nor might dislike that our rates should rise and fall, as do their
grounds or goods.

And very likely it is, that not a few of the customs, Customs at first not
so hurtful as now they be.
and prescriptions, that now are found so prejudicial to the Church, had some
such like beginning. The Foem. Monarc. in the conclusi. n. 7. b.
agreement was according to the full value and worth of the tithe or ground for
the time present: which the one side thought better for him to pay, and the
other for him to receive, then the thing it self in kind.

Which considered, Their doing, An. 2. Ed. 6. Cap. 13. Pult. tith. Number. 41.
which tied us unto compositions, customs, prescriptions, etc. and did not
leave us at liberty to take either the rate or the thing, and (as had been
just and necessary, and Pulton. Ab. tithes. Number. 25 An. 2. Ed. 6. c. 13
in the body of the statute, if that might have its due course, is already
well provided) restore to the Church all her tithes in kind without
diminution, is the less blame worthy, because the value of the tithe and
rate, being at that time little different, we may conjecture, they had no
intent (as who could not so much as imagine that things would grow to those
high prices, whereunto now they are risen) so extremely to damnifie the
Church, and take from us our tithes for little or nothing; but only or
specially that way to provide for the ease and peace of both sides.

But now such compositions, customs and prescriptions, by the very alteration
of times especially, besides the large extent Ridl. view of law. page 210.
and sinister explications of the statutes by which they stand, proving so
hurtful and prejudicial to the Church, that the same should still be
continued and pressed against the Church, is a course against equity and
piety too. And therefore howsoever they might be, or be thought to be fit and
necessary for those times, wherein those statutes were made, yet now appearing
and daily found very unfit and unequal for these our times, for so much as
humane laws, which are but leges temporis the laws of the time, Lindw. lib.
3. tit. de. celebr. miss. c. effrenata. glos. temp. v. qualitate etist. 4. c.
erit. An alteration now desired.
ought to be suitable to the times, I trust we may without either blame or
offense desire some alteration and reformation in this beehalfe. It cannot be
denied that all laws of men have, as all things under sun, Postn. page 47.
ortum, statum and occasum, their beginning in which they might be very good,
their state in which they are but indifferent, and their declining in which
they prove unfit, and so show themselves worthy, and as it were offer
themselves ready to grow out of use, and give place to better. Which in this
cause not respected, if, as these things got protection, where and when they
should have had condemnation and extirpation, so, to the farther increase of
iniquity in our land, and misery in our Church, they shall be favored (as
often is seen) u beyond the very scope and true sense of those statutes, and
Ridl. view of law. p. 131. 139. 210.
men will stand strictly upon the letter of each law, and not follow Postn. p.
53.
dictamen rationis, the sway of sound reason, and the Cod. lib. 1. tit. 17. de
leg. and cunsuetud. Reg. Iur. Sext. Lopez. de contract. and neget. lib. 1. C.
15. p. 81.
mind of the law, much mischief, and manifold inconvenience (as in this case
is too manifest) will and must needs ensue, and the old proverb Tul. de
offic. l. 1
Summum ius, summa iniuria, that is, such, extreme law is extreme injury be
plainly verified. Idem.
A man but heathen wise can tell and teach us, that in such cases. Non exempla
Maiorum quaerenda, sed consilium est eorum a quibus exempla nata sunt,
explicandum, that is, The examples or the very facts of our fore elders are
not to be stood upon, but their purpose and intent, whence their facts
proceeded, is to be considered. This only is true and rational imitation.

Neither do we desire other favor and course in this our cause, then is
commonly granted to others in cases In sundry new statutes, repeales,
explanations, etc
not a few: and in this very case (custom for tithes) has Pulio^. Ab. ^i^h.
Number. 41. lin. 1.
for behoof of the laity against the Note there, the laietie having found but
one unreasonable custo^e against them, and that but in an Angle of the land,
could have it speedily cut away: the clergy find many in all places, yet
they can have no redress.
Church, long since been practiced.

Yea, But what a sore loss and hinderance, would this be to a great many?

Grant, that because that another has, they have not, it be some loss or
abatement of their usual income and former profit, yet that may easily be
borne, if men will consider as Christians should, that God (as the man of God
told 2. Chron. 15. 9. Reynold. pref. Sermon. on. Obad.
the king of Israel, that asked what he should do then, for the many talents
of silver he had laid out?) is able to give them much more then that comes
unto, by restoring it another way, and by blessing and increasing (according to
his special promise Malac.. 3. 8.
in this case) the remainder. If not, that Prou. 16. 8.
better is a little with righteousness, and Prou. 15. 16. Psalm. 37. 16.
in the fear of the Lord, then great revenues without equity. But in very
deed it is none, no man ought to account it any loss or hindrance to him Romans
13. 7. Deuteronomy. 24. 15.
to pay his due to any, but above all to God. And, if men carried an
indifferent mind, why should any account it any hurt to them to pay their
full tithe in one thing more then in another? or more to them then to their
neighbors that now pay the like? or to their predecessors, which in their
times did pay, as then each thing was worth? It is a man's hurt to live by other
men's Turpe lucrnea, res pessima.
goods, and to continue in doing wrong unto, or defrauding any, Prou. 20. 25.
specially, God and his Church, from time to time, as all they do, as I have
now sufficiently showed, which do not give to God his things in kind to the
full, or the full value and due estimation thereof at the least.

From the matter I come to the manner how we must 2. The manner how we must
give.
give. That considering, it seems unto me, that the very word Abulens. in
Matb. qu. 99. Dixit. Reddite et non date: quia dare est donare vel sponte dare:
reddere autem est soluere quod acceperis. 1. Freely.
give does necessarily implie three things, that is, that we pay that which is
due to God freely, fully, and timely, for that indeed is rightly to give a
thing, when it is bestowed freely without constraint or respect of this or that
profit, fully without diminution, and timely in due and convenient season,
without either disordered have or needless delaie.

First we must give freely. God as in all things so doubtless in this, 2. Cor.
9. 7. Ecclus. 35. 10.
loves a cheerful giver, and cannot abide that men should as it were
conductitia intention with a mercenary mind, as those that do all for gain
and profit, yield him that is his. He will not have men make merchandise of his
goods, as if they were their own and not Gods, Math. 10. 8.
gratis accepistis, gratis date, that is, freely ye have received etc.

Secondly, we must give fully, not looking if it be good or bad, neither
Leuit. 27. 33
may we change it. Gods own Law. He 2. Fully.
that bids us to give one another Luke 6. 38.
good measure and running over, does look not to be pinched and scanted at our
hands, as if we counted all too much that he or his are to receive. If we
keep the fattest and fairest to our selves, and turn him the scruffe and
whatsoever is naught or little worth, will he accept it? How he likes such
dealing, his law may teach us wherein oftentimes he requires, that his
offerings be Leuit. 1. and. 3. and 22. 18. 19. 20: etc. Deuteronomy. 17. 1. Number 28. 3.
31.
of the best, without blemish etc. and his Prophet Malachy can certify us, who
says expressly on Gods behalf, Malac. 1. 13.
ye have offered that which was torn, and the lame, and the sick, and should
I accept this at your hand, says the Lord? Again, Ver. 14.
Cursed be the deceiuer, which has in his flock a male, and yet voweth and
sacrifices to the Lord a corrupt thing. And Ver. 8.
Offer it now to thy Prince, will he be content with it, or accept thy person?
Add to these the solemn protestation which God required at every man's hand,
what time he made his account, whereof ye may read, Deuteronomy, 26. The sum
whereof is this, Deuteronomy. 26. 12.
when thou have made an end of tithing, then thou shall say before the Lord thy
God, I have brought the hallowed thing out of mine house, and also have given
it to the Leuite according to thy commandment? I have not eaten thereof in my
mourning for any necessity whatsoever, nor suffered ought to perish by putting
it to any profane usage, or carelessly letting it to be spoiled, but have
harkned to the voice of the Lord my God, and done after all that thou in this
case have commanded me. Look down therefore from thine holy habitation, even
from Heaven, and bless me. God will have him know he must none otherwise
look to be blessed of God, and made to prosper in all that he had, but
according as God, knowing the secrets of all hearts, did know that he had dealt
truly, and justly with God and his ministers in this point.

Thirdly, We must give timely, every thing in his due season. Exodus 22. 29.
Thine abundance and thy liquor meaning the tithes 3. Timely.
thereof, as Decimas et primitias tuas.
the old translator reads it, and all expositors understand it, non tardabis
offerre, thou shall not defer to pay unto the Lord: but shall do it Guide. in
consil. et process. q. 1. I. Si cui in f. ff. de verb. signif. Panorm. in 2.
vocab.
out of hand, so soon as it is payable, and can be severed from the rest. Let
it not lie a rotting or spilling thou carest not how long. It is Deuteronomy. 24. 15.
Number. 18. 31.
the workemans wages that labors for thee in the Lords vineyard, let it not
abide with thee beyond the appointed time. Bis dat, qui cito dat. A due duly
paid, must needs be both better, and better welcome, then when it is deferd and
paid at our leisure, we care not when nor how. And as thou may not detain
it beyond due time, so neither ought thou to impose and thrust it unto the
Church, before the due time. As fruits are not fit to be gathered before they
be ripe, so tithes not to be tendered till they be ready. As Rebuf. de dec. q.
12. fig. 1. per. l. cum res in fi* ff. deleg. 1. glo. et doct. in d. C. cu^
bomines. Guide. Pa. consil. 70. ex prec. q. 1.
minus soluit, qui tardius soluit, so by like reason, minus dat qui citius dat.
Ouer-hastines in the one, cannot but be as prejudicial and hurtful, as delay
in the other. In which case though our covetous and unconscionable age cares
little what is right and reason, so they rid the thing out of their fingers,
yet the example and practice of former times might show them, if they would
see, what they ought to do in this matter. People now will not know that Did.
49. c. vlt. in sin.
Indignum est dare Deo, quod dedignatur homo, that is, It is a thing unworthy
and evil to offer that to God which even an ordinary man would for the
meandness and unfitness disdain to receive: nor consider that it is great
reason the men of God, have that which is theirs, as Joh. Andr. in add. ad
spec. in verb. speciem.
commodious and fit for their use, as any other man has, Hen. Boh. in c. cu^
homines. cod. Oldr. confil. 236 Three sorts of men offend here against. 1.
Impropriators. House. on Matthew. 21. Sermon. 2. p. 50
lest their part perish, while the rest does prosper.

Against this threefold form of this commandment, there be three sorts of men
that notoriously offend.

First, of Impropriators no small number, which have invaded the Patrimony of
the Church, and taken from it of the Gleeb, the tithes, and other profits no
small quantity, as if they had consulted with them of whom the Prophet speaks
Psalm. 83. 12.
Psalm. 83. that said, Let us take to our selves the houses of God in
possession: they have dealt in Gods house as 1. Sam. 15.
Saul did about Gods commandment. All that was uncertain, naught, lean and
little worth, that have they left (and yet scant that neither in some places)
to be disposed of according to Gods commandment, that is, toward the
maintenance of the Minister, but the fattest and the fairest, whatsoever was
goodly to the eye, or commodious to the purse, as I may say worth the taking,
that they have laid hands on, and disposed of at their pleasure. But if that
were sin in Saul, and transgression against God so heinous, that 1. Sam. 15.
23.
for it the Lord cast away Saul and his house, shall not this be sin also in
these, and that such sin as Couel. praefat. to Carlton.
may threaten the off-casting of them and theirs? If it were sacrilege in
Nebuchadnezzar, though a Conqueror Dan. 5.
to take away the goulden vessels of the Temple, and in Belshazzar Ibidem.
Down. Sermon. on. 1. Tim. 3. 1. Ridl. view. page 145.
to abuse them unto profane uses? what is it in them to have taken away not
the moueables only, but even the Patrimony of the Church too? that have turned
out the Priests of God from the inheritance of the Lord; and being none of the
seed of Leui, are King. on Jonas. lect. 33. page 463.
against all equity and conscience entered into it themselves.

The Popes authority by which such spoils were first made Pilking. on Ag. cap.
primo. apud canonist. passim. Hostien. lib. 2. c. 1. Catus. test. veril. Tom.
2. li. 15. Rebuf. de dec. q. 5. et. 13.
to feed his Monks withal, will not defend them, whom he did never intend
should have any part with his in the Churches right. It proves their Original
Down. Sermon on. 1. Tim. 3. 1.
to be Antichristian and them to be without excuse, which have not so much as
Rebuf. de dec. q. 13. fig. 32. et 108.
an erroneous good intent to shadow their sin withal.

Tract of time and use cannot make these lawful and good. Reg iur. ant. 29.
Quod initio vitio sum est, non potest tractu temporis conualescere: that is,
What was faulty in the vprising, cannot but be naughty in the proceeding Math.
Westminster. in flor. hist. an 1261. Johan. Sarisb. de nug. curial. l. 7. c. 17.
They were, they Bucer. de regn. cbr. lib. 2. cap. 7. Latim. ser. 1. et 6
before K. Ed. 6. Lamb. Peramb. of Kent. Monu^. of Martyrs. p. Survey of p.
discip. page 243. Leauer. sermon. at P. cross.
are, and so long as they continue, they will be, the bane of the people, the
shame of our Church, the great hinderance of learning, the impouerishment of
our Clergy, and the infamy of our profession.

The Carlt. cap. 1. Ridl. view of l. page 143. 161.
erroneous and late vpstart opinions neither of popish writers, which to
flatter that man of sin, and to salve his all-oppressing power and infinite
sacriledges: nor of reformed writers, which either upon detestation of popery,
wherein Church-goods, the things of God were so much abused; or upon a
careless neglect of this matter, running along with the current of the time,
that so they might the better attend points of doctrine more material or
controuersall, have held, Tithes not to be de iure diuino a matter of Divine
right, and, that Zanch. de Red. in praec. 4. c. 19. Pet. Marc. loc. com. Class.
4. cap. 13.. 18.
the Magistrate might dispose of them and other Church-goods at their pleasure,
so as the ministers of Churches were any way sufficiently provided for; will
not suffice for shelter in this case: the truth being now come to light, and
this most evidently cleared, that these things are the Lords Ridl. view p. 172.
his proper right and peculiar inheritance.

Nor can the shadow of humane law shield them from sin, seeing it is certain
Fent. Sermon. on prou. 20. 25. page 46. et 53. Hooker. pol. eccl. lib. 5.. 79.
Foem. Mon. n. 3. a
It is not in the power of man, to take from God his right, nor justly to
dispossess him of that which either from the beginning is his, or for long
time he has been invested withal: unless it may be proved that Policy is
above Piety, and that to be lawful among us, which Stat. engl. an 1533. Fox
page 1750 et 1861. Symach. Romans sinod. 6. Marcell. c. u. q. 3. c. 35.
we have utterly condemned in the Papists, and of themselves See Iuel. Des.
cont. Hard. part. 3. cap. 1. Diuis. 2 2. Many Patrones.
not a few do disclaim, I mean that man has power to dispense against the
law and word of God.

Next to these are Patrones of Churches and other their Confederates and
broakers not a few, which under any color whatsoever, deteine any part of the
gleebe or tithes, or otherwise where C^altaria. i. q. 3 Astesa. in 2. part.
sum. rub. de Dec. art. 7. tit. 35.
they ought freely, for the only respect unto religion, and to the worthiness
and learning of the party (not seeking who will give most: but who is most
worthy to receive) give their benefices, do make a gain thereof Foem. Monar.
in the co^cl. o. i. b.
and seek not the good of the Church but their own good. If it were sin in
the Jewish chapmen Matthew 21. 12.
to sell their oxen, sheep, and doves in the house of God, what is it in these
that sell the very house of God it self? or Boys Dominic post. Trin. 10. p. 227.
as one says wittily, magna, parua, omnia. And Down. Sermon. on 1. Tim. 3. 1.
if it were sacrilege in Act. 5. Calrt. c. 5. fol. 31.
Ananias and Saphira, to keep away part of what themselves had consecrated to
God, when as not consecrated the whole was in their power; I take it to be most
plain and evident, yt it can be no less then sacrilege in these Harpics to
take from God, what was long since, for many ages past, given up to God? and
not by themselves, but by holy and devout men of former times freely and
frankly devoted and Policrat. lib. 7. cap. 17. Fulk. in act. 5. sect. 7.
consecrated pietati and fidei: and what never was in their power, but was,
either by their ancient progenitors, or other predecessors, long and long ago,
by all the means they could devise, even Capit. Carul. l. 6. cap. 285. and as
appears in sundry ancient records. offerimus Deo quod ecclesiae tradimus.
with execration and malediction to them that should altar, or violate the
same, passed out of their own power, and left only (as Gods depositum) to
their fidelity and trust, in the name and to the use of the whole parish, and
right of the Church from time to time to be freely and liberaly bestowed. If a
man were put in trust but with an other man's goods by word or will, to employ it
or see it bestowed to such and such uses: would not Iuuenal. Satyr. 13.
all men condemn him, for a godless and faithless man, that should falsify
the trust in him reposed, and as Virgil. Aenead. 3.
Polymnestor did with Polidore, deceiving and wronging those to whom of right
it appertains, convert it in rem suam, to his own use? How much more ought we
to know and acknowledge them to be without any true fear of God, honest faith
to men, or good conscience in themselves, which so solemnly and substantially
be trusted by God and his Church with ye things of God, the patrimony of the
Church, the tithes and oblations of the people, turning their Reinold. on Obad.
Sermon. 2.
patronage into pillage, faith into fraud, and trust into treachery, shall
defraud God, spoil the Church and abuse the people, seeking and making thereof
their own wicked gain and filthy lucre?

Let men set what color they can upon this rotten post, Their visards unmasked.
and indeed Covetousness, Symonie and Sacrilege are now a days exceeding
cunning and crafty: and let these practices be as common and ordinary as may
be, and indeed (or Boys. Dominic. Palm. p. 135.
else the world is much deceived,) they be grown to that height, that as S.
Bernard said long ago of another whelpe of this little Bernard. sup. cantic.
ser. 33.
latere prae abundantia non valet, et prae impudentia non quaerit, much more
may we of these, for the abundance thereof hid they cannot be, and for the
impudency thereof to be hid, they seek not to be: yea be it as House. Sermon. 1.
on Matthew. 21. 12. p. 27. 34. 40.
one of our time most truly has observed, videntur licita, quia publica: that
is, these sins seem to many to be lawful to be done, because they be so
commonly and so openly done, yet Andr. Hisp. reg. Dec. i.
sin is sin. Ada^. Eras. page 313.
Lupus pilum mutat, non mentem, and such sins these are as God does, and will
surely and severely revenge: and he cannot be a good or honest man, let men
repute him what they will, that defiles his fingers herewith. Reinold. Ser. on
Obad. 2.
If they think to cover their profane dealing with Josh. 7. 22.
Achans conueyance, by hiding the pray; or to wash their hands with Matthew. 27.
24.
Pilates pretense, that they are guiltless of the evil, if any be committed,
because they give the aduousons freely to friends or servants, they deceive
themselves. Galat. 6. 7.
God is not mocked: and he will find them out in a day when they look not
for him, and in an hour that they are not ware off, and bring them to shame
and confusion, with punishment more dreadful then he did either Josh. 7. 22.
Achan, or Act 5. 5.
Ananias, and make them and theirs feel by lamentable experience, as all
histories Dan 5. 2. Machab. 7. 3.
Divine Joseph. Antiqu. Iud. lib. 14. c. 12. Valor. Max. l. 1. c. 2. Liu.
Decad. 3 l. 2. Plin. l. 9. c. 1. Macrob. lib. 3. Sabellic. Aenead. 4. l. 3. p
527. et Aen. 5. l. 5. p. 764. et ibid. l. 8. p. 821. Polid. angl. bist. l. 10.
Buyers and sellers are like guilty in Symonie.
and humane do contest, that Ruin is the end of Sacrilege. For, where there
is, Boys Dominic. Palm. p. 135.
Gloria patri, without a sicut in principio, there cannot be gloria filio, nunc
et in sacula.

Will they tell us; The fault is theirs that give, not that take money? House.
Ser. 1. on Matthew. 21. 12. page 26.
We tell them, that Selling and buying are both in one Predicament. The
schoolmen have defined long ago Tho. 22 ae q. 100 Art. 1. Gela. epist 1. cap.
23. Nic. de clem. ep. ad Gelas. Rebuf. de dec. qu. 10. fig. 19.
that vendentes conformantur Simoni in intention, si non actu: that is, the
sellors of spiritual livings are all one with Simon Magus in intent, if not in
act. And we may tell them too, that theirs of the two is the greater sin,
because they provoke and enforce them to buy dearly, that full gladly would
receive freely, And more, if Simon Peter had sinned no less then Simon Magus,
if he had accepted the money which the other offered, (and this no Divine did
ever deny) how much more if he had offered that gift to him for money? then
certainly these which take, not what is unsought or unthought on offered them,
but seek out giuers; let cry Matthew. 26. 15.
Quid dabitis mihi? What will ye give me? tarry for chapmen; and try who will
offer most, can be no less in sin then their copesmates the buyers. And
therefore being pares culpa, as much in falt House. Sermon. 1. on Matthew. 21. 12
page 48.
at the least, they must look to be pares paena, as much punished too, if not
at the hand of man, yet of God, which Romans 2. 6. Collos. 3. 25.
without respect of persons judges every man according to his work: and we
shall do them but right, to lap them up together in that curse which Peter,
having both his hands and his heart free from partaking with Magus, denounced
against their principal predecessor Act. 8. 20.
Acts 8. Pecunia tua tecum pereat, etc. Your money so given and so taken, and
you that give it and take it, perish together. For we see that you both buyers
and sellers, are in the gall of bitterness, and in the bond of iniquity; and
that the hearts of neither sort of you, is upright in the sight of God.
Therefore Greg. lib. 9. epist. 33.
Anathema danti, anathema accipienti: that is, Cursed be the giver, and cursed
be the taker: and let all that love God and the Church say Amen.

To the third place I reduce all such as either by mere 3 Parishioners not a
few. 1. Under color.
fraud, and open injury; or by pretended customs, compositions, prescriptions,
exemptions, and other like sacrilegious courses, defraude the minister of his
due, extort and pare of to themselves any part of his portion, the things of
God Down. Sermon. on 1. Tim. 3. 1.
Pretense of custom etc. will not shield them from sacrilege, nor save them
from sin in this behalf: as you may sufficiently gather by that already
said upon the former branch.

Hard happily this would seem to many, and some peradventure will say of my
words, Amos. 7. 10.
The land cannot bear them. But whether they Ezech. 2. 5.
hear or hear not, like or like not, I for my part dare not Isai. 5. 20.
Ezech. 13. 10.
speak good of evil, and evil of good, nor put light for darkness, nor
darkness for light, for fear of a worse displeasure then any Psalm. 118. 6.
Matthew. 10. 28.
flesh and blood can do unto me.

Let the custom, let the prescription be what it may be; in all equity and
conscience Matthew. 7. 12.
(which is the truest and safest rule to walk by) were there no law to exact
ought of them, Parishoners ought to allow their Minister (for Matthew. 10. 10. 1.
Tim. 5. 18. Reason and equity ought prevail with Christians above Law or
custom.
The labourer is worthy of his meat) necessary and competent maintenance,
which they neither do nor can do, while as the whole even in their own
knowledge and conscience being with the least, they, by their customs, etc.
debar him of no small part thereof, and so do leave and allow him (whether
he sink or swim they care not) such a short scantling, and so sparing an
allowance, as they know is altogether too little, and unfit for the minister of
the Gospel, and a preacher of the word to live upon. D. Some pref. to his
treat. of sacram. arg. 2. Sophronist. p. 55. Rebuff. de congru. port. p. 335.
and 390. fig. 94. C. Omnis Christianus de consecr. did. 1. Panorm. in did. c.
ex present. col. vlt. de pign.
Reason it were, that seeing what in show and common account remains unto the
Church, is altogether incompetent and insufficient for the ministers
maintenance, they should, by a mutual consent (reason and equity prevailing
with them above law and custom) restore unto him that at the least, which by
evidence of reason, example of others, rule of Gods word, laws eccesiasticall,
or other like certain demonstration they shall find and know to be long unto
the Church, and As al his prediall tithes in kind or ad verum valorem his
personal tithes either by just computation, or by reasonable composition.
in very deed to be the ministers due: that so he Both in town and country.
might be able indeed 1. Cor. 9. 14. Parishoners ought to forgo their customs
and pay their full tithe in kind.
ex euangelio viuere, that is, to live of the Gospel.

Neither need they doubt least in so doing they should indammage themselves,
or prejudice their parish. The thing being so consonant to equity, and tending
to so pious and good a purpose, could not but be very well pleasing to God
and grateful to good men: and therefore promise them an assured hope Mal. 3. 8.
of Gods blessing upon all that they have, Luke 17. 37. Ministers ought to
exact it of them and urge them to it
and procure them an able and painful minister from time to time. Nor has
any minister cause to fear least in asking or exacting this he should offend
God, and pass the bounds of his duty. He asks but what in very deed is
his due, and demands but what originally and properly is Gods and the
Churches right: and does thereby reduce them that now go wrong into a right
and due course. A case long since resolved Rebuff. de dec. q. 13. fig. 59. and.
qu. 14. fig. 11. Angel. Clauos. in verb. dec.. 2. C. qui co^tra. did. 8.
Hostiens. in. c. aliquis infi^. cod. Andr. Hisp. regul. dec. 8. et notab. 5.
Clerico si desint alimenta integras decimas petere licebit, non obstante
aliqua praescriptione, that is, The minister, if he want maintenance, may
lawfully demand his full tithes, any prescription or custom, to the contrary
notwithstanding, grounded upon the law of God and nature, 1. Cor. 9. 9. 1 Timothy
5. 18. Deuteronomy. 25. 4.
which says. Thou shall not mousle, that is, withhold necessary food and
maintenance from the mouth of the ox, that treads out the corn: and a
better course by far, then that which in some places of our land is practiced,
I mean, to amend the ministers living by some yearly pension or stipend
raised among few; which like an House. Sermon. 1. on. Mat. 21. page 34.
alms to a beggar, they may continue or discontinue at their pleasure; and is
carried without any equal indifferency in the world, neither want we in this
case besides warrant, example out of the word, for we read that albeit
through the sin of Jeroboam which made Israel to sin, it was become 2. Chr.
30. 5. 10 3. King. 12. 28. Tobi. 1. 4. Joseph. Antiqu. iud. tib. 8. cap. 3.
House. ser. 2. page 21. 34.
a custom in Israel, and confirmed by law, throughout the ten tribes bring
neither tithes, nor any other due, to the house of God in Jerusalem, yet 2.
Chr. 30. 11. 18. 2. Chr. 31. 5. 5. 11 Tob. 1. 4. and. 5. 13
such among the ten tribes as unfeignedly feared God, and had the true knowledge
of the law, held not themselves discharged by any such custom or law, but as
they that knew well, that an interest or propriety Quod diuini iuris est, id
nullius in bonis est. Iastit. lib. 2. tit. 1 Item. Aliqua^de siquis etiam b^na
fide rem possiderit: non tamen illi vsucapio vllo tempor^ procedit: veluti
siquis-rem sacram vel religiosam-possideat. lib. 2. tit. 6. 2. By open injury.
in the things that be Gods, gotten vel vi, vel fraud, either by open force
or cunning fraud makes neither just title nor lawful possessour, the same
notwithstanding, verity and equity more prevailing with them then any
custom or humane law, did pay their tithes as they were due, to whom, by an
everlasting decree they belonged as appears. 2. Chron. 31. Tob. 1. and 5.

As for them which not contented under color of law, custom and other like
pretenses to have taken from the minister a great part of his right, do make
no conscience Extra. de dec. cap. 16. q. 1. et. 7 et in c. tua. de dec. glos.
et doct. in. c. sciscitaueris. 7. quest. 1. C. quisquis. 17. q. 4. Caietam. in
Sum. in verb. decimas.
to deceive and cosen him eue^ of that too which they, having no cloak to
hide their sin withal, both know and acknowledge to be his due, whether I
accuse the^ of oppression or fraud, of theft or sacrilege, of cruelty or
impiety, nothing too hard, nothing too much shall be spoken against the^. And
if I condemn them as much as any of the former, of notorious sin and wickedness
against God and man, no man may justly blame me. Of such it may be said without
al exception or limitation Andr. Hisp. in reg. 1. de dec. Rebuff. de dec. qu.
15. fig. 26.
Non soluentes decimas, filij sunt perditionis: sunt ipsi in statu damnationis
and ijs participantes, etc. that is, They that do not justly pay their tithes
are children of perdition, and both they themselves are in state of damnation,
and likewise al they that be partakers, abettours, counselors, or helpers unto
them therein. They are not fit nor worthy to be trusted and credited in their
other dealings, for, Terent. in adelph.
Qui patrem fallere insueuerit, facile audebit caeteros, that is, He that will
make little conscience to deceive his own father, (God, the Church, and his
Ghostly father) less will he make to serve others in like sort. They show
themselves to have neither Luke 18. 2.
fear of God, nor care for man: Matthew. 10. 14 Calu. in Deuteronomy. 12 Mari. in Gal.
6. 7
to be unworthy the precious Gospel of Jesus Christ and his ministers, both
which they do so contemn, and what in them is, expel from among them: and to
be worse then many of the heathen and infidels of the world, which highly Mal.
3. 8.
feared to rob their Gods, which yet were no Gods, but the work of men's hands:
and Diod. Sicul. l. 2 and. lib. 3. Alex. ab. Alexand* lib. 2. eap. 8.
counted their priests worthy of greatest honor. Then for whom therefore our
Savior has foretold us and them, Matthew. 10. 14
tolerabilius erit in die iudicij; that is, it shall be more tolerable for
them of Sodom and Gomorha in the day of Judgment.

The third general part of the text.
HItherto have we heard what is to be done. Let us The maine and principal
reason why we must give to God, the things of God.
hear also the maine reason wherefore it must be done, we must give to God,
what? the things of God, why? because they are Gods, they do properly belong
unto him as his own possession, they are Deuteronomy. 18. 1. Numb. 18. 20. Ezec. 44.
28.
a peculiar inheritance or special portion reserved to himself, so that
although he Psalm.
has given the earth to the sons of men, yet these Sacrum vectigal. Calu.
in. Heb. 7. 4.
like a chief rent to a landlord, or a certain tribute to a king, always
excepted and reserved. Can we desire a cleerer testimony of it then Gods own
claim and seasure. Numb. 18? Numb. 18. Deuteronomy. 10. 9. Josh. 13. 14. Leuit. 27.
The tenth is mine, and when men began wickedly to alienate the same, and
usurp upon his sacred right, then his reclaim and reseiure thereof Mal. 3.
where having charged them, that they had robbed him, whereof? of his tithes and
oblations, he says, but Malac. 3. 10.
bring ye now hence forward omnes decimas in horreum meum. Bring ye every tithe
into my barn: and then See before page 1. in marg.
constant and general consent of all christendom, which as it were vno ore
and animo, with one mind and one mouth, have ever accounted and called these
things Rebuff. de. dec. qu. 9. fig. 9.
Gods part; the things of Gods, etc. Of which point before, and In my. M. Min,
cap. 6. and 7.
otherwhere I have sufficiently entreated.

Romans 13. 7.
quod suum est, his own: were it in none other repect, but because Prou. 3.
27. It is piety to pay them.
he is the right owner thereof. More, seeing he that owes them is God, it is
piety too, to yield them. Tertul. in apolog. cap. 39.
Pietas est pro pietate sumptus facere: i. It is piety for pieties sake, and
the setting forth of religion, to be at cost, and Philo. Iud. lib. de praem. et
honor. Sacerdotu^.
victus sacerdotum lautior, publicae pietatis est indicium: that is, The ample
and condign maintenance of the ministers of the Church, is an undoubted
argument of our public Piety, and true love and devotion unto God: as contra
of the contrary.

On the other side, to with hold them, or to take them To detain them, it is.
1. Sacrilege against God.
or any part of them from God is iniquity, it is injury because so the right
owner is wronged and defrauded: more, seeing the owner of these things is not
man but God, it is impiety, yea, it is sacrilege, the highest and the
horriblest sin in that kind that can be. If he does sin that robs or
defraudes a private man, and he do more sin that robs the Country, or
ransackes the princes treasure, how much more must he needs sin, and be
guilty of grievous transgression, that defraudeth, that robs, that
ransacketh, not a private man, not a Prince among men, but God himself?
Justin. leg. 1. digest. ad legem Iuliam. Sacrilege worse then treason.
Proximum Sacrilegio crimen est quod Maiestatis dicitur: that is, Treason is a
petty sin in comparison of sacrilege. The reason is rendered by Saint
Augustine. Aug. co^t. cres^ lib. 4. cap. 10.
Tanto grauius est peccatum, quanto committi nonpotest ^isi in Deum, that is.
This sin is so much the more grievous and abominable, because it can be
committed against none other, but against God him self.

As they are Gods by reservation, so are they the ministers of God by
assignation, for them has God passed over (as Before page 5
is already noted) for the use of his sanctuary, for the maintenance of his
ministers therein, that so 1. Cor. 9. 14.
qui predicant euangelium, ex euangelio viviuant: they which preach the Gospel
may live of the Gospel: and Theoph. in locum. Phil. Just. de praem. et hon.
Sacerd.
neither they that receive such things be ashamed to receive them, as if they
lived by alms, or were sustained by the sweat of other men's brows: nor they
that pay them be insolent against the receivers, as if they gave to such their
own goods, and nourished them at their charge. Being then theirs by
assignation, whosoever take or keep from them 2. Sacrilege against the Church.
these things, or do not give them in due sort, are guilty of farther sin
in that as they rob God, so man also. And by how much it must needs be a
greater sin for children to rob their parents, or subjects their prince, so
it is and needs must be a greater sin, to defraud and rob the men to whom
these things are assigned and allotted by God, I mean his Church and the
ministers thereof, then to rob or defraud some ordinary and private persons.
He (says Solomon) Prou. 28. 24.
that robs his father and mother, and says it is no sin, is the companion
of a man that is a destroyer, what then may we say, is he that defraudeth and
robs God his Matthew. 6. 32.
celestial father, the minister of God his 1, Cor. 4. 15.
spiritual father, and the Church of God his Galat. 4. 26.
mother, and this all at once, and in one action? The God whom such wrong, the
Lord I say that has testified, that Matthew. 10. 14. Luke 10. 16.
whosoever receives and condignely entertaineth them, receives him, and
whosoever dispiseth, Ignat. ad. Tral. et ad Magn.
and contemptibly handles them, either for their doctrine or their persons,
despises him, will no doubt revenge such iniquity as done unto himself. And
as David extremely handled the children of Ammon, that shamefully entreated 2.
Sam. 10. 4. Chrysostom. in. 2. Tim. homil. 2.
his messengers, by shauing their beards, and cutting short their garments: so
questionless the Matthew. 22. 42. Couel. in praefat. to Carlet.
son of David will severely punish all such as do and shall contemptuously
handle his servants by cripping their livings and clipping their benefices in
such sort, that they are feign to eat the shells and take the straw, when
others have the kernels and the corn: and are enforced, as 1. King. 18. 13
the Prophets of God in a time of persecution, to live parce and duriter with
bread and water in a cave or a corner; and to go in a frise coat, or a
flannell wastcoat, which Dionysius Valor. Max. lib. 1. cap. 2. Br^son. li. 6.
c. 9.
an Atheist, a Church-robber, thought warm enough for winter, and cold enough
for summer, while, not the prophets of the groves, nor the monks of the
cloisters, but the gallants of the court and the great ones of the country
Luc. 16. 19.
are decked with the fairest, and crammed with the fattest of their portions.

2. Are they Gods? The notice thereof ought to inform us all, that howsoever
these things may seem much These things are not too much for God or his
ministers.
in value, and great in quantity, yet they are not, nor we ought not to
account them too much, too great, for Fent. Sermon. on Pro. 20. 25. p. 26 M. Min.
c. 7. et. 8
what part or portion of our goods should it beseem God to have, but such as
is great and honorable? Is it meet to offer but to some terrene prince or noble
man, any thing but such as is of some good value? fair, and fit for us to
give, and him to receive? such as might argue our affection toward him, and
move his liking toward us? much more is it fit when we offer to our God, 1.
Tim. 6. 15.
the king of kings and Lord of Lords, that it should be, not some contemptible
and beggarly portion, (the Mal. 1. 13. 14.
sure argument of an irreligious and undevout mind) but as they Exodus 35. 5.
that serve God with a willing and a glad heart, such as is C. Quicunque i. in.
16. q. 17.
good and godly. C. vlt. in f^. 49. did.
indignum prorsus est dare deo, quod dedignatur homo.

And if we look but to them, to whom Number. 18. 31. 1. Cor. 9. 14.
for the service they do him, God has assigned the Duar. lib. 8. c. i.
vsum fructum of what is his, which also 1. Tim. 5. 17.
do labor for us in verbo et doctrina, in the word and doctrine, and speak
unto us words whereby Act. 11. 14.
we and ours may be saved, is it not fit and necessary, that Tho. in 22^. qdl.
art. 8. Lauater in Pro. 30. 6. Calu. in Deuteronomy. 12.
they be so seated, and so provided for that they may commode and congrue
viuere, live, if not richly and plenteously Chryso. in epist. ad Tit. c. 2. et
in Phillip. 2. hom. 9. Pet. Mar. loc. co^. class. 3 cap. 2. Rebuff. de cong.
port. page 382. fig. ^6. Ambr. in. 1. Tim. 5. et in 1. These. 5. Bucer. de reg.
Chri. lib. 2. c. 13. Suru. of discip. p. 118.
at least commodiously and competently, and not inconueniently and needily?
that so, they may attend their ministry alone, and not for necessities sake,
2. Tim. 2. 4. Act. 6. 2.
entangle themselves in secular affairs, and so attend it, that they Heb. 13.
17. 1. These. 5. 12.
may fulfill it with joy and not with grief, as ( King on Jonas. page. 463.
with grief and sorrow unto our shame that profess, and so long have
professed the Gospel I speak it,) no small number of our ministers yet are
enforced to do.

That God expects these things his own dealing declares, Gods dealing among
his own people a president.
who Number. 18. totum.
when he did once make claim to any thing by name, it was a portion no less,
viz. the tenth specially, together with the vows and offerings of the people.
And when he did demand an allowance for himself to maintain his Priests and
Levites withal, albeit Number. 3. 46. et 26. 62. compared with the other tribes.
cap. eod.
they were one of the least tribes in Israel, yet it was so much as in all
probability did far exceed any other tribes revenues: and the same in such
sort, both Number. 35. 3. etc.
for their own habitation, and for their household provision, and keeping of
their cattle for use and service about them, was as commodious and fit as to
any of the rest: as he that will consider the particulars, which I have Page 4.
before partly nominated, may plainly and plentifully perceive.

That the Church of God generally never thought these Practice of former times
too much, the practice of former ages may assure us, in which they were so
far from accounting the tithes, the tithes alone, (as many do now) to be
too much for God and his Church, that to the intent, the ministers of God might
have wherewith, and whereon to The view and consideration of the particulars
which the Church yet has or once had, evidently shows this.
live competently and condignely, it added unto the tithes no small nor few
augmentations besides, and provided to every several parish Church the whole
land thoroughout, both edifices and grounds annexed answerable to the estate of
each place and parish, as without the which by the tithes only, they saw that
the ministers of the Gospel C. Non cogantur. 4. did. gloss. in. l. seru.
vrbanis. ff. de legate. 3 doct. in c. episcopus. de Praebend etc. Present
experiance.
could not, as indeed they cannot) commodiously live, and competently be
maintained.

And that in very deed these things are not too much, the very estate of the
ministry duly considered, sound reason will soon yield and confirm. For
certain it is, how great and populous soever the place and parish be, and by
that means (if sacrilege be not seated there) the profits far greater, and
more then in sundry others of less compass, yet if we consider, that where
many people are, are many poor, and so needs 1. Tim. 3. 2.
great hospitality, and Act. 18, 9.
where is great charge of souls needs great ministerial labor, and
spiritual attendance: as also, that there is great difference in the deserts
and gifts of several men, we may conceive, that to the end due and necessary
hospitality may be kept: that the cure of souls may be duly and well
attended: Diversity in learning requires diversity in maintenance.
and, that men of worthy gifts and excellent learning may have reward and
living somewhat answerable, it is necessary that there should be, not a parity
of living in all places, but in some little, in some more, in some much. And
yet shall they find that (such is the unequal division of parishes) as the
meanest are commonly too mean for any, so the greatest even in their just,
first and best form, will be little enough for some.

And therefore their course, was very preposterous and unequal, which, as if
all places and persons were alike, and that might be enough for a minister
every where, which might serve well enough somewhere, so handled the matter,
that The greater the parish is, the less is the ministers living: and scant
one benefice among twenty, or thirty, is fit and competent for a learned man.
By the means whereof it follows that Number. 26. 54.
contrary to the Law of God and good order, The greatest cures have least and
worst intendance: and, The poorest people have meanest or no hospitality. Yet
deserve the first authors thereof some excuse, because first, the extraordinary
duties and auailes of the Church then in use, and likely more and more to
increase: (which yet Rebuff. de congru. port. page 388. fig. 83. 86.
ought not to have been accounted of* because of the uncertainty) secondly,
the payment of personal tithes in a better sort then now a days: 17. Ed. 2. 5.
9. H. 4. 2. 15. H. 6. 2. 4. H. 7. 8. 24. H. 8. 3. etc.
thirdly, the low Whereof whosoever observes our histories for 500. years together
til the days of Q. Mary; shall find that even in such years as are chronicles
for years of great deatth, the prices of things were such (for the most part)
as we now would account reasonable and very good cheap.
prices of all things necessary to live by; and fourthly, the single estate of
the Clergy, with other like considered; the difference and ods was not so
great as now it is, nor the living so incompetent and beggarly. But what excuse
can there be for them, which seeing such alteration of times, and such
insufficiency and want of maintenance, do yet sit still, let all alone, and as
if all were already very well; provide no remedy, no ease for that which whosoever
has but half an eye may see; but one dram of good understanding may
perceive, but one scruple of good conscience must needs consent, and but one
grain of religious affection, confess needs some redress and amendment.

defense or excuse?) an impossibility.

But we can hardly believe that that estate which had Note here how easy it
were to right the Church, whereof see more at large in my M. Min. cap. 10.
power enough in taking away the rights of the Church, has not power likewise
(if it had will) to right them again. Of for some part of amends, that it were
a matter of extreme difficulty; First, to repeal two or three hard and
unequal branches of a statute, that so the body thereof, which is absolutely
sound and good, might have his due and full force; Secondly, to cut off those
injurious prohibitions of fact, whose chief service is to undo the Church,
and by little and little to take away that modicum which yet remains unto it;
Thirdly, to restore to the Church her tithes in kind: and according to the Law
already in force. Fourthly, to provide at the least, (the restitution of the
whole being immedicabile vulnus, and a matter farther then we may preuail
Zepper. de leg. l 4. c. 10 p. 366.
vel precibus vel pecunijs not to be hoped for,) that in every impropriated
Church, there should be ordained a vicar perpetual, and the same conuenably
endowed; as also, Fifthly, that for personal tithes, which are hitherto, An.
2. Ed. 6. c. 13. Pulton AB. tithes. Number. 30. 31.
granted us in name, but taken away in deed, there might for the due
maintenance of our ministers in towns and cities, some As after the manner of
London. See M. Min. cap. 8. page 154. Ibid. for pers. tithes. pa. 54. 81. et.
132.
uniform and reasonable course or composition be generally settled.



But, ought it to seem a small thing in our eyes, that no small number of our
Churches be altogether unprovided of any fit and competent means for
maintenance of their Ministers, and by consequent that many thousand souls in
the land Prou. 29. 18. Math. 15. 14. Romans 10. 14.
do perish for want of teaching? If they were newly converted from Paganism,
or lately of desert, or ruinated places made habitable For in many of them
nothing is left for the minister but a pension of 10. or. 8. or five pound, yea
in some places less the^ 4. pound, per an though the impropriation be worth.
1. 2. 3 ye or 400. pound per an. See Mr. Crashaw. ep. Dedic. before Perkins.
, they could not lightly have been worse provided for, then many of them are,
nor is there fear, they should have suffered such extremities at the hands of
cruel and barbarous enemies in time of war, as they have sustained of their
friends in the days of peace. Is it nothing that we have professed the Gospel
in all peace and liberty so many years, and yet not made due provision for the
ministers of the Gospel, either in town or country; but do entertain them
so basely, so unworthily, House. Ser. 1. on Matthew. 21. 12. page 34.
that the estate even of mean artizans and ordinanary tradesmen is better then
many of theirs? Is it nothing that 1. Tim. 6. 11. 1. Sam. 9. 6.
the men of God; the 1. Cor. 3. 5.
ministers of Jesus Christ, those men which Romans 10. 15.
preach to us the glad tidings of salvation, and Hebr. 13. 17.
watch for our souls, and whom alone the Scripture pronounces 1. Tim. 5. 16.
worthy of double honor, which also in former ages were wont to be honored
Genesis 47. 22. Numb. 8. et. 35.
with freedoms and immunities Cassiod. lib. 2. ep. 20. Iud. charond. ad leg.
Phil Iud. de praem. et honor. sacerd. C. de eccles. et Episcop. 1. We demand
nothing but our own and which is still paid, one or other where.
above any other degree or calling, are with us more pressed with heavy
burdens then any, and depressed none so much with hard measure and
unconscionable courses? And whereas many private causes and things of very
small moment have often had hearing, and found remedy, is our condition alone so
contemptible, or our cause only so unworthy consideration that it only may
have no success? and he be censured as factious, that shall but open his
lips on our behalf?

First, If we did demand any thing, but what in right is ours* and what in
some or other places, is still yielded to the Church, we might with some
color be rejected: but when as we crave and claim of that is other men's
Genes. 14. 23. Crash. ep. dedic. before Perkins.
not so much as a thread or shoo latchet; least any should say, They have made
us rich, their sin is without color of defense that see the wants of the
Church, and distress of the Ministers thereof, and yet take no course for the
supply or remedy thereof in any measure.

Secondly, If that we demand were some trifle, a matter of small moment and
value, our motion might with some 2. That we demand is no trifle.
show of equity be contemned; for what is less beseeming wise men and worthy,
then to contend or argue De lana caprina, for a matter of nothing? But seeing
now, what through alteration of times, and what through unequal 3. We are not
otherwise sufficiently provided for.
courses at the first, that which is deteyned from us, is in many places, as
much at least as that we have: and that there is scant a parish in the land,
wherein the Church one way or other sustaineth not some indemnity and loss,
the cause being so great and so general, it will well beseem both us to make
demand, and them (whom it concerns) to take due notice, and yield just
restitution thereof.

Thirdly, if we were otherwise sufficiently provided for, and had even without
that which is detained but a competent living, some reason there might seem why
we should have no hearing: but seeing what by unequal division of parishes at
the first, the unequal division, or rather dissipation of Church-liuings
since, the multitude of unreasonable customs and prescriptions, together with
the continual imparity of learned men's deserts, that pretense at this time
especially The whole being but enough how should half, a quarter or less a
great deal, be sufficient?
can have no place, there is no cause, why the deaf ear should be turned upon
us: unless any will imagine that we Romans 10. 15.
the Preachers of the Gospel, Matthew. 5. 14.
the lights of the world, Matthew. 24 45. Luke. 12. 42.
the stewards and 1. Cor. 4. 1.
diposers of the Ministeries of God, Act. 26. 18. Act. 16. 17.
the leaders unto life eternal, and 1. Cor. 3, 5.
Ministers of salvation, are less worthy to be equally respected, duly
provided for, and condignely rewarded, then An. 12. Ric. 2. 4 an. 23. H. 6. c.
13. an. 6. H. 8. 3. an. 5. Eliz. c. 4.
the very servants, An. 25. Ed. 3. 2 et 34. cap. 9. an. 13. Ri. 2. 8. an. 23.
H. 6. 13. an. 7. H. 8. c. 5. Pult. ab. Just. of p. Number. 66. ^. ^bidem.
the common laborers, and the u manuary artificers of our parish. 4. They be
not a few that desire it.


Fourthly, If the motion were but the suggestion of some few of the Clergy, or
among them, but of the poorer sort, vicars of Churches and other like, (and yet
why should not Deuteronomy. 24. 14. et. 26. 7. Prou. 21. 13. et 29. 7. 14.
the cry of the poor be heard, and Ovid. de Trist. lib. 5. ^leg. 1.
they that have most cause, be suffered most to complain?) it might with some
show be contemned: but since it cannot be denied, but that the number is great
both of the greater and superior sort of the Clergy, as well as of the meaner
and inferior, besides no small number not Clergy men, and those not mean
persons only, well affected to the Clergy, that desire and labor the same,
this so general and weighty a cause, may justly challenge mature
consideration, speedy and condign regard.

Fifthly. Lastly, if the cause were merely civil and humane, we might with
some good color have the repulse, 5. The cause is Gods.
but being, as it is, a matter altogether of divine right, wherein no man has
power to set God his bounds, and where he has right to this or that, to limit
him in lieu thereof, what pleases them, we ought to be admitted to claim for
God, and permitted, yea and assisted by humane law, to receive the same.

Thirdly, are they Gods? that may teach us, that we must pay these things, not
as many do, as we are affected to These things must be paid as to God
himself.
the party which is to receive them, but as to God himself, whose they are.
For be he worthy or unworthy, yet God is ever worthy of them. The priests
under Moses law are reproved by the Prophets and termed Isa. 56. 10. Ezech,
13. 3. and 34. 2. Hos. 4. et 5. Mich. 3. 5. Zach. 11. 17.
dumb dogs, deceivers, sleepie watch men, Idols, etc. But yet the people are
not advised and taught by the Prophets therefore to withhold from them their
appointed portions: but Mal. 3. 9.
the contrary. Never was there greater corruption among them, never more
wickedness and all kind of unworthiness then in our Saviors time, yet h he
sends the leper cleansed to the b Matthew. 8. 4.
priest, and bids him offer as was appointed, and that to testify that
Melancth. in locum.
the public ministry must be maintained, be the ministers never so weak,
never so wicked. Many do object (says Gualt. in Matthew. 23. hom. 269.
one) plerosque decimis turpiter abuti, etc. That some do filthily abuse
tithes, and that many do employ them to unlawful and profane uses. But yet
(says he) This is but a balde excuse, for of such abuses they shall shall give
account to God, which do commit such things, not who pay the tithes. And what
reason will excuse him that withholds from the needy his necessary living,
least happily he abuse it unto surfeiting and drunkenness. It is the part of
every Christian Romans 13. 7.
to pay to every man his due, and not to go about to excuse his own iniquity
by another fault. Hitherto he.

And therefore as they did very ill, which before our time, under color of
suppressing the licentiousnes, and brideling of the insolency of the popish or
unlearned clergy, did pull from the Church what they could: so do they
worse, which do not only not restore the same again, but daily practice all
the shifts and devises that may be, as who can never be satisfied, to pull
away still more and There be that still labor to pull more from the Church.
Foem. Mo. ni. b. House. on Matthew. 21. Ser. 2. pa. 33.
more from the Church, and so to bring unto, and to keep in extreme
needinesse and poverty the true ministers, and worthy preachers of the
Gospel also. That sin had some color, this has none. But O Lord God Psalm.
126. 2.
that our mouth may be filled with laughter, and our tongue with joy, mollify
their hearts, or else, make them and theirs like Oreb and Zeb, yea make them
and all their counselors, furtherers and partakers like as Zeba and Zalmana,
which yet say, Let us take to our selves the houses of God in possession, and
seek still to sease upon the inheritance of the Lord, as if it were set to be
a pray unto their teeth. Amen. Amen.

Lastly, are they Psalm. 83. 11. Boys Dominic. post. Trin. 10. p. 227.
Gods? If then we rob and defraud, we God will plague them that pay him not
these things duly and justly.
spoil and debar God of those things any manner of way, let us look for
the hand of God to smite us, the wrath and plagues of God to Zepper. de leg.
lib. 4. cap. 10. C. multi. i. q. 1.
consume us for such sin and iniquity. God himself does plainly tell us, Mal.
3. That for this sin he does curse even Mal. 3. 8.
whole nations. As they by their unreasonable customs, and compositions, by
violence and usurpation, take from him his tithes and oblations, so he by
unseasonable weather, by caterpillars, Hag. 1. 6. Math. 7. 2.
and other devouring means, does and will take from them the increase of their
stocks, the fruits of their fields, etc. that so he may bring penury into
their houses, as they do into his, and make them have empty barnes and
hungry bellies, that leave his barnes empty, and his servants in hunger and
need. For this is (as Aug. sermon. de temp. 219. Idem homil. 47. et de rectit.
cath. conuers. Iac. Gryn. in Mal. 3. Ridl. view of L. p. 177
Saint Augustine long ago observed) Domini iustissima consuetudo, the Lords
custom most just and equal, a thing that he does very often execute: what? vt
si illi tu decimam non dederis, tu ad decimam reuoceris, that is, If thou give
him not his tenth, thou, Andr. Hisp. reg. dec. 9.
having lost thy nine parts, be brought to a tenth. And therefore (as the same
father peremptorily C. 16. Maiores q. 17. Nicola. 1. cause 16. q. 2. Rab. Maur.
in Number. lib. 2. C. 22. ^t 23.
affirms, now there are so many tempests by sea and land; so much sterilitie
and dearth of victuals; so often and so great mortalities and famines, because
people do not pay to God his due, but detain unto themselves, some by one
means, some by another, that which is Gods. Other of the fathers, as Orig. in
Number. homil. 11. Hier. in mal. 3.
Origin, Hierom, and others have observed the like. And not the fathers only,
but likewise the ancient Council. Tribur. c. 13. conc. worm. c. 16. q. 1.
synod. Arelat. 4. cap. 9.
counsels and sacred synods of those first and best times, that so we might
know the same to have been also the common doctrine, and the very faith of
the whole Church, have so decreede and concluded.

According unto whom, for our own land and time, though our other sins be
many, and God no doubt, does for diverse transgressions send among us diverse
and sundry plagues, yet I make no question of it, but that for The Principal
cause why God many times smites us with famins, unseasonable weather etc.
this one sin, this so great, so common and usual a sin, viz. the
defrauding of God and his Church, the manifold sacrilege every where
committed among us, the contempt and wrong that way done to our Churchmen both
in town and country, the ill and slender provision made for the Ministers of
the Gospel by us that so long have professed the Gospel; even for this massy
sin, or rather mass of sins it is, that we are so often smitten with famines
and dearth, with unseasonable and bad weather, scorching drought and drenching
wet, floods and fires, with loss of goods and needinesse of all things, that
so we may receive a just and full reward according to our wicked works.

The particular falls and miserable ends of sundry, such as have lift up their
hand in this sort against God, as that of Melanc. de gest. reg. Angl. lib. 3.
Polid. virg. anglic. hist. lib. 10.
William Rufus here at home, and Gagn. lib. 4. hist. franc. Rebuff. de dec. q.
10 fig. 7.
Charles Martel in France may teach us, what danger it is to be adventurers
this way. And where as there have been such in these later times, House. ser.
2. on Matthew. 21. 12. p. 35. 38.
as under color of friendship and holy pretenses, have made no little spoil
of that is Gods, if we consider what has been the end of such, may we not
say with the Psalm. 78. 66. Bern. in Cantic. ser. 65. Ridl. view. p. 170.
Psalmist. 77. Percussit inimicos in posteriora, that is, that God has wounded
his enemies on the hinder parts, and put them to a perpetual shame? and see
that fulfilled in them which is written in another place Psalm. 109. 10. Foem.
Monar. in the conclus. o. 3. a. Couel. in praef. to Carlton.
Let the stranger spoil his labor: and, let his posterity be destroyed, and
in the next generation let his name be clean put out, It is an old rule, yet
not more old then true. Ex male quaesitis, vix gaudet tertius haeres, that is,
Seldom do goods ill got descend to the third heir. Church-goods are the
right Sabellic. Aene. 5. lih. 8. p. 821. Gueuarra. Survey of the preten.
discip. c. 21.
aurum Tholossanum, scant a man that unlawfully takes to himself any part
thereof, ever thriues afterward: very like to the Arc of the God of Israel, if
they 1. Sam. 5, 3.
be forced into the temple of Dagon, or 1. Sam. 5. 9. 1. Sam. 6. 19. God will
bless them that pay him these things justly.
touched by strangers, they will be their overthrow.

On the other side, if we render to God his due, and rightly give him the
things that be his, we may safely promise unto our selves Gods assured favor
and blessing. We have his word for it Mal. 3. if we bring omnes decimas Mal. 3.
8.
all the tithes into his barn, and take such order that there may be
sufficient meat in his house for them that do him and us service there, he
will open the windows of heaven unto us, and power out upon us a blessing of
plenty without measure: he will rebuke the deuourer that he shall not destroy
the fruit of our ground, our land shall be a pleasant land, and so we Hag. 2.
20.
shall be repaid at large, and plentifully restored the loss we might fear,
and the hindrance we might doubt we should do our selves in yielding him his
due. He can say no more, but bid us Mal. 3. 10.
prove him withal, and make trial a year or two, whether he will be as good
as his word, and fulfill his promise or not, And Gryn. in Mal. 3
would to God in hac re long maxima, in this so great and weighty a cause, we
could at length be induced to prove what God would do? He does not use to
deceive me^ with vain words, nor draw the^ on to their hurt, if therefore
there be any truth in him and his word (and what greater impiety can there
be, then to doubt thereof?) It is the ready way to thrive and grow rich,
Maiores nostri ideo copijs omnibus abundabant, quia Deo decimas, Caesari censum
dabant, that is, Our ancestors (says Saint Aug. C. maiores. cause. 16. q. 17.
Augustine) did therefore abound in all wealth and riches, because they always
duly paid to God his tithes, and to Caesar his tribute. And we may justly
think that no small part of that plenty and abundance which our ears have
heard our own forefathers had, was because in this point they were more
righteous then we. They made that conscience Our fathers in their ignorence
showed a better conscience this way, the^ many of us in our knowledge.
of paying their tithes justly and fully, that we do not. They would not for a
world take to themselves that they knew to be, as they rightly and religiously
termed it, Gods part, They believed they should never prosper, if they should
deceive the Church or rob God of his due. They thought it their duty, if not
Cassiod. lib. 3 epist. 9. Foem. Mon. o. 2. a.
noua construere, that is, to give somewhat themselves to the Church, at least,
yet vetera conseruare, to keep most carefully that was already given. They
counted it their glory to be found to be liberal to the Church; yea, so
careful and precise were they in these matters, that many times they would in
their last wills bequeath some thing To be seen in many Testamentary records.
pro decimis oblitis, for forgotten tithes. And therefore God did bless them:
he did increase their store and multiply their seed; he made their flocks to
prove well, and their cattle to prosper. If we that exceed them in
knowledge, would but equal them in practice: and we that go before them in
profession, would but imitate them (for this point) in our conversation, no
doubt we should succeed them in plenty as well as in place: find Gods favor
as ready to attend us as them: and see our fields and flocks, our grounds and
goods more fertile and fruitful, more luckie and prosperous then often they be.
He has said it Titus 1. 2.
that cannot lie, 1. Sam. 2. 30*
Them that honor me, I will honor, and honor Prou. 3. 6.
the Lord with thy substance, and with the first fruits (the best) of thine
increase: so shall thy Barnes be filled, and thy presses run over with new
wine, or in plainer terms, Council. Trib. cap. 13.
Da mihi decimam, and multiplicabo tibi nouem: that is, Give me my tenth
duly, and then I will multiply thy nine parts assuredly.

And now beloved to conclude, and bring my long labor The conclusion
exhortatiue.
wherewith happily, I have wearied you as well as my self, to an end: Consider
I beseech you well what I have said, and 2. Tim. 2. 7.
the Lord Jesus give you understanding. If ought distaste you, yet rashly reject
it not, do first as did Saint Paul's hearers. Act. 17. Act. 17. 11. Ioh. 5 39.
Search the scriptures, whether it be so or no, weigh what I have spoken John
^. 24.
in an equal balance, consult not in matters divine, Galat. 1. 16.
with flesh and blood, let not selfewill, covetousness, custom, company, and
other sinister respects blind and ouerrule you. What convicted by truth, the
2. Esdr. 4. 41.
force whereof is very great, and soundness of argument and demonstration,
you find consonant to verity and equity, that practice, remembering well that
not they are blessed which hear the word only, but they which Luke 11. 28.
hear it and do it: that Act. 5. 29.
we ought rather to obey God then man: and that we must fit and frame not the
word, as if it were Pigh. Hierarch lib. 3. cap. 3 Hos. lib. 3. de auto^i^.
scrip. Cusan. ad Bohem. epist. 2.
a leaden rule, to our actions and time, but our actions and time to the word.
If you hear and yet will not obey, but harden your hearts, and say within your
selves licet persuaseris, non persuadebis, that is, Postn. p. 97.
Though you have persuaded us to the right, yet to the practice persuade us you
shall not: you have nothing left to cloak your sin withal. I take 2. Cor. 1.
23.
God to witness to my soul, that I have not handled the word of God
deceitfully, but have showed you the plain and right way, and laid before you
with all faithfulness and sincerity the very truth and law of God. And
therefore I beseech you, as you desire to approve your selves Iam. 1. 22. Revel.
1. 3.
not hearers only of the word, but doers also of the work, that with all
readiness of heart and will, you embrace and follow it. That so giving to God
those things that be Gods justly without alteration, fully without diminution,
freely without corruption, and timely without delay or ouerhast, God thereby
being rightly honored with your substance, and the Ministers of God duly
provided for, and condignlie entertained, you may avoid the evils which hang
over their heads that do it not, and enjoy Gods blessings and favors which he
has certainly promised, and will most assuredly perform unto all those that
do according to this Commandment.

The God of mercy, author of all grace make you wise unto salvation, enlighten
your minds that you may discern things that differ, and guide your hearts that
you may delight to do those things that be well pleasing in his sight, to the
edifying of your brethren, furtherance of the Gospel, comfort of your own
souls, and withal and above al, to the eternal glory of God our heavenly
Father.

To whom with the Son and the holy Ghost three persons and one everliving God
be rendered and ascribed all honor, praise, power and dominion both now and
ever: Amen.

FINIS.
Faults escaped.
In the first page of the Epistle Dedicatorie, last line but two for, thus,
read this. Page 5. line 9. read complained. Page 10. line 17. read of any,
at any time.


