A MIDNIGHTS Trance: Wherein is discoursed of DEATH, the nature of SOVLES, and
estate of Immortality.

As it was Written at the desire of a Nobleman, By W. D.

LONDON, Printed by George Purslow, for John Budge, and are to be sold at the
sign of the Greene-Dragon in Paul's Churchyard. 1619.

A MIDNIGHTS Trance, wherein is discoursed of Death, The nature of Souls, and
estate of Immortality.
THough it has been doubted if there be in the Soul of Man such imperious
and superexcellent Power, as that it can by the vehement and earnest working of
it, deliver knowledge to another without bodily Organs, and by the only
conceptions and Ideas of it, produce real effects, yet it has been ever and
of all thought infallible and most certain, that it often (either by outward
inspiration, or some secret motion of it self) is augure of its own
Misfortunes, and has shadows of coming Dangers presented unto it, a while
before they fall forth. Hence so many strange apparitions and signs, true
Visions, Dreams most certain, uncouth languishings and drowsinesse, of which
to seek a reason, unless from the sparkling of GOD in the Soul; or from the
God-like sparkles of the Soul, were to make Reason unreasonable, in reasoning
of things transcending her reach.

Having often and diverse times, when I had given my self to rest in the quiet
solitariness of the night, found my imagination troubled with a confused
fear, no, sorrow, or Horror, which interrupting sleep did confound my senses,
and rouse me up all appalled, and transported in a sudden agony and sad
amazednes; of such an unaccustomed perturbation and namelesse woe, not knowing,
nor being able to imagine any apparent cause, carried away with the stream of
my (then doubting) thoghts, I was brought to ascribe it to that secret
fore-knowledg and presageing Power of the Propheticke Mind; and to interpret
such an agony to be to the Spirit, as a faintnes and universal weariness is
to the Body, a token of following sickness, or as the Earthquakes are to
great Cities, Harbingers of greater calamities, or as the roaring of the Sea is,
in a still calm, a sign of some ensuing tempest.

Hereupon, not thinking it strange, if whatsoever is humane should befall me,
knowing how Providence abates grief, and discountenances crosses, and that as
we should not despair of evils, which may happen us, we should not trust too
much in those goods we enjoy: I began to turn over in my remembrance all that
could afflict miserable mortality, and to forecast every thing that with a
Mask of Horror could show it self to humane eyes, till in the end, as by
unities and points, Mathematicians are brought to great numbers and huge
greatness, after many fantastical gla^ces of mankinds sorrow, and those
encumbrances which follow life, I was brought to think, and with amazement, on
the last of humane evils, or (as one said) the last of all dreadful and
terrible things, Death.

And why may we not believe that the Soul (though darkely) foreseeing, and
having secret intelligence of that sharp diuorcement it is to have from the
body, should be ouergrieued and surprised with an uncouth and unaccustomed
sorrow? And at the first encounter examining their near union, long
familiarity and friendship, with the great chang, pain, and vglines, which is
apprehended to be in Death, it shall not appear to be without reason.

They had their being together, parts they are of one reasonable Creature, the
hurting of the one, is the enfeebling of the working of the other, what dear
contentments does the Soul enjoy by the senses? They are the gates and
windows of its knowledge, the Organs of its delight; if it be grievous to an
excellent Lutanist to be long without a Lute, how much more must the want of
so noble an instrument be painful to the Soul? And if two Pilgrims who have
wandered some few miles together, have a hearts grief when they part, what must
the sorrow be at the parting of two so loving friends, as is the Soul and Body?

Death is the violent estranger of acquaintance, the eternal diuorcer of
Marriage, the rauisher of the Children from the Parents, the stealer of the
Parents, from the Children, the intomber of Fame, the only cause of
forgetfulness, by which men talk of them that are gone away, as of so many
shadows, orageworn Stories. It is not overcome by pride, made meek by
flattery, stayed by Time; Wisdom save this, can prevent and help any thing:
nor Youth, nor Virtue, nor Beauty, can make it relent and become partial: It is
the reasonles breaker off of al actions, by this we enjoy no more the sweet
pleasures of Earth, nor behold the stately Vault of Heaven, Sun perpetually
sets, Stars never rise unto us, all strength by this is taken away, all
comeliness defaced, Glory made ignoble, Honor turned into contempt: This in an
hour robs us of, what with so great toil and care in many years, we have
heaped together: Successions of Linages by this are cut short; Kingdoms want
Heirs, and greatest States remain Orphans. By Death we are exiled from this
excellent City of the World, it is no more a world unto us, nor we no more
People unto it.

That Death, naturally is terrible and to be abhorred, it cannot altogether be
denied, it being a priuatio^ of Life, and a not-being, and every privation
being abhorred of nature, and evil of it self, yet I have often thought that
even naturally, to a mind by only nature resolved and prepared, it is more
terrible in conceit then in verity, and at the first glance, then when well
looked upon, and that rather by the weakness of our fantasy, then by what is
in it; and that the solemnities and shows of it, did add much more ugliness
unto it, then otherwise it has: to auerre which conclusion, when I had
gathered my astonished thoughts, I began thus with my self:

If on the great Theater of this Earth, amongst the numberless number of Men,
this condition were only proper to thee and thine, then undoubtedly, thou
had reason to repine at so unjust and partial a Law: But since it is a
necessity, from the which never an age bypast has been exempted, and unto
which those which be, and so many as are to come, are thralled, it being as
common, as any the most vulgar thing to sense, why should thou in thy peevish
opposition take so inevitable and familiar a chance to heart? This is the broad
path of mortality, our general home; behold what millions have trod it before
thee, what multitudes shall after thee, with them who at that same instant
run. In so universal a calamity (if DEATH be one) private complaints cannot
be heard, with so many royal Palaces, it is no loss to see thy poor cabin
burn. Shall the Heavens stay their euer-roling wheels (for what is the motion
of them? but the motion of a swift, and euer-whirling wheel, which twineth
forth, and again vproleth our Life,) and hold still time, to prolong thy
miserable days? As if they had nothing to do else, but to serve thy humor. Thy
Death is a piece of the order of this All, a part of the life of this World:
for while the World is the World, some creatures must die, and other take Life.
Eternal things are raised far above this Sphere of generation and
corruption, where the first matter, like an euer-flowing and ebbing Sea, with
diverse waves, but the same water remains; what is below in the universality
of the kind, not in it self does abide, Man a long line of years has been,
this Man every hundredth is swept away. This Center is the sole Region of Death,
the Grave where every thing that takes life, must rotte, a Stage of change,
only glorious in the inconstancy, and manifold alterations of it, which though
many, seem yet to abide one, and being one, are yet ever many. The never
agreeing bodies of the Elementall Brethren turn one in another, the Earth
changes her countenance with the Seasons, sometimes looking cold and naked,
other times, hot and flowrie; nay I cannot tell how, but even the lowest of
those heavenly bodies, that mother of Months, and Lady of Seas and moisture,
as if she were a mirror of our constant inconstancy, by her too great
nearenesse unto us seems to participate of our changes, never seeing us twice
with that same face, whiles appearing dark, now pale, sometimes again shining
unto us. Death no less then Life, does here act a part, the taking away of
what is old, being the making of a way for what is young. Which since it is so,
and must of necessity be so, thou must learn to will, that which he wills,
whose very willing gives being to all that it wills, and rather to reverence
the ord'rer, then repine at the order, for we be borne not to give laws to
God, and his Lieutenant Nature, but to obey those Laws which they have given.

If thou do complain that there shall be a Time, in the which thou shall not
be, why do thou not too regreat that there was a Time, in the which thou wast
not? And so, that thou art not as old as that enlifening Planet of Time? For
not to have been a thousand year before this moment, is as much to be
deplored, as not to be a thousand after it. We know what Death is by the
thought of that Time, and estate of our selves, which was ere we were. Death
is not to be, that will be after us, which long long ere we were, was. Our
Nephews have that same reason to vex themselves, that they were not young men
in our days, which we have to complain that we shall not be old in theirs;
they who fore-went us, did make place unto us: and shall we grieve to leave a
room to them who come after us? The Violets have their time, though they live
not in the cold Winter, and the Gilly-flowers keep their season, though they
spread not their leaves in the Spring.

Empires, States, Kingdoms, have by the doom of the supreme Providence their
fatal periods, great Cities lie sadly buried in their dust, Arts and Sciences
have not only their eclipses, but their waynings and deaths, the ghastly
Wonders of the World raised by the Ambition of ages are overthrown, the
excellent Fabric of this Universe it self shall one day suffer ruin, or a
change like a ruin, and poor Earth-lings thus to be handled, complain. Seek
now the Assyrian, Median, and Persian Empires: where is the posterity of that
great Macedonian? And the terror of this Earth the Roman Caesar's?

But is this life so great a good, that the loss of it should be so dear unto
man? If it be? the meanest creatures of nature thus be happy, for they live no
less the^ he: if it be so? how is it esteemed by man himself at so small a
rate? that for so small gain, nay, a light word, he will not stand to lose it?
what excellency is there in it, for the which Man should desire it perpetually,
and repine to return to his great Grandmother Dust? Of what worth are the
labors and actions of it, that the interruption and leaving off of them should
be bewailed? Is not the entering into life weakness? The continuing sorrow?
Man in the one is exposed to all the injuries of the Elements, and like a
condemned trespasser (as if it were a fault to com to the light) no sooner
born, the^ bound and manacled; in the other, like a Ball he is vncessa^tly
tossed in the Tennis-court of this World: When he is in the Meridian of his
glory, there mistereth nothing to destroy him, but to let him fall his own
hight, a reflex of the Sun, a blast of wind, nay, the glance of an Eye is
sufficient to kill him.

His Body is but a Mass of discording humors boiled together by the conspiring
virtues of the Planets, which though agreeing for a time, yet can never be made
uniform and brought to a just proportion. To what sickness is it subject
unto, beyond those of the other creatures? no part of it being which is not
particularly infected and afflicted by some one, nay every part of it with
many; so that not without reason, the life of diverse of the meanest creatures
of Nature has been preferred (by the most wise) to the natural life of Man.
And we should rather be brought in a maze, how so fragila matter should so long
endure, then how so soon decay.

Are the actions of the most part of men any thing different from those
laborious exercises of Spiders, that lie in ambush to pray on the simpler, and
euiscerate themselves many dais for the weauing of a frail web, which when
finished with great toil, a blast of wind carries away both the Work and the
Worker? Or are they not such indeed as be the toys of little Children? Or to
hold them at their highest rate, as is some earnest game at Chesse? Every day
we rise and lie down, apparel and disapparell our selves, weary our Bodies,
and refresh them, which is a circle of idle travels; sometime we are in a
chase after a fading beauty; now we seek to enlarge our bounds, augment our
Treasure, feeding poorly to purchase what we must leave (perhaps) to a fool,
or (which is not much better) a Prodigal heir: raised again with the wind of
Ambition, we court that idle name of Honor, not considering that men in glassy
places are but tortured ghosts, wandering in golden Fetters, and glistring
Prisons, having fear and danger their inseperable executioners, in the midst
of multitudes rather guarded then regarded.

Those whom inward Melancholy has made weary of the Worlds eye, who have
withdrawn themselves from the course of earthly affairs, by thoughts curious,
sad regrets, idle contemplations, live a life far worse then others, their
wit being too quick to give them a true taste of woe, while those of a more
shallow and simple conceit, have want of knowledge and ignorance of themselus,
for a remedy against every other evil. What Camelion, what Euripe, what Moon
does change so often as man? He seems not the same person in one and the same
Day, by reason of his subjection to his private Passions.

Young, we scorn our childish conceits, and wading deeper in years (for
years are a Sea into which we wade until we drown) we esteem our Youth
inconstancy, Folly, Rashness: Old, we begin to pity our selves, plaining,
because we are changed, that the World is changed: Like them in a Ship, which
when it is they that launch from the shore, are brought to believe that the
shore does fly from them. When we are freed of evil in our own estate, we
begin to grudge and vex our selves at the happiness and fortunes of others,
we are fraught, we care for what is present, with sadness for what is bypast,
with fear for that which is to come, nay, for that which will never come; we
deem that pity, which is but weakness, and plunge our selves in the deepest
gulfes of anguish, one day still laying up strife of grief for the next. The
Air, the Sea, the Fire, the Beasts be cruel executioners of Man, yet Beasts,
Fire, Sea, and Air, be pitiful to Man, in respect of Man; for, mo men are
destroyed by men, then by them all.

What wrongs, scorns, contumelies, prisons, poisons, torments, receives man
of man? What engines and new works of death are daily found forth by man
against man? What Laws to thrall his liberty? Fantasies and scar-crowes to
inueigle his reason? Amongst the Beasts, is there any has so servile a lot in
another behalf as man? yet neither is content, nor he who reigns, nor he
who serves.

The half of our Life is spent in sleep, which (since it is a release of care,
the balm of woe, and indifferent arbiter unto all) must be the best, and yet
is but the shadow of Death: and who would not rather the^ suffer the Slings,
and Arrows of outrageous Fortune, the whips and scorns of time, the oppressors
wrongs, the proud man's contumelies, sleep ever (that is, dye) and end the
Heart-ake, and the thousand natural Shocks, that flesh is heir to? Our
happiness here, seems rather in the wanting of evils, and being free of
crosses, then in the enjoying of any great good. What has the brauest of
mortals to glory in? Is it greatness? Who can be great on so small a round as
this Earth? and bounded with so short a course of Time? How like is that to
castles, or imaginary Cities, builded in the Sky, of chance-meeting Clouds? Or
to Giants modelled (for a sport) of Snow, which at the hotter looks of the
Sun do melt away? such an impetuous vicissitude so towseth the estates of
this World. Is it knowledge? But we have not yet attained a perfect
understanding of the smallest flower, and why, the grass should rather be
green, then red, the Element of fire is quite put out the Air is but water
rarefied, some affirm there is another world of men and creatures, with
Cities, and Towers in the Moon, the Sun is lost, for it is but a cleft in
the lower Heavens, through which the light of the highest shines: What is all
we know, compared with what we know not? It is (perhaps) artificial cunning:
how many curiosities be framed by the least creatures of Nature, unto which,
the industry of the most curious Artizans does not attain? Is it Riches? What
are they but snares of Liberty, bands to such as have them, possessing, rather
then possessed: Metalls which Nature has hid (foreseeing the great evil
they should occasion) and the only opinion of Men, has brought in estimation?
When we have gathered the greatest abundance, we our selves can enjoy no
more thereof, then so much as belongs to one man, Rich and great men do their
business by others, the lesser do them themselves. Will some talk of our
pleasures? It is not (though in the fables) told out of purpose, that Pleasure
being called in haste from Earth to Heaven, did here forget her apparel, which
Sorrow having thereafter found (to deceive the World) attired her self with;
and if we shall confess the truth of most of our joys, we must say that they
are but disguised Sorrows, the drammes of our honey, are lost in pounds of
Gall, Remorse never ensues our best Delights. Will some Ladies vaunt of their
Beauties? That is but skinne-deepe, of two senses only known, short even of
Marble Statues and Pictures, dangerous to the beholder, and hurt. full to the
possessor, an enemy to Chastity, a thing made to delight others, and not those
who have it, a superficial luster hiding Bones and the Brains, things
fearful to be looked upon; growth of years does take it away, or sickness,
or sorrow preventing them; our strength, matched with that of the unreasonable
creatures, is but weakness.

If Death be good, why should it be feared? And if it be the work of Nature,
how shall it not be good? And how shall it not be of Nature? Since what is
naturally generate, is subject to corruption, for such a composition cannot
ever endure, but must of necessity dissolve. Again, how is not Death good,
fith it is the thaw of all those miseries which the frost of life binds
together? In two or three ages (without Death) what an unpleasant spectacle
were the most flourishing Cities in the World? For what should there be to be
seen in them, save bodies languishing, and courbing again into the Earth?
Pale disfigured faces, Skelitones in stead of Men? And what were there to be
heard, but the regrets of the young, and Plaints of the aged, with the pitiful
cries of sick and pining persons? there is almost no infirmity worse then age.

If there be any evil in Death, it would appear to be for that pain and
torment, which we apprehend to arise of the breaking of those straight ba^ds
which keep the Soul and Body together, which (since it is not without great
wrestling and motion) seems to prove it self vehement and most extreme. The
senses are the only cause of pain, but before that last effect traries, that
the worst composed Bodies feel pain least, and by this reason all sick
persons should not much feel pain, for if they were not evil composed they
would not be sick.

That the sight, hearing, smelling, taste, leave us without pain, and
unawares, we know most certainly, and why should we not believe the same of
the feeling? That which is capable of feeling is the vital Spirits, which in a
man of good health are spread and extended through the whole Body: And hence is
it, that the whole body is capable of pain; but in sick men we see that by
degrees those parts which are most removed from the heart, remain cold, and
being denuded of natural heat, all the pain that they feel, is that they can
feel no pain: now as before the sick be aware, the vital Spirits retire
themselves from the whole extension of his body, to assist the heart, (like
distressed Citizens, which finding their walls battred run to defend their
Cittadell) so do they abandon the heart without any sensible touch, as the
flame withdrawes it self from the wicke, the Oil failing. As to those
shrinking motions and conuulsions of sinews and members, which appear to
witness great pain, let one represent to himself the strings of a high-tuned
Lute, which being cracked retire to their natural winding, or a piece of Ice
which without any outward violence cracks at a Thaw: no other ways do the
sinews of the body, finding themselves slack and vnbended from the Brain,
and that their wonted labors and functions do cease, struggle and seem to
stir themselves without any pain or sense.

Now, although Death were an extreme pain, since it is in an instant, what can
it be? Why should we fear it? For while we are, it comes not, and it being
come, we are no more. Nay, though it were most painful, long continuing, and
terrible ugly, why should we fear it? Since fear is a foolish passion but
where it may preserve, but it cannot preserve us from death. That is ever
terrible, which is unknown: so do little children fear to go in the dark,
and their fear is increased with tales.

But that (perhaps) which does bring thee most anguish, is to leave this
painted Scene of the World in the Spring, and most delicious season of thy
years; for, though to die be usual, to die young may appear extraordinary. If
the present fruition of these things be foolish, what can a long continuance of
them be? Poor and strange Halcyon, why would thou longer nestle amidst these
inconstant waves? have thou not already suffered enough of this world, but thou
must yet endure more? But count thy years which are now () and thou shall find,
that whereas ten have ouer-liued thee, thousands have not attained this age.
One year is sufficient to behold all the magnificence of Nature, nay even one
day and night, for more is but the same brought again.

This Sun, that Moon, those Stars, the disponsition of the Spring, Summer,
Autumn, Winter, is that very same which the Golden age did see. They which
have the longest time lent them to live in, have almost nothing of it at all,
setting it either by that which is past, when they were not, or by that which
is to come: Why should thou then regard, whether thy days be many or few;
which when prolonged to the uttermost, must prove (paraleld with Eternity) as
a Tear is to the Ocean? It is hope of long Life, that makes life seem short.
Who will weigh, and advisedly weigh the inconstancy of humane affairs, with
the back-blows of Fortune, shall never lament to die young. Who knows what
disasters might have befallen him, who dies young, if he had lived to been
old? Haven takes them whom it loves, from dangers before they do approach;
pure and (if we may say so) virgin Souls carry their bodies with great
anguish, and delight not to abide long in them, being ever burnt with a desire
to return to the place of their rest; and to be relieved of fleshly
vncleanlynesse, that which may fall forth every hour, cannot fall out of time:
life is a journey in a dustie way, the furthest home is Death, in this, some
go more heavily burdened then others, swift and active Pilgrims come to the
end of it in the morning, or at Noone: which slow-paced wretches, clogged with
the fragmentall rubbish of this world, scarce with great travel, crawle unto
at midnight. Days are not to be numbered after the number of them; but after
their goodness, the greatness of a Sphere, adds nothing to the roundnesse of
it, but a little circle is as round as the most ample; that Musician is not
most praise-worthie, who has longest played, but he in measured accents who
has made sweetest melody; to live long, has often been a let to live well.
Let it suffice that thou have lived to this time, and (after the course of this
world) not for naught, thou have had some smiles of Fortune, favors of the
worthiest, some friends, and thou have never been disfauoured of the Heaven.

Yet it is almost impossible, that thou can want a desire to live, and
wishest not thy days a while continued, though not for life it self, at least
that thou may leave to aftertimes a monument, that once thou wast; for since
it is denied us to live long, (said one) let us leave some worthy remembrance
of our once here being, and thus extend this spanne of Life so far as is
possible. O poor Ambition! to what I pray thee can thou concreded it? Arches
and stately Temples, which one age does raise, does not another raze? Tombs and
adopted pillars lie buried with them which were in them buried; has not
avarice defaced that, which Devotion did make glorious? All that the hand of
Man can make, is either ouerturned by the hand of Man, or at length by very
standing and continuing consumed; as if there were a secret opposition in Fate,
to control al our industry. Possessions are not enduring, children lose their
Names, families raised on the highest top of wealth and Honor (like those which
are not yet born) leaving off to be, so does Heaven confound what we labor with
Art to distinguish. That renown by Papers, which is though to make men
glorious, and which nearest does approach the Life of those eternal Bodies
above, how slender it is, the very word of paper does import; and what is it
when obtained, but a multitude of words which coming Worlds may scorn? How
many millions never hear the names of the most famous Writers? And amongst
them to whom they are known, how few turn over their pages? And of such as
do, how many sport at their conceits, taking the verity for a Fable, and often a
Fable for Verity, or (as we do pleasants) using all for recreation? Then the
arising of more famous does obscure and darken the glory of the former, being
esteemed as Garments worn out of fashion. Now when thou have obtained what
praise thou could desire, it is but an Echo, a mere sound, a cloud of Air;
which seen a far, did appear something, but approached, is found naught; a
thing imaginary depending on the opinion of other Men; for it is hard to
distinguish virtue and fortune, the most vicious (if prosperous) have ever
been praised, the most virtuous (if unprosperous) have still been despised.
Applause obtained whilst thou live, has ever envy following it, and is
brittle, like that Syracusians Sphere of Glass; and borne after thy Death, it
may as well be ascribed to some of them that were in the Trojan Horse, or to
such as are yet to be borne an hundredth years hereafter, as to thee who
nothing knows, and is of all unknown: What can it avail thee to be talked of
whilst thou art not? Consider in what bounds our Fame is confined: This Globe
which seems large to us, in respect of the Universe, is less then little,
how much thereof is covered with Waters, how much not at al discovered? How
much desert and desolate And how many thousand thousands are they which share
the remanent amongst them? and all this is but a point, and in comparison
nothing to that wide wide canopie of Heaven. For the Horizon that bounds our
sight, binds the Heaven as in two halfs, which it could not do if the Earth
had any quantity compared to it. More, if it were not as a point, the Stars
could not still appear to us of a like greatness in respect of their diurnall
motion: for where the Earth raised it self in Mountains (we being more near
to Heaven) they would appear more great, and where it were humbled in valleys
(we being farther distant) they would seem unto us less.

But on all sides the Heaven being equally distant from the earth, of
necessity we must avouch it to be but a point. Well did one compare it to an
Ant-hill, and men (the Inhabitants) to so many Pismires in the toil and
variety of their diuersified studies. But let it be granted that Glory and Fame
is some great matter, and can reach Heaven it self, since it is often buried
with the honored, and endures so short a time, what great good can it have in
it? How is not Glory temporal, since it increases with Time? Then imagine me
(for what cannot imagination reach unto?) one could be famous in all times to
come, and through the whole World presen, t yet he shall be for ever obscure,
and uncouth to those mighty ones, who were only heretofore famous amongst
Assyrians, Persians, Greeks, and Romans. Again, the vain affectation of Man
is so suppressed, that though his works do abide, the worker is unknown: the
huge Aegypttan Pyramides though they have wrastled with time, and worn upon
the vast of days, yet their builders be no more known, then it is known by
what strange Earthquakes and Deluges Isles were divided from the continent, and
Hills bursted forth of the low Valleys. Days, Months, and years run away,
and only oblivion remains; of so many ages past we may well figure to our
selves something, but can affirm little certainty.

But, Oh my Soul, what ailes thee to be thus backward and fearful at the
remembrance of Death? since it does not reach thee, more then darkness does
those eternal Lamps above: rowse thy self for shame, why should thou fear
to be without a body, since thy Maker and those spiritual and supercelestiall
Inhabitants have no Bodies? Have thou ever seen any Prisoner who when the
Iayle-gates were broken up and he enfranchised and set loose, would rather
plain and sit still on his fetters, then seek his freedom? If thou rightly
think on thy self thou have no cause of sorrow: for, if there be any
resemblance in what is finite of that which is infinite, if thou be not an
Image, thou art a shadow of that eternal Trinity, in thy three essential
Powers, Understanding Will, Memory, which though three, are in thee but one:
and yet abiding one be distinctly three. But in no thing more come thou
near that Sovereign good then in thy Immortality, which who seek to improve,
by that same it prove, like them who arguing themselves to be unreasonable, by
the very arguing show that they have some. Nothing in this visible world is
comparable to thee, thou art so wonderful a beauty, and beautiful a Wonder,
that if but once thou could be gazed upon by bodily eyes, every heart would
be inflamed with thy love, and elevated from their groueling earthly desires.
What God is in the World, thou art in the body, abiding on the Earth, thou
measurest the Heaven, thou make the Seas and Winds to serve thee, thou many
things foreknowest before they fall forth, thou art not content with the sight
of all, within the spacious bounds of this large Cloister of the World, until
thou raise thy self to the happy contemplation of that first illuminating
intelligence, transcending time, and even reaching Eternity it self, into
which thou art transformed: for by receiving, thou (beyond all other things)
art made that which thou receiuest. By thy three faculties, thou participatest
with the three parts of Time; by Memory with that which has passed, by
Understanding with that which is present, and by VVil with that which is to
come.

Man by thee is that Hymen of celestial and terrestrial things, without whom
the universal frame and great Fabric of this world would remain imperfect.
Thou only at once art capable of contraries, thou know thy self an immediate
master piece of that eternal artizan, and acknowledgest thee so separate,
absolute, and diverse an essence from thy Body, that thou disposest of it, as
it pleases thee: for there is no passion in thee so weak which mastereth not
the fear of leaving it. The more thou know, the more apt thou art to know,
not remaining enfabled by thine object as sense by objects sensible. Thou
should be so far from abhorring this separation, that it should be the
first of thy desires, it being thy perfection. Thou art here but as in an
infected and unclean Inn, or a living Tomb, oppressed with cares, suppressed
with ignorance: Most of thy knowledge comes by thy fine intelligencers of
sense, which (being often deceived) deceive thee: small things seem here great
unto thee, and great things small: Folly Wisdom, and Wit Folly: freed of thy
fleshly care thou shall rightly know thy self, and have perfect fruition of
that full and filling happiness, which is God himself. God and happiness are
one, for if God have not happiness, he is not God, because happiness is the
highest and soueraignest good: then if God have happiness, it cannot be a
thing different from him, for if there were any thing different from him in
him, he should be an essence composed, and not simple. More, what is different
in any thing, is either an accident, or a part of it self; in God, happiness
cannot be an accident, because he is not subject to any accident; if it were a
part of him (since the part is before the whole) we should be forced to grant
that something was before God. Bedded and bathed in these earthly Ordures, thou
can not come near that sovereign good, nor have so much notice of him, as
the Owl has of the Sun. Think then by Death that thy shel is broke and thou
then but eue^ hatched: Why should thoube feare-stroken, and brought under
for the parting with this mortal Bride, thy Body? Since it is but for a time,
and such a time as she shall not care for, nor feel any thing in, nor thou
have need of her, nay, since thou shall receive her again more goodly and
beautiful, then when thou leftst her? Being made like unto that Indian
Crystal, which after some reuolutions of ages is turned into purest Diamonds.

If the Soul be the form of the Body, and the form separated from the matter
of it cannot ever remain, but has a natural appetite and desire to be united
thereunto, what can let and hinder this desire, but that one time or other it
be accomplished, and have the expected end, adjoining it self to the body? No
violent thing can be everlasting, the abiding of the Soul without the body
being violent, cannot be everlasting. How is not such a being not violent,
since as in a stranger place the faculties of it (which never leave it) are not
duly exercised?: this is not contradictory to Nature, much less impossible to
God.

If the body shall not arise, how can the only and sovereign Good be
perfectly and infinitely good? For how shall he be Just? Nay, have so much
justice as a man, if he suffer the evil and vicious to have a more prosperous
and happy life then the followers of Virtue? Which ordinarily uses to fall
forth in this life: for the most wicked are lords and gods of this earth, as if
it had been made only for them, and the virtuous are but their enuassaled
slaves, being subject to all dishonors, shames, wrongs, misery. Since then he
is most good, most just, of necessity there must be appointed by him another
time, and another place of retribution, in the place of retribution, in the
which there shall be a reward for living well, and a punishment for doing
evil, with a life in the which both shall have their due; and not in their
Souls only: for, since both the parts of man did act a part in the right or
wrong, it is reason they both be arraigned before that High Justice, to receive
their own. For man is not a Soul only, but a Soul and Body, to which either
guerdon or punishment is due.

This seems to be the voice of Nature in almost all the Religions of the
World, this is that universal testimony charactered in the minds of the most
barbarous and savage people; for all have had a blind aiming at ages to come,
and a mistie divining of another life, all appealing to one general Judgment
Throne. To what else could serve so many expiations, sacrifices, Prayers,
solemnities and ceremonies? To what such sumptuous Temples, and such care of
the dead? To what all Religion? If not to show that they did look for a more
excellent estate of living after the short course of this was out-runne: and
who does deny it, must deny that that there is a God, a Providence, and not
believe that there is a World or Creatures, and that he himself is not what
he is.

But it is not of Death (perhaps) that we complain, but of Time, which using
against us (as against all fragil and caduke things) his adamantine Laws,
alters the constitution of our Bodies, benummes our senses, and the Organes
of our knowledge, of which evils Death relieueth us: So that if we could be
transported (oh happy Colonie!) to a place where there were no time, it were
our only good, and the accomplishment of all our wishes. Death makes this
transplantation, for the last instant of corruption, or leaving off of a thing
to be what it was, is the first of generation or being of that which
succeeds; Death then being the end of this miserable mortal life, of
necessity must be the first beginning of that other eternal; and so without
reason of a virtuous Soul is it either feared or complained on.

As those Images were figured in my Mind, (the Morning Star now almost arising
in the East) I found my thoughts to become calm and appeased, and not long
after my senses one by one forgetting their uses, began to give themselves over
to rest, leaving me in a still and quiet sleep, if sleep it may be called,
where the Mind awaking is carried with free wings from out fleshly bondage?
For, heavy lids had no sooner covered their lights, when I thought (nay sure) I
was where I might discern all in this great All, the large compass of the
rolling Circles, the brightness and continual dances of the twinkling
Stars, which (through their distance) here below cannot be perceived, the
silver countenance of the silent Moon shining by another light, the hanging
of the Earth (as environed with a Crystal girdle) the Sun enthronized in
the midst of the Planets, Eye of the Heavens, Gemme of this goodly Ring the
World. But whilst with wonder and amazement I gazed on those celestial
twins, and the burning Lamps of that glorious Temple, (like some poor
Countryman brought from his solitary Mountains and flocks to behold the
magnificence of some stately City) there was presented to my sight a Man as in
the spring of his years, with that selfsame grace, comely feature, and
maiesticke look, which the late ( (...)) was wont to have: on whom I had no
sooner set mine eye, when (like one thunderstroken) I became all astonished.
But he with a mild demeanor approaching, and voice surpassing all humane
sweetness appeared (me thought) to say:

What is it does thus torture thee? is it the memory of Death, the end of all
Sorrow and entry to these happy places? is thy fortune below on that darkened
Globe (that scarce through the littleness of it here appears) so great, that
thou art heart-broken and dejected for the leaving of it? what if thou had
left behind thee a ( (...)) so glorious to the world (yet but a mote of dust
encircled with a Pond) as that of mine? so loving Parents? such great Hopes?
these had been apparent occasions of regrate, and but apparent. Do thou
think that thou leauest life too soon? Death is best young, things fair and
excellent are of least endurance, the Rose which is the flower of flowers, that
same day that sees it spread in the morning, sees it fade at evening, and lose
the leaves, the Springtime the most amiable Season of the year is the
Shortest. Who lives well, lives long, those whom GOD loves best, are soon
relieved of mortal miseries.

Let not man esteem his estate, after his earthly being, which is but a
Dream, though he be borne on the earth, he is not borne for the earth, more
then the embrion for the Mothers womb: it plaineth to be relieved of its
Bands, and to come to the light of this world, and Man mourns to be loosed
from the Chains with which he is fettered in that enchanted valley of
vanities, it nothing knows whither it is to go, nor ought of the beauty of
the sensible world, and the visible works of God, neither do men of the
magnificence of this intellectual world above, unto which (as by a Midwife)
they are directed by Death.

Fools, who think that this excellent and admirable Frame, so well ordered, so
rightly governed, so wonderfully fair, was by that supreme Wisdom made, that
all things in a circulary course should be and not be, arise and dissolve, and
thus continue, as if they were so many Shadows caused by the incountring of
the Superior Celestial bodies, changing only their fashion and shape; or were
dreams which for a morning have their being in the brain: No, no, the
eternal Wisdom has made man an excellent creature, though he feign would
unmake himself and turn again to nothing, though he seek his happiness
amongst the unreasonable creatures he has placed above.

When some Prince or great King on the earth has builded any stately City, the
work being perfected, they were wont to set their Image in the midst of it,
to be gazed upon and admired; No otherwise has the Sovereign of this All, (the
fabric of it done) placed Man, (made to his own Image) in the midst of this
admirable City. God contains all in him as the beginning of al, Man
contains al in him as the midst of all, inferior things be in man more nobly
then they exist, superior things more basely, celestial things favor him,
earthly things are vassaled unto him, he is the band of ^oth, neither is it
possible but that both of them have peace with him, if he have peace with him
who made the covenant between them and him.

He was made, that he might know the infinite goodness, power, and glory of
him who made him, and knowing love, and loving enjoy him, and to hold the Earth
of him as of his Lord Paramount.

How can it be thought that God should give so long life to Trees, Beasts, and
the Birds of the Air, being Creatures inferior to Man, which have less use of
it, and deny it to him, unless he had prepared another manner of living for
him in a place more excellent?

But O God! (said I) had it not been better that for the good of his native
Country so ( (...)) had yet lived? How long will ye (replied he) like the Ants
think there be no fayrer palaces then their hills, and like poreblinde Moles
there is no greater light, then that little which they shun? As if the master
of a Camp knew when to remove a Sentinel, and he who places Man on this
Earth, did not know how long he had need of him? Every one comes here to act
his part of this Tragicomedie called Life, which done, the Curtain is drawn,
and he removing from the Stage is said to die.

Most ( (...)) then (answered I) Death is not such an evil and pain, as it is
of the vulgar esteemed? Death (said he) nor painful is nor evil of it self,
except in contemplation of the cause of it, being as indifferent as birth: Yet
it cannot be denied, but that the vncouthnesse of it, with the wrong
apprehension of what is unknown in it is noisome. But the Soul sustained by
its Maker, prepared and calmely retired in it self, does find that Death
(since it is in a moment of time) is but a short, nay sweet sigh, and is not
worthy the remembrance compared with the smallest dram of the infinite
happiness of this place.

Here is the Palace roy all of the Almighty King, in which the incomprehensible
comprehensibly manifests himself; in place highest, in substance not subject
to any corruption or change, for it is above all motion, and solid turns not;
in quantity greatest, for if one Star, one Sphere be so vast, how vast,
how great must those bounds be which does them all contain? In quality
purest, Heaven here is all but a Sun, or the Sun all but a Heaven, this is
the only and true Olympe.

If to earthlings the footstool of God seems so pleasant, of what worth (if
they could see) would they hold his Throne? And if the Throne be so wonderful,
what is the sight of him for whom and by whom this All was created? Of whose
glory to behold the thousand thousand part, the most pure intelligences are
fully content, and with wonder and delight stand amazed; for the beauty of his
light and the light of his beauty is incomprehensible.

Here does that earnest appetite of the understanding pause it self, not
seeking to know any more, for it sees before it in the vision of the divine
essence (a mirror in the which not Images or shadows, but the true and perfect
essence of all that is, is most viuely and perfectly seen) all that can be
known, or understood.

Here is the will stayed, loving that Sovereign Good in whose fruition all
good consists, and without which can be none.

Here is a blessed company, every one rejoicing in another and filled with joy
of themselves, the happiness of one is the happiness of the whole, as the
happiness of the whole is the happiness of every one: and as the company is
innumerable, the joy of each one is incomprehensible.

No silly Mortal confined on that piece of earth, who has never seen but
sorrow, can rightly think of, or be capable to conceive the happiness of
this place.

So many feathers move not on Birds, so many Birds cleave not the Air, so many
leaves tremble not on Trees, so many Trees grow not in the wild Forests, so
many waves turn not in the Ocean, so many Sands border not those waves; as
this Triumphing Court has variety of delights, and never loathsome pleasures.

Ambition, Disdain, Malice, Ignorance, Error, Difference of opinions, do not
enter this place, resembling the foggie mists which cover those lists of
sublunary things.

Here is Youth without Age, Strength without Weakness, Joy without Sorrow,
Light without Darkness, Life Without End, Ages do never here expire, Time
did never enter.

All pleasure paragon'd with what is here, is grief, all Mirth mourning, all
Beauty deformity, here one days abiding is above the continuing in the most
Fortunate estate of the Earth many years, and sufficient to counteruaile the
extremest Torments of Life.

Amongst all the wonders of the great Creator, not one appears to be more
strange (replied I) then that the dead should arise, Nature denying a regresse
from privation to a habit.

Wonders (said he) in a wonderful cause are no wonders, the Author of Nature
is not thralled to the Laws of Nature, but works with them or contrary as it
pleases him, unto whom nothing perishes.

This world is as a Cabinet, in which the small things (though hid) are nothing
less kept then the great. To him who in an instant brought all this All from
naught, to bring again in an instant any thing that ever was in it to what it
was once, should not be thought impossible: Where the power is without
limitation, the work has no other limitation then the workers Will; Reason
her self finds it more possible for infinite power to deliver from it self a
finit World, and restore any thing in this world to what it was first, though
decayed and dissolved, then for a finit man, to change the form of matter made
to his hand.

The power of God never brought to knowledge all that it can, for then were his
infinite power bounded and finite.

That time does approach in which the dead shall live, and the living be
changed, and of all actions the guerdon is at hand; then shall there be an End
without an End, Time shall finish, and Place be altered, and another World of
an age Eternal and unchangeable shall arise: With the which (me thought) he
vanished, and I did all astonished awake.

FINIS.

