The Elegant Combat OR, THE Mutual Entertainment between the two learned and
famous Frenchmen Monseiur Du Moulin and Monseiur De Balzac.

Extracted out of the original, By Robert Codrington Master of Arts.

And dedicated to the truly ennobled Master Anthony Mildemay.

printer's device of Anne Griffin

LONDON, Printed by Anne Griffin. 1634.

TO THE TRVE LOVER of all good Learning, and the perfect Mirror of his own
rank, the most worthy and the most accomplished, Anthony Mildemay, Esquire.
SIR,
IF these papers live, it is because they deuote themselves to you, in whom
alone they gratulate the happiness of your Family, which is ennobled by so
safe and so pure a Virtue, that as no Envy dares apapproach it, so no Flattery
can corrupt it, a Family which has enjoyed the favor of your Sovereigns by
descent, and which has proved your Virtues as hereditary as your honors. But
because it did appear to cheap a glory to be absolute in that Court which the
King does daily crown with the divine examples of his Virtues, and where he
is no Subject whose practice expresses not the loyalty of obedience to such
his most royal inclinations, it has been your Business to transplant them
into remote Kingdoms and Courts, who have admired the method of his Government
by your Discourse, and believed it by your Conversation, a Truth which their
Jmitation has illustrated, and which the Pirat and the Infidel has
understood and been guilty of it, who taken more by the more victorious
sweetness o^ your Nature, then you were by their insolence forgate that they
were Turks and made your Deliverance as famous as your Wisdom. You have
enjoyed by this a reflecting happiness, and have improued our Practice at
home, by being such a studied and an elaborate Example abroad and teaching
dispersed Nations the English Virtue, you have made the World indebted to your
own. These are the Garlands which do crown your praises, which your love to
learning does perpetuate and advance as much in excellence as number, but the
modest gratitude of learning being Compendious always in the Panegyriks of her
living Benefactors does become to them more absolute and more just by Death,
for Eternity being the Object and the End of Learning, their Memory must rather
be her Subject then themselves. But your love unto Religion as it is unbounded,
so will your Reward be, which has invited Blessings to descend upon you,
Blessings which shall raise you high as in their Center from whence they flow,
and leaving your Story a mirror to Posterity, shall give life unto your
Epitaph, when the Ruins of your Tomb can remember it no more. This I do not
presage, but demonstrate, for Fame is but the herald and the voice of Honor,
and Jmmortality rather a Debt then a Reward to Virtue. But I forbear to
afflict you with your praises, which are therefore the more due, the more
unwilling you are to hear them. Pardon my imposed Error, the assurance of
your Virtues did give unto my knowledge that it was a sin to conceal them and
my insufficiency to express that knowledge has made my language as guilty as
my silence. But I presume these few leaves delivered in what form soever will
be acceptable to you, not for any beauty that this rude hand of mine can lend
unto them, but for the primitive excellence of their Authors, who meet as
admirably in their eloquence as they differ in their sense. The smallnes of the
Present shall the more ennoble and crown your Acceptance. The Sea receives
the smallest drops with as much acknowledgement as the greatest Rivers, and the
like liberality of entertainment has renowned the Assyrian Monarch, and
indeerd him more to Immortality then all the Glory of the East or the Majesty
of his Empires could. Be pleased to entertain this with your leisure and your
patience, which shall oblige me ere many months be expired, to present you
with a larger volume, as devoted ever to express my self,

The constant honourer of your Virtues, R. C.

A Letter of Mounseiur Du Moulin to Mounseiur De Balzac.
SIR,
I Have received the book which out of your favor it has pleased you to send
unto me, which you could not have given to any Man that did more esteem it,
or less deserve it, for although I find my self one of the most unworthy to
come into your remembrance, yet I am one of the first that do extol your
Virtue, by which you have attained to the height of the Art of Eloquence, and
drawing the Bridge after you have with admiration left Despair unto Posterity.
In the description of Eloquence which the Ancients thought to have no being but
in Fancy, you have made an entire body, and have demonstrated that a man of
these times may out go them, the force and dexterity of your Spirit having
exceeded their imagination, you delight the understanding and instruct it, and
have joined two things rarely sociable, beauty with solidity. This is one of
the belssings of this Age to have bred a Man that in effect has showed how
far that Eloquence may go. But of this I had rather speak to others than
your self, who without affecting praise are content to merit it, and which
follows you so much the closer, by how much the less you search it, so that
he must borrow your pen who worthily would praise it, and I assure you that
for the exercising of it you have made choice of a subject proportionable to
your wit. For as the things done by the King could not be performed by any
other then himself, so could not they have worthily been written by any other
then by you, you insult especially on our miseries, but in that you are not to
be blamed, because you write according to your understanding, and that without
this draught of your pencill the Kings picture could not be perfected, whom
though God has employed to humble us, yet has not his majesty forgotten our
ancient services, nor is he ignorant how that the late King his Father of
glorious memory found no refuge in time of his affliction but among our
Churches. Would you be offended Sir, if I should say, that it seems to me,
that God has presented you another Subject worthy of your excellent Wit, that
is the prowess and the happy success of the King of Sweden for sinee the King
whom you have drawn out in so rich colors cannot satisfy himself to hear
himself but praised, you shall follow his inclinations in drawing the
portraict of another King that emulates his Virtues, mean while your work
shall be to me not only a proof of your sufficiency, but also a pledge of your
Bounty, and seeing it among my other books, I shall almost begin to think my
self somebody, because in sending it to me, you testify that you have some
good opinion of me, which shall obliege me to wish your prosperity and to
remain,

Your most humble and affectionate servant. Du Moulin.

The Letter of Mounseiur De Balzac to Mounseiur Du Moulin.
SIR, There is no modesty that can resist the praises that come from you, and I
should dissemble if I should not acknowledge that I took pleasure to suffer my
self to be corrupted by the first lines of your letter, but I must know my
self a great deal less then I do to remain long in that error; A Man
after he has had a pleasant dream awaketh, and I see well that after you have
spoken so advantageously of my labor, you have not used all the severity of
your judgment, favor you have done me rather then justice, and have sought to
oblige me though with the hazard of offending truth, your self being
theformost you encourage those that are in the race with your hand and voice,
and to persuade them to follow you, you make them believe they shall outgoe
you. Lo here in good earnest an admirable Artifice, and which I had not
discovered at the first blush, But whatsoever it be, or from what principle
soever this glorious approbation comes to me, I do no less esteem it then an
ambitious man would do a crown, and without penetrating into your design I
rejoice in myfortune. It is no small thing Sir, to be beloved of you whom I have
always perfectly esteemed, and have now a long time marked of the Huguenots
party, as an excellent pilot who dares brave a whole fleet out of a Cockeboat,
we have the Right and the Authority, but you have the Address and the
Stratagems, and are no less confident of your courage then we are of our
cause. Certain it is that thereby you may give to a Sedition the appearance of
a just war, and to a multitude of Mutineeres the face of a well disciplined
army, thereby you make pleasing to many people an opinion that has lost the
grace of novelty, and although it leans toward a downfall, we must
confess it has both lineaments and complexion in your writings, and that
never any man did so cunningly cover weakness or hold up ruins with finer
force Si Pergamadextra
Defendi possint etiam bac defensa fuissent:
The Town of Troy from being made a Grave
This arm of thine if any Arm could save.
I use always this language when there is occasion to speak of you, nor do I
take any part at all with the passions of the vulgar, who conserve not the
liberty of their own, judgment, and know neither the faults of their own nor
the virtues of strangers. Form out of what cloud soever the Day comes forth,
it seems beautiful, and I assure my self that at Rome the better part did
praise Hanniball, and none but plebeians spoke opprobiously of him. For it is a
kind of sacrilege to bereave whomsoever it be of the gifts of God, and if I did
not confess that you had received much, I should think my self injurious to
him who had given you much, and in a different cause should offend our common
Benefactor. It is true that sometimes I have not flattered your party, and have
been a little moved against the Authors of these late tumults, but having
observed in your books that our opinions were agreeable, and that subjection
due unto a Sovereign did make up a part of that religion which you teach, I
thought I might speak with your consent that which I have already said, and
that in this I was but your simple interpreter. Be the Tempest begotten by the
North or by the South, it is equally odious to me, and I take not counsel in
what concerns my duty either of England or of Spain. My humor is not to
fight against the times, nor to oppose my self against things present, it is
pain, to me to conceive only the Idaea of Cato or of Brutus, and being to
live under the power of another I find no vettue more convenient then
obedience. If I were a Swisse I could be content to be the Kings compere, and
would not be his subject nor change my liberty for the best master in the
world. But since God has made me to be borne in chains I bear them
willingly, and seeing they are neither rude nor heavy I will not mar my teeth
in trying how to break them. It seems that Heaven approves a government which
it has maintained by the succession of twelve hundred years, an Evil which
had so long continued might in some sort become lawful, and if the Age of men
be venerable that of states is holy. Those great spirits which I have designed
in my work, and which you have had of your party ought to have come in the
beginning of the world, to have given laws to new people, and to have trauaild
in the establishment of policy. But as it is necessary to invent good things,
socertainely it is most dangerous to go about to change even evil ones
themselves. I have no cruel thoughts Sir but those only that concern the
cheifes of your party. I treat in a manner as an enemy, and I care not for
insulting on your miseries, as you ciuilly reproach me, I who have written that
the King should be blessed of all the world if after having suppressed the pride
of Rebels he did not insult on the misfortune of the afflicted. The
persecutors of those who submit themselves are in like execration with me as
the destroyers of tombs, neither have I only pity of affliction, in some
sort I have it in reverence. I know that heretofore men consecrated places that
were stricken with thunder, the finger of God was respected in the person of
the miserable, and great adversities do rather work Religion then receive
reproaches. But so to style the good success of the Kings arms were to speak
improperly, we have all gained in his Victory, all the pain that has been
imposed upon yours has been to make you as happy as our selves, and they are
now possessors and enioyers of that security of which they were but amorous and
jealous before their towns were taken. Our Prince will put no yoke on the
consciences of his subjects, he will not have that received by force which
cannot be well received but by persuasion, nor use those remedies against the
French which were good against the Moors. If the King of Sweden does so use
his prosperity, and does not defile so pure a Grace by punishments and
proscriptions, I promise you to do that which you have desired of me, and to
employ all my Art and Vtensils to erect him a statue. This is just to touch my
inclination to pray me to praise that prince, when should all the Crowns which
are imbroidered on his Scarf be changed into so many kingdoms, they would
not be sufficient (me thinks) to recompense so rare a Virtue or to employ so
vast a Spirit. As I expect nothing but Greatness from his valor, so I hope
for nothing but Goodness from his Virtue. And although some have declared in
Spain that he is the very AntiChrist, yet I am neither so devout to believe
that news, nor so fearful to be afraid thereof. Only I say unto Scrupulous
Men who ask me thereabouts, that in the mean time our King has there a
Second that serves him well and that no Man could present unto the house of
Austria a Demurre that could divert him more from studying on our affairs.
Sir, I will pass noe farther, Better it is to stand at the portall of a holy
place then to enter thereinto being unprepared. Besides that this discourse is
already long enough for the beginning of Acquaintance. Pardon (if you please)
the Contentment which I have in entertaining you, which is the cause that I
have forgotten both your business and my Custom which is not to preach with
my friends, but you have given me the Text which I have treated on and I
believe that you having suddenly opened the bottom of my heart, and I not
dissembling with you my affections; you will hereafter take Confidence in my
freedom; with which I protest unto you most solemnly that I am,

Your most humble and affectionate servant. De Balzac.

An answer of Monseiur DuMoulin to the letter of Monseiur De Balzac.
SIR,
I Had ere now answered your letters if they had been in my Possession, but
they have along time run up and down the town every one desiring to take a
Copy thereof, and from the town they have walked to the Villages from whence
the pestilence has removed us, for albeit that in all your writings there
shine the force and liveliness of your Spirit seasoned with Grace and
Sweetness, tie in these letters you have excelled your self, so elaborate is
the style, and the Conceptions strong and pleasing, that all here glisters:
neither does the soundness hinder the cleerenesse of it, wherein you are
different from many of these times who take delight to dabble in the ink, and
amongst plenty of thorns have but little light, like that of a Gloworme
shining out of a Bush, wherefore in rejecting the praises that I have given
your quill, you show in earnest how much you do deserve them, for you reject
the title of eloquent with so much eloquence, as it seems that you have taken
a task upon you to show that your Modesty is unjust, and to accuse me for not
having praised you enough, you must change your style if you would be
believed, and must become barbarous to the end you may persuade. It would very
ill become me to reply upon all points of your letter, I will not enter into
that list with you, the scope of my writings being not to stroke the ear but
to strike the Conscience: This is their preuiledge that write for true
Doctrine, that incongruities pass oftentimes for elegancies, and that
Barbarism is sociable with Truth. For as blew and red flowers among the Corn
do delight the eye but disadvantage the harvest, so ornaments among good
doctrine do diminish the fruit of the teaching, and do cause that instead of
of teaching matters we are staid at words, and do weigh periods, these
flowers must fall before the fruits come on, and grosser terms do oftentimes
give a deeper impression. And it being necessary in such matters to use
sometimes strong reprehensions; to bring hither the flowers of eloquence, were
as if we should scourge our children with a nosegay. It is for false religions
to borrow these ornaments, as in their Temples and Ceremonies they will have
splendour, so they require a swollne and an artificial language, like unto a
Woman sparkling with Diamonds whose eyes are blind, which Sir, I say to answer
to those offensive praises which you too liberally bestow upon me, praising
me in that I have a Grace to lie, saying that I defend a bad cause with
dexterity and Stratagems, without right and without Authority, and that I
maintain an opinion which has lost the grace of nouelty, and for the height
of all my praises, you say that I would be fit to give a Sedition the appearance
of a just war, which dexterity of seducing you place amongst the gifts of
God, which you say you have in great esteem, so with a double artifice you
prick me as you tickle me, and lift me up a spectacle on high after you have
besmutched and deformed me. Pardon me Sir if I tell you that there is no
blame which is not more tolerable then these praises, to bring more Art and
Industry to defend Error serves to no other end but to go to hell with a
better Grace, and to sweeten poison to destroy both himself and others with
more dexterity. It were better a thousand times for such a Man to be dumb then
so unhappily eloquent, and to be the most brutish amongst men then to have
such an ingenious perverseness. This is ill taking of measures, to place a
fraudulent Eloquence amongst the gifts of God. It is rather the Devil who
whets the tongue and pen of such a Man, and lends him his arms to make war
against God. In brief you have heapt on me those praises which Homer gives to
Paris, praising the beauty of his locks but making him to be the ruin of his
Country. Now that if on our side there were Benifices, Riches, and Pensions,
you might have some Color to think that a spirit desirous to appear had
been drawn by these allurements to defend an evil cause, but Poverty and
Reproach being the Cognizance of our Profession, to be wicked for nothing
would be with the loss of piety to lose common Sense. And whereas you say that
our Religion has lost the grace of Nouelty, I say that it is impossible it
should loose that which it never had, but if it were or had been new, this
should not have been a Grace unto it but a Blemish. Nouelty may give some
grace unto Sallets or Apparel, but not to the Doctrine of Salvation: that were
good news for Italy, where the new Saints do make the old ones loose their
Credit, and for the church of Rome in which the Pope does vaunt of his power to
change that which God has commanded in his word, and that he can make new
Articles of Faith, who not being able to say with Saint Peter Gold and Silver I
have none, uses his ship to traffic; making a noise with the keys, whose
locks he has changed. From this head a defluxion is fallen on the Body of the
Clergy, who set up their Bank in the Temple, and abandoning the Dominicall
letter, are altogether addicted to the goldennu^ber, From whence it comes to
pass that all is put to sale, even God himself and the remission of sins,
and that private Masses are not said but for those who have contributed to the
Church, the wit of avarice digging even into Sepulchers, so that a rich Man
cannot go cheap into his Grave. And there can be no greater change then of a
spiritual to make a temporal Monarchy, but our Religion is the true and
ancient Christianity, only new in this, that it rejects all nouelty, and
esteem eth doctrine new that is not from the Beginning; It being the heavenly
Truth which the Son of God brought into the world, the violence of provoked
people have no more power against it then the Winds have power to change the
beams of the Sun. This is it, why I make my prediction quite contrary to
yours, and instead of the declining which you speak of I assure my self that
it will flourish and chase away the darkness of this Age by the brightness of
it. And I wonder how you can delude your self with such a hope, in a time
wherein our Religion receives so great Increase in the low Countries and in
Germany, and wherein the Greek Churches do range themselves under our
Confession, being drawn thereunto by the evidence of the Truth. This without
doubt is one of the praises which you reserve for the King of Sweden to have
contributed to so good a Work, of whom besides his Valor and success you
will advance his Clemency, and for this that in places conquered he has used
no violence against the Roman Clergy, but lets even the Jesuits themselves
alone, although they teach that it is lawful to kill Kings, and that many
parricides have come out of their schools, who having lately called this King
Anti Christ do now in their Colleges make declamations to his praise. And if
our Churches in France do suffer any Diminution, this proceeds not from the
Cause of the contrary party, but from the Avarice of some of our Nobility who
wound us in giving ear to that TIBIDABO which the Devil propounded to the
Son of God, for there are found of thosewho are always armed againstiron,
but not against silver, and in this golden Age a bag of Pistolls is of great
weight, and being put into the balance does often times ouerweigh the
Conscience. But the Church is no more weakened by that, then a Man's body is by
having vomited a worm or spit forth some filthiness. So Pride, Vanity, and
Avarice are more conveniently lodged in the temples of Idols then in the house
of God. True it is that those of your party do talk of our Religion with great
Contempt as of a desperate Cause which notwithstanding from the lowest is often
mounted up on high: they speak of us, as if we intended to mine the Alps with
a pin or pierce a Lion with a festraw. They black us over with injuries doing
as the enemies of the Gospel did of old who clad the Martirs in the skins of
wild beasts to animate the dogs to tear them, for they transform us into
monsters to provoke the people against us, but the son of God has prepared
us against this reproach, and he himself has passed by the like proofs. I
do rely upon your goodness and your Wisdom that you will support me if I be
sensible on this side, for you are too clear sighted not to discern the
weakness of your Cause, having a long time lived at Rome from whence with the
examples of vices came the decisions of the Faith; where the Jews, enemies of
the name of Christ do live in peace, but the Christians and the faithful are
burned; where in the time of Lent the Shambles are shut and the Stews are
open; where the Penitents whip themselves in public for the sins of others;
where is exercised a merchandise of Annats, of benifices, of dispensations, and
pardons: and I remember that I have read in one of your letters that it is
excellent good sinning there, and that you distinguish the Roman religion from
the Popes Court, for fear the corruption of the one should not stir up an
evil presumption of the other, although that this Court does rule religion. A
spirit excellent as yours should not suffer it self to be inknarled with such
senseless opinions. But you have a more delieate religion then that which the
vulgar do believe, or your Church does institute, nor do you fasten upon any
thing which is not agreeable to your humor. I make no doubt but you scorn the
hypocondriacall devotion of those who adore bones, who kissing and apparelling
Images and tossing up and down their hallowed grains, do make their prayers
by tale in words they understand not. Without doubt you do not think it good
that Service should be said in an unknown tongue as if God were become
barbatous to Men, or as if the Pope had forbidden God to speak in French; you
have seen at Rome many Altars where the Pope has set up pardons for a 100 and
200 thousand years with as many quarantines, and power to draw a soul out of
purgatory; you have seen there the madness of the people coming two or three
hundred miles to a Iubily to obtain the remission of their sins which God has
presented us at home by the preaching of the Gospel; nor are you ignorant out
of what stock the Pope draws this his liberality; for he heaps up the
superabundance of Fastings, whippings, pilgrimages of Saints and Monks, and
conuerts the same into payments for the sins of others. When at Rome you did
refresh your chamber with a Gale sufficient to drive a Ship, and did mount into
your Caroach only, to cross a street, you had not then the leisure to study
these superstitions. But if you had then the Curiosity to take the missall, and
therein to read the Cautels and the Rubricks which do provide against
inconveniences in case the wind should carry away their God, or the Rats
should have eaten Jesus Christ, or the Priest should vomit him up, you would
excuse us and say, certainly it is no marvel if this poor people do find
these things of so hard digestion and ill agreeing with the majesty of the
Son of God. On two points principally we insist, namely on the Succession of
the Pope into the Apostleship, and on the primacy of S. Peter: and we could
never yet obtain that any Man would show us the Institutions of these two
things out of the word of God. But enough of these matters, from which I would
have abstained if you had not pushed me forward. I subscribe to the rest of
your letters. Obedience unto Sovereigns is a thing both just and necessary. To
find in our own Religion or in that of the Kings occasions of Rebellion is to
raise up tumults to defend religion by courses condemned by Religion it self,
who being necessitated in their own particular affairs, do hope to find
ease by moving the fishpoole and to save themselves in the midst of
Confusion. The Cause of God was never advanced that way. Moses had power to
strike Egypt and their King with great plagues, yet would he never draw the
Israelites out of Egypt without the permission of their King. I am of opinion
that in Civil Causes it is more expedient for the people to have a bad master
then to have none at all; how much more having a good and clement King are we
obliged to be faithful to him, who in pardoning us has not done as they do
who help forward their clemency by disdain, esteeming him that has offended
them unworthy of their choler, but he has followed his natural inclination
which has carried him not only to pardon but to benefit also, so that to be
conquered by him is profitable. Furthermore I have always believed that there
is no worse estate then Anarchy, in which every one is a slave because every
one is a master and where the excess of liberty is the Cause of Slavery. For
this liberty brings license, and license confusion, and confusion slavery. As
the hand would be an improper instrument, were the fingers all of an equal
length, So a multitude of equal persons move not without inconvenience; your
maxim that it is dangerous to change evil laws is true out of the business
of Religion. To subject a Man's self by docility unto laws which lead unto
hell, is to break the laws of God, and such who have made those laws shall
not protect before God, those who obey them. But where nothing is to be
considered but the loss of goods and life, it is better to undergo that
unjust yoke then to be exempted from it by troubling the public peace by
rebellion against the Sovereign, for the force of humane laws does not
consist in this that they are just, but in that they are laws, and are made by
them who have Authority, and albeit they have something of unjust in them, yet
it is just to obey them. There are to be found Estates who have a long time
lived in peace and prosperity under unjust Laws well observed, and others
living under just Laws but ill observed have fallen into ruin and confusion.
This peace and prosperity will be always found more durable in a Monarchy
than in any other form of State, for it is the only civil government which
imitates the government of the universal World, where there is but one
Master, and all other States when they are much grown must of necessity come
unto it. But of Monarchies subsisting at this day, this of France has the
pre-eminence in Antiquity and good Laws: the moving humor of our nation and
inclined to change is a clear proof that the State is well composed, for it
had long since ouerturned the State, if the Pillars were not firm, and the
building well compacted. Being borne under this Monarchy we desire the
prosperity of it, and that the crown of our King may be like the crown of
Eggs which daily does increase by Age. If our religion were generally received
in France, the Kings Majesty should be more exalted and his power should the
more enlarge it self. For the Pope should no more pretend to have power over
the life and the Crown of our Kings, and should vaunt no more that he might
depose them, there should not in France be any more justice than that of the
Kings. Causes bred on this side the Alps should not be called over to Rome.
The Clergy should be subject to Civil Laws and should be tryable before
the Kings Judges. The Kingdom should no more be exhausted of money that goes
to Rome for Annats, dispensations, and pardons. So many Lands possessed by the
Clergy and thereby fallen into mortmaine should owe unto the King the same
services and duties which other Lands do which are possessed by the Nobility. In
brief I dare say that the principal reason of the hatred which men bear to
us is because we defend by the Word of God the right of our Kings against the
usurpation of the Popes, who make them kiss their pantofles and under the
shadow of penance do impose upon them corporal punishments. But this is our
unhappiness that as the holy Scripture is a book which is hid from Kings, so
in that which concerns the liberty and independance of their Crowns, they
learn nothing but from them whom the Pope holds bound by the belly. But this
is too much. The pleasure which I take in entertaining you makes me forget
that I write an Epistle and not a book, and has carried me beyond my limits:
that clause wherein you say that I would give unto a sedition the appearance of
a just war has urged me to take some kind of revenge which has bin this, to
tire you with the length of my letters; yet it shall not hinder me from
admiring the beauty and the force of your wit. I honor the gifts of God
wheresoever they be found, on the other side also, I hope that this little
sharpenes which I have used shall not deprive him of your favors who honors
you and who is,

Your most humble and affectionate servant. Du Moulin.

FINIS.

