ELIZA TRIVMPHANS.
YE precious shelles that lie on Lybian shore,
Or Nilus sable sands in needelesse store,
Or in the welthie deepes that western lie,
The muddye mines of Indian treasury.
Where ever incofred in the lowly clay,
(There spiteful nature shrowdes your shining ray)
Yield up the Pearls that in you buried been,
To deck the triumphs of the Maiden Queen.
The six-square Berill with his fiery shine:
The chaste green Smar agde, ruddie Sardian stone,
The Sardonix with mixt-lesse colors dressed,
Calmy Androdamant that aye loves rest,
The costly Chrysolite of golden green,
The Jasper king of wholesome medicine.
A chates black, and clear could Christalline.
Chaldean Sagda, cool Topazion,
Some in her valted Diadem be set
Enameling her costly coronet.
Some bind the borders of her braunched gown,
In seemly ranks descending fairly down,
Or in her crisped locks be looser laid,
Or dubling often her bared bosom shade.
Give place ye Persians with your Tissued trains,
Which baser times accounted Sovereign
Give place ye proudest Queens that were araied
In curious needle works of the Tyrian maid.
Lo here the Art of Nature, pride of Art,
United been, yet strive for greater part
Nature the matter, Art does claim the make,
And both their glory from her grace do take.
Descerning eye deal unto each his due,
And give the verdict with an equal view.
The Lion is the Forests King,
The flore-dece the pride of spring
The three in numbers leads the Ring
The square does make the surest thing
Foure-quartars can divide the best.
The circle is the perfectest,
The cross once bore the holiest
Well may the crown become their crest
Which all desine the worthiest.
A shame on him that thinks amiss,
Or grudges at Elizaes bliss,
Grow ever green victorious Laurel tree,
Whose branch she bears in such solemnitye
And thou fair bow, bud out and spring anew,
That might unto the world her triumph show.
Mean while preferred by her gentle grace
To the revenging sword or awful Mace.
Round globe the figure of her kingdoms right,
Due unto herby sires subduing might
Betoken thou to her impiring hand,
The Northren world, and neighbor western land
From scattered Orkneis unto Piren hills,
The sea-diuided Earths her Empire fills.
Upon two Piles of Trophe-like ascent,
Much like the spires of Egypts monuments,
Sit there two Nymphs arayd in lighter weed
To show the wondering world her virtues meede.
The One with a bending Palm, and band of Bays,
The signs of many fortunate assayes,
Victory self shall Crown her aged head,
While conquered Spain shall be her captive led.
The other on her crowned Temples bears
A girlond made of yellow wheaten Ears.
Her left hand holds up the Horn of store,
Her right the wreath that erst Pomona wore,
Peace in her Reign, and plenty in her peace,
And in her plenty pleasure, and sweet ease
Wars in her Peace, and Conquests in her war,
And fame of Conquest Crowns the Conqueror
Thus does Elyza Triumph on her day,
Whiles her Nouembers sliden soft away.
Slide on ye blessed Months to those forepast,
And with the world wind up your course at last.
The Lion awe, the flower her fair estate,
Terneon perfect, square sure situate
Four quarters equal rule Circle large governance
The cross her piety, and sufferance.
These are to be soulde in Pawles Churchyard at the Brazen Serpent by Robert
Dexter, 1597.


