A PREPARATION unto FASTING and REPENTANCE.

By PETER MOVLIN, and translated by I. B.

LONDON: Printed by T. S. for Nathaniel Newbery, and are to be sold at the
sign of the Star under S. Peter's Church in Cornehill, and in Popes head
ally. 1620.

To the Religious and Virtuous Lady, the Lady JANE BOYS, Widow to the right
worshipful Sir JOHN BOYS, sometime Recorder of the City of Canterbury; grace
and peace from our LORD JESUS CHRIST.
MAdame, I present unto your Ladyships view and reading, this Homely preached
in the French tongue by that learned and judicious divine, Mr. Peter du Moulin,
Minister of the word of God, and by me translated, touching that excellent
conference between God and his servant Abraham; wherein we may behold on the
one side the nature of sin, and the vengeance of God when sinners are come to
their full measure; on the other side the patience and familiar access, which
he affords to those that love him, how mild and patient he is toward them
that fear him, and how he behaues himself toward his enemies, and all to
this end to move us all to faith, repentance, and humility.

And sithence my small pains in englishing it yields me a right to make choice
of one to whom I may dedicate this little volume, I am bold to present the same
unto your Ladyship (hoping your favorable acceptance thereof) and the rather
because it befits you, (Madame) in many respects, for these virtues that are
here required, are in you. (Madame) I speak it without flattery; faith,
repentance, humility, zeal to Gods house, love to his word, love and faith
which you have to the Lord Jesus, and toward all his Saints; for you are an
Anna, always serving God in the Temple with fasting and prayers, a Lydia in
hearing Gods word, a Mary in pondering and meditating the same, a Dorcas to
Widows and Orphans, a Shunamite to the Prophets and Ministers of God, not
only countenancing our persons and ministry with your person and presence in
our Church of Canterbury when you are here, but also cherishing us with good
and comfortable words, and exercising your liberal charity toward our poor,
not leesing your first love, like the Ephesians, but continuing it toward us
from time to time; and therefore the just God will not forget your piety
toward him, nor your charity toward his Saints; but as your name and
charitable works are inregistred in our book of remembrance, so is your name
written in the Book of Life, your deeds of charity in feeding, covering,
visiting the poor, written in that Book that shall be opened in the day of
judgment to your consolation; then shall you reap plentifully what you sow
here, and as Damascen speaks, here you give a little, there you shall receive
much; now you give a transitory thing, then shall you gain an eternal; here
you give a penny, there you shall receive a Kingdom; for if Julius Caesar gave
Lands to one that gave him but a draught of water, what a reward will Christ
give to those, that give but a cup of water to drink in his name to those that
belong to him? If Darius gave a Kingdom to Silosontes, that gave him a garment
only; what a Kingdom will Christ give to those that give him clothing,
food, and drink, in the name and person of the least and poorest of his
brethren? The same Jesus Christ whom you feed, cloth, and visit here on
earth in his members; as he feeds you and clothes you here on earth, not
only corporally, but also spiritually, with the spiritual Manna the bread and
water of life, even he himself who is your spiritual food and garment also,
will give you that everlasting Kingdom, prepared for you from the foundation
of the world; where and when you shall be crowned with the crown of
righteousness, clothed with the roabes of glory, sit down with Abraham,
Isaac and Jacob to be nourished with the fruit of the tree of life and water
of life, and live eternally with him in the kingdom of heaven, Amen.

Canterbury the 30. of June, 1620. Your Ladyships in all dutiful service to
command, JOHN BVLTEEL.

A Preparation unto FASTING and REPENTANCE.
GENESIS Chap. 18. verse. 20. 21. 22. 23. 24. 25. etc. 20 And the Lord said,
Because the cry of Sodom and Gomorrah is great, and because their Sin is
very grievous.

21 I will go down now, and see whether they have done altogether according
to the cry of it, which is come unto me, and if not, I will know, etc.


IT is not needful my brethren to represent and show forth unto you the
extraordinary occasions, for the which we are invited to afflict our souls,
and sanctify a Fast by Repentance; seeing that we want not ordinary causes:
The enmity of Satan, and of the world, the feebleness of the Church, the Name
of God blasphemed, our vices that do increase, our zeal which waxes cold,
the hand of God lifted up to strike us, and his rods prepared, do bind us to
tremble under his hand, and prevent his judgments by Fasting and Repentance;
least GOD send us another kind of Fasting, making us to Fast from his Word,
which is the spiritual bread, sending us that famine prophesied by the Prophet
Amos, not a famine of bread, but a famine of the hearing of the Word of God,
for a punishment, because we taste this spiritual bread with distaste, and
receive not his Word with reverence.

Let us do in such sort, that our humiliation may be acceptable unto God, and
that whiles our bodies are void of meat, we have not our hearts replenished
with hatred and rancour, that whiles we abstain from drinking, we be not
drunken with pride: (for God does as much detest the fast of the hypocrite, as
the dissolutenes of the profane;) that our mouths do not only abstain from
meats, but also from bad discourses and evil words; that we fast with our
ears, to keep them shut against vain and idle discourses, and with our
hands, keeping us from rapine and usury: In a word, that all that which is in
us, even to our secret thoughts celebrat unto God an holy Fast, and pleasing
unto God, through Jesus Christ. That we may know that fasting is not instituted
to satisfy the Justice of God, but to reuenve us of our selves. That we give
unto the poor that which we spare and take from our selves, that our
voluntary fasting may help and aid that fast which the poor indureth of
force and necessity. And while that your bodies fast, let your souls feed on
the food of life, which is a meat which you must eat (as of old the
Paschall Lamb) with bitter herbs, soaking it in tears of repentance.
Instead of sackcloth, after the fashion of the Elders, be ye clothed and
covered all ever with holiness and integrity; in lieu of sprinckling of
ashes, as of old, acknowledge your selves, with Abraham, to be dust and ashes,
and give glory to GOD, in humbling your selves: Who knows if God will not
have pity on his people, and will not stir up his compassions upon his
children? For having in times past stayed the Sun at the prayer of one man,
how much more will he stay and keep back his judgments at the general cry
of his whole Church, proceeding from faith, and made strong by Repentance?

To dispose our hearts thereunto, I have chosen this excellent conference
between God and his Servant Abraham; where you see on the one side the nature
of sin, and the vengeance of God when sins are come to their full and heaped
measure: on the other side the patience and familiar access which he affords
to those that love him. All this conference may be reduced to these three
heads: I. Who he is that speaks. II. How he behaues himself toward his
enemies. III. How mild and patient he is toward them that fear him.

I. PART.
I. Who he is that speaks.
TOuching him that speaks unto Abraham, it is said in the beginning of the
Chapter, that three men did present themselves to Abraham; one of those is
called a while after the LORD: And so in the history of the vision of the
burning bush, and in the history of Gideon, and in that of the conception of
Sampson, even he who is called an Angel, is called the LORD; which cannot
appertain unto any but unto the Son of God our Lord Jesus Christ: For it is
he, who being sent of God, is notwithstanding God, and the Lord our
righteousness, Jeremy 23. by whom even then the Lord governed his Church,
made it feel his assistance and know his will; yea, before the flood he has
by the mouth of Noah preached to the dead, whole spirits are now in the
infernal prison. 1 Pet. 3.19.

Perhaps you find it strange that he appeared unto Abraham in the form of a
man, as if before he was borne of the Virgin Mary, he had took man's nature;
but you must know that the bodies wherein the Son of God appeared in the old
Testament, were but borrowed bodies for a time and by dispensation, the Deity
of the Son not being united personally to the body, which was an instrument
which he used for the present action only, and then left it. Even as a good or
a bad Angel may assume a body and move it, without giving it life or form, and
without making himself one person with that body.

II. How God behaues himself toward his enemies.
NOw touching the manner wherein and whereby God behaueth himself toward his
enemies, it is expressed unto us in these words: And the Lord said unto
Abraham, Because the cry of Sodom and Gomorrah is great, and because their sin
is very grievous, I will go down now, and see whether they have done
altogether according to the cry of it, which is come unto me, and if not, I
will know.

Where you see, that God bears and permits with patience the wicked to rule a
long time, but when their sin is come to the full, then he unfolds and
spreads abroad his terrible judgments; which he does here in this place after
an inquiry and kind of information, to show that he proceeds herein justly
and without precipitation. He speaks then of a sin that cries before God, so
Abels blood, Genesis 4. cries from the ground unto God for vengeance; So Job in
the 31. chapter, speaking of land detained by an unjust possessor, says, that
the land cries against the unlawful possessor, and the furrows likewise
thereof complaint. And Habbakuk Chap. 2. speaking of houses built by extortion,
says, that the stones cries out of the wall, and the beam out of the timber
answers it, as bearing witness against their master before God. And Saint
James in his fist chapter, says, that the hyre of the laborers, which have
reaped down your fields, which is of you kept back by fraud, cries, and the
cries of them which have reaped, are entered into the ears of the Lord of
Sabbath. Which teaches us, that there are heinous sins that cry and call God
to veangeance, so that though men should hold their peace, the thing it self
would speak, as our Savior says, Luke 19. If these men should hold their
peace, the stones would immediately cry out. For even as when God speaks, the
liuelesse and senseless things understand: When he speaks to the rock, it
casts forth water; when he speaks to the dead, they rise up at his word:
Even so God understands the language of senseless things, and brings them
forth to witness against them whom he will punish in his wrath. These crying
sins are the sins that are come to their full measure, as the iniquity of
the Amorites in Ioshuahs time; for in Abraham's time God declares in the 15.
chapter of Genesis, that the iniquity of the Amorites was not yet full, that
is to say, that the measure was not full to the top as then; according to that
which Christ Jesus says unto the Jews, Mat. 23 Ye fill up the measure of your
fathers: which the Apostle Paul, 1 Thessalonians. 2. says, happened in his time, They
fill up their sins always, for the wrath is come upon them to the uttermost.

This last period of sins, is when these two things concur in a country or
in a twone: I. When siners do boast of their wicked acts, and have lost that
good that remains in sinners, to wit, the shame of doing evil, wherein the
Prophet Esayas coupleth the Jews with the Sodomites, in the 3. chapter, They
declare their sin as Sodom, they hide it not Such are they of whom the
Wiseman speaks in the 2. Chapter of Proverbs, who rejoice to do evil, and
delight in the frowardness of the wicked, which is the third and last degree
of iniquity, which David describes in the 1. Psalm. namely, to sit in the seat
of the scornful, that is to say, of those that with insolency and flowting do
mock at Gods Word, and take a delight, yea, a glory to despite and vex him.
II. The second point that makes this full measure of sin is, when there is no
one man to be found in a city or country that withstands the evil, and
opposes himself against it, and as it is said in the 12. Psalm, The godly
man cease, the faithful fail from among the children of men, there is none
that does good, no not one; none that fear GOD, no not one; or else the number
of good men is so small that they are as nothing in a crowde, and as a grain
of corn in a heap of straw. Such was the condition of Jerusalem, which
Jeremy deplores in his 5. Chapter, Run ye to and fro through the streets
of Jerusalem and see now, and know, and seek in the broad places thereof, if
ye can find a man, if there be any that executes judgment, that seeks the
truth, and I will pardon it. And in the 22. chapter of Ezekiel, I sought for a
man amongst them that should make up the hedge, and stand in the gappe before
me for the land, that I should not destroy it, but I found none; therefore have
I powered out mine indignation upon them, I have consumed them with the fire of
my wrath, their own way have I recompensed upon their heads, says the Lord
God.

This self same enormitie and heinousness of sin is here represented by the
word, aggrauate, or made heavy and weighing down, where God says, that the
sin of Sodom is very grievous, speaking of sins as of burdens, which
ouerwhelme our souls, and do hinder them to lift up themselves to God, and
do cast them down headlong into the depth of perdition: Or else he speaks of
sins, as of weights put in a balance, that carry them against the patience
of God, and do make his will to hang toward the side of the punishment;
therefore the Prophet Zachary in his fifth Chapter compares sin to a lump of
lead; and the Prophet David Psa. 38. says, his iniquities are gone over his
head, as an heavy burden, they are too heavy for him: and the Prophet Isaiah
speaking of our sins as of heavy burdens, wherewith Jesus Christ has
charged himself to discharge us; He has borne our griefs, and carried our
sorrows, the Lord has laid on him the iniquity of us all and S. Peter, 1 Pet
2. He has borne our sins in his own body on the tree, by whose stripes we
are healed. O how heavy was that burden, seeing that the least piece of our
sins which every one of us do commit, is a sufficient weight to cast us down
headlong, and plunge us to the bottom of the bottomless pit! Now Jesus Christ
has borne the sins of all men on his Cross. It was the most principal
burden and charge of Jonas ship; the Mariners labored with strength of
arms to unload the ship, and to save their lives did cast their wares into the
sea, but the heauiest burden remained in the ship, namely Jonas sin; neither
was there any way to save themselves, but by casting him into the sea. True it
is, that as Leapers do not feel nor smell their own infection, nor they that
have an obstructed and corrupt nose do not smell the scent of their breath;
and the swine wallowing in the mire do find that odor sweet; so men plunged
and steeped in sin, feel not the weight of their sins, because they are as
it were borne and bred with them, and that this natural evil grows and
increases more and more by custom; which is the reason which the Philosophers
do render, why those that swim between two waters, feel not the weight of
the water which is over their heads, because (say they) that an element is not
heavy in his natural place: Even so sin does not oppress nor ouercharge the
consciences of profane men, and they feel not their consciences burdened,
because sin is there in them as in his own natural place, but if God
withdraws a man out from this bottom and depth, and makes him once to
breath the air of his grace, then the very relics of sin that are in him
weighes him much down and wearies him much.

When therefore the sin of the wicked is come to his full and last measure,
then God, who by his patience has invited sinners to repentance, who has
uncovered, dunged, and pruned this barren fig tree three years long, finally
seeing that it brings forth no fruit, and that the sinner mocks at his long
patience, commands that the are be laid unto the root of this cursed tree, and
rewards his long expectation with the greatness of his punishment. Even as
when a woman condemned to death by law being found with child, her execution
is deferred till she be delivered of of her child; so although God has
already determined in his council to punish some wicked men, notwithstanding
he stays till the sin which they have conceived in their hearts, be brought to
ripeness; during which time the sinner often makes merry, as malefactors do,
who to drive themselves from their dumpes, play in prison at cards and dice;
but before God the day and hour of their execution is decreed.

Notwithstanding before he comes to that point, he speaks as if he doubted of
the truth, and prepares himself to make a kind of information and enquest. I
will go down and see now, says he) whether they have done altogether
according to the cry of it, which is come unto me: And so in the confusion of
languages God descends, to see what the children of men builded, and to have
knowledge thereof.

These things are said after the fashion of men, for God descends not, seeing
he is every where, and has no need to enquire, seeing he knows all things;
but the holy Ghost stuttereth with us, as with children, in humane words, of
Divine things. God comes down to us, when he makes himself to be felt of us;
he stretches his arm, when he displayes his strength; he moves himself when
he will move us; he wakens when he makes it known that he has not slept;
he enquires of the sins of men, when he will convict and convince them; he
speaks as doubting, when he will put us out of doubt of the certainty and full
knowledge of our actions.

Notwithstanding God gives by this practice a rule unto Magistrates, not to
judge till after a careful enquiry, and after a ripe consideration, and to
undergo that Law which God has imposed unto himself, saying, I will go now
down and see if it be thus and thus: Which is also a warning to all particular
men, that they be not unjustly prone to believe calumnies, nor rashly unjust to
condemn others without being well informed of the truth; but expecting the
judgment of GOD that will make all things manifest, let us beware that we
give not rashly our judgment.

III. How gentle and mild God is toward them that fear him, and the care he
has of his children.
THe third point is the manner, how God behaues himself toward those that
fear him. This point requires a more careful and serious consideration,
because it touches us more particularly.

Of these three men setting themselves forwards toward Sodom; two of them go
on their way, but the third who is called the Lord, stays with Abraham who
being in thought for his nephew Lot, fearing least he should be intrapped and
inwrapped in the ruin and destruction of Sodom, makes intercession for the
men thereof: Will thou also destroy the righteous with the wicked? shall not
the judge of all the earth do right? He could not better ground his
supplication, then on Gods Justice as Saint Paul says, Romans 3. What shall we
say, is God unrighteous who takes vengeance? God forbid, for then how shall
God judge the world? God being by nature righteousness it self, can no more
do injustice, then white can black, or the flame can freez. To say that God is
unrighteous, is to say he is God and is not God, for to be, and to be
righteous, are one thing with God, not as with men, or Angels, who are
susceptible of contrary qualities without corruption of their substance. Even
as the right of governing and of judging the world, is deuolued and fallen to
him by inheritance, not happened by election: so neither is he just and
righteous to be conformable to laws that any has imposed to him, but as his
Empire, so his Justice is natural.

This righteousness being necessarily joined with goodness, Abraham had
reason to presuppose, that it was more convenient and befitting this upright
goodness, to support the wicked for the good men's sake, then to destroy the
good for the wickeds sake. Notwithstanding it seems this bears many
exceptions, and has many difficulties. For not to speak of afflictions for
Gods cause, which befall the faithful alone, while that the ungodly prosper as
Christ says, Ye shall weep, but the world shall rejoice, because these
afflictions are honorable, a glorious reproach, honest brands and blemishes,
scarf, and liueries of our warfare, and conformities to Jesus Christ, I will
speak only of evils and afflictions wherewith God punishes the good with the
wicked, and that because of the wicked: God had foretold by his Prophets, that
by reason of the sins of the people, the land should vomit out her Inhabitants,
which was fulfilled when Nebuchadnezzar did lead the people captive into
Babylon; with the multitude of this rebellious people, Daniel and Ezekiel were
led also away, as also those three men, who by the heat of their faith,
overcame the heat of the burning furnace. There were the good afflicted, for
the wicked men's sake. There were seven thousand in Samaria, and among the ten
tribes, that had not bowed their knees unto Baal, were those exempted from the
public calamity, when as Salmanazar and Tiglatpilezer kings of Syria did
lead the ten tribes into captivity. Does not God say by his Prophet Ezekiel,
Chap. 21. that his sword shall cut off from the land of Israel, the righteous
and the wicked. And when God says in the 18. Chapter of the Revelation, Come
out of Babylon my people that ye be not partakers of her sins, and that ye
receive not of her plagnes? does he not warn them, that if any of his people
remain there, he shall be partaker of the plagues of Babylon? And if God would
now at this time afflict a kingdom, given over to idolatry, and should find
there a general plague, who doubts but that the faithful mixed with the
Idolaters should incur the same danger?

To explain unto you this point. Observe that when God visits a kingdom, or a
City, with a general affliction, by reason of the wickedness of the people,
then those of the faithful, mixed with the wicked shall escape, whom God
intends to make as yet use of, and to employ them for his glory, and for the
good of his Church. So he saved Noah from the universal Flood; because he
would reserve him, and make use of him, for the preservation of mankind. So
also in the days of the Emperor Vespasian, the Church of the Apostles that
was in Jerusalem, was warned to go out of the City, and withdraw her self to
Pella on the other side of Jordan, least she should be enclosed by the enemies
in the besieging of the City, whereby it was razed down and the people
destroyed. And in the 14. Chapter of Ezekiel, God speaks after this manner:
Son of man, when the land sins against my by trespassing grievously, then
will I stretch out mine hand upon it, and will break the staff of the bread
thereof, and will send famine upon it, and will cut off man and beast from it;
though those three men, Noah, Daniel, and Job were in it, they should deliver
but their own souls by their righteousness, says the Lord God; they shall
not deliver neither sons nor daughters, they only shall be delivered;
Because that the conservation of these men was profitable to the Church of God.

But if God, who prouides for his work as it pleases him, will employ no more
such a one, and will quickly give him the possession of eternal life, then
marvel not if he die as the rest do; and if the like and semblable accidents
do befall him; notwithstanding in his common afflictions with the wicked, he
has particular consolation; God gives him grace to profit by his
chastisements, and to take these banishments for flights from the world, and
walking toward God: Poverty is unto him a wholesome and profitable dyer, and
an exercise of abstinence. In his death-bringing sickness, Gods Angel assists
him, who wipes off from him his sweaty drops of blood, and Christ Jesus near
him showing him the crown of Glory. His death is as far different from the
death of others, as there is difference between the gates of hell, and the
Kingdom of God. So Threshers with the same flaile do alike thresh both the
corn and the straw, but to diverse ends; which are as Christ Jesus says, To
gather the Wheat into the Barn, but to bind the straw in bundles, to burn
it in the unquenchable fire. So the passage through the red Sea, was the ruin
of the Egyptians, but was to the Church of God a passage to arrive unto the
promised inheritance. In a word, the chastisements wherewith God does visit
the faithful, shall never be fully distinct and separated from those of the
wicked before the day of judgment; for then the sheep shall be called out
from among the goats, divided and set a part, and the tares grown pell-mell,
and confusedly mingled with Wheat* and that has together endured both storm
and weather, wind and havle, shall be picked up by the Angels, even unto the
very last slip and sprig, and be bound in bottles, to be cast into the
everlasting fire.

Notwithstanding, Abraham might seem to pass the limits of modesty in this
demand, as ready to control the actions of God, Will thou (says he)
destroy the righteous with the wicked? that be far from thee; as showing unto
God his duty. Then afterward he seems to use policy and Art toward God,
endeavoring to obtain of God by retaile and parcels, that which he thinks
he shall not get by the whole, and all at one time; saying, If there be fifty
righteous in the City, will thou notspare the place for the fifty righteous
that are therein? And this being granted unto him, from fifty he comes to forty
five, and from that to forty, and from that to thirty, and so at last unto ten.
Hardly I suppose is there to be found any Prince, be he never so mean and
petty, that would endure that any of his servants should lead him so by
degrees, and abuse thus his gentleness, and yet notwithstanding there is some
comparison between the greatest Prince of the world, and the meanest beggar,
yea, between the excellentest Angel, and between the Pismire and worm, the
distance and inequality is not infinite, for they are creatures, and there can
be no infinite distance betwixt two finite things; but there is no comparison
between God and the most excellent creature that is; how much less between
God and between a man, a sinner as Abraham was, who acknowledges himself to
be naught but dust and ashes? whose light is naught but darkness? whose
righteouinesse is as filthy rags? whose strength is as smoke that vanishes
away? If God finds no steadfastness in his Angels, how much less in them that
dwell in houses of clay, whose foundation is in the dust, which are crushed
before the Moth? Such as was the splendour of Herod's robes, when he was eaten
of worms and gave up the ghost, in comparison of the brightness of the Sun,
such is the glory of man in the presence of God, and that small luster which he
has in this world, is accompanied with thousands of briers and incommodities,
like a gloeworme in the midst of a bush. What think ye is the highest heaven
before God? It is as a point in his presence; and what is the earth in regard
of heaven, but as a point in comparison? And what is a man in comparison of the
whole earth, but as a Pismire wandering in a large country? as the Prophet
Isaiah Chapter 40. speaks, Behold the nations are as a drop of a Bueket, and
are counted as the small dust of the balance, and are as nothing before him.
And therefore Abraham says, Behold I have taken upon me to speak unto the
Lord, which am but dust and ashes. It is also the end for the which God has
created man of the dust, to the end that if he should happen to glory of the
light of his understanding, he should be presently abased and abated by the
remembrance of the birth and beginning of his body, and by the feeling of his
infirmity; and to the end he should use and employ this reason to pray unto
God, who lifts the poor from the dust, and powers his treasures into
earthen vessels, that he would not contest against dust, nor enter into an
account with ashes; that he would let it dissolve by nature, without dissoluing
it before his time by the violence of his wrath. This is the consideration
which David brings in the 103. Psalm, to move God to clemency and compassion.
Like as a father pittieth his children, so the Lord pittieth them that fear
him; for he knows our frame, he remembers that we are dust, before whom we
cannot present our selves, but our hairs must stare, our blood must freeze
within us, and all the pride we have in us must needs be abated by fear.

All these considerations might make this private familiarity of Abraham with
God, seem to be excessive, as intending to control the actions of God; and
his cunning with small respect to insinuate himself little by little, and
obtain by pieces that which he durst not demand all at once.

Notwithstanding in that God hears him willingly, and accepts his demand,
hinders us to presume of any evil in such an holy and excellent servant of God.

To resolve you of this point, ye must know that in a great similitude of
words, there is often a great dissimilitude of sense and intention. Two persons
sometimes will use the same words, and make the same signs, but to diverse
ends, and with different intentions. As in the 17. Chapter of Genesis, Abraham
laughes at the promise which God made him touching a Son, this laughter in
him is not reproved, because it proceeded of joy, not of distrust; but in the
18. Chapter Sarah laughes at the self same thing, and is checked for it,
because God did perceive therein her distrust, as if the thing was impossible.
Zachary the father of John Baptist and the Virgin Mary do answer the Angel
in words alike, saying, How shall this be? In Zachary it was a How of doubt,
in the holy virgin Mary it was a How of inquiry, to demand instruction. Who
could approve in any other then in Moses these bold words, Yet now if thou will, forgive their sin, if not, blot me I pray thee out of thy book which
thou have written?

You know that Job and Jeremy pressed with anguish, have cursed the day of their
birth. I think that those that are tormented in hell, say the very same thing;
for as Christ says of Judas, it had been good for those men, that they had
never been borne. But other was the motion that drove these holy men to this,
other the murmuring of the damned; for these are moved and set on with hatred
against God, but Job and Jeremy have suffered themselves to slip by
infirmity to these words of excess, wherein I doubt not but they have greatly
offended God, and have asked him pardon thereof. The bubling of their anguish
have casted forth for once this scumme of their impatience; So in a man weaker
in faith then Abraham, and less accustomed to confer with God familiarly,
this private familiarity might seem excessive; but the humility whereby he
acknowledges himself dust and ashes, and the favorable answers of God to
his demands, do exempt him from the crime of temerity.

Let us not impute to subtilty this kind of insinuating himself so by
degrees, nor look for any craft therein; let us rather attribute it to the
nature of faith, which imboldeneth her self by degrees, and makes her self
familiar little by little, by how much she acknowledges the effects of Gods
favor; for the first favorable answers do give liberty to make others, the
first graces of God do contain covert promises of increasing of graces; for
God gives because he has given, his first liberalities do inuit the
following ones, he crowns not our merits but his gifts, his gifts and his
calling are without repentance.

This private familiarity of Abraham therefore, was without contempt, his
boldness was modest; his confidence humble; which he testifies in
acknowledging himself dust and ashes, for without this humility his prayer had
been unpleasing to God, who reiects the prayer of the proud, and inclines his
care unto those that have a contrite and broken spirit, as it is said in
Isaiah, Chapter 66. I will look to him that is poor and of a contrite spirit,
and trembles at my word. God sends rain in greater abundance on low places,
yea, and when it does fall on high places it stays not there. And if any great
tempest or furious storm happens, the Oak and Ash trees are overthrown
and cast down to the earth, but the Time and Marioram remain whole. Gods
graces falling upon the proud do not stop nor settle there; God resists the
proud, but gives grace unto the humble: To ask of God graces with a haughty
spirit, and opinion of his own righteousness, is to be like him that should
beg with a suit of cloth of gold and all perfumed; he that asks after such
an indecent manner must look to be refused.

Notwithstanding in this gradation of Abraham's de^ands, considering that he
being come to the number of ten, he stays there, and says not, but Lord if
there be five found within the City, will thou not spare the place for those
five righteous? Whither it was because Abraham did judge in himself, that he
ought to subscribe to the decree and sentence of the justice of God, and
acknowledged that it was a just thing that a great City in the which ten
righteous men were not to be found, should be destroyed, and that he ought not
to make intercession for it: Or whither it was, because God hindered him to
proceed on in his demands, least he should ask things contrary to Gods
decree and ordinance, and that thereupon God should have been feign to have
refused him, and reject his prayer; for often in the Scripture God forbids his
servants to make intercession for such and such, when he is resolved not to
pardon them; he forbids Samuel to pray for Saul, and Jeremy to make
intercession for the Jews, because God holds it not convenient to his
goodness, to permit his children to pray unprofitably and without reaping some
fruit.

Observe also that in this conference of God with Abraham, and often elsewhere,
the faithful are called righteous, not that they are without sin, but in
comparison of the wicked; and because God wipeth out their sins by his mercy
for his Sons sake, whom Jeremy calls the Lord, our righteousness, Jeremy
23. Sometimes also because of the righteousness of the cause, which they
maintain, and for the which cause they are persecuted: So Noah, Lot, Job,
Daniel, and Zachary are called righteous, though Noab fell into drunkenness,
Lot committed incest, David adultery and murder, Job cursed the day of his
birth, Zachrie doubted of Gods promises; which faults are as warts in a fair
face, which seem as an exposition of this word Righteous.

That we may know, that when Christ Jesus says that he is not come for the
righteous, but to call sinners to repentance, these sinners are righteous in
some sort, and that Jesus Christ by the righteous understands those that think
they are without sin. Our righteousness consists in acknowledging our
unrighteousness, and in clothing our selves with the righteousness of Jesus
Christ, who has been made sin for us, that we might be made the
righteousness of God in him, 2 Cor. 5. By his knowledge shall my righteous
servant justify many Isa. 53. Who of God is made unto us wisdom, and
righteousness, and sanctification, and redemption, 1 Cor. 1.

This is the sense and meaning of this history, and the exposition of the three
points which we have propounded unto you; whence springs diverse doctrines,
that serve to comfort, instruct, and to humble us.

The Application.
FIrst in the manner wherein God proceeds against Sodom, you have an example
and pattern of Gods patience, soliciting sinners to repentance; he sends Lot
to those of Sodom, who was among them an Herald and Preacher of
righteousness, who dwelling among them, vexed his righteous soul from day to
day with their unlawful deeds, as S. Peter says, 2 Pet. 2. But they believed
him not, Gen, 19.9. This one fellow came in to soiourne, and so will needs be
a Judge? After Lots coming, God sends them wars, that spoils their Country,
and leads them into captivity, whence being delivered by Abraham's help, they
amend not. At the last God being provoked, sends fire from heaven, which
consumes them: whereunto served the nature of the soil, for the country was
full of slime pits, which served as matter unto it, and brought a sudden
inflaming.

Three things are happened unto them for examples, and are written for our
admonition, upon whom the ends of the world are come, least we should abuse
Gods patience, who has so long time supported us, solicites and calls us to
repentance: for what has not God done, to bind us to his love and fear? He
has sent us his servants, and set his word before our eyes, he has chastised
us often, and has set us on foot again by his help; he has scattered us in
strange countries, and then re-assembled us together again by his mercy. He
makes us to subsist now as the remainder of the massacre, as some plankes saved
from shipwreck, or like a brand reserved from the fire, and do as yet subsist
as a miracle to strangers, and a rare example of his providence; for in the
troubles of a State it happens ordinarily as with catarres and defluctions,
which always fall upon the weakest part. Now the weakest part in the body of
this kingdom is the Church of God, notwithstanding in these last stirs which
have troubled this estate, God has secured and saved harmeles his Church, and
restrained the peoples will, though on our side we have enough contributed to
our own ruin, and yet God even this day gives us this grace, that we are
here assembled in peace, to lift up together our hands and hearts before his
presence. He may then say that which he says, Isai. 5. What could have been
done more to the vineyard, that I have not done in it? Wherefore when I looked
that it should bring forth grapes, it brought forth wild grapes: For that we
do not bring forth fruit worthy of repentance, is it because we have not been
chastised? but we newly come forth out of persecution: Or is it because he
has not threatened us? but yet even now we were at deaths door, and as it were
on the point of our steep downe-fall: Or is it because he has imparted unto
us his gifts and graces so sparingly? but who can comprehend his goodness
toward us, his liberality and his patience? Or is it because you have not
been sufficiently and carefully informed? but surely we have not spared our
selves in this point, yea, our liberty and freedom of reprehending seems
intolerable unto many. After a continual labor, we receive instead of
recompense, calumnies, which tend to make our Ministry unfruitful, and to
take away the efficacy from our preaching: The time will come (^f GOD has not
pity on us) wherein ye shall have teachers according to your desire, or else
shall have leisure to fast after the Word of God.

But if we speak in our exhortations against the abuses of Popery, ye hear
that with great attention, but ye will not enter into disputation with your
own vices, as being at agreement with the devil on that side. You condemn the
Church of Rome, in that she forbids the people the reading of the holy
Scripture, but are we for all that the carefuller to read it? they are hindered
to read it by scruple, but you by contempt and negligence. Ye blame those that
pray, not understanding what they say; but are ye more excusable to pray
without thinking what ye say? You reprehend them for superstitious signs and
gesture that they have in the Church; but you in avoiding superstition fall
into irreuerence, one keeping on his Hat in Prayer time: another makes
difficulty to kneel, to show unto our adversaries that we need not suffer so
much for religion, seeing we have it in so little esteem. You condemn the
idolatry of the Church of Rome, and notwithstanding you idolatrize, and as it
were worship your bodies and goods, which you serve much more and better then
you serve God. You condemn spiritual whoredom, and you pollute your selves
with corporal fornication. You condemn those that esteem to merit Paradise
by their good works, and in the mean time you live as if you would go into hell
by your evil works, or as hoping to be saved without your good works. We
blame auricular confession, but are we for all that now careful to confess
our sins to God? We blame those that think to redeem their sins by money
given to the Church, but the money we spare on that side, is it bestowed in
almes-deedes? and that which we withdraw from the idle, is it consecrated to
Gods service. Contrariwise the poor languish and accuse the rich to be little
charitable, the cry of the poor is mounted and entered into the cares of the
LORD of hosts.

And therefore do not take it as an injury to be compared to Sodom and
Gomorrah; for although we are guiltless of that sin, for the which God
consumed them with fire; notwithstanding there are other sins that cry as
loud as that, and for the which many hearers of the Word of God, shall be more
roughly handled in the day of Judgment then Sodom and Gomorrah, as it is
denounced unto Capernaum, Corazin, and Bethsaida, Mat. 11. that had seen the
miracles of Jesus Christ, and heard his word, which they had rejected, and were
not converted.

And indeed the Scripture teaches us, that beside the sin of Sodom, there
are other sins that cry and call for the vengeance of God. There is the cry
of the innocent blood, witness the blood of Abel, that cried from the earth
unto God. There is the cry of the laborers and Servants, whose hire is kept
back by fraud, whereof Saint James speaks, Iam. 5.4. There is the cry of
the widow, and of the orphan, whereof Moses speaks, Exodus 22. Ye shall not
afflict any widow, or fatherless child, if thou afflict them in any wise,
and they cry at all unto me, I will surely hear their cry, and my wrath shall
wax hot, and I will kill you with the sword, and your wives shall be widows,
and your children fatherless. Which is a sin that is to be found among us,
besides which, example of violent snatching and usury are to be found. Such a
one fasteth this day from flesh and meat, that eats at his house the flesh of
the poor, and consumes his neighbors substance. Many ouerturning Gods
commandment that forbids to come unto the altar with void hands, bring to the
Lords Table hands full of violence and extortion, far from clothing Jesus
Christ in his members, seeing that they strip them thereof.

And what think ye of the mortal, or rather immortal quarrels of those,
that have not learnt to forgive, that ask of God every day that he forgive
them not their sins, seeing they forgive not those that have trespassed
against them; that hate a thousand times more their neighbor, then they love
God; seeing they defame the Church of God by their quarrels, and put it to an
open shame? What, do ye think that these things cry not against heaven? Do
ye think that the Heathen soldiers, having not torn Christ's coat, those can
be suffered that tear his body, which is the Church? and seeing that he who
offends one of the least ones, deserves to be thrown and drowned in the depth
of the Sea, with a millstone about his neck, he which offends the whole
Church, deserves he not to be cast into Hell? Or do ye think that he can have
peace with his father, that is always in quarrel with his brethren?

It is good also to observe the causes of the destruction of Sodom, and by
what degrees she came to be corrupted. The Prophet Ezekiel, tells us in the 16.
Chapter. Behold, this was the iniquity of thy Sister Sodom, pride, fullness
of bread, and abundance of idleness, neither did she strengthen the hand of
the poor and needy. These selfsame vices do infect our flock; charity
diminishes amongst us, and covetousness increases; the quarrels are hot, and
the prayers cold; the word of GOD ill planted in our hearts, rancour and hatred
firmly rooted in them; the parents are careful to hoord up goods for their
children, but not to teach them to make good use of them, and to forgo them
willingly for the Gospels sake. In poor families, you shall find in an extreme
poverty, an extreme pride, idleness and drunkenness; they had rather see their
children go naked, then apply themselves to labor and sobriety. Ye shall see
in many of the Nobility a profane humor, an arrogant ignorance, unclean and
filthy words, ordinary swearing, a distaste of Gods Word. They are courageous
to revenge their own injuries, but cowards to resist their vices, or to defend
Gods cause; sumptuous in clothes, but niggards in almsdeeds. They are not
such as our forefathers were in old time, ready to run to Martyrdom, but they
are ready to run to every public faction and sedition.

Are these those, whom God has raised to underprop and support his Church? or
do we hope that God will deliver his people by their hands?

Of all in general we make this complaint, with the Prophet Isaiah, Chap. 9.
The people turns not unto him that smites them neither do they seek the
LORD of hosts. Thou have stricken them, and they have felt no pain; thou have
consumed them and they have refused to receive instruction; they have hardened
their faces like stone, they have refused to turn themselves; and as it is in
the 29. Chapter of Deuteronomie: They have blessed themselves in their hearts,
that is to say, flattered themselves, saying, I shall have peace, though I walk
in the imagination and stubbornes of mine heart, to add drunkenness to thirst.
By this means Gods patience, that should serve to amend us, serves to mar
us. God will give us thereby leisure to repent us of our sins, and we take
leisure thereby to rejoice in our wickedness. God commands us to be holy, but we
will make him a sinner, winking at our profane humor. He will have us expect
his help, and we will have him expect our amendment at our leisure. This is
the right brimstone that pulls down fire from heaven, that sulphurous earth of
Sodom never had such force, to draw down Gods inflaming anger consuming them
with fire, as the contempt of Gods Word has power to pull down his judgments
on our heads: Let us fear least his patience being in the end overcome by his
wrath, we find no more place of repentance, as Godthreatneth by his Prophet
Isaiah, Chap. 1. Therefore when you spread forth your hands, I will hide mine
eyes from you, yea, when ye make many prayers, I will not hear. But as for
them that turn themselves unto the LORD. Gods familiarity with Abraham, and
the free access he gives to his Servant, ought to give them a holy confidence
to speak unto God familiarly, and to be assured that God will hear them. For
as Saint Paul teaches us, Romans 4. that that which is written of Abraham's
faith, which was imputed to him for righteousness, Was not written for his
sake alone, but for us also, to whom it shall be imputed, if we believe on him
that raised up Jesus our Lord from the dead. So then hold certainly, that this
benignity of our God in hearing Abraham's demands, that seemed to be
importunate, is not propounded only for Abraham's sake; but for you also that
believe, that ye may have this assurance, that God is even delighted and
desires to be importuned by his children, and is not offended with this filial
freedom, which proceeds from the spirit of Adoption; that he loves this holy
obstinacy; who according to Jacob wrestling with him, lets him not go, till it
has got a blessing; or after the example of the woman of Canaan, who being
often repulsed by Jesus Christ, yea even so far as to be compared by him to a
dog, yet at last she obtaines, besides the curing of her daughter, this
testimony of Christ that her faith was great, and that he had not found so
great a faith, no not in Israel. And this is that spirit of adoption, of
freeness and liberty, which makes, that as in afflictions we had rather fall
into the hands of God, then into the hands of men, because his compassions are
great and many; so in matter of demands and requests we dare ask of him such
things, as we dare not ask of men, because his grace and goodness are
according to his greatness, that is to say, are incomprehensible.

Nay, which is more, to give us the more private familiarity to call upon him,
although he does us good by his free will, and without any constraint;
notwithstanding he will have us to think that he gives it to our importunity
and continuance in prayer, as we are taught by our Savior Christ, Luke 11. by
that similitude of a friend that goes unto his friend at midnight, and says
unto him; friend, lend me three Loaves, I say unto you, says Christ, though
he will not rise and give him, because he is his friend, yet because of his
importunity, he will rise and give him as many as he needs; and by the
example of an unjust Judge, which dispatcheth the poor widow of her suit to
deliver himself from her importunity, whence Christ says, Shall not God
avenge his own elect, which cry day and night unto him, though he bear long
with them?

This confidence and familiarity of praying unto God, shall no more bar
humility, then it did in Abraham, who amiddest his requests, full of liberty,
acknowledges himself notwithstanding to be naught but dust and ashes. There
is an humble familiarity, an humility with freenes, which being drawn to by
love, diminishes not the reverence due unto him. Wherefore in prayer we join
together these two gestures, we bow our knees, and lift up our eyes, whereof
the one witnesses our humility, the other our confidence. Many other doctrines
do arise from this Text, which we will briefly touch. When you read that in a
great city, ten righteous are not to be found among many thousands; you may
learn, that you must not square your self by the multitude to live well, as
the LORD says, Exodus 23. Thou shall not follow a multitude to do evil. The
multitude has been always a bad counselor, the broad way leads to
destruction. The whole world, shall run after and follow the beast, Revel. 13.
They that produce the greatness, multitude and universality for marks of the
Church, had they lived in Sodom, would have sooner joined themselves with the
Sodomites, then with Lot, who was almost alone among this multitude.

Which Lot being righteous, of whom Abraham speaks, when he says, will thou
destroy the righteous with the wicked? teaches us by his example, that it is a
dangerous thing for an holy man to live in the company of the wicked. Wherefore
David says, Psalm. 26. Gather not my soul with sinners, nor my life with
bloody men. One Jonas thinking to escape and fly from the presence of God, and
to exempt himself from his obedience, had like to have cast away the whole
ship. A heathen Captain of a ship, hearing a wicked man making his prayer
among the rest during the tempest, Hold thy peace, says he, and hide thy
self, lest the gods know that thou art here. Wherefore God said unto the
Israelites, depart from the tents of these wicked men; namely, Korah, Dathan
and Abiram, and touch nothing of theirs, least ye be consumed in all their
sins: Come out of Babylon my people, that ye be not partakers of her sins,
and that ye receive not of her plagues; and that therefore not only for fear
of the like peril and punishment, but also for fear of the contagion of vices.
There is nothing so glewish as evil examples, nothing so pernicious as the
company of the wicked. If Dina had not haunted dancing, she had preserved her
chastity. If the Israelites in Nehemiahs time had not allied themselves by
marriage with the infidels, their children should not have spoken the language
of Ashdod. A little leaven leaueneth the whole lump, by the conversation and
acquaintance with the wicked, we become like them. Wherefore even as one
counsels women that conceive, to have by their bed side the pictures of
fair children, so must we have fair examples before our eyes, to the end we
may conceive good thoughts, and bring forth good actions* For what concord has
Christ with Belial? or what part has he that belieueth with an Infidel?
wherefore come out from among them, and be ye separated* ^aith the LORD, and
touch not the unclean thing, 2 Cor. 6.

Finally touching that which you have heard; namely, if there had been ten
righteous men in Sodom, God would have spared the City for their sakes; ye
may learn how God esteems his children, choosing rather the preservation of
ten of his children, then the ruin of ten thousands of his enemies. He bears
with the wickedness of the world, and fore slowes his judgments for his
Church sake mixed with the world; so God would not send the flood till after
Methusalems death, who dyed a year before the flood; as soon as Josias is
dead, Nebuchadnezzar inuadeth the country of Judea; the life of one servant of
God did support the country, and keep back Gods judgments. So soon as
Saint Augustine was dead, the City Bona, whereof he was Bishop, was won by
the Vandals, and sacked by them; as if by the death of that good man of God,
the rampires and walls of the town were fallen down. Therefore the LORD in
the 57. Chapter of Isaiah, after he had said, that the righteous man
perishes, and no man lays it to heart, and merciful men are taken away;
immediately after he makes the punishment of the wicked to follow, as a
necessary sequel and consequence. But draw ye hither ye sons of the
Sorceresse, against whom do ye spore your selves? etc. Nay which is more, God
having lifted up his hand, to turn vpside down heaven and earth, because they
are become a temple of idols, and the kingdom of the devil, is stopped and
withheld from doing it, because there are a few of the faithful mingled among
the wicked, least in rooting up the darnell, he should also pluck up by the
roots the good corn; therefore it is said to the souls of them that were
slain for the Word of God, that were under the altar, and cried for vengeance
against them that dwell on earth, Apocal. 6. that they should rest yet for a
little season, until their fellow servants, and their brethren that should be
killed as they were, should be fulfilled; that being once done, the end of the
world will necessarily follow: for should the world be so possessed by the devil
that God should have no part in it? or should the Sun rise only to give
light to those that do evil? It is therefore one of the reasons, for the
which the faithful are called the salt of the earth, Matthew. 5. Because it is
that part that preserues the rest of the Inhabitants of the earth, and protects
the world from corruption.

And to apply these things to our selves, I esteem that these last days past,
when our Churches were in great danger, God cast his eyes upon us; he
considered therein many mischiefs and maladies that infect the flock; that
covetousness is very rise among us, so that we esteem of men as we esteem
of bags of money, that is to say, according to the money they have, the man
is esteemed as nothing, as the bag is nothing esteemed. That every one tells
lies and lives subtly with his neighbor. That destruction, hatred, suspicion
are among us, in the highest degree; that usury, whoredom, and blasphemies are
to be found among us, to the great dishonor of the Gospel, that so soon as
there is never so little prosperity, excess, not and superfluity of apparel
do incontinently appear; and that charity toward the poor, and the zeal of
the honor of God is waxed cold; while as the superstitious powere out their
goods at the feet of an Idol, do lay foundations of new religions, build
Churches, give offerings, buy masses and services at a great rate and with an
extreme cost; that is to say, that superstition is seruent in them, but true
religion key-cold in us; that they to make a molten Calfe, do contribute even
unto their jewels and golden eare-rings, whiles that the service of the honor
of God is ill maintained.

For these causes he had already sent his destroying Angels, and had snatched
away his word from us, had it not been that even he the same unto whom
Abraham spoke, who is his only Son our Lord and Savior Jesus has stayed
his wrath, and thereupon he has considered ten righteous amidst this
corruption, that is to say, some few of the number of the true faithful, and
of holy souls that fear him, and groan under the general corruption; for
whose sake he suspends as yet his judgments, and spares the flock; and those
perhaps not the greatest ones, nor the richest, nor the most noble; but perhaps
some poor, whom we know not, and to whom we, as ungrateful, con little
thanks; He has stopped and stayed Gods judgments, and has stood in the gap,
and has been in the public commotion, like the lifting up of the hands of
Moses, that did more then Iosuahs sword; which is the observation that the
wiseman makes in the 9. of Ecclesiastes, That there was a little City and few
men within it, and there came a great King against it, and besieged it, and
built great bulwarks against it; now there was found in it a poor wiseman,
and he by his wisdom delivered the City, yet no man remembered that poor man.

Seeing then that the number of those that fear the Lord among us, is the
defense and the safety of the Church, and as King Ioram said of Elisha, the
Chariot of Israel, and the horsemen thereof, for whose sake God pardons the
rest: Let us labor to increase the number of them; and that notten not thirty,
not fifty, but that the whole troop and flock be truly the holy nation and
the portion of the Lord. Let us make our sins hold their peace that cry, and
that their cry be overcome with the cry of repentance, which powers unto the
feet of our Savior Jesus, that precious ointment, with an holy grief, and
bedewes them with herteares as heretofore Mary did, whose tears were a
thousand times more odoriferous, then her precious ointment, for this filled
the chamber with a sweet pleasing smell, but her repentance is even yet of good
favor in the Church of God.

And in stead of that heavy burden of sins, whereof Christ Jesus does
discharge us, Let us charge and take upon us his yoke which is easy, and his
burden which is light; whether by this yoke and burden we understand his
cross; or whether we take it in general for our subjection unto his word;
that hereafter we have no other will then his, no other trust and confidence
then in his promises, no other joy then in his love.

And that we may make use of our vices, and give to our desires a lawful
imploiment and occupation; let not the violent have hereafter any other
violence, then that which takes by force the Kingdom of heaven. Let usurers
give themselves to giving to the poor, for that is to lend unto God by usury.
Let the couerous gather a treasure in heaven. Let the quarrellers make an
irreconcillable war against their vices. Let the haughty and ambitious glory
in the knowledge of God, and in that they are the children of the most high.

If ye do so, God who desires not the death of a sinner, but his conversion,
whose compassions are always open toward those that seek him; will watch for
your safeguard; he will blow upon the enterprises of our enemies, and will
frustrate their hopes; his providence shall be as a wall of fire about his
Church. If you fear GOD, you will not fear men. Bear your selves courageous
against men's threatenings, but tremble at Gods Word, who has bought and
redeemed you with too great a price, to leave you. He will not deny you things
necessary for this present life, seeing that from the foundation of the world
he has prepared for you an everlasting kingdom; as he himself will proclaim
in the last day. Come ye blessed of my Father, inherito the kingdom prepared
for you, from the foundation of the world. To whom be ascribed all honor,
power and dominion, for ever and ever, Amen.

FINIS.

