A proclamation set forth by the kings majesty, with the advice of his most
honorable priuey counsel* declaring his graces determinacion, concerning the
amendment of his highness coin, and also to admonish such of his subjects, as
be engrossers of Fermes, victualles and other things. etc. and the inhauncers
of al prices of the same, and for the amendment of their gredy and insatiable
doings, etc. the.xj. day of May in the.v. year of his most prosperous reign.
THe kings most excellent Majesty, having of late season understanding and
knowledge, by diverse and sundry consultacions of the Lords, and others of his
privy counsel, how necessary and beneficial, it should be for the wealth of
his hole Realm, to have his Coin reduced to finenes* which has been made
bace from the beginning of the latter Wars in the time of his majesty's
father, of most famous memory, and so remained by continuance of the like: has
had a great, godly, and earnest desire, daily increasing in his majesty's most
noble and godly heart, to begin and attempt some towardenes, to so great a
benefit, and so to proceed and achieue, with as much his own majesty's loss
therein as possible were fit for him to sustain. Wherefore, of a most godly
mind toward his people, and a most fervent desire, to begin to do this
notable great benefit, for the which all good subjects, has of late, as it
were with groninges longed, his Majesty, with the advice of his counsel, who,
with great reasons, were persuaded to advise his majesty thereto, caused his
determination, to be published by a proclamation bearing date* the last day of
April last, that from the last day of August next following, the shilling
coined and set forth by his majesty, should be curraunt for. ix. d. sterf. and
no more, and the grote for. iii. d. as further appears by the same
proclamation, without the which means, his majesty could never possible
attempt or come nere to set furthe and make the Coin of fine silver according
to his good desire, and as in deed ordinarely, his majesty from the beginning
of the consultacion has meant, and does certainly mean. Yet nevertheless,
such is the malice and naughty nature of a certain kind of people, that live
only for themselfes, and as it seems by their doings, neither respect God,
King, the suertye of his majesty's Croune, nor any other Christian creature,
but going about to eat and devour, as well thestate of Nobility* as the lower
sort, being Serving men, Artificers, Handicraftes, poor Husbondemen, laborers
and such like, and further maliciously ouerwharting and hindering all good
purposes of the kings majesty, and his counsel, travailing to do to the
common wealth good, and especially, when they perceive any thing purposed, to
amend the unreasonable prices of victual, and such necessary things for men's
sustenance, that as it is come to his Majesty's knowledge, and his counsel,
by the information of diverse credible persons from sundry parts of this his
Realm, since the aforesaid proclamation was published, which was the very
ordinarye and necessary beginning of a manifest amendment of the coin, the
prices of victualles, Wares and such like things, be purposely inhaunced
beyond all expectacion, and the gracious meaning of the kings Majesty, and
his counsel utterly perverted, and sinisterly abused, the same most manifestly
coming of the deuelishe* malice, and slight of the foresaid kind of naughty
people, injurious to the whole common wealth: which things considered, his
Majesty having the Swearde not in vain committed to him of God, and with the
same as a minister of the almighty, the very indignacion and plages from heaven
to fall where his Swearde shall strike, cannot, ne may not, without thoffence
of God, se and suffer such lewd persons as wilfully be the causers hereof
remain unpunished to their own dampnations, and the distruccion of others.
Wherefore his Majesty, meaning not in ire* or passion, to execute his
indignation, but justly and with good ground, has first by the advice of
his counsel, thought mete to admonish all kind of people in their degrees,
and to let them clearly understand his pleasure and determinacion in this
behalf, so as whosoever shall offend, the same shall not fail of sharp and due
puishment for their offenses.

And therefore first of all, to all such, as either wilfully or ignorantly,
has mistaken his Maiestes good meaning upon the former proclamation, for the
abacing of money, his Majesty declares his good and gracious meaning, and
determinate purpose, by the advice of his counsel, to be thereby to amend his
coin, and to reduce it to finenes of silver, although the same shall be most of
al, without al comparison to his maiestes loss and detrime^t, and yet to the
benefit of his subjects and the honor of the realm. And next to such
Fermours* Grasiers, and Sheep Masters, which by unreasonable and fraudulent
engrossing of Fermes, Grain, Victual, as well Butter and Chese, as other
grosser things, as Woolle and such like, Wood, Cole, and other things
pertaining to the daily sustenance of man, and enhaunsing the prices of
the same, and by manifest decaiyng of tounes and tillage, excessive increasing
of sheep, contrary to diverse good laws and statutes of this realm provided
for these caces, not unknown to the offenders therein Which kind of persons
in deed his majesty and his counsel judges to be the principal occasions of
these almost vncausable dearthes. His majesty pronounces and threatens, that
if they furthewth seace not their gredy, unlawful, and unnatural practizes,
colored with crafts and subtelties to avoid and deceive the meaning of the
laws and all honesty, they shall suffer with his extreme indignation the
Justice of his laws to the uttermost, to the terror of al such as being thus
often gentely admonished have never amended.

Thus much does his majesty in this behalf, partly of clemency of nature,
admonish, that would have no cause to exercise extremity: partly (if the
naughtines of his subject, shall give him cause) yet by this admonition the
punishment shall be more just and necessary. And although his majesty considers
how convenient it is for his office, having indifferent charge and care over
all manner his subjects, not only to reprehend the faults of Offenders, but
also to punish them severely, yet because of late years, the lower sort of
people, lacking in deed in that part, all manner of reason, and being like to
those sick madmen that either will have no Physic, or else will be their own
Physicians, have presumpteously taken upon them thoffice of his majesty, both
in reprehending of their superiors, and attempting redres of things after
their own fantasies, with force, and contrary to the due obedience of good
Subjects toward god and man. Therefore also his majesty, likewise
pronounces and declares unto them, and every of them, that if they shall
excede their duties either in reprehending or attempting any manner of remedy
or redress, otherwise then shall stand with the laws and order of the realm:
His Majesty will not fail but minister unto them sharp terror of his swearde
and Laws, which, as they be well provided of late for such offenders, so
shall they not lack diligent and due execution.

God save the King
RICHARDVS GRAFTON typographus Regius excudebat* Mense Maij. A. M. D. LI.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.


