FOrasmuch as it has pleased Almighty God to call to his mercy out of this
transitory life our Sovereign Lady, the High and Mighty Prince, Elizabeth late
Queen of England, France, and Ireland, by whose death and dissolution, the
Imperial Crown of these Realms aforesaid are now absolutely, wholly, and
solely come to the High and Mighty Prince, James the sixth King of Scotland,
who is lineally and lawfully descended from the body of Margaret, daughter to
the high and Renowned Prince, Henry the seventh King of England, France, and
Ireland, his great Grandfather, the said Lady Margaret being lawfully begotten
of the body of Elizabeth, daughter to King Edward the fourth (by which happy
conjunction both the houses of York and Lancaster were united, to the joy
unspeakable of this Kingdom, formerly rent and torn by the long dissension
of bloody and Civil wars) the same Lady Margaret being also the eldest
sister of Henry the eight, of famous memory King of England as aforesaid:

We therefore the Lords Spiritual and Temporal of this Realm, being here
assembled, united, and assisted with those of her late Majesty's Privy
Counsel, and with great numbers of other principal Gentlemen of quality in
the Kingdom, with the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Citizens of London, and a
multitude of other good Subjects and Commons of this Realm, thirsting now
after nothing so much as to make it known to all persons, who it is that by
Law, by Lineall succession, and undoubted Right is now become the only
Sovereign Lord and King of these Imperial Crowns (to the intent that by
virtue of his Power, Wisdom and Godly Courage, all things may be provided for
and executed, which may prevent or resist either foreign attempts, or popular
disorder, tending to the breach of the present Peace, or to the prejudice of
his Majesty's future quiet) do now hereby with one full Voice and Consent of
Tongue and Heart, publish and proclaim, That the High and Mighty Prince,
James the sixth King of Scotland, is now by the death of our late Sovereign,
Queen of England of famous memory, become also our Only, Lawful, Lineall
and Rightful Liege Lord, James the first, King of England, France and Ireland,
defender of the faith, to whom as to our only just Prince, adorned (besides
his undoubted Right) with all the rarest gifts of mind and body, to the
infinite comfort of all his people and Subjects that shall live under him, We
do acknowledge all faith and constant obedience, with all hearty and humble
affections, both during our natural lives for our selves, and in the behalf
of our posterity. Hereby protesting and denouncing to all persons whatsoever,
that in this just and lawful Act of ours, we are resolved by the favor of
Gods holy assistance, and in the zeal of our own Conscience (warranted by
certain knowledge of his manifest and undoubted Right, as has been said
before) to maintain and uphold his Majesty's person and Estate, as our only
undoubted Sovereign Lord and King, with the Sacrifice of our Lives, Lands,
Goods, Friends, and Adherents, against all power, force, or practice, that
shall go about by word or deed, to interrupt, contradict, or impugn his just
Claymes, his entry into this Kingdom, or any part thereof, at his good
pleasure, or disobey such Royal directions as shall come from him. To all
which we are resolved only to yield our selves, until the last drop of our
bloods be spent for his service. Hereby willing and commanding, in the name of
our Sovereign Lord James the first, King of all the foresaid kingdoms, all the
late Lieutenants, deputy Lieutenants, Sheriffs, Justices, and all Majors,
Bailiffes, Constables, Headboroughes, and all other Officers and Ministers
whatsoever, that they be ayding and assisting from time to time in all things
that are or shall be necessary for the preventing, resisting, and suppressing of
any disorderly assemblies, or other unlawful Act or Attempt, either in word
or deed, against the public peace of the Realm, or any way prejudicial to
the Right, Honor, State or Person, of our only undoubted and dear Lord and
Sovereign that now is, James the first King of all the said Kingdoms, as they
will avoid the peril of his Majesty's heavy indignation, and their own utter
ruin and confusion. Beseeching God to bless his Majesty and his Royal
posterity with long and happy years to reign over us.

God save King James. Robert Lee, Mayor. Io. Cantuar. Tho. Egerton. C.S. Tho.
Buckhurst. Th. E. Oxford. Nottingham. Northumberland. Gilbert Shrewsbury. W.
Derby. E. Worcester. G. Cumberland. R. Sussex. Pembrok. H. Lincoln.
Clanricard. Ri. London. Rob. Hereford. Io. Norwich. Tho. Lawarre. Morley. H.
Cobham. Gray Wilt. Scroope. Lomley. Ed. Cromwell. Rob. Rich. George Hunsdon. G.
Chandoys. W. Compton. Norreys. L. Howard of Waldon. W. Knollys. Ed. Wotton. Io.
Stanhop. Rob. Cecill. Ioh. Fortescue. Jo. Popham.


Imprinted at London by Robert Barker, Printer to our late Sovereign Lady
Queen Elizabeth. March. 24. Anno Domini. 1602.


