The Kings Majesty's free and most general Pardon.
THe Kings most royal Majesty right well perceiuyng his loving subjects by
many and sundry ways and means to have borne and sustained the great
adventures, charges and busynesses of wars and defenses of this his realm,
as well in the time of his most dear father king Henry the right, as in his
time and reign, ente^dyng of his clemency and pity to gratify his said
subjects with his graces free and liberal pardon according to his kyngly
power, trustyng assuredly that his said subjects will continue his loving and
assured obedient subjects, and hereafter in such sort obey his highness laws
and statutes, as to them and every of them of right appertains: is fully
and resolutely contented and pleased, that it be enacted by authority of this
present Parliament in manner and form following, that is to say, that all and
every of his said subjects, as well spiritual as temporal of this his realm
of England, Wales, the Isles of Iernesey and Gernesey, Barwicke, Calleys,
Guysnes, Hammes, Bulloigne and Bullonoys and the Marches of the same, the
heirs, successors, executours, and administrators of them and every of them,
and al and singular bodies in any manner of wise corporate, Cities, Boroughes,
Shires, Ridynges, Hundredes, lathes, rapes wapentakes, tounes, villages and
tithynges, and every of them, and the successor and successors of them, shall be
by thaucthoritie of this present Parliament acquitted, pardoned, released and
discharged against the kings highness, his heirs, successors and executours,
and every of them of all manner of treasons, heresies, felonies, robberies,
offenses, contemptes, trespasses, wrongs, deceiptes, misdemenors, forfaitures,
penalties, and profits, su^mes of money, pains of death, pains corporal, and
pecuniary, and all other things, causes, quarelles, suites, judgments and
execucions, which may be, or can be by his highness in any wise, or by any
means pardoned before and unto the xiiii. day of March in the year of our
Lord God M. CCCCC. xlviii. other then such as hereafter in this act be
excepted or foreprised in such manner and form, and unto such times as they
be excepted or foreprised in this act, and other then such as the clauses of
prouiso hereafter mentioned does extend unto.

AND also the kings highness is further contented and pleased that it be
enacted by the authority of this present Parliament, that this his said
general and free pardon, shall be as good and effectual in the law, to every of
his said subjects, bodies corporate, and other before rehearsed, and to every
of them, by the said general words before rehearsed in all things which be
not hereafter in this present act excepted or foreprised, as the same pardon
should have been, if all offenses, contemptes, forfaitures, causes, matters,
suites, quarrelles, judgments, execucions, penalties, and all other things
not hereafter excepted, nor contained in any clause of prouiso hereafter
mentioned had been particulerly, singulerly, specially and plainly named,
rehearsed and specified and also pardoned by propre and express words and
names in their kinds, natures and qualities, by words and terms thereunto
requisite to have be put in and expressed in this act of free pardon.

AND that his said subjects nor any of them nor their executors nor
administratours of any of them, nor any of thesayd bodies corporate nor any
other persons bodies politic or corporate before named, or any of them, be
nor shall be sued, vexed or inquieted in their bodies, goods, lands or
cattalles, for any manner matter, cause, contempt, misdemcanor, forfaiture,
trespass, offense, or any other thing suffered, done or committed against his
highness, croune, dignity, prerogative, law or statutes, but only for such
matters, causes and offenses as be rehearsed in the excepcions and clauses of
prouiso, in this present act hereafter mentioned, in such manner and form, as
in the same excepcions and clauses of prouiso be mentioned and for none other,
any statute or statutes, laws, customs, uses, or presidentes heretofore had,
made, or used to the contrary in any wise notwithstanddyng.

AND also the kings highness of his bou^teous liberality by thaucthoritie of
this present Parliament grau^teth and freely gives to every of his said
subjects and to every of the said bodies corporate, and other before rehearsed,
and to every of them, all such lands, tenementes, and hereditamentes, goods,
cattals, debtes, fines, issues, profits, amerciamentes, forfaitures, and
sums of money by any of them forfaited, which to his highness does or should
belong or appertain, by reason of any offense, co^tempte, trespass,
misdemeanour, matter, cause, or quarrel, suffered, done, or committed by them or
any of them, which be not hereafter foreprised or excepted in this present act.

AND that al and every the kings said subjects, and al and singular bodies
corporate, and other before rehearsed, may by him or themselfes, or by his or
their deputy, or deputies, or by his or their attornay or attornays, according
to the laws of this realm, plead, and minister this present act of free
pardon for his or their discharge, of and for every thing that is by virtue of
this present act pardoned, discharged, given, or granted without any fee or
other thing in any wise paiyng to any person or persons for writing or entrey
of the judgment, or other cause, concerning such plee, writing, or entrey,
but only xii. d. to be paid to the officer or clarke that shall enter the
plea, matter, or judgment, for the discharge of any the party so pleadyng
the same, any statute or use to the contrary in any wise notwithstaudyng.

AND furthermore the kings highness is pleased and contented that it be enacted
by thaucthoritie of this present parliament, that his said free pardon by the
general words before rehearsed shall be reputed, demed, and judged, allowed and
taken in all manner of courts and else where, as well in the words and clauses
of excepcions and forprises specified in this present act, as in all and
singular other clauses, words and sentences mentioned and rehearsed in this his
said free pardon, most beneficially and auailably to al and singular his said
subjects, bodies corporate and other before rehearsed, and to every of them in
all things ambiguous or doubtful and most strongly in bar and discharge
against his highness, his heirs, successors and executours in every thing,
without any obstacle, challenge or other delay, whatsoever it shall be to be made,
pleaded, objected or alleged by the king our sovereign Lord, his heirs,
successors, or executors, or by his or any of their general attorney or
attorneys or by any person or persons for his highness, or any of his heirs,
successors or executors.

AND furthermore it is enacted by the king our sovereign Lord, by authority
of this present Parliament, that if any officer or clerk of any his highness
courts commonly called the kings Benche, Chauntery, and Common place, or of
his Exchequier, or of any other officer or clerk of any other court with in
this realm or in Wales or other his highness dominions above mentioned at any
time after the tenth day of May next coming which shall be in the year of our
Lord God a M. ccccc. xlix. make out or write out* any manner writtes or other
process, or any extractes, sommons, or other precepts whereby any of the said
subjects or any of the said bodies corporate, or other before rehearsed, or any
of them, shall be in any wise arrested, attached, distrained, sommoned, or
otherwise vexed, inquieted, or grieved in his or their bodies, lands,
tenementes, goods or cattals, or in any of them, for or because of any manner
of thing pardoned or discharged by virtue of this act of free pardon, he so
offendyng and thereof lawfully condemned, shall yield and pay for the
recompense thereof to the party so grieved or offended, treble damages, to be
accounted as parcel of the damages and costs of the suite. And nevertheless
all and singular such writtes, process, extractes and precepts, so to be
made for or upon any manner thing pardoned or discharged by this act of free
pardon, shall be utterly void and of none effect

Except always and foreprised out of this general and free pardon, all and all
manner prepensed and voluntary murders and poysonynges: And except all
selonyous, taking or stealyng of any goods or cattals out of any Church,
Chapel or dwelling house, and all and singular robberies and robbery of any
person or persons in or nere any high way committed, perpetrated or done.

And also except and forprised out of this free pardon, all and all manner of
piracies, and offenses upon the sea, had, done, committed or perpetrated,
sithen the first day of January in the first year of the reign ^f our (...)
the king. And also all and all manner of punishments, Impeticions forfaittures,
peynes of death, Judgments, and executions, for the premises before
excepted, and for every of them.

AND except and forprised out of this fre pardon, all and all manner of dcreates
and conceilementes, of al and synguler moniers, and other officers, ministers,
and workmen of or in any of the mintes within any of the kings realms or
dominions, perpetrated, done, or committed in or about the making coynyng or
altering of any money curraunt within this realm, or in any wise touching or
concerning any accomptes or books of any of the said officers or ministers or
any of them, and all manner of Impeticions, punishments forfayctures and peines
for the same.

AND except and forprysed out of this fre pardon, all and singular sommes and
sum of money grafited to late king Henry theight, by way or mean of
subsidy, fiftene, benevolence, lone and contributio^ or by any of the same
ways or means. And all deteiners, withholdinges and none paimentes, touching
or concerning the same, and also all and all manner of accomptes, and all
actions, suites and demaundes touching or concerning any accomptes, and all
arrerages of account, and al debtes, Impeticions, suites demaunde^s and
execucions by occasion or means of any accompe or for any account.

AND also except all tytles of actions of quare impedit, all rauyshmentes and
withholding of the kings wards, and the withholding of any wards, lands or
teneme^tes, and the profits of the same lands and tenementes, and all and
every fine or fynes for the single value or double value, of the marriage or
marriages of any the kings wards, at any time grown to the king our
sovereign lord, or to any of his noble progenitors.

AND also except all homages and reliefes, and all rentes services, rentes
charges, rentes seck and tenthes and charterages of every of them.

AND also except and forprysed out of this free pardon all and singular
forfeitures, and all manner of penalties, sommes of money and profyttes,
whatsoever grown or dew by reason of any offense or act committed or done,
contrary to any statute or statutes, or contrary to the common law extending
above the sum of ten pounds in money or value whereof any seasure was made,
or any informacion given in the kings exchequer or any suet there commenced
and now depending before the.xii. day of February in the year of our lord God
M.ccccc.xlviij. and not yet determined, or whereof the kings highness or king
Henry theight, by byll sealed with any of their seals before the.xiiij. day
of March in the year of our lord God.M.ccccc.xlviij. have made any gift or
assignement, to any of the servants of our sovereign lord the king, or king
Henry theight, or to any other person or persons.

AND except and forprysed out of this free pardon, all and singular forfaytours
and sommes of money being dew to our soueraygne lord the king, or to king
Henry theight, by any penal statute or statutes, which be converted into the
nature of debtes by judgment or by the agreement of the offendour.

AND except and forprysed out of this fre pardon, all and all manner of debtes,
dew, and to be dew to our sovereign lord the king, or unto the late noble
king of famous memory king Henry theight, and king Henry the seventh, or to
any of them (other then such as are dew to our sovereign lord the king) upon
any obligacion or recognisaunce forfetted for none apparaunce, or for not
keeping of the peace, or not being of good behauour.

AND also except al yssues, fynes, and amerciame^tes, afferid, taxed, set,
extracted, or entered severally, or particulerlye touching and concerning any
one person, or mo persons ioyntlye, extending to the sum of twentye pounds
or above. And that all and synguler other fynes, as well fynes pro licencia
concordandi, as other fynes for contemptes or offenses, set, or taxed, and also
all yssues, and amerciamentes as well real as other which severally or
particulerlye extend not upon or concerning any one person or moo persons
jointly, to the sum of twenty pou^des, whcther they be totted or not totted,
taken to the charge of any shriefe or shryefes, or not taken to his or their
charge extreated or not extreated, whether they be turned into debt or not
turned into debt, and not being levied nor received by any shriefe or shriefes,
baylyefe, ministers, or other officers, shall be fully, clercly and plainly
pardoned and discharged against the king our sovereign lord his heirs and
successors for ever by this present act of fre pardon.

AND (...) enacted by the authority aforesaid, that in care it shall be
objected to or against any shriefe or shriefes, or other accomptaunte or
accomptauntes in the kings court of exchequer or in any other his courts,
that any shriefe or shriefes, or other officers accomptaunte have received or
taken any such fynes yssues or amerciamentes, by this present act pardoned
and acquitted, that then every such shriefe or shriefes or other accomptauntes
shall be discharged, released, pardoned, and acquitted thereof by his or their oath
without any further trial in that behalf.

PROVIDED always that this present act of fre pardon, nor any thing therein
conteigned in any wise extend to discharge, pardon, remit, or acquit any
person or persons, for any manner of yssues, fines or amerciamentes of twenty
pound or under whereof any shriefes has here to fore accounted before the
barons of the kings exchequer, or else where, and paid the same yssues, fynes,
or amerciamentes, upon his or their said account, determined to the kings
use, and have his or their quietusest for the same.

PROVIDED also and be it enacted by thauctoritie of this present parliament,
that all and every person and persons which have tended to sewe liuereye out of
the kings hands, or that ought to sew any lyucreye out of the kings hands,
or that ought to sewe any outer lemaine of any manours, lands, tenementes, or
hereditamentes whatsoever they be, shall sue and be bounden to sue, his and
their liuereie, lyuereis, and outer lemain of his and their manours, lands,
tenementes, and hereditamentes, as they ought or should have done, if this fre
pardon had never been granted, any article, clause, matter, or sentence, act
or acts, thing or things* in this present act of fre perdon, comprysed or
specified to the contrary in anywise notwithstanding.

AND except and forprised out of this free pardon, all and synguler person
and persons, being the said. xiiij. day of March in the year of our lord
God a M. ccccc. xlviij. prisoner or prisoners in the toure of London, or in the
fleet, or which were in the said prisons, or any of them at any time syns
the first day of Februarye, in the year of our lord God M. ccccc. xlviii. and
are not discharged out of prison the said. xiiii. day of March: and also all
and synguler person and persons at any time before the eight day of March,
in the said year of our lord God M. ccccc. xlviii. put to death or in execucion
by virtue of any manner of judgment against him or them given.

AND except and forprised out of this free pardon, all and all manner of
treasons done, committed or perpetrated by any person or persons in any of
the parties of beyond the sea, or in Scotland, by any person or persons now
being beyond the sea, or in Scotland (other then such treasons or petit
treason as has been committed, perpetrated or done by any person being beyond
the sea, or in Scotland, that before the feast of the nativity of our lord
God, that shall be in the year of our lord God M. ccccc. xlix. shall come and
make their return and repair into this realm of England.) And except al
impeticions, punishments, forfaictours, pains of death, executions and
judgments, for the said treasons.

AND furthermore the kings majesty of his especial grace and clemencye, is
pleased and contented, that it be enacted and established by thaucthoritie
aforesaid, that all and synguler person and persons being borne within this
realm of England, or in any of the kings dominions, and now being beyond the
sea, or in Scotland, which before ye first day of March, in the year of our
lord God M. ccccc. xlviii. did flee out of this realm of England, or any other
of the kings dominions, for any high treason, petyt treason, misprision of
treason, or for any felony, murder or other crime or offense by him or them
in anywyse committed, done or perpetrated, shall by virtue of this free pardon
be clearly discharged, acquitted and pardened of all and all manner of treasons,
petit treasons, misprision of treason, and other offenses, and crimes
whatsoever, done, committed, or perpetrated before the said first day of
March, in the said year of our lord God M. ccccc. xlviii. And of all manner of
Impeticions, suites, penalties, forfaictours, and execucions for the same: So
that he or they do come, and make their return and repaier into this realm
of England, on thissyde the said feast of the nativity of our lord God M.
ccccc. xlix.

AND also our said sovereign lord the king, by virtue of this act, and by
thaucthoritie abouesayd, does give authority and license to all and every of
the said persons and person, being beyond the sea or in Scotland, to return
and repair into this realm of England, and other his dominions, before the
same feast of the Nativity of our lord God M. ccccc. xlix.

PROVIDED always and be it enacted by thaucthoritie aforesaid that it shall be
lefull to all and every clerk and other officer of any of the kings courts
without any forfaiture, loss or punishment for the same, to award and make
writtes of Capias Vtlagatum, at the suite of the party plaintiff, against any
person or persons, being outlawed, in any accion, to the intent to compel the
persons or person so out lawed to make answer to the plaintiff or plaintifes,
at whose suite he or they were or was outlawed, and also that every person and
persons now being outlawed, shall be bounden to sue a writ of Scire facias
against the party or parties at whose suite he or they were or was outlawed
before such time as the persons or person so outlawed shall take any
advantage of this free pardon concerning his or their outlawry.

AND the king our sovereign lord is contented and pleased, to grant by
thaucthoritie aforesaid, that it shall be lawful to all and singular
Archebishops and bishops of this his realm of England and Ways to deliver out
of prison and set at liberty all and singular those persons being in prison in
their custody, or in the custody of any of them as clerks or clerk convict or
attainted, which be pardoned by this act of free pardon, without any further
act or suite to be made for the allowaunce of this pardon or otherwise, any
act of Parliament, law, usage, custom or other thing to the contrary in any
wise notwithstanding.

PROVIDED always and be it enacted by authority aforesaid that this present
act of free pardon or any thing therein contained, shall not in any wise extend
to discharge or pardon any offense, pain, or penalty done, committed, or
forfaited by force of any estatute heretofore made against the decaiyng of any
house or houses of husbandry or conuertyng of any land from tyllage into
pasture, otherwise or in any other manner, then to pardon and discharge all
issues, profits, pains and penalties grown or due to the kings Majesty or
to his late father of famous memory king Henry the eight before the last day of
March in the year of our Lord God M. ccccc. xlix. or by reason of any such
offense or offenses, which issues, profits, pains and penalties are plainly
and clearly before pardoned in and by this present act of free pardon, nor
shall extend to give or make any license or dispensacion to any person or
persons to hold or continue the same so decayed or converted contrary to the
form of any such estatute or statutes.

God save the King.
Imprinted in the house of Richard Grafton, printer to the Kings Majesty:

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solu^.


