A PROCLAMATION concerning eating of white meats, made the.xvi. day of
February, the.XXXII. year of the reygne of the kings most royal majesty.
FOR AS MUCH as by diverse and sundry occasyons, as well hearrynge, lynges,
saltfysh, samond, stockfyshe, as other kinds of fyshe, ben this year skant,
and also enhanced in prices above the old rate and comen estimation of their
valor: so that if the kings loving subjects should be enforced only to bye
and provide hearrynge and other salt store of fysshe, for the necessary and
suffycient sustentation and mayntenaunce of their housholdes and families, all
this holy time of Lent, according as they have been wont in times past to do,
and should not be, by some other convenient means releued therein, the same
might and should undoubtedly redounde to their importable charge and dctryment.
And for as much as his highness consyderethe, how this kind and manner of
fasting, that is to say, to absteyne from milk, butter, eggs, chese, and
all other white meats, is but a mere posytiue law of the Church, and used by
a custom within this realm, and of none other sort or necessity, but the
same may be, upon good considerations and grounds, altered and dispensed with
from time to time by the public auctority of kings and princis, when so ever
they shall perceive the same to tend to the hurt and damage of their people.
THE KINGS highness therefore most graciousely considering and tenderyng the
welthe and commodity of his people, has thought good, for the consyderations
above rehearsed, to release and dispense with the said law and custom of
absteynyng from white meats this holy time of Lent, And of his especial grace
and mere motion gives and grants unto al and syngular his subjects, within
this his realm of England, Wales, Cales, Guynes, Hammes, and in all other his
graces dominions, free lyberty, faculty, and license, to eat all manner of
white meats, as milk, eggs, butter, chese, and such like, during the time
of this Lent, without any scruple or grudge of conscience: any law,
constitution, use, or custom to the contrary notwith standing. Wherein never
the less his hyghnes exhorts, and in the name of god requires, all such his
faithful subjects, as may, woll or shall enjoy this his said grant or
faculty, that they be in no wise scruple or doubtefull thereof, nor abuse or
turn the same into a Aeshly or carnal liberty: but rather endeavor them
selfs to their possible powers with this liberty of eating of white meats,
to observe also that fast, which god most specially requires of them: That is
to say, to renounce the world and the devil, with all their pompes and works,
and also to subdowe and repress their carnal effections, and the corrupt
works of their flesh, according to their vow and professyon made at the
font stone. For in these points specially consysteth the very true and perfyt
abstinence and fasting of a Christen man.

GOD SAVE THE KING
Tho. Be^thelet excudebat Cu^ priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.


