An Act for the amendynge of high ways.
FOr amending of high ways being now both very noisome and tedious to
travail in, and dangerous to al passengers, and cariages. Be it enacted by
thauctoritie of this present parliament, that the constables and church
wardens of every parish within this realm, shall yearly upon the twesdaye or
wednesdaye in Easter weke, call together a number of the parochians, and shall
then elect and choose two honest persons of the parish, to be surueyours and
orderers for one year, of the works for amendment of the high ways in their
parish, leading to any market town, the which persons shall have authority
by virtue hereof to order and direct the persons and cariages that shall be
appointed for those works by their discretions, and the said persons so named
shall take upon them the execution of their said offices upon pain every of
them making defaulte to forfeyte twenty shillinges. And the said constables
and churchwardens shall then also name and appoint four days for thamendinge
of the said ways before the feast of the nativity of S. John Baptist then
next following. And shall openly in the church the next sunday after Easter give
knowledge of the same four days, and upon the said days the parochians shall
endeavor them selves to the amendinge of the said ways, and shall be chargeable
thereunto as follows, that is to say, every person for every plowlande in
tillage or pasture, that he or she shall occupy in the same parish, and every
other person kepinge there a draught, or plow, shall find and send at every
day and place to be appointed for the ame^ding of the ways in that parish as
is aforesaid, one wayne or cart furnished after the custom of the country,
with oxen, horses, or other cattle, and all other necessaries mete to carry
things convenient for that purpose, and also able men with the same, upon
pain of every draught making defaulte ten shillinges, and every other
householder, and also every cottiger and labourer, of that parish able to
labor and being no hired servant by the year, shall by themselves, or one
sufficient labourer for every of them upon every of the said four days, work
and travel in thamendement of the said highwaies upon pain of every person
making default to lose for every day.xii. pence. And if the cariages of the
parish or any of them shall not be thought needful by the superuisours to be
occupied upon any of the said days, that then every such person that should
have sent any such carriage, shall send to the said work for every carriage so
spared, two able men, there to labor for that day, upon pain to lose for
every man not so sent to the said work, xii. pence. And every person and
carriage above said, shall have and bring with them such shouels, spades,
pickes, mattockes, and other toles, and instruments, as they do make their
own diches and fences withal, and such as be necessary for their said work.
And all the said persons and cariages shall do and keep their work, as they
shall be appointed by the said superuisours, or one of them, eight hours of
every of the said days, onles they shall be otherwise lycensed by the said
superuisours, or one of them.

And be it enacted by the authority aforesaid, that the Steward, and
Stewardes of every let and lawdaye, shall therein have full power and
authority, to inquire by the oaths of the suitors of all and every thoffences
that shall be committed within the let or lawdaye, against every point, and
article of this estatute, and to assesse such reasonable fynes, and
amerciamentes for the same, as shall be thought mete by the said Steward. And
in default of such inquire, or presentment, the justices of peace of every
place or county, shall have auctorytye to inquire of the same offenses, which
shall be committed within the lymyttes of their commission at every their quarter
sessions, and to assesse such fines therefore, as they or two of them, whereof
one to be of the Quorum, shall think mete. And the stuward of every let and
lawday shall make estreates endented of all the fines, forfeytures, and
amerciamentes, for the defaultes presented before him, and shall deliver the one
part thereof, sealed and signed by him to the bailife or high constable of
every hundred rape, lath, or wapentake, wherein the defaultes shall be presented,
and the other half to the constable and churchwarde^s of the parish, wherein the
defaultes was made, the same to be yerelye delivered within six wekes after
the feast of S. Michell tharchangell, and the clarke of the peace shall make
the like estreates endented of the fines, forfeytures, and amerciamentes for
the defaultes presented before the Justices of peace and shall seal, subscribe
and deliver the same, in like sort as is aforesaid, the which estreates and
every of the^, shall be a sufficient warrant to the said bailife or chief
constable, to levy the said amerciamentes, fines, and forfeytures, by way of
distress. And if no sufficient distress can be found by the said bailife or
head constable, or if the said offender shall obstinatly refuse to pay the said
amerciament, fine, or forfeyture, and do not pay the same within twenty days
after a lawful demand of the same by the said officer, that then every such
person to forfeyte the doble sum that he should before have paid.

And be it further enacted, that every of the said bailifes and head constables
shall at the least once every year betwixt the first day of March and the
last day of April, make a true account and payment of al such sommes of money
(to the constable and churchwardens of every parish wherein the offenses was
committed or to two of them) as he shall have collected upon any of the
aforesaid estreates, upon pain to forfeyte for every time he shall not so
do.xl. shillinges.

And be it enacted by thaucthoritie aforesaid, that al fines, amerciamentes,
and forfeytures, which shall be dew for any offense against the puruey of this
estatute, shall be to the churchwardens of every parish wherein thoffe^ces shall be
committed, to be bestowed of the highwaies in the said parishes, and the said
churchwardens shall have authority to call the said baylife and headconstable
to account before the Justices of peace or two of them, whereof one to be of
the Quoru^, by bil, infourmation or otherwise. The which Justices shall have
authority to take the said account, and to commit the said baillife or
headconstable to prison there to remain until he shall pay al such arrerages as
shall be adjudged by the said Justices, and every of the said bailifes and
headconstables upon their accomptes shall have allowed for every pound he shall
collect and pay, viii. pence for his own pains, and.xii. pence for the fees
of the clarke of the peace or steward of the let for thestreates endented of
every several parish that they shall deliver as is aforesaid, and the
successors of every churchwardens shall have the like action of account against
their predecessors as is before appointed against the bailifes. This act to
continue for seven years next after the beginning of this parliament. And to
the end of the next parliament then next following.

God save the King and the Queen.
EXCVSVM LONDINI IN AEDIBVS IOHANNIS CAVVODI TYPOGRAPHI REGIAE MAIESTATIS.
Anno. M.D.LV.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.


