A Proclamation set forth by the Kings Majesty, prohibiting as well the buyeng
or selling, Gold, Silver, or coin, at any higher price then is appoincted, as
also the melting down of the said Coins.
THough it be manifest, that the kings majesty and his most honorable
cou^sail, have been most careful in the devising and setting forth of remedies,
for such disordres as long time have been, and daily grow within this realm,
wherein beside their trauaill, his highness specially to declare in effect the
earnest desire he has toward the relief of his good subjects, and commune
wealth, has given over the revenue and profits of his mintes which was of no
small importance toward the maintenance of his royal astate. Yet all this
notwithstanding, the malice of wicked men does so much reign, that whatsoever
laws, proclamations, or ordres, be devised, it booteth so little, that the
things for the most part, do rather daily empaire then amend. Wherefore,
seeing that these ordres cannot with gentle procedinges take place, his highness
must of necessite against thobstinate disobedience of those wicked subjects,
use such strong remedies as their unreasonable, and froward doings do require.
And because a great part of thoccasio^ of ye derth of things, has growe^ upon
thalteration of the coin which was done in the time of king Henry the.viij. of
most famous memory, and so continued.v. or vj years. The kings majesty
tendering more his common wealth, then his own profit, has not only given
over the revenue of his mintes, as is aforesaid, but also has now of late,
begone to bring the coin to a perfection, having altered a great part of it,
and entending to reduce the rest into fine silver and gold, according to a
proclamation lately set forth touching the order of that matter. This
notwithstanding, diverse and sundry covetous merchauntes, some gredy
Goldsmithes, and other like, have contrary to the said proclamation, enhaunced
the prices both of gold, and silver, far above thordre appoincted by his
highness, insomuche that some have not been ashamed, openly to buy and sell
Angels and other coins, far above the values rated in the said
proclamation, not only to the great and heinous contempt of his highness most
royal prerogative, aucthorite and commandment, but also to the merueilous
hinderaunce and detriment of the whole common wealth, for the which his highness
has presently caused certain of thoffe^dours to be openly punished, according
to their demerites, and entendeth hencefurth to pardon none that shall be found
faulty in that behalf. Wherefore his highness has determined, this ones by
proclamation to admonish his people again, that no manner of person be so hardy,
as to buy, or to sell, either gold, or silver at higher, or other price, the^ by
the last proclamation is limited: or to give, or take, for any manner of coin,
of gold, or silver current within this realm, more, or less, then by his
majesty's proclamations are appoincted, upon pain not only of forfaioture of
the same coin, but also that the party so offending, shall sustain open
punishment, and abide such fine as shall please his highness.

And further, where it is prohibited* by diverse laws and proclamatio^s, that
no man shall either melt down, cul out, batter, or wilfully break, any manner of
ye kings majesty's coins, to thinte^t to sell it, and that no manner of person,
co^uey any manner of money, gold, or silver out of this realm, into any foreign
parts, or dominions: his highness does straightly charge and command, al manner
of persons from hence forth to have such regard thereunto, as their allegiaunce
and the common wealth of his realms and dominions, do require. For the better
and more assured execution whereof, his highness gives knowledge, that what
person soever, whether he be prentise, servant, or other^, that shall give
information, and be able sufficiently to prove any man from hence forth an
offendour* in any of these poinctes before rehearsed, or if the buyer, will in
this case accuse the seller, or if the conueyer of any Money, Gold or silver,
into any foreyne parts, that accuse the sender, or owner, they and every of
them, by whom the said offenses shall be known, shall have for their reward, the
fourth part of the Money, Gold or Silver, by the^ discovered, to be bought,
sold, molten down or conveyed in form aforesaid, and further, such thanckes
and reward, as their truth and good will toward thexecution of these
reformations shall deserve. And so his highness, straightlye charge and
commands, al Mayors, Shiriffes, Justices, Bayliffes, and al other his
highness ministers, and subjects, to have a special eye and regard to this
matter, as they will avoid his majesty's high indignation, and displeasure.
Yeouen at our palace of Westminstre the.xxi. day of Decembre, the.v. year of
our reign.

God save the King
RICHARDVS GRAFTON typographus Regius excudebat. A. M. D. LI. Cum priuilegio ad
imprimendum solum.


