By the Queen.
A Proclamation for the calling in and frustrating all Commissions for the
making of Saltpeter granted forth before that to George Euelin and others, the
28. of January 1587. whereby many of her Majesty's subjects were greatly
abused, as also that all peter made by the said later Commissions do bring the
same into her Majesty's store, etc.
WHereas the Queens most excellent Majesty for the increase and maintenance
of her Highness store of powder for the service of the Office of her
Ordinance, did heretofore grant diverse Commissions for the making of
Saltpeter within this her Majesty's Realm of England, by virtue whereof, such
(to whom the execution thereof was committed) by color of their said
authority, and by reason of the generality of words therein contained,
contrary to the true meaning of the said Commissions, have forced and drawn
from diverse and sundry her Majesty's loving subjects great services, and have
unduly procured from them great exactions by taking of their woods and
cariages, and by other indirect means, to the great grieuance, and disturbance
of her Majesty's said subjects: of which misdemeanors (her Majesty having
understanding) for the more ease of her Highness subjects, and repressing of
such enormities, her Highness by her Majesty's letters of Commission bearing
date the xxviii. day of January, in the xxx. year of her Majesty's reign, did
grant unto George Euelin Esquier and others, full power and authority for the
making of Saltpeter aforesaid, at their own proper charges, and therein did
not only inhibite and forbid all such forcements and exactions of services and
other misusages of her subjects in their houses, grounds and woods, as had been
required and urged by color of the said former Commissions, but also by the
same Commission did revoke and call in all former Commissions before the said
28. day of January. Since the granting of which later Commission, diverse
persons authorized by the same under the said George and John Euelin for the
working and making of Saltpeter, have fraudulently procured to themselves by
indirect means some of the former Commissions, and by color of the same have
troubled many her Majesty's subjects, contrary to the express will and
pleasure of her Majesty in that behalf. Her Highness therefore upon due
consideration of the premises, and to the end her Majesty's loving subjects
be not ouerpressed, charged, nor prejudiced contrary to her Majesty's said
gracious intent, wills and commands all Justices of Peace, Majors,
Shiriffes, Bailiffes, Constables, and all other her Majesty's Officers and
ministers, by all due means to search and find out such former Commissions
before the said xxviii. of January, and the same to cancel, and all such person
and persons that from the publishing of this Proclamation, shall go about to
attempt to work or take up any thing by color of the said former Commissions,
that such person and persons by the next Justice of Peace (where such offense
shall be done) be forthwith committed to prison, there to remain during her
Majesty's pleasure. And where great quantities of Saltpeter made by virtue of
her Majesty's latter Commission, be, and have been by the said peter-makers
converted unto other uses then for her Majesty's service, as is expressed in
the same Commission, to the great disappointment and disfurnishing of her
Majesty's store of that provision: Her Majesty therefore straightly charge and
forbids all Saltpeter makers, and all other person and persons whatsoever,
to sell, buy, or otherwise procure unto themselves directly or indirectly by
any ways or means whatsoever, any Saltpeter made or hereafter to be made by
virtue of her Majesty's Commission aforesaid, but that ye same may be brought
into her Majesty's store within ye Tower of London, according to the true
intent of her Majesty's Commission in that behalf to them granted, upon pain
of six months imprisonment both to the buyer and seller, and loss of the
Salt peter, or the value thereof so sold and bought. And further, her Majesty
understanding of some bad and evil disposed persons (to the hinderance of so
needful a provision to be had and made within this her Majesty's Realm)
practice to destroy and make waste such ground as the said Petermakers (to
their great cost and charges) have made and founded for the service aforesaid:
Her Majesty therefore wills likewise and commands all Justices of peace,
Majors, Shirifes, Bailiffes and Constables, and al other Officers and ministers
within their several limits, diligently to enquire from henceforth of such
misdemeanors, and such person or persons that from henceforth shall be found
faulty and to offend in the premises, to be by the next Justices of the
peace (where such offense shall be done) committed to prison, there to remain
during the space of six months, without Bail or mainprise, and until her
Majesty's pleasure be further therein known. Given at her Majesty's manor
of Richmond, the xiii. of January 1589. In the 32. year of her Highness
reign.

God save the Queen.
Imprinted at London by the Deputies of Christopher Barker, printer to the
Queens most excellent Majesty. 1595.


