A Proclamacion set forth by the kings Majesty lycencyng the Exchaunges and
rechaunges of money to be frequented and used, in all parts of his highness
Realms and Dominions.
THe kings most excellent Majesty understanding by the lamentable
complainctes and humble suits of diverse and several merchauntes as well his
highness own subjects, as strangers, that their free trades and traffic of
merchaundizes has been now of late, and yet is much empeched and hindered,
because thexchaunge and rechaunge of money (without which they cannot as they
say without much difficulty, especially at this time, use their said
traffic,) has been of late time by our authority restrained and not
permitted within any part of our dominions as they ware wont to be and yet be
in all other parts beyond the sees: Albeit the restrainte of the said
exchaunges and rechaunges was made according to our laws and grounded upon
many good and just consideracions mentioned in our proclamacion, set forth
and publysshed in June last paste, yet at thumble suits of the said
merchants and for the better continuance of thaccustomed free traffic in,
to, and from, al foreyn parts: His Majesty of his godly disposicion and by
thaduise of the lords and other of his highness privy counsel, is pleased
that thexchaunges and rechaunges of money shall be at liberty, and that the
same may be from hencefurth used in all parts of this his majesty's realm and
other his highness dominions, in like, and as ample manner as the same was used
before the publysshyng of the said proclamacion. And that all merchants both
his Majesty's own subjects and strangers vsyng and occupieng the same shall
from hencefurth (during his Majesty's pleasure) be discharged from al pains
forfaictures and penalties contained in any former statute, law or
proclamacion, any thing contained in them, or any of them to the contrary,
notwithstanding.

And his Majesty nevertheless, wills to be understood and known to al men,
that his Majesty's pleasure and straight commandment is, that no man presume
to carry out of this his Majesty's Realm or any other his highness dominions any
Gold or Silver in money, Bullion, Plate, vessel, or otherwise then by his
Majesty's laws is permitted upon, such pains as by his laws be provided
against offenders in this behalf.

Given at Westminster the.xxiij. day of March, in the.vj. year of our reign.
RICHARDVS GRAFTON typographus Regius excudebat. A. M. D. LII.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.


