To the reverend Fathers in God, and our trusty and well beloved, the Bishops
assembled at the Convocation.
JAMES.

RIght reverend Fathers in God, and right trusty and well beloved, we greet
you well. By our Letters of the viij. of October last, directed to the late
Archbishop of Canterbury of reverent memory, which we are assured he did not
fail to impart unto you my Lords the Bishops, as we willed him to do, we
recommended unto him and you, the City of Geneua, to be relieved with some
charitable Collection, to be made in the several Parishes of this Realm, in
such manner, and for such reasons, as in our said Letters are contained. Whereof
we are since advertised, that the success is neither according to our
expectation, nor the speed used therein such as their necessity requires.
Whereupon we have been moved to renew our former direction given to the said
Archbishop, to you all in general being assembled together, that by our second
commendation of so charitable a work, you may perceive how much we affect the
good issue thereof. Requiring you, as well my Lords the Bishops, as all other of
the Convocation who^ it may concern to further the execution of this our
desire, that you immediately take order, each of you within his Diocese or
other charge, that the contents of our Letters to the Archbishop directed be
speedily performed. And that you give charge to all your inferior officers or
others who shall have to do in this Collection, that they do their endeavors
therein, without clayming any fees or laying charges upon the poor city,
which has more need of relief then perhaps is commonly conceived. Given under
our Signet at our Palace of Westminster the 25. day of March, in the second
year of our Reign of England, France, and Ireland, and of Scotland the 37.

To the Minister, Churchwardens and Parishioners of (...)
THe former Letters of his Majesty, have been from me transmitted to the
Clergy of every Deanrie within my Diocese, with such effectual motives as the
weight of the cause requires, whereof I have yet received no meet
satisfaction from the most places. Therefore upon this his Majesty's second
Letter, I desire, and so expect better regard to be had, especially by my
brethren of the Clergy, who (in my opinion) cannot yield less for their
particulars, then three pence of the pound of the valuation of their Benefices,
besides their endeavors to stir up the good affection of their parishioners
to this charitable relief, so again recommended by his Highness to their
Christian and feeling commiseration. The return of your contribution is
required with all convenient speed. 2. Maij. 1604.


