By the King.
Proclamation against selling of Ships.
THE Kings most Excellent Majesty being certainly advertised of many English
Ships with their Furniture sold of late into foreign parts beyond the Seas,
contrary to the Law and Statutes in that case provided, and to the great
damage and hurt of his loving Subjects; Does expressly charge and command all
Merchants, Owners of Ships, Mariners, and all other his Subjects whom it may
concern, That from henceforth they and every of them shall forbear to Sell,
Trucke, Exchange or alienate any English Ship or Vessel, directly or
indirectly, without special License first obtained for the same, under the
great Seal of England, Upon pain for every such offense, to suffer
imprisonment during the Kings pleasure, and to undergo such forfeitures and
Fines as by the Statutes, Laws and Customs ofthis his Majesty's Realm of
England may be inflicted upon them in that behalf, as upon transgressers of
the Laws and Statutes, and contemners of his Majesty's most Royal
Proclamation.

And his Majesty does hereby straightly charge all Admirals, Viceadmirals,
and other Officers of the Admiraltie, Majors, Sheriffs, Bailiffes, Customers,
Comptrollers, Searchers, and all other his Officers, whom it may concern, that
they do carefully inquire after all such as shall offend in the premises, and
cause them to be apprehended, and committed whom they shall find guilty, to
the next Jail, there to remain until they and every of them shall be bound
with sufficient Sureties, in competent sums, for their appearance before the
Lords of his Highness most Honorable Council at the next Starrechamber day,
and not to depart thence without special leave first obtained. And if it shall
appear that any of the said Officers have used negligence or conniuence
herein, His Majesty will extend the pain of his displeasure unto them, and
cause them to feel the smart thereof.

Given at our Honor of Hampton Court the 15. day of October, in the second
year of our Reign of England, France and Ireland, and of Scotland the eight
and thirtieth.
God save the King.
Imprinted at London by Robert Barker, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty. ANNO DOM. 1604.


