The effect of certain branches of the Statute made in Anno xxxiij. Henrici
viij. touching the maintenance of Artillery, and the punishment of such as use
unlawful games, very necessary to be put in execution.
FIrst, that all fathers, governors, and rulers of such as be tender of age,
do teach and bring them up in the knowledge of shooting: and that every man
having a man child, or men children in his house, shall provide, ordeine, and
have in his house for every man child, being of the age of seven years and
above, til he shall come to the age of seventeen years, a bow and two shafts,
to induce and learn them, and bring them up in shooting, and shall deliver all
the same bow and Arrows to the same young men to use and occupy. And if the
same young men be servants, that then their master shall abate the money that
they shall pay for the same bows and arrows of their wages. And after all
such young men shall come to the age of seventeen years, every of them shall
provide and have a bow and four arrows continually for himself, at his
proper costs and charges, or else of the gift or provision of his friends, and
use and cocupy the same in shooting, as is before rehearsed. And if the master
suffer any of his servants taking wages, being in his household, and under the
age of seventeen years, to lack a bow and two arrows, contrary to the form
of this estatute, by the space of one month together, then the master or
father in whom such negligence shall be, shall for every such default forfeit
vi.s.viii.d. and that every servant passing the age of seventeen years, and
under the age of threescore years, and taking wages, which can or is able to
shoot, and shall lack a bow and four arrows by the space of one month
together, shall for every such default forfeit and lose vi.s.viii.d.

Item, that no person by himself, factor, deputy, servant, or other person,
shall for his or their gain, lucre, or living, keep, have, hold, occupy,
exercise, or maintain, any common house, alley, or place of bowling, coiting,
cloise, coiles, half bowl, tennis, dising, table, or carding, or any other
manner of game, prohibited by any statute heretofore made, or any unlawful new
game now invented or made, or hereafter to be invented, found, had, or made,
upon pain to forfeit and pay for every day keeping, having, mainteining, or
suffering any such game to be had, kept, executed, played, or maintained within
any such house, garden, alley, or other place, contrary to the form and effect
of this estatute, xl.s. and the players so taken, to pay for every time
vi.s.viii.d.

Item, that the Justices of Peace, and every Mayor, Shiriffe, Bailiffe,
Constable, or other head Officer, have authority to enter into all places,
as well within Franchises or elsewhere, and the persons offending in any of the
premises, to take and put in prison, until such time they put in sureties no
more to suffer, occupy, or commit the said offenses.

Item, that all Majors, Shiriffes, Bailiffes, Constables, and other head
Officers within every City, Borough, and Town within this Realm, where any
such Officers shall fortune to be, as well within the Franchises as without, shall
make due search weekly, or at the furthest at all times hereafter once every
month in all places, where any such houses, Alleys, Play, or Plays shall be
suspected to be had, kept, and maintained. And if the said Majors, Shiriffes,
Bailiffes, Constables, and other head Officers, within their Cities, Boroughs,
and Towns, as well within Franchises, as without, do not make due search at
the furthest once every moves, if the case so require, according to the tenor
of this Act, and do not execute the same, in all things according to the
purport and force of the same: that then every such Mayor, Shiriffes,
Bailiffes, Constables, or other head Officer, to pay and forfeit for every
month not making such search, nor executing the same, xl.s.

Item, that no Artificer, or handycrafts man of any occupation, Husbandman,
Apprentice, Labourer, servant of Husbandry, Journey man, or servant, or
Artificer, Mariner, Fisherman, Waterman, or any Seruingman, may use any
unlawful game.

Item, that all that play at Bowls or any other unlawful game in the fields,
to loose for every such time vi.s.viii.d. and to be committed to prison, unto
such time they put in sureties no more to use the same.

Item, this Statute to be proclaimed four times every year, and the like to
be done in all Assizes and Sessions, and to continue for ever.

Memorandum, that there is a prouiso in this Statute for all men of worship,
which may dispend one hundred pounds yearly and upwards, may use these games
with discretion at their pleasures.

God save the King.
Imprinted at London by Robert Barker, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty. Anno Dom. 1608.

Cum priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.


