By the King.
WHereas at the late rising of the first Session of our Parliament, We did
prorogue the same until the seventh day of February next, intending then to
hold at that time another Session thereof: We have since been informed from
diverse parts of our Realm, that some contagion of Sickness does yet so
continue in many of our principal Cities and Towns, and is also scattered in
diverse other places of less note, as if we should against the Spring of the
year draw so great a concourse of people together, as the assembly of the
Parliament brings with it, (the continuance whereof is uncertain) it were
much to be doubted, that the infection of the Plague might be renewed again in
our City of LONDON, which is our Chamber, and the place of our most ordinary
residence, as it did the first year of our entry, by reason of the great
assembly at our Coronation, which if the settling of our State here had not
necessarily required to be then performed, We would have forborue. And
forasmuch also as for these two years past, by reason of our entry into this
our Kingdom, our Coronation, the holding of our Parliament, and such other
Solemnities, requiring the presence of persons of the best sort, the most part
of the Gentlemen of quality of this Realm have been absent from the places of
their ordinary abode, whereby the Countries have wanted their assistance in the
government of them, and our people the comfort of their presence and
Hospitality: We have therefore thought it convenient to prorogue our said
Parliament until the third day of October next ensuing, at which time we
intend by Gods grace to hold another Session thereof, And in the mean time all
those, who repaired hither about the Commission concerning the Union, or do
now reside here in expectation of that Session of our Parliament at the time
appointed, may return to their own homes until the said third day of
October, when We will expect again their attendance. And in the mean time
We do straightly charge and command them, and all others who have any trust
to them from Us, either in the Commission of the Peace, or otherwise for the
good government of our people, that they do immediately repair home to their
own dwellings, to attend to such Services as to them belong to do, whereof by
their absence both We and our Subjects are defrauded.

Given at our Palace of Westminster the xxiiij. day of December, in the second
year of our Reign of Great Britain, France and Ireland.
God save the King.
Imprinted at London by Robert Barker, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty.

ANNO DOM. 1604.


