By the right Honorable the Lords, Commissioners for the Office of Earl
Marshall of ENGLAND.
THe Kings most Excellent Majesty being informed of many great abuses, offered
to the Nobility and Gentry of this Kingdom, as well by the sinister practice
of certain mechanical Tradesmen, as Painters, Glasiers, Stone-cutters,
Caruers, and many other Artificers, trading in Armoury, who presuming, without
authority, to intermeddle with the marshalling of Arms, the erecting of
Monuments, whereon Arms are to be fixed, Coats quartered, due differences to
be observed, being mysteries of Honor and out of their element, by reason
whereof many great errors are daily committed, to the great offense and
prejudice of our ancient Nobility and Gentry of this Kingdom, and to the
breeding of many ambiguous doubts and questions, which may happen in their
Discents and Issues in future times, as also by a general neglect of the
Nobility and Gentry themselves, in the omission of Funerals, and other
ceremonial Rites heretofore used, which are now almost or altogether laid
aside. For remedy of which abuses and neglects, his Majesty out of his
Gracious and Royal disposition, so much tendering the preservation of the good
estate of his said Nobility and Gentry of this Kingdom, esteeming them the
principal Pillars of this Land, who in all former Ages have been thought fit
to be distinguished from the vulgar and meaner sort and rank of people, and
thereby have been respected and renowned thorowout all Christendom: Has
commanded us his Commissioners for the Office of the Earl Marshall of ENGLAND,
to look into the aforesaid abuses and neglects: whereupon, we the said Lords,
Commissioners, ( viz. EDWARD, Earl of Worcester, Lord Keeper of his Majesty's
Privy Seal; LODOVICK, Duke of Lenox, Lord Steward of his Majesty's Household;
GEORGE, Marquis of Buckingham, Master of his Majesty's Horse; CHARLES, Earl of
Nottingham, Lord high Admiral of England; WILLIAM, Earl of Pembroke, Lord
Chamberlain of his Majesty's Household; and THOMAS, Earl of Arundell) having
taken due and considerate deliberation of the Premises, and finding that by
reason of the daily abuses and neglects aforesaid, that not only his Majesty's
Office, but also his Officers of Arms, the Kings Heralds and Pursuiuants,
being Officers of Honor, whose chiefest support and maintenance has ever
depended upon the performance of the said Funeral Rites and Obsequies of the
Nobility and Gentry of this Land, taking at all such times Certificates of
the Matches, Issues, and times of Decease of the Estates aforesaid, with their
Arms, which of right they ought to bear, without wrong doing to any, and from
whom his Majesty henceforward will expect a more strict account then of late
time has been had. By Virtue therefore of his Majesty's Commission to us
directed under the great Seal of England, bearing date the seventh day of
February, in the fifteenth year of his Majesty's Reign of England, France,
and Ireland, and of Scotland the one and fiftieth, Do order, decree, and
ordain, that as well for the good of the said Nobility and Gentry of this
Kingdom, as otherwise, That from henceforth all Noble men, Baronets, Knights,
Esquires, and Gentlemen of eminent Place, Office, Birth, and Quality, that
shall be either silently buried in the Night time by Torch-light, or otherwise,
by Day or Night time without the attendance of an Officer of Arms, shall
nevertheless immediately after the death and burial of every such Defunct,
return a true Certificate of the Matches, Issues, and times of Decease, with
their Arms, which of right they bore, for the which they shall pay into the
said Office of Arms, such Fees as we have and do hereby set down and
appoint, viz. Every GENTLEMAN, using Funeral Scutchions at his burial, three
pounds six shillings and eight pence, and using none, forty shillings. Every
ESQVIRE of Coat Armor, six pounds thirteen shillings and four pence. Every
KNIGHT, ten pounds. Every BARONET and BANNERET, thirteen pounds, six
shillings and eight pence. Every BARON and BARONESS, that ought to have a
great Banner and Bannerols, five and twenty pounds. Every BISHOP, five and
twenty pounds. Every VICOVNT and VICOVNTESSE, thirty pounds. Every EARL and
COUNTESS, five and thirty pounds. Every MARQVES and MARCHIONESS, forty
pounds. Every DVKE and DVCHESSE, five and forty pounds: and, Every
ARCHBISHOP, five and forty pounds. All which said several sums of Money,
are to be paid to the said Officers of Arms, or their Assigns, being orderly
demanded after the burial of every such Defunct, by the Heirs, Executors, or
Administrators, of all and every Persons of the degrees aforesaid. The which
Certificates and Fees, if they shall refuse to return and pay, We shall, upon
complaint made by the Officers of Arms, to us, or to the Earl Marshall of
England for the time being, take such further order therein, as shall be
thought meet and expedient for the accomplishment of his Majesty's
commandment. And further, We the Lords, Commissioners aforesaid, do
straightly charge and command all the said Officers of Arms, which now are or
hereafter shall be, to take a true Certificate of the Matches, Issues, and
times of Decease of all the Estates aforesaid, with the Arms, which of right
they ought to bear, without wrong doing to any (they paying such Fees as are
before set down by these Presents) and likewise, the like Certificates of all
Gentlemen, whose estates exceed not on^ thousand Marks, to enter them as
exactly as the rest, paying no Fees at all, which Certificates shall be truly
and carefully Registered, and safely kept in a fair Book in the Office of
Arms, as an authentic Record, which in future time may determine and end
many questions that hereafter may arise, as by many examples of late times have
been seen. Provided always, that if any of the inferior degrees abouesaid,
viz. Knights, Esquires, or Gentlemen, shall pretend poverty or disabilitie,
and shall make the same appear by Petition unto the Earl Marshall of England,
or the Lords, Commissioners for the said Office for the time being, such order
shall be taken therein, as that the Gentlemen shall be relieved, and the Office
of Arms satisfied. Nevertheless, if any of the degrees aforesaid shall
require to have their Funerals honorably solemnized with Heralds attendance,
and such other ceremonies as have in former times been used, that then they
shall pay all such Fees as heretofore have been accustomed. And for remedy of
the former gross abuses, which are daily committed by Painters, that keep
open shops of Armourie, and do devise and give forth Arms at their pleasures,
assuming the names of Heralds Painters for their more countenance therein: We
do order and will, and in his Majesty's name straightly charge them, and every
of them, as well within the City of London, as in all other Cities and
Countries within this Realm, that from henceforth they presume not to paint
any Arms upon Coaches, or elsewhere, or Funeral work, or to make or paint
any Discents or Pedegrees, or give any trick of Coats of Arms out of their
Books and Shops for any of the Estates aforesaid, without the allowance and
approbation of the Kings of Arms, to whom it does chiefly appertain. And for
remedy of such abuses as are committed by Masons, which commonly make Tombs
and Monuments, and do ingraue diverse Arms and Matches, and set forth in their
Inscriptions false Genealogies with vain and frivolous Titles, setting up
Coronets upon some unfitting and impertinent to the qualities of the person
whom they demonstrate: We charge them also and every of them, by the immediate
authority which we hold from his Majesty, and do thereby order, that they
shall not from henceforth ingraue, or cause to be engraven, painted or set
forth any Arms, Genealogies, Epitaphs, or Inscriptions, or make any Monument,
without it be first seen and allowed by the Kings and Officers of Arms whom
it does concern, the Copy whereof with the form of the Monument, to be
drawn and entered into a Book, which Book shall be called, The Book of
Monuments, and be kept in the Office of Arms for ever, to the end if ever
afterward any thing should happen to be added or diminished, or the Monument
translated or defaced, as many are and have been, yet the truth may appear by
the said Register Book. And whereas we are further advertised, that diverse
Glasiers, Goldsmiths, Cutters, Grauers, and Caruers, and other Artific^rs, do
usually paint in Glass, grave in Metal, and cut Seals of Arms, carue in
Timber, and such like diverse Arms, Coats, and Crosts, without any warrant or
knowledge of the same to be true and justifiable, to the great wrong and
prejudice of many Noble and ancient Families of this Kingdom. We do hereby
order likewise, and in his Majesty's name straightly charge and command them
and every of them, and all other Artificers whatsoever, to forbear to paint in
Glass, cut Seals, or otherwise grave in Metal, or carue in Timber or
otherwise, any matter of Armourie, before the draft thereof be first seen and
allowed by the Kings and Officers of Arms, whom it shall concern, unless it
be of the Nobility whose Coats and Quarterings are eminent and well known, or
such of the ancient Gentry as have been formerly viewed, approved, and
allowed by the Provincial Kings of Arms, in their several Visitations,
within their Provinces.

Given under our Hands and Seals, the tenth day of November, in the sixteenth
year of his Majesty's Reign of England, France, and Ireland, and of Scotland
the fifty two, At WHITE HALL. Anno Domini 1618. E. Worcester. seal HONI SOIT
QVI MAL Y PENSE Lenox. seal HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE G. Buckingham. seal HONI
SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE Nottingham. seal HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE Pembroke. seal
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE T. Arundell. seal HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE



