By the King.
WHereas Thomas Percy Gentleman, and some other his Confederates, persons
known to be so utterly corrupted with the superstition of the Romish Religion,
as seduced with the blindness thereof, and being otherwise of lewd life,
insolent disposition, and for the most part of desperate estate, have been
discovered to have contrived the most horrible treason that ever entered into
the hearts of men, against our Person, our Children, the whole Nobility,
Clergy, and Commons in Parliament assembled, which howsoever cloaked with
zeal of Superstitious Religion, aimed indeed at the Subversion of the State,
and to induce an horrible confusion of all things, In which they and all others
of bankerupt and necessitous estate, might have those of better ability for a
pray to repair their beggarly Fortunes, and have proceeded so far some of
them in their deuilish Attempts, as to assemble in Troops in our Counties of
Warwick and Worcester, where they have broken up a Stable, and taken out
Horses of diverse Noblemen and Gentlemen, within our town of Warwick, And no
doubt but do proceed further in their purposes, seeking to raise some
Rebellion in our Realm, and will with many fained and false Allegations seek
to seduce diverse of our Subjects, especially with show of Religion: Although
we are by good experience so well persuaded of the Loyalty of diverse of our
Subjects (though not professing true Religion) that they do as much abhor
this detestable conspiracy as our Self, and will be ready to do their best
endeavors (though with expense of their blood) to suppress all Attemptors
against our safety and the quiet of our State, and to discover whomsoever they
shall suspect to be of Rebellious or Traitorous disposition: Yet have We
thought good by this our open Declaration, to give warning and advertisement to
all our Subjects whatsoever, of that horrible purpose of Percies and his
accomplices, and to distinguish between all others, calling themselves
Catholics, and these detestable Traitors: And therefore do denounce and
publish all the Persons hereunder named, Adherents to Percy, to be Traitors
known, and that all others are in the same case, who shall in any wise either
receive, abbette, cherish, entertain, or adhere unto them, or not do their
best endeavors to apprehend and take them.

Wherefore we will and command all our Lieutenants, Deputy lieutenants,
Sheriffs, Justices of Peace, Mayors, Bayliffes, Constables, and all other our
Officers, Ministers and loving Subjects, to take knowledge thereof, and to do
their best duties herein, as they will answer the contrary at their uttermost
peril: Not doubting, but that they all, without regard of their pretense of
Religion, will with one heart and will, employ themselves for the suppressing,
apprehending, detecting, and discovering of all sorts of persons any ways
likely to be privy to a Treason so hateful to God and men, and implying in it
the utter subversion of this Realm, and dignity thereof.

And where we do hear that many do spread abroad, that this Conspiracy was
intended only for matter of Religion, and that foreign Princes our
neighbors are interessed therein, which Rumors are diuulged by busy persons
both to scandalize the Amity wherein we stand with all Christian Princes and
States, and to give unto lewd persons hope that they shall be backed in their
enterprises by great Potentates: We do declare, that we cannot admit so
inhumane a thought, as to conceive that any Prince, of what Religion soever,
could give ear to so Savage and Barbarous an imagination: And that by such
examinations as hitherto have been taken, we find them all, and their ministers
clear from any suspicion of priuitie thereunto; whereof one infallible
argument to us is, that all the Ministers of foreign Princes, which are now
here, made earnest suit to us to be present in the place that day. And
therefore we do admonish and charge all our Subjects, that they shall not
speak of any the Princes our neighbors, or their Ambassadors, otherwise then
reverently, upon pain of our displeasure, and to be punished as persons
seeking the disturbance of the Peace, wherein we live with our said neighbors.

Given at our Palace of Westminster, the seventh day of November, in the third
year of our reign of Great Britain, France, and Ireland.
God save the King.
Thomas Percy Gentleman. Robert Catesby Esquire. Ambrose Rookwood of Coldham
hall in Suffolk Esquire. Thomas Winter gentleman, brother of Robert Winter of
Huddington in the County of Worcester. Edward Grant of Northbrooke in the
County of Warwick Gentleman. John Wright. Christopher Wright. Robert Ashfield
servant to Robert Catesby Esquire.
Imprinted at London by Robert Barker, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty. ANNO DOM. 1605.


