woodcut of England's coat of arms, 1609 HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

DIEV ET MON DROIT


By the King.
A Proclamation for relief of the subject that might be otherwise damnified by
the late burning of Records in the Six Clerks Office.
THE Kings most Excellent Majesty, graciously and tenderly considering the
manifold inconveniences, that might happen to many of his loving Subjects, by
means of a dangerous and sudden fire, that of late consumed, not only all
the buildings and rooms belonging to the Office of six Clerks of the high
Court of Chancerie, but also many Bills, Answers, and other pleadings, together
with the depositions of witnesses and decrees concerning his said Subjects,
and likewise diverse patent rolls, warrants, and other Records remaining in
that Office; And desiring in his great and Princely goodness, not only to devise
all possible means to relieve and help his said Subjects, but also to give
notice thereof, whereby every person, whom the same does concern, may readily
make resort where they may partake of the benefits of his most gracious and
royal providence, does hereby publish and declare. That all such Bills,
Answers, Pleadings and depositions (the Records and originals whereof were
burnt, as aforesaid) shall at the request of such person and persons, whom the
same does any way concern, producing any exemplification or authentic copy
thereof under the hand of the Court, be again written out, filed and recorded.
And for such depositions whereof no copies were made, either in respect that
the same were not published or otherwise, Certioraries shall be awarded, at the
desire of any person or persons whom the same does concern, unto the
Commissioners, in whose hands the originals of the said depositions do
remain, to certify the same again into the said Court of Chancery, there to
remain of record. And where any depositions, taken in any suit not yet
determined, have been burnt, as aforesaid, and cannot be renewed by any the
means aforesaid; in such case the Lord Keeper of the Great Seal of England,
or Our said Court of Chancery, upon understanding of the nature and state of
the business, may give such order as to Justice shall appertain, for the
relief of the party grieved, by ordering a new examination of witnesses, or
otherwise, as shall be fit. And where any Decrees, or Inrolments of Decrees,
have been burnt, as aforesaid, That in every such case, at the request of such
person and persons, whom the same does any way concern, producing any
exemplification of the said Decree, or any Writ, De executione Decreti, the
said Decree shall be new written, and enrolled. And that all inrolments of
Patents burnt, as aforesaid, shall at the request of any person or persons whom
the same does concern (producing the original patent, or any exemplification
or Constat thereof, and upon view of the original Bill or warrant under the
Signet or Privy Seal, remaining either in the Signet Office, or elsewhere,
and upon view of the books of controlment, remaining in the custody of the
Clarke of the Hamper, or elsewhere,) be newly written, entered, and enrolled of
Record. And his Majesty's will and pleasure is, and the said six Clerks have
assented, that for the writing, in grossing, eutring, or inrolling of any the
premises by them or any of their Clerks, or for doing any thing in the
premises by them or any of their Clerks, no fees or rewards shall be taken,
but the same shall be done gratis, without fee. And his Majesty's further will
and pleasure is, and he does heerby require and authorize, as well the Lord
Keeper of the great Seal of England, as the Master of the Rolls, and either
of them in their several places, to see the premises duly performed, and to
settle, quiet, and reconcile all such ambiguities, doubts, and questions, as
shall arise concerning the due execution and performance of the premises, in
such sort, as they in their wisdoms and good discretions shall find it meet.
Nevertheless, his Majesty does declare, that it is not his purpose or
intention, that any shall take benefit of this his Princely grace and Royal
providence, but such only as shall desire and request the same on this side
and before the tenth day of July, now next ensuing.

Given at Our Palace at Westminster the seventh day of January, in the
nineteenth year of Our Reign of Great Britain, France, and Ireland.
God save the King.
Imprinted at London by BONHAM NORTON, and JOHN BILL, Printers to the Kings
most Excellent Majesty. M.DC.XXI.


