woodcut of England's coat of arms, 1609 The effect of certain branches of the
Statute made in Anno 33. Henrici viij. touching the maintenance of Artillery,
and the punishment of such as use unlawful Games, very necessary to be put in
execution.
FIrst, that all fathers, governors, and rulers of such as be tender of age,
do teach and bring them up in the knowledge of Shooting, and that every man
having a man child, or men children in his house, shall provide, ordain, and
have in his house for every man child, being of the age of seven years and
above, till he shall come to the age of seventeen years, a Bow and two
Shafts, to induce and learn them, and bring them up in Shooting, and shall
deliver all the same Bow and Arrows to the same young men to use and occupy.
And if the same young men be servants, that then their master shall abate the
money that they shall pay for the same Bows and Arrows of their wages. And
after all such young men shall come to the age of seventeen years, every of
them shall provide and have a Bow and four Arrows continually for himself,
at his proper cost and charges, or else of the gift and provision of his
friends, and use and occupy the same in Shooting, as is before rehearsed. And
if the master suffer any of his servants taking wages, being in his household,
and under the age of seventeen years, to lack a Bow and two Arrows,
contrary to the form of this Statute, by the space of one month together,
then the Master or Father in whom such negligence shall be, shall for every
such default forfeit vi.s.viii.d. And that every servant passing the age of
seventeen years, and under the age of threescore years, and taking wages,
which can, or is able to Shoot, and shall lack a Bow and four Arrows by
the space of one month together, shall for every such default forfeit and lose
vi.s.viii.d.

ITem, that no person by himself, Factor, Deputy, servant, or other person,
shall for his or their gain, lucre, or living, keep, have, hold, occupy
exercise, or maintain any common house, Alley, or place of Bowling, Coiting,
Cloise, Coiles, half Bowl, Tennis, Dicing, Table, or Carding, or any other
manner of Game, prohibited by any Statute heretofore made, or any unlawful new
Game now invented or made, or hereafter to be invented, found, had, or made,
upon pain to forfeit and pay for every day keeping, having, maintaining, or
suffering any such Game to be had, kept, executed, played, or maintained within
any such House, Garden, Alley, or other place, contrary to the form and effect
of this Statute, xl.s. and the players so taken, to pay for every time vi. s.
viii. d.

ITem, That the Justices of Peace, and every Mayor, Sheriff, Bayliffe,
Constable, or other head Officer, have authority to enter into all places, as
well within Franchises or elsewhere, and the persons offending in any of the
premises, to take and put in prison, until such time they put in Sureties no
more to suffer, occupy, or commit the said offenses.

ITem, That all Majors, Sheriffs, Bayliffes, Constables, and other head
Officers within every City, Borough, and Town within this Realm, where any
such Officers shall fortune to be, as well within the Franchises as without,
shall make due search weekly, or at the furthest at all times hereafter once
every Month in all places, where any such Houses, Allies, Play or Plays shall
be suspected to be had, kept, and maintained. And if the said Mayors,
Shiriffes, Bayliffes, Constables, and other head officers, within their Cities,
Boroughs, and Towns, as well within Franchises as without, do not make due
search at the furthest once every month, if the case so require, according to
the tenor of this Act, and do not execute the same in all things, according to
the purport and force of the same: that then every such Mayor, Shiriffes,
Bailiffes, Constables or other head Officer, to pay and forfeit for every
Month not making such search, nor executing the same, forty shillings.

ITem, that no Artificer, or handicrafts-man of any Occupation, Husbandman,
Apprentice, Labourer, servant of Husbandry, Iourneyman, or servant, or
Artificer, Mariner, Fisherman, Waterman, or any Serving man, may use any
unlawful Game.

ITem, that all that play at Bowls, or any other unlawful Game in the fields,
to lose for every such time, vi.s.viii.d. and to be committed to prison, unto
such time they put in Sureties no more to use the same.

ITem, This Statute to be proclaimed four times every year, and the like to
be done in all Assizes and Sessions, and to continue for ever.

MEmorandum, That there is a Prouiso in this Statute for all men of worship,
which may dispend one hundred pounds yearly and upwards, may use these Games
with discretion at their pleasures.

God save the King.
Imprinted at London by BONHAM NORTON and JOHN BILL, Printers to the Kings most
Excellent Majesty. 1619.

Cum Priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.


