BY THE KING.
A Proclamation prohibiting the keeping of Bartholomew Fair, and Sturbridge
Fair.
THE Kings most Excellent Majesty out of his Princely and Christian care of
his loving Subjects, that no good means of providence may be neglected to
stay the further spreading of the great infection of the Plague, does find it
necessary to prevent all occasions of public concourse of His people for the
present, till it shall please Almighty God of his goodness, to cease the
violence of the contagion, which is very far dispersed into many parts of the
Kingdom already. And therefore remembering that there are at hand two Faires of
special note, unto which there is usually extraordinary resort out of all
parts of the Kingdom. The one kept in Smithfield near the City of London,
called Bartholomew Fair: and the other near Cambridge, called Sturbridge
Fair. The holding whereof at the usual times would in all likelihood be the
occasion of further danger and infection to other parts of the Land, which yet
by Gods mercy stand clear, and free. Has with the advice of his Majesty's
Privy Council, thought good by this open declaration of His pleasure, and
necessary commandment, not only to admonish and require all his loving Subjects
to forbear to resort for this time to either of the said two Faires, or to any
other Faires within fifty miles of the said City of London, but also to
inioyne the Lords of the said Faires, and others interessed in them, or any of
them, that they all forbear to hold the said Faires, or any thing appertaining
to them at the times accustomed, or at any other time, till by Gods goodness
and mercy the infection of the plague shall cease, or be so much diminished,
that his Majesty shall give order for holding them, upon pain of such
punishment, as for a contempt, so much concerning the universal safety of his
people, they shall be adjudged to deserve, which they must expect to be
inflicted with all severity, his Majesty's desire being so intentive for
preventing the general infection threatened, as he is resolved to spare no man
that shall be the cause of dispersing the same. And to that purpose does hereby
further charge and enjoin under like penalty, all Citizens, and Inhabitants
of the said City of London, that none of them shall repair to any Fair held
within any part of this Kingdom, until it shall please God to cease the
infection now reigning amongst them, his Majesty's intention being, and so
hereby declaring himself, that no Lord of any Faires, or others interessed in
the profits thereof, shall by this necessary and temporary restraint receive
any prejudice in the right of his, or their Faires, or liberties thereunto
belonging, any thing before mentioned notwithstanding. Given at the Court at
Woodstocke the fourth day of August in the first year of his Majesty's Reign
of great Britain, France, and Ireland.

God save the King.
Printed at Oxford by I. L. and W. T. for Bonham Norton and John Bill, Printers
to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1625.


