BY THE KING. A Proclamation for recalling His Majesty's Subjects from the
Seminaries beyond the Seas, and putting the Laws against Jesuits and Popish
Priests in execution.
THE Kings most Excellent Majesty being lately put in mind by the humble
petition of the Lords spiritual and temporal, and Commons assembled in
Parliament of the increase of Papists within His Majesty's Dominions, and the
dangerous consequences of the same: And discerning thereby to his exceeding joy
and comfort in t hat representative body of this Realm, and in his loving
Subjects in general, a true and hearty zeal and affection to God's true
Religion, which he well knows has only power to bind the conscience to
loyalty and obedience, is desirous that His faithful Subjects may reciprocally
take notice of His Majesty's readiness and constant resolution to maintain the
same true Religion professed, and by Law established within this Realm, and
upon all occasions to suppress the contrary. And therefore whereas His
Majesty has bin informed that diverse Children both of Noblemen, and others
His natural Subjects have bin heretofore sent over into the Seminaries,
Schools, or other Houses of Popish religion beyond the Seas, and are there
remaining to be brought up contrary to the Laws here established. His Majesty
straightly charge and commands, That all the said Children do before
Christmas day next return into their Native Countries, and submit themselves
to His Maiestie's Laws, and conform themselves to live in such duty and
obedience as becomes good Subjects. And that their Parents, Tutors,
Governors, and such others as have bin, or are faulty either in sending,
permitting, or maintaining them there, take present order to recall them home,
and to provide that they be returned into their own Countries upon the day
aforesaid upon pain of the uttermost severity of His Maiestie's Justice to be
extended in that behalf, And his Majesty does also upon like pain straightly
charge and command, That no Bishop, Priest, or other person having taken, or
which shall take order by, or under any authority, or power derived from the
Sea of Rome, which he or they be natural borne Subjects, Denizens, or
Strangers, do presume to confer any Ecclesiastical orders, or exercise any
Ecclesiastical function, or jurisdiction whatsoever, toward, or upon any of
his M^ies natural borne Subjects within this Realm, or any other his Majesty's
Dominions. His Majesty does also give express charge and commandment unto all
and singular Judges, Justices and others to who^ the same appertains, That
all the Laws and Statutes now standing in force, be put in due execution
against all Jesuits, Seminary Priests, and others, having taken orders by any
authority from the Sea of Rome being His Majesty's Subjects, which from and
after the last day of September next coming shall be found within His Maiestie's
Dominions, which day His Majesty does by this Proclamation limit and prefixe
for the uttermost time of their departure, and auoidance out of this Realm,
and all other His Majesty's Dominions at their perils, and not to return
again upon the severe penalties of the Laws now in force against them. His
Majesty hereby commanding all and singular Majors, Sheriffs, Justices of the
peace, and Officers of Ports whither they shall repair for their Shipping out,
quietly to suffer the^ in the mean time to depart. But if any of the^, or any
others of that kind shall after that day be found within His Majesty's
Dominions, that then the course of Justice and the Laws be taken and pursued
against them with severity. Giving warning hereby to all his Majesty's loving
Subjects, that after the last day of September next ensuing they do not
receive, harbor, entertain, relieve, or conceal any of the said Jesuits,
Seminary Priests, or other Popish Priests upon the penalties which by the Law
they shall incur for so doing, And His Majesty's pleasure is, that after the
last day of September next ensuing diligent search be from time to time made
for the apprehension and bringing to Justice of all Offenders in any the
premises.

Given at the Court at Woodstocke the fourteenth day of August in the first
year of his Majesty's Reign of great Britain, France, and Ireland.
God save the King.
Printed at Oxford by I. L. and W. T. for Bonham Norton and John Bill, Printers
to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1625.


