HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE DIEV ^ ET ^ MON ^ DROIT royal blazon surmounted by a
crown and flanked by the English lion on one side and the Scottish unicorn on
the other
At the Star Chamber the twentieth of June, 1634.
Present: Lord Archbishop of Canterbury. Lord Keeper. Lord Archbishop of York.
Lord Privy Seal. Lord high Chamberlain. Lord Chamberlain. Earl of
Bridgewater. Lord Cottington. Lord Newburgh. Master Treasurer. Master
Comptroler. Master Secretary Coke. Master Secretary Windebank.


THis day the Board did take into consideration the complaints made from
several parts of the Kingdom, concerning the stopp and refusal of Farthing
Tokens, proceeding as well from the abuse in counterfeiting the same, as in
causing the same to pass, as well in payments, as for commodities and for wages
to Workmen and Laborers, in greater quantities then was intended.

And whereas upon a Decree lately made in the High Court of Star Chamber, the
five and twentieth day of April last, wherein Sir Francis Crane Knight, was
Plaintiff against William Hawks and others for making and venting of
counterfeit Farthing Tokens: Their Lordships did call to mind, that there was
consideration likewise had, and provision made by the said Decree against the
abuse in forcing the same upon men for Wages and in other paiments, and
directing the right use to be made of them for the good and benefit of the
Subject, according to His Majesty's Royal Intention, and the Proclamations
published in that behalf.

It was therefore by the Board thought fit and ordered, that so much of the
said Decree as concerned the regulating of the business de futuro, should be
set down in this order, and together with the same be forthwith printed and
published, which part of the said Decree does accordingly follow in these
words, viz.

THe Court being informed, that by the abuse of some particular persons, whose
only aim is, to make a private gain and profit to themselves, His Majesty's
people are much abused in many parts of this Kingdom; and poor Laborers,
whose necessities are such as inforceth them to take their Hire in any Money,
are compelled many times to take their whole weeks wages in Farthings, from
such as buy great quantities at low rates, and make a commodity thereby: Which
abuse, as it is already become a great burden and grieuance to His Majesty's
people in many parts of this Realm, so it is to be feared, it will hereafter
turn to the great disadvantage of His Majesty's Patentees, if it be not
remedied by a timely reformation. Their Lordships being therefore willing to
prevent and meet with such growing evils, and desirous to remove the
Inconveniences of forcing His Majesty's Subjects to take such great quantities
of Farthings in payments: Which Farthing Tokens rightly used, are of themselves
very useful and necessary, and were made chiefly for the relief of the poor,
and to be vented and used only for exchange in small sums, but not to be
put upon any in great payments; Have thought fit and ordered, and it is by this
their Lordships Sentence declared, that it is utterly unlawful, and expressly
contrary to the true meaning of His Majesty's Letters Patents and Proclamation,
that any such Farthing Tokens should be enforced upon any poor Laborers, or
Workmen, or other persons in any payments either of great or lesser sums.

And they declare further, That they think it fit that no person should pay
above two pence in Farthings to any other person at any time. And this Court
does also declare it to be unlawful for any man to buy or barter for any
Farthings, at or for any lesser rate then they are usually vented by His
Majesty's Patentees, to whom the sole making thereof is granted, and upon whom
the rechange thereof lies at the same rate; And if any person shall be found
herein to offend in either of these kinds, This Court is resolved severely to
punish the Offenders. And the Court does withal hold fit, and desire that His
Majesty should be moved to declare and command the same, by his Highness
Proclamation to be published through this Kingdom, that so the true use of
these Farthing Tokens intended for the good of the poor may be continued, and
the abuses aforesaid may either be prevented or punished.

God save the King.
Imprinted at London by Robert Barker, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty: and by the Assigns of John Bill. M.DC.XXXIIII.


