DIEV ET MON DROIT HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon surmounted by a crown
and flanked by the English lion on one side and the Scottish unicorn on the
other
By the King.
A Proclamation declaring those of Scotland, who have entered, or shall enter
this Kingdom in a Warlike manner, and their Adherents, to be Rebels and
Traitors to His MAJESTY.
WHereas the Kings most Excellent Majesty, for a long time now together, by
all ways of Mildness and Clemency (beyond that of Sovereign Princes) has
endeavored to appease the disorders and Rebellious courses and proceedings of
His Subjects of Scotland, who upon pretenses of Religion have sought to shake
off His Regal Power and Government: His Majesty now finds that His Princely
Lenity toward them has produced no better effects then their encouragements
still to persist in their disloyalties and Rebellions against Him: And in these
their Insolences they have now so far proceeded as to take up Arms, to gather
Forces, and in a Hostile manner have entered and invaded this Kingdom of
England. And as for their pretenses of enjoying their Religion and Liberties,
His Majesty has already often assured them of His clear Intentions and
Resolutions therein. Wherefore His Majesty out of His continued Princely and
tender care of that His native Kingdom, has thought fit (by the advice of His
Privy Council) once more to make this public Declaration to the world, that
He has left no ways (beseeming a Prince) unattempted, whereby to reclaim and
reduce them to that duty and obedience which Loyal Subjects do owe to their
lawful Sovereign.

And therefore His Majesty does hereby further declare, That all those of
Scotland who have already entered, or hereafter shall presume to enter, (in an
Hostile or Warlike manner) into any part of this His Kingdom of England, and
their Adherents and Assistants and parts of the Kingdom without any consent,
nay without all knowledge of Us, Our Commissioner, or Council, and directly
contrary to many standing Laws at this day in force in that Kingdom, and yet
pretend violation of their Laws, as one of the main causes of their brainsick
distemners.

Here therefore We take God and the world to witness, We hold Our self forced
and constrained to Arm, not only to reclaim them, and to set our kingly
authority right again in that Our ancient and native Kingdom, but also for the
safety of this Kingdom, Our loyal Subjects in it, with their wives, children,
and goods, as well as Our own, against the rage and fury of these men and their
Covenant. And this We think fit to let you further know, that We hope in time
to make the best of them see that We will endure no such Covenant and Band in
Our Kingdom, to which We shall not consent: So the question is not now, whether
a Service Book to be received or not; nor whether Episcopal government shall
be continued, or Presbyteriall admitted, but whether We are their King or not:
For though in some of their Libels they give Us good words, and speak Us fair
for their own ends, especially in their last, Printed at Edinburgh, February
quarto 1639. yet some of them refuse both the Oath of Allegiance and Supremacy,
and publicly maintain that they are not obliged to take the same. Now how can
We think these men are dutiful and loyal in their hearts, that broach such
dangerous Opinions, or Religiously minded that teach such Rebellious Doctrine,
and so contrary to all which Protestant Divines teach toward the King and the
Civil Magistrate; Nay, they have infected diverse of their Contrymen (which
are come into other parts) with the same Venom; for three Scots-men taken in
Wales, are at this day Imprisoned for direct denial of Our Supremacy and
their Allegiance, saying, They cannot take those Oaths, because they have
sworn to the Covenant. But though We have been thus mild toward them, and
continued so long, yet We would not have any of them, or any of Our other
Subjects think, that We can or will permit Episcopal Government, established
by many Acts of Parliament in that Our Kingdom, to be abolished, seeing it is
known to the whole Christian world, that the same is most Christian in it self,
and most Peaceable for the Civil State, and most consonant to Monarchical
Government.

And We would have Our Subjects of that Kingdom consider, what will become of
the third Estate there in Parliament, if Episcopacie should be abrogated.

And further, We think fit to Declare unto you, and to the Christian World,
That by Our Intention of introducing the Service Book into that Kingdom, We
had not the least thought of Innovation of Religion in this or that, but merely
to have a Conformity with that Worship of God which is observed within both Our
other Kingdoms, though ill minded men have wrested some things in it to a
sinister sense.

We further give you to understand, that there is a large Declaration coming
forth, containing all the particular passages which have occurred in this
business from the very beginning, attested with their own foul Acts, to
disanull and shame their fair, but false words. But because this cannot so soon
be made ready, We hold it most expedient to let this short Declaration forerun
it, that Our loyal Subjects here and elsewhere, may not be infected with their
false, wicked, specious, but most Seditious Informations. For example sake in
their last Pamphlet (besides diverse other false, base, and fawning Passages)
there are these scandalous and most notorious untruths: As first, they say,
That We have committed the Arms We now take, and the Armies We now raise,
into the hands of professed Papists, which is not more dishonorable to Our
self, and the noble Persons entrusted by Us, then odiously and notoriously
false. Again they say, That some of power in the Hierarchy of England, have
been the cause of Our taking Arms to Invade Our native Kingdom, and of meddling
with their Religion; whereas it is most certain, that no one of them have done
any thing therein, but by Our own Princely direction and command. And for Arms,
it is notoriously known to all Our Council then present, That their Counsels
were for Peace, and have been the perswaders (as much as in them lay) of the
undeserved Moderation wherewith We have hitherto proceeded toward so great
Offenders.

And further they say, That they intend no Act of Hostility against England,
unless they shall be necessitated in their own defense. We would fain know,
defense of what? Is it of disobedience? Defense against whom? Is it not against
Us their True and Lawful Sovereign? If they will defend against Us, it ought
to be by Law, and not by Arms: That defense We shall never deny them; This by
Arms We shall never permit them. Now Our Laws which they seem so much to value,
are in a manner oppressed by them, in so much that Our Judges are so awed, as
that they dare hardly proceed according to Law.

With these, and the like mutinous Libels, We desire Our good Subjects should
not be infected, but that all of them might know the present necessity We have
to Arm Our Self, which is for no other end, save only for the safety and
security of this Our Kingdom, the reestablishment of Our Authorities in that,
and the suppressing of such as have misled and abused Our Subjects there, and
would (if not prevented) do the like here; but is no way to enforce any
Innovation of Religion established in that Kingdom, or any ways to infringe
the Laws thereof, or any of their Liberties whatsoever, which are according to
Law.

These are therefore to Will and Command all Our loving Subjects of this Our
Kingdom, That they receive no more of their seditious Pamphlets sent from
Scotland, or any other place concerning those affairs, which can have no other
use or influence then to draw the hearts of Our loyal People to the like
rebellious courses. And that such of Our Subjects here, as have already
received any of these Rebellious Pamphlets, do presently deliver them to the
next Justice of Peace, that he may send them to one of Our Secretaries, as both
they and the Justices of Peace will answer it at their uttermost perils.

And Our further Will and pleasure is, That this Our Proclamation and
Declaration be read in time of Divine Service in every Church within the
Kingdom, That all Our People to the meanest, may see the notorious carriages of
these men, and likewise the Justice and Mercy of all Our proceedings.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall the seven and twentieth day of February, in
the fourteenth year of Our Reign of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland. God
save the King.
Imprinted at London by ROBERT BARKER, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty: And by the Assigns of JOHN BILL. 1638.


