A COMMISSION for the well governing of Our people, inhabiting in
New Foundland; Or, Traffiquing in Bays, Creekes, or fresh Rivers there.

Imprinted at London by ROBERT BARKER, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
MAJESTY: And by the Assigns of JOHN BILL. M.DC.XXXIII.

HIS MAJESTY'S Commission, for the well-gouerning of His subjects inhabiting in
the New Foundland.
CHARLES by the grace of GOD, King of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith, etc. To all to whom these presents shall come, greeting.
Whereas the Region, or Country called New Foundland, has been acquired to
the Dominion of Our Progenitors; which We hold, and Our people have many
years resorted to those parts, where, and in the coasts adjoining they
employed themselves in Fishing, whereby a great number of Our people have been
set on work, and the Navigations and Mariners of Our Realm has been much
increased.

And Our Subjects resorting thither, one by the other, and the natives of those
parts were orderly and gently entreated, until of late some of Our Subjects of
the Realm of England, planting themselves in that Country, and there residing
and inhabiting, upon conceit, that for wrongs or injuries done there, either on
the Shore, or in the Sea adjoining, they cannot be here impeached, and the
rather, for that We, or Our Progenitors, have not hitherto given Laws to the
Inhabitants there, and by that example, Our Subjects resorting thither, iniure
one another, and use all manner of excess to the great hinderance of the
voyage, and common damage of this Realm: For preventing such inconueniencies
hereafter, We do hereby declare in what manner our people in New Foundland
and upon the Sea adjoining, and the Bays, Creekes, or fresh Rivers there,
shall be guided and governed: Do make and ordain the Laws following in the
things after specified; Commanding that the same be obeyed and put in execution.

First, if any man on the land there shall kill another, or if any shall
secretly or forcibly steal the goods of any other to the value of Forty
shillings; he shall be forthwith apprehended and arrested, detayned and brought
Prisoner into England, and the crime committed by him shall be made known to the
Earl Marshall of England for the time being: to whom the Delinquent shall be
delivered as Prisoner; And the said Earl Marshall shall take Cognizance of the
cause: And if he shall find by the testimony of two witnesses or more, that
the party had there killed a man not being at that time first assaulted by the
party slain, or that the killing were by mis-aduenture, or had stolen such
goods; the Delinquent shall suffer pain of death, and all the company shall
endeavor to apprehend such malefactor.

Secondly, That no Ballast, Prestones, or any thing else hurtful to the
Harbourers be thrown out to the prejudice of the said Harbors, but that it be
carried a shore, and laid where it may not do annoyance.

Thirdly, That no person whatsoever, either Fishermen or Inhabitants do
destroy, deface, or any way work any spoil or detriment to any Stage,
Cookeroome, Flakes, Spikes, Nails, or any thing else, that belongs to the
Stages whatsoever, either at the end of the voyage when he has done, and is
to depart the Country, or to any such Stages as he shall fall withal at his
coming into the Country, but that he of they content themselves with such
Stage or Stages only, as shall be needful for them: And that for the
repayring of such Stages, as he or they take, they shall fetch Timber out of
the woods, and not to do it with the ruining or tearing down of other Stages.

Fourthly, That according to the ancient custom every Ship or Fisher that
first enters a Harbor, in behalf of the Ship be Admiral of the said
Harbor, wherein for the time being, he shall reserve only so much Beach and
Flakes, or both, as is needful for the number of boats that he shall use,
with an overplus only for one Boat more then he needs, as a privilege for
his first coming.

And that every Ship coming after, content himself with what he shall have
necessary use for, without keeping or detaining any more to the prejudice of
others next coming.

And that any that are possessed of several places in several Harbors, with
intent to keep them all, before they can resolve upon which of them to choose,
shall be bound to resolve and send advice to such after comers in those places
as expect his resolution, and that within forty eight hours, if the weather
so serve, that the said after comers may likewise choose their places, and so
none receive prejudice by others delays.

Fifthly, That no person cut out, deface, or any way alter, or change the marks
of any Boats, or Traine-fats, whereby to defraud the right owners. And that no
person convert to his own use, the said Boats or Traine-fats so belonging to
others, without their consents, nor remove, nor take them from the places where
they be left by the owners, except in case of necessity, and then to give
notice thereof to the Admiral and others, whereby the right owners may know
what is become of them.

Sixthly, that no person do diminish, take away, purloyne, or steal any of the
Fish, or Train, or Salt which is put in Caske, Traynefats or Cookeroome, or
other house in any of the Harbors or Fishing places of the Country, or any
other provision belonging to the fishing trade, or to the Ships.

Seventhly, That no person set fire in any of the wood of the Country, or
work any detriment or destruction to the same, by Rynding of the Trees, either
for the seeling of Ships, holds, or for Rooms on Shore, or for any other
uses, Except for the covering of the roofes for Cookeroomes to dress their
meat in, and these Rooms not to extend above sixteen foot in length at the
most.

Eighthly. That no man cast Ancor, or ought else hurtful, which may breed
annoyance, or hinder the haleing of Seanes for bait in places accustomed
thereunto.

Ninthly, That no person rob the Netts of others out of any drift Boat or
Drouer for bait by night, nor take away any bait out of their Fishing-boats by
their Ships sides, nor rob or steal any of their Nets, or any part
thereof.

Tenthly, That no person do set up any Tavern for selling of Wine, Beer, or
strong Waters, Cider, or Tobacco, to entertain the Fishermen, because it is
found that by such means they are debauched, neglecting their labors, and
poor ill-gouerned men, not only spend most part of their shares before they
come home, upon which the life and maintenance of their wife and children
depends, but are likewise hurtful in diverse other ways, as by neglecting
and making themselves unfit for their labor, by purloyning and stealing from
their owners, and by making unlawful shifts to supply their disorders, etc.
which disorders they frequently follow since these occasions have presented
themselves.

Lastly, That upon the Sundays the Company assemble in meet places, and have
divine Service to be said by some of the Masters of the Ships, or some
others, which prayers shall be such as are in the Book of Common Prayer.

And because that speedy punishment may be inflicted upon the offenders against
those Laws and Constitutions;

We do ordain that every of the Majors of Southampton, Weymouth, and
Melcombe Regis, Lynne, Plymouth, Dartmouth, Estlow, Foye and Barnestable, for
the time being, may take Cognizans of all complaints made by any offender
against any of these Ordinances upon the land, and by oath of Witnesses,
examine the truth thereof, award amends to the parties grieved, and punish the
deliuquents by Fine, and Imprisonment, or either of them, and of their goods
sound in the parts of New Foundland, or in the Sea, cause satisfaction thereof
to be made by Warrants under their hands and seals.

And the Vice-Admirals in Our Counties of Southampton, Dorset, Deuon, and
Cornwall, upon complaint made of any of the pre^isses committed upon the Sea,
shall speedily and effectually proceed against the offenders.

Also We Will and Ordain, that these Laws and Ordinances, shall stand in
force, and be put in due execution, until We shall otherwise provide and
ordain.

And We do require the Admiral in every Harbor in this next Season
ensuing, calling together such as shall be in that Harbor, publicly to
proclaim these presents.

And that they also proclaim the same on the Shore.

In witness whereof We have caused these Our Letters to be made Patents.

Witness our self at Westminster, the tenth day of February, in the ninth
^eere of Our Reign. Willys.


