ORDERS AND DIRECTIONS, Together With a Commission for the better
Administration of Justice, and more perfect Information of His MAJESTY;

How, and by whom the Laws and Statutes tending to the relief of the Poor,
the well ordering and training up of youth in Trades, and the reformation of
Disorders and disordered persons, are executed throughout the Kingdom:

Which His Royal MAJESTY has commanded to be Published and Inquired of, by
the Body of His Privy Council, whom He has made principal Commissioners for
this purpose.

Imprinted at London by ROBERT BARKER, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
MAJESTY: And by the Assigns of JOHN BILL. 1630.

woodcut of the English coat of arms, 1630 HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

DIEV ET MON DROIT



A Commission to the Lords, and others of the Privy Council, for putting in
execution of the Laws and Statutes for relief of the poor, punishment of
Rogues, and employment of gifts to charitable uses, etc.
CHARLES by the grace of GOD King of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith, etc.

To the most Reverend Father in God, Our right trusty and well-beloved
Counselor, GEORGE Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, Primate and Metropolitan of
all England.

And to Our right trusty and well-beloved Counselor THOMAS Lord COVENTRIE, Lord
Keeper of Our great Seal of England.

And also to the right Reverend Father in GOD, Our right trusty and well-beloved
Counselor, SAMVEL Lord Archbishop of York, Primate and Metropolitan of
England.

And likewise to Our right trusty and well-beloved Counselor RICHARD Lord
WESTON, Our high Treasurer of England.

And also to Our right trusty and right well-beloved Cousins and Counselors,
EDWARD Viscount CONVVAY, Lord President of Our Privy Council.

HENRY Earl of Manchester, keeper of Our Privy Seal.

ROBERT Earl of Lindsey, Lord Great Chamberlain of England.

THOMAS Earl of Arundel and Surrey, Earl Marshal of England.

PHILIP Earl of Pembroke and Mountgomery Lord Chamberlain of Our Household.

THEOPHILUS Earl of Suffolk, Lord Warden of our Cinque Ports.

EDWARD Earl of Dorset, Lord Chamberlain to our dearest Consort the Queen.

WILLIAM Earl of Salisbury.

WILLIAM Earl of Exester.

JOHN Earl of Bridgewater.

JAMES Earl of Carlisle.

HENRY Earl of Holland.

WILLIAM Earl of Banbury.

HENRY Earl of Danby.

WILLIAM Earl of Morton.

THOMAS Earl of Kelly.

EDWARD Viscount Wimbledon.

DVDLEY Viscount Dorchester one of Our principal Secretaries of State.

THOMAS Viscount Wentworth, Lord President of Our Council in the North parts.

OLIVER Viscount Grandison.

HENRY Viscount Falkeland.

And likewise to the Reverend Father in God Our right trusty and well-beloved
Counselors, WILLIAM Lord Bishop of London.

RICHARD Lord Bishop of Winchester.

And also to Our right trusty and well-beloved Counselors, EDWARD Lord
Newburgh, Chancellor of our Duchy of Lancaster.

Sir THOMAS EDMVNDS, Knight, Treasurer of Our Household.

Sir HENRY VANE, Knight, Comptroller of Our Household.

Sir THOMAS IERMYN, Knight, Vice-Chamberlaine of Our Household.

Sir ROBERT NAVNTON, Knight, Master of Our Court of Wards and Liueries.

Sir JOHN COKE, Knight, one other of Our principal Secretaries of State.

Sir FRANCIS COTTINGTON, Baronet, Chancellor of Our Exchequer.

Sir JULIUS CAESAR, Knight, Master of the Rolls.

And Sir WILLIAM ALEXANDER, Knight, greeting.

WHereas diverse good Laws and Statutes, most necessary for these times, have,
during the happy Reign of Queen ELIZABETH, and of Our late Father of blessed
memory, and since our coming to the Crown of England, been with great
wisdom, peitie, and policy, made and enacted in Parliament, as well for the
charitable relief of aged and impotent poor people, not able by their labors
to get their livings and for the training up of Youth in honest and profitable
Trades and Mysteries, by putting them forth to be Apprentices, as also for the
setting to work of idle persons, who being of ability to work, in some kind
or other, do nevertheless, refuse to labor, and either wander up and down
the City and Country begging, or which is worse, maintain themselves by
filching and stealing; And for the punishment of sundry Rogues and Vagabonds,
and setting of them to work: And for the suppressing of that odious and
loathsome sin of Drunkenness; And the repressing of idleness, the root of
so many evils: The due execution of which, and the like laws and Statutes,
would prevent and cut off many offenses and crimes of high nature.

ANd whereas we are informed that the defect of the execution of the said good
and politic Laws and Constitutions in that behalf made, proceeds
espicially from the neglect of duty in some of Our Justices of the Peace and
other Officers, Magistrates, and Ministers of the Peace, within the several
Counties, Cities and towns Corporate of this our Realm of England, and
Dominion of Wales, to whom the care and trust of seeing the said Laws to be
put in execution, is by the said Laws principally committed, which
remissness and neglect of duty does grow and arise from this, That by the
most of the said Laws, there are little or no Penalties or Forfcitures at all
inflicted upon the said Justices of Peace, Magistrates, Officers and Ministers
for not performing their duties in that behalf, or if any be, yet partly by
reason of the smallness thereof, and partly by reason of their power and
authority in their several places, whereby they hold others under them in
awe, there are few or no Complaints or Informations made of the neglects and
want of due execution of the Offices of the said Justices and other Ministers;
and although the care and diligence of our Judges and Justices of Assise be
never so great, yet by reason of the shortness of their Assizes and Sessions
in every County, and multiplicitie of business, they neither have due
information of the said neglects, nor in those times, can take such exact
courses as were requisite for redress of such general abuses and
inconveniences so highly importing the public good of this Our Realm, by
reason whereof the said Justices of Peace, Magistrates, Officers and Ministers,
are now of late in most parts of this Our Kingdom grown secure in their said
negligence, and the said politic and necessary Laws and Statutes laid aside
or little regarded as Laws of small use and consequence, whereas upon the
present making of the said Laws, the same being then duly executed, as also
at this day in some Counties and parts of this Our Kingdom, where some
Justices of Peace and other Magistrates do duly and diligently execute the
same, there evidently appears great reformation, benefit and safety to
redound to the Commonwealth, And likewise when as there was care taken, and
diligence used to have the Laws concerning charitable uses, well executed, and
all pious gifts to be employed according to the good intent of the Donors,
these poor people were better relieved then now they are: All which We taking
into Our Princely care, for the preservation of the common Peace of this
Realm, the performance of men's pious intentions in their gifts of Charity,
and the general good and quiet of Our Subjects.

After long and mature deliberation, finding that there is no better ways or
means to have the said Laws and Statutes put in full execution, then by
committing the trust and oversight thereof to the special care and industry
of certain persons of principal Place, Dignity and Order near unto Our
Person; who upon their diligent inquiry how the said Laws and Statutes are
put in execution, may be able upon all occasions from time to time to give Us
particular information thereof, and by their approved Wisdoms, experience
and Judgments, give Directions and Instructions from time to time for the
better execution of the said Statutes.

Know ye therefore that We out of that long experience and full assurance We
have had of the great integrity, wisdom, fidelity and industry of you, and
every of you; Have constituted, authorized and appointed you to be Our
Commissioners, and by these presents do constitute, authorize and appoint, and
strictly require you, or any four or more of you Our Commissioners either by
examination upon Oath, or without Oath, or by all and every such good and
lawful means as to you, or any four or more of you, in your Wisdoms and
Judgments shall seem convenient and requisite from time to time from
henceforth to make Inquiry, and thereby to inform your selves how all and
every the Laws and Statutes now in force, which any way concern the relief
of impotent or poor people, the binding out of Apprentices, the setting to
work of poor children, and such other poor people, as being able or willing
to work, have no stock or means to employ themselves; The compelling and
forcing such lazy and idle persons to work, as being of bodies able and
strong, do nevertheless refuse to labor; the maintenance, government, and
well ordering of houses of Correction and other places for relief of poor
indigent and impotent people, the Rating, Collecting, and employment of all
such Sums, as by the Statute of the three and fourtieth of ELIZABETH, are
appointed for the relief of Soldiers and Mariners, the punishment or setting
on work of Rogues and Vagabonds: And all Laws and Statutes now in force for
the repressing of Drunkenness and Idleness, the reforming of abuses committed
in Innes and Alehouses, the abridging of the number of Alehouses, and the well
ordering of such as be licensed, the keeping of Watches and Wards duly, and
how other public services for God, the King, and the Commonwealth, are put
in practice and executed.

To which end and purpose, to you Our Commissioners, or any six or more of
you, We give full power and authority from time to time hereafter, to give
such Directions and Instructions, and by all other good and lawful means to
set down, and give such Orders and Directions, as that all and every the said
Laws and other necessary Statutes may be duly and effectually executed, and
the Pains and Penalties thereof levied and employed, according to the purport
and true meaning of the same Laws.

And whereas no Nation of the world has provided more liberally, or ordained
better Laws for due employment of Lands, Goods, and Stocks of money, given to
charitable uses, then this Our Kingdom of England has done: Yet nevertheless
the said Bounties and charitable Gifts have not been employed according to the
mind and intent of the Giuers, by reason of some Devices, Frauds, Breach of
Trust, Aim at private Gain, and partly by the negligence of those that have
been trusted to perform the same.

Therefore Our Will and express Pleasure is, That those Statutes of the thirty
ninth and forty third of Elizabeth, and all other Laws and Statutes
concerning Hospitals, Almes-houses, Meisons de Dieu, and other pious Donations,
Collections, or public Gifts for the benefit of the Poor, or public Works,
be strictly inquired and put in execution. And all Deeds of Foundations,
Charters, Wills, Devices, Dispositions of Lands, Goods, Annuities, or Rents,
given, appointed, or intended to any the Houses aforesaid, or to any charitable
use or public Work, be diligently sought out and discovered, to the end there
may be an employment of all the Profits, according to the Will and Mind of
the Donors or Founders.

And We do further by these Presents, give full power and authority unto you,
or any six or more of you, to call unto you for your assistance in the
Premises, when you shall see it needful, all, or any of Our Justices of
Assize, as often as you shall see cause, and to give such Directions and
Instructions by your Letters, or otherwise, as well to Our said Justices of
Assize, Oyer and Termyner, and Jail delivery, for their several Circuits: As
also to Our Justices, Majors, Bayliffes, and other head Officers, within Cities
and Boroughs, Clerks of the Assise and Sessions, and other Officers and
Ministers within Our several Counties and Shires of this our Realm of England
and Dominion of Wales, and the several Divisions of the same, as to you, or
any six or more of you in your wisdoms shall seem meet and requisite, and
shall be agreeable to the Laws and Statutes of this Our Realm, for the
better execution of the Laws and Statutes in the time to come. All which
Directions, Instructions, and Orders, at any time or times hereafter so to be
made or taken by you, or any six or more of you, by force of these presents;
We Will and straightly Charge and Command by these presents, to be sincerely
and duly from time to time, obeyed, observed, and kept, by all and every
Officer and Officers, Justice and Justices, Person and Persons, to whom it
shall appertain.

And We do hereby further will and require you, that you or any four or more
of you, do from time to time give unto Us particular and true information of
the care and industry of Our Justices of Peace in their several Divisions,
Majors, Bayliffes, and head Officers, in their several Cities, and Towns
Corporate, as upon the said inquiry you shall find to be diligent in putting
the said Laws, Statutes, Orders and Directions in execution, That so by their
service and your report, they appearing to deserve well of their King and
Country, may receive not only good acceptance at Our hands, but all due
encouragement and comfort to continue in their well doings; And if contrariwise
you shall find any of Our said Justices of Peace, or other the persons before
named to be negligent and remiss in their several places and duties touching
the performance and execution of the said Laws and Statutes committed to their
Charge, or the Orders and Directions given by you, or any six of you for the
better execution of the said Statutes: Then Our pleasure is, that you do
likewise certify the names of such as you shall find so remiss and
negligent, that accordingly order may be taken for their removing and
displacing out of the Commission of the Peace, as men unworthy of their said
Trust and Places; As also deserving to receive such further Punishment in Our
Court of Starchamber, or otherwise as may be by Law inflicted upon them.

And further we do by these Presents give unto you, or any six or more of
you, full power and authority to do and execute all and every other lawful
and necessary Act and Acts, thing and things for the better and more due
Execution of the Premises or any of them, as you or any six, or more of you,
shall in your Wisdoms and Judgments think to be fit and convenient.

And because you that are attendants upon Our Person, or otherwise employed in
Our Services cannot at all times be in Person in the several Shires of this
Our Kingdom, to execute this Our Commission in such sort as we have appointed
it: And for that it will be very fit and requisite for you to have persons of
Trust under you, who may faithfully assist you in the execution of this Our
Commission.

We do therefore give unto you for your better Aid and Assistance, and the
better performance of this Our Service, full power and authority from time to
time, to Assign, Appoint and Constitute by your writing under your Hands and
Seals or the Hands and Seals of any six, or more of you, such sufficient
meet persons as you, or any six of you, in your discretions shall from time
to time think fit and appoint to be your Deputies in every or any County,
City, Borough or town Corporate of this Our Kingdom of England, or Dominion
of Wales.

And We do give unto such persons, so to be by you deputed, assigned, and
appointed, as aforesaid, or to any two, three, or more of them full power and
authority to do and execute in our said Counties, Cities, Boroughs, and Towns
Corporate, as well within Liberties as without; All and every thing and things,
which by virtue of this Our Commission, is to you our principal Commissioners
entrusted and committed, or which you, or any of you Our Commissioners, if you
were personally present, might or ought to do; They your said Deputies
pursuing such Directions and Jnstructions from time to time as you or any six
of you shall give unto them in writing; And the better to enable them so to
do, you shall deliver to such deputies as you shall make in every County,
City, or Town corporate as aforesaid, a duplicate, or true transcript of this
Our Commission, subscribed with your hands, or under the hands of six of you
at the least.

And We do further by the tenor of these presents, will and command, and do
give full power and authority to Our Lord Chancelour, or Lord Keeper of Our
great Seal for the time being, to cause several Commissions to be made
forth, under Our great Seal of England, to such persons of trust and quality,
as any six, or more of you shall from time to time nominate unto him, and
shall so signify unto him by writing under your hands to the same tenor and
effect, in every material thing, as in these Our Letters Patents is expressed,
with a clause to be inserted in every such Commission and Commissions,
commanding such persons so to be nominated, that they certify all their
proceedings thereupon to you Our foresaid Commissioners, or to any six of you,
at such times and places, as you, or any six of you shall appoint.

Jn witness whereof, We have caused these Our Letters to be made Patents:
Witness Our self at Westminster the fifth day of January, in the sixth year of
Our Reign.
Preface.
FOr the better administration of Justice, and more perfect Information of His
Majesty, how, and by whom the Laws and Statutes tending to the relief of the
poor, and the reformation of disorders and disordered persons are executed
throughout the Kingdom; His Royal Majesty has Commanded this Commission
aforesaid, together with these Orders and Directions following, to be published
by the Body of His Privy Council, whom He has made principal Commissioners
for this purpose.

ORDERS.
I.
THAT the Justices of Peace of every Shire within the Realm do divide
themselves, and allot amongst themselves what Justices of the Peace, and what
Hundreds shall attend monthly at some certain places of the Shire. And at
this day and place, the High Constables, Petty-Constables, and Churchwardens,
and Overseers for the Poor of those Hundreds, shall attend the said Justices.
And there inquiry shall be made, and Information taken by the Justices, how
every of these Officers in their several places have done their duties in
Execution of the Laws mentioned in the Commission annexed, and what persons
have offended against any of the said Laws.

II.
WHere neglect or defect is found in any of the said Officers, in making their
Presentiments, condign punishment to be inflicted upon them by the Justices
according to Law.

III.
WHen offenses are presented at one meeting, then the penalties of the Laws
offended, to be leauied and brought to the Justices at their next meeting.

IIII.
WHen the penalties are leauied, the Justices are to take care that the same be
employed accordingly as by the Statutes are appointed.

V.
FOr encouragement to men that do inform and prosecute others for offending
against these Laws or any of them, liberty to be left to the Justices of
Peace that do meet to reward the Informer or Prosecutor, out of part of the
money leauied upon his, or their Presentiments, or Information.

Though the Statute do not prescribe this, yet this is not against the Law
that gives the penalty to the Poor, which penalty nor no part thereof would
else come unto the poor but by this means.

VI.
THat the several Justices of Peace of every Shire, do once every three
months certify an account in Writing to the high Sheriff of the County, of
their proceedings in this way, whom they have punished, what they have leuyed,
and how they have employed it.

VII.
THat the High Sheriff within fourteen days after this Account delivered,
do send the same over to the Justices of Assize for that County, or to one of
them, and the Justice or Justices that receive the same, to certify it in the
beginning of every Term next after, to the Lords Commissioners. And if any of
the Justices of Peace shall fail to make such account to the Sheriff, then
the Sheriff shall certify such default to the Lords Commissioners.

VIII.
THe Justices of Assize in every Circuit, are to enquire, and specially to
mark, what Justices of the Peace are careful and diligent in execution of
these Laws, and the Directions given, and who are negligent and remiss. And
what other things of note happen in their Circuits, to make report thereof to
the King, upon their return from their Circuits every half year.

DIRECTIONS.
I.
THat the Lords of Manors and Towns, take care that their Tenants, and the
parishoners of every Town may be relieved by work, or otherwise at home, and
not suffered to straggle, and beg up and down in their parishes.

II.
THat Stewards to Lords and Gentlemen, in keeping their Leetes twice a year,
do specially enquire upon those Articles that tend to the reformation, or
punishment of common offenses and abuses: As of Bakers and Brewers, for
breaking of Assizes: Of Forestallers, and Regraters: Against Tradesmen of all
sorts, for selling with under weights, or at excessive prises, or things
unwholesome, or things made in deceit: Of people, breakers of houses, common
thieves, and their Receivers; haunters of Tauerns, or Alehouses; those that go
in good clothes, and fare well, and none knows whereof they live; those that
be night-walkers; builders of Cottages, and takers in of Inmates; offenses of
Victuallers, Artificers, Workmen and Laborers.

III.
THat the poor children in every Parish be put forth Apprentices to husbandry,
and other handy-crafts, and money to be raised in the Parishes for placing
them, according to the Law; and if any party shall refuse to take the said
Apprentice, being put out according to the Law; such party as shall refuse to
take the said Apprentice, to be bound over to the next quarter Sessions, or
Assizes, and there to be bound to his good behavior, or otherwise ordered, as
shall be found fit.

IIII.
THat the Statute of Laborers, for retaining of Servants, and ordering of
Wages, betwixt the Servant and the Master be not deluded by private Contracts,
before they come to the Statutes, and the common fashion of Essoyning many
absent, not to be allowed of course, as is used.

V.
THat the weekly taxations for relief of the Poor, and other purposes
mentioned in the Statute of 43. Eliz. be in these times of scarcity raised to
higher Rates in every Parish, then in times to fore were used. And
Contributions had from other Parishes, to help the weaker Parishes, especially
from those places where depopulations have been, some good Contribution to
come, for help of other Parishes. And where any money or Stock has been, or
shall be given to the relief of the Poor in any parish, such Gift to be no
occasion of lessening the Rates of the Parish.

VI.
THat the petty Constables in all Parishes, be chosen of the abler sort of
Parishioners, and the office not to be put upon the poorer sort, if it may be.

VII.
WAtches in the night, and Warding by day, and to be appointed in every Town
and village, for apprehension of rogues, and vagabonds, and for safety and good
order.

VIII.
AND because it is found by daily experience, that the remissness and
negligence of petty-Constables is a great cause of the swarming of Rogues and
Beggars, therefore the high Constables in their several Divisions are
specially to be charged to look unto the petty-Constables, that they use
diligence in their Offices, and the High Constables to present to the Justices
of Peace, the defaults of the petty Constables, for not punishing the Rogues,
or not presenting those that are Relieuers of the Rogues and Beggars, the Law
inflicting a Penalty upon the Constable for not punishing them, and upon such
party as shall relieve them.

IX.
IF in any Parish there be found any persons that live out of Service, or that
live idly and will not work for reasonable wages, or live to spend all they
have at the Alehouse, those persons to be brought by the High Constables, and
petty Constables to the Justices at their meetings, there to be ordered and
punished as shall be found fit.

X.
THat the Correction houses in all Counties may be made adjoining to the
common Prisons, and the Jailer to be made Governor of them, that so he may
employ to work Prisoners committed for small causes, and so they may learn
honestly by labor, and not live idly and miserably long in prison, whereby
they are made worse when they come out then they were when they went in, and
where many houses of Correction are in one County, one of them at least to be
near the Jail.

XI.
THat no man harbor Rogues in their Barnes, or Outhouseings. And the wandering
persons with women and children, to give account to the Constable or Justice of
Peace, where they were married, and where their children were Christened; for
these people live like Saluages, neither marry nor bury nor Christen, which
licentious liberty makes so many delight to be Rogues and Wanderers.

XII.
ANd because the High ways in all Counties of England are in great decay,
partly so grown, for that men think there is no course by the Common Law, or
Order from the State to amend the same: And the worke-dayes appointed by the
Statute are so omitted, or idly performed, that there comes little good by
them. Therefore the Justices of Peace at these monthly meetings, are to take
special care of: and not only to cause the Surueyors of the High ways to
present the same; but by their own view, to inform themselves, that at the
next Quarter Sessions after every meeting, they may present all such neglects,
and offenses (as upon their own view) and the Offenders there to be punished
according to Law.

Imprinted at London by ROBERT BARKER, Printer to the KINGS most Excellent
MAJESTY: and by the Assigns of JOHN BILL.

M.DC.XXX.


