(...) of the Head-lands of England* they (...) one from another, agreeing with
the plot of the description of the Country, with their several distances, as
follows.
FRom Holly Island to the Sowter, is South, Southeast, And in distance 17.
leagues, and a mile. From the Sowter to Whitby is Southeast. And in distance
from one point to another 12. leagues. From Whitby to Flambrough-head is
South-east and half a point Southerly, 8. leagues. From Flambrough-head to the
Sporne, is South, South-east Easterly 13. leagues and a mile. From the Sporne
to Cromar is South-east and by East, 24. leagues, and a mile. From Cromar to
Winterton-nes, is Southeast and by South, 4. leagues. From Winterton-nes, to
Caster-nes, is South, South-east, 2. leagues, and a mile. From Caster-nes to
Layestof is South, 3. leagues, and of a league. From Layestof to East-nes is
South, and half a point to the Westwards, 1. league, 2. miles. From East-nes
to Orforth-nes is South and by West, 6. leagues, and a mile. From Orforth-nes
to the North-foreland, is South, and one third of a point to the Westwards 15.
leagues, and mile. From the North-foreland, to the South-foreland is South, 6.
leagues, and one mile. From the South-foreland to Dunge-nes is Southwest, and
one fourth part of a point to the Southwards, 7. leagues. From Dunge-nes to
Beach is West, Southwest, and one fourth part of a point to the Southwards 13.
leagues. From Beach to Dune noze is West, Southwest, and three quarters of a
point to the Westward 24. leagues 2. miles From Dune-noze to Portland, is West,
and by South Southerly, 16. leagues of a mile. From Portland to the Start, is
West, Southwest, and one fifth part of a point to the Westwards, 18. leagues, 2.
miles. From the Start to the Ram, is West, and one fourth part of a point to
the Northwards, 6. leagues From the Ram to the Dudman, is West, Southwest,
and one sixth part of a point to the Westwards, 8. leagues From the Dudman to
the Lizard, is West Southwest, and one third part of a point to the Southwards,
9. leagues. From the Lizard to Lands-end is West, Northwest Northerly, 7.
leagues. From Lands-end to Milford is North, and two third parts of a point to
the Eastwards, 31. leagues, 2. miles. From Milford to S. David's head is North,
and half a point to the Westwards, 5. leagues, mile. From S. David's head to
Beardsie is North and by East, and one eight part of a point to the Eastwards,
12. leagues mile. From Beardsie to Holy head is North, and one sixth part of a
point to the Westwards, 9. leagues. From Holy head to the I Will of Man is North,
and by East, and one fifth part of a point to the Northwards, 26. leagues.
We whose names are hereunder written, being called before the right
worshipful Sir Julius Caesar Knight, Judge of the Kings Majesty's high Court
of Admiraltie; And there impannelled and sworn upon a Jury to set down the
bounds and limits, how far the Kings Chambers, havens, or ports, on the Sea
coasts do extend: Do hereby certify and set down (according to our best
knowledge, and understanding,) That his Highness said Chambers, Havens or
Ports, are all the Sea coasts within a straight line drawn from one Headland
to the next Headland, throughout this Realm of England. And for the better
understanding thereof have made a plot of the same, and have thereunto prefixed
this our schedule, showing how every Headland does bear upon a right line the
one from the other, according to the said plot.

Dated the fourth day of March. Anno Dom. 1604. And in the second year of the
reign of our sovereign Lord King James, etc. Thomas Milton. William Bygate.
John Burrell. William Jones. Peter Hills. Michael Edmonds. James Woodcott.
Thomas Beast. William Iuye. John Skinner. John Wyldes. Henry Hanken. William
Case.


Imprinted at London by Robert Barker, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty.

ENGLAND

map of England's coastal headlands


