AN ANSWER TO THE TEN COVNTER DEMANDS PROPOVNDED BY T. DRAKES Preacher of the
Word at H. and D. in the County of ESSEX.

By Will. Euring.

PROVE. 9.12. If thou be wise thou shall be wise for thy self, and if thou be a
scorner thou alone shall suffer.

Printed in the year 1619.

To the Reader.
IT is the manner of some quarrelsome persons, that being beaten by one
adversary, too strong for them, they are not quiet in their minds till they
have got another, with whom they hope to deal well enough; and to beat the
former upon his back, wrecking upon him all that anger which they have
harbored in their heart against the other, but could not utter as they
desired. So it seems to be with this man: who having had of late (as it is
reported) much combating with the Morris-dauncing-Papists and Athiests in his
parish, whereof lately he was Minister: And finding them too hard for him; and
that instead of being sheep to follow him, they came with open mouth like
wolves both against the sheep and Shepherd: he has thought it best, seeing
these wolves thus coming to save himself by flying to an other place; leaving
the pore sheep in the same fould with the wolves, to shift for themselves as
they could. But not resting so, he has bethought him of an other sort of
adversaries, with whom he hopes more easily to deal: and these are the poor
Separatists; against whom he has also those Morris-dauncers, and many greater
then they to take his part. Them he encountreth stoutly with Ten
Counter-Demands (as he calls them) with which as with so many iron horns, he
hopes so to shake the silly Separatists, as not to leave them a whole bone in
their skin. But why does he call them Counter-Demands? Not because he has
answered, but only seen, as I hear, 7 Demands of theirs, some good space
since propounded by the^. These he should rather have answered, in my judgment,
if he could, for the defense of his Church Communion, Government, Ministry,
and Worship. But it seems he had rather ask, then answer questions (as what
bungler cannot better strike then fence?) and so his meaning is, to set these
his Ten Counter-demands against their Seven Demands, that so they might knock
heads together, to see whose is hardest. Since then it must be so, I will first
set down those Seven, and after answer his Ten, simply, without all doubt,
yet as well as I can: but plainly, and distinctly as he desires: Entreating
thee, good Reader, to bear with my vnschollership, for I have not been brought
up among the Muses, but Mariners: and am unwillingly, though particularly,
drawn hereunto by his importunity.

Quest. 1 Whether the Lord Jesus Christ have in his last will and Testament
given unto, and set in his Church, sufficient ordinary Offices, with their
callings, works, and maintenance, for the administration of his holy things;
and for the ordinary instruction, guidance, and service of his Church to the
end of the world, or no?

2. Whether the Offices of Pastors, Teachers, Elders, Deacons, and Helpers be
those offices appointed in the Testament of Christ? or whether the present
ecclesiastical offices of Archbishops. Lord-Bishops, Suffragans, Deanes,
Priests, Vicars,, Archdeacons, Prebendaries, Canons, Gospellers, Petty-Canons,
Epistlers, Virgerers, Queristers, Organ-Players, Parsons, Curates, Chancelors,
Commissaries, Proctors, Registers, Appariters or Sumners, Churchwardens,
Doctors of Divinity, Questmen or Sidemen, Deacons or half Priests, Chaplins or
house-Priests, Clerks, Sextons, and the rest now had and retained in the
Cathedral and Parishionall Assemblies of the Land, be those Offices appointed
in Christ's last will and testament, or no?

3 Whether the calling, and entrance into the ecclesiastical offices last
before named, with their administrations, and maintenance now had and retained
in England, be the manner of calling, administration, and maintenance, which
Christ has appointed for the offices of his Church, or no?

4 Whether every true Church of Christ, be not a company of people called and
separated out from the world and false worship and ways thereof, by the word
of God, and joined together in the fellowship of the Gospel, by voluntary
profession of the faith, and obedience of Christ.

5 Whether the sacraments, being seals of the righteousness which is by faith,
may be administered unto any other, but to the faithful and their seed, or in
any other ministry or manner then is prescribed, and appointed by Jesus Christ
the Apostle and high priest of our profession? And whether they be not
otherwise administered in the parish assemblies of England at this day, or no?

6 Whether the book of Common prayer, with the feasts, fasts, stinted prayers,
holly days, and leiturgy prescribed therein and used in the assemblies, be
the true worship of God commanded in his word, or the devise and invention of
man for Gods worship and service.

7 Whether all people and Churches without exception, be not bound in religion,
only to receive and submit unto that Ministry, worship and order, which Christ
as Lord and King has given unto, and appointed in his Church: or whether any
may receive and join unto another devised by man for the worship and service
of God: and consequently whether they that join to the present Ecclesiastical
ministry, worship, and order of the Cathedral and Parishionall Assemblies, can
be assured by the word of God, that they join to the former, or dayned by
Christ, and not to the latter, devised by man for the worship and service of
God.

AN ANSWER TO TEN Counter-Demands, Propounded by T. DRAKES, Preacher of the
Word at H. and D. in the County of ESSEX.
REverend sir, you have given us here a Counter blow: and as it is reported,
you yet think to give us, if not a greater, yet another Blow, but you
earnestly desired to have these your Ten Counterblowes directly and distinctly
ansvvered; which I will labor to do God assisting me.

Demand 1. Your first Demand is, Whether our separation from your Church or
Church-assembles of England, can in any probability be pleasing unto God,
seeing it has had (say you) such unhappy beginnings, and so many dismal and
fatal events: the first founder of it coming to Judas his shameful and
fearful end, hanging him self: and the second (you say) totally recanting and
coming again to you: as diverse of our proselites do daily, etc.

Answer.
This is the sum or ground of your first Demand other words there are, here
and there dropped from your pen, which give no strength at all to your demand,
and therefore I pass them by, and answer, yea. Though this be true that you
have said, yet may our separation from your Church or parish-asse^blies of
England be pleasing unto God: and for proof hereof consider what follovveth.

This your demand is like as if a Cananite or Philistim should thus have
demanded of the Israelites. Whether is it like that the wars you hold against
us, can in any probability be pleasing unto God, seeing that they have had such
unhappy success, with so many dismal and fatal events? some were burnt
with fire, Nom. 11.1 some sunk into the earth alive, Nom. 16.32.33 some were
destroyed of serpents. Nom. 21.6. some by the enemies svvord. Nom. 14.45. some
by the svvord of their own brethren. Exodus 32 27. Even Moses and Aaron, your
first and greatest, yea principal pillars of greatest reckoning, died in the
desert for their sin. And of six hundred thousand men that came out of Egypt
to fight against us, Exodus 12.37. only two men are left alive. Nom. 26.64, 65
etc. What think you Sir? Was this war in any probability pleasing unto God?
if you say yea, you have ansvvered your demand your self: and discovered your
own folly: for thus you see a Pagan might have pleaded against Israel, Gods
true Church then, with as much color and more truth, then you that are
called a Christian, can do against us now: and thus I think your first
demand is sufficiently ansvvered.

But it may be sir, you will not be thus satisfied, without your particulars
be examined. M. Bolton, which (you say) was the first founder of our
separation, hanged himself, as did Judas: well. Prove you as much for Boiton
as I do for Judas. As we deny Bolton to have been the first founder of our
separation, so sure I am, that Judas was one of the first and principallest
publishers of the gospel of Christ: for he was numbered with the Apostles,
being one of the twelve and had received fellowship in their ministration,
Act. 1.17.

And will you now therefore call the Gospel and Christianity into question,
as whether it be of God or no? because this Judas hanged himself: if no, what
weight then is in your demand? And now I pray you sir consider also that this
M. Bolto^, one of the Elders of that separated Church where of M. Fits was
pastor in the beginning of Queen Elizabeth's reign, first revolted at Paul's
Cross, falling back again to you: and was reproved and excommunicated for
this, by that separated Church: and afterward, not having grace to return or
repent hanged himself. This being so M. Boltons martyrdom is little for the
credit of your cause, or Church, whereof he dyed a member.

The second you say totally recanted etc. And this you note to be Brown. And
say I, so did Demas. 2. Tim. 4.10. which sometime was a fellow-helper with
Paul as well as Luke Col. 4.14. Phil. 2.4. As diverse others in all ages have
done, who loved this present world more then God. Can it not therefore stand
with your liking Sir, that the Gospel which Christ or Paul preached, can in
any probability be pleasing unto God, because Judas hanged himself, and Demas
totally recanted it. I pray you Sir consider what the Apostle says; What
though some have not believed or been unfaithful, shall their unfaithfulness,
make the faith of God without effect? God forbid. Romans 3.3.4.

And again, consider I pray you: Christian religion was at a lovv ebb when
so many went back from Christ, that he said to the twelve, will ye also leave
me. Ioh. 6.66. yet you see still Christianity florisheth: and we, to our
exceeding great comfort do behold it. And for us, though many bad ones have gone
a way, yet God brings better in their place daily. And thus I think your
first Demand is directly and distinctly ansvvered, as you desire. Only this I
will further add concerning M. Brown, that he has so left it in practice, as
to show the corruption of his heart; yet so holds it in professed judgment,
as shows the strength of the truth, still upholding it self in so evil a
conscience: who professes in keeping his Ministry, that he lives of the
spoils of Babylon.

And for Master Boulton, although you think you have great advantage against us
in his case and some others, who have fallen from us: yet if things be rightly
considered, the contrary will appear. And as Abimelech king of Gerar, when
he reproved Abraham for denying Sarah to be his wife, had more need to have
reproved himself for his want of the fear of God, and of common humanity, by
which pore Abraham was driven to that strayt: so you, in upbraiding us with
these men's falls, had more need reprove your selves, and your own most
unmercifull dealings toward us, by which diverse are forced to deny the truth
as Abraham did his wife, against their consciences: vvhereuppo^ follows most
fearful despair and sometimes such woeful events as this upon Boltons
Apostacy was; and so you are before the Lord, made guilty both of the blood of
the bodies, and of the souls of those miserable men.

And whereas you have a marginall note of one M. Nowel in Warwickshire; you
are the first from whom I ever heard any thing of that man, and therefore this
is all that I can say, If he were not fully persuaded of the truth in that
estate wherein he stood, but dyed with a troubled mind seeking the truth:
what does this make either against us, or for you? I see nothing, let wise men
judge etc.

2 Demand. Your second demand is, as I understand it. Whether our profession,
religion, and discipline, as it stands in opposition to your Parishassembles
in England and the rest of the reformed Churches, can be of God, or have any
approbation from God: seeing that it has no virtue, power, and efficacy in it,
(as the Gospel preached in your parishassemples through Gods blessings
abundantly has) to win, convert, and draw unto our party, and profession,
Atheists, Papists, Heretics, rude, profane etc.

2 Answer. To this your demand I answer yea: our profession religion and
discipline (as you call it) may be of God, and have approbation from God,
though not converting any such. And if it be so of God, as it be approved in
his word, it is enough, though we have not converted any at all; and for proof
hereof, as also for further answer to your demand, consider this that
follovveth.

Your demand is like as if a Cananite should thus have demanded of Noah. Genesis
6. Can this thy Arc building, be of God, or have any approbation from God,
seeing that in all this time there appears neither virtue, power, nor
efficacy to vvin, convert, and dravv unto thy party any at all? for thou can
hardly show any one person converted unto thee by thy preaching, or Arc
building these hundred and twenty years? what think you Sir? could Noah his
Arc building be of God, or have any, etc

Also, I pray you Sir consider with your self what answer you would have
made, if any of your Morris-dancing papists or profane Atheists (with whom
you, but lately, were much cumbered) should have demanded the like of you?
Your administration, and ministerial office, had so little virtue, power, and
efficacy in it, among them, that you were glad to leave them unconverted and
come away from them: and it may be, they deemed your ministry not to be of God,
nor to have any approbation from God: and you your self also peradventure,
thinking the same thing, and seeing also that those to whom you sued for
redress, could not or would not give any more virtue, power, or efficacy to
your Ministry, and office, you took the best course, as you thought, even to
leave them in their Idolatry and prophanes and come away from them: for the
which I would have you mind well and consider what the Lord says. Zacha.
^^.17. surely sir, seeing that you thus deem of things by the effects, you can
not but think very hardly of your self: considering the small effect your
ministry has wrought, especially amongst your Morris-dauncers.

And yet for further answer to your demand, consider sir, we are a poor
vveak despised people here in England, hated and persecuted of all, or the most
part in the land: and therefore, if we have any meetings or coming together
on the Lords day? they must be very private for fear of such persecuting
adversaries as cannot endure (and are ignorant of) the truth of Gods ordinances
to be taught and practiced, so that Papists, Atheists, and such like profane,
come not at our exercises: and how is it possible we should convert any that
come not to hear us? If we should demand of you, how many Turks and Saracens
have been converted in your Parish assemblies, what answer would you give
us, that will not answer your self.

2 To let pass the Churches in this way, beyond the seas, which have their
more free meetings, and able ministeries, and where this blessing of God in
converting men, is more seen, then, I think, in any of the Parishes that ever
you your self were minister of (though you have been in more then a good
many or then a good Pastor should or would be) I may bouloly say, that we,
how fevv or mean soever we are; do convert more to our Churches thou you do
to yours. All these Atheists, Heretics, and prophaine persons were as well
of your Church before their conversion, as after: and for the Papists, either
they come to hear you, and then they are of your Church also, namely
Church-Papists, or not: and then, how do you convert them by your ministry.
Besides, it is evident, that the number of Papists do daily increase in the
land infinitely; such is your plentiful conversion of Papists.

But indeed Sir, your follovving words, wherein you please to term us,
refined reformers, saying, that we seduce only the sound, and pervert and
estrange from you those that are otherwise well affected, and of some
understanding etc. are worth the considering: and I entreat the Godly readers
to take knowledge of this that follovveth.

First I profess unfeignedly with an upright heart as in Gods presence, who
knovveth the secrets of all hearts: that neither I my self, nor any other (to
my knowledge) that professes the same course of true religion with me) did
ever intend or once conceive, so much as in thought, any one point or part of
sedition, or evil conspiracy, against any man's person: much less against the
kings majesty his royal state, and government: but we do acknowledge his
majesty to be supreme governor in all his dominions in all causes and over all
persons of what estate or degree so ever they be: and that no person may
declyne or appeall from his authotity or judgment in any cause whatsoever: but
that in all things obedience is due unto him, either Active if the thing
commanded be not against Gods word, or Passive if it be: except pardon can be
obtained: and hereunto we do diligently exhort and provoke all men at all
times etc.

This being in the first place considered, it is true that you say: our cause
has wrought most upon such as have some understanding and knowledge; and are
of tender consciences pliable to the truth: others of more corrupt consciences
have set against us, and against our cause, and blasphemed it etc.

The consideration of this, will in any wise man's judgment rather lead unto our
cause, then from it, when the better sort, by your own confession, do come to
us, the worser and baser sort remain still with you. And this much for answer
to your second demand, now to your third.

This your third demand is of another kind differing from the former: for here
you seem to leave your national Church and Parishassembles of England, and
make your demand only for your reformed assemblies: wherein you say the Gospel
is sincerely preached and professed, and the sacraments duly administered etc.
But of this particular you shall have answer when I come to your 7 and 8
demand?

3. Demand. Your demand is here to know. Whether those reformed Assemblies
whereof you speak are worse then the Jews Sinagogues: and your ministers
worse then the Scribes and pharisees which sat in Moses Chayer? Whom Christ
commanded the people to hear etc.

3 Answ. Your demand then being only in desence of your reformed Assemblies,
it had been well, if you had shevved us where and which those assemblies be,
that are reformed. We know indeed, that many amongst you both ministers and
people have made much suite to Parliaments, and vvrote many books (of which I
have read some) for reformation of your Church and Ministry: but still to the
best of our discerning, all your parish assemblies are as before under one and
the same order, and manner of vvorshippe ministry, and confusion of people:
all governed by the fame spiritual laws, and spiritual Lords, their
spiritual courts, and canons: all being still one Church, all one communion and
fellovvshippe: so that your Demand being only for your reformed assemblies,
and yet you tell us not which nor where they be, how can we give you a
direct answer to your demand.

First therefore tell us where and which those assembles be that are
reformed, and then you shall have a direct answer, God vvilling. In the mean
time we will take this for one advantage among the rest: that is, that there
appears a check in your conscience, because you make your defense, or demand
but for a part of your Church: that is, your reformed assemblies: whereby you
intimate, that there is a vvorser sort of assemblies, that are unreformed,
which you will not plead for: where as if your Church or Church-asse^blies
of England were Christ's true Church, we think you should have labored to
defend the whole: is not every one of Christ's true Churches to be defended?
how deceitfully then do you deal with your Church that seek to vphould
your reformed assembles and neglect the rest: all being in one brotherhood and
communion together,

But it may be sir, you are driven to shift for your self: therefore if you
will show us which be your reformed assembiles, we will show you great
difference betvveen those Sinagogues of the Jews, where Christ and his
disciples did teach, and your parish assemblies: great difference between
those that sat in Moses Chair, which were in true office under Moses
according to the law, and you, with the rest, that have no true office under
Christ according to the gospel. Your mighty reason a minore ad majus (which
words indeed I understand not) is this: If (say you) our Lord Jesus, his
disciples and people, did not separate from thire Sinagogues and assemblies,
that were in faith and manners more defective then ours are: much less ought
they to separate from our assembles, wherein all the grounds of Christian
religion are soundly held and professed, (you might have added) and but fevv
practice, neither of priests nor people, in whom covetousness, wrath, envy,
and contention do daily abound: many thousands neither knowing, nor regarding
to know what true faith means: and for their manners which you would
seem so much to commend: let the manners even of that Parish assembly wherein
your self did of late exercise your spiritual authority in vain: as also the
ma^nerly conditions and conversation of almost all in general, testify how
true this your bold affirmation of their manners is: and vvithall, let the
Readers mind, that although you boast of all the grounds of christian
religion, yet it is but held and professed; not practiced among you: so that it
may seem you believe also, that to hold and profess, (without obedience) is
sufficient for the salvation of the professors: but to the intent that this may
be better discerned, I do entreat and desire all that are christianly minded
to read and consider of these fevv places of scripture. Iam. 1.21.22.25.26.
Tit. 1.16.2. These. 1.7.8.9. Eze. 22.26 I will only point the places, let the
godly read and judge.

4 Demand Now to your fourth demand, which is; Whether those great multituds
of people spoken of Math. 14.13.14.15. etc. Ioh. 6.5.10.11. can with any reason
be denied to be members of the visible church, though yet wanting the pretended
constitution of the Separatists? and albeit many of them (you say) were drawn,
not by doctrine but by miracles, report, and with their desire to be fed: etc.

4 Answ. To this your demand I answer directly, yea: they may with good
reason grounded on the word of God (speaking as you do of the multitude) be
denied to be members of any visible Church, and this does plainly apeare in
the same 2 chapters; namely, Mat. 14. Ioh. 6. which may also be compared with
other scriptures to prove the same.

There were none of them members of the visible Church of Christ, but those
that did visibly appear to be Christ's Disciples: but the multitude that
followed him for their bellies sake were not his Disciples, as the very words
of the text do prove; where a diffecence is put between the one and the
other. First, look Mat. 14.19. where it is said, He caused the multitude to
sit down, and when he had blessed, and broke, he gave it to the disciples and
the disciples to the multitude. And when they had all eaten and were sufficed,
he caused his disciples to enter into a ship while he sent the multitude away.
Mat. 14.22.23. Mar. 4.4. If you say, he taught them altogether; it is true: yet
was it in parables: and afterward he expounded all things to his disciples
aparte. Mar. 4.10.11.34.35.36. Mat. 13.10.11.13.14.15.36.

And thus it does plainly appear that the multitude were not his disciples: and
consequently, not members of any visible Church of Christ: for then he would
not have sent them away empty in their souls, and full in their bodies, but he
would have expounded all things to them altogether, for their edification and
further comfort. But the text does plainly show the disciples to be within:
and the multitude to be without. Mar. 4.10.11.12.

And whereas you further demand, Whether those 3. thousand in the second of the
acts, that were converted at Peter's Sermon, were not true members of a true
visible Church before they had officers chosen among them? etc.

I Answer yea, they were: this you say cannot be refuted; and it is true: but
what have you gained by this? what does this help the multitude spoken of
before? If I should charge you here with deceitful dealing, by shuffling this
place of the Acts with the other two places of scripture, thereby to make your
demand seem something, and of some weight, blinding therewith the eyes of your
readers; I doubt you could hardly clear your self with a good conscience: but
howsoever you would seem to shuffle them together to serve your turn, yet
they are plainly distinguished thus as follows,

This place of the Acts, speaks of three thousand godly penitent sinners,
pricked in their hearts for their sins, and converted at that sermon: the
multitude spoken of in the other two scriptures were not such, by your own
grant. Again, these in the second of the Acts received the apostles doctrine
gladly, and forsaking that froward generation with whom they lived, they joined
them selves unto the Church, as appearath in the 37.40. and 41. verses. Now who
can deny these 3. thousand (though still the multitude be denied) to be members
of the true visible Church when the text says they were added to the Church?
although it should be granted, that as yet they had no other officers chosen
but the Apostles. But then say you, And why not our Church Assemblies in
England, (much more grounded in the faith) a true visible Church. etc.

I answer no, it will not follovv; because (howsoever some fevv of you may
be more grounded in knowledge of the truth then they were, and thereby your
sins and transgressions much more greater against God, by knovving more, and
obaying less) your parrish assemblies were not at the first gathred from
others by the preaching of the word, their hearts being touched with godly
sorrovv for their sins, neither do they yet appear to be pricked in their
hearts for their sins, as those three thousand were. Your parish assemblies do
not gladly receive the Apostles doctrine, and continue therein, with gladness
of heart to be directed, and ordered thereby, as they did: but every man among
you, will do what his own heart lists: even according to the frowardnes
and anger of his evil heart: so that were it not for the laws of the nation
and the power of the magistrates restrayning them more then the doctrine of
Christ and the Apostles; the manifold mischiefs that would be done by one
against another among you through the envy and malice of your evil and wicked
hearts, is too manifest to be denied, and too shameful to be defended. I do
heartily desire you, Sir, to examine your own heart well in this point, and
mind well the exhortations that the Apostle gives in Heb. 3.12. 2. Cor.
13.5.6.7.8.9.11. 1. Cor. 11.28.29.30.31. you see and know that your
Parish-assemblies are so far from continuing in the Apostles doctrine, that
they neither konw (therefore not receive) nor yet regard to know what the
wholesome doctrine of the Apostles means. I speak not this of all in
particular, the Lord knows my heart is far from so thinking: I know many that
have tender consciences, and loving affections, and do well regard the best
rhings: but I speak generally of the conditions of the most, with whom the
better sort stand all in the communion, and in one order, or disorder rather:
being mingled together all in one brotherhood: and that not by personal
failing, but by the very constitution and laws of your Church, civil and
ecclesiastical, clean contrary to the revealed will of God in his Word.

Even you your self Sir, that are a leader, and profess your self to be a
guide to the blind, you break the law of God,, and defile his holy things:
you put no difference between the holy and profane, neither discern between
the unclean and the clean, so the Lord is profaned among you. Eze. 22.26.
Consider I pray you and compare together these few places of Scripture Mat.
18.1516.17. Romans 16.17. 1. Cor. 5.11.12.13. 2, These, 36.7. etc. and then
compare this order here appointed by Christ, and his apostles, unto the order
of your Church and Parish-assemblies, and you shall see, even by these 5.
places of scripture, how far you are from that holy order which Christ in his
last will and testament has given and appointed unto his visible Church to
walk in, and to practice.

You compel all that are of your Parish (howsoever unworthy or unable) to pay
their offerings, and to receive the communion, especially at your holy time of
Easter: there is the table prepared, bread and wine set, come that will and
welcome. Esaias, 65.11.12. yea if they be dwelling in your Parish, and will not
pay their offerings, and come to the communion daily, they are by you presented
into your spiritual Courts, thither they are summoned: if they appear not
obedienly, paying their fees, clearing the books etc. they shall be by that
Court excommunicated out of your Parish-assemblies: and then, before they may
be admitted again either to the fore named banquet, or to your devine service
(as you call it) their purses must pay dear enough for a blessing, or
absolution, which they must receive humbly kneeling on their knees before Mas.
Commissary, or Mas. Chancellors worship: and if they die excommunicate before
they have received this bounsing blessing, they may not be brought into your
holy ground to be buried there in christian burial, (as you call it) unless
their friends will first purchase absolution for them. If the mould of this
came not from Rome, then I pray you Sir, show us where you learned it: for in
the whole Bible, we cannot find any such spiritual order given or appointed
by God unto his Church.

5 Demand. Your 5. demand is Whether that in Constantines (the first Christian
Emperor) time, and ever since, unto M. John Calvin's days for the space of 13
hundred years there was no Christian Churches in Asia, Afric and Europe,
because they had the same outward constitution, formal state, Bishops,
Archbishops, Metropolytans, and Church government, for substance, and substance
of doctrine, that our English Church has and retains etc.

To tell you the truth: I know not well how to answer this your demand: yet
not because it is so divinely grounded on the word of God: but only because I
want scoole learning, and knowledge of ancient Authors writings: as being not
able to read and understand them: so that now you have me at a non plus: as
wise men and fools use to say.

Yet this is one thing much to be lamented: that a man of your place and
learning should leave the Scripture, the true word of the living God, and thus
inquire of the dead: but according to the old proverb, like will to like.

5 Answer. Thus much I say for answer to this your far-fetched demand: I do
believe and am fully persuaded by the word of God, that in whatsoever Emperors
or Kings time, since the time of Christ: in what Nation or Country soever:
whether in Asia, Africa, Europe, (or wheresoever) any Church or Churches has
been, is, or shall be gathered or constituted in any other manner, or by and
with any other matter, under or unto any other worship, ministry, spiritual
Governors, or spiritual government, then the same for substance in manner and
matter, which Christ and his Apostles have appointed in the new testament: they
are not the true visible Churches of Christ.

I do not mean hereby, an absolute true and perfect gathering or constituting:
but that all things, both for the gathering and continuing of the true visible
Church of Christ, must be (so far as can be discerned by men) agreeable to the
word of God, as God shall make men able to discern and understand the
Scriptures. And this is all that I can say for answer to this your demand: only
I will not loose the good advantage that I have gained by the same; which is
this; I see that you are not able to approve your Church by the word of God,
and therefore you are driven to make inquiry, and to look about you to see if
you can epsy and find out any other Churches, though never so far of, whose
constitution or gathering, ministry and worship, ecclesiastical Governors and
Ecclesiastical government, is for substance like unto you, hoping by them to
justify your selves: but how like it is that other Churches can afoord you any
help or sauegard, when as by the verdict of Gods word you stand condemned, let
the godly judge. He has need of a staff that leans on a reed. And yet
even for this your poor proof, it is affirmed by some, who know those
histories, that it is a very boast without all truth, that the Churches either
in Constantines time, or a long time after, were gathered by compulsion of all,
tag and rag, in the empire, as yours are of all, in the kindome: or that there
were any such Arch Bishops, or Lord Bishops, with sole authority to rule and
govern. Besides, let the Reader note how in your very Demand, you do grauut
the great difference between the Churches since Calvines time, that is
between all reformed Churches; and your unreformed Church of Enland.

6 Demand. Your sixth Demand is, Whether the reformed Churches in the lower and
higher Germany, in France, the Churches in Geneva, etc. that come nearer to our
constitution and discipline (you say) then yours in England do; be true visible
Churches or no? etc.

To this your Demand, you have added two branches depending upon the former,
the which I will answer, as you have set them down one afer another.

6 Answer. I answer yea, they are true visible constituted Churches, and have a
true and lawful ministry set over them: both which, you in your
Parish-assemblies want.

Then you further demand, and say. If they be such, why then do not we adjoyn
our selves to some of those, but distaste them (you say) as much as we do
yours? I think Sir, it had been a point of wisdom first to have heard our
answer before you had thus hastily affirmed, that we distaste them as much as we
do yours: but Solomon has answered you for your haste, Pro. 29.20. And I will
answer your Demand.

I have in my former answer affirmed the^ to be true constituted Churches, and
that they have a true and lawful ministry set over the^: whereby you see we do
not altogether distaste them as much as we do yours. And now to this your
Demand; which is: why we do not adioyne our selves unto them etc. I think this
may serve for answer: we can not understand their language: and I think you
cannot give us any good reason why we should adioyn our selves to worship God
though in a true Church, when we can not understand what they say: for how
should we profit or be edified by their doctrine how should we say Amen to
their giving of thanks, seeing we know not what they say? 1. Cor. 14.16.17.

You yet further Demand: Why we do not in judgment assent unto any or all
those reformed Churches that with a joint consent (as may appear (you say) by
the harmony of confessions) acknwledge the Church of England to be a true
Church, and give it the right hand of fellowship? how dare they (say you)
refuse? etc.

To this I answer: I do not know that the word of God binds us to assent unto
the judgment of true Churches, any further then we understand their judgment to
assent with (and agree unto) the word of God.

True Churches may err in their judgment of another Church, especially if they
be not rightly informed of their estate: as it appears the reformed Churches
are not rightly informed of yours: for how then can they approve of the
constitution, ministry, spiritual governors, and spiritual government of
your Church to be warrantable by the word of God, but they must in so doing
condemn themselves: for in all these points they are as far contrary to you,
as white and black: true and false are the one to the other: and I suppose none
will say that two such co^traries can be both true. But mind with all: the
Apostle says to particular Churches and persons, judge ye what I say, 1. Cor.
10.15. believe not every spirit, but try the spirits etc. 1, Ioh. 4.1. And
again, if any man preach otherwise unto you then we have preached, let him be
accursed. Gala. 1.8.9.

Now you seem to teach us another Gospel: for you would not have us judge and
try our selves and others by the word of God, but send to other Churches in
Germany, in France, and Geneva, hear what they say and what they judge for
truth or falsehood: if they approve, who dare disalow? if they give the right
hand of fellowship, how dare we refuse? etc.

Thus you daube with untempered mortar, haueing nothing but such old popish
valor to countenance your Counter-Demands: does ill beseem a man of your
place and learning. Hear what the word of God says, To the Law and to the
Testimony: if they speak not according to this word, it is because there is no
light in them. Isay. 8.20.

Your leaving of this Law and this Testimony makes us leave you: you may as
well bid us put out our own eyes, that other men may lead us: and as soon
will we follow you in that, as in this your popish counsel.

We have learned to live by our own faith, and to know that every man must
bear his own burden, and answerr for him self unto God. Hab. 2.4. Gala. 6.5.
And to think that any may excuse them selves, or be the boulder because they
have the approbation of others, when they can not approve themselves by the
word of God, will prove but an evil and false delusion of Satan: therefore
seeing that all men, even whole Churches may err in their judgments: let every
man take heed how he judges, and how he depends on other men, and makes
flesh his arm, and will not hear the word of the Lord, that reproves his
iniquities: As for the reformed Churches, we believe that they rejoice for the
many truths you witness against Popery, and we also do the like: but if you
rely upon their aprobbation, and will not examine your ways, and try your
selves by the word of God, you may perish in your sins, and other churches shall
not be able to excuse or save you. And thus I think your sixth Demand is
sufficiently answered. Let him that reads consider.

7 Demand. Your 7 and 8 Demands are so much alike, that one may judge them to
be twins, they resemble either other, and so unlike the rest: therefore this
answer shall serve for them both until further occasion be offered. In your
seventh Demand you thus begin. How can the Church, or Church assemblies be
false, etc.

7 Answer. I answer, your Church (and Church Assemblies) of England may be
false for ought that you have yet said to the contrary: but if we might entreat
you to set forth and show us the right form and fashion of the building of
your Church, we should the better discern it, and give you a directer answer
to your Demand then now we can do: but in the mean time we will a little
consider and examine what you say. In these words of yours, how can the Church
or Church Assemblies etc. you grant the whole nation to be a Church: then me
things you seem to devide that Church into many Churches, calling them Church
Assemblies: meaning thereby (as I conjecture) your Parish-assemblies.

8 Demand. And so it appears by your 8 Demand, where you write thus: How can
the formal state (as they call it) of the provincial, diocesan, cathedral
and Parishonall Churches of England, and the regiment thereof be unlawful, etc,

Here you have foysted in a word or two which I found not in the former, which
word, because I understand it not, as you (peradventure) mean: therefore I
will not meddle with it: neither will I meddle with popish names and titles of
your Churches, though you muster them up so valorously as if you meant to
terrify the readers with the very names of them: only this I find your demand
in both, to be: how the Church (and Parish-assemblies) of England can be false;
the rest dropped, or rather scattered abroad throughout your Demands, is but your
vnsavery salt, which you have cast out upon the dunghill of your counter work:
all being (as you think) so couched together, as that it cannot be easily raked
abroad: but I will try, if by the help of God and the truth of his word, I can
show what vnsavery stuff it is.

8 Answ. To these your 7. and 8. Demands I answer: that to hold and maintain
a national Church: that is to hold, that any nation can be a church, now in
the time of the Gospel, we deem to be erroneous and false: and do affirm
that no warrant or defense for it can be found in the word of God. It is an
humane invention, and differs from the testament of Christ, which shows
many Churches to be in a nation or Country: as in Judea Asia, Galatia etc.
Gala. 1.2.22. Rev. 1.4. But not any nation to be a Church.

Now that yours is a National Church, not only the name and title, as it is
usually called, (besides your own grant) but the co^stitutio^ also shows: for
it has a pastor over the whole nation, the Archbishop of Canterbury,
Metropolitan and Primate over all England: your most reverend father in God,
who makes and consecrateth the Diocesian Bishops, whereupon arises Diocesian
Churches or Sees: and they again make your Parish Priests, to the Archbishops:
and to his successors the inferior Bishops have sworn (So help them God in
Jesus Christ) all due reverence and obedience. This your book of consecration
shows: and we desire you to show us warrant for those things in the
Scripture, if you can: or else show us where you have learned them.

In your 8 Demand you say thus; The name, calling, and office of these Bishops
(for either you must mean these Bishops (or the like) or else you speak
nothing to the matter in hand) Whether (say you) we respect, ordination of
ministers, or power of jurisdiction: is the same for substance, expressed in
the New testament. And this (you say) has been and will be proved, seeing it
has had a continual succession from the Apostles time unto this day etc.

If you were as ready to prove, as you are to affirm things, then were your
valor something worth. But you and the rest, are so loath to be drawn to
prove you ministry and ordination by the word of God, that if you cannot make
us take your word for the lawfullnes thereof, then you will try by all means
possible how you can get us into some prison, and keep us there, until you
have found your proof out of some other dark corner: for by the light of
Gods word we think you will never be able to prove the lawfullnes thereof.

These things that you say, have indeed been often by others affirmed: but
never otherwise proved then by you at this present. But if you good sir, would
now take the payns to prove what you have said, by the word of God, your
pains would deserve thanks of many: And withal, let me entreat you sir I pray
you (because you say it has had a continual succession from the Apostles time
unto this day) to show me, for my learning, which of the Apostles was the
Arch Apostle or Archbishop (If you please so to call him) over or before all
the rest, and from whom (or by what authority) he had that high place and
Lordly office. And also where, and with whom he left that his
Arch-Metropolitane authority to lord it over the rest, as these do at this
day, as you say.

I profess unfeignedly, that if I could see these things proved by the word of
God, I would soon (through Gods mercy) change my mind.

But in the mean time, to let pass the rest of that frothie stuff, which
might be raked together in these your 7 and 8 Demands, I will come again to
your 7 demand, though I could from the 16.17.18. and 19. lines in your 8 Demand
light you such a candle as I think you would be loath that any should see the
light thereof, but I will not blow at that cole now, yet you (against your will
I am sure) have made a fair beginning to kindle it, where you say thus, The
Pope was not Antichrist before he had gotten the title of universal Bishop,
nor complete until he had gotten into his bands both swords, that is, both
Civil and Ecclesiastical Dominion: if I should now add but a little of your
own fuel to that coal, these your words would discover a great part of the
mystery of iniquity which grows in your ministry at this day. But to let that
pass, nothing doubting but God in his good time, by the brightness of the
Gospel, will cause the same to appear more and more daily, I will come to your 7
Demand, where you tell us of the Gospel soundly and substantially taught and
professed: and the sacraments so rightly administered and received in your
Church, as for proportion no country in the world (you say) nor National
Church whatsoever, can afford the like, etc

The like vain boast of all the grounds of Christian religion, soundly held
and professed, etc. I met with in your third Demand: but neither there nor
hear you speak any word of the practice, Christian religion, and of the
kingly power and office of Christ governing your Church: of these things you
say nothing: nothing how Christ ought to reign as King in his Church, by his
own Laws and ordinances executed, and administered in and by his own offices
and officers which he has given unto and appointed in his Church forthat
work, Ephe. 4.11.12.13. Romans 12.6.7.8.9. Not a word of this, I pray you Sir,
let not this candle be light, howsoever you do: you may make your people think
that Christ will be a Prophet to teach them, and a Priest to sacrifice for
them, though he be not a King to rule and reign over them in and by his own
Laws and officers: they peradventure know not (or dare not tell you) that this
is a denying of apart of the mediatorship of Christ: therefore Sir, as long as
you can, let them not know the kingly office of Christ, nor what the Holy Ghost
says in Luke 19.27. let them know no other government, for the Church but your
spitituall courts: it will serve their turn well enough, until the Lord shall
move their hearts better to consider and discern the truth of his will reveiled
in his word, which in his good time he will do unto all those that earnestly
desire, and with upright hearts seek and labor to worship and serve him in
spirit and in truth. And now I will labor to show the deceit of your vainglory
in boasting of the word and sacraments, which you say are so soundly taught and
administered, etc.

You would have us (and all men) take it for granted that the nation of England
is the true visible Church of Christ: which you are not able to prove: then you
go on, telling us of the sound and substantial things in this your Church: but
we would first entreat you to show us your Church constituted and builded
according to the scripture: if your Church be as you would make us believe, then
show it, that we may see and discern whether it be soundly and substantially
built of choice trees, and of precious living stones (to the best of man's
discerning) hewed and squared and fastened together according to the heavenly
pattern: every stone living, elect and precious: (I say still in the best of
man's discerning) every stone having his beauty, his burden and order: all of
them laboring to support one another, to edify one another, to exhort, to
admonish and reprove one another, that so they may be the habitation of God, as
these scriptures do show, Exo. 19.5.6. and chap. 25.8.9, 40. 1. Chro. 29.2.
Zach. 14.21. compared with Heb. 8.1.2.5.6. etc. Chap. 9.11.14.1. Pet.
2.4.5.7.8.9. Act. 2.37.41.42. Rev. 1.5.6, Heb. 3.13. Chap. 10.24.15. Lev.
19.17. Gala. 6.1 2. with many other, which I omit.

The material Temple (which was but a tipe of this) we read to be built from
the very foundation: of choice costly perfect stones: the beams and rafters of
choice Ceaders, Algummim trees, 1. King. 5.17. Chap. 6.7. 2. Chro. 2.8. Ezra.
3.7.12. etc.

But of the incomparable beauty and unutterable excellency of this spiritual
Temple* under the holy ministry and happy government of Christ, it must be such
as none may grow nor be planted there, until they be first cut off from their
corrupt natural stock where they grew before: and then be grafted into the
true olive tree, the true vine: yea and being planted and ingrafted, that
plant, that branch that brings not forth good fruit, but brings forth evil
fruit apparently seen and known, must be cut of and cast out, Romans
11.17.18.19.20.21. 1. Cor. 6.11. Tit. 3.3. etc. Romans 6.4.5.6. etc. Math. 3.10.
and 7.19. and 15.13. Luke 13.6. Ioh. 15.6. Math. 18.15.16.17. Romans 16.17.18. 1.
Cor. 5.11.12.13. Now show us your Church to be thus built, and thus ordered
according to the testament of Christ: I do not mean thus built in perfect
manner: but that every member of your Church in the plating thereof do in the
best of man's discerning, according to Godly judgment, in his or their measure,
hewn, fitted and squared for the building, before ^e be fastened there into:
for as the Apostle says, We which live, must no more live unto our selves, but
unto the will of him that dyed for us and rose again: Ephe. 4.22.23.24. 2 Cor.
5.15.17. 1 Pet. 4.3. We must be new creatures, for we are the workmanship of
God created anew into Christ Jesus unto good works, which God has ordained
that we should walk in them, Ephe. 2.10.

When you have proved (and showed us) your Church thus framed, fashioned, and
ordered, then we will take a view of those things which you say (but you prove
not) to be, therein so sound and substantially taught and administered.

But if you still boast of those good things in your Church, and yet your
Church it self be built of rough tree, or rotten timber, hay and stubble, or
of the thorns and briars of the wilderness, and with such dead or hard stones as
cannot be hewn and squared, and fastened into the building together, according
to the heavenly prtterne, then is your Church a false Church, and deceitful,
notwithstanding all your sound and substantial things therein: which things
although they be (indeed) both sound and substantial of themselves, yet will
they not keep up your tottering building but in time it will fall and come to
naught. And this at this time shall serve for answer to your 7 and 8 Demands:
only thus much more: because I would not have you any more boast, or go about
to dasell our eyes with the sight of those things which you say are in your
Church, until you have showed us the true form and fashion of the building of
your Church, I will demand of you this one question;

When the Prophet Haggai, chap. 1. reproved the Jews for that Gods house was
not builded among them: would it have been a sufficient answer for them, think
you Sir, to have said to the Prophet thus, We have costly and fair, sound and
substantial seelings of the sweetest and purest wood, costly carved and
curiously wrought, with many goodly and rich hangings, cushings, carpets, and
curtins, with so many other costly and sumptuous ornaments and deckings, yea
all whatsoever, according to the appointment of the law for Gods house, as for
the proportion, no Country in the world can afford the like. Nay Sir, admit
they should also have said thus. And behold also, we have the foundation laid,
and we have many expert and excellent builders, all of them sound and learned
workmen: and for instruments, also, to hew and square the timber and stone, we
have so good as non can be better: of which timber and stones also we have so
great plenty, and so excellent good, with all other things necessary to finish
the building, as for proportion no country in the world can afford the like:
therefore although the stones be neither laid, nor squared, nor the timber
hewed, fitted nor framed: yet have we the house of God well builded.

What think you Sir, would this have been a sufficient answer to have satisfied
the prophet? if no, consider then how little your vain boast will stand you in
stead in the day of your appearing: search the Scriptures, and you shall find
there, that every true visible Church of Christ must consist of a company of
people (be they many or few) that are called out and separated from the froward
generation of the world, by the Gospel, ( John. 15.19. 17.6.9.11.14, etc. Act.
2.40. 2. Cor. 6.15 16.17.18.) and joined (or built) together into a holy
communion and fellowship, among themselves, Act. 2.41.44. Ephe. 2.13.19.20.22.)
all of them being (in their measure believers, pricked in their hearts for their
sins, and now laboring together to continue in the Apostles doctrine, Act.
2.27.42.

Being thus coupled and knit together they are called in the Scripture the
Temple of God, 1. Cor. 3.16.17. the habitation of God, Ephe. 2.22. the Church
of God, 1. Cor 1.2.2. Cor. 11. unto the which Church he daly adds those that
he will save, Act. 2.41.47. they are then called, Saints, Romans 1.7. 1. Cor.
1.2. they are called Holy Brethren. Heb. 3.1. they are called the body of
Christ, and members for their part of the whole building of God. Consider what
is said, etc. 2. Tim. 2.7. etc.

9 Demand. And now to your Counter-Demand, which is: Whether any new laws can
or ought to be made, or inacted: or any further reformation made without the
christian Princes or Magistrates consent, etc.

9 Answer. I Answer no. And I further ad, that whatsoever subjects, of what
degree or state soever they be, that shall go about either to inact any new
laws in the Kings Dominions, or to reform the order and state of the
Kingdom, contrary to that order which is already established, without the
consent and lawful authority of the Prince and Magistrate, he is by the word
of God judged and condemned worthy of damnation, Romans 13.12. 5.6. Rev.
12.18.19. And if for this his or their offense, the Prince and Magistrates do
put him or them to death (as by their lawful anthority they may) it is no more
then they have justly and worthily deserved for their evil doings.

The next word in this your 9 Demand, are thus set down, and thus odly
pointed, or ever in a well ordered Church has bin inacted, or made and
whether, they have done well, to separate without the Kings Majesty's leave and
license, and consent of the state.

These your refined words, as they be in this fashion set down, I do not well
understand 2 therefore I will give you no other answer then is already made
in the former words: desiring that this which is here answered may be compared
with that which is written for answer to the last 4 lines of your second
Demand, and I think it will give sufficient satisfaction: and for the better
clearing of all other meanings: I will demand of you these two questions
desiring your answer, if not printed, yet under your hand writing.

Quest. 1. Whether Christ be not the only wise God and everlasting King, and
perfect law giver to his Church: and whether all Kings, Potentats, Princes and
people be not bound to submit themselves as true and faithful subjects unto
him and to his laws given unto his Church: or whether any or all of them may
by their royal power, learning or authority, alter, change, leave out, or ad
unto any of those laws which Christ has already set forth in his last will
and testament.

Quest. 2 Whether every particular man (and consequently all men be not bound
by the word of God to separate themselves from every known sin and error
(whether in faith, or conversation of life) that the Lord shall give him sight
of: and labor diligently to reform themselves and their families according to
the law and will of God revealed in his word, without the consent of the
Christian Prince and Magistrates under whom he lives: or whether they be
bound to go on and continue still in their sin or error, and not to separate
from the same until they have first sued for, and obtained the Princes and
Magistrates leave and license and consent of the state, that is indeed and
briefly whether God must be, God or no, eexcept men will give him leave.

10 Demand. your tenth and last Demand is. Whether it were not the Separatists
best course to return again to Gods true Church and people, from whom (you
say) upon some conceited hard dealing they have made an unlawful rent, and
there to confer with the best learned: and if still their consciences be
somewhat tender, to supplicate for some favor and liberty: or if (say you)
they will not take this course: whether it wear not good for them for the
avoiding of scandill, and in expectance of some prosperous success by the
permission of our noble King and bonor able Counsel, to remove to Virginea,
and make a Plantation there, in hope to convert infidels to christianity.

Although I can partly guess in what humor you propounded this your Demand, yet
I will not answer you according to that your humor, but I will answer you even
as I desire to follow the truth in love and peace with you and with all men.

I answer, Those that have separated and made an unlawful rent from Gods true
Church and people (as you say) it is the best course for them to return
again, and with godly sorrow to manifest their true and unfeigned repentance
for the unlawful rent they have made.

And that this may be the sooner effected and brought to pass: seeing that you
still take it for granted that your National Church, and Parish-Assemblies of
England, is the true visible Church of Christ: I do once again entreat you to
show us the true form and fashion of your Church: And lay you apart all wrath
and Envious Anger, that so we may together in peace and love: you with us, and
we with you, take a view and consider of your Church, and compare the form and
fashion thereof with the form and fassion of the true visible Church of Christ,
as it is described unto us in the scripture: If you can prove your Church or
parish assemblies to be like unto that true visible Church of Christ both for
true matter whereof it is built, viz. Saints: And also for the manner of the
building, being coupled and combined according to the heavenly pattern. Both
you and all men shall see, that I am willing, not only to return again, but
also to labor with godly diligence, to live in a holy communion and
fellowshipe with you, laboring to obey the laws and ordinances of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ, supporting and strengthening one another in all love: And
if this good and godly course may be accomplished: not only I my self, but
all of us, that now are separated from you, would much more willingly and
gladly return again and labor to plant our selves again in the meanest part
of England, to enjoy peace with holiness and to follow the truth in love among
our kindred and friends in our own native cuntry, then either to continue
where now many of us as yet live, or to plant our selves in Virginia or in any
other country in the world, upon any conditions, or hope of any thing in this
life whatsoever. Yet even for Virginia thus much, When some of ours desired to
have planted our selves there, with his majesty's leave upon these three
grounds, first, that they might be means of replanting the gospel amongst the
heathens. Secondly that they might live under the Kings government. Thirdly,
that they might make way for, and unite with others, what in them lies, whose
consciences are greived with the state of the Church in England: the Bishops
did by all means oppose them, and their friends therein; and though they, above
other men, pretend the planting of the Gospel amongst heathens, as you here
do, yet have they been rather content, that the most vile miscreants in the
kingdom and such as were rather like to turn christians to heathens then to
make of heathens Christians, then they.

And thus much for answer to your ten Counter Demands: nothing doubting but we
shall be able to bear the weight of your next blow with patience, when it
comes forth. If in the mean time I have not answered you to any or all these
your demands as you desire, yet I have endeavored my self to do it according
to truth in the best of my understanding, as the word of God has directed me.

I do entreat you sir, not to suffer the unadvised anger of your own evil
and froward heart, cause you to take things in the worst part; although I
confess that at the first sight, or view hereof, this my harsh, rude, and
unlearned writing may seem unpleasant and offensive: yet upon better and more
serious considerations you shall have less cause to find fault.

Therefore sir, When you find herein any thing that may move you to take
offense, I pray you pass by it in love, and show you forth that godly
patience, which you sometime teach to others. Remember sir, He that is slow to
wrath, is of great wisdom: but he that is of a hasty mind exalts folly,
Pro. 14.29. And again, he that is slow unto anger is better then the mighty
man: and he that rules his own mind is better then he that wins a City.
Pro, 16, 32.

Consider also, sir, It is you that have drawn me to write, and therefore you
have the less cause to be angry, with me: except your heart be envious, full of
deceit and malice, covetousness, pride, and vainglory, Romans 1.29.30.31. against
which things (considering how evil they be in any) it may be hoped that you
have learned to strive. Philip. 2.3. and do labor to be purged from an evil
conscience, Heb. 10.21.22.23.24, I pray you sir, bear with me for writing
thus vulearnedly: I have endeavored my self in the best manner that I can, to
speak according to the word, as taught of the holy Ghost: from which, where I
have swarved, or abused the same, I humbly crave of you, and of every godly
wise Reader, Christian correction, rather then pardon: for it ought to go
before, and shall be more profitable unto me: yea greater every way shall the
benefit thereof be, both for me, and for others also: for I being better
instructed, shall through Gods mercy, both repent and learn to amend my
faults; and others shall reap the fruits of Gods graces which more plentifully
by your godly and diligent care, lovingly to correct what you see amiss: unto
the which duty of love, if I may any way stir you and others up, I shall not
think my labor wholly lost, but shall be very glad to see you and others so
well affected. Fare ye well.

Let all Glory and honor, praise and thanks be given to God alone.

FINIS.

