THE RECOMPENSE OF THE RIGHTEOUS.

Being a Jewel fit to be placed in every Christians heart.

Preached in a Sermon at Linfield in Sussex, and published at the request of
some well disposed Christians.

By HVMPHREY EVERENDEN.

The second Edition.

LONDON, Printed by WILLIAM JONES for ROBERT BIRD, and are to be sold at the
sign of the Bible in Cheapeside. 1626

TO THE CHRISTIAN READER.
Think it not strange beloved in Christ Jesus, I come in with my poor mite
amongst the rich gifts of many learned writers published in the kingdom (whose
excellency I reverence, and whose earnest I earnestly desire, for the benefit
of Gods Church, and the confusion of the kingdom of Satan.) It is the benefit
of the simple I desire and aim at; if thou can from so silly flower suck
but one drop of honey to sweeten thy soul, my labor is not lost, my gift not
to be despised, read then and consider, and God grant his blessings to rest on
his own ordinance, to the glory of his blessed name, Amen.

Linfield in Sussex, September the 26, 1624. Thine in Christ Humphry Euereuden
the unworthy Minister of Christ in that place.

THE RECOMPENSE of the Righteous. A SERMON PREACHED at Linfield in Sussex.
MATH. 25. verse. 46. And the Righteous shall go into life eternal.


IN the Parable of the Tares, Math. 13.24 our Savior Christ shows that it is
Gods pleasure, that in this life the wicked shall not be rooted out from
amongst the righteous: and yet at the harvest, that is at the later day, there
shall be a difference made between them. Now in this example of the general
Judgment of that day, our Savior shows, that the difference then made shall
be fourfold. First, of their Persons verse 23. Secondly, of their works,
verse 35.42. Thirdly, of their condition, verse 34, 41. Fourthly, of their
reward, in this 46. verse, Of the peculiar of the righteous I make choice at
this time to speak, that it may be an encouragement to the evil to forsake
their wicked ways, to live the life of the righteous, that their latter end
may be like unto his: and to the good to persevere in their righteous
resolutions begun, that their labor may not be in vain in the Lord. Curious
division of the words I purposely omit, only as they ly they yeald us this
instruction.

Math. 13.43. Dan. 12.2. To. 2.7. 1 Cor. 2 9. 2 Timothy 3.8.

Ephesians. 1.23.

of the Law, whereunto they are naturally subject for their corruptions and
transgressions, and being delivered from the curse, are made partakers of the
blessing. Gal. 3.13.14.

Cor. 1.30.

For our further instruction in this point four things are to be considered.

First, why the happiness of the blessed is called life.

Secondly, wherein their happiness consists.

Thirdly, how many sorts of those that are to be partakers of this happiness.

Fourthly, by what means we shall attain to it.

and enjoy that light that shall never be observed: on the contrary our age is
so far from being a true life, as that it is a very death, because every moment
of our life is a step to death: and as Seneca says, quotidie morinum
quotidie en demitur aliquo pars vitae: we die daily, for every day some part
of our life is taken away: a mortal man from the first moment of his quickening
is drawing on (as we say) to death.

paena damni et paena sens^^e, the loss of happiness, and the sense of
torments. So does the happiness of the glorified consist in absolute freedom
from all evil, and a full possession of all good. Apo: 21.4.5.

Their positive goods ye second part of their happiness stand in 3. things.
Prerogatives Possessions. Properties.


Apo. 1.6. That they shall be made Kings and Priests to God the Father:
Christians are Kings and Priests in this life Kings; so far as they rule over
their sinful affections, Priests, in offering up sacrifices of prayer, praise,
and sanctified lives to God: but in their estate of happiness their regalitie
and priesthood shall be perfected, insomuch as they shall fully reign over all
sin and sinful affections, and shall offer up such sacrifices unto God in
praises, as shall be free from spot and imperfection.

Math: 19.28. ye which followed me in the regeneration, shall sit upon the
twelve thrones, and judge the twelve tribes of Israel, and confirmed by the
Apostle: The Saints shall judge the world: the Saints shall judge the Angels, 1
Cor. 6.2.3. so that they shall have the prerogative not only of Kings and
Priests, but also of Judges, the first concerns the whole continuance of
their estate in happiness, the second only the beginning thereof.

1. Such as concern the body only. 2. Such as concern both body and soul.


First, that which concerns the body is, that it shall be clothed with
immortality and incorruption, so that it shall be no longer subject to death
or changing, nor turn into a corruptible carcass. 1 Cor. 15.53.

Math. 13.43. yet in that glory shall be differences, secundum magis and minus,
according to their differences in measure of grace whilst they lived here. Dan.
12.3.
1 Cor. 15.41.42.

Psalm. 36.8. Esaias 51.11. and how great these joys shall be our Savior Christ
does show, where he calls it, our Masters joy. Math. 25.12. that is, that joy
which our Savior Christ our Lord and Master is entered into. Now if the peace
of conscience being only a taste of these joys, be so great as that it passes
all understanding. Phil. 4.7. oh how unspeakable shall these joys be in the
full fruition and possession of them. Furthermore, all these pleasures proceed
from the vision and sight of God as the beams from the Sun, 1 Cor. 13.12. 1
Ioh. 3.2. and the reason is because true delights do rest there, and are there
to be found, as in the fountain and wellspring of them. psalm. 16.11.

they be many, yet may be reduced unto two heads.

Cor. 13.12.



how long Lord, how long, etc. Apoc. 6.10. if they did not both know and
remember their persecutions? Thirdly, if by an earthly knowledge they mean a
natural knowledge, I answer, that in so much as the glorified Saints shall not
be altogecher delivered from the properties of a natural man, but from such as
perticipate of imperfection and corruption, I see no reason why he should be
debarred from a natural knowledge not imperfect or corrupt, but to know this
person to have been my father, mother, or the like, does not more partake of
imperfection or corruption, then to know and remember in that life, the
persecutions and afflictions of the life passed.

Apoca. 4.8.10. For as the sense of wants do move us to prayer, so the love of
Gods mercies do move us to praises.

John the Baptist from their mothers womb, Luke 1.15. these are those that are
called into Gods vineyard at the break of day, Math. 20.1. The fewer sort are
conuerts who are called home to God after the course of a wicked and carnal
life, these are those that are called into the vineyard at other hours of the
day, some rather some later, as it pleases God to seek them, neither is this
privilege of this sort small, for Christ says, there is joy in heaven, and
joy in the presence of the Angels of God, for one sinner that conuerteth: Luke
15.7.11. In this rank we have for example. The publican, Luke 18.13. The
prodigal son, Luke 15.20, 21. Zacheus. Luke 19.8, 9. The these on the
Cross called at the last hour, Luke 23.42

Math. 16.16. Ioh. 3.14, 15. 2. Good works the fruits of faith, Romans 2.7. Apo.
14.13. 3. Sufferings, To. 8.17. where the Apostle teaches that Christian
perfection of this life is not fulfilled in all possible practice of piety,
whereby we are made conformable to Christ in holy obedience, unless there be
also a conformity to Christ in his sufferings, and the reason is, because
Christian integrity cannot go scot-free from persecution, 2 Timothy 3.12.

Math. 7.14. yet life at the end of the passage is a sufficient motive to cause
us to enter and pass through it, men labor here with sweat and care for the
maintenance of this temporal life, although ever full of sorrows and
vexation, which also at length notwithstanding all their labors and cares will
leave them, oh how great labors then should we undergo, that we may obtain
and enjoy this eternal life, accompanied with all joys that never shall have
change or ending! but men now adays dare not labor for the food which
perishes not, for fear of loosing that food which perishes, they say they
cannot let their work to follow Sermons, to read, to meditate, and pray; they
be weary with their weeks work, they must lie abed on Sundays, they cannot
spare time for their servants to learn the principles of religion, they have
other fish to seethe. But were not he a fool, that would neglect to prosecute
the inheritance of a kingdom, which on conditions he might obtain, for fear
of loosing a few moueables at home, which also he is not sure to keep an
hour: no less is the folly of these men that will refuse to seek the
kingdom of heaven and life eternal, which through Christ they may obtain for
ever, for fear of hinderance in their temporal estate which may be taken
from them in an hour.

Tim. 6.9. He that might get a kingdom would he regard a cottage, he that
might have gold would he regard a counter, and is it not a most vile folly that
men will so much regard earthly riches, which either will forsake them, or else
must be forsaken of them that for the love of them they will loose those
heavenly riches, which shall never perish, forsake us, or be forsaken of us.
Math. 6.20. What are all things in this life but vanity and vexation of
spirit? as the wiseman teaches, Eccle. 2.7. what he gained then that gained a
world, what has he obtained that inioyeth all the pleasures of this life?
surely he has gained vanity and lost eternity, he has gotten vexation of
spirit, and lost the fullness of joy.

Cor. 2.9. make us suffer the sorrows of this life with gladness? True it is,
many are the tribulations of the righteous, yea, they are great, Psalm 34.19.
they are of diverse sorts, as the rage and subtlety of Satan, and his
instruments can invent, but if their greatness multitude and variety, be
compared with the greatness multitude and variety of the ioys of heaven,
there is no comparison between them, neither is the one worthy of the other.
Romans 8.18.

Ps. 30.5. That although they sow to the spirit during this life in tears, yet
they shall reap all happiness in the life to come in eternal joys. Psalm.
126.3. that although now the world rejoice and triumph, and they mourn and
lament, yet men, the men of this world shall weep, wail, and gnash their teeth
for ever: their sorrow shall be turned into eternal joy, Ioh. 16.20. Which he
that made us give us, and to which he that bought us bring us. Amen.

*

FINIS.

