OEDIPVS: THREE CANTOES.

Wherein is contained: 1 His unfortunate Infancy. 2 His execrable Actions. 3
His lamentable End.


By T.E. Bach: Art. Cantab.

Oedipus sum, non Davus.

LONDON, Printed by NICHOLAS OAKS. 1615.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVL THE PATRON AND PATTERN OF GOOD ARTS, Mr. JOHN CLAPHAM,
Esquire, one of the six Clerks of the Chauncerie. D. D.
SIR, the multitude of Writers in our age has begotten a scarcity of Patrons.
And Poesy is grown so frequent, that it may say with Niobe, inopemse copia
fecit: when it own community has brought it into contempt. Insomuch that
being about to publish these slight Composures, which have so far ore-leaven'd
my disposition, addicted to nothing less then popularitie; that
notwithstanding my desire to suppress it, yet rupto iecore exire caprificus, I
was compelled with Catullus, Quoi do^^ novum at illepidum libellum, when I
could not think of any that would be so partial as to think has nugas esse
aliquid: seeing that nowadaies Thespis cannot act without the reprehension of
Solon: And most men, like supercilious Cato's, ever censure verse to be loose,
though it be never so strictly restrained within the limits of untainted
numbers: Till at last, through the happy knowledge of your self, I resolved to
make intrusion ambitious to you, from whom I could not choose but conceive
encouragement, when your elaborate lines do promise you to favor that in
others, which others admire in you. I could here enter into a discourse of your
deserved praises, but that I know it cannot be acceptable to an ingenuous
disposition; and I find it a burden intolerable for an unable quill. Neither
can Alexander digest the soothings of Aristobulus, neither will he suffer any
to portray out his stature but Policletus. Since then I cannot like Protogenes,
judge truly de lineis Apellaeis, I will pass over that in silence which would
surpass all my indevours. It is all I seek, if the abundance of your worth
may take away any thing from the unworthiness of my imperfect labors. And if
that laurel, doctae frontis praemia, which shadows your temples, shall prove
to me as Naturalists report to all, (...), I will not fear the tyrannies of
our censuring times; but whilst other Nightingales boast the sufficiency of
their Music to coment it self; this only shall excuse her scritching by
being the bird of Pallas. To whose protection in you, I commit both it and my
self.

THO. EVANS.

To the Ingenious and Ingenuous Readers.
GEntlemen, for the best of you I desire to be no more, and the worst, I hope,
will prone no less, To you only I offer the perusing of my labors. If any
immodest Thalassius require moving Epigrams, and lascivious Odes, able to
corrupt a Vestall, and make Priapus blush at his own rites, I pray him to
abstain his frustrated expectation. I love not to set before my Reader, the
head of Polypus, Nor do I account it a sufficient excuse for Poets to say;
Lasciua est nobis pagina, vita proba. I would have Carmina Ithiphallica, and
Fescinina banished from their Writings, and not only themselves to live well,
but their lines to be drawn out by their lives. I cannot satisfy neither
those greedy pursuers of humors, that would have Jests broken against
Gentlemen Vshers little legs, every Chenalieres bald pate uncovered, and the
deformities of a hooded dame deelpher'd through her Mask. Nothing but Satyrs,
Whips, and Scourges, to such, I say: I will not defile my self with others
pitch, judging him always a notorious corrupted person, that best expresses
the guilt in others, which he finds liueliest charactered in himself. Yet if
any of them shall tempt me, they shall find me an Archilochus, whose Standish
can swarm with wasps as well as his Sepulcher. I request also those, that come
as Cato into the Theater, tantum vt exirent, who seeing the Title of my book
take it up, where Lectis vix paginis duabus
Spectant descatholicon severe;


Either not to begin to read, or not to show their dislike in their
discontinuance. But as for you, whose squeamish niceness condemns Poesy,
because it is so, be as far from me, as I endeavor to be from your ignorance.
It Is not to you, But, Ad sacra vatum carmen affero nostrum. Now a greater
scarcity then you have of wit befall you What mean you to move in a Sphere
above your knowledge, and censure exquisite numbers, which your capacity cannot
reach to? Know Poesy is Divine: no marvel if it suit not the humor of earthly
clods; Grouell with your dejected cogitations, while they breath heavenly
raptures.

-- Quos Cantor Apollo
Non patitur versare lutum.
It Is not your scandalous imputations can sully the luster of a Poet: the
Arch-builder of this Universe is so styled; whom therefore they call (...). No
less are those, whom that Divinity with Celestial inspirations abstracts
from the society of men. As for my self so far am I from the slighted opinion
of such, that it is my wish -- Me primum ante omnia Musae.
Quarum sacra fero, ardenti perculsus amore
Accipiant, coelique vias, and sidera monstrent.


And (oh you) that are Castalidum decus sororum, That have been rockt in the
laps of the Nursing Muses, suffer me to taste of your Milk; as for your Honey I
will not presume to touch. Though my want of industry denies me your Crowns
of Iuy, yet, Non sum adeo deformis, but that I deem my self worthy of a sprig
of Laurel. But I fear my just spleen, and zealous affection has transported
me too far. I will therefore return to you (ingenious Readers) whom I
earnestly request, that it may be lawful for me to live, Occipiti coeco,
secured in your approbations from all the dislikes which I almost desire may be
sprinkled upon me to kindle my more earnest flame. As for the Story I treat
of, I will not urge your faith, neither in the thing it self, nor the
relation: for being a matter so diversely spoken of amongst diverse Writers, I
was utterly ignorant, as Sabellicus says upon the same, In re tam antiqua, and
fabulosa, quid certi dicerem. I thought it as good therefore to follow my own
fancy, as the uncertainty of others: hoping my authority will pass current;
when Omnibus hoc licitum est Poetis. If at any time, the frequency of reading
about the History has begot imitation, impute it to the obaious aptness of
the Author; so copious, that scarce no invention lives from his lines, that
another can imagine fit for the same matter. Howsoever community may excuse a
bad custom. Few there are which are only supposititij to themselves: and for
my self I am not often faulty in that kind. For I protest I have many times
took pains to shun his almost inevitable sentences: But I will not make a
fault by excusing. Accept it as it is; it is my first child, but not the heir
of all the fathers wit. There is some laid up to enrich a second brother, to
keep it from accustomed dishonesty, when I shall put it to shift into the
world: yet if this prove a grief to the parent, I will instantly be diuorc't
from Thalia, and make my self happy in the progeny from a better stock:
Farewell.

Thine: T. E.

OEDIPVS.
CANTO. I.
THE ARGUMENT.
ORacles counceld to preserve, a son
Exposed is to death, reserved by chance
Does all that to him's destined to be done.
In Fathers blood be sleeps his impious lance,
Partakes incestuous sweetes through ignorance:
Until truth known, he tears out both his eyes,
So killes his mother, and by lightning dies.
Re gloomy Cinthya pallid queen of night,
Had seven times paced through each celestial Sign,
Sometimes a niggard, shutting up her light,
Sometimes more free bestowing all her shine,
Since Thebes, the stage of fearful Tragedies,
With wanton Odes, Rites that unholy are,
And ceremonious use did solomnize
The royal nuptials of a royal pair,
Love was not barren: but locasta's womb
Gave certain notice of ensuing fruits,
That not a grave all Laius might intombe,
Issue so well obliuions force confutes.
Wherefore the hopeful father strait decrees
To search the fate of yet his unborn heir:
For man, impatient of uncertainties,
Loves to know truths, though known they grievous are.
To Delphos then his brother Creon hyes,
Where great Apollo from his secret Cell
Declares events in mystic prophesies,
Answers dark questions, and men's fate foretelles.
Here all obsequious duties done and past,
His prayers entreating what his gifts enforced:
The Heavenly Priest this answer made at last,
And for their best endeavors told the worst,
The Child that but an Embrio is as yet
By Nature rarely good, by Fortune bad,
Shall wed his mother, brothers shall beget,
And work his death, of whom his life he had.
No sooner ended was the dire presage,
But as a man transformed poor Creon stood:
Fear such a war with hosts of doubts did wage,
That tears supplied the office of his blood.
Not any tincture of Vermilion red,
Did keep possession on his liuelesse cheek,
But leaving that with salt deaw colored
The fainting heart to cherish out did seek.
A sudden palsy quiver'd every lim,
So great an earthquake shook that little world;
His tongue grew infant, and his sight waxt dim:
His hair (by nature soft) distraction curled:
Great signs of grief did show a grief too great
To bound it self, or be expressed in fignes;
As little Tablets do in brief repeat
The ample sum contained in larger lines.
No sooner reason was recovered,
But finding grief should not be long prolonged,
Ere more made light, what one ore-burthened,
He parts the weight to who^ the weight belonged.
For time not many wasted sands had spent,
Ere Have, the Herald of too ill success,
Enforced Suspicion doubt some ill event:
That knew delay still vsher'd happiness.
The longing King ficke in this short return,
Feels many fits of cold despairing fires,
As often freezing as he often does burn,
Desires to know, yet fears what he desires.
Tell me (quoth he) yet prithee do not tell:
If clouds foretell a tempests violence,
If looks not right cote something that is not well,
Keep sorrow there, which hurts proceeding thence.
If thy tongues language harshly iarres on chance,
Conceal the Story of unhappy news,
I can endure a patient ignorance,
And rather this, then to repent, do choose.
Far better is it for me to live in hope,
Then knowing truths, to have my hopes despair:
Expected mischiefs have an endless scope,
And still are present, ere they present are.
But if that Fortune will so much forget,
To be herself, as to be fortunate,
Bet not unwilling to discharge the debt
That may enrich all my ensuing state.
Here did he stay, though still he might have spoke,
Had not Suspense, too covetous of reply,
Longing to be resolved, more speeches broke,
When Silence yet gave words more liberty.
But speechless Creon prisons up his tongue,
And will not take occasion to reveal;
But with fixed eye-balles, and a head down hung,
Declares the message which he would conceal.
By this the King conjectures, that it is ill,
Yet could not gather what that ill should be:
He saw too much a fainting heart to kill,
But not enough to clear uncertainty.
Therefore afresh he does renew his suite,
More earnest now to have him tell the worst,
Then erst desirous that he should be mute;
Entreating now, what he refusd at first.
Although (quoth he) by this I know too much
To make me wretched, though the rest unknown;
Yet lo, the fondness of our nature's such,
As much to grieve at doubted ills, as shown.
Suspicion ever does far more torment,
Then can the mischief that we do suspect,
When never certain of the hid event,
After one ill, we still a worse expect.
The ominous blaze of heavens fantastic fire,
That never shines, but for prodigious end,
Affrights th'vnskilfull gazets that admire,
When knowing not what, they know they do portend.
Had thou with offerings nere solicited
The D^lian Altars, for unhappy truth,
With hope my self I might have flattered:
Mine age should nere have envied at my youth.
But since the Gods do otherwise consent,
Add not more mischief to the sacred doom,
Tell what thou know, that told, we may prevent,
Or armed with patience, bear what ere shall come.
Here rests again the yet uncertain king,
And here again does Croon hold his peace,
A while deferring what his have did bring;
That grief late told, might somewhat grief release.
Fain would he speak some comfort that was faign'd,
Feign would he place the words in other sense:
But fear of what might happen, him constrained,
To be offensive, for to shun offense:
Who being heard, look how -- alas I err,
If I compare what is beyond compare;
Too flight are words, too weak are Characters
To Express the passions that vn-vttred are.
Well may we draw soft-natur'd men that melt
At others sorrows with drowned cheeks and eyes
But as for him that has the sorrow felt,
The cunning'st pensill, with a veil descries.
Suffice it that he grieves, and spends his hours
In solitary lonenesse; casts what must be done,
Whether to yield unto the higher powers,
Or by prevention their intents to shun.
When through times swiftness now the time w^^ come,
That this unhappy issue must be borne,
The secret sorrows of a laboring womb
Seises the queen, of all save grief forlorn.
Unto whose succor people more devout,
Inuoke P^l^^^^^ for an easy birth:
Saturnia'^ Al^^^ decked all about,
Inuit their goddess to behold the earth.
And oh Lupine thou their prayers heard'st,
Though the other office of thy Deity
Had better shown, how much that thou regard'st
The sacred vows that then were made to thee,
When with thy nymphs thou rangest in the wood,
In steady hand clasping an I^ory how,
The N^^^^^ monsters, and the Tigers blood
Make thy darts blush to so thee murder so.
And do thou now to pity here begin?
Or want thou Arrows for to tyra^ni^e?
Lo (...) a Monster nere before has bin,
Prey to thy force, grace to thy victories.
But now I see, what the eternal Fate
Decrees, shall happen, all you rest decree:
Your heavenly wills differ from ours estate,
Which through our weakness still contrary be.
But, you do all conspire in one consent,
To make unhappy that which must be so:
More cruel, when your cruelty might prevent,
What mischiefs fall after you pity show.
Wherefore a safe deliverance thou gave
And now a goodly issue springs at last.
Had thou destroyed what thou unkindly sau'dst,
My present quill had not told sorrows past.
For now no sooner was the tidings brought
To Laius hearing of what is come to pass,
But that fresh cares, and contradicting thoughts
Arise to trouble what not settled was.
But taking truce a while, he goes to see
After what sort a child so ill might look,
Whether not monstrous as his manners be,
Seeing the face is the souls reckoning book.
Yet he not found what reason thought he should,
A swarthy visage, clouded up in frowns,
Sunk eyes, that buried in their houses stood,
Or torted shadow which his temples crown;
But there as in a glass himself he saw,
And in his cheek marked how his cheek was died,
Where cunning Nature beds of flowers did draw,
Whose head to crop, hard hearts would have denied.
Long in this mirror he himself beheld,
Till like Narciss^^ selfe-enamored,
He seemed transformed; and when his peace he held,
His own perfections he in silence read,
In those fair eyes, that seemed to mock his eyes,
Imagination from her duty sweru'd,
Attentive wondering, a self-love descries,
Being not himself, when he himself observed.
Pigmalion-like, with many a melting kiss,
He dotes upon this picture he had made,
Only desire in him contraried, his,
Who for his liuelesse Image motion prayed:
This grieving, that his workmanship expressed
Unto the life, a creature so divine;
Wished those pure beauties were in Iuory dressed,
Whose white, nor sin might spot, nor time decline.
What reason is it, that reason should collect
(Says he, when wonder to his words gave place)
Our disposition in our eyes aspect,
Reading our minds imprinted in our face?
Were that an axiom: who'st that should admire
This apt proportion of well-orderd parts?
This breath perfumed to kindle Cupids fire,
These precious chains to prison captived hearts:
And would not grant this were the decent bower,
Where comely Graces had set down to dwell,
Where Virtue, of her self an ample dower,
Wedded her self, diuorc'd from other Cell.
If glorious Temples with their pride declare
Th'inhabited greatness of the Deity:
Oh then what precious Jewels lodged are
In such a gorgeous well built Treasury!
Surely at least it can but empty be
Of the expected riches, and not fraught
With the suspected mass of iniu^y:
Naught sure can here be harbor'd that is naught,
Sin would have ^ose a more vnpolish't den
Whose ugly building it could not defile,
More barbarous looks for direful agents, when
These seem not rude, and steed of frowning smile.
Unless, perchance, Vice, weary of contempt,
Would borrow countenance of this countenance,
Having no other beauty, but what is lent
It Is own unseen misfeature to advance:
For had it been truly apparelled
In It own native garments, as soon I should
Have loathed the form, as that it harbored;
As soon have hated, as now loved it good.
Oh could our eyes carry a stronger sight
Then man's compacted outside could reflect;
Or were his breast transparant as the light,
To let weak beams his inward parts detect.
This gay attire of beauty would no more
Bewitch our fancies, then a golden chain
Worn from it is place, or Th^tis Paramour^
Divining blush before a shower of rain.
But when the face, is all we can perceive,
And as that pleases we affected are,
How easy is it for beauty to deceive,
When sin still hides it self by seeming fair?
And it may be, 'twas for some greater end,
That subtle Nature framed this feature thus,
Namely, to further what the Gods pretend,
Which nere she could, were this not glorious.
Now such a precious sanguine keeps his tide
In th'azure conduits of well-branched veins,
As to let out were worse then pa^ricide,
In other vessel, then what it contains.
So rare this form, as sure it is worser far
For me to offer violence, then for it
T'attempt the crimes that to it destined are,
When It of force, I a free fault commit.
I love thee, son, too well those powers know
The hearts of parents, and how much a child
In barren'st pit^e makes affection grow.
Oh that thou were less comely, or less vild.
Yet how soere; shall my kind fondness add
More power to Fortune, over subject man?
Who well may triumph if we warning had,
Yet do not shun her frailty when we can.
Shall I, to save thy life, go loose mine own?
Procure the name of Incest to my bed?
And what (...) in ages past been known,
Suffer a brother in a Fathers stead.
First, let me better manifest my love
To thee my son, first let this beauty dye
Unspotted, as such beauty does behooue:
Flowers are ph^ch't, when fresh, not being dry.
Never shall Writers blot thy memory,
Or from thy life fetch argument to their song;
But for thee bl^ne deaths hasty cruelty,
Deemed virtues hope, had thou not died so young.
Oh you deprived fathers, that with tears,
Behold your childrens time less Funeral,
Dry, dry your eyes, with them are fled your fears,
In their deep graves your cares lie tombed all.
Call not to mind their form, their wantonness
They wearied time with; never (alas) recount
The hopes you had, that they your age should bless:
Such reckonings often fall short of our account.
Often have I seen a curious Gardener
Cherish an imp with the kind start ^e had,
Whose youth gay flowers and goodly bloomes did bear;
But the best fruit his age could show was bad:
Then he repents his ^ares, and labors lost,
Wishing it then had perished when it pleased,
Or that he nere had hoped, since hopes are crossed,
Then a saved labor might have sorrow ea^d.
Many fair Sun-shines do our youth adorn:
But when as age gives liberty to sin,
A cloudy evening does eclipse our morn,
Weeds ouergrow the herbs before has bin.
And far more pleasing do we find it then,
If being virtuous we had perished
That our kind parents might larnent us, when
Living we wring more tears then being dead,
Here forcing pity somewhat to retire
A yet-ne're-guilty weapon forth he draws,
Which lifting up t'accomplish his defire
Affection stays his hand, and makes him pause.
The child, with apprehension, innocent
Smiles at his image in his fathers eyes:
The soone-m^^'d father herewithall relents
And in distracted passion thus he cries.
Can nature be so far vn^aturall,
As that a father should a Butcher be?
Can the least drop, that a child's eye lets fall
Pass unregarded without efficacy?
Or if there could; can heaven forget to speak,
In the loud language of confused Thunder?
Can such an act be, and the clouds not break?
Not Jove's artillery cleave the earth in sunder?
Or if example might the fact admit,
And heaven not punish us for doing ill:
Can I, whose heart was never so brazen yet,
As the mean bloudlesse creatures blood to spill,
First on my son my cruelty express?
A father more inhumane then a man,
To others kind, to mine own pitiless,
The sangu^^ spill, that with my sanguine ran.
Rather it should be one, thine enemy
Framed of a harder ^ould, then could be found
Amongst (...) tyranny,
One that would ground a ^ischiefe on no ground.
I never should thy Funerals bewail
In the (...) habit of a weeping black,
Thy p^rple still would make my sable pale,
Mourning my fault, thy death would mourning lack,
Those hands must be more irreligious far
Then mine, and challenge a less interest
In this same life, that must this life debar.
A heart that is imprisoned in an iron breast.
Hereafter when thy Epitaph worn out
In letters old, reuiues thy story new,
The weeping readers, that do stand about
And through their tears the crime do greater view,
Will wrong my softness thus, and thus exclaime^
What flinty matter did the man compose?
How rocky was the womb from whence he came?
That could relentlesse a sons life depose?
When we, that but spectators, absent be
And no beholders of what we behold,
Thaw into water, when we think we see
The merciless murder which he did of old.
The stone that now weeps ore this Monument
Was for compassionate tears first made a stone:
If Pity then attired in marble went,
What garment did such Cruelty put (...)
Our Writers surely do past times belie,
And tell but tales for us to (...).
Where in our age can we such acts espy?
Such deeds beyond our reach to (...).
The seasons are but nick-nam'd, and we try
Theirs were the Iron, ours the golden times:
Only we want their plenty, the reason why,
Our age is punished for their ages crimes.
Ere thus a scandal do prevent my death,
Thy hand, oh child, my scandal shall prevent,
Finish thy mischiefs with unworthy breath.
Be worse then thou art able to repent,
Before that I, in whom compassion fits,
My unstained hands in guiltless blood pollutes
Some wretch for such a villanie's more fit,
I cannot hear thy cries and persecute.
Here tears from their stopped fountains began to break,
Whereat he houses up the ^atall lenife:
And having nothing more that he could speak,
Seeks amongst his Swains one to attempt his life.
Poor men, alas, they all were pitiful,
Whose only practice ever was to save:
Yet one there was amongst the rest more (...),
Whose looks of crabbed members notice gave.
This from his fellows being eal'd apart,
The King thinks (...)
To him he opes the h^d griefs of his heart,
And st^ictly charges that his son do die.
Do not I pray (quoth he) expostulate,
Or blame me being thus vunaturall;
Know only this, Repentance comes too late,
When either this, or a worse ill must fall.
And oh dear child, when thy pure soul is freed
From this corpe prison, let it rest in peace
In pleasant fields, and on Ambrosia feed;
Let not my act thy happiness decrease.
It Is not the base defire I have to live
Makes me thus cruel: by my clear thoughts I'd^ first
My second breath, that fame affoords me, give,
Dye twice, then by thy death once live accursed.
Could Destinies but alter their intent,
Or Delphes contradict it own presage,
I Would let an immortality be spent,
Ere thou should perish in vnripen'd age.
Now for thy self it is, that thy self must die:
Who else must live the monster of the earth:
No offering else the Gods can pacify,
Dye then newborn, ere live to curse thy birth.
Even as a froward child affected stands,
Playing the wanton, with some sha^pe delight,
Whose sport though pleasing; yet will hurt his hand,
Cries being had, or taken from his sights
The like inconstant passions hold this King,
Grieung to loose what grieves him (...),
And more, alas he sorrows in this thing,
That that should grieve him which should make him glad.
Now does he print his last departing kiss
When now affection coins some new delay:
Only (quoth he) I will but utter this,
Then strives to speak when he had naught to say.
The mother, not so manly in her woe,
Speaks all her sorrows in a female eye;
Like weeping Rhea, when she should forgo
Her first borne son, through Saturnes cruelty.
After her grief struggling for greater vent,
Had sighed a farewell from her big-swoln heart,
With briny Mirrh, that stead of Odors went,
She balmes the Hearse, and now the Hearse departs.
Now had the Sun, with blushing modesty
Took his unwilling leave on Thetis cheek,
And other Tapers of the golden sky
Put out their lights, elsewhere the night to seek;
When early riser Phorb^^, iolliest swain
That on Cith^ron tunes an oaten quill,
Displayed his siluer-flockes upon the plain,
Himself to be inspired, sat on the Hill.
Where many morning Madrigals he sang
In praise of Pan, with many amorous lays
Of Shepherds loves, that all the Meadows rang,
And Ph^^^ seemed attentive with his rays.
There fell he to compassion Majesty
And great men's cares in such a bli^^some strain
As well his Music did his mind descry
His song, and thoughts did the same notes co^taine.
When on the sudde^ some n^^r neighboring shrinks
Not strong enough to syllable it is woes,
Breaks off his pastime, and does wonder strike
In him a stranger to such cries an those.
And listening still, he heard a second voice
That breathed together Pity, Cruelty:
Both life and death in one confused noise
Relenting, that it must persisting be.
You Powers, said it, that guide these things below,
Vnman me quite from this same shape of man:
Let all my limbs to Oaken branches grow,
Obdure my heart, e'ne harder, if you can:
That as I am, I don't so much digress
From being my self, as yet alas I must
Be too disloyal, or too pitiless,
Hazard my virtues, or deceive my trust.
Authority commands, I do obey,
And reason it is command should be respected:
And yet remorse Authority gaine-saies;
Either do threat, if either be neglected.
Whither, oh then, shall I my self convert,
On either side I am attacht with guilt,
Shunning a fault, I cannot a fault divert,
But sin as much in blood, that is saved, as spilt.
Oh (...), and in him you earthly Kings,
That print your wa^en Vassails as you list,
Observe in me what your injustice brings,
How much our (...) do often your wills resist.
Think you, that you can ere your selves acquit,
In the assistant doers of your plots?
The (...)'s more heinous sure you do commit,
Doubled dishonor does your honor blot.
When not content, with your own virtues wast,
To the foul acts you might have done alone,
More are corrupted, more in mischief placed,
By others crimes to amplysie your own.
That we beholding in your vices face
Looks so deformed, deem that our faults are fair:
And if a King, no dire attempts disgrace,
Surely in us they but beseeming are.
Yet, why do I move in too high a Sphere?
Censure Kings actions? they have Eagles eyes,
And in their matters further insight bear
Then the misconstruing common search descryes.
They weigh not Rumors breath, but still direct
Their not rash doings to some second end:
Which it is not for the vulgar to detect,
Since Kings endenour's often their sight offend.
Well, howsoere, I know there nothing is,
From good, though falsely styled, so remote,
Which circumstance, yea in an act as this,
Cannot of virtue give some seeming note.
Yet greatness know, though fortune blind has put
In our estates some inequality,
Our minds yet Nature in one mould has shut,
And meannesse cannot alter quality.
The same affections that do move in you,
As well in us, do claim their interest,
We do not blushlesse, what you blush to do.
Our crimes accuse us in like guilty breast.
Then to discharge me of so bad a charge
Yet keep a conscience free, immaculate,
I Will not perform, what I Will perform at large,
Taught to use others, vsd for others hate.
You goodly Poplars, that do frindge this Brook
With a fair bordure of an even green,
To you the guilt I leave, which I forsook,
You shall be faultlesse, when no fault you ween.
You hearing want, by which should be conuai'd
Feeling relentance at an infants moan,
Unless your griefs in amber wet arrayed
Seem to weep others sorrows in your own.
Take you the business of this Tragic deed,
Forget your Female passions were of yore,
Let not, ahlas see you of this take heed,
New griefs the form, your old griefs changed, restore:
For so your female softness may forbear
To work a story, which when one shall tell,
Renues your late left shape in them that hear:
Be then still secret, senseless, and farewell.
Here ends the voice, and here fresh cries begin,
When the uncertain Swain to be resolved
Pryes through the glade, where he obscured had bin,
And veiw'd a sight that all his ioints dissolved.
A child erst unacquainted with the Air,
Till now brought forth to bid the Air adeiw,
Whose feet with plyant osiers peirced were,
Hung up as fruit, that on the Poplar grew,
Not far his fellow keeper of the folds,
Pursued with his own guilty steps did run,
Whose flight, with his retired neerenesse told
His eyes abhorred the fact his hands had done.
A while concealed he staid, till he espied
By his sights failing, all discovery
Absent, and vanished, then eft-soones him he hyed
To Express his goodness, there, where none could see.
Soon from the willing branches he vnloads
The harmless burden, which retiring back,
A quiuering Ditty with their leaves bestowed
For the deliverance from a sin so black.
The Amazed Shepherd ouer-gone with wonder,
Conjectures first, then doubts to gather more.
Yet the King's virtues keeps suspicion under,
But still the fact approues his thoughts before.
When, now ahlas! the Swain is more perplexed,
Because he saved, then erst he was to save;
Compassion now Repentance had annexed:
Thus second thoughts not the first motions have.
Fear forced him somewhat from his virtues shrink.
So much does danger goodness violate.
That now he makes a question, and bethinkes
How ill it was to be compassionate.
Not long in these contrary fits he stood,
E're looking up, he chanced to spy not far
A man, whose age gave notice he was good,
Since livers ill, seldom, long livers are.
To him drawn near, this spectacle he shows,
And all the manner, how the child was found,
Only keeps in, what he still doubts he knows,
Mistrusting mischief that might once redound.
The easy natured old man, that had now
Almost forgot, vnpractis'd, how to weep,
Let Us fall a shower, a watring to bestow
On his parched beauties, buried in wrinckles deep.
Who so had seen those lukewarm drops distill,
For ever would the prodigy remember,
That tepid Springs should rise from frozen Hill
Or April rain in midst of cold December.
Tears soon dissolved, he falls into complaints;
But with slow speech, and a dull tardy tongue:
His breath he spent, although for breath he faiuts,
As well you would judge it was a swan that sung.
At last, as poor in words, as in his were,
His mourning ceast, when through compassion,
That in his bosom limitlesse was set,
He begs the child of Phorbas for his own.
He yields as willing, as the other asks.
So after some inquiring chat, they part:
The ^n^to tend his Flocks, his daily task,
The other home, burdened, but light in heart.
Where come; To Corinths childlesse king and queen
He gives the infant, which Polybius
With care brought up, as it his own had been,
And from his swollen feet named him Oedipus.
His after fortunes, and finister fate
That mischiefs, that unknown to him befell,
It skils not with continuance to relate
Another Canto shall it plainly tell.
OEDIPVS.
CANTO. II.
COthurnall Writers as a rule propose,
The Unhappy issue of a Tragedy
Proceeds from mischiefs not so great, and those
Have blithe beginnings in their Infancy.
Oh then! how black may we expect the scoene
Arising from a protasy so sad,
Sorrow that welcomes, is an unwelcome means
To Horrors Cell in frightfull darkness clad.
Mischief before was young, and could not go
But as a learner practiced how she might,
As in her age, so in perfection grow,
At last to power down all her ripend spite:
Whom therefore late we as an infant left,
Now think him fully come to man's estate,
Enjoying friends, although of friends bereft,
On whom to all men's thinking fortune waits.
Inricht with gifts of Nature, gifts of Art,
Happy in his supposed parents love:
The hope of Cori^th, and the very heart
Which Greece defir'd, once by the same to move,
In midst of all this earthly iollity,
Knowledge which he through industry had go^
More then was trite, proved curiosity,
And it is more dangerous so to know, then not,
For having now attained to all he could
By use or precept: as man's nature is
Insatiate, resolved that it is more good
Rather then to reserve, to search and miss,
So in th'aboundance of quick sight he winkes,
And wantoned with too much, himself persuades
He yet wants somewhat, and still of that he thinks
But finds, that it from finding, up was laid,
Namely, his coming sortune, good, or ill,
Concealed within the God of Natures breast,
In vain for man, t'attempt to know, or will,
Till Times commission be too manifest.
But no impossibility withstands
Desire, as earnest, as ambitious.
Since then his own search not so much commands
Delphos be hopes, will prove propitious.
Thither he hasts: What fondness is it that man
Should burn in so inquisitiue a fire
To know what is Predestinate, and when,
Enquiring what is most hurtful to enquire.
For say the Augurs do foretell content,
^ho always presuppose our industry,
We in predictions ever consident,
Neglectfull prove, to prove at last they lie.
If ill, Misfortune is no Cockatrice,
Whose sight infections, if first seen, is shun.
Bad luck admits no counsel, no advice,
We fall into it by prevention:
Witness these rash proceedings: for now come
To Pholus Temple, he with suppliant vows
Implores the Deities determined doom,
Who with prophetic fires his Priests endowes.
Soon the Castalian Nymph inspired, replies,
Dare Mortals dally with Immortality?
Think they the Delian Oracle tells lies?,
That for ones fate, they twice solicit me?
Do I ere use my self to contradict?
Or am I not ^t every time the same?
Am I benign sometimes, and sometimes strict?
Change I decrees, as you do change your flame?
If not: why then, what diffidence is this
In our truths power, that what once answered was,
As 'twere to pose us, now propounded is?
Hope you for better things to come to pass?
Know, thou that had thy sentence yet unborn,
Which heretofore thy hapless Sire received,
Though now what we foretold, thou laughst to scorn,
That our prophetic laurel's not decein'd.
Quickly begone, our doom to verify,
That by thy fate our credit may be won;
Yet lives thy father, by thy hand to dye.
Thy mother yet, to bear her son a son.
Fury and madness now possess him first,
That superstition should enforce belief,
Against all assurance in his bosom nursed,
Which in our judgment should persuade us chief.
Anon with Phoebus he the cause debates,
I wonder not (says he) that thou do err,
Nor do I credit what thou do relate,
Thy licence's known, thou art a traveller.
Tell me, Apollo, if thou can me tell,
To whom is man's corrupted inside known?
Does not himself, himself perceive, as well
As you, and best determines of his own?
If not: how vain is it that thy Temple door
Commands selfe-knowledge, when do all he can
To know himself, man knows himself no more,
Then I believe thou know thy self of man?
And if we do, oh why should thou persuade
Us to be such, whereof we nothing know,
But that it is false? Never is that gainsaid,
Which in our selves we are assured is so.
See, if celestial eyes, that power have
To view our intrailes, ransacke every nooke,
Where cogitation wanders in her cave,
Observe me throghly with one searching look,
Mark strictly, and declare if thou can find
One thought, one little motion, whereby
To be confirmed, nay if thou scan'st my mind,
There nothing dwells, which gives thee not the lie.
I know thus much, I am not ignorant,
So far in my soft-natur'd disposition,
Though to diseases apt it health may want,
Yet I presume Im'e still mine own Physician.
And but I find mine innocence gainsayes,
Even with my life Id'e finish that intent.
And yet there are evasions many ways,
Death set apart, to hinder the event,
Before those rays, wherewith thou see me now,
Twice mask their glories in the clouded West,
Ere twice Aurora with a bashful brow,
Ashamed of Tithon, blvshes in the East,
I Will ease this ground whereon I now do tread,
Of my loathed burden: all the world I Will range,
Whersoere I am by fame or fancy led,
That changing climates, I my fate may change.
Corinth fare-wel, and all my household Lares,
Thy pleasures, your protection I forsake,
For sorrow, dangers, poverty and cares:
It Is virtue only me an exile makes.
Nere will I take repentant step to turn,
Where my mischance is native as my soil:
And first I Will see thy loved buildings burn,
Before thy smoke shall tempt me from my toil.
Parents farewell. Thus I, your hapless son,
Turn hence m'vnwilling lights: for why I fear
I am t^^n'd (...) like, whose infection
(...) in the eye-b^lles; else I know not where.
Inhospitable, regions stay for me,
Wilds unfrequented, shores v^^^^'d unknown,
Nights pitchy birthright, where no Sun they see,
Each countrey's mine to breath in, same mine own.
Thus in distempered blood he D^^ph^s leaves,
With some few private friends, and as a man
Desperate, himself of all forecast bereaues,
Dares all the worst that now misfortune can:
Even as a Pinnace by a Pirat chased,
Steeres her indifferent keele for any coast,
Harbors with any danger met in have,
Rather then try the danger feared most:
So he, vntra^eld in the seas of chance,
To S^ill^ from supposd Cha^y^^is hies:
Mischief once known, and shunned, with ignorance
Is m^t: the same he follows, which he flies.
Turn, ^^^e to Corinth, fond misdeeming youth,
Keep thy self there, and keep thy self secure,
Our fortune, us, as we the world pursues;
And sure she is; but in a place unsure.
Then be not thou degenerate from good,
So far, as to take pains in doing ill,
If thou must quench thy Eagles thirst with blood,
Shun tediousness, and drink with ease thy fill.
Change the white livery of Polybius head
With his effused gore; and that being done,
Deface the print of M^r^pes chaste bed:
Think thou do all, that now this think to shun,
And so perchance thou may prevent with doing
What thou must do in seeking to prevent.
Thy wariness works now thine own undoing,
And by resisting, furthers Fates intent.
But thou must on to act, and I to ^ell
Thy deeds of horror, that without thine aid,
Learnings great armed Goddess on me dwell,
I shall (...) less heinous being afraid.
From Th^b^s there lies a narrow beaten way,
Made rudely pleasant with uneven thorn,
Which wandering long through cool Castalia,
Looses it self upon a plain vnworne.
There Nature portraid Flora's counterfeit
In youthfulst beauties, on a ground of green,
Which she with such skild workmanship had se^,
As well how much she scorned Art was seen.
Near whose embroydred margent El^^ glides,
With crooked turnings winding in and out,
That she might longer in the meade abide,
And find the readiest way in going about.
Hitherest L^i^^ came, as was his use,
With soluce to spur on the tardy time,
Reposing his wild thoughts, and taking truce
With conscience, still accusing him of crime.
And now (alas) 'twas his unhappy hap,
As he from Th^b^s to Ph^^^s io^^^ied,
A little town, within whose purple lap
Tipsie Lyaus lays his drowsy head.
Here on this green to meet his thought-dead son
Posting to Thebes, whose indigested rage,
In him had all humanity undone,
Left no respect, neither of state nor age:
For grown to choser, after melancholy,
He rudely rushes through the peaceful train,
And passing forth with more irreverent folly,
Ore-turnes his fathers Chariot on the plain.
The Kingly old man all possessed with spleen,
Thirsts after a revengefull recompense:
And as the flies have stings, the Ant her teene,
He draws the sword he wore for show, not sense.
His readiness does prompt his company
To the like valorous opposition:
But Oedipus as ready as was he,
Asks pardon with maintaining, not contrition.
Now the inconstant Goddess 'gins to smile,
Triumphing in her selfe-lou'd policy,
How queintly she can man's intents beguile,
And blinder then herself make those that see.
You Furies too, th'obseruant slaves of chance,
Though discords nurses, yet you now conspire,
Where Death sounds Iron harmony, to dance,
To crown Erin^is with your brands of (...).
But Nature, where art thou? Where Sympa^hy
That Elmes and Vines espouseth? vanishe gone?
'Twixt whom, or where should Inclination be,
If here abandoned in the Sire and Son?
Or you neglectfull Ge^^ij, that attend
On our directed actions, where are you,
That now you loyter? Is It to be contemned
We are indulgent, or a debt we owe?
Me thinks the liberal expense bestowed
On your unnecessary feasts, might charm
From you some succor, that some power bestowed
To hinder purposes that tend to harm.
But you oft-blamed sistes in my verse,
That do determine man's uncertain years,
It Is you: but thou of all the three most fierce,
That a sons sword mistakest for thy sheares,
By which poor Laius thread being cut, he falls.
Even as an antique edifice of stone,
Struck with a thundering peale of shot, whose walls
If not by force, would have decayed alone.
No sooner fell he; but the Thebans fled,
Some for assistant succor, some for fear.
Some washed their bloody cheeks in tears they shed
Others with outcries forced others tear.
The murderers, not knowing whom they had slain,
Howseuer would not trust their innocence,
Their guilt assures them that they shall be taken,
If long they stay: so they depart from thence,
Leaving the busy multitude employed
In vain enquiry of they know not whom,
All the whole cheerfulness of Thebes destroyed,
And Cadmus race quite sorrow overcome:
Amongst the rest, the but halfe-living queen
Comes where her other best-lou'd half lay dead:
Whose mangled body, when she once had seen,
Her heart his wounds received, but faster bled.
Anon herself on his stiff trunk she throws,
Kisses his bloud-left cheeks: oh thus (quoth she)
The all she has of thine, thy wife bestows,
Even till she has no breath, she will breath on thee.
And being dead, thus on thy grave I Will lie,
Tombing thee in an Alablaster shrine,
With open bosom, that the passer by
May see what thy heart was, by seeing mine.
And now I think thee happy Niobe,
Whose marble breast yield to no sense of woes,
After thou twice seven funerals did see,
Twice did thy children in thy womb enclose.
Oh would my fortune now like thine might prove,
Im'e sure the grief is greatest I abide.
Thou but for children mourned'st, I for a Love
Might have made me a mother ere I died.
Remembrance now at this sad name of Mother,
Does old mishaps to be wept ore, bring out.
A green wounds anguish often vnskinnes another,
Sorrow's a circle, and still turns about.
Now comes to mind her child-births bitterness,
Made heavier with the burden that she bore,
Which had he lived yet, would have grieved her less
Though he had triumphed in his fathers gore.
In vain, oh Laius, did thou kill thy son,
When from a stranger thou have death received:
If needs thy thread must have bin cut, ere spunne,
Would he had lived, thy life to have bereaved.
He might have best bin author of thy death,
In whom thou liu'dst: through him perpetual
Succession might have lengthend thy short breath,
Built from these ruins towers that nere should fall,
Now both are perished with your memory,
Of whom no age-withstanding record's left;
Only my breast retains what none can see,
What soon will fail, so soon of you bereft.
Oh ill betide thee cruel hearted man,
If man thou be'st, that had a heart so cruel,
Uncivil monster I think rather, than
Composd of heavenly fire, and earthly fuel.
The savage tyrant of the forest would
Have loathed the fact to do; and being done,
Flints would have wept, and rocks, if here they stood,
Would melt as wax at presence of the sun.
Oh rocks, and snaggy flints, when we compare
Hard men with you, we do you injury:
Men are themselves, I most like men they are,
When they are furthest from humanity.
Here from the bounds of charity transported,
She on the murdrer bitterly exclaimes,
Wishing him woes not to be comforted,
To prove his fathers ruins, mothers shame.
Till what her sad attendants could afford,
She tastes of comfort, if there comfort live
Amongst those that in one misery accord,
Wanting that most, which they desire to give.
Reason at last established patience;
So taking up the relics of their King,
With slow procession they depart from thence
Toward Thebes, and with the^ their sad load do bring
Where long it was not, ere with Funeral Rites,
The corpse were brought unto the Funeral pile.
Music sounds harsh, though it elsewhere delights
What mirth did use; now vsd, does mirth exile.
Performed are the Obsequies at last,
The people clothed in customary black,
To give more state unto their sorrow past,
Mould to present it by their looking back.
Scarce were their Cypress garlands withered,
Scarce of their spent tears had they took their leave
Ere Mischief, Hydra-like, exalts her head,
Which by the formers loss she does receive.
For angry Juno, never reconciled,
To her corriuals brothers progeny,
Burning in rage, so often to be beguiled,
Thus wreakes her self on them with tyranny,
Hard by the City in Crenaa's sight,
A hill there is, whose spired top commands
A spacious prospect, which Phycaeos hight,
Washing his graueld feet in Duces sands.
Here the too much enraged Goddess placed
Echidna's daughter, triple featured Sphinx,
Of rare composure above the doubtful wast,
Which baser grows, as nearer earth it sinkes.
A virgins face she had, where might be read
Perfection printed in each graceful part:
And from her head a golden curtain spread,
Hangs as the cover to some curious Art.
As for her voice, no Princes wronged Lad,
No Siren sweeter, or more cunning sings,
Plump moving breast, smooth skin, white arms she had,
Fanning a feather' pair of painted wings.
But as an Artist leanes his carved work
On forms deformed: or as each wise man tells,
Worst Serpents under gayest flowers lurk,
Or pleasures welcomes have but harsh farewelles:
So Nature in a Lions half had put,
That other half; but totally Divine;
Whose meaning, since from most it up be shut,
Disdain not this morality of mine.
Learning and Knowledge by our Sphinx is meant,
As hid, as her Aenigma's, posing wits
In Hierogliphicks, and to this intent
On armed Pallas helmets top she sits.
On hill she keeps, and so the Muses do,
Hard are the numbers of a Poets rhyme,
Nature, Art, Use, are the thr^ steps thereto:
Care must be had, that we directly clime.
Nature does rudely our dull mass prepare,
And if not helped, contemplates but with sense,
Her groueling looks downwards dejected are,
And can derive but earthly knowledge thence.
But Art erects it self with Reason; scans
Things above reach: then taking Uses wings,
Man's spirit soars up higher then a man's,
Houering above heavens Crystal Orb, he sings.
Beast, Maid, and Bird, is Nature, Art, and Use,
Joined in one knowledge, as those three in one,
If you admit not this, admit excuse.
Learning's a Sphinx, her riddles are unknown:
Well, here she held long her dominion,
Propounding questions unto passers by,
Given by the Muses to her, on condition,
If answered, she; else, the not-answerers dye.
To many lo, her riddles she propounds,
Whose hidden meaning was so intricate,
That to her none the mystery expounds,
So all by her took the last stroke of Fate.
Thebes long with these injurious wrongs was vexed
Almost unpeopled: the remainder mewd
Up in the City walls, that all perplexed,
They fall to counsel, where they thus conclude;
That forthwith it abroad be published,
That who the question of dark Sphinx unfolds,
Shall to the widow (...) Queen be married,
And th'vnswaid Scepter of the Kingdom hold,
Soon the shrill Trumpet of dispersed Fame,
Reported the adventure far and near:
Amongst the rest to Oedipus it came,
Pursuing Rumors with an open ear.
Retiring straight himself into his mind,
He weighes the prize, casts what the dangers be:
Then urged with exile, and his fate assigned,
Resolves to go; if not to speed, to dye.
With winged have to Theban gates he hies,
Craves his admittance to the Governor:
Obtained, he manifests his enterprise,
So he may have what he adventures for.
Confirmed more fully, he is welcomed thither,
Fairly entreated, with the best observance,
Anon with Creon he goes forth together
To show Iocasta his allegiance.
Her Majesty deiects him on his knee,
So much of mother-ignorance perceived,
Well did that formal reverence agree,
Had not obedience bin therein deceived.
She takes him up soon from the humble ground,
When each of other taking stricter view,
Their hearts began throb, porte^tuous fires they found
Blaze in their breasts, threatening what would ensue.
She loves, she likes, both doting on their own,
Such correspondence had affection bred.
Had thou, o Nature, erst thy self thus shown,
The son had nere the father butchered.
The modest queen called by the instant night,
Commits them to a wished untroubled rest,
Herself withdrawing from attendant sight,
Enters the privy chamber of her breast.
Where with a troop of traitrous thoughts surpised
She finds herself taken prisoner by desire,
With Protean variety so disguised,
That she at first could not detect the fire:
Till scorcht, she both found out, and loved the flame,
Grew jealous of it, whispered by het fear,
The means to get, was but to loose the same,
But shame commands prevention to forbear.
Love against shame disputes, and bashful laws,
Shame against the lawless liberty of love:
Both do object, both answer in their cause,
Till sleep breaks up the Court, and cause remoues,
Early when Phoebe couch't her silver horn,
Drowsy Endimion with a kiss to wake,
The Rosy horses of the red-cheek't Morn
To their fresh journey do themselves betake.
The longing multitude betimes await
Their Champions coming, who when he arose,
Condemned himself for sleeping over-late,
Deferring bliss, or adding time to woes.
He Is ready, and of all things furnished is,
Only he stays to bid the queen farewell,
When he bestowd (...) first incestuous kiss,
That after opned the black way to Hell.
Away he goes, and after him she sent
Her earnest looks: often did she go about
To call him back; but ever that intent
Was crossed with blushing, nor could words come out.
So with her prayers for him, she retires:
When now the Monster, as her manner was,
Unto her mountains narrow top aspires,
Watching for strangers, which that way should pass.
Anon she sees one coming all alone,
Save that with cries he was accompanied
Of those, which further off did make their moan,
Lamenting for his death ere he was dead.
Approach't within the limits of their words,
Vain man, said she, what rashness bids thee come
Hither too me, thus of thine own accord,
Whither with pains I scarce can hale in some?
Think to prevail? or seek'st thou death out here?
Attend me then: What is it, I feign would know,
Which in the morn it self on four does bear,
At noone on two, at night on three feet goes?
Now all his wits together he collects,
Thinks of a thousand species of things,
Of Sun-obseruing plants, and those insects,
To whom one day, life and corruption brings.
But he whose stars maliciously reserved
For firmer fastening, their slow influence,
Must from this little danger b^preseru'd,
That it not lessen Ruins eminence.
Therefore with too quick readiness inspired,
That helped but for advantage, he replies;
If this be all, strict poser, that is required:
Danger does easly teach me to be wise.
The creature thou inquirest for, is Man,
Who from the mansion where he dwells, does borrow
His mutability: who nothing can
But by degrees, never the same to morrow.
View first his childhood, when his heavenly fire
Proportioned to his stature, scarcely warmes
The earthen house, where Nature it inspires,
He puts no diffrence 'twixt his legs and arms,
But as a sluggard, looking up espies
The mornings cleerenesse, and again does sleep:
So he newborn, falls whence he first did rise,
Still his acquaintance with the earth to keep.
When grown to man, with countnance more erect
Having his weary pilgrimage half spent,
He viewes his iourneys end with strict aspect,
Contemplats heaven, from whence his soul was lent
As for the earth, with a disdainful heel
He treades upon it, and makes this orbed base
The weight of two fair sinewy columns feel.
And of what else leanes on their arched space.
At last, though as a building he still wears
The same first strengthening, the same timber, walls,
Yet crazed with batteries of tempestuous years
His weakness craves more props, more pedestals.
For after Sunne-set, when the spotted night
Puts on a roabe of Stars, though now we see
More Tapers burning, yet if we'd have more light grow,
An artificial noone must added be.
Thus men grown old, perchance they wise may
Yet if their age put one foot in the grave,
Necessity inforces when he goes
That he another to supply it have;
And that is a staff, to free his withered hand
From th'vnsteddy Palsy: Behold him than
He as Apollos tripos right does stand,
And thus what thou inquirest for is man.
At this such anger, as a man inflames
E'ne to the height of madness, and transports
Consideratiue revenge, from whence wrong came,
Thither where felt, self hindered to retort,
Possesses Typhons offspring, who beholding
Her date expired, flutters her balefull wings,
Bears talents against her self, her hair enfolding
To comb the curled locks, from their rooted springs.
Anon she digs wels on her cheeks which bleed
Torrents of gore: when now this prologue past
The act insues, in which as 'twas decreed
From her steep hill, her self she headlong casts.
Against whose flinty bottom she beats out
Her subtle brains, being so of breath bereaved,
Which apprehended by the distant rout,
Was with no common shouts, and claps received:
Some flung their caps up, others cheerely sung
Peans of triumph; others strewn the ways,
Whilst some depart from the confused thrung
To gather Garlands of victorious Bays.
In brief, themselves they carefully employ
To gratulate their Countries greed Redeemer:
The Queen expresses in her looks such joy
As modesty does counsel best beseemes her.
There with a public, but discreet embrace,
Her arms do take possession of their own,
And having given all the respectfull grace,
That with so short acquaintance could be shown,
Back they return, vsher'd with musickes voice,
Whose curious running descant, and choice strain
Would have moved Marble, and made Hints rejoice,
Able to have built Thebes Towers once again.
The monster laid upon a silly Ass,
Is by each fearelesse vulgar eye discerned,
Her talents toutcht, as she along does pass,
For Learning's knot's undone, who is not learned?
Come to Amphio^s wondrous architect,
Whose Waste a seuen-claspt girdle does contain;
The Conqueror, in conscience yet unchecked,
Claims his reward, Danger requires gain.
The honest State denies not, but inuests
His Temples in the Theban Royalty:
The Queen and he soon took their interests
The each of other, whereto all agree.
Appointed is the Nuptial day, and come
Whispered for fatal by the mourning Doves,
Nor was the Scritch-owle, nor the Raven dumb,
In signs preposterous of preposterous love.
Hymen's vncheerely flame does sadly burn
And sparely drinks the sullen wax that fryes
Less then gives food, not surfets; hid powers turn
Thalassios Ballads into Elegies.
O Midwife-Goddesse, Loue-betrothing Queen
Show some misliking wonder to forbid:
Thou frown'st when harlots in thy porch are seen:
Can incest then be in thy Temple hid?
Borrow some fury of thy brother fell
And riue thy guilty Mansion, sane profane.
Better have no place where thy Rites may dwell,
Then have it blemished with so foul a stain:
It Is no dismembered sacrifice of beasts
Can an incenst Divinity appease.
Gods trafique not with men, nor to our feasts
Bring guest-like palats, for a meal to please.
They laugh our scorned endeavors, and though now
These from permission gather thy consent,
Yet shall they find, that a long wrinckled brow
Is never leuel'd with fond blandishment.
In vain exempt they from thy hostiall flame
To teach the Paphian Turtles love, the gall,
When in their kisses they shall find the same,
And bitterness e'ne from their sweetes shall fall.
For take imaginations wings, and fly,
Over ten Summers crowned with ripened corn,
Let ruddy grapes, ten luscious Autumnes die,
And from their surfets see an issue borne:
Two manly Twins, to call their father, brother,
This Eteocles, Polynices he,
Antigone the sister to her mother,
Too fair a blossom from so foul a Tree.
Mischief is come to age, and pleasure must
Resign here birthright, what is supposed clear
Unknown, with knowledge manifests the rust.
Bad men are guiltless, till their guilt appear.
Vnyoake thy Teame yet, weary Waggoner,
Phoebus has taken his horses from the Car.
Rough are the ways through which thou have to er,
And daylight asks no Pilots Arctick Star.
The Milch-cow with full Vdder bellows home,
And rich Menalchas folds his fleecy Sheep:
When Pyrois next, on champed bit does foam,
Forwards proceed, Night calls thee now to sleep.
OEDIPVS.
CANTO. III.
UP sluggish fury, see thy Muses friend
Solicites matter for thy numerous verse:
With morn begin, thou, that thy work woldst end,
Though night were thy fit'st hearer, yet rehearse.
Hereto with hasty steps, thou have orerun
An Infants fate, by whom a Sire did die,
A mothers changed relation with her son,
And riddles made in consanguinity.
Now with as much celerity set down
The justice of reuengefull Nemesis,
The sicknesses of an abused Crown,
How sin is punished, though unknown it is.
Oh! saddest sister of the sacred nine,
That shroud'st thy self in cabin hung with black,
Lend me thy Ebon quill, or guide thou mine:
Endow me now, with what I most would lack.
Time wearing out, which ignorance made sweet
With execrable pleasures virtuous thought
New ills Pandoras box, new opened Fleet
By who^ worse things, the^ by the first are wrought.
No soft Etesiae, with cool blasts does fan
The sweaty drops from the least laboring brow,
And frustrate is the use of breathing, when
The Air is sucked, as from a scalding stow.
Phoebus bestriding the fierce Lions back
Stirs up the fury of th'vnloosed Dog,
Drinks up the Brooks, burns the Earths vesture black,
Wants diving vapors from the fenny Bog.
Dirce commands no further then her head,
No watery relics show the stranger proof
How far Ismenos liquid greatness spread;
The Oxen pass the Foord with unwashed hoof.
Sickely Diana keeps her Cloudy Chamber,
Looks not abroad, but with a Countenance pale,
No healthful Planet spreds his locks of amber,
But from the carth a counterfeit exhales.
Abortiue Ceres does her fruit deny
Adds fuel to her selfe-consuming fire,
Which when the patient Husbandman does see
He weeps perhaps to quench his scorched desire.
There is no place in Thebes stretched Territories
Free from some plague or other, no age, no sex:
Here paraleld, were all examples, Stories
That ever did this Universe perplex.
Both old and young, fathers and children fall,
Wives with their husbands, and what is most unkind
Friends are not left to weep friends funerals,
Death, just in this, lets none to stay behind.
Ere scarce the son be rakt up in the pyre,
The flame's again renewed by the mother,
Often are they burned in the selfsame fire
Which erst they kindled to consume another.
No Art preuailes: Physicians cannot give
Themselves assurance, showing their skill they die,
Promising life to others, they not live:
The earth more Toombes, the woods more piles deny.
In these afflictions, the sad King distressed
Powers out himself in prayer, but unheard,
He does entreat to have those ills redrest,
Or that death only ben't from him debarred.
Ione had his Offerings burnt to him with Oak
Juno her Lamb, Isis her Calfe did smell:
The Hyacinth Apollo did inuoke,
Poppy on Ceres safforn'd Altars fell.
Pan knew his Pine Tree, and the Lars their whelps,
Venus her Pigeons, decked with crimson Roses,
But none are willing to employ their helps.
No God of Thebes yet otherwise disposes,
Therefore to neighboring Delphos they repair,
Where they do supplyant ask what must be done
For Thebos deliverance, what offering, prayer,
The Gods require for satisfaction.
To them an answer vsher'd was with Thunder,
No Star shall look on Thebes but with a frown:
No plague unheard of, till it is felt with wonder,
Shall cease it is fiege against your unpeopled Town,
Till he that was the murdrer of your King
Be from the Air you breath in banished,
His wretched presence does these mischiefs bring
Which live in him, and shall pursue him fled.
The King, great thanks upon the Gods bestows,
Commanding that which to perform behoues,
The same which justice to oppression owes,
No more they may establish Subjects loves.
Soon shall my Countries plague be cured now;
Oh easy Gods, that with compassionate eyes
Behold Thebes desolate buildings, mark my vow,
And be auspicious to my enterprise.
Be present too oh daylights greater guide,
Empal'd with Crownets of Maiesticke rays,
That in twelve Empires do thy Orb divide,
Variously treading heavens distinguished maze.
Night-wandring Goddess be not absent neither,
Nor thou that do in iron fetters bind
Blasting Praenester, that with a word can either
Call home, or send abroad thy struggling wind.
And thou lascivious Neptune that do cast
Thy amorous arms, thy Trident laid aside,
Almost about my Monarchies small Waste
As thou by both her watered sides do ride.
Attend me all: By whose hand Laius fell
Let him no harbor, no abode enjoy,
No not himself, wherein himself may dwell,
But when none else, let he himself annoy.
May his own household Gods unfaithful prove,
And the unnatural Lart in exile worse,
Reap he most shame, from what he most does love,
And may his wife an impious offspring nurse.
Kill he his father, as he killed his King,
And let his acts my wishes power out-goe,
If a worse fate then mine can torment bring
Heap't up, yet do he, what I shun to do.
And for my self, as I with prayers desire
My untouched parents may proclaim me good,
No cooling intermission shall retire,
Revenge, till blood be washed away with blo^d.
But play not with us, true Propheticke spirit,
Thus by denied grants to make us long:
Search is ambitious, and would all inherit,
Secrets withheld make inquisition strong.
A taste but whets the li^^ish appetite
For satisfactions earnester p^^^^^it.
Unto a prisoner, the sp^^e-scanted light
A bondage is, to want it, and to view't.
Then do thou (heavenly good^^s) whom it pleased
To show the means, further the means unfold:
Point forth the man, that soon we may be eased,
Or teach us to forget what thou have ^old.
Else as impatient patients we fare,
To whom the Ch^^^^k has prescribed receipts
Of such ingredients as so hidden are,
That they are doubted to be skild deceits.
Urge Gods no more, replies the sacred Priest:
Man must work somewhat for his better being,
Yet if with this thou not contented be,
Blinded Tiresias eyes must help thy seeing.
Forthwith the faithful Creon is dismissed
To Phoebus second Oracle, who late
Lost sight, yet gained a better then he mist,
As he Celestial matters did debate.
Far from the City lies a nighted Grove
Down in the Valley where fleet Dirce glides,
Where th'vntoucht Cipresse spreads his boughs above
And from the Sun the subject Bramble hides.
The aged Oak his rotten branches tends,
From whose corrupted side thick ielly drops,
And stooping under many years he bends
To rest his crippled truncke on younger props:
There bitter-berried Daphne, Mirrha stood,
The trembling Apse, the Birch, with smooth thin rine:
The Eternal Cedar for my lines too good,
The upright Alder, and Sunne-guilded Pine.
In midst of this is situate a Tree
Of wondrous greatness, whose extended arms
Mete the large confines of it is Empery,
And fense the weak inhabitants from harms.
Within the hollow compass of whose trunk
Nature had cut out an uncivil den,
Which a cold fountain, without ceasing drunk
Up of the earth, moats with a miry fen.
Here, by his daughter Manto led he meets,
Reuerenc'd Tiresias, And from the King
Him, all humanity observed, he greets;
And further vtters what him thither brings.
Then as the neuer-erring Prophet wild,
A hostiall fire upon the Altar's made
Which they before of Turffs of earth did build,
And there two cole-blacke Heifers on were laid.
The sacred Vates standing by the fire
In direful roabs yclad, with box-tree crowned,
Often waves his powerful wand, and then enquires
What Omens in the beasts or flames are found.
Anon he sings the hideous magic verse,
Calls on the names of dutious Spirits thrice,
Thrice does he smite the shook earth, thrice rehearse,
What devils may compel, or devils tice.
A bloody shower from his right hand falls,
And from his left drops blood with Bacchus mixed:
Then with more earnest voice again he calls
With steady countenance, on the center fixed.
Now dismal Hecats Dogs began to bark,
Which to repeat, the wood by Eccho's taught
A night comes now there answering day so dark.
A blinder Chaos seen, then the old was thought.
Up rise the subjects of infernal Dis,
At which each Tree his frighted branches heaues,
Many an Oak in splinters shiuer'd is,
Many an Elm shrinkes up his blasted leaves.
Earth suffers violence, and open rends
Her sealed up womb, to show her tombed dead,
The subtle spirits, penetrating fiends
Out of her cauernes lift their crisped heads:
There might one see the griesly God of Hell
Put his number hand out of his frozen Lake;
Nights very self, three sister'd furies fell,
Picking queint morsels, on a speckled snake.
The viperous brood of strange produced brothers.
Blind Fury running careless of a guide,
Horror with upright hair, And all the others
Eternal Darkness does create or hide.
Grief against it self that exercises rage,
Sickness that droopes a lither-head down hung,
Fear never certain, selfe-despising age,
Detraction last with her backe-biting tongue,
That even Manto custom'd to these Rites
Astonished stood: only her unmoved Sire
Does more the ghosts, the^ ghosts can me^ affright,
That trembling Fiends closely themselves retire.
When he afresh effectual charms infers
Graue-bedrid corpse out of Deaths sleep to wake,
Who breaking open their Marble Sepulchers,
Their living forms unto their souls retake.
So many leaves does not Oeta shed,
So many Swallows does not Winter chase,
So many Bees are not in Hybla fed,
So many billows wash not Neptunes face,
As there of sundry Nations ghosts appeared,
Some with dismembered bodies, some with scarres
Doubly disfigured, and were doubly seared:
Others untouched, slain by loves stroke, not wars.
Amongst the rest, Laiu^ his head erects
With meager looks, gored through with ghastly wounds,
That almost none him by his form detects,
While thus he speaks, while he in tears abounds.
Oh house of Cadmus never satisfied
With blood of kindred, once my Country dear,
Whose first bad offspring by each other dyed,
And still that enmity the last does bear:
It Is not heavens anger, but thy wickedness
Thou labour'st with, no South Wind pestilence brings.
The thirsty earth vnquencht with rain, hurts less,
Then th'abhominable action of thy Kings.
It Is he not yet corrected paricide
My murderer, that for satisfaction
Of a Sires death, a Mother makes his Bride,
A worser father, though too bad a son.
It Is he, to one womb twice a diverse load,
Cursed with prodigious issue, who, ahlas!
Upon himself two brothers has bestowed:
Darker Aenig^aes, then ere Sphinxes was.
He, He, it is, that now my Scepter swayes:
Whom I, with all your City prosecute,
Only his exile misery allaies,
And till revenged I still will persecute.
He gone, the painted spring shall soon repair
Your withered Arbors with their wonted green;
No poisonous vapor shall infect your Air,
But all shall be, as it before has been.
This done, and the infernal crew dismissed,
Cre^^ departs with sundry thoughts perplexed,
Who in no steady counsel can persist,
Approving what is disproued by the next.
Anon the King is instant for the news,
And after wanton preparation ended,
The messenger would feign himself excuse
From telling it, by telling where it tended.
But he more earnest through denial, threats
By torment to extort it from his tongue,
And mixes with his anger fair entreates,
Till both prevailed: he hears it, and was stung.
A while with cogitations much distract,
He pauses on it, and begins to doubt
Some subtle stratageme, contrived compact,
Which Creon forged his Crown to go about.
This he augments by his unwillingness
And pollitick deferrings, common tricks
In those near Crowns to tempt Kings easiness,
When in the State, themselves, they would surer fix.
And so concludes of this, for he that knows
His innocence, cen't without prejudice
Of Reason, credit such reports as those:
The Gods persuade not what is known otherwise.
Polybius that yet lives, and yet enioyes
Meropes kisses, which I never tried
But as a son, all argument destroys
Either of incest, or of paricide.
And as for Laius death, you Gods can tell
I Am ignorant of 't, my memory
Records but one that ere by my hand fell:
Hard is my fortune if that one were he.
Yet to be further satisfied, he hies,
Coniures a true narration from his wife
Of Laius fortunes; she with tears descries
Each circumstance both of his death, and life.
The persons age, the manner, time, and place,
How, when, and where, he slaughterd was, agree,
Prove him an homicide unto his face,
By demonstration, not by fallacy.
Long he debates the matter in his mind,
Wherein no resolution can be found;
Kings wreaths about their heads are faster twined
Then slightly may be from their heads unbound.
He balances in even poized scales
A Kingdoms glories, with a Kingdoms woes:
Fear holds when one, love when the other, fails,
The eye both heauiest, both does light'st suppose.
Pills wrapped in sugar, hounyed bitterness,
The licorish taste perswasiuely disswades,
Infected beauty, gorgeous wretchedness
With tempting frights, emboldning makes afraid,
Ene as the Loadstones Northern Pole does hold
Th'attracted Iron, with an amorous kiss:
But turning thence her wanton lips, behold
Strange love for stranger hatred changed is.
Such is the nature of a Crown distressed,
Veiw only outside, and we are captives taken:
But if we turn our eyes, to see the rest,
It frights more powrfully, then it can detain.
Feign would the King, our subject, still command,
And would as feign his Country had relief.
Thoughts vndetermin'd, yet are at a stand,
Whether to keep with care, or leave with grief.
Fixed thus in wavering, lo a gray-hair'd man
Feebled with age and weariness, who first
Ere Oedipus was a Corinthian,
Out of Cithaeron brought him to be nursed,
From Corinths Coufines to Boe^tia comes,
With news of crazed Polybius mellow'd fall
Also from foreign rule to fetch him home
To order his Sires Crown, and Funeral.
His message done, still Oedipus enquires
About his death: and much distempered,
Was it not I (says he) that built the fire
That was ordained to be his funeral bed?
Mark if thou know me, prithee, don't I look
Like to a paricide, surfeited with death?
Say, was he patient when he life forsook?
Breathed he not Oedipus when he scarce had breath?
What disease had he? was it not some unkind thought
Of my misconster'd disobedience?
Which, whilst within to smother it he sought,
Festerd and burst like to an ulcer thence.
I, I, it is so, the wily Gods beguile
Me in my fortunes, when their dread intent
Could have no way bin brought about, but while
My niceness was too wary to prevent:
I Will try your cunning further: you that made
My power above it self, there is yet another,
And a worse mischief you to me have laid,
See if my absence can defile my mother.
Never will I her loved loathed presence grant
To my witcht eyes, I must I know not whither,
Corinth and Thebes live happy in my want,
Since without mischief I can live in neither.
Dis-ioynted words end their distracted sound
In as discordant gesture, giving note
What troubled dregs did in his brain abound
When on his looks Frenzy herself did quote.
Compassion, with patheticke letters prints
A feeling seeing in spectators by:
No shame of womanish imputation stints
The helpless fluxure of th'affected eye.
Moved with the rest, the aged messenger,
Learned in the grounds from whence his grief did rise,
Shows him how far his woes and fears did err,
And cleares his doubts with worse uncertainties.
Fear not (says he) Meropes wrongful bed,
She Is but a fostring stranger to thy blood,
These hands to her first thee delivered;
But to supply defects in woman-hood.
Polybius claimed no interest of a son
In thee; but of what he bestowed on thee,
Being his by nothing but adoption:
Thou nothing owd'st but thanks for charity.
As a mistrustfull patient long diseasd,
His medicines doubts, mislikes his uncouth drinks,
Wherewith his queazie stomach is displeasd,
His sickness better then his potion thinks:
So fares the King, who in this remedy
Collects more dangerous plots to be included,
Fears that this knowledge will worse ills descry,
Wishes he still were, as at first, deluded.
But since begun, he is minded to go on,
Fall out what will, he all will have revealed,
Charging a true and full narration
Of all his fortunes hitherto concealed;
Which thus the old man vtter'd. At what time
The Sun attended by the heavenly Twins,
Smiled on the wanton Springs enameled prime,
Looked on clear Strymons fishes gilded finnes:
When first the daizies op't their painted lids,
To wait on Tytan without slumbring home:
I followed my lascivious wandering kids,
Whither Cithaeron swells her fertile womb.
There of a Theban Shepherd I received
Thy self a child, bored through the feet with plants,
Almost of life, through cruelty bereaved.
By what chance done, to tell my knowledge wants,
Your Parents likewise are unknown to me:
Nor can I tell what of the Swain became,
And if my sight helps not my memory,
Describe I cannot, nor unfold his name.
Herewith the king, eager to sift out all,
Himself will wretched absolutely make;
And Phorbas with his fellow swains home calls,
Of whom the old man new acquaintance takes.
The rest dismissed, of him it is demanded,
What child it was, that he away did give:
At which he blushes; and again commanded,
A poor found child, he says, that could not live.
That answer though will not enough suffice,
The infants parents, and mischance are urged
On him, which he with timorousness denies,
And often himself with protestations purged.
Till wrinch't awhile upon the torturing rack,
His constancy turns coward, and bewrayes
Collected secrets, that no proof did lack:
Thy wife was mother to that child he says.
Even as a Lion on the Lybian plain,
Struck with an Arrow from the hunters Bow,
Shakes the shag'd order of his golden maine,
Does wrathful fires from his nostrils blow,
Spits seas of foame from his incensed jaws,
Shoots sparkles from his ruddy eye-balles, rends
The earths green mantle with revengeful claws;
And against himself lastly his fury bends:
So rages Oedipus, and spurns the ground,
To call up Furies; lifts his eyes to heaven,
To see if bright Astraea there sat crowned
With wreathes of stars above the wandering seve^^.
Often does he shake his head, as if he meant
Again to settle his distracted brains,
Many a groan from his grip't heart is sent,
Many a trembling Earthquake he sustaines.
Till (as extremities never long endure)
Sleep binds his senses in a jail of iet:
Yet horror here is not enough secure,
Dreams catch his swimming fancies in a net.
His slumbers broken with illusiue sights,
Raise sudden starts, mutter out words abrupt,
His hair on tip-toe, heaues with vain affrights:
Rest do minds troubled, rest does interrupt.
Anon he wakes, calls for his horse to fly.
He is pursued: it is true, but whither wilt?
Thou hear'st about thee thine own enemy,
And fly thy country may, but not thy guilt.
Perceiving then how he did err, he smiles
Even out of griefs Antiperistasie.
Alas thou er'st not, nor thy dream beguiles,
Pursued thou art, Crimes the pursuers be.
But Grief and he grown more familiar,
Strange welcomes, Artfull gratulations ceast,
Which more in Innes then Mansions used are,
Not to a daily, but a seldom guest.
Yet when acquaintance would vn-nurtur'd grow,
And too much on a wearied friend rely,
Unmannerly, till it be bidden go,
He looks upon it with disliking eye.
And to be rid of cumbersome intrusion,
Cuts kindness shorter, and directly chides
His trouble from him; when ingrate confusion
Claims it as due, and courtesy derides:
And having got the upper hand, insults
Ore his dejected owner, rebell-like:
As when Ambition gathring head, revolts,
And at a crowns forbidden luster strikes.
When as the King sees that submit he must,
Impatience thus in sillables breaks out.
Blast me some powerful vapor into dust,
Circle me Furies with your brands about.
Oh let the weight of my impiety
Press down the center, dig it self a grave,
Or from two poles crack the warpt Axletree,
That Nature may a second labor have.
Earth shrink thou under me: and thou to whom
Divided Chaos pitchy darkness sent,
Let me inhabit in some vaulted room
Where no light is through guilty crannies lent.
You Citizens of Thebes, for me distressed,
Tomb me alive with stones: you childlesse mothers,
Striping the milk out from your vnsuckt breasts,
You that have lost the names of sons and brothers:
You widowed Matrons, loue-deprived Maids,
Pierce me at once with clamors loud and thick:
It Is I whom Gods do hate, and Man vpbraids,
The very But where Fate her Arrows stick.
Why do I stay? why does not heaven ordain
Some punishing Iron? or some strangling rope?
Or why descends not some consuming rain?
Is vengeance laid up for a further scope?
I have sinned all I can; but I mistake,
A punishment cannot be thought on fit:
There Is some unheard of creature yet to make,
That joined to cruelty, may have Art and wit.
Me thinks I feel a Vulture peck my liver,
My intrailes by some Tiger eaten up,
Or in the muddy bottom of a river,
The nibbling Fry upon my carcass sup.
Oh my sad soul, do not look pale on death,
Fear not thy period unto all thy fears:
Delights but Comma's are to gather breath,
Lest we should tire ere the full points appears.
See here (for now he had vnsheath'd his sword)
How easy is it for a man to dye?
One little touch, yea oftentimes a word,
Man's great bulk falls, even conquered with a fly.
There is but one, and that a narrow way
To enter life; but if we would go out,
Of many thousand beaten paths we may
Take our own choice, we need not go about.
And this is all that man can call his own,
What else he has, Nature or Fortune lends:
Many can life deny, but death can none.
Only to dye, upon man's will depends.
Dye then: so setting to his naked breast
His weapons point, ready thereon to fall,
Somewhat detaines him to perform the rest;
Not that he thought death grievous, but too small.
Death is a Felons sentence: and shall I
For parricide and incest feel no more?
Some men do count it happiness to dye,
A cure esteem it rather then a sore.
Yet say, the violent separation
Of the acquainted body from the soul,
Chiefly to such, who no relation
Have but to earth, does manliness control;
What then? thy Fathers death, thy death requires:
Thy death for incest must the God appease:
Thy death must quench thy countries funeral fires:
And with one death can satisfy all these?
Could thou dye often, could thy corpse renewd
Change tenants often, could thou be borne again,
Dye again faultlesse, could vicissitude
Of life and death draw out an endless pain,
Revenge might somewhat be suffisd; but now
Life is thy greatest torment, death espying
As more remote, so with more frightful brow,
Since thou but once, oh be thou long in dying,
It Is now grown vulgar to be Stoicall,
Peasants redeem with easy deaths their fears:
Who would be manly, or heroical,
What Cowards think intolerable, bears.
Linger my hasty soul, be not bankerous
Merely in policy, break not so soon,
Some sighs thou still have left to furnish out
Thy trade with breath; hold out till they be done.
A sudden shower from his eyes does rain,
Have I tears yet? says he: alas vain wet,
Thou can not wash away one spot, one stain
That my least guilt upon my fame has set.
It Is not enough to weep, I often have vsd
Tears in my mirth; let them not look out here,
Yet power it down, if there be blood infusd,
And see the eye drop after it is shed tear;
You shall weep blood (mine eyes:) and sets his nails
Where sight had built her azure monument:
Thus shed your selves, no moisture else prevails.
Then from their crakt strings he his eye-bals rent.
Now, now it is finished: I am clear, no light
Betrays me to my self, I Am living dead,
Exempt from those that live, by wanting sight;
From those are dead, because unburied.
So having all the office of his eye
Discharged by the other four, his guidlesse feet
Are vsher'd by his hands, when suddenly
His wife, his mother, both in one him meets.
Son, husband (cries she) would not both, or neither,
My wombes Primitiae, my beds second Lord!
Why turnst thou hence thy hollow circles? whither
Those rings without their jewels? hold this sword,
Look on my bosom with the eyes of thought,
Lend thou the hand, and I will lend the sight:
My death thou may, that have a fathers wrought.
Strike thou but home, thou can not but strike right
Why do thou stay? Am I not guilty too?
Then bear not all the punishment alone,
Some often is mine; on me mine own bestow:
A heavy burden parted seems none.
Oh I conjure thee by these lamps extinguished,
By all the wrongs and rights that we have done,
By this womb lastly that has not distinguished
Her love betwixt a husband, and a son.
Ore-come at length, he strikes with one full blow^
Her life it self to a long flight betakes:
He wanders thence, secured in dangers now,
Made less already, then fate less can make.
Long lived he so, till heaven compassion took:
Revenge herself saw too much satisfied,
Ione with unwonted thunderbolt him struck
Into a heap of peaceful ashes dried.
His sons both killing wars, his daughters fate,
To following buskind Writers I commit:
My Popiniay is lesson'd not to prate,
Where many words may argue little wit.
FINIS.

