THE SECOND REPORT of Doctor John Faustus, containing his appearances, and the
deeds of Wagner.

Written by an English Gentleman student in Wittenberg an University of
Germany in Saxony.

PVBLISHED FOR THE DELIGHT of all those which desire Novelties by a friend of
the same Gentleman.

LONDON. Printed by Abell Ieffes, for Cuthbert Burby, and are to be sold at the
middle Shop at Saint Mildreds Church by the Stocks. 1594.

UNTO THEM WHICH WOULD know the truth.
I
IT is plain that many things in the first book are mere lies, for proof
mark this: it is said that it is translated, so it is, and where it is word
for word: But I have talked with the man that first wrote them, having them
from Wagners very friend, wherein he says many things are corrupted, some
added de nouo, some canceld and taken away, and many were augmented. As for
addition to the Copy is there where Mephostophiles disputes of the numbers of
Hels, and some other disputations: And let a man mark them duly, they shall
find them I will not say childish, but certainly superficial, not like the
talk of Devils, where with foldings of words they do use to dilate at large,
and more subtell by far. But as for his Obligation and the most part, it is
certain they are most credible and out of all question.

II
For to take away a doubt, whether there were such a man, which is generally a
thing not believed, I assure them this, that there was, and it is proved thus,
nor is Germany so unknown but that the truth of these things following may
be found if any suspect.

III
First there is yet remaining the ruins of his house, not far from
Melanchtons house as they call at the towns end of Wittenberg, right opposite
to the Schools.

IIII
Secondly there is yet to be seen his tree, a great hollow Truncke, wherein
he used to read Nigromancy to his scholars, not far from the town in a
very remote place, which I think is sufficient testimony to any reasonable
ear. And enquire of them which have been there, see if they will not affirm
it. Notwithstanding I do not go by these means I, to entreat men to
believe, for I care not whether they do or no, but only to certify you of the
truth as I my self would be.

V
Next, his tomb is at Mars Temple, a three miles beyond the City, upon which
is written on a Marble stone by his own hand, this Epitaph, which is somewhat
old by reason of his small skill in grauing.

Hic iaceo Johannes Faustus, Doctor diuini iuris in dignissimus, qui pro amore
magiae Diabolicae scientiae vanissime cecidi ab amore Dei: O Lector pro me
miserrimo damnato homine ne preceris, nam preces non iuuant quem Deus
condemnauit: O pie Christian memento mei, and saltem vnam pro infiducia
mealachrymulam exprime, and cui non potes mederi, eius miserere, et ipse cave.

The Stone was found in his study, and his will was fulfilled, and he lies
betwixt a heap of three and thirty fir trees in the fort of the Hill in a great
hole where this is erected.

VI
If these will not serve, then shall you hear the testimony of a learned man
John Wierus, cap. 4. libro 1. de magis infamibus. Which I have translated.

John Faustus borne at Kundling a little village, learning Magic at Graconia,
where he was openly taught, and exercised it.

In sundry places of Germany, with the admiration of many and with manifold
lies, fraud, and illusions, with vain vaunting and promises but could do
nothing: one example I will show to the Reader, upon this condition, that he
will pass his faith first to me that he will not imitate him: Then reherseth
he one of his knaueries, how he took upon him to make no hair grow upon a
man's face, and took away with a powder which I will not name, both the beard
that he had and all the skin, causing such infla^mations in his face that it
burned all over cruelly. This he committed being taken at Batoburg upon the
bank of the river Mosa hard upon the bounds of Gelderland: Another (says
this learned Physician) not unknown to me, having a black bearde, the rest of
his face somewhat dark and swarte, witnessing melancholy (for he was
splenaticke) when he came to Faustus, who redily said: Truly I thought you
had been my Familiar, straight way marking your feet, whether long and
crooked nails stook out of them: So likening this man to the Devil, which he
thought had come unto him, which Devil he was wont to call Sorarius.

VI
For his death in the same place, thus says he: At length he was found in a
Village of the Duchy of Wittenberg by his bed side stark dead, and his face
turnde backewards, and the midnight before, the house was shaken as it is
reported. Thus far he, an Author not to be doubted of, and approved
through Christendom of singular and exact judgment, as appears by his
writings of the like argument confutation.

VII
More in the same place he says: That a schoolemaister amongst the Goslaryens,
instructed of Faustus the Magitian, or rather Infaustus his evil doctrine,
learned a way how the Devil might be bound by spell on a glass, who as you
may there read was so affrighted, that lying one whole year speeches, at thend
he spoke of his fear and devils appearance, and then having received his
christian rites died.

As for the Author this Doctor Wier, doubt you not of his credit, for he is
alleged of the very singularest scholars, as the best that ever wrote in that
argument. We have a Gentleman of our own country, master Reignold Scot
Esquier, that does universally quote him as his chief and especial help in
his discovery of Witchcraft, yea and he testifies of him not without good
desert, saying: I. Bode in his lawyerly Physic reasons contrarily, as
though Melancholye were farthest of from these old women whom we call Witches.
And the most famous and noble Phisician John Wier for his opinion in that
behalf: Lo where he calls him the most famous Physician as he was then
certainly, in the discovery of Witchcraft, lib. 3. Cap. 7.

IX
Thus far I have set down that you may know and persuade your selves so
far as you see just cause by the reasons.

Vale.
THE SECOND REPORT OF DOctor John Faustus.
In nomine aeternae and semperuiuae maiestatis, Amen.
Spectatum admissi risum teneatis amici.
CHAP. I.
DOctor John Faustus whose parentage howsoever hitherto informed, is known to
be base, his father when he was at the best, but the son of a poor Farmer,
his Mother the daughter of one of ye same condition, borne in a small village
called Kundling in Silesia, brought up in literature at Gracouia, after at
Wittenberg, whose life made him famous, and death notorious: being thus
tormented and torn in pieces, at the time appointed beetwixt the Devils and
him, moved by this example woeful and lamentable enough, the hearts of the
Students and Scholars which where witnesses of his distraughture, that with an
inward terror of conscience vexed and tormented, they departed and declared
the whole volumes of his detestable life, which before his Tragedy was thus
acted, were not known. Christopher Wagner his familiar servant unto whom he
had committed the secrets of his bosom, and had intimated unto him what ever
his four and twenty years familiarity with the black Art, and more black
Devils had taught him: He after the death of his thus slain Master musing
at every thing thus done, every thing thus done being wonderful: (as men do
whom fear makes passionate and meditation of former loss, urges a latter
augment of fresh sorrows:) in a distraughtfull furye (the company of Students
being departed, which were eye witnesses of the Doctors lamentable end)
conuayed himself unto his Masters Library, viewing with sorrowful eyes the
only Monuments of his life, the disputations betwixt him and Mephostophiles,
his aunsweres and demands, and else whatsoever questions moved or disputed
off betwixt the Devils and him, the memorials of his Heavens and Hells voyages,
his conueaunce with many the like comicall iourneis. The boy of a soddaine fell
into a deep considering of his former meriments, sports and delights, in so
much that in this conceit he flung out of this study, as if he meant to bury
the remembrance of these matters by contempt and negligence: coming into the
same Hall wherein his Masters latest Tragedy was performed, sighing for his
want, he remembered (for as then he lately read it) how that one Article to the
which his Master had bound Mephostophiles was, that after his death he should
be a spirit in nature and essence as others were. The Wag at this began to
smile (oh how such things seeming pleasant make fools hearts merry)
conceiving with himself how to make his once Master become his man, and to
have the number of his spiritual followers doubled, scorning the a lonely
attendaunce of one servant. To this therefore he determined a time for the
raising of his Masters spirit: and therewith he fell to read earnestly of
other matters, so long that he began to leave as wearied and wearied began to
muse. Suddenly the air began to receive an alteration and change with a
thick foggye miste, as if it would have shut up the d^^^red day from man's
view, the winds raged, the thunder lifted ^p his voice above the common
strain, hail and rain immediately following, and all these but the ordinary
presages of an appearing Spirit. At this Kit began to tremble, not as afraid
of that which came, but stricken with inward horror of conscience, thinking
that no other time had been appointed to be his doomes day. Suddenly (for
always such haps are sudden) the doors slew open as if they would have fled
from flying, and in all pomp entered as it were the Prologue of a Comedy, a
fellow so short and little as if he should be of one year, and yet not so
brief as ill favored, in his hands a Club, on his head a Crown of Laurel,
riding upon a low Mule, his name was Gomory a strong and mighty Duke, the
ruler of six and twenty Legions: next and next in bravery appeared Volac a
great Governor, in the shape of a Boy with wings like an Angel of Hell,
seeming to be of old rusty iron, riding upon a Dragon with four heads, in
his hands he held a flaming Torch to give light to the after-commers and
beholders: next after him appeared Asmoday a King mighty and puissant ragged
and brizled like a Bore on foot, bearinge a banner or a lance. After him
issued Lucifer the King of the Orient with the four Monarchs of his
dominions, betwixt them were two mighty Spaniels which drew in a fiery Cart
Doctor John Faustus, whom if reason had not better ruled Wagner would have
saluted, for so natural was his semblaunce, so lively his countenance, as if
it had either been a new Faustus, or not the old murdered Faustus, but the
fear which his masters harm put him in, cast him besides the renewing of his
old acquaintance, after these came diverse others with trumpets and excellent
melody.

This right maruailous triumph thus presented, each one did his humble
obeysaunce, the best beginning (though good there were none) and in the end
with huge tumult and ecchoing of tru^pets they crowned him a King, which when
they had done, with the like ceremonies they conuayed out again the Doctor
whom his wretchedness made a King, and his new King-ship nothing. Wagner started
as if he had now begun to marvel, amazed at this merry Interlude, having
recovered his memory again, he began softly to speak to himself in such like
manner. Is this (quoth he) the honor my Master has in Hell? Is this the
reverence with which the Feends infernal use to entertain such guestes? O
ye Spirits of Hell, and ye even now revived Emperors of great Limbus, from
whence have you drawn this extraordinary humanity, is it to skorne poor
Faustus or to mock Wagner that you show such reverence to a vile abject, what
then would they do to Wagner who is worthy to have a fitter servant then
their King? At these words he blushed exceedingly, and began to rage very
grievously with his consciences terror, and with some few tears repenting his
irreligious conclusion, rose up from the ground, and supposing it to be but an
illusion dream, or a temptation, or else some conceit proceeding from his
moiste and melancholicke fantasy, ouerprest with too many vapors, raised up by
continual thought into his Pores: wherefore he went forthwith into the
streets, (so much he distrusted himself) and demanded whether it rainde,
hailde, or thundered, and it was answered that it neither raind, haild, nor
thundered. Wagner, albeit he was newly revived from a fear, and scarcely
thoroughly wakened from this his great terrors, yet with this comicall jest his
decayed spirits began to recover their old strength and power, turning these
great braueries of Devils into a meriment, and his conceived fear into a mere
fancy. This was the first time that ever Faustus appeared unto his servant
Wagner, who recited this unto his companions as a matter of great truth and
little moment.

How certain drunken Dutchmen were abused by their own conceit and self
imagination, of seeing the grand Doctor, Doctor Faustus. CHAP. II.
IT shall not be impertinent (my very good friends) to declare as I am bound by
a Translatours duty, to show what these my Dutch friends and students have
imparted unto me, not for that I will be a King of your hearts to command you
to believe, but that you may with the rest of the History conceive the common
opinion of him in the vulgars belief here in Germany, as concerning such the
like illusions before pretended. About the same time, the next year wherein
Faustus was thus handled betwixt six and seven a clock in the morning, the
five and twentieth day of June, 1539 there chanced certain Scholars to the
number of nine, and five other Merchants (called of them Copshmen) two being
English, to walk abroad to a little village within four English mile (which
is about one of theirs) of Wittenberg called Shaftsburg to the intent to make
merry, whither beeinge come they were exceeding pleasant, as Dutchmen are,
especially when they be at their good Beer, for they are men very impatient of
thirst, wherewith the Italian mocks them saying: Germani multos possunt
tolerare labores,
O vtinam possint tam been far sitim.


Unto which they merrely answer.

Vt nos dura sitis, sic vos Venus improba vexat,
Lex lata est Veneri Iulia, nulla mero.
So long they druncke, that at last they came to be within a little of druncke,
fetching over the Green nine Muses so often at sundry drafts, till they began
to be exceeding merry and pleasant, til it being time to depart, so they set
out for Wittenberg, and being within a mile or such a matter of the Cittye,
they came to a thick Grove called of them the Phogelvvald which is Birds
VVood in English, a place somewhat delightsome above any there abouts,
situated upon a top of a very high Hill, but the arms of it spread
themselves somewhat lower into the neighbor valleys and meddowes, full of very
fine Christalline brooks and springes, which running through the large rancks
of trees empty themselves into the Elue, a River which keeps his current by
Wittenberg, in this place in a fair Summer sunshine day, gather together a
great number of country maids servants, and other of the female sex, which
they call Phogels (Birds) unto the^ there resort in such like days, a great
number of scholars to meet with these Birds, which exercise Venery either for
pleasure, but indeed seldom but for gain, with whom when they have daunced a
great while (after some odd tune, as after that which they call Robinsons
delight, but more truly a jest, though somewhat tolerable) some 20. or 30. or
40. couple together, then here steps out one couple, and here another, and get
them to such odd corners, as their continual practice does make known: on
the same day wherein this merry company were wandering, who if I should not much
err, I durst say they were most deeply drunk, being a Sun-shining day and have
no other way to pass to Wittenberg, but only by this Phogelvvald where they
determined to be lusty with some of the Phogels, they came at length to these
forenamed places, where as to them it seemed sundry Women dancing, and amongst
them diverse Scholars, and verily they deemed Magister Doctor Faustus
likewise, and seeing diverse maids standing idle so many as would fit there
many, they went to take them by the hands, and as their order is saluting them,
to hope about or two (for all the high Dutchmens dances stands upon hopping,
turning, winding, and such odd gesture) and as they seemed they danced at
great leisure till this said Faustus came to them, requesting them not be
amazed, for that it was reported he was dead, assuring them in very deed he
was not in this world, but had changed it for a better, which if it did please
them he would show unto them, where betwixt their delights and his were no
comparison, at his request they were all contented, and he leading the foremost,
brought them down into a fair pleasant green, whereon in stead of certain
flowers grew Pots full of ye best beer, which they tasted on, finding them as
good as any that ever they drunk in their whole lives, and farther into a most
rich and sumptuous palace, wherein as they seemed they dwelt many days with
great mirth and pleasure, til at length one more full of courtesy than the rest
thanked master Faustus for his good entertainment, at which words soddainely
was heard so great a noise and howling especially of the poor Doctor, who was
immediately reared up into the Air, accompanied with such a sort of black
clouds and mistes, as therewith not only the sky, but also their eyes were
mightily darkened, and they brought into a deep Cauern, wherein besides most
soft beds they had nothing to comfort themselves, in which they wallowed and
slept till they snorted, some of the Scholars that were present at their
departure being in a soberer conceit than the rest, desirous to see whither
they would go, followed them fast after, till they espied them on this durty
ease, for in stead of beds they were all bewrapped, and some more than half
sunck in deep and yielding mire by the rivers bancks. Whom when they saw in
this more than miserable case, moved with pity, conuayed them in Wagons home:
and being demanded in the morning (for then they were a little wiser) the
occasion of their so great and seldom seen disorder, they declared it from
the beeginning to the ending, which they were so far from believing, that
they counted it as canonical, which when some Students reported unto me, I
could not abstain from hearty laughter, not only to see how they had abused
themselves, but also others by so fond belief. For I said that in drunkenness,
so thick a vapor as rises from so thick a matter as their Beer, clambering
up and spreading it self so universally in the fantasy, makes it conceive no
other impression, but that which the mind before it came to be ouerpressed was
conversant about, and it was evident that in all the talk they had, there was
nothing mentioned but only Faustus, and Faustus merriments, and where a thing
is amongst so many so agreeingly talked off, it is likely it should take effect
as well in all as in one. Well, I was content to subscribe to their folly rather
to satisfy their selfe-willed conceits, than mine own thought. Many odd
prancks Faustus is made the father of, which are either so frivolous as no body
can credit but like frivolous people, or so merely smelling of the Caske,
that a man may easily know the child by the Father.

VVagners conference with Doctor Faustus, and how miserably they broke up their
disputations. CHAP. III.
VVAGNER one morning arose betimes and departed to Wittenberg, but a small mile
from the house, and having puruayed himself of al necessaries, was admitted
for a scholar (immediately after his Master was departed out of this World)
into the University. Where, for that he was Faustus true and familiar servant,
he was both well and manifoldly acquainted, wherein he remained in all solace
amongst a great number of his companions, who then rather frequented his
company, not only for that he was Faustus his servant, whose memory was very
freshly continued among them, but that they were verily assured that he had a
great part of his Masters skill and science, which they honored with more
then lawful reverence.

Upon a day Christopher Wagner (as many times he did) separated himself from
his other companions and friends, to ruminate upon his melancholicke conceits,
erring far in a place full of Trees and the fullness of Trees gave it the
name of a Grove, suddenly like as all such chances hap, Faustus or Faustus
Spirit clapped him upon the shoulder, saying: VVagner, good morrow. VVagner
auayled his Scholars Bonnet, thinking verily that he was some other Student,
but beholdinge his Master Faustus, he was most terribly affrighted, and
stepping aside he began to mumble to himself a Benedicite, and crossing
himself, rehearsing and saying CONIVRO TE IN NOMINE PATRIS ET FILII ET
SPIRITVS SANCTI, etc. making a Circle etc. Faustus rolling his eyes and for
mere fury and anger stamping bound (for so he seemed) with the vehemence of
the Exorcisme ran about most terribly the brimmes thereof, that therewith the
neighbor ground did seem to tremble, casting out a blackish s^omy sulphury
smoke out of his mouth, wherewith the bright air was much darkened, at length
appeased, either forced with necessity or knavery, he spoke and that very
distinctly. VVagner (quoth. he) art thou afeard of me as of a Spirit, or
infernal Ghost, am not (I ungrateful rascal) Faustus, am not I thy Master
Faustus? quoth VVagner very confidently, what thou were I know, what also thou
art who knows not? though once my Master ^ow thou shall be my servant,
though once my friend and familiar, now I may justly term thee neither, the
Laws of Devils has not made me secure from thy tyranny, and how may thy
friendship avail me? For how can that help which is not? affections are not
amongst Feends, nor passions amongst Spirits. Wherefore Faustus if thou will
that I be thy Master, as whether thou will or no, I will Conjure thee, etc. to
answer directly and truly to all my questions. Ah VVagner (quoth Faustus) is
this the duty of a servant? do thou mistrust, that in me which neither I
mean nor thou of honest thought and duetye ought imagine? And as for
affections in Spirits certainly there is none, but I am none, feel me my
good VVagner, behold flesh, blood, and bones, and Spirits have neither flesh,
blood, nor bones. Believe me I shall teach thee the nature and essence of
Devils, I will teach thee that which neither thou can desire of me or think
Extra captum humanum. Then my good Boy VVagner come to me, and use me not as a
Spirit whose body is nothing but a Spirit, and as Logicians say Substantia
incorporea, and I will open unto thee the secrets of the World, and Hell, and
else whatsoever in the works of Nature. Come my VVagner my son, my darling,
my sweet delight, and rejoicing, the only hope of my labors, boldly,
lovingly, curteouslye above all, which am the very same matter and substance I
once was, and if thou doubtst as well thou may reach thy hand to me, for I
cannot mine to thee, and feel whether I am not as I say I am, flesh, blood,
and bones: VVagner half astonished at this his fervent speech, yet rather
hearing it then believing it: Why Faustus, let me speak to you somewhat more
considerately, thou say thou art substance, and all substance is heavy,
and no heavy thing can ascend vpwardes, and as thy conference with
Mephostophiles does plainly declare the place of Spirits is in the Air, in
which nothing that is heavy can remain, and therefore thou art not substance
or not Faustus. Quoth Faustus that no heavy things is in the Air is plainly
falls, for thou see that material bodies are in the Air, as hail, snow and
other meteors: Whereto VVagner answered: Faustus they truly are in the Air
not of the Air, and you know the causes of them are terrestrial vapors drawn
from the earth by the attracttiue virtue of the Sun, and therefore they fall
down because they are heavy, for were they of the Air as are Spirits, then
should they still remain in it, but briefly no violent motion may be called
natural, as that heavy material Dew is carried from the earth by a violent
and contrary motion: the Sun therefore leaving the Zenyth of any Horison, and
coming to the Nadir oppositely the material bodies of Dew, (as the causes
always fail with the effects) and nextly the concretion of Snow and Hail,
because they are substance, cannot remain in the light and vnheauy Air:
Wherefore I have answered thee that thou art either a Spirit or not
substance. I wondered when I read this discourse, with what patience the Doctor
could endure so long an argument, but it proved otherwise, for the Doctor
brake forth into these speeches unable to contain himself any longer.

Wagner thou seem to gather natural arguments of Metaphysicall effects, I
say unto thee Wagner since thou art thus far entered into a Philosophical
discourse, that I being as I am Faustus, may be, for so I am, a dweller in the
profound Abyss of the Air, whose compass is measurable in this, that it is
not mesurable: For let us speak according to men naturally the rather to fit
thy capacity, we see that in the regiment of man's body, the man is of quality
like to the predominant complexion and Element, as if Chollar abound, the man
is light, nimble, and for a while furious, seldom strong, ready to meddle, and
carried away with phanaticke illusions: If Blood abound he is ruddy, fair,
gentle, etc. Et sic de reliquis. If therefore the predominant Element is able
so much to change the nature of man, as to make it above the rest capable or
incapable, the same reason makes that this body of mine which thou see,
being governed and predomineirde by that quick and ready spirit and soul
which makes a man immortal is no hinderaunce why this corporal realty of me
should accompany my spirit, not as a body, but as a part of the same Spirit:
and otherwise VVAGNER the whole world is in the Air, and as it were the center
of the Heavens, and what substaunces soever is made, Fishes which dwell in the
deep Seas except (and yet not always) are moved in the Air, Kit believe me I
am as thou see Faustus and the same very same.

VVagner almost at the last cast, said, we dispute not what you are Faustus,
but what by reason you may be. Well, answered Faustus seeing thou will not
believe, nor give any credit to my sayings, and which I prove by arguments,
I hope thou will believe thine own eyes, and if thou see what I say unto
thee, thou will neither be obstinate nor incredulous, and rather then VVagner
(whom I do love as my self) should be carried away with so palpable an
Heresy, behold Wagner and believe, and straight ways he drew his knife, the
Prologue of his knavery, and looking first upon Wagner, and next on the weapon
which he had in his hand, as if with his eyes he would have moved him to some
pity, and moved them to be witnesses of the truth, he struck himself into
his thigh twice or thrice, and after his strokes followed blood so hastily, as
if it would have overtaken the injurious worker of his effusion: which blood
Faustus received in a silver Bowl, and staunching his wound, but not until
the blood might be seen over the Cup brimmes, then Faustus lifted the blood
on high saying: See here the witness of the truth, Wagner take it, look how
fresh it is, it is not that which comes from a Spirit, it is blood both in
nature and color, and if this be not enough to make thee believe that which I
do tell thee, it boots not, there is not any truth at all.

I thought it enough for an extemporall Dis and controversy, I thought the
scholar had heard as well and as long as the Doctor had taught, but yet he had
not ended. Wagner receiving the Cup and looking on the blood, beheld him
without saying any thing, showing by his silence his meaning. Faustus minding
to revenge and recompense VVagner his unbelief, nay further (quoth he) feel
my hand, tell me whether it has not the natural heat and essential
solidity: then immediately he stretched forth his arm. Wagner with sudden
ecstasy of joy carried away, ran to embrace his old Master, as his new
friend, whom when Faustus had excircled he fell to beating the poor Scholar
most miserably, that Wagners pitiful roaring, seemed to be an Echo to the
Doctors blows, now (quoth Faustus) hereafter be learned either to be more wary
or less mistrustfull, and therewith laughing effusedly vanished away, leaving
Wagner to be a witness (yet almost half dead with his buffeting) of their
conference, and that he was a good substantial Burgess of Hell: Wagner poor
Boy for the space of seven hours not able scarce of himself to stir or to
take breath, and without much sturring either of hand or foot, whereby any able
life might be coniectured: At length lifting up his head and sighing a little,
(for a little was as much as he could do at that time) he reared himself up
and laying his head upon his hand and his hand upon the ground, he after
sighs sent out most sorrowful groans, and after groans some feeble words, as
he after reported it to his companions and familiar acquaintance: to accuse
either his Masters rigor or his own folly, he thought as merely vain as
little prevailing: Wherefore comforting himself with his misery, because he
was comfortless, rose up, and looking for the cup of blood (for the gain of
the silver moved him: In place whereof he found his Cap full of piss, and all
beraied, sore ashamed and soar withal, so well as he might, which was sorely
enough, he rose up, and what by creeping and going he got whom to his
Chamber, where he abode till he had recovered his health again.

Thus was his Philosophical incredulity recompensed with rusticall cruelty,
such was the good love of the Spirit, that for a long space after he was not
able to walk out of his Chamber. This did he affirm for most certain truth,
and to his saying added his beaten skin, a testimonial and witness to his
familiarly beloved acquaintance, one of the which recounted it all summarily
in a Letter from Wittenberg to me, where I was at Lyptzip, knowing that I
intended to certify my friends in England of a matter so notable and
strange, and worthy of memory, and augmented by Fame more then of very deed,
for the idle headed fellows having gotten such a notable fellow as Faustus to
Father their lies upon, ceased not daily and hourly to begette new children,
but they cost very little nursing and bringing up, they had the wide World, a
very good Grandam where they might feed their fill: As for the disputations
betwixt those two in this place, and those which you shall find in other
places likewise abundantly, consider from whose brains they proceed, for you
must give the Germane leave to show his Art, for wit for the most part they
have very little, but that which they toil for like Cart Horses. But in all
their doings you shall easelye perceive if any thing be in them excellent,
either with how much liking and urging they bring it forth, or how it is
wetted over with dropping of the Tappe exceedingly.

Wagners coosenage committed upon the sellers of his Masters goods. CHAP.
IIII.
ACcording to the Law of the country the goods of Faustus were to be
confiscate and applied to the Treasury, by an Edict published against Coniurers
by Sigismunde Duke of Saxony. According ta the tenor thereof Faustus goods
were to be alienated, but Wagner so handled the matter that the spear being
stuck up, and his goods set to be sold, Wagner had provided bidders and money
of his own, the one were such as never were seen more, and the other but
round counters.

The Messengers being thus coosened by Wagner, durst not for shame report it,
nor he for fear of further punishment vaunt of it: the one contented to put up
the loss quietly, and the other to enjoy them without further contradiction.

The description of Vienna. CHAP. V.
FAme had so far carried the report of Faustus death, as it had the memory of
his life, and for by continual motion rumors increase, as says the
Heroical fountain of Latin verse Virgil.

Nobilitate viget viresque acquirit eundo. In Austrich these news were very
frequent, being a Province mightily replenished with people, and marching upon
the hems of the Hungarian, is a near neighbor to the most cruel Dog and
tyrant the Turk. In Vienna, a City of the same by which as the Thames by
London the great, and often but never enough praised River of great Danuby
keeps his current the City it self (being every way bigger then the fair
Cittye of London) within the Walls, the head of the City rests upon the
mountain of Orstkirken, the front displayeth the wide plains upon the
discendent of the same Hill, but she washes her feet in the River: her body
and her breast covering the large valley lying betwixt Hill and Hill, not far
into the City the Danuby is derived into two arms, which by running about a
certain Hill, of some half mile and more, meet at length again in the same
Channel: In this Island is the Dukes Court, out of which are two and thirty
maruailous goodly stone Bridges, intending to either side of the City: at the
very promontories ends, stands two no less fair, then high and strong
Castles, in this place did the Duke keep his Court, with very great royalty,
unto whom when this was reported, hearing of a certain that Wagner had great
store of his masters skill and whatsoever, he caused one that in such matters
is commonly commanded, to ride to Wittenberg, to the intent to hear the
truth, for many things more then the truth were certified unto him: the
messenger without delay (because the journey was long) departed and left the
Court, and we him a while.

A long discourse betwixt the Devil and VVagner, and ended with a good
Philosophical repast. CHAP. VI.
VVAgner solitary musing in his Chamber and conuersing with many multitudes of
thoughts, suddenly appeared Mephostophiles his masters Familiar, after him
Akercocke, which was VVagners, and after all Faustus: Quoth Mephostophiles what
cheer? Sirrah such as you see, we are as we were and never the better: and
welcome Akercocke, but my very good Faustus, that you come at this time I
rejoice. So then they all sat down, and sat right against him. Then entered
in diverse delicate viands, and there not then to be ended with unseen
Symphonies of Musiike. Then spoke Wagner and said Clauditeiam riuos, now we
have satisfied our appetite with meat, I pray you hear me with patience, for
I have a thing in my mind of which I would feign be resolved, but because you
so fowly, and so often fowly entreated my Master, for demanding some
questions, you shall ratify this Article with me again. 1. That in my
demands you shall answer truly and patientiy, for what hurt can redound to
you by aunswering of a question, seeing if you are sure of any thing you may
hold fast, a question cannot take it away: Without delay these good fellows
confirmed the Article with a great oath: but he would take their simple word
without surety he knew their honesty so well. Then VVagner pulling down his
Cap into his eyes, and leaning upon his elbow a while, and throwing up his
eyes to Heaven, and then sighing, at length folding his arms within
themselves, sat still a little time, then spitting a little and fetching a
hearty hem with a good courage spoke unto them thus.

Sirs, it is not unknown unto you how dear I have always accounted of my
Master, whose condition is as far from that it was as mine from yours, for
which I have more often lamented his departure then mine own misery, being
once every way a man, so thoroughly instructed with the weapons of all
Sciences, that in all the world hardly his peer could be found, so that your
victory over such a man is more to be wailed then ever many a thousand such as
I am. To be short that you may understand whither I will go without further
Oration. Wherefore I desire you, I pray you, nay I by your Article command
you, that you declare unto me truly without collusion, whither that Faustus
here present in that state wherein he now is, may come again to be a living man
amongst us, either his old shape renewed, or he in a new: For some
Philosophers say, and some Divines, as Origines and Tertullian, and whither
they say truly or no I know not, that no sooner the soul of man departs
from one but that it does enter into another. Wherefore I considering with my
self thus much, and often for his cause that he may not only be Faustus, but
also a living man and dweller upon the earth, to enjoy not only those graces
which through his great deserts he had lost, but also according to his infinite
knowledge, multiply them through Gods favors again and again abundantly. And
though you shall perhaps deny that the same Individual cannot be again so
resuscitated, yet that Numero it may in spite of you al, I kno^ ^^ may: for we
do not doubt that the same Indiuidual may Nu^^^ro be again regotten, because
that after seven and thirty thousand years, the heavenly constellation shall
be in every point per totu^, the same then that now it is, according to Plato
and the Astronomers. And therefore we shall be ye same in Numero, and shall sit
in this or that school or place as now we do, that is in that Magno anno, in
that great year: Whereupon Plato said, that after the great year he should
return to Athens, and should there read: Because the constellation shall happen
so, therefore that returning, the same effects shall with them likewise return.
Now having heard my resolution, answer me to my first proposition in full and
amply, as that I may be satisfied. At the conclusion of this speech Fa. turned
his head aside laying it betwixt his hands hiding it, so sat a great while.
Ache. he friskt up and down for he had neither clog nor chain, because he was in
the number of the wild ones, and over the table and back again. Ak. was the
familiar which F. gave to W. who asked him in the fashion of an Ape. Such
cranks, such lifts, careers and gambalds, as he played there, would have made a
horse laugh. Meph. who as it seemed was the speaker of ye Parliament in hell,
rose and walked about very hastily, at length he came to the table and striking
his fist on it (the print was seen 2. year after, and was carried to S.
Margets church for a relic, to show what a hot fellow the devil is in his
anger) and again beating said, thou, and then left, and came and went, and came
and went again, here he takes me one book and hurls it against a Cupboorde,
and then he takes the Cupboord and hurls it against the wall, and then he takes
the wall and throws it against the house, and the house out at the Window.
Pacifying his rage at the length, rolling his eyes, and seeming beat his teeth
together, sat down further off, and thus quietly spoke with a loud voice.
Were it not VVagner that our solemn vow, forbids to disturb or torment
thee for any demandes, this thy fond pride should be rewarded with most
intolerable punishments: As for the question I will answer thee more
substa^tially then such a foolish doltish one does require. And for that we
have day enough before us I will trauail further in it then ye gravity of the
argument can require, if it be but that thou may see how great an Ass thou
art, which can imagine so gross a matter in thy more gross head: As for thy
great Peer be it as you (...) to expect it you, in the mean we will enjoy him
and thee at our pleasure in despite of God and Heaven and all his imperial
armies of saints. Thy question is this: Whither the Spirit of a damned man can
return into the body of another man. To which I answer Negatiuely, it cannot.

1 If this were to them granted, then they should observe and keep the
Embrious in the Womb of the mother, that they might constitutiuely unite
themselves to it, to have at the leastewise, sensual consolation, and
delectation.

2. Then secondly because it is common to reasonable creatures to fashion and
informate the body, and to perfect it with some natural delightment, not to
vex it.

3. Then thirdly because of the law and order of Nature, the souls from the
places in their departure to them allotted, assigned and deputed of God,
neither do nor can depart at any time: for it is written: For the soul is a
Spirit going and returning. And they which do otherwise hold opinion are to
be accused, nay condemned in this with Pythagoras, who did abstain from all
living Animals and creatures, believing that in some the souls of some men did
dwell and abide. Thus far the Arrogonian named Bartholomew Sybilla a
Monopolitane, who writ upon this question being at Wittenberg, at the request
of him that did set forth the Dutch Copy show himself, to be a good
Philosopher and no worse Divine. But mark what follows, this is written
according to men in faith: the Devil was out of the first street of Coany
when he was past this last period. For that Pythagorical opinion, if that were:
this absurdity would follow: (I will speak plainly the rather to fit thy
capacity) and if the soul should pass out of the dead into the living, then
should mortality be the cause of the souls immortality (this is pretily
spoken) and by that means make it corruptible, which cannot be. And see thou
Wagner? for I will teach thee by demonstrations, and therewith he took a coal
of fire, and held it to him so long that it came to be but a coal, now thou
see Wagner, that so long as fire was in this subject it had life, but the
quality being removed from the quantity, neither is the quality found or seen
or known whither it vanishes, nor can the same fire though fire may return
into another body or subject albeit the quantity remains. Thus may the soul
of man be compared to the fire in the coal, as concerning his entrance and
departure, but not reentrance, for that coal may take life again, that is
fire, but so cannot humane body because one spirit can be united but to one
body, and not two to one, nor one spirit to two bodies: Wherefore that spirit
being departed it is irreuocable because of the unity, and the impossibility of
returning in the one, in the other of receiving any other. As for other reasons
directly by circumstaunce, if the Soul goes either to joy or pain
immediately, then I am certain that that hope which thou have is so merely
vain, as any thing which may hap under that title: For proof behold, and then
through the Wanscot door of VVagners study entered in two Kings, which drawing
their swords did there in presence combat together fiercely and couragiosly,
one of them shortly after fainting under the adversaries strokes fell down,
the other victorious, yet wounded, very canonically as a man may say, staggerd
immediately, as if he would feign have not fallen, yet for all that he fell:
then entered two men carrying Torches with the snuffes downwards, with great
solemnity (more then is here needful to be recapitulated, for I see nothing
but that this might have been very well left out for any thing worthy the
gravity of the matter) which when they had carried out the first slain
combattant, with armed men, and a dying stroke of the Drum, clothed all in the
color which best notes by his external hew, the internal sorrow: Then next
there entered two Pages all in silver white crowned with Baies, carrying their
Torches aloft declaring the height of their glory by the height of their
flames: next to them diverse Trumpetters and all in white, urging forth into
the wast air their victorious florishes, next a great standard bearer, and I
cannot tell what, but the conclusion was, that the triumph was exceeding great
and pompous, adorned with as many ceremonies as such a victory might or could
be, the Spirit when they were all gone began to speak and said, this was the
battle which was fought for the great Realm of Asia, by Hercules and
Orontides, where Orontides was slain, and Hercules sore wounded, but yet
recovered after which he achieved his 12 labors, and the 13 of which the Poet
speaks the hardest of al. Tertius hinc decimus labor est durissimns, vna
Quinquaginta simul stuprauit nocte puellas.


This History is as I do think in the Chronicle of Hell, for I did never hear
of it before, nor any body else, I appeal to all the Histories. Marry it may
be this was when Hercules was a little Boy, and then peradventure in deed the
records make no mention of it, but yet we have that recorded which he did when
he was less then a little Boy, as his killing of a Serpent in his Craddle, and
such a History as I do remember is enrould in the golden Book of the seven
wise Masters of Room, an autenticall author. But let that pass and let us
draw more near unto the cause: For as the devil was before our days, so by
authority he may allege experience, and we must of necessity believe that it
is either true or a lie. Mephostophiles continued his speech for all this
Aparenthesis, declaring VVagner his meaning in this point, for (quoth he) as
you se these two champions contending for the title of victory, one of the^
must needs if they try the extremest as they did receive the dishonor, the
other the glory, so in the combat wherein the dying body battaileth with the
lively soul, the soul if grace has made acceptable shall enjoy those
everlasting pleasures of Paradise, and dwell in heaven blessed and glorious
amongst the beautiful Angels, but if it be counted as reprobate and outcast of
God, then according to that punishment which his great sins did deserve, he can
have no other place but the continual horror of hell, wherein we miserable
dwell, and the ugly company of black devils and his frightfull Angels. There is
no other mean but honor or dishonor in this case, no other mean but joy or
pain, no other mean but heaven or hell perpetually: there is no place left for
a third. I could more copiously dispute of this matter, but that I will not be
too tedious in so exile a question. For where it is said in an author to which
I am witness, for I stood by his elbow when he writ the lines. Animae sunt in
loco certo and expectant iudiciu^, neque se inde possunt co^mouere. Which place
as appears in the precedent chapter is heaven or hell: again it is said Anima
quae pecauerit ipsa morietur. Of necessity then the soul to whom the Lord
imputes not his sin shall live, for they are immediate oppositio^s, for the
soul that is in joy will not come to these troubles, nor that which is in
torment cannot: therefore it is said: Et reuertatur puluis in terra^
quemadmodum erat, and spiritus reuertatur ad Dominum qui dedit illum, so there
is no mention in any scripture of the souls returning, but to a certain place
deputed of God to him. But before I go any further in ye declaring of that
which is here to be set down, I know they that have their consciences more of
the precise cut, will say, that there was a learned devil, true it is he is
learned, strong, and above all human conceit, subtle and crafty: and if they
say it is blasphemously done to have the word spoken to the world by so vile a
mouth, first they know how mightily the devil is conversant in holy writ, in
any thing to overthrow a christian thought, knowing that as ye word of God is a
word of power to attain salvation to whom grace is given: and to work
eternal damnation where that gift is wanting, knowing it is the only means
to debell and conquer the christian thought, for as a man is governed by a law
and by it lives, so if any thing be evidently directed against him in it, it
slayes his heart, it overthrows him, it takes away his power for ever, nor is
it more blasphemous to be speak to us men, then to God himself, as it is in
S. Alathero, where the devil was not afeard, to assail his creator with most
terrible arguments of the divine letter. They which have right minds can
persuade themselves accordingly: but otherwise they may cavil as long as they
will, which they may do to their small profit, assuring them this that in
coveting by fault finding to seem learned, they make themselves the notes and
reproach not only of the learned, but even of the absurd and barbarous rude
fools, and that they are the only spirits of error and contention, and the
chief causes of unbelief by vayn reasonings and questions to the unresolved
christian. But as for this speech which is but Humile dicendigenus in very
truth, let them thus think, that if there were any such controversy betwixt
VVagner and his spirit, as is here mentioned, that those are not the words
which were spoken, but that they do proceed from a young Scholar who gave me
this copy, and not of a devil, of whose familiarity and frequency and of
other circumstantiue causes, I will God willing in the Catastraphe and
conclusion of this Book deliver unto you my poor opinion. In the mean while I
will follow the matter into which we are fallen my good friends and without
further ado I pray without any more excusiue phrase, patiently expect the good
hour wherein the death of this volume is prepared: Mephostophiles taking
breath a little, presented his speech saying: it is said likewise. Factum est
autem vt moreretur mendicus. etc. And it came to pass that the beggar dyed,
and was carried away of Angels into Abraham's bosom, and that rich man died and
was buried, and he being in Hell lifted up his eyes, when he was in torments,
and saw Abraham a far off and Lazarus in his bosom. Nor nothing does that
impugn which is said of the Papist, that he cannot come into Gods presence nor
be one of the elect unless they be purified from their sins, for which
purification, they ordain a place so terribly stuck with pins, needles,
daggers, swords, nails, etc. so soultring with hot burning surnaces, and so
every way formidable with material sulphury fires, that no tongue can
express, nor any heart imagine, wherein the sinful soul must be many times
and often cleansed, but I hope if this were true then Lazarus should have bin
likewise so dressed in their terrible imagined terrors, which he was not, unless
they will be so impudent to say that he had no sin. I shall not need to
dispute how absurd it is to say that the sin of the soul in the body
committed, must be extirpated and purified by a material substance and
rigor, nor of the matter of the like argument. And hereupon he seemed to sigh
as if some sudden thought had ouerprest his stomach. I can quoth he largely
discourse of al divine and human propositions, but as the unlearned Parrat
who speaks often and much, and understands never any thing to profit
himself. Ah that unto us Spirits no secrets are secret, no doings of man
vnhid, and yet we Devils cursed of God are incapable of any of Gods mercies,
though through them we were created. We know repentance is the way to attain
the celestial savor: we know Gods mercies how great they are, and that we
ought to despair of nothing, yet there is nothing (such is our seeing
blindness) so it appertain to God and godliness, of which we do not
despair. No Wagner we are so far from living again, as we are from
certainty to be saved. But in stead of that we are crossed with all kind of
vexation, for since the first time that I with my Master and fellows fell
down from Heaven being of the most royal order of Angels, Potestates,
Cherubins, and Seraphins, riding upon the wings of the Wind in all bright
shining Majesty, and enjoying the most glorious and uiuine presence of our
Creator, till for our heart swelling pride, and hawty insolency, within as
little space of time as we were created in, with his dreadful lightning threw
us down headlong into the bottomless Abysses of the Air, wherein we endure
these tortures and like wicked souls with us, as our manifold deserts have
brought upon us. And for that we know that the way to mercy is utterly denied,
and that we are as much hated of our selves as of God, we think it the
sweetest remedy in these manifold miseries to have partakers of our common woe
with us. Wherefore it is most expedient for us to be thus enuiously malicious
against all mankind, making them too as far in Gods dreadful curse as our
selves.

VVagner melting at these words, his eyes undid the great burden of his
sorrow, strayning himself so long that he wept, and yet could say nothing, but
only a small volley of sobs hastily following: Mephostophiles seeing how
VVagner was drowned in so deep a melancholy, told him pulling him by the
sleeue that he would be still demanding of such foolish questions which will
profit him so little as might be. Know thou not (quoth he) that all the
Rhetorickes are the servant of my tongue, or that we can move pity or hatred
when we please, fool as thou art forget these vain conferences, persuade thy
self that they are but the effect of speech, long can thou not live, and yet
do thou live as if thou did not long: youthly should be thy thoughts, and
fraught with the rank lustines of conceit and amorous delight, if thou will
ask questions let them be such as appertain to love and wealth, to pleasure,
to pastime, and to merriment. How say thou to such a one, naming a
Gentlewoman the most beautiful Lady under the cope of Heaven? thou shall enjoy
her, nay any one so she be one whom thou lists to call beautiful, whosoever
thy eyes shall lay their delight upon. And presently Music was heard so
sweet, so plenteous, and so rauishinge, as if on Music depended all sweet,
all plenty, al rauishment. The doors conuaying themselves aside, as giving
place to so divine a fairenes, entering in a blew Velvet Gown rased, and
thickely beset in the gards with most pure Doches of gould, not altogether
ignorant of precious stones, sued with royal Ermines, loose about her: her
heads ornament, (though greater ornament to her head then her head there could
not be) was a kind of atirde Caul (such as I have seen none in England
according to their description) raised up at the corners with stiff square
wiers of beaten gould, on that a Chaplet or frontire of Roses, on the Chaplet a
veil of Lawne, which covered all her fair body denying the sight of such an
Angel, but only through a shadow: In brief she was such a one as would have
roused the basest desire in the whole World to attempt wondrous enterprises,
in her hands silken soft, she held a Lute, discoursing sweetelye upon the
solemn stringes with her nimble fingers. A maid carrying a blew waxen Taper in
a silver white Candlestick made in fashion of a Censor, but it was derived
into two several branches, in whose ends were curiously wroght two most
beautiful places to pight tapers one. The maid bir Lady would have well
contented a reasonable proper Squire, it was a pretty rank less, round about
as plump as a Bladder, which being yet smoking new is blown up with Wind:
well I will not trouble you with these rude descriptions any longer, but desire
you to conceive the excellency of this fair Lady, for it is far more copious
in the Dutch Copy then is here necessary to to be recapitulated. Wagners heart
leaping at this sight looked about him, as if he would have no body privy to
himself but himself, and so it was in deed, for Faustus, Mephostophiles, and
Akercocke were gone, and thereupon with a boon courage advancing himself
upon his toes, and weeding himself in the best Germane fashion, as he could
very well, began to travail unto her, but remembering his bad apparel stepped
back and blushed, and hid his face, but suddenly retourning again as if he
had known now how rather to become his weeds, began to fewter himself, but O
wonder, his habit was changed with his thought, and he was now no more Wagner
but Armisuerio the Ladies Lord. And to be short this new Armisuerio and old
VVagner met with the Lady, and saluting her in the best kind of Bon noche,
used her as he would do his Lady, and she him as her Lord. So passing aver
their weary night in such pleasure as I could find in my heart to enjoy or any
man (unless an Euenuch beside.)

The arriual of the Messenger at Wittenberg, and the description of VVagner.
CHAP. VII.
IT is time to wind about another furrow with our swerting Teeme and bring our
speech to another matter, entering out of one into another, for change is sweet.
Not forgetting by the way the Purceuant or as we may better call him a
Messenger who lately departed from Vienna in Austria, and I think by that time
this disputation was finished, had almost overtaken all the way betwixt him and
home, which was some fifteen days travail, after five Germane miles to the
days labor, and arrived at Wittenberg, by enquiry came to Wagners chamber,
which was in the way as ye go to the Public Schools, as ye go from
Melancthons house, a pretty house and of a reasonable large sise built of hewn
stone, and environed with a good thick Wall, of some three foot and a half
thick and twenty high, at the bottom guarded about with a good broad Mount of
seven yardes over, and round about very large and secret walks, far from al
company and resort, and there he might talk without fear with the Devil and
his Dam to, thither this fellow coming knocked peremptorily at the door,
Wagner was even now gone to his study, and rising up in a Pedlers chafe, that
he should go to his book, especially if it were goodness not once in a
month, and yet then to be troubled, he swore a little thing would make him
never study more, it should not, but putting one his cloak and his hat, came
down and vnbolted the door: Unto whom the Messenger seeing such a pretty
jolly fellow did some little of reverence, Wagner as yet scarce having let
down his choler, stepped back, and perceiving him wear such a Weed as
Serieants there do use to wear, thinking with himself that some had come
from the prince for coosening of his servant, shut the door upon him and
went powting and swearing and pitifully chafing, that if the knave ofered to
sue him he would surely kill him at the least, down he fetched a good
Bastinado and set it behind the door and opened it again, and demanded
somewhat mildly what he had to say unto him, to whom the Messenger said, that
he came from the Archduke of Austria from Vienna, who willing to hear some
certainety of his Master, did send for him assuring himself, that not only
he could satisfy his desire in that matter, but also show him as much skill as
ever his master had. Wagner hearing the purpose of his message with good
effectual words, thankt him again, and rendered most serviceable reverence to
his good Lord and Master for remembering so gently of his poor servant etc.
Desiring him to tarry until he might set every thing in due order and he
would not fail to go with him. The Messenger did not deny him, and so they
went up together into their Chamber, whom ever after the Messenger loved
dearly for his proper behauior and personage, for in deed Wagner was a very
goodly young man, being about the common stature, straight and reasonably
slender, well trust, his hair very yellow and his face fair, his bearde which
did but now express the blossoms of his lusty courage of ye like yellow, well
mannered, as having bin brought up amongst the finest and best sort of Devils:
having a pleasant filed tongue, and would make the dainty Rhetoric come as
smoothly out of his mouth as an arrow out of a piece of paper, well could he
talk of amorous devices, and entreat the brauest Ladies with sweet
entertainment, in truth by report he was a Gentle-like man, and accomplished
with as many fine parts as a better man than he might justly vaunt of: he
could play upon any fine Instrument, and was not ignorant of any laudable
exercises, carrying a brave lusty conceit even to his death: and furnished
with many proportions of art, there was nothing wanting in the man but a godly
mindo.

The Tragedy of Doctor Faustus seen in the Air, and acted in the presence of
a thousand people of Wittenberg. An. 1540. CHAP. VIII.
IN a brave summer Sunshine day, the whole people of Wittenberg being gathered
together, to behold certain matches for the Garland who could drink most,
and also to see a match shot at a pair of Buts with Harquebushiers, as their
order is in a low meddow hard by the Elue: which now being on his freshest
pride was full of fine and sweet flowers, being in the latter end of the
month wherein the Sun departs from the last embracings of Gemini. On a
sudden there was seen a maruailous bright and glorious Rayne-bow, spreading
the wide arms over the wide World, and straight was there hard a noise of
Trumpets, soundinge a short flourish, and then another, and by and by another
all alike short, at the which the assembly was wonderously affeard, and
listened, desirous to see the effect of this wonder and strange miracle, some
of them fell to their Aue mary's lustely, thinkinge that the universal Doom
had been at that instant, as thus they beheld with admiration, they might
distinctly perceive a goodlye Stage to be reard (shining to sight like the
bright burnish gold) upon many a fair Pillar of clearest Cristall, whose
feet rested upon the Arch of the broad Rayne-bow, therein was the high Throne
wherein the King should sit, and that prowdly placed with two and twenty
degrees to the top, and round about curious wrought chaires for diverse other
Potentates, there might you see the groundwork at the one end of the Stage
whereout the personated devils should enter in their fiery ornaments, made like
the broad wide mouth of an huge Dragon, which with continual armies of smoke
and flame breathed forth his angry stomachs rage, round about the eyes grew
hairs not so horrible as men call brissels, but more horrible as long and
stiff spears, the teeth of this Hels mouth far out stretching, and such as a
man might well call monstrous, and more then a man can by words signify: to
be short his hew of that color which to himself means sorrow, and to others
ministers like passion: a thick lamp black, blacker then any paint, any
Hell, blacker then it own self. At the other end in opposition was seen the
place wherein the bloudlesse skirmishes are so often performed on the Stage,
the Walls (not so pleasant as old wives would have their tales addorned with)
of Pasty crust, but Iron attempered with the most firm steel, which being
brightly filed shone as beautifully over the whole place as the Pale shiminge
Cynthia, environed with high and stately Turrets of the like metal and
beautye; and hereat many in gates and out-gates: out of each side lay the
bended Ordinance, showing at their wide hollowes the crueltye of death: out of
sundry loopes many large Banners and Streamers were pendant, brieflye nothing
was there wanting that might make it a fair Castle. There might you see to be
short the Gibbet, the Posts, the Ladders, the tiring house, there every thing
which in the like houses either use or necessity makes common. Now above all
was there the gay Clouds Vsque quaque adorned with the heavenly firmament, and
oftenspotted with golden tears which men call Stars: There was lively
portrayed the whole Imperial Army of the fair heavenly inhabitauntes, the
bright Angels, and such whose names to declare in so vile a matter were too
impious and sacrilegious. They were so naturally done that you would have
sworn it had been Heaven it self or the Epitome of it, or some second Heaven,
and a new Heaven it was, from thence like dewy drops wherein the Sun lays his
golden shine, making them to appear like small golden tears, the sweet
odours and comforting liquor streamde, and seemde always to rain from thence
but they never fell, but kept a beaten path from down on high wherein the
descending Angel might rejoice. I should be too long if I should express this
rare Stage, especially in such sort and such like words as the like occasion in
a more worthy subject wuld require, but of necessity we must barely apply our
descriptions to the nature of the whole History. We must not fail in the
first principle of Art, according to that of Horace.

Humano capiti ceruicem pictor equinam
Iungere si velit, and varias inducere plumas
Vndique collatis membris, vt turpiter atrum
Desinat in piscem mulier formosa superne:
Spectatum admissi risum teneatis amici.
Credit e Pisones isti fabulae fore librum
Per similem.
Non vt placidis cocant immitia.
I shall not need to turn back to declare the deep astonishement of the
people, who are always in most small manners induced easily to wondering, but
now this excellent fair Theator erected, immediately after the third sound of
the Trumpets, there enters in the Prologue atttired in a black vesture, and
making his three obeysances, began to show the argument of that Scenicall
Tragedy, but because it was so far off they could not understand the words,
and having thrice bowed himself to the high Throne, presently vanished. Then
out of this representaunce of Hels mouth, issued out whole Armies of fiery
flames, and most thick foggy smoakes, after which entered in a great batell of
footmen Devils, all armed after the best fashion with pike etc, marching after
the stroke of the courageous Drum, who girded about laid siege to this fair
Castle, on whose Walls after the summons Faustus presented himself upon the
battelments, armed with a great number of Crosses, pen and incke horns,
charms, characters, seals; periapts etc. who after sharp words defled the
whole assembly, seeming to speak earnestly in his own defense, and as they
were ready to rear the Ladders, and Faustus had begun to prepare for the
counterbattery, determining to throw down upon the assemblies heads so many
heavy charms and coniurations, that they should fall down half way from the
ascendant, whilst these things began to wax whot from the aforesaid Heaven,
there descended a Legion of bright Angels ridinge upon milk white Chariots,
drawn with the like white steeds, who with celestial divine melody came into
the Tower, to the intent to fight for the Doctor against his furious enemies,
but he wanting pay-money, and void in deed of all good thoughts not able to
abide their most blessed presence sent them away, and they returned from whence
they came, sorrowfully lamenting his most wilful obstinacy, whilst he had all
be nointed the Walls with holy Water, and painted with blood many a crimson
Cross. At length the Alarm was given, and the Ladders cleaude to the Walls, up
the assaylants climbde, up they lifted their fearful weapons. Faustus not
able (destitute of help) to withstand them was taken prisoner, and his tower
down rased to the earth, with whose fall both the large Heaven and World shook
and quaked mightily, whom when they had fettered they left there, they marching
out and the forenamed Chaires were presently occupied with all the Imperial
rulers of Hell, who clothed in their holyday apparel sat there to give
Judgment upon this wilful Faustus, whom two Hangmans of Hell vnloofed, and
there in presence of them all the great devil before his chief peers, first
stamping with his angry foot, and then shaking his great bushe of hair, that
therewith he made the near places and the most proud Devils courages to
tremble, and with his fire burnt scepter, and his like colored Crown, all of
gold, setting one arm by his side, and the other upon the pummell of his
Chair, shook a prettye space with such angry fury, that the flames which
proceeded from his frightful eyes did dim the sight of the Witte^bers beelde.
There was in this said Wittenberg a gallant fair Lady and a virgin, which now
following her mother accompanied with sundry gallant Germane Gentlemen, had
even now entered out of their Barge, and seeing the whole world of people as
they thought gasing up into the Heaven so very strangely, were partly stricken
with wonder, some with fear, and some with sudden merryment, and hasting down
the hill more then a round pace, asked some what was there to do, and they bid
them look up (for here is to be noted that they looked up before but could see
nothing but as always they were wont until they showed them it) which they
did, and at the same time wherein the great Devil was in his red whot anger,
this young Gentlewoman looked up, whose most ugly shape so seared her, that
even then there she fell down in a sown, whom they conuaied away very
speedily, yet ere they could come home she was welnigh dead, and so she lay
for two years without hope of life, or certainty of death: great sorrow to
her parents, and as cruel pain to her: But she at length recovered her
Spirit, and if by your patience I may I will tell you how. There was a most
learned and excellent Doctor dwelling in the Town who had great knowledge in
the black Art, who being requested to use some Physic to aid her in her
great extremity, being promised for reward five thousand Dollars. This Doctor
perceiving the cause of her malady was not caused of any distemperature of her
body, but only of the before said fear, knew that Physic might well make her
body sound, but her mind never. Wherefore not only for the reward, but also to
become gracious and famous at once, proceeded in his cure on this manner. One
night having made his Orisons and nine times combed his hair with tears of a
pure maid, and nine times gone about a fire made all of pure Heben coal, and
thrice nine times called upon the name of the most dreadful Hecate, he laid
himself to sleep upon a pure white and clean unspotted maidens smock, and
covered himself over with the ashes of a white Hind roasted and burned
altogether, he slept, and the next morning apparelled in white robes, having
often and often called, recalled, and exercised the three Fairies Millia,
Achilya, and Sybilla at length the ground opened, and with them they brought a
milk white Steed, and did put upon his finger the ring of inuinsibility, when
they were vanished, he mounted up upon his Horse, who with more swift flight
then the winged Pegasus carried him through the wide Air so fast and so long,
that having passed over Bohem, Hungary, Thracia, all Afin Minor, Mesopotamia,
and at length to Arabia, Foelix, where he alighted upon a most high Mountain,
all the way from the top to the bottom of a just breadth and steepenes, so that
he that were on that would think himself not in the world, and they beneath
would deem him to be in heaven, upon the brims of it round about grew the high
Pines, the stately Cedars, and always so green as the most fresh Meddow: the
height of this huge rock was two and twenty miles in even altitude and half a
mile of just circuit all the way: there he tied his Horse to a Tree and knocked
at the Castle gate, where before was never seen any, so that no path could
there be seen, so that a man might justly have called it the house of little
Hospitality, to him there came Neglectment an old Lady, and demanded what he
would, who told her his errand, and withal a ring of fine gold from the three
Fairies, she knew the ring and his errand, and conuayed him into many a fair
room, wherein she showed him many a worthy Knights memorials, many an antique
Monument heaped up, but inner rooms so monstrous dark and nightly, that no
human eye could perceive any thing, and forth she brought him unto a
Garden, out of the midst whereof rose a little Hill from the summity whereof,
there was a paued way of pure Crystal stone, from along whose bosom trilled
a small Water: This water an old man held, and in deed he had it as a
Patrimony, for therefore he could show many an ancient evidence, and worn
Charter, his hair was all fled to his front, as if some enemy had scared the
hinder locks from his scalpe, on his back hung a pair of Wings which flagged
down, as if either they had been broken or he weary, and thus he over stroad
a round World, from out if every part whereof gushed out this small River
which was conuayed down in this Crystal pipe, in his hand he held a long
sith, and in the other an hour glass, here the Doctor seeing the old ruins
of this sumptuous house, and all the fair Walls and buildings ouergroan with
a deadly Moss was much amassed, but because he could not tarry, he dipped a small
Violl in the spring and departed, and for because he was so peremptorily warned
not to tarry, he could not behold the most stately Galleries, in which he
might see the Worlds chief pleasures and Monuments, some wholly worn away,
some half, and some even now beginning, and some wholly quite ouer-groane with
a thick earthye fur, for as he came by an old Wall he chaunst with his elbow
to rub off the thick Moss, and then might he see a fair piece of Parchement
gilded and painted curiously, wherein was truly described the ancient tokens
of a most brave and worthy Gentleman, so having sped of his journey he came by
the same way again as he went, Neglectment shut the doors upon him, whilst he
mounted upon his white swift footed Horse and by the like time arrived at his
own house, where having with the blood of a new slain heyfer, thrice anointed
the feet of his Cauallo, and tying at his ear with a string of fine silk
spunne by the hands of a pure maid, the received ring of inuisibility unto his
ear, with many a Cross, and many open Aue Maria, dismissed him, who in the
same moment returned to the place from whence he came. With this water the
Doctor came to the maid, and having used a certain incantation, gave her to
drink of the water of deep Oblivion, which she had no sooner tasted of, but
straight ways she had forgotten the terrible picture of the Devil, and was
revived out of all her infernal fears, the Doctor called winning him credit,
favor and fame, and richly rewarded for his medicine, departed, and running
whom threw his Violl into the deep River buryinge oblivion with oblivion, the
parents of the young Lady rejoicing exceedingly at their daughters recovery,
for ever after caused the place wherein their daughter was thus scared, to be
inaccessable for man or beast, compassing it in with a high wall, and
overthrowing the banckes, so that now there is no mention of the meadow nor of
the Wall.

The Devil, the great Devil Lucifer having finished his brief Oration,
descended down out of his Judgment seat, and pointing unto all his Nobles,
took Faustus by the hand, and placed him just before him, taking him by the
chinne seemed to them to bid him speak freely, he mounted up again unto his
high Throne, and with a more mild madness expected the speech of the Doctor,
who having bowed himself submissiuely unto these damnable company, he began to
speak, and yet not long, then he began to walk up and down and to show
strange gestures, when suddenly for some bugs words escaped by Faustus, all
the Devils there rose up, and with their swords drawn threatninge with them
the poor Doctor, turning al their bodies and directing their faces to the
King, who with a stern countenance commanded silence. When Faustus having
long raged, of a soddaine howling loud, and tearing his hair, laid both his
arms upon his neck, and leapt down headlong of the stage, the whole company
immediately vanishing, but the stage with a most monstrous thundering crack
followed Faustus hastily, the people verily thinking that they would have
fallen upon them ran all away, and he was happiest that had the swiftest
foot, some leapte into the River and swam away, and all of them with great
affright ran into the City and clapped the City gates together, straight, and
to increase this fear they thought they hard a thing fall into the river as if
a thousand houses had fallen down from the top of Heaven into it. But
afterward this was known to be VVagners knavery, who did this to show the
Purceuaunt some point of his skill.

CHAP. XI.
THe messenger had not tarried above three days, when as Wagner had trust up
his baggage, and was now ready to depart when on the third day at night he
cause his boy Artur Harmaruan, (who was the son of a wealthy boore, witty
above many, and praised for his notable waggery: his father dwelt at
Malmesburg a town hard by Wittenberg in Saxony in high Dutchland, with whom
Wagner being acquainted had obtained him of his father to serve him, and he to
be taught of Wagner) him he cause to go to diverse scholars of his
acquaintance, to suppe with him at his departure, who being invited to this
hated farewell, came speedily where they had a banquet and other courtesies
which in such a time both custom and laws of their fellowship do prescribe:
In the supper time the scholars moved many questions, and amongst the rest
one desired the purseuant to describe unto them his Lord and master, for they
heard say that the Duke Alphonsus, was a marvelous qualified Gentleman: The
purseuant not willing to refuse their request told them that seeing their
demand proceeded of a common good zeal, he could not but wrongully refuse to
satisfy: notwithstanding the truth might be better known of another then of
him, when duty bids to be partial, if any defect might breed partiality,
but so much as I will tell you, the enemy will not disdain to affirm: And
there he told them the very stature, proportion, and particular lineamentes,
concluding that he showed the uprightness of his mind by the proportion of
his body, and keeping in his outward shape, the virtue which philosophers
would have kept in the mind. There he told them the feature of his
countenance, the color of his hair, eyes, face, cheeks, etc. He told them
his stature, favor, and strength, which was such, that with pure cleanness of
his force, he has foyld a gentleman in wrestling, who beside wightnesse of
body, was very firm without affection, not as some do which in performing
any thing will with such a ridiculous soreness act it, as if the force of the
body must be personated upon the Theater of his face: He declared unto them
that the gifts of his mind were such as then he could not for the number
reckon up, but even as occasion should serve might meet with them, being all
such as were more ready to be admired then imitated, as if all virtues were
gathered in him together, magnanimity, magnificence, affability, modesty etc.
briefly (he said) there were in him all those Graces, which adorn the
subject with the title of Virtuous. He likewise recounted unto them his
studies, unto which he accommodated himself at vacant hours, were partly the
Poetry. A Poem of his he said he had by chance gotten, (and by greater
chance had it there at that instant) which he had made in praise of his
excellent Lady when he was but of young years, his Father living I dare say he
would not for ten thousand florens have it seen, being such a one as on a
dreaming passion he had let fall from his pen and of many the most abject,
but such as this is deserves commendations, because a Prince made it, but if
you saw his real devises, you would then say they were Princelike. And then he
read it, which I was loath my good friends either to translate or translated to
present it here, for that it was not worthy your censure, considering the nice
buildings of Sonnets now a days, but according to Aristos vain you shall
find it very confirmable, as also for that I knew that if I should have left
it out, it would have been more wished for then now admirde. Yet for that I
prefer your well known good wills before any vain fear, take this with the
rest if they be any with such favor, as if I were by you at the reading.

A mio solemente amandona
Madonna: Donna non parelia.
L' Angelico sembiante e quel bell volte,
Fa l'odio, e l'ira va in obliuione,
Ch' a l' etc.
Thus have I harshly Englished them verbally.

Angellike semblaunce beauties ornament,
Whose Virtue quels all wrath and rancor deep,
Whose life Heavens grace and death would monument
Virtue thy life are. The Letter were worn out in this place.

How many wounded hearts thou makst to tremble,
And I of many one cannot dissemble,
How far into in (...) that ere-sore.
So were thy beauty but deserving praise,
So were thy beauty but as feminine,
Then could my quill his strain so high arrayse,
Then could with it compare the masculine,
Thy beauty praise thy bounty spast divine,
No strain no quill such wonderments assaies,
Then Poets pen shall to thy power his power resign,
What words may well express such excellence,
No humane thought thy beauties may comprise
And words may tell al humane insolence,
All humane words and wit thy gifts surprise.
To satisfy my self in my pretense,
Our pen unto the heavens must wander hence.
And fill it self with dew of heavenly Sapience.
And I my life shall to your hands resign,
Which live to serve a humane Saint so past divine.
Se da colei.
Che poco ingegno adhoradhor mi lima.
This Sonnet was ended with as much praise as it began with desire, and one
of them coppied it out, and so it was made common to the rest, and made a good
sort of them Poets, rectifying their gross conceits, with so sweet a matter.
He told them that this was but a preparatiue to wondering in respect of his
choice makings. Then he showed them this Epigram, which he made when as before
the Duke his Father, a brace of fair English Gray hounds fell down at the
Hearts heels stark dead, (the Heart also lying not above six yards off dead to)
with chasing, having out stripped the rest of the dogs above half a mile.

Then he reckonned unto him the delight he took in Lymming, and showed them
very many fine devises of his own handy work. The scollers singularly
delighted with the view of the relics of so great a Prince, approved by
silence that excellency which by speech they could not. In fine there he
reckoned by enough to be praised, and peradventure more then was true, but not
more then is desired. There he set forth with great and ardent Emphasis other
qualities, as his skill and hardy demeanor at the Tilt turney, how he could
menage the sturdy stead, leap, run, vaunt, dance, sing, play on diverse
Instruments, and talk with amiable speech amongst fair Ladies which we call
courting, in all his actions full of gentle familiar affability, still
reserving to himself the due honor belonging to his personage. He concluded in
fine that he was the most qualified Prince and absolute Gentleman that day in
all Christendom: saying if they knew his humanity, justice and liberality, you
would say in him were all humanity, justice and liberality: And as the greatest
thing that the world can show is beauty, so the least thing that is to be
praised, in him is beauty, you would say no less then I have spoken could be
in his person if you did but see him. Thus far the digression came in the
commendations of this Alphonsus which truly I was weary of, fearing the great
insufficiency of the description, but yet he had not done. I would to God
(quoth he) you would come to Vienna and I promise you such lodging and
entertainment, that next to the sight of him should be worthiest of your
thanks. Wherefore you shall not sorrow that your friend Wagner departs
unless you will seem to envy rather his felicity then his departure. I would
we were even all of us as we sit at the Table in the Dukes Court, and here
again with a wish, and herewith their knocked one at the door, Wagner craftily
fayning that he himself would rise to see him that knocked so, desiring them
all to sit still in any case, and opening therewith the door, there entered two
young Lords of Tergeste and Morauia, bearing Torches, and next there came the
Duke of Austrich, as they thought, and Wagner talked with him bare headed (the
Purceuant thinking verily it had been his Master, would have done his duty
unto him, but that the rest hindered him: on his head he wore a little Hat of
blew velvet, with a rich band of pearl, stone and gould, and a long white
feather, his cloak of blewe velvet, round guarded with gould lace, edged with
Orient pearl, and betwixt the gards oylet holes whereout hung by small silk
thredes long bugles, all the sleeves in the like order: by his side a golden
hilted Rapier, and on his Rapier his hand, his Buskins of the fine Polonian
leather, richly embrodered, on the turnings down with costly Goldsmiths work,
al his apparel whatsoever most beautiful and princely, he had no sooner passed
by (which was not until he was distinctly viewed of them) but that Wagner
spoke unto them in such manner: saying that that Honorable this man's Lord had
sent for him, whose commandment I will in no wise repugne. Wherefore I
beseech you to take it as you would my greatest advancement. This his
description of his feature, judge how rightly he has said, for my part I
confess that they are rather less then the truth, then not as he has
reported, and herein to satisfy you the more I have caused my spirit
Akercocke to take his shape upon him.

Now (quoth he) it is time to depart, but because it shall be the last night
of our meeting none of you shall depart, for I have lodging enough for you all,
and for you shall not be forgetful of Wagner when he is gone, let every man
wish his woman, and so to bed my masters. They began all to laugh merrely, not
as hoping or wishing, but as if they had heard a merry purpose, and therefore
they laughed because it was merry, and such mirth they always liked off.
VVagner was almost angry, and yet for that he was almost he was not angry,
sending out a great oath as the Prologue of his Comedy, bidding his Boy go
prepare their beds and chambers, and bid them wish whom they would, he would
their wishes should be performed. Then rose up one of the scholars persuading
himself of VVagners earnest, and yet doubting, because he feared he was not in
earnest. Why (quoth he) if you mean in very deed my friend Kit. I would I had
such a woman, I believe beside her self there is none fairer then the fairest
in this town. Why weenest thou I jest (quoth Wagner, go thy ways, yonder
she is upon pain of my head, and so it was in deed: then every one strove
who should wish first, and he that wished last had his first wish, so every one
took his Damzel and for that night departed to their beds, who are witnesses
of that nights great pleasures, and in the morning they arose wishing that
every morning were the morrow of such a night. Every one gate him a Hackney,
and brought him on the way a days journey, where they with great grief left
him, who rode til he came to Vienna, and they till they arrived at Wittenberg.
Thus still you see these Pot meetings, are ended emongst these puft-cheekt
Hannikins with bed daliaunces, rightly describing their lives most bestiall and
Epicure-like.

A lamentable history of the death of sundry students of Wittenberg. CHAP. X.
NOt long after it was reported and blased abroad that Wagner was departed,
diverse Scholars gessing that he had left his Books or the most part behind,
determined to send for Harmaruan, which they did, who by no persuasions could
be won to let them have his masters Keys, so they devised amongst
themselves to bind the Boy as he should go home to his Inn, where as his
Master had put him to board till his return. And night drawing on Harmaruan
went to his lodging, by the way scholars to the number of seven met him and
bound him, and beat him sore until he gave them all the Keys, which he
carefully carried about him sowed in a wide Germane sloppe, which when they had
(they being all muffled and disguised strangely with vizards) they loosed, and
then they ran hastily to VVagners house, as if they had fled from followers, or
else followed some hastelye flying, where being come, they opened the gates, and
being entered shut them again, this being about eleven of the clock in ye
night, and in they went, where they found two Barrels of mighty strong March
English Beer of two years old, which they broched, and sat so long drinking
till they were all well druncke. And then down they get into a back Court,
and having lighted Tapers, having injuriously framed all the circles, squares,
triangles, etc. and apparelled with all the coniuring roabes that the Art
requires, there they begin in a most dreadful confusion of hellishe sillables
to inform the Feend, and after these words followed as if there needs must
such things follow after such words, a terrible roar, and then so bright a
smoothring thick fiery fume ascended out of the earth as if it would have made
an eternal night, then a vehement flame followed which with continual motion,
ran about the brims of the circle, until as weary it left moving, (all this
while they continued reasonably constant, and continued their inuocations
without any fear) then from beneath was heard most lamentable outcries, from
above huge trembling, thunder, and round about nothing but fear and death in a
thousand terrible diverse shapes, then they began to quail a little, but yet
by encouragement grew hardy by reason of the number, then round about was
sounded alarms with drums, and onesette with Trumpets, as if there all the
World had conflicted, then ye flame which all this while ran about the circle
became a body, but such a body, as if it had been but a Picture would have
madded any one. At whose sight they wholly overcome with deadly fear forgot the
use of their Pantacles or any such gear, but even submitted themselves to the
small mercy of the Feend, who with great violence rent them and fore them most
lamentably. Harmaruan who had raised a great many to the intent to follow them
suspecting that which in deed was, was after long wandering (for they had
caused a Devil discrier to void all within a certain circuit) with his
company brought to the house, where round about they might see in the Court
wherein these seven were coniuring, huge flames as if some great pile had
been made to the burial of a noble Heroie, climing up in huge volumes up
into the Air, or if some great store of stuble had been fired, so vehemently
furious was the flame that no man there (and there were above thirty) was able
once to draw near to any part of ye house, the cry was carried into the City
of this fire, whereupon the whole town was assembled with hooks, buckets,
ladders, etc. where in vain they emptied many a large Well, till diverse
learned Preachers falling down submissiuely on their knees, with good faith
appeased this seeming fire which in deed was none, but a mere diabolical
illusion, then they entered into the house, where they found the Barrels brought
a bed and delivered, the cups, the whole furniture clean destroyed, broken,
and throne about the House, but drawing near unto the most ruefull and
lamentable spectacle of all, coming into the yeard or grove which was moted
about and enclosed with a thick Wall of trees very exceeding high, as Fur
trees are, so very thick that no light was pearceable into it, in the very
midst whereof was a round plot of some one hundred foot any way from the
Center, there found they the religious Circles, there the strange Characters,
names of Angels, a thousand Crosses, there found they the five cross hilted
Daggers for the five Kings of Hell, there many a strong bulwark builded with
rows of Crosses, there found they the surplesses, the stoles, pall, miters,
holy water, pots broken, their periapts, seats, signs of the Angels of the
seven days, with infinite like trash and damnable roggery, the fruits of the
Devils rank fancy. But the most lamentable sight of all the seven Scholars
utterly torn in pieces, their blood having changed the color of the ground
into a dark Crimson, al their bodies as black as any coal as if they had
been scorcht with a material fire, their flesh violently rent from the bones,
and hanging down in morsels like the skirts of a side coat, their bones all
broaken, their veins cut in sunder, and their bowels broad shed upon the
earth, their brains powered out and covering the red grass all over, their
notes stimtyed, their eyes thrust out, their mouths widened and slit up to the
ears, their teeth dashed out, and their tongue starting out betwixt their gums,
their hair clean singed of, in brief imagine with your selves in your minds,
and propounde a p^cture in your thought, the most deformed, borne, and ill
favored that you can think on, yet shall it not compare to the most
lachrimable sight and show of them, surpassing as much all credit as my skill
dewly to describe them, whom when they had buried without tarriaunce, raced the
house to the ground, and filled up the moates with earth, heaping upon the
place of this murder the stones of the house defaced, then they returned home
discoursing with lamentable judgment upon the high and severe revenge of Gods
indignation upon them which durst presume to tempt his glorious Majesty. And
finally unless repentance breed a more speedy remorse such is the fatal end
of such proud attempts. And surely this is most true, for I my self have
seen the ground where the house stood, and yet the moates damde up and the
Water breaking throw ths stones even to this day, there did I see a skull and a
shancke bone of them not yet rotten: and there did I see the huge heap of
stones wherewith they are covered, a fearful example of Gods wrath and
justice against such infidel Christians.

CHAP. XI.
THe great Turk called Souldan, Alias Cham, comprehending as many victories in
his sword as some Emperors in their thoughts arrived at length before Vienna,
having made his preamble with the destroying and burning of the country before
him, thinking upon the ancient pollitick rule, Better it is to have a spoiled
country then a lost, with a brave prepared Army of two hundred thousand
Saracens, horse and foot, and so many it is certain he had, because they
doubted not but there were 300000 The mighty Cham having erected his royal
Pauilions, and entrenched himself to besiege the noble Vienna, munified his
camp with Artillery and deep ditches, and then he sent a Letter of destaunce
unto the Honorable Alphonsus, as being principal in his own City, who was
environed within the walls of the city expecting the day of battle, for to
this intent the states of Italye and the Emperor of Germany, with the Dukes of
Saxony, Bauaria, and the other Provinces near assembled (for now necessity
bred unity) with a brave company of Soldiers to exterminate this monster out
of their confines: unto the Duke of Austrich only (for he had no intelligence
of their assembled forces) he directed his Letters with defiance, meaning to
conclude his long travails with a certain victory: fearing neither the peril
which so many gallant soldiers thoroughly resolved might bring, nor that ever
God or fortune (as they call it) would once show him any disfavor, whose only
favor is only in show. Nor yet that the heavens great God would not with
severe reuengement chastise the Leuiathans insolency and slaughter of so many
Martirs, rather deferring then forgetting so just a punishment.

CHAP. XII.
ABout this time the Messenger and Wagner arrived at Vienna very late in the
night and passed through the Turkishe Sentinels, and arriving at the City, and
for that night they lay at the Purceuants house, no sooner had the approaching
Sun sent before him the marshals of the morrow light, and a new morning
ministered occasion of new matter, but up those two arose and being ready
departed for the Court, and now the day was almost in the greatest beauty,
when the Messenger was admitted into the Dukes presence, unto whom he recited
what ever was seen, and done in that time of his absence, (only I forgot to
tell you how Wagner raged and stormed, and thundered, when Akercocke brought
him word of the destruction of his House at Wittenberg as he was in the way to
Austria) wherewith the Duke was wonderfully both delighted and astonished. And
having wellcommed Wagner very graciously and accordingly rewarded, he dismissed
them till further leisure, commanding the Purceuant to show him all the
pleasure he might.

CHAP. XIII.
AFter al these most excellent Princes were come into the counsel chamber, the
Herrald sounded his trumpet after the Turkishe summons then did all the states
draw into the great Hall, wherein a high Imperial throne richly ordered with
shining cloth of Gold, every noble and estate placed correspondently to his
degree, where in presence of them all the Herralde was admitted, who coming
with his coat of Arms lying upon his right arm into the bottom of the
Hall, made three obeysances down with the right knee unto the ground, with a
loud and distinct voice spoke unto the Duke only, telling him that his
sovereign and Master Soultan Alias Chan, the son of Murad Chan, the son of
Rabeck Chan, the son of Mahomet Chan, and so upwards till he came to their
great Prophet Mahomet, God on the earth, and Emperor of all the East. And then
he began to reckon five hundred titles, with a long etc.. Unto thee Alphonsus
Arche-Duke of Austrich, and there he declared the whole effects of his
message, and at last with a great Brauado ended, and then he did one his gaie
coat of Arms expecting their answer. When as the Duke craving license of
the Emperor to speak answered ye Herrauld in most gallant and triumphing
terms, commanding him to say unto the proud Turk his master, that ere five
days came about he would trample his victorious horns under his feet, and ride
in triumph upon his stubborn neck, and that in defense of himself and of
brave Christendom he would leese the uttermost drop of his blood, and to
make it good he would not be in quiet till he had met his master in the midst
of the field, and therewith he drew out his sword, and all they with him,
crying God and Saint Michaell for the right of Christendom: then stood up
the Emperor and auowed all that they had said before him, commanding moreover
the Herrald to say to the proud Usurper, that seeing the quarrel would breed
great effusion of blood, and yet he never the nearer, that he a man every way
equal to himself, not only for the speedier advance of his battles, but
also to have a certain end to such an uncertain enterprise, he would fight
with him body to body, armed at all points after their own guise at any time
within this fortnight, and Herrald bring me word (quoth he) that he will so
do, and by my Honor I promise to give thee for thy tidings 10000. Ducats.
Then the Herralde being highly rewarded was dismissed, and reported their brave
aunsweres unto the Turk, with all the great majesty of the Christian Princes,
who presently went to counsel together, and so continued till other like
necessary business called them away.

CHAP. XIIII.
IN this Chapter (Gentlemen) part of the Dutch copy was wanting, and the
other part so rent that it could not be red, yet by some circumstances I
conjecture that the Duke of Austriche had diverse and dangerous conflicts with
the Turk, yet being supported by the English men and other Christians, with
the help of Wagner, who standing in a high tower to see the conflicts, caused
by his Magic such a storm to arise that no man was able to abide, the Turk
was still discomfited.

The gifts of Wagner to the Duke, and three Devils retaind for Soldiers to
the same Prince. CHAP. XV.
IN the next morning VVagner presented himself to the Duke in presence of all
the whole Princes of the Christians, whom very graciously he entertained as he
might for his good service, and there in presence of them al he desired the
Duke to take at his servants hands a small gift, which he condiscended unto,
and then VVagner caused a Chest to be brought in of fine Iron, wrought and
inameld with gould and color most curiously, then he opened it and took out
a whole armor of fine bright steel so light as a common Dublet, but so
subtelly and excellently framed, that it passed all comparison of hardness,
there was a Musket shot at every piece whereon remained no great notice of a
blow, but as of a little touch, plain without any broider work or otherwise
carved, but so exceeding bright as would well have dazeled the long beholders
eyes, a shield of the same fashion, made like a tortoyle shell, a sword of the
like fine temper, with all the furniture of a soldier, then took he out a
Plume which he had no sooner put into the crest, but he that stood behind
could not see no part of his back, nor he that stood before of his breast, so
that thus it made him invisible, there he told him it was fetched out of the
great Turks armory, which they say was Mahomets, but I say more truly Alias
Chans, which for himself caused it to be made, having called together the most
excellent Philosophers and workmen that were to be found in all his wide
Empire. The great rewards the Duke would have given him for it he refused, he
was only contented with thanks and favor. And then might they see from the
door of the chamber three most gallaunt men to enter, which were his three
Familiars, whom VVagner taking by the hands presented unto the whole assembly
of Princes, but more directly to the Duke, assuring them that they were the
most fortunate, most valiant, strong, hardy, and puissant men that in the World
were to be found, and in deed they seemed to be as goodly swart men as any eye
beheld, he told their several names Mephostophiles he termed Mamri,
Akercocke he termed Simionte, Faustus he called Don infeligo, showing that
they were borne in those fortunate Islands, wherein the Poets fained the Elysian
fields to be, joining by West upon the end of Barbary, being from Vienna to
those fortunate Islands 35. degrees of lo^gitude and eight minutes, and 48.
degrees and 22. minutes from the Equator or Aequinoctiall, in latitude not
then found out. So were they most graciously entertained of all the Nobles,
and entertained in the Dukes most Honorable pay. VVagner said that they three
left their country and sought adventures, and by chance coming this way, I
knowing of it by secret intelligence, met them and certainly assured of their
high valors, thought good to show them to you, for he that first had spoake
to them had been first served, nor cared they whether to serve us or the
Infidel.

CHAP. XVI.
I Spoke before of a challenge made by the Emperor unto the Turk, which when
the Herrald had reported unto the Soultan (who certainly was a very honorable
Soldier) but there he vowed to perform it, and to set the Emperors head
upon his highest pauilion in view of all the City. And thereuppon the next
day after this skirmishe, he sent the same Herrald with purpose and
commandment to declare in excellent gallant terms the acceptance of the
combat, knowing that it depended upon his honor to show his small fear, in
not refusing so equal a Foe, whose profer proceeded from a most Honorable
resolution: when it was reported unto the Empepour that the same Herralde
returned, he caused the Hall to be adorned with most brave furniture, his high
Chair of estate placed, and all about seats for the other Princes. The
Emperor having seated himself, full of brave thought and gallant hardyhood,
expecting the answer of the enemy in such sort as it was in very deed. In
all brave manner the Herrald in proud phrase uttered the purport of his message,
requesting that a peace being concluded on both parts for the space of three
days, and free egresse and regresse for the Nobles on both parties the one to
view the Camp, the other the Court, and on the third day he would armed in
his country manner meet him in the listes, to show that he never refused the
combat of any Christian Emperor, albeit he knew his calling far superior to
that of his. So then the message was accepted, the Herrald had his 10000.
Ducats carried to the Turks camp on horse, and they in the City began to
keep feasts, and entertained the Turkish Nobles in exceeding bravery, and they
theirs in the like without damage or thought of treason.

CHAP. XVII.
DVring the time of this truce, these four companions, Infeligo, Wagner,
Mamri, Symionte, cast how to abuse the great Turk most notably, and Akercocke
otherwise called Symionte he would begin first, and lead them the dance. Then
he leaves them and gets me up unseen to the Turks Camp, and in his Camp to
his own Pauilion, and so into the place where the great Infidel himself sat,
he being then gone into the Lauatory, which is a place wherein he three times a
day does bathe himself, which by so doing he does verily believe that all his
sins are remitted and washed away be they never so horrible, diuelishe, or
wicked, then Akercocke or Symionte, which ye will, goes inuisibly into the
Lauatory, where the great Villain was bathing himself amongst three of his
most fair Concubines stark naked, swimming as much in their dalliance as in
the water, mingling his washing with kisses and his cleansing with
voluptuousness, Akercock in the shape of a bright Angel appears unto him,
and with a proud magnifico presented himself unto the slave, who straight
ways very reverently fell down upon his knees, and with his hands high
lifted up, worshipped toward him in great humility, whilst Akercocke with
good devotion fell a board the Concubines, and there acted them before his face
one after another: when he had so done, he takes the great slave by the tip of
his pickenouant, agd shaking him fiercely (who all this while with great dread
and fear lay half astonished and al naked on the ground) told him that he
had prepared a more brauer place for his so good a servant then so base a
bathe, and no fairer Concubines. (Now the Turk had seen how like a lusty
rank fellow this Simionte had behaved himself, at which he wonders not
greatly, because Faustus whom he thought to have been Mahomet (as well as he
did think Akercocke) had also showed the virtue of so great a God as Mahound,
twenty times more beauty then Jupiter.) Then the Turkish Emperor with half
dyinge hollow voice, as if his breath had been almost gone or else but now
coming, said that he was all at his commandment, and so followed Simionte
stark naked as he was born, who led him by the hand round about, and through
every Lane and place of his Camp, to the great wonderment and laughter of his
people, who verily thought Mahound had commanded him to do penance before he
fought with the Christian Emperor. But for all this the people fell into such
laughter that some had welnigh given up the Ghost at the same instant, diverse
Christian Nobles saw him all this while, who effusedly laughed at so apparaunt
foolery. The Turk for all this not moved, for indeed he heard all and saw
nothing, went about wonderfully mannerly: like as you shall see a Dutch Frow
with a handkercheife in her hand mince it after ye hopping Germane. Could a man
devise a more notorious kind of abuse, then to make that man which will not
be seen but in great secrecy, and abundantly and richly clad, to be not
only seen openly but also stark naked, and become their laughing stocks whose
terror he is always, but Akercocke had not yet so left him, but down he
runs to Danuby (where there was ready Mamri or Mephostophiles to receive him)
and there having turned himself and the vilest part of himself to the Turks
mouth, making him kiss and kiss it again, he took him and hurld him
violently into the Water, and then Akercocke vanished away.

The second mocking. CHAP. XVIII.
NO sooner was he in but he saw then apparently how he had been misled and
abused, and there for very shame would have drowned himself in very deed, had
not Mamri come swiftly flying over and gave him a terrible blow on the noddle
with a good Bastinado, that he almost made his brains fly out, and rapte him
up by his long hair out of the water unto the land, where he buffeted him so
long till at length he came to himself again, the^ Mamri fewtred himself to
abuse him kindly, and there with sweet and compassionatiue speech comforted
him, desiring his reverend Majesty not to take any grief seeing it was done
in the sight of all his men, in the knowledge of none. And therewith to show ye
more pity of his misery he seemed to shed abundance of tears, desiring him
to go with him and he would put upon him his soft raiment. The Turk (who then
had his crown upon his head or else it had not been half in the right Qu)
seeing one lamenting his case so affectionatly, condiscended unto him and
promised him most large honorable promotion and reward. Mamri set him upon his
legs and led him to a little muddy place by the river side, and there varnished
the Emperor over with most thick, terrible, and excrementall mud, not sparing
either his face, nose, eyes, mouth, nor any thing, whilst he miserable man
thought he had been in most divine contentment. Thus he led him in the view
of five thousand people (for here is to be noted that all that ever saw him
both knew him to be the great villain Turk, and could not but laugh most
entirely at him, nor his own men could do any other nor once think of any
rescue or remedy, by the working of infernal instinct) until he came to
Vienna, and in Vienna to the most fair gates and where greatest resort of
people are always together, there at the City gate he drew out a long taber
and a pipe and strikt up such a merry note, as the foolish orname^t of all
London stages never could come near him, no not when he wakte the writer of
the news out of Purgatory, with the shrill noise. There at the gate stood a
Carpenter who was then carrying a Coffin to a certain house to bury one in, him
Mephostophiles beat till he lay on the could ground, and took the Coffin
and caused the Turk to hold it in his hand. Memorandum that none of all these
Spirits were seen of any one, but felt of them which saw them. Then from the
gate he began to play, the Turk and the Coffin skipt and turned, and vaunted,
and bounded, and leapt, and heaued, and sprung so fast and so thick together,
that the coffin rapping the misserable man sometime on the shinnes, breast,
thighs, head, face, that the durty color was almost wipte away with the
streams of blood. At this strange fight and the unheard noise of that kind
of Instrument, all the boys, girls, and roags in the town were gathered with
this troop, and this mirth, he conuaied them round about the streets, and all the way as they went, such eggs, such chamber pots emptyings, such excrements,
odoure, water, etc. were thrown down on their heads, that it seemed all those
vile matters were reserved for that Tempest, until such time (then it being
about two of the clock in the afternoon when every one is busied in some
plesaunt pastaunce) as all this fair company came to the Court, whereout at
diverse windows lay the chiefest of all the Nobility, and the most brave
Gentlewomen, who seeing such a huge crowd of Boys, the great Turk and a
Coffin dancing, and a taber and pipe played upon, they were almost amassed,
thus he marched finely round about the whole Court, till coming to the Court
gate he entered in, (but the Boys were excluded) with this merry Morris there
in presence of them all the Turk fell down dead, whom Mamri laid in the
Coffin, and then vanished away.

The third. CHAP. XIX.
THen came Infeligo or Faustus and touching him revived him to the great wonder
of the beholders, and covering him somewhat shamefastly, went into his chamber
with him, and there benotted him round upon the head and the beard, which is
the fowlest reproach and disgrace that can be offered to the Turk, which done
he conuaied him into the presence of the Emperor, where he made them such
sport, that uneath they could recover their modesty in three hours space, to
see the proud Villain plaistered over with such muddy mortar, all ever his
head and face, his eyes and teeth showing like black Moors, or as a pair of
eyes looking through a Lettice, or as they call it a Periwig, wherein if the
eyes had feet they might be set in she stocks: All his lineaments were
lineamented with this pariet, he stood quiuering and shaking either for could
or fear like an Aspine leaf (as they say) whilst every man buffeted him, he
standing with a sturg^stice and an old shoe, as they do at blind man buffe to
see who he could hit. Thus long he made them sport, till one told the Emperor
that it was the great Turk, at which he was exceeding wroth and sorry.

The fourth and last. CHAP. XX.
When Wagner seeing him grieved, came and kneeled down before him, declaring
that he would undertake to heal all his wounds and other greeueances
whatsoever, yea and make him utterly forget all that was passed as if it had
never been, and promised more to carry him home himself safe and sound, which
the Emperor thanked him highly for, requesting him to perform it presently,
for he would not for half his reuenews that his Foe should have any occasion
to allege against him, for to excuse the Combat. Then went Wagner up into his
chamber, and apparelled himself in white tafita made close to his body, and
there where they use to wear round hose half a foot deep, stuck with swans
feathers, like the skirts of a horsmans coat, his hose, shoos, (for all were
together) of the same white tafita, and within with white leather, at his
heels two fine silver wings, and on his shoulders two maruailous large bright
siluery wings, and on his head an upright little steeple hat (with a white
feather of two or three ranges) of white tafita, and in his hand a Caduceus or
a Mercuriall Rod in the same white silver color, he entered into the Presence
Chamber before all the assembly to their singular contentation, for in his
Personated garments he seemed to be a very Angel, for it was in doubt whither
Mercury was half so beautiful or no. And there opening a large casement (as
there they are very large) with a brave R'ingratio departed from them taking up
his flight in the view of them all into the air, as if he would have beat
the Azure firmament with his wast wings. Thus he carried him lower and lower
till he did light upon a great Elm, and there he opened his sight to see in
what plight he was. The Turk seeing in what a trance he had been, began to
swear, to banne and curse, and was even then ready to have thrown himself down
headlong, but Mercury he stepped to him and bad him be of good cheer, for it
had pleased the great God Jupiter, whose servant Mahomet was, to show him
those great abuses, to the intent he should be more wary in his actions, and
take heed how to tempt the Christians with vain battles and such like speech,
but now (quoth he) come and give me thy hand, and thern will I lead thee to
thy Pauilion, where as yet thou art not missed of the Nobles, for in the place
where thou wast taken away, has Jove sent one to bear thy shape. Then again
he took his flight and all the way as he went he rapt his heels against the
tops of the high trees, and beat him pitifully upon the shins all the journey,
upon the tents tops. Now they arrived in the same place from whence he was
taken. and there he laid himself domn who presently recovered his former
strength in full perfectness, and not only not felt it but utterly forgot it.
Then he continued his wonted solace and prepared himself to the battle,
whilst he was made a laughinge stock of the world, Wagner returned through
ye same path which he had made in the air before, came not yet to the Court
before they had done laughing, for there the matter from the beginning to the
end was rehearsed.

The process to the combat. CHAP. XXI.
THe two days of the truce were passed and the third morning was come, in
which time many gallaunt feats of arms and actiuity were performed on both
parts. Now the time of the combat was come. There was in the River of Danuby a
pretty Island of a quarter of a mile long or more, as even as ground might be
all the way, in this place were the lists prepared, and a scaffold richly
hanged for the Judges to determine in. In the evening about four of the clock
(being then reasonable cool) The Christian Emperor issued out with above
100000. Christians, the rest being above 60000. were left to defend the City
(for both the Christian and especially the Turks were increased) where he
entered into the wide plain, and coming to the bancks side he entered into a
broad Ferry boat leaving his whole Army on the other side of the River
whilst he labored to attain to the Island. The Duke of Austria with his
attendants Mamri, Simionte, Infeligo, and Wagner, the Dukes of Clebe, Saxony,
Campany, and Brabant, with the like number all brauelye and gloriously mounted:
The Duke of Austria in his bright armor marshalled the field, and of the
Christian sat as Judges the kings of Luscitany and Arragon with their
Herralds: Now the Emperor is landed in the Island and is mounted into his rich
saddle, armed in armor so costly, strong, curious, and resplendescent, that it
seemed all the beauty in the world had been gathered together in it, his courser
so firm, nimbly ioynted, tall and large, such a one might have been the son
of Gargantuas more for his Giant-like proportion. Then took he his strong and
large Asken lance, bearing in his steel head Iron death, at the top whereof
hung a fair and rich pennion, the whole shaft of the spear double g lded over
and curiously enameld, about his neck hung his horn shield, artificially
adorned with his own atchieuement, the belt whereon his sword hung of beaten
gold, his caparison of pure cloth of gold, whereon the rich stones were so
ordinary that they took away ye glittering of the metal only as if it had
been the Sun beams, trailed along betwixt precious gutters. On his helmet was
fixed a rich Crown of the most excellent metal. In brief for I would feign
have made an end of this idle news, there was all the richnes in his Empire in
that all the beauty of his richnes, in them al ye desire of each eye: when he
had saluted ye judges he trotted twice or thrice about the lists, and then
lighted at his Pauilion which was there erected of cloth of gold, where he sat
with convenient company and refreshed himself. Now in the mean the Turk he
set forward with an army double the christian, and 100000. and above still left
in the Camp. And here I must needs leave to tell you of his exceeding
preparation unless I should make a whole volume, for beside the wondrous
furniture of his Soldiers, the most rare choice of ornaments, there was
nothing could be devised, nay more then of set purpose could be devised was
there. But briefly I will turn to the Turk himself, where if I had art
according, I should sooner weary you with delight the^ words: But 100000. of
his men having marched before to the banckes and there embatteled themselves by
the river all along, with such hideous noise of Trumpets horns (for so they
use) drums of bras, fluites etc. that there was more heard then seen by far,
then aproached the great Turk himself, before him rode 4000. Ianissaries
armed in their fashion, with a long Gown of Scarlet red laced with gold lace,
and long sleeves of a very narrow breadth, which was girt close unto him, under
that a good armor, with a long high cap like a milk pale for all the world,
of white Satin or some such like gear, with a long feather enough to come down
to a tall man's hams, very thick laced in the brims with gold and pearl, in his
hand a short Iauelin, at his side his Cemiter, at his back a great Quiver of
broad arrows, and by a string of silk hung his steel bow, over every 100. of
these is a Boluch Bassa a Centurien as we call him, and these be of the Turks
guard, and are called Solaquis Archers, and they rode fifty in a rank, then
came following the about 200. Peicher or Peiclers, all in one livery of very
rich tissue after their fashion, and these are of the Turks Laqueis which have
a sharp teene Hatchet sticking at their girdels, and the have of Brasill, with
this they will stand 30. paces off and cleave a penny loaf or hit it some
where, they will commonly stick an inche and half deep into a very tuffe
Ashen wood, or a Brasill, or such like hard wood: there in great triumph upon
an Elephant richly trapped, stood a Tower of two yardes and a half high of
pure silver, in the top whereof stood an Image of beaten gold, representing
their Mahomet, round about which upon Mules Azamoglans or Iamoglans, who are
children of tribute exacted upon the Christian captives, and contributary,
fine, sweet, and the most choice picked Gentlemen brought up to sundry dainty
qualities, who with heavenly melody followed this Elephant, the religious men
going round about singing sweetly together: before all these next to the
Ianissaries went above 200. Trumpets, and as many followed the great Turk,
who then approached, having his Chariot of pure silver of above 20000. pound
weight, drawn with eight milk white Elephants, round about rode and went bare
headed, Azamoglans Peyclers most gorgeously and resplendescent appareled, under
the Turks feet lay a pillow of clear Crystal embossed at the ends with
huge golden knobs, on his head a wreath of purple with a most rich diadem as it
is comely known the order of it, the stage can show the making of it, but
other things they differ mightily in. Here you must suppose the exceeding
glory of his apparel, there he sat upright in the Chair with such a
maiestical, proud, severe, warlike countenance, as justly became so high a
throne, before him went Aga which is the great Captain of his Ianizaries, with
the Hali Bassa, the Captain of his nauall expeditions, Bianco Bassa the
Captain of his Ianissarie Harquebushiers, the Zanfyretto Bassa captain of his
guard, with other of great authority bare headed. After his Chariot came sweet
melody, and then five Elephants of War (an Elephant is welnigh as big as six
Oxen gant and slender like a horse in ye franks, and of more swift foot then a
man would think for, his fashion is like no beast in England, but the ridge of
his back is like that of an borse, his feet has five great horny toes, and a
very long snoute of above two yards in length, with which he will draw by
only snuffing up a good pretty big lad, and deliver him to the Rider this long
trunck falls down betwixt a large pair of teeth or tushes of above an Ell and
a half long (as ye may commonly see at the Comb makers in London) bending
like a Bores upward, his ears welnigh from the top to the neither tippe of the
hanging down above seven foot long.) And after these five Elephants, sadled
and ordered for a man to ride on, came tru^pets, and all in the like manner as
before, and then marched 500. in a rank, 100000. footmen, and by their sides
for wings 40000. horsemen, so that he came to the combat with 240000. fighting
men, well accomplished in arms: then was the great Turk carried under a
goodly canapy upon a black Wagon on men's shoulders into the Ferry, which was
richly prepared, where in the view of both Camps he landed, whilst the
warlike instruments ecchoed wide in the Air. In the Island for Judges sat (in
armor as did the other) the king of Rhods and the king of Pamphilia, now
called Alcayr. When the Turk was landed there was brought to him by the hands
of two kings a great Elephant of an Ash color white embossed very glittringly,
where on the great Turk mounted by a short ladder of silver, armed very
strongly and most beautifully, then took he his Iauelin in his hand, and
vibrated it in great bravery (as he could handle his weapon well) and hung
his quiver of long Darts at his back, then his cemiter etc. and so having
saluted the Judges retirde unto the uttermost part of the field, then mounted
up the brave and puissant Emperor so lightly in his heavy armor, as if either
his gladness had lessened his weight, or the goodness of his cause, to the
great rejoicing of the Christian and amazement of ye turk, at whom the
Christians yield so universally and hallowed, and other infinite kinds of
gladsome tokens that the Turk astonished stood stone still till the Christian
had done, and then as men new risen to life, with such an horrible shout, that
their voice rebounded to the air, at which same time the Christian shouted
again with them, as if they would have committed a battle with voices, and
surely their voices did fight in the wide coasts and shoares of the air. This
done the Emperors prepared themselves to the fight.

The Combat, CHAP. XXII.
ANd when they were sworn that neither of them had any magic herb, charm
or incantation whereby they might prevail in their fight on their adversary,
and had solemnized the accustomable ceremonies in like matters of combat. The
Herralds gave their words of encounter, then with loud voice and shrill
Trumpets courageous blast, whilst all the people were in dead night expecting
the demeanor of these renowned Princes. Now we have brought you to behold
these two champions, arrived thither with their brave followers, ready to prove
their valiaunce in the face of so great a multitude. Now if you will stand
aside least their ragged spears endamage you, I will give you leave to look
through the Lattice, where you shall even now see the two Emperors with their
brave shocke, press Doubt betwixt their cruel encountrings. Now you may see
the two combattants, or but as yet champions, coming from the ends of the
field, the excellent Christian Emperor with incomparable valor, visiting his
Horse sides with his spurs, carrying his spear in the rest with an even
level, so that the thundering of the brave Steed presaged ye dint of the
great thunderclap. When Ali Chan, gently galloping with his huge beast came
forward with more swift pace still as he drew nearer to the Emperor. All this
while you may behold the^ hastening in their course, like as you see two great
waves gallopping from the corners of the sea driven by contrary winds, meeting
together by long random, to make the neighbors shoares to quake and dimbde
with their boisterous carrier. The Emperor being now with his greatest fury
ready to fasten his lance upon his adversary, and his adversary ready to
fasten his Iauelin on him, when the Turk suddenly stepped aside, and the
Emperor thrusted his void lance into the Air, (for he might easily do it,
for though the Elephant be but low, yet he was higher then his horse by a yard,
and yet his horse was the fairest and tallest to be found in all Christendom,
so that needs he must lay his spear in an uneven height to break it on
him. Suddenly ye Turk stopped and with his nimble Beast followed the Emperor
as he had fled, whereat all the whole army of Turks showted horribly clapping
their hands, and the Christian stood still in great silence, stricken with just
wonder of this strange Quidity in combat, and ere the Emperor could make his
stop with a short turn, the Turk had hit him upon the shoulder with his
Iauelin, which being denide entrance, for very anger rent it self in forty
pieces, and chid in the Air till they broake their necks on the ground: and
had not then the Horse started the monstrous Elephant had overthrown him with
his rider to the earth. But then the Horse incenst with ire for this injury,
and his master more hotely burning with disdain and furious gall, leapt,
bounded, and sent out at his mouth the fomy arguments of his better stomach,
but so fast the vile Turk followed that he had spent 3. long Darts upon the
barbed flanckes of the Horse, which all in vain returned to their Master. The
beholding Turks so egerly pursuing the strokes with shouting, as if with a
hidden Sympathy their trayning had augmented the violence of the blows. At
length the good Emperor sorely ashamed came now to make him amends for his
pretty falsery: and with great scope thronging his lance forward just upward
upon the Turks face, and when he was almost by him, the Infidel as if he but
made a sport of the fight, stepped aside very delivery, thinking that he should
have made him run in the like order as before, but he more cautelous marking
of purpose which way he meant to decline, turned with him and his learned Horse
could well do it, and indeed desire of revenge had so seated it self in his
brave courageous breast, that now he even followed him as he had been drawn
with Cartropes, the Turk seeing how he was circumuented, fetched a pretty
compass and troad a round, the Elephant flying from ye horse and the horse
following the Elephant, as you might see Seignior Propspero lead the way in
Mile end Green in the ringles, this was a pretty sport to see the matter turned
to a play. Now the Christians having like occasion to show their gladness, gave
such an Applaudite as never was heard in any Theater, laughinge so effusedly
that they dashed their adversaries clean out of countenance, tickling again
with the long loud laughter: When they had run not passing twice about, the
Turk seeing his time, conuaied himself out of the ring, and then got again
on his back, spending his cowardly Darts upon his strong enemies armor, and
so fast he followed and so quickly the good Emperor turned back again, that
his horses barbe of Steel out stickinge in his front, met just upon the out
side of the right eye of the Elepha^t, that it sticking out a foot entered in
above an inche, which ye horse perceiving made the rest follow into his head up
to the hiltes (as to say) laying out his fore feet out straight, and his
hinder legs in like manner, went poaking, and crowded himself forewarde still
gathering upon the Elephant, so that not so much with the Horses force as the
great beasts cruel pain, the Elephant swaid back above 100. foot. Now was
the Emperor glad and with both his hands lifting himself upon his stirrops,
took his lance and stroke with the point the Turk full on the visard so
thick and so many times, that some blood followed, with an hue and cry out of
the windows of the Helmet, to find the worker of his effusion: till the
villain slave drawing his fine sword smoate the lance very bravely in two,
and casting his shield before him, received the last stroke on the truncheon of
it, which the gentle Emperor with fell fury threw at him, that he made him
decline almost to the fall. The Turk sitting on the Elephants back could not
with his Semiter reach the Christian, nor he the Turk with his Curtilax, so
that now they sat and lookte one upon the other, and the people at them, and
all at this strange copeing. The good Horse Grauntier by chance being gored a
little under the maine betwixt the bendings of the barbs with the sharp tusk of
the Elephant, neied with great stomach, and leasinge from the beast which he
had welnigh forced to the lists end, being thereto forwarded with the sharp
spurs with so exceeding fury, that it was not only a marvel how the good
Prince could sit him so assuredly, and also that he spoild not himself, and
with more eager fury began to gallop upon the Elephant again, his mouth wide
open, and horrible with the salt fume which in abundance issued from his great
heart: for by how much the more a thing is gentle and quiet, by so much the
more being moved he is iracund and implacable. But the Emperor turning his
rayns carried him clean contrary to the lists end, where stood lances for the
same purpose as the manner is, of which he choose the two stiffest, longest,
and rudest for their stature and came softly pacing to the Turk: who stood
even there still where he was the Elephant bleedinge in sunch abou^dance, that
by the loss of so much blood his meekenes turned into rage, and began to rise
and bray, and stamp, and with an uncertain sway to move, so that with much
ado the Slave stayed and appeased him, then the brave Emperor lifting up his
visour not only to take breath but the more freely that his speech might have
passage, he told the Turk that he had in a base cowardly manner by false fraud
and unequal fight dishonored himself and endangerd him, for which he told him
Malgrado suo he would be gloriously revenged: and now that they had spent a
good time in uncertain Fortune, he had brought two lances choose which he
would, and either begin the fight a new or make an end of the old, promising
upon his Honor that if he refused so to do, he would fasten one in his beast
and another in his heart. And if he dared to do that, he bad him come down
on foot and there break a staff with him. The Turk as he was an Honorable
soldier then presently slipped of his Elephant, bravely answering that he came
to conquer him in sport, and not meaning to make a purposed battle, but since
he was so presumptuous as to dare him to his face, he should soon perceive
how lightly he wayed his proud words, and then skipping to him straight a
Lance out of his hand, and went 100. paces backewards, so did the Emperor very
joyfully, when they were come so far as they thought, they might trust to their
breath, houlding their Lances in both their hands, began to run very swiftly,
and desire brought them together so fast and outragiously, that their Lauces
somewhat too malapert not suffering the^ to come together hurld the Turk above
seven feet of the Lances length, so that not one there but thought he had
been either slain, or his wind dashed out of his belly: the Prince reeld
backward above two paces and yet fell down much astonished. The people on both
sides exceedingly amazed and affrighted, especially the Turks who sent out
such a doleful Sauntus that it would have moved the stones to ruth, but the
dolor of the Christian was not so great for the moving of the Emperor revived
their spirits much. In a cause on which the behoulders safeties do depend the
ill success is much feared, for it may be seen by this, that they will with
a certain alacrity and Sympathy seem to help or to pity as the cause
requires. On a soddain the Emperor lift up his head, at which the Christians
gave such an universal shoute, as if even now they would paue frayed the
mountains adjacent. The two courageous beasts having lately heaped up red hot
rancor in their disdainefull stomachs, assaulted the one the other with all
the weapons of nature, that it had been enough for to have delighted any one,
but the Horse had some small advantage by reason of the Elephants right eye was
covered with the trayling down of the blood. By this time the Emperors rose
again, and the one went to his Horse the other to his Elephant, having first
splintered their spears, and fenced so long as any virtue remained in the
slaughtered Lances. When each had gotten to their beasts they began to
forward them, who with equal ire moved needed no encouragement, the^ did the
Emperor coming with full scope upon the Turk, smoat the Elephant just upon
one of the teeth, while with great rage the Horse had fastened his pike again
in the Iaw bone, so that the Elephant still swayed back, but neither of them
being able to reach the one the other, the excellent Prince casting his goulden
shield before him and drawing his glittering Curtelax, leapt upon the neck of
his Horse, and laying one hand upon the one tooth of the Elephant, with the
other hand upon the thong, that went cross his forehead, vauted up and settling
his feet upon the tuskes and his hand on the head of the beast, cast up
himself, and laid his sitting place where his hands were, and there rode by
little and a little till he might buckle with the insedent. No sooner came he
within the reach of the Turk, but he smote the Turk so freely, who was ready
prepared for him that he made him decline a little, there they fought so long
that the Elephant driven through pain was thrust up to the lists, hereupon all
the people Christian in a more free manner then ever at any time before, all
the while their hard mettald swords played upon each others shield, so that
the glory of their rare fight was so wonderfullye pleasing to the eye, and so
honorable to the combattants, that if they had tested one would well have been
contented to view all the long day: but the good Prince was too hard for the
other, for with his ready blows he urged the great Slave out of his cell, and
made him sit behind the arsonne of the saddle, and if this chance had not
happened he had surely made him sit behind the arsonne of his Elephantes
Tail. For as soon as the Elephant had but touched the lists, the Christian
Marshals of the field came galloping and parted the Combattants, holding the
Turk as vanquished, whilst betwixt the contrary and adverse part there was
four Negatiues, so that welnigh they had fallen to blows, for ye case seemed
to the Christian plain, to the Turk unjust. That because the Beast whereon he
rode went to the Lists end, therefore the stopper should be blamed. Well,
Herraldes whose office it is to deal in such royal matters, had the
discussing of it, and it was deferred to arbiters, with this condition, that if
the Turk was found vanquished, he should be yielded as recreant (and miscreant
he was.) So the matter was posted of whilst it never was concluded, and both
the parties departed, the one to ye camp the other to the city, in no less
solemn pomp then they entered accompanied into the sands, where so rare a
chance fortuned betwixt so puissaunt Emperors. And because the matter was as
strange as true, I have soiourned a little too long in it. But in the next Inn
you shall have a better refreshment or a newer choice.

CHAP. XXIII.
BY chance a Knight smoate Faustus a box on the ear in the presence of a
great company of brave Ladies, wherefore he swore to be egregiously revenged
on him, giving him the Field, which the knight refused not, so the weapons, the
place, the time were ordained, and Faustus went out to the field, and no sooner
was Faustus gone out of the presence but Signior di Medesimo who was well
known to be a valorous and courageous man in his kind as any was about the
Court, on a soddaine fell down on his knees before all the Ladies, shaking and
quiuering with a face as pall as him which was new risen from a months
burying, desiring them if ever they tendered any Gentleman's case, to entreat
Mounsier Infeligo to forgive him his trespass. At this the whole assembly
burst out into a loud laughter, to see the man that was even now in his brave
terms and vanting words to come in all submissiue manner to entreat for a
pardon so ridiculously. He yet not desisting with many a salt tear and hands
lifted up toward the Heavens, from whence his pity came, when Faustus came
blowing in like aswash-buckler with his Rapier by his side and his hand on his
Poynard, swearing all the cross row over. But when he saw the Knight in such a
pickell, he satte himself against a wall and laughed so loud and so heartely,
that all the whole rout could not choose, but laughe with him, and here was
laughing, and here and there and every where. At length 2. Ladies rose to whom
perhaps this knight owed some particular service, and desired Don Infeligo with
very mild sermon to be friends with Medesimo again, he told them that they
could not demand the thing which he would not readily fulfill, marry he
requested this, that as the disgrace which he had received was too great to
be forgotten without some such equal revenge, that he might use some like
injury, whereby he might be satisfied and he might again come into his grace:
which they granted. Faustus came to Medesimo and reard him up upon his feet,
and then got upon his baccke, and so rid twice about the Chamber, and when he
had done he took him by the chin, who had not yet forgotten how to weep,
shaking worse then any school boy when he fears to clime the horse, and gave
him a good box on the ear and went his way. So the Knight was utterly
disgraced, and for shame durst not be seen all that day after. They which were
there had sport abundance, and Faustus was feared for his brave valor and with
his continual delight in knauerye got him foes enough to.

CHAP. XXIIII.
ANother time he by chance over heard a Gentleman which was talking to a
Lady, and said that whatsoever she commanded him to do he would do it,
if she would grant him grace. The Gentlewoman belike willing to hear him
speak, so not to her required him to build in that place with one word a
Castle of fine silver, at which the Gentleman amazed went away confounded,
Faustus followed him fast, and said to him that he had over heard the Ladies
unjust demand, wherefore go say (quoth he) thou will do it with one word. And
so the Gentleman did and it was done, whilst he ran laughing in to many nobles
and lusty gallants, telling them he would show them the straungest thing that
ever they saw, and all they came running into the garden together, where they
found the Gentleman fast lockte in a pair of stocks, and an ugly foul
kitchen wench in his arms. O Lord what wondrous sport did he make them there.
And when they had laughed their fill, he lewsd the gallaunt, who went and swore
all that he could he would be revenged on him. In such monstrous intolerable
knaueries Faustus took especial felicity.

CHAP. XXV.
THese four honest fellows Faustus, Akercock, Mephostophiles, and Wagner went
out together into the street, and walking there by chance espied four
Gentlewomen seeming to be sisters, them they cast to abuse, and they were never
content to play any merry pranckes for honest sport, but they must be so
satirically full of gall, that they commonly proved infamous, sparing neither
their good name on whom they committed them nor any kind of villainy, so it
might procure mirth: when they had talked sufficiently with them, they did so
much that they were contented to ride abroad with them, and so each fetched his
horse and came to them masked, and the Gentlewomen were wimpled likewise (for
the men as well as women use there to were maskes.) Thus they rode to the
common furlong where many Italian gentlemen were playing at the Baloun, and
there they rode round about whole armies of shouts accompanyng them, they
riding still backward and forward, whilst these men women had sowed their coats
to their dublets, and pind upon their backs things of vile reproach amongst
them, then rode they to the Court not yet satisfied, where they were entertained
with more merriment and laughter. And when these men-women saw the greatest
multitude that was there likely to be, even upon a piece of ground which was
higher then all the rest, they leapt down, and by reason of the friendship
betwixt their peticoats and their doublets, they haled them al down one after
another, the horses ran away, and they lay upon them to their great confusion
and reproach, yet they thought al well since they were personated and masked, but
the women stripte off their women's garments and their head attires, and there
they were well known to be four brave noble young Gentlemen brethren, and each
of them rent off the maskes of Meph. and his mates, and detected them to their
great shame, who neither durst revenge themselves for fear of further
displeasure, nor of revealing what they were, nor could be moaned of any one
for their notable abuses before hand, so that where as in others it had been
but a common jest, on them it was wonderful strange and ridiculous. So they
with shame enough went fretting in vain to their lodging.

CHAP. XXVI.
THe Emperor being some 5. or 6. days in rest within his walls mused as floath
cannot dwell in true noble breasts, the whole Army to set forward, leaving a
convenient Garrison within the City of 30000. men, marched into the fields in
sundry embattails with above 130000. men. And there in the view of the Army
Meph. Aker. Wag. Fau. pricked up to the Turks camp, armed in complete harnes,
and there challenged any four to break a staff with them, then came their
forth four Ianissaries horeseme^ armed at all assaies, and there they ran
altogether to the singular delight of the beholders, so gallantly they demeaned
themselves, but in the cope all the 4. Ianissaries were run quite throw, and
throw (as they say) and there lay on the could earth, then made these 4.
fellows in Arms their stop and expected a fresh revenge: which came immediately
thundering out of the entry of the Camp, with whom to occur in time they met
with the like success as before, to their singular commendations and high
praises: then began the Turk to stamp and fret, and commanded four of the best
in his whole camp, and four more with them to run at these villains and to
captive them, where they should rue the rashness of their presumption with long
eternal torment. These 8. came with all their power together and broake their
lances very hardly upon their faces, and so did they 4. on theirs, then they
drew their swords committing a brave turnay, till two of the Turks were slain,
and the 6. fled, which were immediately hanged, at which ye christian laughed
heartely, and these four returned thanked highly, and for that the Enemy would
not advance himself to the general Fortune of the fight, they marched in
again into the City.

CHAP. XXVII.
ABout 2. a clock in the night the Turk approached with all his whole army
unto the walls of the city, causing particular bands and Pyoners to dig through
the countermure, the Sentinels which were on the walls privily espying by reason
the Moon gave some slender light, though she was but three days old, gave
warning without any alarm to the chief commanders. so that the whole power
of the Cittye almost was gathered into Arms, without any stroke of the Drum.
The place wherein the turk was entering, was right against a streets end of
above two yards over and not above thirty yards from the breach, they had
dug a deep trench and placed on the scarf nine double canons thoroughly
round and charged with chain and murderinge shot, and on each side of the
cross street they had erected fortes of gravel etc. like our Barricadoes
now, in each of which they placed above fifteen Culuerin and Cannon. Now the
brech being sufficient the Turk having entered above 2000. men gave ye onset,
and sounded the bloody alarm, when suddenly the Flanckers discharged and the
bulwarks shot freely together, and utterly cut of all them that entered beyond
the ditch, and betwixt those three mentioned Forts with their terrible shot,
they swept them all out of the place, then began the Turk to thrust his men
forward upon the breach (having lost in this assault above 2100.) and ever as
they came up to the breach the Cannon heaued them of, and the small shot from
the loopes, so galled them that they durst not approach. But the Turk cared
not, for the murdering of his men, might weary the Cannons insatiate cruelty
at length. Then was the alarm given through the City, and every one fell to
their Arms, getting to the walls, and the rest to the assembling places, whilst
the Turk freshly filled the breaches with murdered men, he enforcing himself
to his power to enter, and they to keep him out. When he saw that how he had
stopped the breaches so with dead bodies, which almost made a new red sea with
their blood, in a great rage transporting above 30000. me^ over the Danubie,
furnished them with scaling ladders, whilst he with great store of cannon beat
his own slain men off the forenamed breaches, for he was a merciless tyran,
and caused them to assault the wall it self, which they did. Now began the
morning to appear, and ye Christian came just upon the backs of the
assailants, with the greatest part of the whole power of the city, and put
them al to the sword, save those that escaped from them by water, but killed of
their own felows. Then the Christian marched upon the Turk, who seeing his
power greatly weakened, having lost at his unlucky assault above 23000. men,
cursing and banning his disastrous fortune, and his Gods the giuers of it,
retired in a flying pace to his camp, whilst the plentious spoil made rich
the Christian, for upon the dead carcases were found store of jewels and gold
in great plenty.

Chap. 28.
THis new victory gladded the Christians exceedingly, as much as it grieved
the Turk. The breaches now were freshly repaired with all expedition. The
Christian Princes seeing the inconvenience that followed their keeping within
the city, and how great shame it were for them to abstain from the enemy,
considering their power to be not much inferior to that of the Turks in number,
much more in brave souldierie, wherefore they made a general muster, and
determined to offer the battle to them in the plain field, which if they
refused, they would give them in their camps, concluding all under one days
valiaunce, then marched forth the English archers, of whom Wagner desired he
might be with his fellows, which when they had taken their stond, they
brought store of fletcherie to them in carts, which were there disburdened, so
every archer being five double furnished, the number of them now was nine
thousand, the pike being converted into them, being thereto desirous, and
having therefore made great suite, for the Emperor was very loath to forgo
their first good service: Faustus counseled the Captain to choose a plot of
above one hundredth akers square, where it was open to each horse man, which
they meruailed at greatly, but yet they easily granted to stand any where:
they were so well placed, that they stood as well to defend the friend, as to
offend the foe. Then in due order marched out the whole enemies of the
Christian, and so setteled themselves, whilst the Turk brought forward his
thick swarms. Now it had bin a brave sight, to see the greatest princes of
the whole world East and west, attended on by their whole forces set in araie,
their gorgeous and bright armours and weapons casting up long tramels of golden
shine to the heavens, the noise of clarions, trumpets, etc. encouraging the
fainting soldier, and increasing the boldness of the resolute There was at once
in this field all the terror of the world, accompanied with all the beauty.
In the City you might have seen the remainders at the churches at prayer,
solemn procession round about the town with great devotion, etc. Well, the
time was come that the horsemen began to assault the pike, and attempting the
ruptures of their araie, and the forlorn hoaps fiercely skirmishing, whilst
with loud outcries the whole use of hearing was taken away: above you nothing
but smoke, round about you the thundering cannon, and sharp horrors of sundry
weapons, and at your feet death. There might you see the great use of the
eughen how for the horse no whit fearing the musket, or caliuer, as used to it,
nor yet respec^ the pearcing of a bullet, by the thick tempest of arrows,
hiding their eyes, and hurting their bodies, overthrew the horse master to the
ground, on that side could not one horse man appear, but straight they fetch
him down, so that of thirty thousand horsemen of one assault, there was not
one that came within five spears length of the battle on foot. The great Turk
cursing heaven and earth, and al trees that bore such murdering fruit as bows
and arrows, caused a troup of five hundredth barbed horse with twenty thousand
more to run upon the archens altogether, which they did, but when they came
just upon a little ridge, not one horse but sodaynely stopped, and the riders
which now had rested their stones, lying close upon the saddle pommels, were
thrown quite out of the saddle, and either their backs broken, or quite
slain. All the whole archerie with the camp wondering hereat, as ignorant of
the matter, every one suspending his several judgment, but Faustus laughed
heartily, who knew the matter plain, for there had they buried in sand all the
way wolves guts, which by natural magic, as authors affirm suffers not the
horse to come over it in any case, nor any force can carry him over with a
rider on him. For the Archers drue just upon, and so universally shot together,
that all the troops were put to flight, and above half spoiled and murdered.
To be brief, so much the Christian prevailed upon the Turk in three hours
and a halfes fight, that all them were turned and fled, each one advancing
forward in his flight, there were slain in this battle and flight above seven
score thousand Turks, the great Turk himself fighting manfully on his
Elephant, was by the Emperors own hands slain, all his chief Bassas and men
of honor, to the number of three hundred died manfully about him: now the
retrait was sounded, and they marched home in most glorious pomp and
rejoicing, where the soldiers made rich with the great spoil of the camp,
were dismissed, and the princes returned home, and due order taken for the
safety of the city. So the Duke of Austria rid of his enemies, gave him self
to his forepassed life, and the other princes with great joy caused general
feasts and triumphs to be performed in all their kingdoms, provinces, and
territories whatsoever.

FINIS.

