A SERMON Preached on the 8. day of May 1615. in the Parish Church of S.
STEPHEN in Walbrooke London.

At an anniuersarie Solemnity and assembly of the Company of Grocers of
LONDON.

In commemoration of their ancient and first beginning to be a Company.

BY R. F. DOCTOR in Divinity.

LONDON Printed for William Aspley.

1615.

TO THE Right Worshipful and his singular good PATRONS, the Company of the
GROCERS.
R. F. Wishes the increase of all peace and happiness.
RIght worshipful, although it be much against my disposition, who preach so
often, to commit any one Sermon to the public view, especially this, whereof I
have as mean conceit as of the rest ordinarily delivered. Notwithstanding, if
it may give any satisfaction, I do humbly entreat, that you would be pleased
to accept of so small a testimony of my greater thankfulness. To whom as I
acknowledge my self much obliged, so shall I ever be ready to render a far
greater signification of my duty. And albeit this subject deserves to be
amplified much more then my leisure in the throng of other business would at
this time permit: yet understanding of a rumor spread, as if upon conference
with some, I should begin to alter my mind; I have chosen rather to set it
down word for word as it was at that time uttered, then to enlarge any branch
of it. I labored most to deliver the naked truth in this point, without
ornament of speech: such nakedness is never to be ashamed. Thus desiring
Almighty God that the simple truth may so work upon the consciences of every
one for the establishing of peace, order, and government amongst us, that we
may have a most tender care of all such Oaths from that Oath of Allegiance to
his Majesty, to the Oaths taken by the meanest Churchwardens in our
parishes: I do humbly commend you in my prayers to the gracious protection of
the Almighty.

From S. Stephens Walbrooke, London. May 25. 1615. R. F.

HEB. 6. 16. For men verily swear by him that is greater: an Oath amongst them
is an end of all strife.
AN oath is the strongest confirmation of a truth auerred, and the most
religious obligation of any thing promised that is to be found under heaven. So
holy, that God has hallowed it no otherwise then his own Sabbath both by
precept and example. For as the fourth Commandment is not only sanctified by
divine precept, Remember thou keep holy the Sabbath day, but by Gods own
example, He rested the seventh day, wherefore the Lord blessed the seventh day
and hallowed it. In like manner this affirmitiue part of the third
Commandment is sanctified by precept as a part of Gods worship, Ess. 45.
23. Every knee shall bow to me, and every tongue shall swear by me. And at the
13. verse. before my text, we have his own practice and example: where he
confirms his promise to Abraham by an Oath, As is the institution, so is the
form, and end of an Oath: for we swear by a greater then our selves, to the
end that such swering may be a present remedy against all strife and
contention amongst us. Let these be the two parts of my text, The form and the
end of an Oath. 1 The Form, That men swear by a greater. 2 The End, That it
makes an end of all strife.


1 This greater, by whom men swear, is no less then God himself, for in Ier.
5. 7. God chalengeth those who swear by them that be no Gods. An Oath
therefore is the invocation of the name of God, reverend and holy then is an
Oath, because reverend and holy is his name; So deeply is this point imprinted
in the hearts of men, that natural Religion has taught the very Heathen
themselves, to swear by their gods, as Laban swear by the God of Nahor, but
Jacob, by the fear of Isaake, that is by the true God Genesis 31. 53.
whom Isaake his father worshipped.

This point also is expressed, by the very ceremony of an Oath: Joseph put his
hand under Jacobs thigh, and the servant of Abraham under the thigh of his
Master. Because (as S. August: and Ambros expounds it) God our Savior was to
proceed out of the loins of Abraham, Isaake, and Jacob; and as of old they put
their hands, under the thigh of those Patriarchs of whom Christ was then to
come: so to the same purpose do Christians lay their hands upon some part of
that sacred book wherein Christ is revealed. By such like ceremonies do we
signify that we swear by a greater, and that greater to be no other then God,
and our Savior.

The 3 grounds or reasons of inuocating the name of God in an Oath as they do
naturally rise of that term of my text (...) so will they clear the way unto
that which follows.

1 Men by sin have lost their credit, and therefore do they pawn the credit
of him who is truth it self. And in case of necessity for want of other
sufficient pledge God does vouchsafe to pledge his truth for honest men that
mean well, The truth and credit of God is greater then man's, and therefore men
swear by him, as by a greater.

2 An Oath is the manifestation of a secret truth or intention of the heart for
to swear in things manifest, is the taking of the name of God in vain. But
God alone is the knower of the heart and reins, therefore he only must
testify, that which is perfectly known to none but him. He is greater in
knowledge then man, in knowledge of secret thoughts and things that are most
hidden, therefore man swears by him as by the greater.

3 If a man shall forswear himself, or violate his Oath, the wrong is done
directly unto God. His truth is falsified, his name is abused in the highest
degree. Great reason therefore that he should be judge in that case. To redeem
his sacred name by taking vengeance upon perjured persons. From this ground it
arises that the Majesty of God is called upon in an Oath. Vt testis and
vindex. And therefore as God does pawn his sacred name for our credit, so do
we lay in a counterpawne of our salvation, or of somewhat that is dearest unto
us for our fidelity. Which we must forfeit if we keep not our Oath.

The Apostle has given an instance of a perfect form in this kind, 2. Cor.
1. 23. I call God to record upon my Soul. There is God Testis and Vindex, I
call God to record, there is Gods pawn for Paul

Upon my Soul, There is Paul's counterpawne for his sidelitie. In animam meam,
upon the peril of mine own soul be it if I falsify Gods record. If Paul now
had abused the testimony of God, he had forfeited his own soul.

This forfeiture was of old expressed by God do so to me and more also, or
such like forms of execration. Now is it given for the conclusion of our
solemn Oaths. So help you God.

By this I hope you conceive the form, and by the form, the nature of an
Oath, together with the reasons why we swear only by the name of God as the
greater.

Greater in name and credit, that his Credit might supply the defects in ours.

Greater in the knowledge of secrets, that he might testify the simple
intentions of our hearts.

Greater in power and judgment that he might take vengeance of such wretches
as dare abuse his sacred majesty.

Therefore men verily swear by him that is greater.

2 From this divine form is derived so excellent an end of an Oath, that it
makes an end of strife A font pietatis fluit rimus charitatis. And fit it is
that so worthy a stream should flow from such a fountain. For a greater
testimony of sincere truth, nor a cleerer evidence of the most secret
intentions cannot be given then is an Oath. Wherefore after that this witness
has once spoken, after that this obligation is once subscribed by laying the
hand upon the book, and sealed by kissing of the same, it were a great
indignity offered to that divine Majesty, once to call in question, or to move
contention about that which a lawful Oath has before determined.

An indignity I say, seeing the God of truth has vouchsafed himself to
interpose as a witness of sincerity, and a revenger of perjury.

Let an oath therefore be an end of all strife amongst us, I pray God it may,
and God forbid but it should.

Wherefore (Right-worshipfull and beloved) seeing my finger is now upon the
sore, give me leave to touch it a little to the quick. If any ask what I have
to do to intermedle; Let this be mine Apology. First my profession binds
me to be a peacemaker amongst you being of the Company assembled within my
cure. As in general I began the last year.

Next I must ever acknowledge this Company my worthy Patrons, And my self
also by further favors to be an unworthy member of the same. And thereby also
do I stand obliged for the resolving of your consciences in this point of
scruple, and for the faster knitting of you up in the band of peace.

Understand therefore, that there be two kind of Oaths, the one is
assertorie, and the other promisorie.

The Oath of asseueration by which the truth of any thing past or present is
auerred must needs be kept by such as have any conscience at all. The reason
is, because the breach thereof falls directly, wholly, and all at once upon
the Conscience, and thereby becomes most sensible.

2 But an oath of promise being once past, is in time forgotten, as if the
binding power thereof did by little and little wear away, which though it be
not so in truth, but only in the error of our obliuious nature, yet is this the
most charitable reason that can be rendered, of the too too much neglect of
Oaths in this City. Yet is this the Oath which is to be intended in this
business, and which is mentioned in this Scripture, for in the 13. Verse
before my text, it is said. When God made the promise unto Abraham having no
greater to swear by, he swear by himself. This is that Oath which you have
solemnly taken, wherein you have pawned the sacred Majesty of God, that you
will faithfully keep your promise, by laying hand upon the book, and kissing
the same. Wherein if at any time hereafter you shall fail, you have forfeited
that interest, which you have in that Majesty by the bond of those words. So
help you God.

Now the Question is no more but this.

A Citizen has undertaken a double Oath.

1 As Freeman of the City he swears To be obeisant and obedient to the
Mayor and the Ministers of this City. To maintain the franchises and
Customs thereof. This City to keep harmless in that him lies. Yo be
contributorie to all manner of charges etc* bearing part as a freeman ought.

2 As a member of this fellowship he has likewise sworn.

Truly to obey all manner of rules, impositions and ordinances that be made, or
hereafter shall be made and lawfully ordained for the ordering of the said
fellowship.

Whether this man thus obliged may endeavor or consent not to disorder, but to
dismember this fellowship, by the separation of himself and others from the
same.

Whether he may labor to be freed from those charges to which he has sworn
to be contributory.

Whether by this president of Innovation, to encourage other Companies upon the
like pretense to attempt the same: be to obey the governors, to maintain and
keep this City harmless to his power.

I will not sit Judge or determine upon any man's conscience, but only lay open
the Question in such manner, as every man in his conscience may be his own
Judge.

There be two points without compass of this question.

1 That those who have not taken this Oath may upon just cause seek: and that
authority in the Eye to a more public good may command a separation, we call
it not into question. For this is their act and not thine, and therefore
concerns not this point.

2 It is not denied but a Company may be imagined so apparently pestilent to
the common wealth; so tyrannical and burdensome to the sworn members of the
same, as they may lawfully desire and endeavor a redress, and for want of
that a separation, for they are sworn only to that which is lawful. But this
is far from our point, I find it not objected.

What then might be the motive The Reformation of Abuses.

Beloved, this word Reformation is a good word: but it has guilt many a rotten
piece of wood.

For what Faction or Schism ever entered into Church, what rebellion or
insurrection ever began in Commonwealth, which masked not under a pretense of
Reformation?

Abuses there are, and ever will be, though a new Company should drop from the
clouds. And a reformation of abuses is evermore to be desired.

But first. Is there no means of reformation already established equivalent to
that which is desired?

If not. May no means be thought upon, by joint suit to be obtained, without
such innovation and separation?

If not. Is all this clear, or is it questionable and doubtful, and as yet
undetermined?

If it be but questionable, then make this a Quaere.

Whether such a scruple arising in thy mind, or suggested by others, may
dispense with any bra^ch of a solemn Oath which is clear and without
question? Lay thine Oath then in one Scoale with all the waights that thereunto
belongs, as has been delivered: and let thy conscience be an indifferent
Judge, whether a scruple remaining as yet questionable may ouer-ballance the
same?

Let me propound two places of Scripture unto you, the one as a precept, the
other by way of example, both concerning the validity of a promissarie Oath.

1 In the 15. Psalm, the question is, Who shall dwell in Gods Tabernacle, or
rest upon his holy hill? That is, Who shall be a lively member of the Church
militant on earth, or enter into eternal rest in heaven? One maine branch of
the answer is at the fifth verse, He that swears to his neighbor, and
disappointeth him not, and though it be to his own hinderance. As it is the
public good which is pretended, so let our caveat be, what is intended in this
attempt. It is the zeal of some public good which consumes us in this
business? Or is it the hope of some advantage or supposed dignity, some
profit, or expected liberty unto our selves, which puts fire unto us?
Remember this is not a private oath twixt neighbor and neighbor, whereof the
Psalmist speaks, but public and solemn, and so much the more obligatorie.
The breach thereof is directly against heaven and earth. And the scandalous
example of that breach may extend to all the Companies of this City, as a
motive for the slacking of their Oaths.

Therefore whatsoever advantage, liberty, or dignity may accrue thereby, keep
thine oath entire, though it be to thine own hinderance. If thou mean to dwell
in Gods Tabernacle on earth, or to rest upon his holy hill in heaven: for the
anchor of that hope lies at pawn.

2. An example we have, Ios. 9. 18. where the children of Israel mistaking the
Gibeonites for far strangers, who indeed were their neighbors, did make a
league with them, and confirmed the same by solemn Oath.

1. This was an oath against the Law of God, Deuteron. 7. 2. Thou shall not
make a Covenant with them, nor have compassion on them.

2. It was an Oath rashly taken by the Princes, in that they asked not counsel
at the mouth of God, but suffered themselves to be deluded by their old
apparel, their patched bottles, their clouted shoes, and mouldie bread.

3. It was an Oath guilefully given by the Gibeonites, Dolus personarum, a
mistaking of the persons themselves to whom they swear.

Notwithstanding all this, the Princes of the people that swear, durst not
satisfy the people in breaking their Oath.

Saul afterward did break it in slaying the Gibeonites, a long time after,
when time might seem to have worn out the sense of it, 2. Sam. 21. 1.

Hereupon God sent three years famine. David inquireth of the cause of that
famine. God answers, It was Saul and his bloody house for killing the
Gibeonites, to whom the children of Israel had sworn. And besides this, for
further satisfaction, the seven sons of Saul were hanged up in the mountain
before the Lord.

Observe therefore, that this being a rash, guilefull, and unlawful oath, had
no binding power in it self: yet seeing the name of the God of Israel was
pawned by his people, it pleased God rather to dispense with his own Law, then
with their Oath, in regard of scandal amongst Heathen people, that they might
not say, Israel made light account of the name of their God.

Beloved, this Oath of yours is no unlawful Oath, but approved of all. It is
no rash Oath. If it were you should not only condemn your selves, but an
infinite number besides for taking the same.

It is no deceitful Oath. The words are plain and simple. Let me add
further: It is not the Oath of Princes to their slaves appointed to the
slaughter, as the Gibeonites were, but of the members of a fellowship and
incorporation. It is not single, but doubled, doubled with solemnity to this
Company, to this City.

Now if we were but men, Heathen men that knew not the true God: yet he that
shall break such an Oath, shall not only lose his credit for ever amongst men,
etiamsi per plures Deos iuret, but vengeance also from above would follow him,
as the wise Wisd. 14. 30.
man auerreth. Not by any power in the Idols, by whom the Heathen swear, but
because in every false religion there is some truth intwined by the virtue of
that truth, the vengeance of that divine power which is acknowledged by
Idolaters, shall follow perjured persons.

But we are Christians, worshipping the true God and Savior of the world.
This obligation then is doubled upon us: and what will profane persons object
if we break it?

We profess our selves professors of the Gospel of Christ, and worshippers
of the true God truly. What will our adversaries in this profession say, when
they shall see us pass over these divine bonds as matter of mere formalitie?
I will tell you what they do say; That our Forefathers in this Land under
their Religion were faster tied by their bare word and promise, then
Protestants at this day by their most solemn Oaths.

If they shall infer this a non causa, pro causa, imputing it to our
Religion, it is well known we can easily quit them with their own. But in
some men of our Religion we must confess it is inexcusable. Come we then to
our general conclusion.

If there be any Freeman of this City, member of this Company, who does or
shall desire not to be subject to such lawful ordinances as he is formerly
sworn unto; or shall endeavor or give consent to those that shall endeavor for
any such innovation or separation as may prove dangerous either to the shaking
of this City government, or the weakening of this present Company.

Before that such a one proceed any further, Let him lay his hand upon his
heart, and seriously consider the binding power of a solemn promissorie Oath
in general as has been delivered, together with the contents of his double
oath in particular; Next let him see what warrant he has either upon hope of
any dignity, liberty, or advantage to himself in private, Or upon any
scruple arising in him, or suggested by others for the public, to cross any
branch of either Oath: Or what power can dispense with his conscience in this
case* the subject of his Oath remaining as it does.

It is clear thy Oath does not bind thee from seeking the redress and
reformation of any abuse within thy calling whatsoever, God forbid it should,
Neither does it forbid thee to advice in thy place about the means of
reformation; Only abstain from that means which shall transgress any part of
thine Oath.

If there be no means of reformation either already established, or to be
obtained, but such: Let that be the act of authority, the invention of
superiors and not thine, Let it be their determination, rather then thy
seeking. Touch not thine Oath. Remember how far thou art obliged before by a
divine bond, and thou may not play fast and loose with the eternal God. He
is that greater in my text by whom we swear, and an Oath ought to be the end
of all strife amongst men, in private societies, in Companies, in Cities, and
in kingdoms. Be it far from us then to contend or strive against any branch
of our Oath, least we seem to strive against God. And then shall we kick
against the pricks, to the wounding of our selves, our souls and consciences
for ever.

Of which Conscience as of a most precious Jewel, that every one of us may
have a tender care, together with a most holy Reverence of Gods most glorious
name in these sacred covenants and celestial bonds, he give grace who is the
fountain of all Graces, Jesus Christ, to whom with the Father and blessed
spirit, three persons and one God, be all praise and glory.

Finis.

