MONSIEUR THOMAS.

A COMEDY.

Acted at the Private House in Black Friars.

The Author, JOHN FLETCHER, Gent.

Decorative design with flowers

LONDON, Printed by Thomas Harper, for John Waterson, and are to be sold at his
shop in Paul's Churchyard, at the sign of the Crown. 1639.

TO THE NOBLE HONOVRER OF The dead Authors works and memory, Master CHARLES
COTTON.
SIR,
MY directing of this piece unto you, renders me obvious to many censures,
which I would willingly prevent by declaring mine own and your right thereto.
Mine was the fortune to be made the unworthy preserver of it; yours is the
worthy opinion you have of the Author and his Poems: neither can it easily be
determined, whether your affection to them has made you (by observing) more
able to judge of them, then your ability to judge of them has made you to
affect them, deservedly, not partially. In this presumptuous act of mine, I
express my twofold zeal; to him and your noble self, who have built him a
more honorable monument in that fair opinion you have of him, then any
inscription subject to the wearing of time can be. You will find him in this
Poem as active as in others, to many of which, the dull apprehensions of former
times gave but slender allowance, from malicious custom more than reason: yet
they have since by your candid self and others been clearly vindicated. You
shall oblige by your acceptance of this acknowledgement (which is the best I
can render you, mine own weak labors being too unworthy your judicious
perusal) him that is ambitious to be known

Your most humble servant; RICHARD BROM.

In praise of the Author, and his following Poem.
It Is both the life of Action and of wit,
When Actors so the fancied humors hit,
As if 'twixt them and the Author there were strife
How each to other should give mutual life.
The last this wanted not. Invention strayes
Here in full many pleasant turning ways,
That like Meanders their curld circles bend,
Yet in a smooth stream run to crown the end.
Then it is authorized by the Authors name;
Who never writ but with such sprightly flame,
As if the Muses jointly did inspire,
His raptures only with their sacred fire.
And yet perhaps it did participate
At first presenting but of common fate;
When ignorance was judge, and but a few
What was legitimate, what bastard, knew.
The world's grown wiser now: each man can say
If Fletcher made it it is an exc'lent play.
Thus Poemes like their Authors may be sed,
Never to live 'till they have first been dead.
Rich: Brom.

Monsieur Thomas, A Comedy.
Actus Primus,
Scena Prima.
Enter Alice and Valentine. Alice. HOw dearly welcome you are!

Val. I know it,
And my best sister, you as deer to my sight,
And pray let this confirm it, how you have governed
My poor state in my absence, how my servants,
I dare and must believe, else I should wrong ye,
The best and worthiest.

Alice As my woman's wit Sir,
Which is but weak and crazie.

Val. But good Alice
Tell me how fares the gentle Cellide,
The life of my affection, since my travel,
My long, and lazy travel? is her love still
Upon the growing hand? does it not stop
And wither at my years? has she not viewed
And entertained some younger smooth behavior
Some youth but in his blossom, as her self is?
There lies my fears.

Alice They need not, for believe me
So well you have managed her, and won her mind,
Even from her hours of childehood, to this ripeness,
And in your absence, that by me enforced still,
So well distilled your gentleness into her,
Observed her, fed her fancy, lived still in her,
And though Love be a boy, and ever youthful,
And young, and beauteous objects ever aimed at,
Yet here ye have gone beyond love, bettered nature,
Made him appear in years, in gray years fiery,
His bow at full bent ever: fear not brother,
For though your body has been far off from her,
Yet every hour your heart, which is your goodness,
I have forced into her, won a place prepared too,
And willingly to give it ever harbor:
Believe she is so much yours, and won by miracle,
(Which is by age) so deep a stamp set on her
By your observances, she cannot alter,
Were the child living now ye lost at sea
Among the Genoway Galleys, what a happiness,
What a maine blessing?

Val. O no more good sister,
Touch no more that string, it is too harsh and jarring.
With that child all my hopes went, and you know
The root of all those hopes, the mother too
Within few days.

Alice It Is too true, and too fatal,
But peace be with their souls.

Val. For her loss
I hope, the beauteous Cellide.

Alice. You may Sir,
For all she is, is yours.

Val. For the poor boys loss,
I have brought a noble friend, I found in travel
A worthier mind, and a more temperate spirit
If J have so much judgment to discern 'em,
Man yet was never master of.

Alice What is he?

Val. A Gentleman, I do assure my self,
And of a worthy breeding, though he hide it:
I found him at Valentia, poor and needy,
Only his mind the master of a treasure.
I sought his friendship, won him by much violence,
His honesty and modesty still fearing
To thrust a charge upon me; how I love him,
He shall now know, where want and he hereafter
Shall be no more companions: use him nobly,
It is my will, good sister, all I have
J make him free companion in, and part er,
But only

Alice I observe ye, hold your right there,
Love and high rule allows no rivals, brother,
He shall have fair regard, and all observance.

Enter Hylas. Hylas Ye are welcome noble Sir.

Val. What, Monsieur Hylas,
I Am glad to see your merry body well yet.

Hyl. Yf'aith you are welcome home; what news beyond seas?

Val. None, but new men expected, such as you are
To breed new admirations: it is my sister,
Pray ye know her sir.

Hylas With all my heart, your leave Lady.

Alice Ye have it sir.

Hylas A shrewd smart touch, which does prognosticate
A body keen and active, somewhat old,
But that is all one: age brings experience
And knowledge to dispatch. I must be better
And nearer in my service, with your leave sir,
To this fair Lady.

Val. What, the old squire of dames still?

Hyl. Still the admirer of their goodness with all my heart now
I love a woman of her years, a pacer
That lay the bridle in her neck will travel
Forty, and somewhat fulsome is a fine dish,
These young colts; are too sketish.

Enter Mary. Al. My cousin Mary
In all her joy Sir to congratulate
Your fair return.

Val. My loving, and kind cousin,
A thousand welcomes.

Mary. A thousand thanks to heaven Sir
For your safe, voyage, and return.

Val. I thank ^e:
But where is my blessed Cellide? her slacknesse
In visitation.

Mary Think not so dear Uncle,
I left her on her knees, thanking the gods
With tears and prayers.

Val. Ye have given me too much comfort.

Mary She will not belong from ye.

Hyl. Your fair cousin?

Val. It is so, and a bait you cannot balke sir,
If your old rule reign in you, ye may know her.
A happy stock ye have, right worthy Lady,
The poorest of your servants, vows his duty
And obliged faith.

Mary. O it is a kiss you would sir,
Take it, and tie your tongue up.

Hyl. I am an ass
I do perceive now: a blind ass, a blockhead:
For this is handsomnesse, this that that draws us,
Body and bones: oh what a mounted forehead,
What eyes and lips, what every thing about her?
How like a Swan she swims her pace, and bears
Her silver breasts? this is the woman, she,
And only she, that I will so much honor
As to think worthy of my love, all older Idols
I heartily abhor, and give to gunpowder,
And all complexions besides hers, to Gypsies.

Enter Francis at one door, and Cellide at another. Val. O my dear life, my
better heart, all dangers,
Distresses in my travel, all misfortunes,
Had they been endless like the hours upon me,
In this kiss, had been buried in oblivion:
How happy have ye made me, truly happy?

Cel. My joy has so much overmastered me,
That in my tears for your return.

Val. O dearest:
My noble friend too: what a blessedness
Have I about me now? how full my wishes
Are come again, a thousand hearty welcomes
I once more lay upon ye: all I have,
The fair and liberal use of all my servants
To be at your command, and all the uses
Of al within my power.

Fran. Ye are too munificent,
Nor am I able to conceive those thanks sir.

Val. Ye wrong my tender love now, even my service,
Nothing accepted, nothing stuck between us
And our entire affections, but this woman,
This I beseech ye friend.

Fran. It is a jewel
I do confess would make a thief, but never
Of him that is so much yours, and bound your servant,
That were a base ingratitude.

Val. Ye are noble,
Pray be acquainted with her, keep your way sir,
My cousin and my sister.

Alice Ye are most welcome:

Mary If any thing in our poor powers fair sir
To render ye content, and liberal welcome
May but appear, command it.

Alice Ye shall find us
Happy in our performance.

Fra. The poor servant
Of both your goodnesses presents his service.

Val. Come no more complement: custom has made it
Dull, old, and tedious: ye are once more welcome,
As your own thoughts can make ye, and the same ever.
And so we will in to ratify it.

Hyl. Hark ye Valentine,
Is wild oats yet come over?

Val. Yes: with me Sir.

Mar. How does he bear himself?

Val. A great deal better:
Why do you blush? the Gentleman will do well.

Mar. I should be glad on it Sir.

Val. How does his Father?

Hyl. As mad a worm as ere he was.

Val. I looked for it:
Shall we enjoy your company?

Hyl. I Will wayt on ye:
Only a thought, or two.

Val. We bar all prayers. Exeunt all but Hylas.

Hyl. This last wench, I this last wench was a fair one:
A dainty wench, a right one: a devil take it,
What do I ayle; to have fifteen now in liking
Enough a man would think to stay my stomach,
But what is fifteen, or fifteen score to my thoughts?
And wherefore are mine eyes made, and have lights,
But to increase my objects? this last wench
Sticks plaguey close unto me: a hundred pound
I were as close to her: if I loved now
As many foolish men do, I should run mad.

Scaena Secunda.
Enter old Sebastian, and Lancelot. Seb. Sirrah, no more of your French shrugs
J advise you,
If you be lowzie, shift your self.

Lan. May it please your worship:

Seb Only to see my son, my son good Lancelot
Your Master, and my son: body O me sir,
No money, no more money Monsieur Lancelot,
Not a deneere, sweet Signior: bring the person,
The person of my boy, my boy Tom: Monsieur Thomas,
Or get you gone again, du gata whee sir,
Bassa mi cu, good Lancelot, valetote.
My boy, or nothing.

Lan. Then to answer punctually.

Seb. I say to 'th purpose.

Lan. Then J say to the purpose,
Because your Worships vulgar understanding
May meet me at the nearest: your son, my master,
Or Monsieur Thomas, (for so his travel styles him)
Through many foreign plots that virtue meets with,
And dangers ( I beseech ye give attention)
Is at the last ariv'd
To ask your (as the French man calls it sweetly)
Benediction, ae jour en jour.

Seb. Sirrah, do not conjure me with your French furies.

Lan. Che ditt'a vou, Monsieur.

Seb. Che doga vou, Rascal:
Leave me your rotten language, and tell me plainly
And quickly sirrah, left I crack your French crown,
What your good Master means: I have maintained
You and your Monsieur, as I take it Lancelot
These two years at your ditty vous, your jours:
Jour me no more, for not another penny
Shall pass my purse.

Lan. Your Worship is erroneous,
For as I told you, your Son Tom, or Thomas,
My Master, and your son is now arrived
To ask ye, as our language bears it nearest
Your quotidian blessing, and here he is in person.

Enter Thomas. Seb. What Tom, boy, welcome with all my heart boy,
Welcome 'faith, thou have gladded me at soul boy,
Infinite glad I am, I have prayed too, Thomas
For you wild Thomas, Tom, I thank thee heartily
For coming home.

Thom. Sir, I do find your prayers
Have much much prevailed above my sins.

Seb. How Is this?

Thom. Else certain I had perished with my rudeness,
Ere J had won my self to that discretion
I hope you shall hereafter find.

Seb. Humh, humh,
Discretion? is it come to that? the boy's spoild.

Thom. Sirah, you rogue, look for it, for I will make thee
Ten times more miserable then thou thoughtst thy self
Before thou travelledst: thou have told my father
I know it, and I find it, all my rogueries
By mere way of prevention to undo me.

Lan. Sir, as J speak eight languages, I only
Told him you came to ask his benediction,
De jour enjour.

Thom. But that I must be civil,
I would beat thee like a dog: sir, howsoever
The time I have misspent may make you doubtful,
Nay, harden your belief against my conversion,

Seb. A pox of travel, I say.

Thom. Yet dear father
Your own experience in my after courses.

Enter Dorothea. Seb. Prithee no more; it is scurvy; there is thy sister
Undone without redemption: he eats with picks
Utterly spoyld, his spirit baffell'd in him.
How have I find that this affliction
Should light so heavy on me. I have no more sons;
And this no more mine own, no spark of nature
Allows him mine now, he is grown tame: my grand curse
Hang ore his head that thus transformed thee: travel?
I Will send my horse to travel next: we monsieur,
Now will my most canonical dear neighbors
Say I have found my son, and rejoice with me
Because he has mewed his mad tricks off. I know not,
But I am sure; this Monsieur, this fine gentleman
Will never be in my books like mad Thomas,
I must go seek an heir, for my inheritance
Must not turn secretary: my name and quality
Has kept my land three hundred years in madness,
And it slip now, may it sink. Exit.

Tho. Excellent sister,
I am glad to see thee well: but where is my father?

Dor. Gone discontent, it seems.

Thom. He did ill in it
As he dos all: for I was uttering
A handsome speech or two, I have been studying
Ere since I came from Paris: how glad to see thee?

Dor. I am gladder to see you, with more love too
I dare maintain it, then my fathers sorry
To see (as he supposes) your conversion:
And I am sure he is vexed, nay more I know it,
He has prayed against it mainely: but it appears sir
Ye had rather blind him with that poor opinion,
Then in your self correct it, dearest brother,
Since there is in our uniforme resemblance,
No more to make us two, but our bare sexes:
And since one happy birth produced us hither,
Let one more happy mind.

Thom. Ir shallbe sister,
For I can do it when I list: and yet wench
Be mad too when I please: I have the trick on it.
Beware a traveller.

Dor. Leave that trick too,

Thom. Not for the world: but where is my Mistress
And prithee say how does she? I melt to see her,
And presently: I must a way.

Dor. Then do so.
For of my fath she will not see your brother.

Thom. Not see me? I Will.

Dor. Now you play your true self;
How would my father love this! I Will assure ye
She will not see you: she has heard, (and lowdly)
The gambolls that you played since your departure,
In every Town ye came, your several mischeifes.
Your rowses, and your wenches: all your quarrels,
And the no causes of 'em: these I take it
Although she love ye well, to modest ears,
To one that waited for your reformation,
To which end travel was propounded by her Uncle,
Must needs, and reason for it, be examined,
And by her modesty, and feared too light too
To fyle with her affections: ye have lost her
For any thing I see, exiled your self.

Thom. No more of that sweet Doll, I will be civil.

Dor. But how long?

Thom. Would thou have me lose my birthright?
For yond old thing will disinherit me
If I grow too demure: good sweet Doll, prithee:
Prithee dear sister, let me see her.

Dor. No.

Thom. Nay, I beseech thee: by this light.

Dor. I: swagger.

Thom. Kiss me, and be my friend, we two were twins.
And shall we now grow strangers?

Dor. It Is not my fault,

Thom. Well, there be other women, and remember
You, you were the cause of this: there be more lands too,
And better people in 'em: fare ye well,
And other loves: what shall become of me
And of my vanities, because they grieve ye.

Dor. Come hither, come, do you see that clowd that flies there?
So light are you, and blown with every fancy:
Will ye but make me hope ye may be civil?
I know your nature's sweet enough, and tender,
Not grated on, nor curbed: do you love your Mistress?

Thom. He lies, that says I do not.

Dor. Would ye see her?

Thom. If you please: for it must be so.

Dor. And appear to her
A thing to be beloved?

Thom. Yes.

Dor. Change then
A little of your wildenesse into wisdom,
And put on a more smoothness:
I Will do the best I can to help ye, yet
I do protest she swore, and swore it deeply,
She would never see you more: where is your man's heart now?
What do you faint at this?

Thom. She is a woman:
But he she entertaines next for a servant,
I shall be bold to quarter.

Dor. No thought of fighting:
Go in, and there we will talk more: be but ruled,
And what lies in my power, ye shall be sure of.

Scaena Tertia.
Enter Alice and Mary. Al. He cannot be so wild still.

Ma. It Is most certain
I have now heard all, and all the truth.

Al. Grant all that:
Is he the first, that h'as bin given a lost man,
And yet come fairly home? he is young, and tender
And fit for that impression; your affections
Shall stamp upon him, age brings on discretion,
A year hence, these mad toys that now possess him
Will show like bugbeares to him, shapes to fright him;
Marriage dissolves all these like mists.

Mar. They are grounded
Hereditary in him, from his father
And to his grave they will haunt him.

Al. It Is your fear
Which is a wise part in you; yet your love
However you may seem to lessen it
with these dislikes, and choke it with these errors,
Do what you can will break out to excuse him,
Ye have him in your heart, and planted, Cousin,
From whence the power of reason, nor discretion
Can ever root him.

Mar. Planted in my heart Aunt?
Believe it no, I never was so liberal:
What though he show a so so comely fellow
Which we call pretty? or say it may be hansom?
What though his promises may stumble at
The power of goodness in him, sometimes use too?

Al. How willingly thy heart betrays thee cousin?
Cozen thy self no more: thou have no more power
To leave off loving him, then he that is thirsty
Has to abstain from drink standing before him.
His mind is not so monstrous for his shape
If I have eyes; I have not seen his better.
A hansom brown complexion

Mar. Reasonable
Inclining to a tawney.

Al. Had I said so
You would have wished my tongue out: then his making.

Mar. Which may be mended: I have seen legs straiter.
And cleaner made.

Al. A body too,

Mar. Far neater,
And better set together.

Alice God forgive thee,
For against thy conscience thou lie stubbornely.

Mar. I grant it is neat enough.

Alice It Is excellent,
And where the outward parts are fair and lovely,
(Which are but molds o'th mind) what must the soul be?
Put case youth has his swinge, and fyery nature
Flames to mad uses many times.

Mar. All this
You only use, to make me say I love him:
I do confess I do, but that my fondness
Should fling it self upon his desperate follies.

Alice I do not counsel that, see him reclaimed first,
Which will not prove a miracle, yet Mary
I am afraid 'twill vex thee horribly
To stay so long.

Mar. No, no Aunt, no believe me.

Alice What was your dream to night? for I observed ye
Hugging of me; with good, dear, sweet Tom.

Mar. Fie Aunt,
Upon my conscience.

Alice On my word it is true wench:
And then ye kissed me Mary, more then once too,
And sighed, and O sweet Tom again: nay, do not blush,
Ye have it at the heart wench.

Mar. I Will be hanged first,
But you must have your way. Enter Dorothea.

Alice And so will you too,
Or break down hedges for it: Dorothea,
The welcom'st woman living: how does thy brother?
I hear he is turned a wondrous civil gentleman
Since his short travel.

Dor. Pray heaven he make it good Alice.

Mar. How do ye friend, I have a quarrel to ye,
Ye stole away, and left my company.

Dor. O pardon me, dear friend, it was to welcome
A brother, that I have some cause to love well.

Mar. Prithee how is he? thou speakst truth.

Dor. Not perfect:
I hope he will be.

Mar. Never: has forgot me,
I hear wench, and his hot love too:

Alice Thou would howl then.

Mar. And I am glad it should be so; his travels
Have yielded him variety of Mistresses,
Fairer in his eye far.

Alice O cogging rascal.

Mar. I was a fool, but better thoughts I thank heaven.

Dor. Pray do not think so, for he loves you dearly,
Upon my troth most firmly: would feign see you.

Mar. See me friend? do you think it fit?

Dor. It may be,
Without the loss of credit too: he is not
Such a prodigious thing, so monstrous,
To fling from all society.

Mar. His so much contrary
To my desires, such an antipathy
That I must sooner see my grave.

Dor. Dear friend,
He was not so before he went.

Mar. I grant it,
For then I daily hoped his fair conversion.

Alice Come, do not mask your self, but see him freely,
Ye have a mind.

Mar. That mind I Will master then.

Dor. And is your hate so mortal?

Mar. Not to his person,
But to his qualities, his mad-cap follies,
Which still like Hydras heads grow thicker on him.
I have a credit friend, and maids of my sort,
Love where their modesties may live untainted.

Dor. I give up that hope then: pray, for your friends sake,
If I have any interest within ye,
Do but this courtesy, accept this Letter.

Mar. From him?

Dor. The same: it is but a minutes reading,
And as we look on shapes of painted devils,
Which for the present may disturb our fancy,
But with the next new object loose 'em, so
If this be foul, ye may forget it, 'pray:

Mar. Have ye seen it friend?

Dor. I will not lie: I have not,
But I presume, so much he honors you,
The worst part of himself was cast away
When to his best part he writ this.

Mar. For your sake,
Not that I any way shall like his scribbling.

Alice A shrewd dissembling queen.

Dor. J thank ye dear friend,
I know she loves him.

Alice Yes, and will not loose him,
Unless he leap into the Moon, believe that,
And then she will scramble too: young wenches loves
Are like the course of quarterns, they may shift
And seem to cease sometimes, and yet we see
The least distemper pulls 'em back again,
And seats 'em in their old course: fear her not,
Unless he be a devil.

Mar. Now heaven bless me.

Dor. What has he writ?

Mar. Out, out upon him.

Dor. Ha, what has the mad man done?

Mar. Worse, worse, and worse still,

Alice Some northern toy, a little broad.

Mar. Still fowler?
Hay, hay boys: goodness keep me: oh:

Dor. What ayle ye?

Mar. Here, take your spell again, it burns my fingers.
Was ever Lover writ so sweet a Letter,
So elegant a style? pray look upon it:
The rarest inventory of rank oaths
That ever cutpurse cast.

Alice What a mad boy is this?

Mar. Only in the bottom
A little julip gently sprinkled over
To cool his mouth, lest it break out in blisters,
Indeed law. Yours for ever.

Dor. I am sorry.

Mar. You shall be welcome to me, eome when you please,
And ever may command me virtuously,
But for your brother, you must pardon me,
Till I am of his nature, no access friend,
No word of visitation, as ye love me,
And so for now I Will leave ye. Exit.

Alice What a letter
Has this thing written, how it roares like thunder?
With what a state he enters into style.
Dear Mistress.

Dor. Out upon him bedlam.

Alice Well, there be ways to reach her yet: such likeness
As you two carry me thinks.

Dor. I am mad too,
And yet can apprehend ye: fare ye well,
The fool shall now fish for himself.

Alice Be sure then
His tewgh be tith and strong: and next no swearing,
He Will catch no fish else. Farewell Doll.

Dor. Farewell Alice. Exeunt.

Actus Secundus,
Scena Prima.
Enter Valentine, Alice, and Cellide. Cell. INdeed he is much changed,
extremely altered,
His color faded strangely too.

Val. The air,
The sharp and nipping air of our new clymat
I hope is all, which will as well restore
To health again th'affected body by it,
And make it stronger far, as leave it dangerous;
How does my sweet, our blessed hour comes on now
Apace my Cellide, (it knocks at door)
In which our loves, and long desires like rivers
Rising asunder far, shall fall together,
Within these too days dear.

Cel. When heaven, and you sir
Shall think it fit: for by your wills I am governed,

Alice 'Twere good some preparation.

Enter Franck. Val. All that may be:
It shall be no blind wedding: and all the joy
Of all our friends I hope: he looks worse hourly:
How does my friend, my self? he sweats too coldly,
His pulse, like the slow dropping of a spowt,
Scarce gives his function: how is it man, alas sir,
You look extreme ill: is it any old grief,
The weight of which?

Fra. None, gentle sir, that I feel
Your love is too too tender.
Nay believe sir,

Cell. You cannot be the master of your health,
Either some fever lies in wait to catch ye,
Whose harbinger's already in your face
We see preparing: or some discontent,
Which if it lie in this house, I dare say
Both for this noble Gentleman, and all
That live within it, shall as readily
Be purged away, and with as much care softened,
And where the cause is.

Fra. It Is a joy to be ill,
Where such a virtuous fair Physician
Is ready to releeve: your noble cares
I must, and ever shall be thankful for,
And would my service (I dare not look upon her)
But be not fearful, I feel nothing dangerous,
A grudging caused by the alteration
Of air, may hang upon me: my heart's whole,
(I would it were)

Val. I knew the cause to be so.

Fra. No, you shall never know it.

Alice Some warm broths
To purge the blood, and keep your bed a day Sir,
And sweat it out.

Cel. I have such cordials,
That if you will but promise me to take 'em,
Indeed you shall be well, and very quickly,
I Will be your Doctor, you shall see how finely
I Will fetch ye up again.

Val. He sweats extremely:
Hot, very hot: his pulse beats like a drum now,
Feel sister, feel, feel sweet.

Fra. How that touch stung me?

Val. My gown there.

Cel. And those julips in the window.

Alice Some see his bed made.

Val. This is most unhappy,
Take courage man, it is nothing but an ague.

Cell. And this shall be the last fit.

Fra. Not by thousands:
Now what it is to be truly miserable,
I feel at full experience.

Alice He grows fainter.

Val. Come, lead him in, he shall to bed: a vomit,
I Will have a vomit for him.

Alice A purge first,
And if he breathed a vein.

Val. No, no, no bleeding,
A Clyster will cool all.

Cell. Be of good cheer Sir.

Alice He Is loath to speak.

Cel. How hard he holds my hand Aunt?

Alice I do not like that sign.

Val. Away to's chamber,
Softly, he is full of pain, be diligent
With all the care ye have: would I had scus'd him. Exeunt

Scena Secunda.
Enter Dorothea and Thomas. Dor. Why do you rail at me? do I dwell in her
To force her to do this or that? your Letter,
A wilde-fire on your Letter; our sweet Letter;
You are so learned in your writs: ye stand now
As if ye had worried sheep: you must tutne tippet,
And suddenly, and truly, and discreetly
Put on the shape of order and humanity,
Or you must marry Malkyn the May Lady:
You must, dear brother: do you make me carrier
Of your confound-mee's, and your culverings?
Am I a seemly agent for your oaths?
Who would have writ such a debosh'd?

Thom. Your patience,
May not a man profess his Love?

Dor. In blasphemies?
Rack a maids tender cares, with dam's and devils?

Thom. Out, out upon thee.
how would you have me write?
Begin with my love premised? surely,
And by my truly Mistress

Dor. Take your own course
For I see all perswasion's lost upon ye:
Humanity, all drowned: from this hour fayrely

Tho. I Will wash my hands of all ye do: farewell Sir.
Thou art not mad?

Dor. No, if I were, dear brother
I would keep you company: get a new Mistress
Some suburb Sant, that six pence, and some others
Will draw to parley: carowse her health in Cans
And candles ends, and quarrel for her beauty,
Such a sweet heart must serve your turn: your old love
Releases ye of all your ties; disclaimes ye
And utterly abjures your memory
Till time has better managed ye, will ye command me

Tho. What bobd of all sides?

Dor. Any worthy service
Unto my father sir, that I may tell him
Even to his peace of heart, and much rejoicing
Ye are his true son Thom still? will it please ye
To beat some half a dozen of his servants presently
That I may testify you have brought the same faith
Vnblemishd home, ye carried out? or if it like you
There be two chambermaids within, young wenches,
Handsome and apt for exercise: you have bin good, sir,
And charitable though I say it Signiour
To such poor orphans: and now, by the way I think on it
Your young rear Admiral, I mean your last bastard
Don John, ye had by Lady Blanch the Dairy Maid,
Is by an Academy of learned Gypsies,
Foreseeing some strange wonder in the infant
Stolen from the Nurse, and wanders with those Prophets.
There is plate in the parlour, and good store sir,
When your wants shall supply it. So most humbly
(First rendering my due service) I take leave sir. Exit.

Tho. Why Doll, why Doll I say: my letter subd too,
And no access without I mend my manners?
All my designs in Limbo? I will have her,
Yes, I will have her, though the devil rore,
I am resolved that, if she live above ground,
I Will not be bobd in the nose with every bobtaile:
I will be civil too: now I think better,
Exceeding civil, wondrous finely carried:
And yet be mad upon occasion,
And stark mad too, and save my land: my father:
I Will have my will of him, how ere my wench goes. Exit.

Enter Sebastian and Lancelot. Seb. Sirrah, I say still you have spoild your
Master: leave your stiches:
I say thou have spoild thy master.

Lan. I say how sir?

Seb. Marry thou have taught him like an arrant rascal,
First to read perfectly: which on my blessing
I warned him from: for I knew if he read once,
He was a lost man. Secondly, sir Lancelot,
Sir lousy Lancelot, ye have suffered him
Against my power first, then against my precept,
To keep that simpring sort of people company,
That sober men call civil: mark ye that Sir?

Lan. And't please your worship.

Seb. It does not please my worship,
Nor shall not please my worship: third and lastly,
Which if the law were here, I would hang thee for,
(However I will lame thee) like a villain,
Thou have wrought him
Clean to forget what it is to do a mischief,
A handsome mischief, such as thou knew'st I loved well.
My servants all are sound now, my drink sowrd,
Not a horse pawnd, nor played away: no warrants
Come for the breach of peace.
Men travel with their money, and nothing meets 'em:
I was accursed to send thee, thou were ever
Leaning to laziness, and loss of spirit,
Thou slept'st still like a cork upon the water,
Your worship knows, I ever was accounted
The most debosh'd, and please you to remember,
Every day drunk too, for your worships credit,
I broke the Butlers head too.

Seb. No base Palliard
J do remember yet that anslaight, thou wast beaten,
And fledst before the Butler: a black jacke
Playing upon thee furiously, J saw it:
I saw thee scattered rogue, behold thy Master.

Enter Thomas with a Book. Thom. What sweet content dwells here?

La. Put up your book sir,
We are all undone else.

Seb. Tom, when is the horse-race?

Tho. I know not sir.

Seb. You will be there?

Tho. Not I sir,
I have forgot those journeyes.

Seb. Spoild for ever,
The cocking holds at Derby, and there will be
Jack Wild-oats, and Will Purser.

Tho. I am sorry sir,
They should employ their time so slenderly,
Their understandings will bear better courses.

Seb. Yes, I will marry again: but Monsieur Thomas,
What say ye to the gentleman that challenged ye
Before he went, and the fellow ye fell out with?

Thom. O good Sir,
Remember not those follies: where I have wronged sir,
(So much I have now learned to discern my self)
My means, and my repentance shall make even,
Nor do I think it any imputation
To let the law p^rswade me.

Seb. Any woman:
I care not of what color, or complexion,
Any that can bear children: rest ye merry. Exit.

La. Ye have utterly undone: clean discharged me,
I am for the ragged regiment.

Thom. Eight languages,
And wither at an old man's words?

La. O pardon me.
I know him but too well: eight score I take it
Will not keep me from beating, if not killing:
I Will give him leave to break a leg, and thank him:
You might have saved all this, and sworn a little.
What had an oath or two bin? or a head broke,
Though t'had been mine, to have satissied the old man?

Tho. I Will break it yet.

La. Now it is too late, I take it:
Will ye be drunk to night, (a less entreaty
Has served your turn) and save all yet? not mad drunk,
For then ye are the devil, yet the drunker,
The better for your father still: your state is desperate,
And with a desperate cure ye must recover it:
Do something, do sir: do some drunken thing,
Some mad thing, or some any thing to help us.

Tho. Go for a Fiddler then: the poor old Fiddler
That says his songs: but first where lies my Mistress,
Did ye enquire out that?

La. In The Lodge, alone sir,
None but her own attendants.

Tho. It Is the happier:
Away then, find this Fiddler, and do not miss me
By nine a clock.

La. Via. Exit.

Tho. My father's mad now,
And ten to one will disinherite me:
I Will put him to his plunge, and yet be merry,
What Rybabalde?

Enter Hylas and Sam. Hyl. Don Thomasio.
De been venew.

Tho. I do embrace your body:
How do thou Sam.

Sam. The same Sam still: your friend sir.

Tho. And how is it bouncing boys?

Hyl. Thou art not altered,
They said thou were all Monsieur.

Tho. O believe it,
I am much altered, much another way:
The civil'st Gentleman in all your Country:
Do not ye see me altered? ye, and nay Gentlemen,
A much converted man: where is the best wine boys?

Hyl. A sound Convertite.

Tho. What have thou made up twenty yet?

Hyl. By'r Lady,
I have given a shrewd push at it, for as I take it,
The last I fell in love with, scor'd sixteen.

Tho. Look to your skin, Rambaldo the sleeping Giant
Will rowze, and rent thee piece-meale.

Sam. He never perceives 'em
Longer then looking on.

Tho. Thou never meanest then
To marry any that thou love?

Hyl. No surely,
Nor any wise man I think; marriage?
Would you have me now begin to be prentize,
And learn to cobble other men's old boots?

Sam. Why you may take a Maid.

Hyl. Where? can you tell me?
Or if 'twere possible I might get a Maid,
To what use should I put her? look upon her,
Dandle her upon my knee, and give her sugar sops?
All the new gowns in the parish will not please her,
If she be high bred, for there is the sport she aims at,
Nor all the feathers in the Friars.

Thom. Then take a widow,
A good stanch wench, that tith,

Hyl. And begin a new order,
Live in a dead man's monument, not I sir,
I Will keep mine old road, a true mendicant:
What pleasure this day yields me, I never covet
To lay up for the morrow: and me thinks ever
Another man's cook dresses my diet neatest.

Thom. Thou wast wont to love old women, fat, and flat nosed,
And thou would say they kissed like Flounders, flat
All the face over.

Hyl. J have had such damsels
J must confess.

Tho. Thou have been a precious rogue.

Sam. Only his eyes: and O my conscience
They lie with half the kingdom.

Enter over the stage, Physicians and others. Tho. What Is the matter?
Whither go all these men-menders, these Physicians?
Whose dog lies sick o'th mulligrubs?

Sam. O the Gentleman,
The young smug Signiour, Master Valentine,
Brought out of travel with him, as J hear
Is fallen sick o'th sudden, desperate sick,
And likely they go thither.

Tho. Who? young Frank?
The only tempered spirit, Scholar, Soldier,
Courtier: and all in one piece? it is not possible.

Enter Alice. Sam. There Is one can better satisfy you.

Tho. Mistress Alice,
I joy to see you Lady.

Alice Good Monsieur Thomas,
You Are welcome from your travel: I am hasty,
A Gentleman lies sick sir.

Tho. And how do thou?
I must know, and I will know.

Alice Excellent well,
As well as may be, thank ye.

Thom. I am glad on it,
And prithee hark.

Alice I cannot stay.

Thom. A while Alice.

Sam. Never look so narrowly, the mark's in her mouth still,

Hyl. I am looking at her legs, prithee be quiet.

Alice I cannot stay.

Thom. O sweet Alice.

Hyl. A clean instep,
And that I love a life: I did not mark
This woman half so well before, how quick
And nimble like a shadow, there her leg showed:
By the mas a neat one, the color of her stocking,
A much inviting color.

Alice My good Monsieur,
I have no time to talk now,

Hyl. Pretty breeches,
Finely becoming too.

Thom. By heaven.

Alice She will not,
I can assure you that, and so

Tho. But this word.

Alice I cannot, nor I will not: good Lord. Ezit.

Hyl. Well you shall hear more from me.

Thom. We Will go visit
It Is charity: besides I know she is there:
And under visitation I shall see her
Will ye along?

Hyl. By any means.

Thom. Be sure then
I be a civil man: J have sport in hand boys
Shall make mirth for a marriage day.

Hyl. Away then. Exeunt

Scaena Tertia.
Enter three Physicians with an Vrinall. 1 Phis. A Plurisie. I see it.

2 I rather hold it
For tremor cordis.

3 Do you mark the Pheses?
It Is a most pestilent contagious fever,
A surfeit, a plaguey surfeit: he must bleed.

1 By no means.

3 I say bleed.

1 I say it is dangerous:
The person being spent so much before hand,
And nature drawn so low, clysters, cool clysters.

2 Now with your favors, J should think a vomit:
For take away the cause, the effect must follow,
The stomack's foul and fur'd, the pot's unflam'd yet.

3 No, no, we will rectify that part by mild means,
Nature so sunk, must find no violence.

Enter a Servant. Ser. Wilt please ye draw near? the weak gentleman
Grows worse and worse still.

1 Come, we will attend him.

2 He shall do well my friend.

Ser. My masters love sir.

1 Excellent well I warrant thee, right and straight friend.

3 There Is no doubt in him, none at all, never fear him.

Exeunt. Scena Quarta.
Enter Valentine and Michael. Mich. THat he is desp^rate sick, I do believe
well,
And that without a sp^edy cure, it kills him,
But that it lies within the help^ of physic,
Now to restore his health, or art to cure him:
Believe it you are cosened: clean beside it.
I would tell ye the true cause too, but 'twould vex ye,
Nay, run ye mad.

Val. May all I have restore him?
So dearly and so tenderly I love him,
I do not know the cause why, yea my life too.

Mich. Now I perceive ye so well set, I Will tell you,
Hei mihi quod nullis amor, est medicabilis herbis.

Val. 'Twas that I only feared: good friend go from me,
I find my heart too full for further conference:
You are assured of this?

Mich. 'Twill prove too certain,
But bear it nobly sir, youth has his errors.

Val. I shall do, and I thank ye: pray ye no words on it,
I do not use to talk sir. Exit.

Val. Ye are welcome:
Is there no constancy in earthly things:
No happiness in us, but what must alter,
No life without the heavy load of fortune?
What miseries we are, and to our selves,
Even then when full content seems to sit by us,
What daily sores, and sorrows?

Enter Alice. Alice O dear brother,
The Gentleman if ev^r you will see him
Alive as I think.

Enter Cellide. Cel. O he faints, for heaven sake,
For heaven sake sir.

Val. Go comfort him dear sister. Exit Alice.
And one word sweet, with you: then we will go to him.
What think you of this Gentleman?

Cel. My pity thinks sir,
It Is great misfortune, that he should thus perish.

Val. It is indeed: but Cellide, he must dye.

Cel. That were a cruelty, when care may cure him,
Why do you weep so sir, he may recover?

Val. He may, but with much danger: my sweet Cellide
You have a powerful tongue.

Cel. To do you service.

Val. J will betray his grief: he loves a gentlewoman,
A friend of yours, whose heart another holds,
He knows it too: yet such a sway blind fancy,
And his not daring to deliver it,
Have won upon him, that they must undo him:
Never so hopeful and so sweet a spirit,
Misfortune fell so foul on.

Cel. Sure she is hard hearted,
That can look on, and not relent, and deeply
At such a misery: she is not married?

Val. Not yet.

Cel. Nor near it?

Val. When she please.

Cel. And pray sir,
Does he deserve her truly, that she loves so?

Val. His love may merit much: his person little,
For there the match lies mangled.

Cel. Is he your friend?

Val. He should be, for he is near me.

Cel. Will not he dye then?
When the other shall recover?

Val. Ye have posed me.

Cell. Me thinks he should go near it, if he love her;
If she love him

Val. She does, and would do equal:

Cel. It Is A hard task you put me: yet for your sake
I will speak to her: all the art I have:
My best endevors: all his youth, and person,
His mind more full of beautis: all his hopes,
The memory of such a sad example,
Ill spoken of, and never old: the curses
Of loving maids, and what may be alleag'd
I Will lay before her: what is her name? I am ready

Val. But will you deal effectually?

Cell. Most truly:
Nay were it my self, at your entreaty.

Vall. And could ye be so pitiful?

Cell. So dutiful;
Because you urge it sir,

Vall. It may be then
It is your self

Cell. It is in deed, I know it.
And now know how ye love me.

Vall. O my dearest,
Let but your goodness judge: your own part: pitiy:
Set but your eyes on his afflictions:
He is mine, and so becomes your charge: but think
What ruin nature suffers in this young man,
What loss humanity, and noble manhood:
Take to your better judgment my declining,
My age, hung full of impotence, and ils,
My body budding now no more: seere winter
Has sealed that sap up, at the best and happiest
I can but be your infant: you my nurse,
And how unequal dearest: where his years,
His sweetness, and his ever spring of goodness,
My fortunes growing in him, and my self too,
Which makes him all your old love: misconceive not,
I say not this, as weary of my bondage,
Or ready to infringe my faith: bear witness,
Those eyes that I adore still, those lamps that light me
To all the joy I have.

Cel. You have said enough sir,
And more then ere I thought that tongue could utter,
But ye are a man, a false man too.

Val. Dear Cellide.

Cel. And now, to show you that I am a woman
Robbed of her rest, and fooled out of her fondness,
The Gentleman shall live: and if he love me,
Ye shall be both my triumphs: I will to him,
And as you carelessly fling off your fortune,
And now grow weary of my easy winning,
So will I lose the name of Valentine,
From henceforth all his flatteries, and believe it,
Since ye have so so slightly parted with affection,
And that affection you have pawned your faith for:
From this hour, no repentance, vows, nor prayers
Shall pluck me back again: what I shall do,
Yet I will undertake his cure, expect it,
Shall minister no comfort, no content
To either of ye, but hourly more vexations.

Val. Why let him dye then.

Cel. No, so much I have loved
To be commanded by you, that even now,
Even in my hate I will obey your wishes.

Val. What shall I do?

Cel. Dye like a fool unsorrow'd?
A bankrupt fool, that flings away his treasure?
I must begin my cure.

Val. And I my crosses. Exeunt.

Actus Tertius,
Scena Prima.
Enter Francksick, Physicians, and a Pothecary. 1 Phis. CLap on the Cataplasme.

Fra. Good Gentlemen,
Good learned Gentlemen.

2 And see those brothe^ there,
Ready within this hour, pray keep your arms in,
The air is raw, and ministers much evil.

Fra. Pray leave me: I beseech ye leave me gentlemen.
I have no other sickness but your presence,
Convey your Cataplasmes to those that need 'em,
Your Vomits, and your Clysters.

3 Pray be ruled sir.

1 Bring in the Lettice cap: you must be shaved sir,
And then how suddenly we will make you sleep.

Fra. Till doomes-day: what unnecessary nothings
Are these about a wounded mind?

2 How do ye?

Fra. What questions they propound too: how do you sir?
I am glad to see you well.

3 A great distemper, it grows hotter still.

1 Open your mouth I pray sir.

Fra. And can you tell me
How old I am then? there is my hand, pray show me
How many broken shins within this two year.
Who would be thus in fetters, good master Doctor,
And you dear Doctor, and the third sweet Doctor
And precious master Apothecary, I do pray ye
To give me leave to live a little longer,
Ye stand before me like my blacks.

2 It Is dangerous,
For now his fancy turns too.

Enter Cellide. Cell. By your leave Gentlemen:
And pray ye your leave a while too, I have something
Of secret to imparr unto the patient.

1 Withal our hearts.

3 I mary such a Physic
May chance to find the humor: be not long Lady
For we must minister within this half hour. Exit. Plus.

Cell. You shall not stay for me.

Fra. Would you were all rotten
That ye might only intend one another itches:
Or would the Gentlemen with one consent
Would drink small Beer but seven year, and abolish
That wildfire of the blood, unsatiate wenching
That your too Indies, springs and falls might fail ye
What torments these intruders into bodies.

Cell. How do you worthy Sir?

Fra. Bless me, what beams
Flew from these angel eyes: O what a misery
What a most studdied torment it is to me now
To be an honest man: dare ye sit by me?

Cell. Yes; and do more then that too: comfort ye
I see ye have need.

Fra. You are a fair Physician:
You bring no bitterness gilt ore, to gull us
No danger in your looks, yet there my death lies.

Cell. I would be sorry sir, my charity
And my good wishes for your health should merit
So stubborn^ a construction: will it please ye
To taste a little of this Cordial Enter Valentine.
For this I think must cure ye.

Fra. Of which Lady?
Sure she has found my grief? why do you blush so?

Cell. Do you not understand? of this, this Cordial.

Val. Of my afflicted heart: she is gone for ever.

Fra. What heaven ye have brought me Lady?

Cell. Do not wonder:
For it is not impudence, nor want of honor
Makes me do this: but love to save your life sir
Your life, too excellent to loose in wishes
Love, virtuous love.

Fra. A virtuous blessing crown ye
O goodly sweet, can there be so much charity
So noble a compassion in that heart
That Is filled up with another fair affections?
Can mercy drop from those eyes.
Can miracles be wrought upon a dead man,
When all the power ye have, and perfect object
Lies in another light: and his deserves it?

Cell. Do not despair: nor do not think to boldly
I dare abuse my promise, it was your friends
And so fast tide, I thought no time could ruin:
But so much has your danger, and that spell
The powerful name of friend, prevailed above him
To whom I ever owe obedience,
That here I am, by his command to cure ye,
Nay more for ever, by his full resignement
And willingly I ratefie it.

Fra. Hold for heaven sake,
Must my friends misery make me a triumph?
Bear I that noble name, to be a Traitor?
O virtuous goodness, keep thy self untainted:
You have no power to yield, nor he to render
Nor I to take: I am resolved to die first.

Val. Ha; say thou so? nay then thou shall not perish.

Fra. And though I love ye above the light shines on me,
Beyond the wealth of Kingdoms, free content,
Sooner would snatch at such a blessing offered
Then at my pardoned life by the law forfeited,
Yet, yet O noble beauty, yet O paradise
For you are all the wonder revealed of it,
Yet is a gratitude to be preserved
A worthy gratitude to one most worthy.
The name, and noblenes of friends.

Cell. Pray tell me
If I had never known that gentleman
Would you not willingly embrace my offer?

Fra. Do you make a doubt?

Cell. And can ye be unwilling
He being old and impotent: his aim too
Levelled at you, for your good? not constrained,
But out of cure, and council? alas consider
Play but the woman with me, and consider
As he himself does, and I now dare see it
Truly consider sir, what misery.

Fra. For virtues sake take heed.

Cell. What loss of youth,
What everlasting banishment from that
Our years do only covet to arive at
Equal affections and shot together:
What living name can dead age leave behind him
What art of memory but fruitless doting?

Fra. This cannot be.

Cell. To you unless ye apply it
With more and firmer faith, and so digest it
I speak but of things possible, not done
Nor like to be, a posset cures your sickness
And yet I know ye grieve this; and howsoever
The worthiness of Friend may make ye stagger
Which is a fair thing in ye, yet my Patient,
My gentle Patient, I would feign say more
If you would understand.

Val. O cruel Woman.

Cell. Yet sure your sickness is not so forgetful
Nor you so willing to be lost.

Fra. Pray stay there:
Me thinks you are not fair now; me thinks more
That modest, virtue, men delivered of you
Shows but like shadow to me, thin, and fading.

Val. Excellent Friend.

Fra. Ye have no share in goodness:
Ye are belyde; you are not Cellide,
The modest, unaculate: who are ye?
For I will know: what devil to do mischief
Unto my virtuous Friend, has shifted shapes
With that unblemished beauty.

Cell. Do not rave Sir,
Nor let the violence of thoughts distract ye,
You shall enjoy me: I am yours: I pity
By those fair eyes I do.

Fra. O double hearted,
O woman, perfect woman: what distraction
Was meant to mankind when thou was it made a devil,
What an invyting hell invented? tell me,
And if you yet remember what i^ goodness,
Tell me by that, and truth, can one so cherished
So sainted in the soul of him, whose service
Is almost turned to supperstition,
Whose every day endeavors, and desires
Offer themselves like incense on your altar,
Whose heart holds no int^lligence, but holy
And most religious with his love; whose life
(And let it ever be remembered Lady)
Is drawn out only for your ends.

Val. O miracle.

Fra. Whose all, and every part of man: pray make me
Like ready Pages wait upon your pleasures;
Whose breath is but your bubble. Can ye, dare ye,
Must ye cast of this man, though he were willing,
Though in a noblenes, so cross my danger
His friendship durst confirm it, without baseness,
Without the stain of honor? shall not people
Say liberally hereafter, there is the Lady
That lost her Father, Friend, herself, her faith too,
To fawn upon a stranger, for ought you know
As faithless as your self, in love as fruitless?

Val. Take her withal my heart, thou art so honest
That it is most necessary I be undone.

Cell. With all my soul possess her. Exit, Val.
Till this minut.
I scorned, and hated ye, and came to cosen ye:
Vtter'd those things might draw a wonder on me,
To make ye mad.

Fra. Good heaven, what is this woman?

Cell. Nor did your danger, but in charity.
Move me a whit: nor you appear unto me
More then a common object, yet, now truly,
Truly, and nobly I do love ye dearly,
And from this hour, ye are the man I honor,
You are the man, the excellence, the honesty,
The only friend, and I am glad your sickness
Fell so most happily at this time on ye,
To make this truth the worlds.

Fra. Whether do you drive me?

Cell. Back to your honesty, make that good ever,
It Is like a strong built Castle, seated high,
That draws on all ambitions, still repair it,
Still fortify it: there are thousand foes
Besides the tyrant beauty, will assail it:
Look to your Centin is that watch it hourly,
Your eyes, let them not wander.

Fra. Is this serious?

Cell. Or does she play still with me?
Keep your ears,
The two maine ports that may betray ye strongly
From light belief first, then from flattery,
Especially where woman beats the parley:
The body of your strength, your noble heart
From ever yielding to dishonest ends,
Rigd round about with virtue, that no breaches,
No subtle mines may meet ye.

Fra. How like the Sun
Laboring in his eclipse, dark, and prodigious,
She showed till now? when having won her way,
How full of wonder he breaks out again,
And sheds his virtuous beams: excellent Angel,
For no less can that heavenly mind proclaim thee,
Honor of all thy sex, let it be lawful,
And like a pilgrim thus I kneel to beg it,
Not with profane lips now, nor burnt affections,
But, reconciled to faith, with holy wishes,
To kiss that virgin hand.

Cel. Take your desire sir,
And in a nobler way, for I dare trust ye,
No other fruit my love must ever yield ye,
I fear no more: yet your most constant memory
(So much I am wedded to that worthiness)
Shall ever be my friend, companion, husband,
Farewell, and fairly govern your affections,
Stand, and deceive me not: O noble young man,
I love thee with my soul, but dare not say it:
Once more farewell, and prosper. Exit.

Fra. Goodness guide thee:
My wonder like to fearful shapes in dreams,
Has wakened me out of my fit of folly,
But not to shake it off: a spell dwells in me,
A hidden charm shot from this beauteous woman,
That fate can never avoid, nor physic find,
And by her counsel strengthened: only this
Is all the help I have, I love fair virtue.
Well, something I must do, to be a friend,
Yet I am poor, and tardy: something for her too,
Though I can never reach her excellence,
Yet but to give an offer at a greatness.

Enter Valentine, Thomas, Hylas, and Sam. Val. Be not uncivil Tom, and take
your pleasure.

Thom. Do you think I am mad? you will give me leave
To try her fairly?

Val. Do your best.

Thom. Why there boy,
But where is the sick man?

Hyl. Where are the gentlewomen
That should attend him, there is the patent
Me thinks these women.

Thom. Thou think nothing else.

Val. Go to him friend, and comfort him: I Will lead ye:
O my best joy, my worthiest friend, ptay pardon me,
I am so overjoyed I want expression:
I may live to be thankful: bid your friends welcome.

Exit. Val. Thom. How do thou Frank? how do thou boy, bear up man:
What, shrink in the sinews for a little sickness?
Deavolo morte.

Fra. I am o'th mending hand.

Thom. How like a Flute thou speak: o'th mending hand man
Gogs bores, I am well, speak like a man of worship.

Fra. Thou art a mad companion: never staid Tom?

Tho. Let rogues be staid that have no habitation,
A gentleman may wander: sit thee down Frank,
And see what I have brought thee: come discover,
Open the scene, and let the work appear,
A friend at need you rogue is worth a million.

Fra. What have thou there, a julip?

Hyl. He must not touch it,
It Is present death.

Tho. Ye are an Ass, a twirepipe,
A Ieffrey John bo peep, thou mimister,
Thou mend a left handed pack-saddle, out puppey,
My friend Frank, but a very foolish fellow:
Do thou see that bottle? view it well.

Fran. I do Tom.

Tom. There be as many lives in it, as a Cat carries,
It Is everlasting liquor.

Fra. What?

Tom. Old Sack boy,
Old reverend Sack, which for ought that I can read yet,
Was that Philosophers Stone the wise King Ptolomeus
Did all his wonders by.

Fra. I see no harm Tom,
Drink with a moderation.

Tom. Drink with sugar;
Which I have ready here, and here a glass boy,
Take me without my tools.

Sam. Pray sir be temperate,
You know your own state best.

Fra. Sir, I much thank ye,
And shall be careful: yet a glass or two
So fit I find my body, and that so needful.

Tom, Fill it, and leave your fooling: thou say true Frank.

Hyl. Where are these women I say?

Tom. It Is most necessary,
Hang up your julips, and your portugal possets,
Your barley brothes, and sorrel sops, they are mangy,
And breed the scratches only: give me Sack:
I wonder where this wench is though: have at thee:

Hyl. So long, and yet no bolting.

Fra. Do, I Will pledge thee.

Tom. Take it off thrice, and then cry heigh like a Huntsman
With a clear heart, and no more fits I warrant thee.
The only Cordial Frank. Phis. within, and Serve.

1 Phis. Are the things ready?
And is the Barber come?

Ser. An hour ago sir.

1 Phis. Bring out the oils then.

Fra. Now or never gentlemen,
Do me a kindness and deliver me.

Tom From whom boy?

Fra. From these things, that talk within there,
Physicians, Tom, Physicians, scowring-sticks,
They mean to read upon me.

Enter three Phis. Apoth. and Barber. Hyl. Let 'em enter.

Tom. And be thou confident, we will deliver thee:
For look ye Doctor, say the devil were sick now,
His horns sawed off and his head bound with a Biggin,
Sick of a calenture taken by a surfeit
Of stinking souls at his nephews, and S. Dunstans,
What would you minister upon the sudden?
Your judgment short and sound.

1 Ph. A fools head.

Tom. No sir,
It must be a Physicians for three causes,
The first because it is a bald head likely,
Which will down easily without apple-pap.

3 Phis. A maine cause.

Tom. So it is, and well considered,
The second, for it is filled with broken Greek sir,
Which will so tumble in his stomach, Doctor,
And work upon the crudities, conceive me
The fears, and the fidle strings within it,
That those damned souls must disembogue again.

Hyl. Or meeting with the stygian humor.

Tom. Right sir.

Hyl. Forced with a cataplasme of crackers.

Tom. Ever.

Hyl. Scowre all before him, like a Scavenger.

Tom. Satis fecisti domine: my last cause,
My last is, and not least, most learned Doctors,
Because in most Physicians heads (I mean those
That are most excellent, and old withal,
And angry, though a patient say his prayers,
And Paracelsians that do trade with poisons,
We have it by tradition of great writers)
There is a kind of toad-stone bread, whose virtue
The Doctor being dried.

1 Phis. We are abused sirs.

Hyl. I take it so, or shall be, for say the belly-ake
Caused by an inundation of Pease-porridge,
Are we therefore to open the port vein,
Or the port Esquiline?

Sam. A learned question:
Or grant the diaphragm^ by a rupture,
The sign being then in the head of Capricorn.

Tom. Meet with the passion Hupercondriaca,
And so cause a carnositie in the kidneyes.

Tom. Must not the brains being buttered with this humor
Answer me that.

Sam Most excellently argued.

2 Phis. The next fit you will have, my most fine schol
Bedlam shall find a salve for: fare ye well sir,
We came to do^ you good, burthese young Doctors
It s^emes have boar'd our noses.

3 Drink hard Gentlemen,
And get unwholesome drabs: it is ten to one then
We shall hear further from ye; your note altered. Ex.

Tom. And will thou be gone says one?

Hyl. And will thou be gone says to'ther?

Toas. Then take the odd crown
To mend thy old gown.

Sam. And we will be gone all together.

Fra. My learned Tom.

Enter Servant. Ser. Sir, the young Gentlewomen
Sent me to see what company ye had with ye
They much desire to visit ye.

Fra. Pray ye thank 'em,
And tell 'em my most sickness is their absence:
Ye see my company.

Tom. Come hither Crab,
What gentlewomen are these? my Mistress?

Ser. Yes sir.

Hyl. And who else?

Ser. Mistress Alice.

Hyl. Oh.

Tom. Hark ye sirrah.
No word of my being here, unless she know it.

Ser. I do not think she does.

Tom. Take that, and mum, then

Ser. You have tied my tongue up. Exit.

Tom. Sit you down good Francis,
And not a word of me till ye hear from me,
And as you find my humor, follow it:
You two come hither, and stand close, unseen boys,
And do as I shall tutor ye.

Fran. What, new work?

Tom. Prithee no more, but help me now,

Hyl. I would feign
Talk with the gentlewomen.

Tom. Talk with the gentlewomen?
Of what forsooth? whose maidenhead the last mask
Suffered impression, or whose clyster wrought best:
Take me as I shall tell thee.

Hyl. To what end?
What other end came we along?

Sam. Be ruled though.

Tom. Your we zell face must needs be ferretting
About the farthing-ale,
Do as I bid ye,
Or by this light.

Hyl. Come then,

Tom. Stand close and mark me,

Fran. All this forced foolery will never do it.

Enter Alice and Mary. Alice I hope we bring ye health sir: how is it with ye?

Ma. You look far better trust me, the fresh color
Creeps now again into his cheeks.

Alice Your enemy
I see has done his worst. Come, we must have ye
Lusty again, and frolic man; leave thinking

Ma. Indeed it does ye harm sir.

Fra. My best visitants,
I shall be governed by ye.

Alice You shall be well then,
And suddenly, and soundly well.

Ma. This air sir
laying now seasoned ye: will keep ye ever.

Tho. No, no, I have no hope, nor is it fit friends,
My life has bin so lewd, my loose condition,
Which I repent too late, so lamentable,
That any thing but curses light upon me,
Exorbitant in all my ways.

Alice Who Is that sir,
Another sick man.

Ma. Sure, I know that voice well.

Tho. In all my courses, curelesse disobedience.

Fra. What a strange fellow's this?

Tho. No counsel friends,
No look before I leapt.

Alice Do yo' know the voice sir?

Fra. Yes, it is a gentleman's that is much afflicted
In's mind: great pity Ladies.

Alice Now heaven help him.

Fra. He came to me, to ask free pardon of me,
For some things done long since, which his distemper
Made to appear like wrong, but 'twas not so.

Ma. O that this could be truth.

Hyl. Persuade your self.

Tho. To what end gentlemen, when all is perished
Upon a wrack, is there a hope remaining?
The sea, that never knew sorrow, may be pitiful,
My credit's spilt, and sunk, nor is it possible,
Were my life lengthened out as long as.

Ma. I like this well.

Sam. Your mind is too mistrustfull.

Tho. I have a virtuous sister, but I scorned her,
A Mistress too, a noble gentlewoman,
For goodness all out-going.

Alice Now I know him.

Thom. With these eyes friends, my eyes must never see more.

Al. This is for your sake Mary: take heed cosen,
A man is not so soon made.

Tom. O my fortune,
But it is just, I be despised and hated.

Hyl. Despair not, it is not manly: one hours goodness
Strikes off an infinite of ils.

Al. Weep truly
And with compassion Cousin.

Fra. How exactly
This cunning young thief plays his part.

Ma. Well Tom
My Tom again, if this be truth.

Hill. She weeps boy.

Tom. O I shall die.

Ma. Now heaven defend.

Sam. Thou have her.

Tom. Come lead me to my Friend to take his farewell,
And then what fortune shall befall me, welcome.
How does it show?

Hyl. O rarely well.

Ma. Say you so Sir.

Fra. O ye grand Ass.

Ma. And are ye there my Iuggler
Away we are abused Alice.

Al. Fool be with thee. Exit. Ma. and Al.

Tom. Where is she.

Fra. Gone; she found you out, and finely,
In your own nooze she halter'd ye: you must be whispering
To know how things showd: not content to fare well
But you must roar out roast meat; till that suspicion
You carried it most neately, she believed too
And wept most tenderly; had you continew'd,
Without doubt you had brought her off.

Tom. This was thy Rouging.
For thou were ever whispering: fie upon thee
Now could I breeks thy head.

Hyl. You spoke to me first.

Tom. Do not anger me,
For by this hand i will beat the buzard blind then
She shall not escape me thus: farewell for this time,

Fra. Good night, it is almost bed time: yet no sleep
Must enter these eyes, till I work a wonder. Exit.

Tom. Thou shall along too, for I mean to plague thee
For this nights sins, I will never leave walking of thee
Till I have worn thee out.

Hyl. Your will be done Sir.

Tom. You will not leave me Sam.

Sam. Not I.

To. Away then: i will be your guide now, if my man be trusty
My spightfull Dame, i will pipe ye such a huntsup
Shall make ye dance a tipvaes: keep close to me. Exeunt.

Scena Secunda.
Enter Sebastian, and Dorothy. Seb. NEver persuade me, I will marry again
What should I leave my state to, pins and poaking sticks
To Farthingals, and frownces, to fore-horses
And a old leather bawdy house behind'en
To thee?

Dor. You have a son Sir.

Seb. Where, what is he?
Who is he like?

Dor. Your self.

Seb. Thou lie, thou have mard him,
Thou, and thy prayer books: I do disclaim him:
Did not I take him singing yesternight
A godly Ballad, to a godly tune too,
And had a catechizme in's pocket Damsel,
One of your dear disciples, I perceive it?
When did he ride abroad since he came over?
What Tavern h^s he used to? what hings done
That shows a man, and mettle? when was my house
At such a shame before, to creep to bed
At ten a clock, and twelve, for want of company?
No singing, nor no dancing, nor no drinking?
Thou think not of these scandals; when, and where
Has he but showed his sword of late.

Dor. Despair not
I do beseech you Sir, nor tempt your weakness,
For if you like it so, I can assure you
He is the same man still.

Seb. Would thou were ashes
On that condition; but believe it gossip
You shall know you have wrong.

Dor. You never Sir,
So will I know my duty: and for heaven sake,
Take but this council with ye ere you marry,
You were wont to bear me: take him, and confess him
Search him toth' quick, and if you find him fail
Do as please you; a Mothers name I honor.

Seb. He is lost, and spoiled I am resolved my rooffe
Shall never harbor him: and for your Minion
I Will keep you close enough, least you break loose
And do more michiefe; get ye in: who waits. Exit. Dor.

Enter Servant Ser. Do you call Sir?

Seb. Seek the Boy: and bid him wait
My pleasure in the morning: mark what house
He is in, and what he does: and truly tell me.

Ser. I will not fail Sir.

Seb. If ye do, i will hang ye. Exeunt.

Scena Tertia.
Enter Thomas, Hylas, and Sam. Tom. Keep you the back door there, and be sure
None of her servants enter, or go out,
If any woman pass, she is lawful prize, boys
Cut off all convoyes.

Hyl. Who shall answer this?

Tho. Why, I shall answer it, you fearful widgen,
I shall appear toth' action.

Hyl. May we discourse too
On honorable terms?

Tho. With any gentlewoman
That shall appear at window: ye may rehearse too
By your commission safely, some sweet parcels
Of poetry to a Chambermaid.

Hyl. May we sing too?
For there is my masterpiece.

Tho. By no means, no boys,
I am the man reserved for air, it is my part,
And if she be not rock, my voice shall reach her:
Ye may record a little, or ye may whistle,
As time shall minister, but for maine singing,
Pray ye satisfy your selves: away, be careful.

Hyl. But hark ye one word Tom, we may be beaten.

Tom. That Is as ye think good your selves: if you deserve it,
Why it is the easiest thing to compass: beaten?
What bugbeares dwell in thy brains? who should beat thee?

Hyl. She has men enough,

Thom. Art not thou man enough too?
Thou have flesh enough about thee: if all that mass
Will not maintain a little spirit, hang it,
And dry it too for dogs meat: get you gone;
I have things of moment in my mind: that door,
Keep it as thou would keep thy wife from a Servingman.
No more I say: away Sam.

Sam. At your will sir. Exit Hyl. and Sam.

Enter Lancelot and Fiddler. Lan. I have him here, a rare rogue, good sweet
master,
Do something of some savor suddenly,
That we may eat, and live: I am almost starved,
No point manieur, no point devein, no Signieur,
Not by the virtue of my languages,
Nothing at my old masters to be hoped for,
O Signieur du, nothing to line my life with,
But cold Pyes with a cudgel, till you help us.

Tho. Nothing but famine frights thee: come hither Fiddler,
Whad Ballads are you seen in best: be short sir.

Fiddler Under your masterships correction, I can sing
The Duke of Norfolk, or the merry Ballad
Of Diverus and Lazarus, the Rose of England,
In Creet when Dedimus first began,
Jonas his crying out against Coventry,

Tho. Excellent,
Rare matters all.

Fid. Mawdlin the Merchants daughter,
The Devil, and ye dainty Dames.

Tom. Rare still.

Fid. The landing of the Spaniards at Bow,
With the bloody battle at Mile-end.

Tho. All excellent:
No tuning as ye love me; let thy Fidle
Speak welsh, or any thing that is out of all tune,
The vilder still the better, like thy self,
For I presume thy voice will make no trees dance.

Fid. Nay truly, ye shall have it even as homely.

Tho. Keep ye to that key, are they all abed trow?

Lan. I hear no stirring any where, no light
In any window, it is a night for the nonce Sir.

Tom. Come strike up then: and say the Merchants daughter,
We Will bear the burden: proceed to incision Fiddler. Song.

Enter Servant above. Ser. Who Is there? what noise is this? what rogue
At these hours?

Thom. O what is that to you my fool?
O what is that to you,
Pluck in your face you bawling Ass,
Or I will break your brow. hey down, down, a down.
A new Ballad, a new, a new.

Fid. The twelfth of April, on May day,
My house and goods were burnt away, etc. Maid above.

Maid Why who is this?

Lan. O damsel dear,
Open the door, and it shall appear,
Open the door,
O gentle squire.

Maid I Will see thee hang first: farewell my dear,
It Is master Thomas, there he stands.

Enter Mary above. Mary It Is strange
That nothing can redeem him: rail him hence,
Or sing him out in's own way, any thing
To be delivered of him.

Maid Then have at him:
My man Thomas did me promise.
He would visit me this night.

Tho. I am here Love, tell me dear Love,
How I may obtain thy sight.

Maid Come up to my window love, come, come, come,
Come to my window my dear,
The wind, nor the rain, shall trouble thee again,
But thou shall be lodged here.

Thom. And art thou strong enough?

Lan. Up, up, I warrant ye.

Mary What do thou mean to do?

Maid Good Mistress peace,
I Will warrant ye we will cool him: Madge, Madge above.

Madge I am ready.

Tho. The love of Greece and it tickled him so,
That he devised a way to go.
Now sing the Duke of Northumberland.

Fiddler And climbing to promotion,
He fell down suddenly, Madge with a devils vizard roaring, offers to kiss him,
and he falls down.

Maid Farewell sir.

Mary What have thou done? thou have broke his neck.

Maid Not hurt him,
He pitched upon his legs like a Cat,

Tho. O woman:
O miserable woman, I am spoiled,
My leg, my leg, my leg, oh both my legs.

Mary. I told thee what thou had done, mischief go with thee,

Tho. O I am lamed for ever: O my leg,
Broken in twenty places: O take heed,
Take heed of women, Fiddler: oh a Surgeon,
A Surgeon, or I dye: oh my good people,
No charitable people, all despightfull,
Oh what a misery am I in: oh my leg.

Lan. Be patient sir, be patient: let me bind it.

Enter Samuel and Hylas with his head broken. Tho. Oh do not touch it rogue.

Hyl. My head, my head,
Oh my head's killed.

Sam. You must be courting wenches
Through key-holes, Captain Hylas, come and be comforted,
The skin is scarce broke.

Tho. O my leg.

Sam. How do ye sir?

Tho. Oh maimed for ever with a fall, he is spoiled too,
I see his brains.

Hyl. Away with me for Gods sake,
A Surgeon.

Sam. Here Is a night indeed.

Hyl. A Surgeon. Exit all but Fiddler.

Enter Mary and servant below. Mary Go run for help.

Tho. Oh,

Mary Run all, and all too little,
O cursed beast that hurt him, run, run, fly,
He will be dead else.

Tho. Oh.

Mary Good friend go you too.

Fid. Who pays me for my Music?

Mary Pox o'your Music,
There Is twelve pence for ye.

Fid. There Is two groates again forsooth,
I never take above, and rest ye merry. Exit.

Ma. A grease pot guild your fidle strings: how do you,
How is my dear?

Tom. Why well I thank ye sweet heart,
Shall we walk in, for now there is none to trouble us?

Ma. Are ye so crafty sir? I shall meet with ye,
I knew your trick, and I was willing: my Tom,
Mine own Tom, now to satisfy thee, welcome, welcome,
Welcome my best friend to me, all my dearest.

Tom. Now ye are my noble Mistress: we loose time sweet.

Ma. I think they are all gone.

Tom. All, ye did wisely.

Ma. And you as craftily.

Tom. We are well met Mistress.

Ma. Come, let us go in then lovingly: O my Skarfe Tom.
I lost it thereabout, find it, and wear it
As your poor Mistress favor. Exit.

Tom. I am made now,
I see no venture is in no hand: I have it,
How now? the door locked, and she in before?
Am I so trimmed?

Ma. One parting word sweet Thomas,
Though to save your credit, I discharged your Fiddler,
I must not satisfy your folly too sir,
Ye'are subtle, but believe it Fox, i will find ye,
The Surgeons will be here strait, rore again boy,
And break thy legs for shame, thou will be sport else,
Good night.

Tom. She says most true, I must not stay: she has bobd me,
Which if I live, I Will recompense, and shortly,
Now for a Ballad to bring me off again.
All young men be warned by me, how you do go a wooing.
Seek not to climb, for fear ye fall thereby, comes your undoing, and Exeunt.

Actus Quartus,
Scena Prima.
Enter Valentine, Alice, and servant. Val. HE cannot go and take no farewell
of me,
Can he be so unkind? he is but retired
Into the Garden or the Orchard: see sirs.

Alice He would not ride there certain, those were planted
Only for walks I take it.

Val. Ride, nay then,
Had he horse out?

Ser. So the Groom delivers
Somewhat before the break of day.

Val. He Is gone,
My bestfriends gone Alice? I have lost the noblest,,
The truest, and the most man I ere found yet.

Alice Inded sir, he deserves all praise.

Val. All sister,
All, all, and all too little: O that honesty,
That ermine honesty, unspotted ever,
That perfect goodness.

Alice Sure he will return sir,
He cannot be so harsh.

Val. O never, never,
Never return, thou know not where the cause lies.

Alice He was the worthiest welcome.

Val. He deserved it.

Alice Nor wanted, to our knowledge.

Val. I will tell thee,
Within this hour, things that shall startle thee.
He never must return. Enter Michael.

Mich. Good morrow Signieur.

Val. Good morrow master Michael.

Mich. My good neighbor,
Me thinks you are stirring early since your travel,
You have learned the rule of health sir, where is your mistres?
She keeps her warm I warrant ye, a bed yet?

Val. I think she does.

Alice It Is not her hour of waking.

Mich. Did you lie with her Lady?

Alice Not to night sir.
Nor any night this week else.

Mich. When last saw ye her?

Alice Late yester night.

Mich. Was she abed then?

Alice No sir,
I left her at her prayers: why do ye ask me?

Mich. I have been strangely haunted with a dream
All this long night, and after many wakings,
The same dream still; me thought I met young Cellide
Just at S. Katherines gate the Nunnery.

Val. Ha?

Mich. Her face slubber'd over with tears, and troubles,
Me thought she cried unto the Lady Abbess,
For charity receive me holy woman,
A Maid that has forgot the worlds affections,
Into thy virgin order: me thought she took her,
Put on a Stole, and sacred robe upon her,
And there I left her.

Val. Dream?

Mich. Good Mistress Alice
Do me the favor (yet to satisfy me)
To step but up, and see.

Alice I know she is there sir,
And all this but a dream?

Mich. You know not my dreams,
They are unhappy ones, and often truths,
But this I hope, yet

Alice I will satisfy ye, Exit.

Mich. Neighbors, how does the gentleman?

Val. I know not,
Dream of a Nunnery?

Mich. How found ye my words
About the nature of his sickness Valentine?

Val. Did she not cry out, 'twas my folly too
That forced her to this Nunnery? did she not curse me?
For God sake speak: did you not dream of me too,
How basely, poorly, tamely, like a fool,
Tired wi^h his joys?

Mich. Alas poor gentleman.
Ye promised me sir to bear all these crosses.

Val. I bear 'em till I break again.

Mich. But nobly,
Truly to weigh,

Val. Good neighbors, no more of it,
Ye do but fling flax on my fire: where is she?

Enter Alice. Alice Not yonder sir, nor has not this night certain
Bin in her bed.

Mich. It must be truth she tells ye,
And now I Will show ye why I came: this morning
A man of mine being employed about business,
Came early home, who at S. Katherines Nunnery,
About day peep told me he met your Mistress,
And as I spoke it in a dream, so troubled
And so received by the ^bbesse, did he see her?
The wonder made me rise, and haste unto ye
To know the cause.

Val. Farewell, I cannot speak it. Exit Val.

Alice For heaven take leave him not.

Mich. I will not Lady.

Alice Alas, he is much afflicted,

Mich. We shall know shortly more, apply your own care
At home good Alice, and trust him to my counsel.
Nay, do not weep, all shall be well, despair not. Exeunt.

Scena Secunda.
Enter Sebastian, and a Servant. Seb. AT Valentines house so merry?

Ser. As a pie Sir:

Seb. So gameson do thou say?

Ser. I am sure I heard it.

Seb. Ballads, and Fidles too?

Ser. No, but one Fidle;
But twenty noyces. Enter Launcelet.

Seb. Did he do devises?

Ser. The best devises sir: here is my fellow Launcelet
He can inform ye all: he was among 'em,
A mad thing too: I stood but in a corner.

Seb. Come sir, what can you say? is there any hope yet
You Master may return?

Lan. He went far else
I will assure your worship on my credit
By the faith of a Travellor, and a Gentleman,
Your son in found again, the son, the Tom.

Seb. Is he the old Tom?

Lan. The old Tom.

Seb. Go forward.

Lan. Next, to consider how he is the old Tom.

Seb. Handle me that.

Lan. I would ye had seen it handled
Last night sir, as we handled it: cap a pe,
Footte for leers, and learings; O the noise
The noise we made.

Seb. Good, good.

Lan. The windows clattring
And all the Chambermaides, in such a whobub,
One with her smock half off; another in have
Wi^h a serving man's hose upon her head.

Seb. Good still.

Lan. A fellow railing out of a loop hole there
And his mouth stopped with dirt.

Seb. in faith a fine Boy.

Lan. Here one of our heads broke.

Seb. Excellent good still.

Lan. The gentleman himself young M. Thomas,
Invirond with his furious Mermidons
The fiery Fiddler, and my self; now singing,
Now beating at the door, there parlying,
Courting at that window, at the other scalling
And all these several noyses to two Trenchers,
Strung with a bottom of brown thread, which showd admirable.

Seb. There eat, and grow again, I am pleased.

Lan. Nor here sir.
Gave we the frolic over: though at length
We quit the Ladies Skonce on composition
But to the silent streets we turned our furies:
A fleeping watchman here we stole the shoes from,
There made a noise, at which he wakes, and follows:
The streets are durty, takes a queen hith cold,
Hard cheese, and that choakes him of Monday next:
Windows, and signs we sent to Erebus;
A crew of bawling curs we entertained last,
When having let the pigs loose in out parishes,
O the brave cry we made as high as Algate!
Down comes a Constable, and the Sow his Sister
Most traitorously tramples upon Authority,
There a whole stand of rug gowns rowted manly
And the Kings peace put flight: a purblind pig here
Runs me his head into the Admirable Lantern,
Out goes the light, and all turns to confusion:
A Potter rises, to enquire this passion
A Boar imbost takes sanctuary in his shop.
When twenty dogs rush after, we still cheering
Down goes the pots, and pipkins, down the pudding pans,
The cream bols cry revenge here, there the candlesticks.

Seb. If this be true, thou little tyny page
This tale that thou tell me
Then on thy back will I presently hang
A handson new Levery:
But if this be false, thou little tyney page
As false it well may be
Then with a cudgel of four foot long
I Will beat thee from head to toe. Enter Servant.

Seb. Will the boy come.

Ser. He will sir. Enter Thomas.

Seb. Time tries all there.

Lan. Here he comes now himself sir.

Seb. To be short Thomas
Because I feel a scruple in my conscience
Concerning the demeanor, and a maine one
And therefore like a Father would be satisfied,
Get up to that window there, and presently
Like a most complete Gentleman, come from Tripoly.

Tom Good Lord sir, how are you misled: what fancies
(Fitter for idle boys, and drunkards, let me speak't
And with a little wonder I beseech you)
Choke up your noble judgment?

Seb. You Rogue Launcelet,
You lying rascal.

Lan. Will ye spoil all again sir.
Why, what a devil do you mean?

Tom. Away knave,
Ye keep a company of saucy fellows
Debosh'd, and dai^y drunkards, to deavoure ye,
Things, whose dull souls, tend to the Celler only,
Ye are ill advised sir, to commit your credit.

Seb. Sirrah, sirrah.

Lan. Let me never eat again sir,
Nor feel the blessing of another blew-coate
If this young Gentleman, sweet Master Thomas
Be not as mad as heart can wish: your heart sir,
If yesternights discourse: speak fellow Robin
And if thou speak less then truth.

Tom. It Is strange these varlets.

Ser. By these ten bones sir, if these eyes, and ears
Can hear and see.

Tom. Extreme strange, should thus boldly
Bud in your sight, unto your son.

Lan. O deu guin
Can ye deny, ye beat a Constable
Last night.

Tom. I touch Authority ye rascal?
I violate the Law?

Lan. Good M. Thomas.

Ser. Did you not take two Wenches from the Watch too
And put 'em into pudding lane?

Lan. We mean not
Those civil things you did at M. Valentines
The Fidle, and the fa'las,

Tom. O strange impudence?
I do beseech you sir give no such license
To knaves and drunkards, to abuse your son thus:
Be wise in time, and turne'em off: we live sir
In a State governed civilly, and soberly
Where each man's actions should confirm the Law,
Not crack, and canzell it.

Seb. Lancelot du Lake
Get you upon adventers: cast your coat
And make your exit.

Lan. Pur la mour de dieu
Pur me no purs: but pur at that door, out sirrah
I Will beat ye purblind else, out ye eight languages,

Lan. My blood upon your head. Exit. Lan.

Tom. Purge me'em all sir.

Seb. And you too presently.

Tom. Even as you please sir.

Seb. Bid my maid servant come: and bring my daughter
I will have one shall please me. Exit ser.

Tom. It Is most fit sir.

Seb. Bring me the money there: here M. Thomas,
Enter two servants with two bags. I pray sit down, ye are no more my son
now,
Good gentleman be covered

Tom. At your pleasure.

Seb. This money I do give ye, because of whilom
You have bin thought my son, and by myself too,
And some things done like me: ye are now another
There is two hundred pound, a civil some
For a young civil man: much land and Lordship
Will as I take it now, but prove temptation
To dread ye from your settled, and sweet carriage.

Tom. You say right sir.

Seb. Nay I beseech ye cover.

Tom. At your dispose: and I beseech ye too sir,
Fot the word civil, and more settled course
It may be put to use, that on the interest
Like a poor Gentleman.

Seb. It shall, to my use
To mine again: do you see sir: good fine gentleman,
I give no brooding money for a Scrivener,
Mine is for present traffic, and so i will use it.

Tom. So much for that then.

Enter Dorothy, and four Maids, Seb. For the maine cause Mounsieur
I sent to treat with you about, behold it;
Behold that piece of story work, and view it
I want a right heir to inherir me,
Not my estate alone, but my conditions,
From which you are revolted, therefore dead,
And I will break my back, but I will get one.

Tom. Will you choose there sir?

Seb. There, among those Damsels,
In mine own tribe: I know their quallities
Which cannot fail to please me: for their beauties
A matter of a three farthings, makes all perfect,
A little beer, and beeffe broth: they are sound too.
Stand all a breast: now gentle M. Thomas
Before I choose, you having lived long with me,
And happily sometimes with some of these too,
Which fault I never frowned upon: pray show me
(For fear we confound our Genealogies)
Which have you laid aboard? speak your mind freely
Have you had copulation with that Damsel?

Tom. I have.

Seb. Stand you a side then: how with her sir?

Tom. How, is not seemly here to say.

Dor. Here Is fine sport.

Seb. Retire you too: speak forward M. Thomas.

Tom. I will: and to the purpose; even with all sir.

Seb. With all that is somewhat large.

Dor. And yet you like it
Was ever sin so glorious?

Seb. With all Thomas.

Tom. All surely sir.

Seb. A sign thou art mine own yet,
In again all: and to your several functions. Exit. Maids.
What say you to young Luce, my neighbors daughter,
She was too young I take it, when you traveled;
Some twelve year old?

Tom. Her will was fifteen sir,

Seb. A pretty answer, to cut of long discourse,
For I have many yet to ask ye of,
Where I can choose, and nobly, hold up your finger
When ye are right: what say ye to Valeria;
Whose husband lies a dying now? why two,
And in that form?

Tom. Her husband is recovered.

Seb. A witty moral: have at ye once more Thomas,
The sisters of St. Albones, all five; dat boy,
Dat's mine own boy.

Dor. Now our upon thee Monster.

Tom. Still hoping of your pardon.

Seb. There needs none man:
A straw on pardon: prithee need no pardon:
I Will ask no more, nor think no more of marriage,
For O my conscience I shall be thy Cuckold:
There Is some good yet left in him: bear your self well,
You may recover me, there is twenty pound sir,
I see some sparkles which may flame again,
You may eat with me when you please, you know me.

Exit Seb. Dor. Why do you lie so damnably, so foolishly?

Tom. Do thou long to have thy head broke? hold thy peace
And do as I would have thee, or by this hand
I Will kill thy Parrat, hang up thy small hand,
And drink away thy dowry to a penny.

Dor. Was ever such a wild Ass?

Tho. Prithee be quiet,

Dor. And do thou think men will not beat thee monstrously
For abusing their wives and children?

Tom. And do thou think
Men's wives and children can be abused too much?

Dor. I wonder at thee.

Tom. Nay, thou shall adjure me
Before I have done.

Dor. How stand ye with your mistress?

Thom. I shall stand nearer
Ere I be twelve hours older: there is my business,
She is monstrous subtle Doll.

Doll The devil I think
Cannot out subtle thee.

Tho. If he play fair play,
Come, you must help me presently.

Dor. I discard ye.

Tom. Thou shall not sleep nor eat.

Dor. I Will no hand with ye,
No bawd to your abuses.

Thom. By this light Doll,
Nothing but in the way of honesty.

Dor. Thou never knew'st that road: I hear your vigile

Tom. Sweet honey Doll, if I do not marry her,
Honestly marry her, if I mean not honorably,
Come, thou shall help me, take heed how you vex me,
I Will help thee to a husband too, a fine gentleman,
I know thou art mad, a tall young man, a brown man,
I swear he has his maidenhead, a rich man.

Dor. You may come in to dinner, and I Will answer ye.

Tho. Nay I Will go with thee Doll: four hundred a year wench. Exeunt.

Scaena Tertia.
Enter Michael and Valentine. Mich. GOod sir go back again, and take my
counsel,
Sores are not cured by sorrows, nor time broke from us,
Pulled back again by sighs.

Val. What should I do friend?

Mich. Do that that may redeem ye, go back quickly,
Sebastians daughter can prevail much with her,
The Abbess is her Aunt too.

Val. But my friend then
Whose love and loss is equal tied.

Mich. Content ye,
That shall be my task if he be alive,
Or where my travel and my care may reach him,
I Will bring him back again.

Val. Say he come back
To piece his poor friends life out? and my mistress
Be vowed for ever a recluse?

Mich. So suddenly
She cannot, haste ye therefore instantly away sir,
To put that daughter by first as to a father,
Then as a friend she was committed to ye,
And all the care she now has: by which privilege
She cannot do her this violence,
But you may break it, and the law allows ye.

Val. O but I forced her to it.

Mich. Leave disputing
Against your self, if you will needs be miserable
Spite of her goodness, and your friends persuasions,
Think on, and thrive thereafter.

Val. I will home then,
And follow your advise, and good, good Michael.

Mich. No more, I know your soul's divided Valentine,
Cure but that part at home with speedy marriage
Ere my return, for then those thoughts that vexed her,
While there ran any stream for loose affections,
Will be stopped up, and chaste eyed honor guide her
Away, and hope the best still: I Will work for ye,
And pray too heartily, away, no more words Exeunt.

Scena Quarta.
Enter Hylas and Sam. Hyl. I Care not for my broken head,
But that it should be his plot, and a wench too,
A lowzie, lazy wench prepared to do it.

Sam. Thou had as good be quiet, for of my conscience
He Will put another on thee else.

Hyl. I am resolved
To call him to account, was it not manifest
He meant a mischief to me, and laughed at me,
When he lay roaring out, his leg was broken,
And no such matter: had he broke his neck,
Indeed 'twould never ha grieved me: gallows gall him,
Why should he choose out me?

Sam. Thou art ever ready
To thrust thy self into these she occasions,
And he as full of knavery to accept it.

Hyl. Well, if I live, I Will have a new trick for him.

Sam. That will not be amiss, but to fight with him
Is to no purpose: besides, he is truly valiant,
And a most deadly hand: thou never foughtst yet,
Not of my conscience have no faith in fighting.

Hyl. No, no, I will not fight.

Sam, B^side the quarrel,
Which has a woman in it, to make it scurvy,
Who would lie stinking in a Surgeons hands
A month or two this weather; for believe it,
He never hurts under a quarters healing.

Hyl. No upon better thought, I will not fight Sam,
But watch my time

Sam. To pay him with a project:
Watch him too, I would wish ye: prithee tell me,
Do thou affect these women still?

Hyl. Yes faith Sam,
I love 'em even as well as ever I did,
Nay, if my brains were beaten out, I must to 'em.

Sam. Do thou love any woman?

Hyl. Any woman
Of what degree or calling.

Sam. Of any age too?

Hyl. Of any age, from fourscore to fourteen boy,
Of any fashion.

Sam. And defect too?

Hyl. Right.
For those I love to lead me to repentance:
A woman with no nose, after my surquedry,
Shows like King Philips moral, memento mori,
And she that has a wodden leg, demonstrates
Like Hypocrites, we halt before the gallows:
An old one with one tooth, seems to say to us
Sweet meats have sour sauce: she that is full of aches,
Crum not your bread before you taste your porridge,
And many morals we may find.

Sam. It Is well sir,
Ye make so worthy uses: but quid igitur,
What shall we now determine?

Hyl. Let Us consider,
An hour or two, how I may fit this fellow.

Sam. Let Us find him first, he will quickly give occasion,
But take heed to your self, and say I warned ye:
He has a plaguey pate.

Hyl. That at my danger. Exeunt. Music.

Scena Quinta.
Enter Saylors singing to them, Michael and Francis. Sail. ABoard, aboard, the
wind stands fair.

Mich. These call for passengers, I Will stay, and see
What men they take aboard.

Fra. A boat, a boat, a boat.

Say. Away then.

Fra. Whether are ye bound friends?

Sail. Down to the Straytes.

Mich. Ha, it is not much unlike him.

Fra. May I have passage for my money?

Say. And welcome too.

Mich. It Is he, I know it is he now.

Fra. Then merrily aboard, and noble friend
Heavens goodness keep thee ever, and all virtue
Dwell in thy bosom Cellide, my last tears
J leave behind me thus, a sacrifice,
For I dare stay no longer to betray ye.

Mich. Be not so quick sit: Saylors I here charge ye
By virtue of this warrant, as you will answer it,
For both your ship and Merchant I know perfectly:
Lay hold upon this fellow.

Fra. Fellow?

Mich. J sir.

Sail. No hand to sword sir, we shall master ye,
Fetch out the manacles.

Fra. I do obey ye:
But I beseech ye sir, inform me truly
How I am guilty.

Mich. Ye have robbed a gentleman,
One that ye are bound to for your life and being:
Money and horse unjustly ye took from him,
And something of more note, but for you are a gentleman.

Fra. It shall be so, and here I Will end all miseries,
Since friendship is so cruel, I confess it,
And which is more, a hundred of these robberies:
This Ring I stole too from him: and this jewel
The first and last of all my wealth: forgive me
My innocence and truth, for saying I stole 'em,
And may they prove of value but to recompense
The thousand part of his love, and bread I have eaten.
Pray see 'em rendered noble sir, and so
I yield me to your power.

Mich. Guard him to the water,
I charge you Saylors, there I will receive him,
And back convey him to a Justice.

Say. Come sir,
Look to your neck, you are like to sail in the air now.

Exeunt. Scena Sexta.
Enter Thomas, Dorothy, and Maid. Tho. COme quickly, quickly, quickly, paint me
handsomely
Take heed my nose be not in grain too,
Come Doll, Doll, disen me.

Dor. If you should play now
Your devils parts again.

Tom. Yea and nay Dorothy.

Dol. If ye do any thing, but that ye have sworn to,
Which only is access.

Tho. As I am a gentleman:
Out with this hair Doll, handsomely.

Doll. You have your breeches?

Tom. I prithee away, thou know I am monstrous ticklish,
What do thou think I love to blast my buttocks?

Doll. I Will plague ye for this roguery: for I know well
What ye intend sir.

Tom. On with my Muffler.

Dol. Ye are a sweet Lady: come let us see you curtsie:
What broke in the bum, hold up your head.

Tom. Plague on it
I shall he piss my breeches if I cowre thus,
Come, am I ready.

Maid. At all points, as like sir
As if you were my Mistress.

Dol. Who goes with ye.

Tom. None but my fortune, and my self. Exit. Tho.

Dol. Bless ye
Now run thou for thy life, and get before him,
Take the by way, and tell my Cousin Marie
In what shape he intends to come to coz n her
I Will follow at thy heels my self: fly wench

Maid. I Will do it. Exit.

Enter Sebastian and Thomas. Dol. My Father has met him: this goes excellent
And i will away in time: look to your skin Thomas. Exit. Gillian.

Seb. What, are you grown so corn sed gooddy
You will not know your Father: what vaga'res
Have you in hand, what out leapes, durty heels
That at these hours of night ye must be gadding,
And through the Orchard take your private passage;
What, is the breeze in your breech, or has your brother
Appointed you an hour of meditation
How to demean himself: get ye to bed, drab
Or i will so crab your shoulders: ye demure slut
Ye civil dish of sliced beef get ye in.

Tho. I wy' not, that I wy' not.

Seb. Is It even so Dame
Have at ye with a night spell then.

Tho. Pray hold sir.

Seb. St. Geoge, St. George, our Ladies knight
He walks by day, so does he by night,
And when he had her found
He her beat, and her bound,
Until to him her troth she plight,
She would not stir from him that night.

Tho. Nay then have at ye with a counter-spell,
From Elves, Hobs and Fayries, that trouble our Dayries,
From Fire-drakes and fiends, and such as the devil sends,
Defend us heaven. Exi

Enter Lancelot. Lan. Bless my Master: look up sir I beseech ye,
Up with your eyes to heaven.

Seb. Up with your nose sir,
I do not bleed, 'twas a sound knock she gave me,
A plaguey mankind gi^le, how my brains totters?
Well, go thy ways, thou have got one thousand pound more
With this dog trick,
Mine own true spirit in her too,

Lan. In her, alas sir,
Alas poor gentlewoman, she a hand so heavy
To knock ye like a Calfe down, or so brave a courage
To beat her father? if you could believe sir.

Seb. Who would thou make me believe it was, the devil?

Lan. One that spits fire as fast as he sometimes sir,
And changes shapes as often: your son Thomas:
Never wonder, if it be not he, straight hang me.

Seb. He? if it be so,
I Will put thee in my Will, and there is an end on it.

Lan. J saw his legs, has Boots on like a Player,
Under his wenches clothes: it is he, it is Thomas
In his own sisters clothes, sir, and I can wast him.

Seb. No more words then, we will watch him: thou wilt not believe Lance,
How heartily glad I am.

Lan. May ye be gladder,
But not this way sir.

Seb. No more words, but watch him. Exeunt.

Scena septima.
Enter Mary, Dorothy, and Maid. Mar. When comes he?

Doll. Presently.

Mar. Then get you up Doll,
Away, I Will strait come to you: is all ready?

Maid All.

Ma. Let the light stand far enough.

Maid It Is placed so.

Ma. Stay you to entertain him to his chamber,
But keep close wench, he flies at all.

Maid I warrant ye.

Mar. You need no more instruction?

Maid I am perfect. Exeunt.

Scena secunda.

Enter Valentine and Thomas. Tho. MOre stops yet? sure the fiend's my ghostly
father,
Old Valentine: what wind's in his poope?

Val. Lady,
You are met most happily: O gentle Doll,
You must now do me an especial favor.

Tom. What is it Master Valentine? I am sorely troubled
With a salt rheum fallen i'my gums.

Val. I Will tell ye,
And let it move you equally: my blessed Mistress
Upon a slight occasion taking anger,
Took also (to undo me) your Aunts Nunnery,
From whence by my persuasion to redeem her,
Will be impossible: nor have I liberty
To come, and visit her: my good, good Dorothy,
You are most powerful with her, and your Aunt too,
And have access at all hours liberally,
Speak now, or never for me.

Tho. In a Nunnery?
That course must not be suffered Master Valentine,
Her mother never knew it: rare sport for me:
Sport upon sport, by the break of day I Will meet ye,
And fear not man, we will have her out I warrant ye,
I cannot stay now.

Val. You will not break?

Tho. By no means.
Good night.

Val. Good night kind Mistress Doll. Exit.

Tho. This thrives well,
Every one takes me for my sister, excellent:
This Nunnerys fall so pat too, to my figure,
Where there be handsome wenches, and they shall know it
If once I creep in, ere they get me out again:
Stay, here is the house and one of her Maids.

Enter Maid. Maid Who Is there?
O Mistress Dorothy you are a stranger.

Tho. Still Mistress Dorothy? this geere will cotton.

Maid Will you walk in forsooth?

Tho. Where is your Mistress?

Maid Not very well: she is gone to bed, I am glad
You are come so fit to comfort her.

Tho. Yes, I Will comfort her.

Maid Pray make not much noise, for she is sure asleep,
You know your side, creep softly in, your company
Will warm her well.

Tho. I warrant thee I Will warm her.

Maid Your brother has been here, the strangest fellow.

Tho. A very rogue, a rank rogue.

Maid I Will conduct ye
Even to her chamber door, and there commit ye. Exeunt.

Scena Octava.
Enter Michael, Francis, and Officers. Mich. COme sir, for this night I shall
entertain ye,
And like a gentleman, how ere your fortune
Has cast ye on the worst part.

Fra. How you please sir,
I am resolved, nor can a joy or misery
Much move me now.

Mich. I am angry with my self now
For putting this forced way upon his patience,
Yet any other course had been too slender:
Yet what to think I know not, for most liberally
He has confessed strange wrong, which if they prove so,
How ere the others long love may forget all,
Yet 'twas most fit he should come back, and this way
Drink that: and now to my care leave your prisoner,
I Will be his guard for this night.

Off. Good night to your worship.

Mich. Good night my honest friends: Come sir, I hope
There shall be no such cause of such a sadness
As you put on.

Fra. Faith sir, my rest is up,
And what I now pull, shall no more afflict me
Then if I played at span-counter, nor is my face
The map of any thing I seem to suffer,
Lighter affections seldom dwell in me sir.

Mich. A constant gentleman: would I had taken
A fever when I took this harsh way to disturb him,
Come walk with me sir, ere to morrow night
I doubt not but to see all this blown over. Exeunt.

Actus Quintus, Scena Quarta.
Enter Hylas. Hyl. I Have dogged his sister, sure 'twas she,
And I hope she will come back again this night too:

Sam I have lost of purpose: now if I can
With all the art I have, as she comes back,
But win a parley for my broken pate,
Off goes her maidenhead, and there is vindicta.
They stir about the house, I Will stand at distance. Exit.

Enter Mary and Dorothy, and then Thomas and Maid. Doll. Is he come in?

Mar. Speak softly,
He is, and there he goes.

Tho. Good night, good night wench.

a bed discovered with a black More in it. Maid As softly as you can. Exit.

Tho. I Will play the Mouse Nan,
How close the little thief lies.

Mar. How he itches?

Doll. What would you give now to be there, and I
At home Mall?

Ma. Peace for shame.

Tom. In what a figure
The little fool has pulled it self together:
Anon you will lie streighter:
Ha, there is rare circumstance
Belongs to such a treatise: do ye tumble,
I Will tumble with ye straight wench: she sleeps soundly,
Full little think thou of thy joy that is coming,
The sweet, sweet joy, full little of the kisses,
But those unthought of things come ever happiest.
How soft the rogue feels? Oye little villain,
Ye delicate coy thief, how I shall thrum ye?
Your fie away, good servant, as ye are a gentleman.

Ma. Prithee leave laughing.
Out upon ye Thomas
What do ye mean to do? i will call the house up,
O god, I am sure ye will not, shall not serve ye,
For up ye go now, and ye were my Father.

Ma. Your courage will be cold anon.

Tho. If it do hang for'
Yet i will be quarterd here first.

Dor. O feirce villain.

Ma. What would he do indeed Doll?

Dor. You had best try him.

Tho. I Will kiss thee ere I come to bed: sweet Mary.

Ma. Prithee leave laughing.

Dor. O, for gentle Nicholas.

Tho. And view that stormy face, that has so thundered me,
A coldne's crept over't now; by your leave, candle,
And next door by yours too, so, a pretty, pretty
Shall I now look upon ye: by this light it moves me.

Ma. Much good may it do you sir.

Tho. Holy saints, defend me.
The devil, devil, devil, devil, O the devil.

Ma. Dor. Ha, ha, ha, ha, the devil O the devil.

Tho. I am abused most damnedly: most beastly,
Yet if it be a she devil: But the house is up,
And here is no staying longer in this Cassock,
Woman, I here disclaim thee; and in vengeance
I Will marry with that devil, but i will vex thee.

Ma. Byr' Lady, but you shall not sir, i will watch ye.

Tho. Plague O your spanish leather hide; i will waken ye:
Devil, good night: good night good devil.

Moore. Oh.

Tho. Rore again, devil, rore again. Ex. Tho.

Moore. O, O, sir.

Ma. Open the doors before him: let him vanish.
Now, let him come again, i will use him kinder
How now Wench.

Moore. Pray lie here your self, next Mistress
And entertain your sweet heart.

Ma. What said he to thee.

Moore. I had a soft bed: and I slept out all,
But his kind farewell: ye may bake me now
For O my conscience, he has made me venison.

Ma. Alas poor Kate; i will give thee a new Petticoate,

Dor. And I a Wastcoate, Wench.

Ma. Draw in the bed Maids,
And see it made again; put fresh sheets on too,
For Doll. and I: come Wench, lets laugh an hour now,
To morrow early, will we see young Cellide
They say she has taken Sanctuary: love, and they
Are thick sown, but come up so full of thistles.

Dor. They must needs Mall: for it is a pricking age grown
Prithee to bed, for I am monstrous sleepy.

Ma. A match, but art not thou thy brother?

Dor. Would I were Wench,
You should hear further.

Ma. Come, no more of that Doll. Exeunt.

Scena quinta.
Enter Hylas, and Thomas. Hyl. I Heard the doors clap: now, and't be thy will,
wench
By the mas she comes: you are surely melt fair gentlewoman,
I take it Mistress Doll, Sebastians daughter.

Tho. I take right sir: Hylas, are you feretting
I Will fit you with a pennyworth presently.

Hyl. How dare you walk so late so sweet: so weak guarded?

Tho. Faith sir, I do no harm, nor none I look for
Yet I am glad, I have met so good a gentleman,
Against all chances: for though I never knew ye
Yet I have heard much good spoke of ye,

Hyl. Hark ye.
What if a man should kiss ye?

Tho, That Is no harm sir,
Pray God he scapes my heard, there lies the mischief.

Hyl. Her lips are monstrous rugged, but that surely
Is but the sharpness of the weather: hark ye once more,
And in your ear, sweet Mistress, for ye are so,
And ever shall be from this hour: I have vowed it.

Enter Sebastian and Lancelot. Seb. Why that is my daughter, rogue, do thou
not see her
Kissing that fellow there, there in that corner?

Lan. Kissing?

Seb. Now, now, now they agree o'th match too.

Tho. Nay then ye love me not.

Hyl. By this white hand Doll.

Tom. I must confess, I have long desired your sight sir.

Lan. Why there is the Boots still sir.

Seb. Hang Boots sir,
Why they will wear breeches too.

Tom. Dishonest me
Not for the world.

Seb. Why now they kiss again, there
I knew 'twas she, and that her crafty stealing
Out the back way must needs have such a meaning.

Lan. I am at my small wits end.

Thom. If ye mean honorably.

Lan. Did she never beat ye before sir?

Seb. Why do thou follow me?
Thou rascal slave have thou not twice abused me?
Have thou not spoiled the boy? by thine own covenant,
Would thou not now be hanged?

Lan. I think I would sir,
But you are so impatient: does not this show sir,
(I do beseech ye speak, and speak with judgment,
And let the case be equally considered)
Far braver in your daughter? in a son now
It Is nothing, of no mark: every man does it,
But, to beget a daughter, a man maiden
That reaches at these high exploits, is admirable:
Nay she goes far beyond him: for when durst he,
But when he was drunk, do any thing to speak of?
This is Sebastian truly.

Seb. Thou say right Lance,
And there is my hand once more.

Tho. Not without marriage.

Seb. Did thou hear that?

Lan. I think she spoke of marriage,

Seb. And he shall marry her, for it seems she likes him,
And their first boy shall be my heir.

Lan. I marry
Now ye go right to work.

Thom. Fie, fie sir,
Now I have promised ye this night to marry,
Would ye be so intemperate? are ye a gentleman?

Hyl. I have no maw to marriage, yet this rascal
Tempts me extremely: will ye marry presently?

Tho. Get you before, and stay me at the Chapel,
Close by the Nunnery, there you shall find a night Prie^^
Little sir Hugh, and he can say the Matrimony
Over without book, for we must have no company
Nor light, for fear my father know, which must not yet
And then to morrow night.

Hyl. Nothing to night sweet?

Tho. No, not a bit, I am sent of business
About my dowry, sweet, do not you spoil all now,
It Is of muh haste. I can scarce stay the marriage,
Now if you love me, get you gone.

Hyl. You Will follow?

Tom. Within this hour, my sweet chicke.

Hyl. Kiss.

Tho. A rope kiss ye,
Come, come, I stand o'thornee.

Hyl. Me thinks her mouth still
Is monstrous rough, but they have ways to mend it,
Farewell.

Tom. Farewell, I Will fit ye with a wife, sir.

Seb. Come, follow close, I Will see the end she aims at,
And if he be a handsome fellow Lancelot,
^iat, it is done, and all my state is settled. Exeunt.

Scena Sexta.
Enter Abbess, Cellide, and Nuns. Ab. COme, to your Mattins Maids: these early
hours
My gentle daughter, will disturb a while,
Your fair eyes, nurterd in ease.

Cel. No virtuous mother,
It Is for my holy health, to purchase which
They shall forget the child of ease, soft slumbers,
O my afflicted heart, how thou art tortured,
And Love, how like a tyrant, thou raign'st in me,
Commanding and forbidding at one instant:
Why came I hither that desire to have
Only all liberty, to make me happy?
Why did thou bring that young man home, O Valentine,
That virtuous youth, why did thou speak his goodness
In such a phrase, as if all tongues, all praises
Were made for him? O fond and ignorant,
Why did thou foster my affection
Till it grew up, to know no other father,
And then betray it?

Ab. Can ye sing?

Cel. Yes, Mother,
My sorrows only.

Ab. Be gone, and to the Quire then. Exeunt.

Music singing. Scena septima.
Enter Michael and Servant, and Francis. Mich. Have thou inquired him out?

Ser. He Is not at home sir,
His sister thinks he is gone to the Nunnery,

Mich. Most likely: I Will away, an hour hence sirrah,
Come you along with this young gentleman,
Do him all service, and fair office.

Ser. Yes sir. Exeunt.

Scena Octava.
Enter Hylas and Sam. Sam. Where have thou been man?

Hyl. Is there never a shop open?
I Will give thee a pair of gloves Sam.

Sam. What Is the matter?

Hyl. What do thou think?

Sam. Thou art not married?

Hyl. By the mass but I am, all to be married,
I am in the order now Sam.

Sam. To whom prithee?
I thought there was some such trick in it, you stole from me
But who, for heaven sake?

Hyl. Even the sweetest woman,
The rarest woman Samuel, and the lustiest,
But wondrous honest, honest as the ice boy,
Not a bit before hand, for my life, sirrah,
And of a lusty kindred.

Sam. But who Hylas?

Hyl. The young gentleman and I are like to be friends again,
The fates will have it so.

Sam. Who, Monsieur Thomas?

Hyl. All wrongs forgot.

Sam. O now I smell ye Hylas.
Does he know of it?

Hyl. No, there is the trick I owe hi^
It Is done boy, we are fast faith, my youth now
Shall know I am aforehand, for his qualities.

Sam. Is there no trick in it?

Hyl. None, but up and ride boy:
I have made her no jointure neither, there I have paid him.

Sam. She Is a brave wench.

Hyl. She shall be, as I Will use her,
And if she anger me, all his abuses
I Will clap upon her Cassocke.

Sam. Take heed Hylas,

Hyl. It Is past that Sam, come, J must meet her presently,
And now shall see me, a most glorious husband.

Exeunt. Scena Nona.
Enter Dorothy, Mary, Valentine. Dor. IN troth sir, you never spoke to me.

Val. Can ye forget me?
Did not you promise all your help and cunning
In my behalf, but for one hour to see her,
Did you not swear it? by this hand, no strictness
Nor rule this house holds, shall by me, be broken.

Dor. I saw ye not these two days.

Val. Do not wrong me,
I met ye, by my life, just as you entered
This gentle Ladies Lodge last night, thus suited
About eleven a clock.

Dor. It Is true I was there,
But that I saw or spoke to you.

Mar. I have found it,
Your brothor Thomas, Doll.

Dor. Pray sir be satisfied,
And wherein I can do you good, command me,
What a mad fool is this? stay here a while sir,
Whilst we walk in, and make your peace. Exit.

Enter Abbess. Val. I thank ye. squeake within.

Ab. Why, what is the matter there among these Maids?
Now benedicite, have ye got the breeze there?
Give me my holly sprinckle.

Enter 2 Nun. 1 Nun O Madam, there is a strange thing like a gentlewoman,
Like Mistress Dorothy, I think the fiend
Crept in to the Nunnery we know not which way,
Plays revell rowt among us.

Ab. Give me my holy water pot.

1 Nun Here Madam.

Ab. Spirit of earth or air, I do conjure thee, squeake within
Of water or of fire.

1 Nun Hark Madam, hark.

Ab. Be thou ghost that cannot rest: or a shadow of the blessed,
Be thou black, or white, or green, be thou heard, or to be seen

Enter Thomas and Cellide. 2 Nun It comes, it comes.

Cell. What are ye? speak, speak gently,
And next, what would ye with me?

Tom. Any thing you will let me.

Cell. You are no woman certain.

Tom. Nor you no Nun, nor shall not be.

Cel. What make ye here?

Tom. I am a holy Friar.

Ab. Is this the Spirit?

Tho. Nothing but spirit Aunt.

Ab. Now out upon thee.

Tho. Peace, or I Will conjure too Aunt.

Ab. Why come you thus?

Tho. That Is all one, here is my purpose:
Out with this Nun, she is too handsome for ye,
I Will tell thee (Aunt) and I speak it with tears to thee,
If thou keptst her here, as yet I hope thou art wiser,
Mark but the mischief follows.

Ab. She is a Votresse.

Tho. Let her be what she will, she will undo thee,
Let her but one hour out, as I direct ye,
Or have among your Nuns again.

Abb. You have no project
But fair and honest?

Tom. As thine eyes, sweet Abbess,

Abb. I will be ruld then.

Tom. Thus then and persuade her
But do not iuggle with me, if ye do Aunt.

Abb. I must be there my self.

Tom. Away and fit her.

Abb. Come daughter, you must now be rull'd, or never.

Cell. I must obey your will.

Abb. That Is my good daughter. Exeunt.

Scena Decima.
Enter Dorothy, and Mary. Ma. What a coil has this Fellow kept in the Nunnery
Sure he has run the Abbess out of her wits.

Do. Out of the Nunnery I think, for we can neither see her
Nor the young Cellide.

Mar. Pray heavens he be not teasing.

Dor. Nay you may thank your self, 'twas your own structures.

Enter Hylas, and Sam. Sam. Why there is the gentlewoman,

Hyl. Mas it is she indeed
How smart the pretty thief looks? 'morrow Mistress.

Dor. Good morrow to you sir.

Sam. How strange she bears it?

Hyl. Maids must do so, at first.

Dor. Would ye ought with us, gentlemen?

Hyl. Yes marry would I
A little with your Ladyship.

Dor. Your will sir.

Hyl. Doll, I would have ye presently prepare your self
And those things you would have with you,
For my house is ready.

Dor. How sir?

Hyl. And this night not to fail, you must come to me,
My Friends will all be there too: For Trunks, and those things
And household stuff, and clothes you would have carried
To morrow, or the next day, i will take order:
Only, What money you have, bring away with ye,
And Jewels:

Dor. Jewels sir?

Hyl. I, for adornement
There Is a bed up, to play the game in, Dorothy,
And now come kiss me heartily.

Dor. Who are you?

Hyl. This Lady shall be welcome too.

Ma. To what sir?

Hyl. Your neighbor can resolve ye.

Dor. The man's foolish
Sir, you look soberly: who is this fellow,
And where is his business?

Sam. By heaven, thou art abused still.

Hyl. It may be so: Come, ye may speak now boldly
There Is none but friends, Wench.

Dor. Came ye out of Bedlam?
Alas, it is ill sir, that ye suffer him
To walk in the open air thus: 'twill undo hlm.
A pretty hansome gentleman: great pity.

Sam. Let me not live more if thou be'st not cozens,

Hyl. Are not you my Wife? did not I marry you last night
At St. Michaels Chapel?

Dor. Did not I say he was mad?

Hyl. Are not you Mistress Dorothy, Thomas sister?

Mar. There he speaks sense, but i will assure ye gentleman,
I think no Wife of yours: at what hour was it?

Hyl. S' precious; you will make me mad; did not the Priest
Sir Hugh that you appointed, about twelve a clock
Tie our hands fast? did not you swear you loved me?
Did not I court ye, coming from this gentlewomans?

Ma. Good sir, go sleep: for if I credit have
She was in my arms, then, abed.

Sam. I told ye.

Hyl. Be not so confident.

Dor. By the mas, she must sir.
For i will no husband here, before I know him:
And so good morrow to ye: Come, let us go seeke'em.

Sam. I told ye what ye had done.

Hyl. Is the devil stirring?
Well, go with me: for now I will be married. Exeunt

Scena Vndecima.
Enter Michael, Valentine, and Alice. Mich. I Have brought him back again.

Val. You have don a friendship
Worthy the love you bear me.

Mich. Would he had so too.

Val. O he is a worthy young man.

Mich. When all is tryde
I fear you will change your faith: bring in the gentleman.

Enter Francis, and servant, and Abbess, and Cellide, severally. Val. My happy
Mistress too: now Fortune help me,
And all you stars, that govern chaste desires
Shinne fair, and lovely.

Abb. But one hour, dear Daughter,
To hear your Guardian, what he can deliver
In Loves defense, and his: and then your pleasure.

Cell. Though much unwilling, you have made me yield,
More for his sake I see: how full of sorrow
Sweet catching sorrow, he appears? O love,
That thou but knew'st to heal, as well as hurt us.

Mich. Be ruld by me: I see her eye fast on him:
And what ye heard, believe, for it is so certain
He neither dared, nor must oppose my evidence;
And be you wise, young Lady, and believe too.
This man you love, Sir?

Val. As I love my soul, Sir.

Mich. This man you put into a free possession
Of what his wants could ask: or your self render?

Val. And shall do still.

Mich Nothing was bard his liberty
But this fair Maid; that friendship first was broken,
And you, and she abused; next, (to my sorrow
So fair a form should hide so dark intentions,)
He has himself confes'd (my purpose being
Only to stop his Journey, by that policy
Of laying felony to his charge, to fright the Saylors)
Diverse abuses, done, thefts often practiced,
Moneys, and Jewels too, and those no trifles.

Cell. O where have I bestrew'd my faith: in neither:
Let Us in for ever now, there is virtue.

Mich. Nay do not wonder at it, he shall say it,
Are ye not guilty thus?

Fra. Yes: O my Fortune.

Mich. To give a proof I speak not enviously
Look here: do you know these Jewels.

Cell. In, good Mother.

Enter Thomas, Dorothy, and Mary: then Sebastian and Lancelot. Val. These
Jewels; I have known.

Dor. You have made brave sport.

Tho. I Will make more, if I live Wench
Nay do not look on me: I care not for ye.

Lan. Do you see now plain? that is Mistress Dorothy,
And that is his Mistress.

Seb. Peace, let my joy work easily
Ha, boy: art there my boy: mine own boy, Tom. boy,
Home Lance, and strike a fresh piece, of wine, the towns ours,

Val. Sure, I have known these Jewels.

Alice They are they, certain.

Val. Good heaven, that they were.

Alice. I Will pawn my life on it
And this is he; Come hither Mistress Dorothy,
And Mistress Mary: who does that face look like:
And view my brother well?

Dor. In truth like him.

Ma. Upon my troth exceeding like,

Mich. Beshrew me,
But much: and maine resemblance, both of face
And lineaments of body: now heaven grant it.

Alice My brother's full of passion, I Will speak to him.
Now, as you are a gentleman, resolve me,
Where did you get these jewels?

Fra. Now I Will tell ye,
Because blind fortune yet may make me happy,
Of whom I had 'em, I have never heard yet,
But from my infancy, upon this arm
I ever wore'em.

Alice It Is Francisco brother,
By heaven I tied 'em on: a little more sir,
A little, little more, what parents have ye?

Fra. None
That J know yet: the more my stubborn fortune,
But as J heard a Merchant say that bred me,
Who, to my more affliction, di'de a poor man,
When J reached eighteen years.

Alice What said that Merchant?

Fra. He said, an infant, in the Genoway Galleyes.
But from what place he never could direct me.
I was taken in a sea fight, and from a Mariner,
Out of his manly pity he redeemed me.
He told me of a Nurse that waited on me,
But she, poor soul, he said was killed.
A letter too, I had enclosed within me,
To one Castructio a Venetian Merchant,
To bring me up: the man, when years allowed me,
And want of friends compelled, I sought, but found him
Long dead before, and all my hopes gone with him.
The wars was my retreat then, and my travel
In which I found this gentleman's free bounty,
For which, heaven recompensed him: now ye have all.

Val. And all the worldly bliss that heaven can send me,
And all my prayers and thanks.

Alice Down of your knees, sir,
For now you have found a father, and that father
That will not venture ye again in Gallyes.

Mich. It Is true, believe her sir, and we all joy with ye.

Val. My best friend still: my dearest: now heaven bless thee
And make me worthy of this benefit.
Now my best Mistress.

Cel. Now sir, I come to ye.

Ab. No, no, let us in wench.

Cel. Not for the world, now, Mother,
And thus sir, all my serviee I pay to you,
And all my love to him.

Val. And may it prosper,
Take her Francisco: now no more young Callidon,
And love her dearly, for thy father does so.

Fra. May all hate seek me else, and thus I seal it.

Val. Nothing but mirth now, friends.

Enter Hylas and Sam, Hyl. Nay, I will find him.

Sam. What do all these here?

Tho. You are a trusty husband,
And a hot lover too.

Hyl. Nay then, good morrow,
Now J perceive the knavery.

Sam. J still told ye.

Tho. Stay, or I Will make ye stay: come hither sister,

Val. Why how now Mistress Thomas?

Tho. Peace a little,
Thou would feign have a wife?

Hyl. Not I, by no means.

Tho. Thou shall have a wife, and a fruitful wife, for I find^ Hylas known son
again.
That I shall never be able to bring thee children.

Seb. A notable brave boy.

Hyl. I am very well sir.

Tho. Thou shall be better Hylas, thou have 7 hundred pound a year,
And thou shall make her 3 hundred jointure.

Hyl. No.

Tho. Thou shall boy, and shall bestow
Two hundred pound in clothes, look on her,
A delicate lusty wench, she has fifteen hundred,
And seasible: strike hands, or I Will strike first.

Dor. You Will let me like?

Mar. He Is a good handsome fellow,
Play not the fool.

Tho. Strike, brother, Hylas quickly,

Hyl. If you can love me, well.

Dor. If you can please me.

Tho. Try that out soon, I say, my brother Hylas.

Sam. Take her, and use her well, she is a brave gentlewoman.

Hyl. You must allow me another Mistress.

Dor. Then you must allow me another servant.

Hyl. Well, let us together then, a lusty kindred.

Seb. I Will give thee five hundred pound more for that word.

Ma. Now sir, for you and I to make the feast full.

Tho. No, not a bit, you are a virtuous Lady,
And love to live in contemplation.

Ma. Come fool, I am friends now.

Tho. The fool shall not ride ye,
There lie my woman, now my man again,
And now for travel once more.

Seb. I Will bar that first.

Ma. And I next.

Tho. Hold your self contented: for I say I will travel,
And so long I will travel, till I find a father
That I never knew, and a wife that I never looked for,
And a state without expectation,
So rest you merry gentlemen.

Ma. You shall not
Upon my faith, I love you now extremely,
And now J'le kiss ye.

Tho. This will not do it, Mistress,

Ma. Why when we are married, we will do more,

Seb. There Is all boy,
The keys of all I have, come, let us be merry,
For now I see thou art right.

Tho. Shall we to Church straight?

Val. Now presently, and there with nuptial.
The holy Priest shall make ye happy all.

Tho. Away then, fair before. Exeunt.

FINIS.

