HONOR TRIVMPHANT.

OR The Peers Challenge, by Arms defensible, at Tilt, Turney, and Barriers.

In Honor of all fair Ladies, and in defense of these four positions
following. 1. Knights in Ladies service have no free will. 2. Beauty is the
mainteiner of valor. 3. Fair Lady was never false. 4. Perfect Lovers are
only wise.
Maintained by Arguments.

ALSO The Monarchs meeting: OR The King of Denmarkes welcome into England.

Tam Mercurio, quam Marti. AT LONDON Printed for Francis Burton. 1606.

To the most noble Lord, the Duke of Lennox his grace.

First Position. Knights in Ladies service have no free will.

To the Right Honorable the Earl of Arundel.

Second Position. Beauty is the mainteiner of valor.

To the Right Honorable the Earl of Pembrooke.

Third Position. Fair Lady was never false.

To the Right Honorable the Earl of Mountgomery.

Fourth Position. Perfect lovers are only wise.


To the Rightly Honorable, and truly worthy Ladies, the Countess of
Pembrooke, and the Countess of Mountgomerie.
MOST EXCELLENT LADIES.
Where perfect honor is ennobled with accomplished perfection, Beauty is not
scant: which evermore is the glorious shrine of honorable favor: else had I
misconceited mine own hopes, and been grauelled in mine own conceits: but my
strong confidence, is my confident warrant: neither can ye distaste that, which
explanes, but what is done for you, what is done by yours. If the pleasure ye
shall take in the Defenders, who are yours, by the defense, which is for you,
be great: then the acceptance cannot be less, in reading the reasons for that
defense: especially being to you devoted: and only to you devoted. What
defects and weakly mainteyning arguments, in the arguments there are, your
protection shall wipe off, and the truth it self (which needs no luster)
chiefly privilege. I affect no singularity, I boast no affectation: yet can I
not freeze in the one, when I am temperately heated with the other. To whom
(noble Countesses) should I dedicate the ornaments of love, and beauty? but to
the beautifullest ornaments, worthy to be beloved. Neither doubt I, but as
these endeauours were willingly intended, so will they as gratefully be
accepted. Otherwise (as I hope, as I fear not) I will be an alien to mine own
issue: as unworthy to be christined for mine, since dis-esteemed in being mine.
Others, who oppose themselves, if not by Mercury persuaded, I refer to be by
Mars enforced. So aduenturing at once all my deserts, in your like or dislike:
I rest.

Devoted to your honorable virtues, I. F.

To every sundry opinioned Reader.
READER,
I Intend not to make any tedious Apology: if thou be my friend, thou will
censure friendly: if a stranger, indifferently: if an enemy, I esteem thee
not. Then thus:

I write not to content each cauelling brain,
But eyes of noblest spirits: he that loves me
Will thank my labors, and commend my vein,
For any others envy, least it moves me.
"He that will storm at every wrongful hate,
"Must not refer it to desert, but fate.
Let Ladies smile upon my lines, I care not
For idle faults in grauer Censors eye:
On whose opinion (truth it is) I dare not,
The merit of my studies to rely.
Here is the comfort, which does cheer despair,
I shall be liked not of the grave, but fair.
Meritum rependant venustae. Honor tryumphant.
TO THE RIGHT NOble Lord, the Duke of Lennox his Grace. First Position.
Knights in Ladies service have no free will.

RIGHT NOBLE LORD,
HOw certain it is, both by the tradition of ancient and modern judgments
avowed, that every man is not borne for himself; the community of the saw,
and the authority of reason shall be a Privilege sufficient; but how much
mistaken both the Philosophers of old and later Neotorickes have been, their
own ignorance makes manifest: A man (say they) is partly borne for his
Country, partly for his Parents, partly for his friends, nothing or (if any
thing yet) least and lastly for himself. True, yet had the sensible touch of
passion touched them with the feeling of a passionate sense; how much more and
more truly might they have affirmed, that the chiefest creation of man was
(next his own soul) to do homage to the excellent frame of beauty, a woman:
A woman? the art of nature, the lively perfection of heavens Architecture: for
though Man be the little world where wonder lies;
yet Women are Saints above earth's Paradise.


For what is he, who is so absolute a Lord of himself? so powerful in his
own power? so free of his own affections? as being ensnared in the pleasing
servitude of a gracious beauty, can or durst to undertake any occasion of
remissness, but his own heart will be the first guilty accuser of his own folly,
and his sincere repentance do penance in the language of grief, in the
grief of despair. Again, what is he then, that being free from this captiued
happiness of love, as it were disdaining to stoop to the bondage of beauty,
will not at length feel the misery of his scorn, and be scorned in the
wrack of his misery? besides, may he not be desperate of his own merit, to
think himself the only exiled abject banished from out the acceptance of a
Ladies favor, as also his own unworthiness, which cannot deserve so
delicious a blessing? say then such a one be entertained, as a happy servant
to a more glorious mistress: how soon, how much is his own free rule of
himself indeered to the command of a precious Goddess, neither then has he,
neither is it meet he should have any more domination over his own affections.
Mars throws down his weapons, and Venus leads him captive, the luster of her
eyes, and the glory of her worth are of such irresistable a force, as the
weakness of his manhood, or the aptness of his frailty, are neither able to
endure the ones reflection, or withstand the others temptation: how then? must
he yield? true, not to captivity, but freedom; for to be captiued to
beauty, is to be free to virtue: who would not put of an armor of hard
steel and turn from his enemies, to be enchained in pleasure, and turn to a
lady in a bed of soft down? foolish hardiness, is hardened foolishness, when
securest love is the loueliest security.

Love once was free from love, and had a will
To play the wanton wag, he struck full many,
And took delight soft thoughts of ease to kill:
Yet he himself was never spoyid of any.
Love careless would go walk, when by a grove
Love saw a Nymph, when straight Love fell in love.
Cupid with Psiches fell in love, whose beauty
Dazzled the luster of his wandering eye:
Forcing his heart deuote obsequious duty,
Unto the wonder of her diety.
Herein was Cupid blind, who else could see
Love now captived his heart, which erst was free.
Love has no power ere he gain his rest,
But to impawne, swear, promise, and protest;
Alas, what is it then that men in bed
Will not vow, urge, to gain a maiden head:
Which being got, they ever after stand
Devoted to their Ladies dear command.
Then what man of reason is he, who would be so unreasonable in his own
desires, to wish himself obstinatly foolish; or think himself foolishlie
wife: by ^^^^ining his own dissolute infranchisment, in the boundless limitts
of his own frantic wilfulness? such and of such nature are they, who in the
rancorous spleenes of an vnpreuailing rancour, durst not only in the malice
of their tongues to speak, but in the venom of their hearts, to copy out
whole pamphlets against the dignity of the female sex: either without respect
that they themselves came from a woman, or without regard that a woman wrought
the peace for their weak-ballac't souls: (oh but say such) had not a woman
been the tempter and efficient of our fall, we had not needed a redemptions:
alas silly betrayers of your own folly? wretched blasphemers against the
perfection of nature? can ye not or will ye not understand that the blessing
of this fall, is salvation? assurance of heaven? certainty of joys? yes it is
doubtlesly probable that women are, Natures pride, Virtues ornaments, Angels on
earth, worthy to be served, Saints in heaven, Memorable to be registered.

Ne ij sunt amore digni,
Quos indignos reijcit amor.
Would any man live happy in content of mind? fortunate in prosperity of
content? singular in the repute of account? blessed in being enriched with
earths rarest blessing? let him then ennoble his deserts, by deserving to be
beloved: of whom? of popular opinion or unstable vulgar dependances? no, but
of love it self a woman. Would any be miserable? let him be excluded from the
favor of beauty; and it is a misery incomparable, a torment unspeakable, a
death, yea a hell insufferable. How then comes it to pass that some vain
oppugners of love think? that by serving of a lady, they themselves both
honor in their love, and ought to be honored for loving of their beloved? it
is easily answered, by the imperfection of their manhood, and pride of their
gross erroneous folly. For this in the rules of affection is text, Whosoever
truly love, and are truly of their ladies beloved, ought in their service to
employ their endeavors; more for the honor and deserving the continuance of
their ladies good will, than any way to respect the Free Will of their own
heedlesse dispositions, else are they degenerate Bastards, and Apostates,
reuolting from the principals, and principal rules of sincere devotion. It is
not enough for any man that has by long suit, tedious imprecations, ieopardous
hazard, toil of body, grief of mind, pitiful laments, obsequious fawnings,
desperate passions, and passionate despair; at length for a meed or requital
to his unrest, gained the favorable acceprance, of his most and best desired
lady: it is not I say then enough, for such a man to think, that by his
penance in obtaining, he has performed a Knights service having obtained: but
he must thenceforth, as much employ his industry to preserve. For well said
the Poet whosoever said it, Non minor est virtus quam quaerere parta tueri.

Perfect service, and serviceable loyalty, is seen more clearly in deserving
love and maintaining it, tha^ in attempting or laboring for it. How can any one
be said truly to serve, when he more respects the liberty of his own
affections, than the imposition of Ladies command? to attain happiness, and
then neglect it is but an unhappy negligence, a negligent unhappiness: it is
an unthankful ingratitude, than which nothing can be to heaven more heinous,
and in the regard of men more detestable. Herein are certain chuffes differing
from the glorious nature of gentilitie; who having stumbled upon the raritie of
beauty, are cloyed in their own delicacies: not prizing the invaluable jewel
of what they possess, not esteeming the benefit of their precious felicity:
but like swine touze pearl without respect, when as generous spirits glory in
their ample fortune: and subject themselves to their chiefest glory, for to be
a deserving servant to a deserved lady, is liberally to enjoy heaven on earth.
If therefore the scope of mortality consist in the fruition of imparadised
content, or a contented paradise? how requisite is it, that Knights (for under
these titles of honor, do I conclude true lovers) should loose the freedom
of their own wills, to be serviceable to the wills of their choycest ladies? who
can serve two Masters? who can be a master of himself, when he is a servant to
his lady? but either he scorns the humility due to her, or affects a
singularity to himself, if the one, he is no servant; if the other, an unfit
lover Why? for because a true lover must frame his actions to the behestes of
his lady, and magnifying her worthiness. Hence is it said, and truly said,
Knights in ladies service have no free will: that is, they ought not to be
their own, nor subject to their own pleasure, unless to please themselves in
the recreation which tends to their ladies honor. How pithily said a wise
man, Non amare decet, at amari praestat.

To love, is common to sensuality; but to be beloved, is the crown of desert;
they best deserve to be beloved, who deserve love; and they principally deserve
love, who can moderate their private affection, and level the scope of desert,
to the executing their ladies command, and adorn their names by martial
feats of arms. As for instance, Paris defended Hellen with the loss of his
life: Troylus would fight for Cresseida: Aenaeas won Lauinia with the dint of
his weapon, and sweat of blood: Paelops hazarded his life for Hippodamia, yea
what better example than of late in our own territory? that noble untimely
cropped spirit of honor, our english Hector, who cared not to undergo any gust
of spleen, and censure, for his neuer-sufficiently admired Opia, a perfect
Penelope to her ancient knight Ulysses, he an unfeigned Ulysses to her, for
whose sake neither the wiles of Circes, or inchauntments of Sirens, or brunt of
wars, could force or entice to forgetfulness. But examples may seem rather
tedious than convenient, I leave the certainty of them to their authors, with
this prouiso, that what is manifest, needs no commentary. Now then considering
the perfections of ladies, have been both informer and modern ages, so
resonant through every climate of the world: what dull spirit? what leaden
apprehension has he? that would be more curious, to undertake the yoke of
their service, then forward to participate their beauties. Lentulus the Roman
warrior, after all his conquests abroad, was willingly captived and conquered
at home; insomuch as at the first veiw of Terentia, he feared not to say, Non
bellum, non fortuna: Fate cannot limitt, war cannot subdue the efficatie of
love.

The fleeting pashions of disloyal minds,
Proceeds from wrong directed scope of lust,
Inconstant change beseems grosse-feeding hindes,
In whose deserts is neither faith, or trust.
When noble spirits in the bonds of duty,
Pay tribute to the excellence of beauty.
For gentle temper of a freer blood,
Counts bondage to a lady willing pleasure,
Adoring service of best worthy good:
And deem their toil for favor pleasing leisure:
Not reckoning command, seruilitie,
But true performance, true nobility.
To talk, converse, or daily, is not love:
But amorous wantonness of idle play,
Brunts of defense does firm affection prove,
Who would not fight when beutie is the prey?
Then who is he who would not think he is free,
When he is inthral'd to loves captivity?
Loves captivity is freedoms infranchisement, and whosoever is a prisoner, to
the merit of fairness, is absolutely naturalized a denizen to happiness. To
conclude (for in known verities many proofs are needless) a true, and truly
loving knights liberty, ought to be inchained, to the disposure of his lady:
her will must be to him a law, and that law, not penal, but irrefragable. The
sincerity of his tried affection, must be an obstacle to wilfulnes, with due
consideration, that although he be bound to undergo her pleasure, so he shall
undertake no shame that may displease. For from the fair proceeds nothing but
what is fair. Ladies are mild, and fearful to impose dangers: wise, and will
prevent them: especially such dangers, as either may threaten inglorious
dishonor, or likely peril to their beloved. Timorous they are of the worst,
careful (and in that care ambitious) for the best. Nature made them Females,
virtuously kind, women, angelically virtuous: horror befits not their sex, or
unthankfulness their beauties: for although war defends the right of love,
yet love cannot brook the severity of war.

Dalliance in chambers, harmless play and sport,
Do with the sweetes of love, much better sort.
Since then ladies are molded of this temper, and tempered in the mould of
love, mildness, and kindness: what is that Knight that would not be their
captive? insomuch as the bluntest cynicke, must in reason avow, that it is most
reason, that Knights in Ladies service have no Free Will.

TO THE RIGHT Honorable the Earl of Arundel. Second Position.
Beauty is the Maintainer of Valor.

RIGHT HONORABLE.
IT is no prejudice to the precious claritie of knowledge, even in undoubted
truths, to make truth more doubtless, for in matters of wrong, arguments do
confound sense, when in explanation of right, they do senceably approve it.
It Is good; Mystery in demonstration, is a confused niceness. So known is the
certainty of this Positio^, Et domi, et foris, that whosoever would seem
ignorantly strange, would but bewray his strangely rude ignorance in seeming
so. Beauty (say we) is the maintayner of Valor: Who is so blunt as knows it
not? who is so blockish as will not (and may with justice) defend it? an
instance even in the entrance shall be no absurdity. In the infancy of the
Roman Empire, (as Plutarch to the purpose rehearses) the Romans violently
seized upon the Sabines ladies: by violence they won them, by valor they
justified their winning; insomuch as ever after betwixt these warlike Nations
began both increase of hatred, and defiance of hostility. In which times
Kissing had his first original, devised by the Sabine ladies, as an
earnest-peny of desert, to the guerdon of the Romans desperate toil. For
although in the eyes of some more Stoicall censures, Kissing seems but a
needless ceremony, yet in the feeling of love, it is the first taste of love,
the first certainty of hope, the first hope of obtaining, the first obtaining
of favor, the first favor of grant, the first grant of assurance, the first
and principallest assurance of affection; the first shadow of the substance of
after contented happiness, happy pleasure, pleasing heaven; but to our matter.
Men for the most part (some more heroycall inclinations by nature excepted) are
in the frailty of their humanity, so fearful of harms, and so desirous of
the preservative of life: as although not the discouragement of cowardice, yet
proper instinct of mortality, will deter them from wilful, and imminent
running into peril. Some again are of that frozen and cold temperature of
disposition, as according to the proverb, they esteem it provident safety,
to sleep in a whole skin. Of this imbecilitie are many, who have only
enjoyed, the lazy softness of vicious ease; and never felt, at least never
conceited the touch of any misery, no not of gentilitie. The self alone
means therefore, that were to be ordained, for a provocation, and inciteme^t
to liuelyhood of manhood was, the quintessence, raritie, yea rare quintessence
of divine astonishment, Beauty: upon whose al-perfection, the greedy eye of
desire (even in spirits of clay and mud) being sixth, has stirred up such a
rauishment of possession, as they now esteem all dangers weak; nay, all
impossibilities facilities, to possess it. That Cardinall-vertue of invincible
fortitude, had long since ben leuel'd with cowardice, had not beauty the alarm
to magnanimity, rent the distrust of weakness and strengthened it with contempt
of precedencie; aemulation of desert. Say then, how probable is it? how
indubitate hereditary is the dependence of Valor, to the merit of beauty?
Beauty! which pricks on the slowest, encourages the faint-harted, sharpens
the dull, commands the stowtest, recreateth the weary, and guerdoneth the
deserving. Beauty! the largess of the Gods; the comfort of men; the bounty of
heaven; the prize of earth; the paradise of glory; the Vialactea to felicity;
the wonder of it self, beauty. This is that Achilles impenetrable shield,
which every Ulysses pleads for, every Ajax fights for; this is that golden
fleece, which the Argonautes sued to find, which Jason toyling enioied. This is
that famoused Trophey, which Philip would have his son Alexander in the games
of Olympus to wrestle for. How much are they deceived (I mean these fainter
bloods) who vainly imagine, that soldiers fight for spoil only; Generals
hazard their persons for greedines; Seamen traffic for avarice: Knights
wander for prey, or that any ieopards his life, chiefly for lucre. Does not
the merchant venture shipwreck to return with a present, that may purchase
his Ladies liking? and in her liking his own bliss? does not the soldier
fight abroad to preserve his lady in safety at home? does not the general
command, that he may return with victory gracious in his Ladies eyes? does
not the Knight errant attempt threatenings of horror? adventures of dread?
thunder of death it self? only to rumor his fame in the cares of his lady?
does he not range for the succor of beauty? for the freedom of beauty? for
the joy of beauty? and all spoil that the soldier bleedes for, all the
greediness that commanders sweat for, all the avarice that the Merchant
trades for, all the prey that the Knight adventures for, all the benefit that
every one and all of these hope, wish, pray, contend for, is the fruition of
Beauty: than which nothing can be more grateful, nothing is so acceptable.

Valor. Through streams of blood and massacres of death,
I spend the troubles of a glorious breath.
In feats of arms and life's dread desperation,
I touze to gain me Fame and Reputation.
All that I strive for, is to comprehend
Honor; to honor all my labors tend.

Honor. Valor does aim at me, I aim at Beauty,
And make my greatness greater by my duty.
Valor does fight for me, when all my prize
Consist's in favor of sweet Beauties eyes.
Honor sustaineth Valor: when again
Beauty feeds Honor: and in that them twain.

Beauty. Mean-bred deserts who covet much ambition,
Having attained it, ever grow ambitious:
Soring to gain my love, in whose tuition
Their greatness is aduaunst, and made propitious:
I strengthen cowards, and exalt the spirits
Of weakness, I maintain proud chivalry:
In me the drifts of Honor pledge their merits:
To guerdon and discern worthes dignity:
And but for me they brunts of hazard loath:
Honor pays Valor: Beutie rules them both.

The whole scope that Valor, and men of valiant courage aim their drifts at,
is for the most part a famous name, and reputed Honor: but the mark which
honor directs his level to, is to participate the delightful sweets of
sweetest Beauty, which in all succeeding posterities, has been of so powerful
and powerfully respected awe, that for the hopes, which men have evermore
conceived of enjoying it, they have with accountrements of defense been pressed,
for fear of losing, to preserve it. Beauty! why it is the life of
magnanimity, it is the perfect spark, whose luster reflecteth boldness to
the timorous. Beauty! what is it? what can it else be? but the model of all
fortitude, for this proof (unless I be mistaken as I am not) did the
antiquaries of the elder world, such as were Martialists, attribute all worship
unto Pallas, all adoration to Bellona, reuerencing her as the Goddess of
arms, yet she a woman. Fair she was, else in vain would she strive with
Venus for the golden ball: valiant she was, else with foolish superstition, did
the ancient best Warriors adore her, and the younger Sophyes allow her, yes,
yes, she was wise, beautiful, and valiant, including this morrall, that as
she had courage, so was she a woman, whose force was not more fierce to
terrify, but her Beutie was as piercing to wound. Did they applaud her
martial disposition? true, but they did reverence her amiable looks, most
certain it is, the valiant may and do contend with the valiant, but Beauty
has the maistery of both.

Audentes forma cogit audaces. Love breaths more resolution into the forwardnes
of the resolved; for never have we read, never heard of any undaunted Champion,
who being free in his own affections, did strive so much by perilous
exployts, to adorn the rumor of fame; but if he after were blessed, by being an
entertained servant to some worthy lady, those dangers which before seemed
dangers, he would now deem easy, and all easy atchiuements, toys, only that
should then be most honorable, which threatened most terror. Hercules valued
the swimming over the Sea, to breed wonder in Deianeira, not for that he
desired to do it, but because she should admire, and commend the deed. Why do
spruce courtiers, practice courtlike actiuitie? but to breed delight to their
Ladies. why do men in general contend to exceed in bravery? but to be noted
the brauest of their ladies. Why do cormorants hoord treasure? but to attract
some ladies liking Why do poor men toil? great men trauerse? but all to one
end, to share Beauty. why do Kings and greatest Princes, thirst to enlarge
their empires and dominions? but to be noted for more eminent, and more to be
loved for that eminence of their ladies. Let us look into all the devoyres of
mankind, and they all tend to the content of Beauty: Men to honor men, is
rather a bootlesse fear, then in regardfull love; but for men to be honored
of ladies, is the scope of all felicity. Men in kindness are mutually lambs,
but in corriuall-shipp of love, Lions. Should I fight for my friend, I might be
appeazed in my choler, but for my lady, I am inexorable.

Chalibs mihi circa pectus. The tears of widows, the cries of babes, the
condolement of Parents, the entreaties of Children, the wounds of the maimed,
the wrack of the oppressed, cannot move pity in a steeled heart, which fights
for report in the honor of his lady. It is said of the Turks they train their
youth in discipline of war, with intent of cruelty, believe it I cannot be
persuaded, that being so absolute warriors, they should so wholly be murtherous
tyrants, except to return with triumph in the sight of their ladies.
Tamburlaine, the scourge of God, and sauadgest monster of his time; never made
a slaughter upon any of his conquered captives, but the principallest he ever
sent as slaves to his queen Zenocrate, intending that as she was the deity,
who infused strength into his arms: so she should be the whole glory of his
triumph.

Pax ruat in bellum, sociumque in praelia faedus:
Causa subit; nulla front regendus Amor.
How requisite it is then for a kingdom, which would be fortifyed with choice
of magnanimous spirits, to be also enriched with the ornament of Beauty: the
expediency in occasions of necessity makes evident. I have often maruailed why
the Romans (famous for their loves) going to battle against a world of so
many nations, as they did, for more suerty of victory, had not carried their
ladies with the^: that by the sight of them their enfeebled strength, might
(like the head of Hydra) doubly have renewed. Doubtless had Julius Caesar, at his
first arrival for the conquest of Britane, brought with him Cleopatra, he
would never have twice suffered so shameful a repulse. What infinite examples
might here be alleged, for the probatio^, that Beauty has evermore instigated
audacity to the dullest? finally in the apprehe^sion of common reason, let
every man examine himself, whether it be not the immediate norisher of al
fortitude? It is, it has been, and ever will be the nurse, and food of
heroical chiualry, for valor not seasoned with the hopes of love, is an
irresolute valor. A soldier, and libertine, is an un armed soldier? Beauty
is the spur to Honor; Honor the serviceable attendant on Beauty, yet will some
homebred poring Academicke say, it is the only means to make a warrior a flat
coward: for Beauty allures to delights, delights to ease, ease consequently the
fosterer to discouraged pusillanimity: but let such an vnexperie^ced plodder
know, it is as difficult for him to censure of courage, as it is easy for the
courageous to scorn his ce^sure, or indeed rather pity his ridiculous folly
in ce^suring, as Hanniball did Phormio, when he would read him a lecture of
war, who had ever bin trained in the wars: as if a mild lover may not dally at
home in a cabinet, yet the self same be a severe soldier in the field. Let
therefore every man of reason, be reasonable in understanding, and where he
cannot contradict, confess that the truth is greatest and chiefly prevails,
principally when arms will justify, what arguments confirm, and arguments
again reciprocally corroborate what arms (on the behalf of justice) does
maintain, and rightly maintain, that merely of it self, Beauty is the
maintainer of Valor.

TO THE RIGHT HONOrable the Earl of Pembroke. Third Position.
Fair Lady was never false.

RIGHT HONORABLE.
THe temperature of the mind follows the temperature of the body. Which
certain axiom (says that sage Prince of Philosophers Aristotle) is ever more
infallible. Then do not I a little marvel, what arrogant spleen of
malediction with teeth of iuyceles envy; durst to detract from the worthiness
of Beauty? terming it a particular blessing, bestowed for a more general curse.
Terming it fickle, deceitful, inco^stant, when if the sawes of authority be
authe^ticall, nothing can be more precious, nothing in it self so virtuous.
Fair Lady was never false? Oh says some curious impostor, Euge hominem? a
goodly theme? much wit no doubt expected? few proofs produced? who will not
swear the contrary? who will not believe the contrary as his Creed? vain
fondlings, as many as so believe, doubtless shall be so deceived; and do
penance for their error in the gall of their distrust. For if the temperature
of the mind, follow the temperature of the body? (text it is) then without
controversy, as the outward shape is more singular, so the inward virtues must
be most exquisite. Nature is but the handmayd to heaven. Beauty is the rarest
workmanship of Natures power. So questionless where the hand maid of heaven
has imparted her art, the blessings of the Gods are plentifully abounding.
Neither will they make that lame, which nature has framed perfect. For why?
can falsehood lie hidden under the raritie of fairness? no more than vice can
lurk under the plumes of virtue; which is merely impossible. Beauty is but a
fair Inn to lodge more fairer guests within. It is but the lively color of
an excellent tasting wine. It is the greatest good in it self, that heart of
humanity can wish for. If deformity be the dreg's and scum of earths
disgrace? if it be (as it is) the curse of the Parents transgression, laid upon
the child? then contrarily, must beauty be the immediate testimony of heavens
favor? why were people in times past, called Giants and Monsters? but for the
ugly appearance of their shapes. Neither were they in body so misshapen, as in
conditions odious. So then even in them it is manifestly verified, that foulest
enormities harbor in fowlest forms, then it follows, that firmest virtues,
are shrouded in the fairest complexions. Some indeed oppose an argument, that
Beauty of it self is a great good: but the abuse most wretched and common.
Yea, so common, that the very face of beauty is a presumption: yea more, a
warrant of inconstancy; to such is easily replied. Such abuse proceeds not
from perfect beauty, but from the adulterate counterfeit of beauty, art. Of
this nature are those that being intemperately wanton, strive with artificial
cunning, to cover the defects of nature. For true beauty, as it is of it self
a good, so is it in it self simple, innocent, and harmless. Into which no
thought of unkindness, can penetrate: and being once subject to love, can
never, will never be tempted to loosnesse. O strange says one! oh heresy
cries another; palpably false! falsely absurd; do not Poets the pillars of your
folly affirm, that Venus forsooth your only Deity of your passions, the queen
of your thoughtts, the boast and goddess of your loves, was absolutely false
to her husband? else had Cupid been unborn; Aenoeas unbegotten. And yet lady
was never fair and false! was not Helen of Greece made a Trojan stale; a
scorn to posterities, whose very name is ominous to cuckolds. Do not all
chronicles of antiquity show? not only that the fair, but the fairest have
proved lightest? and yet fair lady was never false. True, the Poets say so,
who being themselves lasciuiously addicted, thought it great inhumanity, at
least injury, that Beauty should be ingrost to the proper use of one alone
man. Besides if Poets are to be credited, Venus was a Goddess, not framed by
nature, but yssuing from the Gods, and therefore above humane apprehension.
Poets speak truth to warrant their writs, and so was Venus fair, they devise
fictions to approve their wits; so was she immodest: with this Caveat, that
she was Venus, was a troth; that she was trothles, a fiction. Also Helen was
counted fair, because many affected her, procured by her enticing wantones,
inuiting allurements. Courteous I think she was, and therefore beloved, fair
never, for then not fickle. Indeed I acknowledge, old writers being themselves
past the youth of love, and sunk into dotage, have inueighed against the
dignity of that sex, not upon knowledge, but mere supposition, deming that
because the worst are haunted of the worst for their lewdnes, condemn the
fairest for being fair, as the principal enchantment. Now so much difference
is there, betwixt the wanto^ and the fair, as the wanto^ may be beloved, but
the fair, will not be wanton. It is to be supposed, that such as inclined to
the loose fickleness of change, are not of that excellent temper, oftrue
bewty, because then they knowing their own merit, (as women of that nature do)
would be by how much the more noted, by so much the more tender of the
preseuatio^ of their honors report. And somewhat precizely (pardon troth) prize
their own value: Scire tuu^ nihilest nisi te scire hoc sciat alter. To be
fair, and not admired is as a hidden mineral: yet to be admired, and not
preserve that admiration, is an vnvalued indignity. But as ladies are fair, so
are they wise, and as they are both fair and wise; constant. Alas, most know,
and many feel, that bewty is not easily woed to love; many bitter conflicts, of
oppressed griefs, are to be endured, ere they are won to liste^ to affection.
And at length being persuaded, they were not so obdurat before to be sued to,
as they are now most constant in their loves most sincerely firm to their
choice. Experience teaches it, that stele is not soon hot, yet being once
fired, is less easily cooled An example or two, shall warrant the credit of the
rest: who could be more industrious to his lady, tha^ Theseus was in gaining
Ariadne? who being conquered, was ever most fast to him: though injuriously;
yea, perfidiously forsaken of him. Portia so inderely reverenced Cato, as she
would for his preservation swallow coals. Alcest would die for Admetus. And
Penelope (the mirror of the Greek matrons, both for constancy and Bewty would
never falsify her faith to Ulysses. I my self should account such proofs
inconvenient, did not the proof of my defense, rely upon former instances
compared both with present and latter times. Diana renowned for beauty, was
more renowned for chastity, insomuch as singularly, and truly fairest ladies
co^tended to be her nymphs, if trust to writers may be attributed: rara
praeclara: according to the proverb, that the fairest are the fairest, that is
the best and best to be esteemed. what is more to be urged for the ratifying our
maintenance: but the exterior beauty, is assurance of the interior quality. To
answer to every vain objection, that some more nice wits only seeming witty in
censure and misconstruction, is not here intended, as fronti nulla fides: the
ficklenes of Cresseida: the mutability of some Lais: let it suffice, they are
fictions and nugatory inuectiues, of deseruingly abused poets: or repulsed
Annalogers, ridiculous in the understanding of the wise: conte^ptible, in the
perseverance of understanding. It is even as impossible for ladies of quaintest
forms, to incline to thoughts of trothles impude^cy, as for monsters of
deformity, to produce effects of virtue. Needs there any other demo^stration,
the^ the admirable (almost incredible) ornament of chastity? Lucrece the Roma
dame, the paragon of those times, the mirror of those days, for rauishing
perfection of beauty: harmeles, unspotted Lucrece? who did withstand lust to
the eternizing her honor, and monumented her rape with extremity of death. who
is he to obstinate in his error? so wilful in his madness? so mad in his
erronius wilfulnes? as would not even in the glass of Lucresias perseuera^ce
(eue^ to the uttermost extinct of life) se the wonder of bewty, matched with
the indiuiduat adiu^ct vnsoyled constancy.

Constantia est gemella venustatis indiuidua. Three particularities there are,
that stand firm for this position: examples, already alleged: approbation of
judgment newly rehearsed: and ground of troth now to be verefi'de. verefi'de
said I? the self assurance of the subject, is a testimony most probable, if
vice be the nourisher of vice, virtue must be the effect of virtue. that is
sincerely a virtue, which is a good, and that good is Beauty, so herein
fictions comprehe^d truth, as forma bonum: yet ere I wade further, and be
grauel'd in the ouze, and quick sand of my own intention, I am for the clearing
of such, as may misconceite my drift, to make an Apology for my defense:
neither by my just justification, of an apparent verity, the wanton shall tax
my endeavors as ridiculous, knowing their own imperfections, nor challenge
this, as a due belonging to the encouragme^t of their lenity. I confess (and
blush that occasion should be ministered of confession) that many there are,
whose bewitching looks, draw youth into folly, and age into dotage, rather
madness: too many there are, whose smooth counterfeit, in the indiseretion of
virility, may pass for Beauty: when the counterfeiters, are so mutable, as
they are neither ever their own, or ever certain any on's. yea, even in great
personages, this loosnesse is an imboldning, to the meaner: rather a president
to the worst of offending: the greatness of their estates (I speak of some that
have been) bolstereth out the co^munity, of licentious immodesty, whose shames
were they enameled in the tableture of their foreheads, it would be a hideous
visour, to more deformed co^plections, more enormious conditions. Such there
are, who under the abomination of luxury, (nicely termed kindness) import the
pretexted gloss of beauties name, to such are also mercenarye slaves,
intimated servants, against whom, although my purpose is not to inueigh, yet
do I here exclude the^ from out the assotiation of the fair: let those be
false, beautiful they are not. In the^ the te^perature of the body, follows
the te^perature of the mind: not the temperature of the mind, the temperature
of the body: Of whom the philosopher insisteth. As I said before, so I here
avow that the error of their enchanting amyablenes bewitcheth their adherents,
who being ensnared in the nets of their lasciuiousnes, esteem that prime
beauty which they themselves deliciously enjoy. For as the loose have no
substance, but fading art to attract, so the excelle^tly fair, have no
falsehood to be soyled; no cunning to beguile; no visor to delude. They are
doves without gals; swans without spots, fawnes without spleen: they are
simple, and will not be trained; fair and cannot be tempted: they are the pure
color of white, without stain, whose delicate ears, by profaned tongues may
be enforced to hear ill, but whose unmoved breasts, by the fond cannot be
enflamed to consent to il. Herein are the bewtiful said to be Angels on earth,
for that as they exceed others in wonder of beauty; so they excel all other in
graces of virtue: it shall not be amiss, to answer to the maleuolent will of
some witty maleuolent detractors.

Adverse.
Women. o they are fickle falling stars:
Tides in their ebbes, Moons ever in the wayne,
Frost in the thawe, saint hearted in the wars
Of constancy, yet constant in disdain.
Women! o they are creatures most vnholly:
Borne for a scourge to men, and curb to folly.
Mulieri ne credas, ne mortuae quidem.
Proof.
Women! why they are fixed lamps of heaven,
Shining bright luster to the hearts of men.
Firm diamonds, and fair, bright looks, hearts even:
Constant in scorn of motions, where and when
Princes for ladies praise have fell at odds,
They are of men adored, beloved of Gods:
The highest blessing, that to earth's uncommon,
Is man's perfection, soul of life, a woman.
Dijs compares foeminae.
Every fair lady is lovely, but every lovely lady is not fair: so then the
lovely may be fickle, but the fair cannot be inconstant: what should I more
say; and yet what have I said that is enough? what, that can be too much? and
yet is not to much? since the only experience of the subject, commends his
own worthiness. To such the^ as credit it, I wish the^ a fair lady: to
misbeleuers and infidels in love this curse: may their ladies be foul, and so
be loathsome, yet false, and repay them with the common crest (...)

TO THE RIGHT Honorable the Earl of Mountgomery. The fourth and last Position.
Perfect lovers are only wise.

Right Honorable,
PErspicax est amatorum vigilans ocellus, praeuidet aduersa, studet horis
conuenientibus. A perfect lover is never less idle, then when he is idle:
never more busied, then when least seriously employed.

Wise seeming Censors count that labor vain,
Which is devoted to the hopes of love,
When they themselves, themselves much vainer prove,
By holding Lovers labors in disdain:
They have forgot the wiles which made them tremble,
In heat of youth, when youth their bloods did move,
What wit they vse'd, what tears they did dissemble.
Their now waxt shallow apprehensions, then
Were quick to see the worst, wise to prevent it:
How they pleased fancy, how they might content it,
How much their hearts differed from hearts of men:
How provident they were to fawn, to flatter,
To swear, vow, urge their grief and to lament it:
Alas who would not do it in such a matter.
Love makes men wise, it is not a feeling kiss,
That Is the true sport, there is sport more sweet then this:
To which, ere lovers thoroughly do attain,
They must attend, do service, grieve, and feign.
For this with Ladies honors best does fit,
Not to be conquered by Desire, but Wit.
In all ages, both past and present, never have there been more witty
policies, more politic circumuentions broached then in speedy obtaining of
delatorie love: which is in it self so urgent, so impatient of delays, as the
soundest sleights, quaintest devises, have been studied for accomplishing, of
rest to unrest, ease to disquiet, remedy to desperation. Three things trial
has taught to be expedient for mastery in love. After choice, Patience to
endure reproves, Wit to procure content, Boldness to attempt at
opportunities. Vain is patience without hope: hope desperate without means:
means, when occasion proffers her forelock, and women toleration: hinderance,
without boldness. Yet boldness without wit, is to no use, neither without
wit shall time be ever found when to be bold. In a perfect lover therefore,
all these three are iudicially cohered. Also if a curious surueior will upon
this approve, that lovers have been witty, yet disallow any wisdom in this
wit, by distinguishing a different discrepancie betwixt wit and wisdom,
since the one tends only to folly of humanity, the other to consideration of
divinity, I will answer, that perfect Lovers, even in this respect are
perfectly wise, as with ease thus: being overcome with the affection, of some
excellently deserving beauty, with admitation of the singular perfection
thereof, with what curious workmanship it is framed, with what glory of
Majesty it is endowed: it is an immediate occasion, to bring them in serious
conceit, of weighing the wonders of the heavens in compacting such admirable
quintessence, in so precious a form, by which they will deeply reuolue the
dignitye of GOD in that mould, and truly acknowledge the weakness of their
own nature, in comparison of Beauty. This is the ready and directest course,
to force men to consider their own frailty, and magnify the omnipotency of
their creator, in fashioning both. So as Love is the only line which leads
man to the font of Wisdom; that is, to the gloryfying of heavens power, and
confessing man's imbecility. Who then can deny? who will not allow? that
Perfect Lovers are only wise? only wise! true, for men devoted to
contemplation of Theology, are withdrawn from the absolute, and due reverence
(sometime) of him to whom they chiefly owe all due reverence, by humane
affairs: when Lovers have evermore the Idea of Peauty in their imaginations,
and therefore hourly do adore their makers Architecture. Perfect Lovers are
only wise: now again to humanity: the dullest wit, the most unseasoned
capacity, being once salted with the taste of love, sharpens his dullness, and
seasons his capacity, to study any slieght, any device for setting a period to
his desires. Insomuch, as no time shall ever present any opportunity of study,
but all invention is used, all conceiptes employed, for the fruition of his
beloved: who being inioyed, yet his wits are never idle, but industrious for
conservation of what he inioyes, as loath to impart from that which with so
much vigilancie he not easily obtained. As hitherto I have proceeded with
demonstration of examples: so now (to the purpose) will I infer an instance,
to the more effectual proof of this. The Greeks after the discursion of
Helen, preparing an expedition against Troy, both for acquittance of their
injury, and recovery of their false (never truly fair) Queen, stood not in
more need of Achilles for his courage, then of Ulysses for his counsel: who
being then newly married, to his perfectly fair Penelope, was upon good cause
(moved in the tenderness of his love) unwilling to that action: but excuse
could not prevail, except policy could find excuse: he fears much, but
loves more, which love even at an instant ripens his invention: Love ripeneth
his invention, he faines madness, and for madness to advise in sober actions,
would prove but a mad advise, an unadvised madness. but he was discovered and
went. Secondly, what undoubted wisdom in him, did charm his ears, against
the incantations of the Sirens: the devout affection which he bore to his
Penelope, quickening his apprehension. Was ever man a truer lover? and ever man
more truly wise? It is infallibly certain, certainly infallible, perfect
lovers are only wise. Now it may be cauelled, that that cannot be, for how can
Lovers be wise, when Love it self is both vain, idle, and foolish? a toye? a
mere conceit of fancy? But how vain, foolish, idle, and fantastical are
they that so conceive? Love is the only band, the alone obligation, that
traffiques betwixt earthly creatures and heavenly Angels, that unites woman to
man, yea man to man, nay man to himself, and himself to God. Love is the
dignity of man's worth, not a blind Cupid, a sensual lust, as Poets feign: but
an earnest and reasonable desire of good, as authorities confirm. It is an
entire conuinction of souls together.

Mutua sors animi, pia commutatio mentis,
sub fido fidum est pectore pignus Amor.
Quid magis est placidum? nihil est faelicius illo;
Pax iucunda, manus splendida, tuta quies.
Fulget in auricoma nitido cum robore forma:
Ipsa suasplendens gaudet Amore Venus.
Love is that tickling blood, which softly creepes,
Into the pleasures of a quiet breast:
Presenting pretty drcames in flumbring sleeps,
Andin a Ladies boosome takes his rest.
Love bath's him in the channel of delight,
Which lovers sigh for, and wish they also might.
Of twenty thousand 't is the wittiest passion,
Wise, in foreseeing of ensuing care:
Makes lovers provident, yields consolation,
And checks the bad from ill, if so they dare.
Love is that fountain, where the springs do lie,
Whence sweetest waters run, yet never dry.
Love is that harmless prick, in pleasant brier.
Which does most please the sent, and breed desire.
Thus much for satisfaction of the witty. Now briefly follows for a conclusion
to the wise. Lovers are perfect wise, and simply perfect: indeed absolutely
perfect, insomuch as nothing is more expedient to the full accomplishment of a
wise man, then to be a Lover. Now would any man seem to oppose himself, to
the adverse maintaining of what has already been proved? it will be evident,
he shall more toil his brains to affirm an untroth, then the praise or
commendation he expects, with a general Plaudite will counteruaile. If any
champion will likewise be desperate hardy, to undertake a disallowance, of
these chalie^ged positions, question-lesse he need not doubt, but he shall not
sooner be armed, but as soon foiled, and in the vulgar confession of shame,
acknowledge his dearly bought wilfulness. But I leave that to trial. I here
mean to be a pen man, no champion.

Conclusion.
WOuld any man be gracious in a Ladies favor? let him then subject himself to
her will. Would any be valiant and renowned for chiualty? let him serve under
the colors of beauty. Would any strive to be blessed in having a Lady truly
constant? let him choose her truly fair. Would any be perfectly wise? let him
be perfectly loving. Would any be happy? courageous? singular? or provident?
let him be a lover. In that life consists all happiness, all courage, all
glory, all wisdom. But as for such, who do frigescere ad ignem, I do desist
to inueigh against their cold spirits: only in this, I hate them, that I pity
them.

He who will strive to please each curious eye,
Must freeze in sdence. But I care not I,
Let better favors favor mine endeavor,
The vulgartaunting shall affright me never.
May it please you, to whom it is intended.
Then
It Is glory to deserve, though not commended.
Non omnibus studeo.
non maleuolis.
FINIS
THE Monarchs meeting, Or The King of Denmarkes welcome, into England.
NOw had the harvest of the year brought forth,
The blessed fruit of long expected hope,
And leueld with the toil of labors worth,
The crop of fatness, to the trad's-mans scope.
Now were the blossoms ripened to the hand,
Of well deserving sweat: when all anon,
The mighty ruler of a peaceful land,
Began to take his wished progression.
Calm was the sea, and gentle gustes did blow,
A whistling gale unto the flagges of peace:
Full were the streams, and smooth soft tides did flow,
And gave assurance of contented ease.
When on the bubbling beauty of fair Thames,
(Urged by the princely love of amity)
A Christian King, in state, and majesty,
Was entertained with sundry shows of games.
The silver Crystal stream, was proud to bear,
The burden of a person, each way graced,
With all the rites of humane Love and Fear,
In whose high looks, honor was lively placed.
Much welcome was the tidings of this news,
Unto the royal ear of worthy James:
Preparing with all speed, that speed might use,
With his own presence to ennoble Thames.
Look how did Jove salute the minor Gods,
Inuiting all in heaven at a feast,
Where no more awe was reuerenc'd, no odds,
Betwixt his proper person and the rest.
So did these Princes meet, in whose first meeting,
Joy was abundant in the truce of love:
Each inter-changing a concordant greeting,
Which in the peers of both did comfort move.
Ambitious was the river of this honor,
Knowing the value of the weight she bore:
Graced that such favor Kings bestowed upon her,
Bearing a richer burden nere before.
Kings met, and Kings saluted one another,
Either rejoicing in the others sight:
Princes with Princes, brother joyed with brother,
Each solacing the other with delight.
A goodly view of Majesty it was,
To see such intimated league betwixt them:
They strived in kindness how they might surpass,
Sporting the season which the tide prefixed them.
Like to a Prince in every point aright,
He came, and like a Prince was entertained:
With all the tipes of dignity bedight,
with all the friendship, friendship could have claimed.
O what a gladsome sight of joy it is?
When monarchs so are linkt in amity?
How strengthened are those Empires with safe bliss,
Where two such Princes join in unity?
Great both are in dominions, yet more great,
In being virtuously religious:
Fresh blooming piety does praise beget,
In godly zeal. Let tyrants be litigious?
What He amongst the stoutest of contempt?
Full in command? and fuller in disdain?
Durst any threats of en'mity attempt?
Or to oppose himself against those twain?
Those twain! so firmly are they matched together,
So everlastingly affectionate.
So indiuidually combined together,
As they love none of both, who do one hate.
Power with power, realm with realm united,
hearts joined with hearts, and hand embraced in hand:
Should all the world of nations be excited,
Yet all the world could scarce those two withstand.
Nor is it faining show of smooth pretext,
But doubtless troth of love which brought him hither:
Let none with such suspicion be perplexed,
For then they never had thus come together.
Nor can it be supposed, a Prince so mighty,
so worthy in himself, so absolute.
Who has so large a rule, a charge so weighty,
would leave his country, but for mere repute.
Puissant is the Danish King, and strong,
In all the sinews of approved force:
Valiant, and able, for to right the wrong,
That should proceed from any eager course.
It is no common thing seen every day,
Scarce in an age, to see so great a state:
From out his countries bounds to come away,
For visitation of an neighboring mate.
It is no common honor, that is done
Unto our happy land by his arriving:
Much worth thereby, and glory have we won,
Our homebred hearts, with stranger loves reviving.
Two Kings in England have been rarely seen,
Two Kings for singularity renowned:
The like before has hardly ever been,
for never were two with more honor crowned.
This may we boast, and after times report,
How much the King of Denmark graced our age:
A King of so much eminence, such port,
By his arrival did his love engage.
England with Denmark, Denmark eke with us,
Are firmly now in league, conjoined in one:
Seven Kingdoms now again united, thus
Are strengthened, so as stronger can be none.
Then as a certain and welwishing greeting,
We thus applaud the monarchs happy meeting.
HAyle Princely stem of great magnificence?
Issue of royal blood, who do commence
True instance of thy fast undoubted love,
And by thy coming certainly approve
The pledge of peace, thus low in humblest heart
Regreetes unto thy truce do we impart.
With fit applause our thanks devoutly running,
Gives welcome to the honor of thy coming.
Time cannot raze, nor amity surcease
Betwixt our realm and thine a long lived peace.
Whiles thoughts are vndefil'd, and credit true,
From age to age this league will still renew.
And thou thy self (great King of Danes wilt joy,
Counting the hazards which thou did employ
Dangers of thanks: by tasting approbation
Of spotless friendship with our willing nation.
We are not subtle French, to fawn and flatter:
Nor Spaniards hot in show, yet cold in matter.
Trothlesse Italian fleeting Irish wiles,
(Whose trust when most protesting most beguiles)
We deem dishonor. German policies,
Or ever changing Indian sopperies
We spurn. Know we are English hating wrongs,
Bearing our thoughts deciphered in our tongs.
Rather the sun may in his courses alter,
Then we in true-meant trust our promise faulter:
Which of our chiefest emulating foes
Can justly tax us? but we ever chose
To die with fame, then live with infamy,
Purchased with disesteemed treachery.
What needs an instance? rumor will auow,
We have our troth engraven in our brow.
"Who are in nature, false ye free in name,
"Are servile slaves to fear, and fools to shame.
What more? we are thy friends, and thou art our,
Thy love is ours, and our force thy power.
Long may this happy thread of faith be wouen,
And nere have dissolution but with heaven.
Fatal and joyous does the knot begin,
Then who does break it first, commits first sin.
Lo then great monarch, with what words of zeal,
Thy coming we embrace, and hopes reveal
Of linkt conjunction: pressed to gratify
That love, which thou with love do ratify.
Here speaks the clamor of a public voice,
Which speaking, all do publicly rejoice
Thy safe arrival: England thanks the honor,
Which by thy presence thou bestowest upon her.
Sounding loud Echoes of thy Kingly fame,
And making trophies, to adorn thy name.
The Clarions breath thy welcome, Bells do ring,
Praise shoutes, whiles all thy friends thus sweetly sing.
The applause Song for the King of Denmarkes arrival.
IN the most happy season of the year,
When fairest sunshine glistered on the earth,
The royal King of Denmark did appear,
And tuned the hearts of England full with mirth:
In goodly majesty, and princely cheer,
Even in the fullest crop of haruest's birth:
When birds with pleasant notes did sweetly sing,
To give a hearty welcome to the King.
Prettily, prettily,
With music sweet,
Did Philomele merrily,
and joyfully,
and ever prettily,
The noble King of Denmark greet.
Welcome to England, Prince of high degree,
And all our song shall ever welcome be.
Our King himself rejoiced in his sight,
His presence to the Court did breed delight,
Blithe was the country, and the City proud.
Cornets with trumpets, shrill did blow, and loud.
To welcome to our land,
With hearty greeting:
(By our Kings command)
The Monarchs meeting.
Which we fulfilling,
With love and minds willing,
Joined together,
Welcome hither,
Friendly,
and ever
kindly,
The Danish King, a Prince of high degree,
For all our song shall ever welcome be.
To welcome all our notes, and love does tend,
In that sense we began, with that we end.
Cantibus and carmine. FINIS.

