THE SAINTS HOPE, AND INFALLIBLENES THEREOF. or Two Sermons preached before the
English Company at Middelb. about the month of October, 1608.

Written by Mr. Iohne Forbes, at the earnest request of the hearers, and now
published by them for the general instruction and comfort of all Gods children.

Printed at Middelborough, by Richard Schilders, 1610.

To his dear and welbeloved in the Lord, the faithful English Company at
Middelburrough, increase of wisdom and grace from God the Father of our Lord
Jesus Christ be multiplied.
YOur earnest request in the Lord (most heartely beloved in him) was, that I
would put in writ to you those first Sermons, which, at the will of God, I
preached amongst you. J confess that I am obliged to you all, in all duties of
love, because of the abundance of your love to me, or rather to the Lord Jesus.
Therefore, although the conscience of my weakness and infirmity did ever, till
this hour, hold me back from writing or prese^ting in writ any of my weak
labors to the use of any yet, I could not resist your lawful and earnest
desire in this particular; praying God to direct it to his glory and your
comfort. Receive the^ the first two conceaved in substance as I delivered them,
but in larged according to the special consolatio^s, which it pleased the Lord
to minister unto my own heart out of this Scripture, in time of my most heavy
sickness, when J was daily in hope to go out of this body to dwell with the
Lord. If ye find any comfort in them, give all the glory to him who is able
by the mouth of Babes and Sucklings, to make perfect his praise. And not
staying as Babes upon the use of this milk, go on in strength by the solid
comfort of that strong meat, which ye have abundantly in the Lords great
mercy daily ministered unto you, by the painful labors and faithful
watchfulnes of your loving and learned Pastor, whom the Lord has taught to be
a Scribe in his kingdom, a faithful and wise steward to give his children
their portion of meat in season, at whose mouth receiving that sincere milk
of the word, ye shall doubtless grow up to be a spiritual house and an holy
Priesthood to God by Jesus Christ our Lord, whose special blessing J pray for
to his work amongst you, that you to your Pastor, and he to you, may be a
joy, a glory, and a crown of rejoicing in the presence of the Lord Jesus
Christ at his coming, whose grace, mercy and peace be with you all. Amen.

Yours in the Lord M. I. F.

1. Epist. of Peter Cap. 1. verse 3. Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord
Jesus Christ, who according to his abundant mercy, has begotten us again
unto a lively hope, by the resurrection of Jesus from the dead.


IT is most true which the Apostle says to the Corinths, 1. Cor. 15:19.
that if in this life only we have hope in Christ, we are of all men the most
miserable. For in all outward things concerning this present life, the wicked,
for the most part, are in much better case then the godly; who daily bearing
the cross, through many tribulations and afflictions, do enter in the kingdom
of heaven. This being a thing necessary, Romans 8.17. 2. Tim. 2.12
that whosoever shall reign with Christ, must first suffer with him. For there
is no other way whereby the members can enter into glory, but the same by
which the Prince of salvation was consecrate. Herefore it is that the Apostle
in this Epistle, being to exhort the Saints to constancy in holiness and
patient bearing of all afflictions, does lay the foundation of his doctrine,
and prepare the way to this Exhortation, by setting before their eyes the hope
of eternal life in Heaven with God: The fight of things invisible sustain the
Saints in this life.
Knowing that in this life there is nothing, no not the very inward beginnings
of grace, and sense of the goodness and bountifulnes of God, and of the peace
and joy spiritual, that is able to uphold the Saints in suffering for Christ,
if they had no esperance of greater and more excellent things after this life
in the world to come. Therefore it is that in the Scriptures the spirit leads
the Saints always to the sight of the glory that is to be manifested, to the
Price of their high calling in Jesus, and to the recompense of reward laid up
for the^ in the heavens: 2. Cor. 4.10 etc.
knowing that the daily bearing about of the dying of our Lord in our bodies,
and in the daily decay of the outward man, we were not able to endure without
fainting, if we did not cast our eyes upon things invisible and eternal, Act.
7.55.
and not upon things visible which perish. It was the sight of the glory of
God, and of Jesus at the right hand of God that made Stephan to endure stoning
to death: It was the sight of him who is invisible, and of the recompense of
reward which made Moses to despise the wrath of Pharao, Heb. 11.24
and to esteem the reproach of Christ greater riches then the treasures of
Aegipt. The thing which did sustain Job in his greatest miseries, Job. 19.26.
was the hope and assurance he had that he should see God in his flesh,
although that after his skin, worms should destroy his body: even that he
himself should see him, and that his eyes should behold him and none other
for him. Heb. 12.2.
Christ Jesus our Lord himself endured the cross and despised the shame, for
the joy which was laid before him. According to which examples we must also
endeavor to hold the eyes of our mind fixed upon Jesus the author and
finisher of our faith, where he sits at the right hand of the Father
crowned with glory and honor; waiting still for our blessed hope, which also
the very Creature waits for, Romans 8.19
and in waiting groneth and labors in pain, because it also is subdued
under hope, that it also shall be delivered from the bondage of corruption in
that day. This is the cause wherefore the Apostle Peter in this place does
speak so much of this hope: even that, as he himself exhorts us, we may
gird up the loins of our minds and be sober, and trust perfectly, or to the
end in the grace which is brought to us in the revelation of Jesus Christ,
putting on, as the Apostle Paul exhorts us, 1. These. 5.8.
the hope of salvation for our helmet.

In setting down this hope, the Spirit of God for our further comfort and the
more strong enforcing of the exhortation builded thereupon, does meet the
chief tentations which may assault our weakness in the troubles which
accompany the profession of the truth: of which three are touched in the word
which we have read. The one concerns Life it self: the other the Quality
and Condition of that life: the last the Certainty and Assurance of it. So
first because the Apostle did know how hard and difficill a thing it is to
persuade man to forsake this present world, the life, the glory, the riches,
the reast and pleasures of it, except he have esperance of an other world,
life, glory, riches and pleasure. Therefore does he first set down the
exceeding mercy and goodness of God in begetting us to the hope of life in the
heavens. Secondly, in respect the naked hope of an other life is not sufficient
to persuade us to forsake this life, nor to minister solid joy in suffering
for it, except we know that this life for which we hope, be much more excellent
and precious. Therefore in the second place the Apostle describes the
excellency of this life hoped for. Thirdly, seeing for the solid consolation
of the Saints, it is required that not only they have hope of life and know
the excellency of it, but also that they be sure not to be frustrat nor
disappointed of their hope. Therefore in the third place he declares the
certainty and infalliblenes of this hope. In these three points consists the
substance of the word which we have read: whereof we are now to speak, as
the Lord shall assist by his grace.

But first of all before we enter to speak of these three, Gods benefits never
to be remembered without thankfulness.
we must consider the manner which the Apostle uses in propounding of them,
which is by way of thanksgiving. To teach us in what manner we should speak of
the blessings of God, whose goodness to us should never be remembered without out
thanksgiving to him. He chooses us: he predestinateth us: he calls us,
Ephesians. 1.6.
says the Apostle, to the praise of the glory of his grace. Therefore when
ever it pleases him to bestow upon us the fruits of his love, and free grace
in Jesus Christ: we should always receive them, think and speak of them, so
as our God receive of us the thing for which he gives them, that is the
praise of his glorious grace, wherewith he does abound toward us in all
spiritual blessings in Jesus Christ. There is a great difference betwixt the
manner of speech of those who speak upon a bare and naked knowledge of the
blessings of God, and of those who speak from the sense and feeling of them,
as having tasted themselves of the goodness and bountifulnes of God in these
blessings toward the^ in Christ. The speech of the one as it is without
feeling, so is it fectles and without force: they can speak of his goodness and
not give him glory: whereas the other are forced by their feeling to glorify
God because he is good, his love in their hearts constrayning them, as says
the Apostle. 2. Cor. 5.14
This is the cause why the Saints in Gods word have made so many songs of
praise and thanksgiving to God: so sweet is the sense of his mercy, and so
deep was the insight they had of it toward themselves, that they have
provoked all the creatures to praise him, because he is good, and his mercy
endures for ever: as though themselves alone were not sufficient to speak of
the praise of his grace toward them, yea the help of al creatures being too
too small in their judgment to make the^ worthily to render him the glory of
his goodness to them alone: and knowing that their tongues and lips were not
able condignely to thank him, they have called on their souls and all that is
within them to praise his holy name. This serves for a trial to us to examine
ourselves in what sort we possess the knowledge of the grace of God toward
man in Christ. Surely, it is to be feared that there is small sense and lively
feeling of it within us, when thankfulness does not outwardly abound in our
speeches and actions. And hereby may we justly esteem this age, although it
abound in knowledge, yet to have small feeling of the things known, seeing the
affections of men are so slenderly touched with the love of God and his
goodness, neither heart nor tongue being prepared to proclayme his praise. The
Prophet says, and so does the Apostle, I believed and therefore I spoke: 2.
Cor. 4.13
surely where faith is, there will be speech. The Apostle therefore writing to
the Colossians bids them abound in faith with thanksgiving. Colos. 2.7.
The same Apostle willing to make us understand what is the nature of true
knowledge, after he has exhorted us to know the will of the Lord, and to be
filled with the Spirit, he subioynes an exhortation to practice the effects of
this knowledge, and amongst the rest he desires us always to give thanks for all things to God the Father in the name of Jesus Christ our Lord, joining these
two things together, and teaching us that no blessing, yea nothing should
happen to us for the which we should not give thanks to God. For that is the
nature of true grace truly ingraffed in the heart for all things, even for
Afflictions to praise the Lord. Let us look on the example of Job, when God
did permit Satan to spoil him of his substance, Job. 1.21.
his speech is, The Lord has given, and the Lord has taken it, blessed be the
name of the Lord. Behold he acknowledges that it was the Lord that did give,
and it was the Lord that did take, and he blessed the Lord both in giving him
and in taking from him. If then the very Afflictions and chastisements, whereby
the Lord exercises the faith and tries the patience of his Saints, be just
matter both of rejoicing, as James says, Iam. 1.2.
and also of thanksgiving: how much more should we render thanks to God for our
Election, our Calling, our Justification, and all the rest of his blessings
both spiritual and bodily. Let us learn then with the Apostle and according
to the former exhortation of Paul, to give thanks always for all things to God
the Father in the Name of Jesus Christ our Lord. So much concerning the manner
of the Apostles speaking and propounding this blessing. Now we come to the
matter it self, which we divided in three, whereof the first concerns the
blessing of God bestowed upon us. In declaring of this blessing, we have these
points set down by the Apostle in order, 1. The Author and giver of it, to
wit the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. 2. The cause moving him to
call us to so excellent a blessing, to wit, his abundant mercy. 3. The
preparatiue and fitting minds, whereby he both makes us able for the benefit,
and brings us to it, to wit, The begetting of us again. 4. The blessing it
self, to wit, a living hope, or the hope of life. 5. And last, the ground and
foundation of this hope, to wit, the Resurrection of Christ from the dead.

Now concerning the first, it is the Father who is the Author of this
blessing, as he is the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. Therefore does
the Apostle so describe him in this place. The Father to be considered as God
and Father of Christ.
In the which there are two things to be noted. 1. That the Father must be the
God and Father of the Son, before we obtain this blessing. 2. That the Son
must be our Lord before the Father, being now both God and Father to the Son,
do bestow upon us this blessing. The first teaches us that our Adoption,
Calling, etc. are in and for Christ, not simply as he is God, nor simply as he
is man, but as he is both God and man, and so Mediator betwixt God and man: for
as he is man, the Father is his God, and so does he himself call him My God,
my God, why have thou forsaken me: and as he is God, the Father is his Father
from all eternity. The second teaches us that we must be of the number of
these who are given by the Father to the Son, and for whom the Son has
dyed to deliver the^ out of the hands of their ennemies, that they should
serve him without fear all the days of their life in holiness and righteousness
before him: Luc. 1.74.
both these are evident in the words. The first in that he gives thanks to
God (for so it should be read) and Father of Christ for this blessing of
hope. The second in that he styles Christ our Lord: both contain not only rare
and wonderful mysteries, but matter of most singular comfort and necessary
instruction to all Christians.

To speak a little of the first, it is a matter of great admiration to see the
love of the Father toward man so great that he would have his Son abasing
himself so for man's redemption, that he would have him become a servant and
subject to obedience as other me^. So speaks the Father by the Prophet:
Behold my servant, Isay. 42.1.
I will stay upon him mine elect in whom my Soul delights: and not only
that, but much more that which him so abased, he would establish his covenant
to be the God and Father of Christ as he is man, all mankind having lost that
felicity in the fall of Ada^: so that in Christ Jesus, 2. Sam. 7.14 conferred
with Heb. 15.
the man blessed for ever, the Father begins to be a God and Father to
mankind again. Next in this point is to be admired the wonderful love of the
Son to man, Philip. 2.6.7.8.
who being in the form of God, thought it no robbery to be equal with God,
but he made himself of no reputation, and took on him the form of a servant,
and was made like unto men, and was found in shape as a man; he humbled
himself and became obedient unto the death, even the death of the Cross.
Hereby it comes to pass that the Son of God becomes our brother, and so we
again, in Gods infinite mercy, Psalm. 22.25. conferred with Heb. 12.
restored to the dignity of the Sons of God in Christ, who having taken
part with us of flesh and blood, was not ashamed to call us brethren, us I
say, whom the Father had given him: Isay. 8.18. conferred with Heb. 2.13.
and also the children of God. Behold, here am I and the children which God
has given me. Thus nothing in the world should more rejoice our hearts then
the incarnation of the Son of God, Luc. 2.14.
by the which glory came to God in the highest heavens, peace in the earth,
and goodwill toward men: and by the which God became to be with us: therefore
was he called Emanuel, Isay. 7.14. and Math. 1.23.
for the true tabernacle of God became to be with men when the Son of God
became man. The use for our instruction of this first point is threefold. No
saving knowledge nor sight of God but in Christ.
1. We must hereby learn that God makes his covenant of grace immediately,
and first with his Son made man: for this is the word of the covenant, I
will be your God, and ye shall be my people: and in the place before cited out of
the 2. of Sam. cap. 7 I will be his Father, and he shall be my Son. Thus none in
all the world of all the posterity of Adam was worthy, with whom the Lord
should enter in covenant, but his Son alone, in whom it is that we are made
the children of God, he first becoming our brother. Thus it is evident that we
cannot have the Lord to be either God or Father to us, but in Christ. Therefore
he sends this Message with Marie to his Disciples, as the most comfortable
that he could send after his Resurrection: Ioh. 20.17.
Go to my Brethren and say to them, I assende to my Father, and your Father;
to my God and your God. Therefore the nature of true faith is always to look
to God in Christ, and to behold all blessings coming from the Father in and
for Christ, and to see God to be a God and a Father in him alone: so that who
looks not to God in Christ, can see nothing in him to comfort them, but by
the contrary they must see him armed with wrath and justice to their
everlasting confusion as their Judge and not as their God. The second is that
they do not know God aright unto salvation, who only know him as the Father of
the Son, and do not know him as their God: The knowledge of the incarnation
of the Son, necessary to Life.
for it is not sufficient to know the mystery of the Trinity unto Salvation,
but we must also know the mystery of the humiliation of the second person,
whereby he became a servant to the Father, and the Father became his God.
Therefore must we both learn to know the eternal generation of the Son as God
equal with the Father: And that also whereof the Lord speaks in the 2.
Psalm: Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee. Whereby is understood
the manifestation of the son in the flesh, and declaration of him now to be
the Son of God. The third use is, to know the diverse grounds of Gods
dispensation of his benefits to man, which are two: The first is in his Son,
as Creator, Ruler, Vpholder of the world, in whom they are, they live, they
move, Act 17.25. etc.
and who gives to al life and breath, and all things: by which reason also all
men are the generation of God, in respect of their creation. The second ground
of his dispensation is in his Son, as Redeemer of the world, and Mediator
betwixt the Father and Man, being himself both God and Man, and having the
Father both God and Father to him, that he might bring the rest of the
children given to him, not only to the dignity of sons again, but also to
the glory. In which respect the elect, all the generation of God by
regeneration and new birth, besides that they are the generation of God with
the rest of the world, by creation, etc. according to the diversity of their
grounds, so is the dispensation of God to men diverse. The first is, the ground
of his dispensation, to the reprobates, yea to all his other creatures. The
second is, the ground of his dispensation to his elect. And because the first
ground concerns this life: therefore is it that God bestows on the
reprobates, abundance of earthly things, as riches, honor, kingdoms and
Empires, and yet al in his wrath, because they receive them not in Christ, the
only cause of his love to man: and so it shall come to pass, that many who
have most of this wordly wealth, riches and pleasures from God, shall
nevertheless be cast by him in hell fire: therefore we must not judge of Gods
favor to men by the outward blessings of this life, whereof all are partakers:
for God makes his sun to arise on the evil, and the good, and sends rain
on the just and unjust. Math. 5.45.
The second ground of Gods dispensation concerns specially the life to come
(albeit the children of God have the promise both of this life and the life to
come,) therefore is it that the Lord bestows his love, his mercy, his grace,
and all his spiritual blessings, to none, but such as are lively members of
Jesus Christ his Son: who do worship him in Christ his Son made man, who
do come to him by Christ: who do call upon him in the name of Christ: who do
acknowledge Christ to be their wisdom, their righteousness, 1. Cor. 1.30
their sanctification, and redemption. Therefore, we should study to have part
in Christ, if we desire to receive from God eternal life: but more of this in
the next point, to wit, that it behooves Christ to be our Lord, before we
receive the blessings from God, which now follows. In this point we have to
consider: First, how many ways Christ is the Lord of Mankind, and next in
what sense he is called our Lord by the Apostles: As for the first, we find
him in the scriptures three manner of ways Lord. First, How many ways Christ
is Lord.
as we have God the Creator of all things, in which respect, he is also Lord
of all things: seeing all things received their being from him, and are
sustained by the power of his word. Concerning the first, in Psalm 102. Heb.
1.3.
He is called Lord: Thou O Lord from the beginning laydest the foundation of
the earth, and the heavens are the works of thy hands. Further it is said
concerning his authority: Thy Throne O God is from everlasting to everlasting.
And touching the same, and the second also, in the first to the Hebrews it is
said, that by him God made the world: and thereafter, that he sustaines all
things by the mighty power of his word. Secondly, he is called Lord as he is
the son of man: Mat. 28.18.
for even as he is man, he has received all power both in heaven and in earth,
Colos. 2.10.
and is made the head of all principality and power, Psalm. 8.
and is crowned with glory and honor, and is set above all the works of Gods
hands, Heb. 2.7.8.
and has all things put in subjection under his feet, Phil. 2.4. and 10.11.
and has a name given him above all names: that at the name of Jesus, Ephe.
1.21.
should every knee bow, both of things in heaven and things in earth, and
things under the earth: John 17.2.
And that every tongue should confess that Jesus Christ is the Lord, unto the
glory of God the Father: And this dominion is general over all flesh, and
above all principality and power, and might, and domination, and every name
that is named. So that hereby he is Lord of the very Devils and of the
reprobates, no less then of the godly and elect. John 17.1.
But the end wherefore he received this power, is not one to both: for to the
elect it is that he may give to them eternal life, but to the other it is that
he may crush them with a scepter of iron, Psalm. 2.9 Revel. 2.27
and break them in pieces like a potters vessel. Which is a great consolation
to all that are his members: 2. These. 7.8 9.10.
knowing that all their ^enem^^ts both bodily and spiritual are ruled by their
Lord and Savior, and that the heavens are his, and all that therein is: and
the earth is his, and that therein is, So that nothing can be wanting to them
that fear him. Lastly, he is Lord specially and only of his Saints and Church
of God, Ephe. 5.25.26.27.
which he has purchased to him self by his own blood. 1. Pet. 2.24. Colos.
1.14 Luc 1.71.72. and 73 74.75. Psalm. 2.6. Luc. 1.32. Ephesians. 1.22. Ioh. 10.19.
John 17.2. and 6 and 9.11.24. 1. Pet. 2.4. Heb. 2.5.
And therefore beside this general Dominion which is given him over all
creatures, he is specially anointed and set king upon Sion, the Lords holy
Mountain, and has received the throne of his father David, to reign over the
house of Jacob for ever, and is made above all things, the head of the Church:
in which respect the elect are said, only to be given to him of the Father,
whereas in respect of his general Dominion, all things are given him of the
Father. This Dominion and Lordship consists in the Right that Christ has to
us by his own purchase: and in the spiritual government of his Saints by his
spirit and word: Ruling thereby in their hearts, and not suffering any more
Satan nor sin to bear rule in their minds, but making them as a chosen
generation: a Royal Priesthood: an holy Nation: a people set at liberty, to
show forth the virtues of him that has called them out of darkness into his
marvelous light: And this is the kingdom of Christ which is not of this world,
but is called the kingdom of the world to come, because it concerns not the
things of the world belonging to this earthly and corruptible life, but the
things that belong to the spiritual life of God in us: in creating us over
again to his Image, 1. Cor. 7.31
and making us partakers of all the spiritual blessings that are in the
heavenly places in Christ Jesus him self. And secondly, it is so called,
because it shall not be perfyted in this world, but in the world to come, when
the shape and form of this world shall be abolished and passed away. These are
the three ways that Christ is to be considered Lord in the scriptures. In the
first respect, he is Lord with the Father and with the Spirit, and he is the
very life of the world, in whom al things have their natural being and
moving, and so are bound for this very life to serve him. In the second
respect he is made Lord by the Father, who has given him the preeminence in
all things above all creatures, John 5.2.7.
that he should rule the world and execute judgment, as he is the Son of
Man. In which respect all knees must bow to him, and every mouth shall be
compelled to confess him the Lord, when all his enemies shall be made his
footestoole. In the third respect, he is Lord by Conquesting of us out of the
hands of Satan and all our spiritual enemies, and satisfaction of the
Fathers justice for our sins, appointed by the Father, and set over the
house of God as the only Lord thereof: the only High Priest and Prophet. So
that in this respect it is said by the Apostle, that unto us, there is but one
God, 1. Cor. 5. and 1
which is that Father of whom are all things, and we in him. And one Lord
Jesus Christ, by whom are all things, and we by him. So that we are to
acknowledge no other Lord over us, as we are the house of God and members of
the body of Christ, but Christ alone: since none but Christ alone has been
crucified for us. Heb. 3.4 and 6.
Therefore does the Apostle show plainly, that Moses, who had the greatest
authority in the house of God, of any mortal man before the Apostle, and who
was faithful in all the house of God, that yet he was not Lord of the house,
but in it was as a servant: and that Christ only, as the Son, is over his
own house. 2. Cor. 4.5.
And the Apostle Paul, speaking of himself and the other Apostles, All
creaturs obliged to acknowledge Christ their Lord
declared that they never preached themselves to be the Lords of the Saints,
but the Lord Jesus to be the Lord, and themselves servants to the Church for
Christ's sake. Now Christ being our Lord in all the three respects, we have
to consider the use hereof, and in which of the three he is here in this place
called our Lord: By this doctrine it is manifested, that whether we be of the
number of these that have no mind of any lise but of this present life,
whether we be such as regard the course of this world, and government of all
the affairs of this life: or whether we be such as have our minds lifted up
to the heavens in respect of the life to come: we must always, at least ought
always to reverence Christ as our Lord nevertheles if in the first degree we
only honor him, that is as he is the Author of this mortal life, we are no
better then the beasts and most in sensible creatures, who in that respect in
their own kind, do glorify him: Romans 8.19.
yea we are more senceles then the senceles creatures, who with groaning wait
for the manifestation of the sons of God. If in the second respect, we only
acknowledge Christ our Lord, then are we in no better case then the reprobates,
and Devils themselves, who have confessed Christ the Lord, Act. 19.15.
and acknowledged his authority in begging liberty to enter in swyne before
they durst do it: Mat. 8.29. and 31.
and in the end shall all be compelled to confess it. The ground, and comfort
and cause of all true happiness, is, to have Christ our Lord, in the third
respect: and this is, when his spiritual kingdom is erected in our hearts,
which stands not in meat nor drink, nor any thing whereby this mortal life
is maintained, but in righteousness and peace and joy in the holy Ghost, Romans
14.17
arising upon the assurance of the remission of our sins, and justification by
faith in the blood of Jesus, and this blessed hope of eternal life in the
heavens. In this last sense is it that here Christ is called our Lord, and in
respect of this Lordship and Dominion of Christ over us, and in us, is it, that
we receive from the Father, this blessed hope: The sense whereof makes us to
render glory, and honor, and thanks, and praise to him in Christ, as the
Apostle here does. In respect of which kingdom it is, that in the 97.98. and
99. Psalms, the sea, the yles, the floods, and Mountains, are commanded to
rejoice, to sing, to clap their hands, to praise him, to tremble and be moved
at his presence, and glory of his power, and to exalt and worship him.

The use of this doctrine is twoofolde: First, it warns us to examine our
hearts, if Christ have come in to dwell in them, in righteousness, in peace, and
joy of the holy Ghost, and so have made us partakers of his death and life, and
given us the earnest of our inheritance, even the holy Spirit of promise: then
may we rejoice truly, and then shall we have just reason to glory in the hope
of the glory of God, Romans 5.1.2.
having peace with God through Jesus Christ our Lord: Where by the contrary,
they that have not Christ reigning in them, or will not have him to reign over
them, after the last respect: have to look for nothing but according to that
which of the Psalmist is said: That the Lord shall speak to them in his
wrath, and vex them in his sore displeasure: Psalm. 2.5.
And according as it is said by Jesus himself, that they shall be brought and
slain before him. Luc. 14.27.
Therefore blessed are they that do submit themselves to the Gospel of Jesus,
which is the scepter and sword of his kingdom: and woe shall be to all them that
repine against it.

The second use of this point is, to teach us to know, if our thanksgiving to
God, be rightly given, and if it proceed of the right ground. The Apostle to
the Ephesians bids us, that we give thanks at all times and for all things.
8. phe. 5.20.
But to whom? To him, says the Apostle, who is God and Father. And after what
manner? that does he also declare, saying: In the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ.
Whatsoever blessing then it be which we receive from God, be it bodily or
spiritual, concerning either this life or the life to come, we must
acknowledge the giver both God and Father: thank him as God and Father, and
that in the Name of Jesus our Lord. Therefore they do not glorify God aright
by their thanksgiving, who do not acknowledge him to bestow these benefits
upon them as their God and Father in Christ, according to this covenant, and
who in thanksgiving do not glorify God in the name of Jesus, as their Lord.
For this cause the Apostle to the Colossians commands us: Colos. 3.1^
that whatsoever we do in word or deed, we do it all in the name of the
Lord Jesus: and thereto more particularly he adds concerning thanksgiving:
giving thanks to God the Father through him. To teach us after what manner we
should thank God aright for all things. And hereunto agrees that which the
Apostle to the Hebrews teaches us, when he bids us that we should have
grace in our hearts, Heb. 12.28.
by the which we may serve God so as he be pleased. For where Grace is not,
and so by consequence, where the knowledge of God in Christ is not, and the
kingdom of Christ is not erected in the heart, in righteousness, peace and joy
of the holy Ghost, there is no thanksgiving proceeding from that heart, that
can be acceptable to God. No, nothing that is done for his service, can be
acceptable unto him. Psalm. 116.1^
For as we have already said before out of the Psalmist and other Apostles: I
believed, therefore did I speak, 2. Cor. Cap. 4. verse. 13. the speech to God,
or of God. That which proceeds not from faith, shall never be accepted of
him. Therefore is it that the Apostle bids us, that we should abound in
faith with thanksgiving, to inform us, that all true thanksgiving must be
accompanied with faith, and flow therefrom.

Thus much concerning this first point, that is the Author of this benefit of
a lively hope. Now follows the second point, touching the cause moving God
the Father in Christ to begett us to his hope, and that is his abundant mercy.

In this point, Mercy the only cause moving God to call us.
we have two things to be marked. The first is, the cause it self moving God
to bring us to his blessing, which is his MERCY. The second is, the quality
of his mercy, which mooveth him to grant this blessing, which stands in the
measure of it, in that it is called, his abundant mercy. As touching the
first, it plainly lays down before us our own miseries: First, in that we
were such as had need to be pitied, and upon whom the Lord should have
compassion, as being in miserable case, and unable to deliver our selves from
our misery: For where there is no help left but that which stands in the
mercy of our Judge, he also being our party, the case must needs be most
miserable. Now it is plain by the Apostle, that if God had not had pity and
compassion on us, we had never attained, not so much as to any hope or
esperance of eternal life, seeing nothing else but his own mercy and pity
did move him to call us to this blessed hope: which is most plainly set down
by the Apostle to the Ephesians, Ephe. 2.3.4
in that he makes all men, both Jew and Gentile by nature, to be the
children of wrath; and the cause of our calling, regeneration and safety from
that wrath, to be the riches of Gods pity and compassion, and the abundance
of his love. Secondly, this sets before us the nature of our God, that it is
such, as he himself proclaimed, when he made all his goods go before Moses,
and proclaimed the Name of the Lord before him, saying: The Lord, the Lord:
strong, Exo. 34.6.7.
merciful and gracious: slow to anger, and abundant in goodness and truth:
reserving mercy for thousands: forgiving iniquity and transgression, and
sin, etc. Psalm. 116.5.
Therefore it is that David having tasted of the mercy and kindness of the
Lord, does show forth to the world the same, Psalm. 3^.5.
saying: The Lord is merciful and righteous, and our God is full of
compassion. And again, Psalm. 34.8.
He indureth but a while in his anger, but in his favor is life. Weeping may
abide at evening, but joy comes in the morning. Also he inviteth the world to
prove how good the Lord is, Saying, Taste ye and see how gracious the Lord is.
And for this cause, does David take occasion to praise the Lord, and to resolve
with him self to praise him in the said 34. Psalm: Psalm. 34.^.
I will always give thanks unto the Lord: his praise shall be in my mouth
continually, and does inuit and will all others to praise the Lord with him,
saying: Praise the Lord with me, Psalm. 3.4.3.
and let us magnify his Name together. And further he does resolve, to
rejoice and glory in the Lord, and in his mercy, saying: I will be glad and
rejoice in his mercy. And again: My soul shall glory in the Lord. And also
exhorts the righteous and Saints to love the Lord, and to rejoice in him,
because of his mercy, saying in the 31. Psalm: Love the Lord all ye Saints,
etc. And the 32. Psalm and 11. verse. Be glad ye righteous, and rejoice in
the Lord, and be joyful all ye that are upright in heart. And so in the
beginning of the 33. Psalm, and many other Psalms. The use of this point is:
First, to humble us all before the Lord our God, as being such who have
forfaited all felicity, that there is no hope of blessedness, Gal. 3.22.
nor life left us, but in the mercy of God, against whom we have sinned, for
all are included under sin, that the promise by the faith of Jesus Christ,
should be given to them that believe: Romans 11.32
And God has shut up all in unbelief, that he might have mercy on all. So
that we must all confess with the Prophet: Ier. lament. 3. and 22.
That it is the Lords mercy, that we are not consumed. And again: Isai. 1.9.
Except the Lord of Hoastes had reserved to him a small remnaunt, we should
have been as Sodom, and should have been like to Gomora. For as the Apostle
says: Romans 3.9. and 23.24
All both Jew and Gentile are under sin: there is none righteous: no, not
one, etc. For all have sinned, and are deprived of the glory of God, and are
justified freely by his grace. Therefore let us all learn to obey the
exhortation and instruction given by God to us, by the mouth of his Prophet,
that is, Micah. 6.8.
to humble our selves: to walk with our God. Iem. 4.6.7.10.
And as the Apostle says: Let us submit our selves to God, for he resists
the proud, and gives grace to the humble: Let us cast down our selves before
him, and he will lift us up. Hereupon does follow the second use, which is,
to convince all them that put the cause of their salvation, or hope of
salvation, either in the power of their free will, or in the merit of their
works, or any other thing whatsoever, except in the mercy of God only. For God
witnessed of himself in the Prophet Esaie: I, even I, am he, that puts
away thine iniquities, for mine own sake, Esa. cap. 43. verse. 25. And the
Apostle plainly testifies, that by grace we are saved through faith. Ephesians.
cap. 2. verse. 8. And least that any man should think, that to believe were in
his own power, and did proceed from himself, and therefore that his safety
were of himself, the Apostle adds, and that not of our selves, it is the
gift of God. And yet further to make it more clear, he subioyneth, that it is
not of works, that we are saved. And he gives the reason twoofold. First,
least any man should boast himself. For as the Apostle in an other Epistle
affirms: All rejoicing, all gloriation of man in himself, is excluded, and
that by the law of faith, and not of works: Romans 3.27. and 4.2.
for if our Justice did come by our works, then had we wherein to rejoice and
glory. And for this cause also is it, that God does choose the vile things of
this world, the foolish and the weak, 1. Cor. 27. to the end
even that no flesh should rejoice or glory in his presence, for we are that
which we are, of him in Christ Jesus, and not of our selves, nor in our selves
says the Apostle, be it Wiesdom, justification, sactification, or redemption.
That according as it is written. He that rejoices, let him rejoice in the
Lord.

The second reason of the Apostle to the Ephesians, Phil. 2.13.
is, Because the power of doing good, is not of our selves, nor in our selves,
because we are the workmanship of God, created to good works. And this
Creation (says the Apostle) is in Christ Jesus, and therefore not in our
selves. Therefore it is not of our selves that we do good, but of God, who
works in us both the will and the deed, and that of his good pleasure.
Neither have we the virtues in our selves of working good, but in Christ Jesus,
that we justly say with the Apostle to the Galathians, Gall. 2.10.
It is not we that live any more, but Christ that lives in us. And therefore
with the same Apostle to the Corinthians: 2. Cor. 12.2 and 3.
Our rejoicing should be not in our selves, but in the man, which is Christ.
And we ought to acknowledge with him, that what we are, we are it by the grace
of God: And when we labor in well doing, it is not we, but the grace of God
which is with us. This serves to us for two things, to instruct us, not with
Papist or other whatsoever, to asscribe merits to our works, or to esteem
the cause of our election, calling, justification, or glorification to be in
our selves or our works, but in the free grace of God. Therefore does the
Apostle to the Romans, declare, Romans 11.5.
that the remnant which are saved, are reserved according to the election of
grace: and thereupon concludes, that if election be of grace, it is no more of
works, else were grace no more grace: And if it be of works, then it is no
more of grace, or else, works were no more works. So may we conclude here, of
our calling to the hope of life: since the Apostle says, It is of Gods
abounda^t mercy, than it is not of merit, else were mercy no more mercy: and if
it be of merit, it is no more mercy, or else merit were no more merit. The
cause therefore moving God to call and elect us, is no ways in us, but in God
himself. Therefore does the Apostle say to the Ephesians, Ephe. 1.5.
that God has predestined us to be adopted through Christ in himself. And
what was the cause in himself moving him, the Apostle likewise declares it
(According to the good pleasure of his will.) And moreover in the next verse, he
makes it more plain, saying: That it is his grace wherewith he has made us
freely accepted in his beloved: and yet more amply, he clears this, adding
in the 7. verse, That the redemption which we have by the blood of Jesus
Christ, is also according to his rich grace. Declaring that whither we look to
God in giving Christ to dye for us, or whither we consider God justifying us
in Christ, and accepting of us in him for the merit of his death, applying or
imputing the same to us: There was, nor is nothing that moves him to do so,
but his own grace. For as it is written, Exodus 33.19
I will have mercy upon him, to whom I will show mercy: and will have
compassion upon him on whom I will have compassion. So that it is not in him
that wills, Romans 9.15. and 16. and 18
nor in him that runs, but in God that shows mercy. And therefore he
has mercy on whom he will, and whom he will, hardens.

The second thing that hereby we learn is, that comfortable lesson which the
spirit of God teaches us by the Apostle to the Romans, reasoning from this
mercy and love of God toward us in Christ, who when we were yet of no
strength, at his time, Rom 5.6.7. and 8.9.10.
dyed for the ungodly: God setting forth his merueillous love to us, that
while we were yet sinners, Christ dyed for us. Whereupon he concludes, that
now being justified by his blood, we shall much more be saved from wrath
through him. For as the the Apostle says. If when we were enemies, we were
reconciled to God by the death of his Son, Ephe. 2.3.4 and 5.
much more being re^ciled, we shall be saved by his life. For that mercy that
moved God when we were dead in sin and trespass, being by nature the
children of wrath, Ier. lament. 3.22.
to quicken us in Christ: Seeing it remained for ever, and his compassions
fail not, but are renewed every morning, Ephe. 2.3.4
must needs much more move him to accomplish the good pleasure of his will in
us, Psalm. 106.1.
who now are made the children of his love in Christ. Therefore need we not
to fear what man, Romans 8.38. and 39.
yea what Devils can do to us: For neither death, nor life, nor Angels nor
principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor height,
nor depth, nor any other creature shall be able to separate us from the love of
God, which is in Christ Jesus. For our God is full of compassion and mercy,
Psalm. 103.8. etc.
slow to anger, and of great kindness. Therefore he will not always chyde,
Psalm. 103.6.
nor keep his anger for ever: neither will he deal with us after our sins,
nor reward us according to our iniquities, seeing he pitied us, and had mercy
on us, when we were his enemies. For that mercy that moved God to beget us to
the hope of life, when we were strangers from him, and without hope, and
without God, much more shall it move him to bring us (now being made his
children) to the enjoying of that blessed hope. Hereupon it follows, That
Gods mercy is the only ground of solid and perfect comfort to man, and only
sure stay to the soul of him that is in trouble: and that contrariwise they
can have no steadfast hope, nor perfect joy through their hope, who build their
hope of life, not upon the mercy of God, but on their own merit, or merit
of any other creature. Therefore is it that in the scripture the most
lamentable and sorrowful case of the godly is described to be, when as the
sense of Gods mercy fails them: For then do they cry out: Will God show
noe more favor? Psalm. 77.8.
Is his Mercy clean gone for ever? Does his promise fail for evermore? Has
God forgotten to be merciful? Has he shutt up his tender mercies in
displeasure? This is my death says the servant of God. Hereby declaring that
mercy is their only comfort, and cause of their life. And where mercy
appears to be shutt up in displeasure, there is no assurance of life, Psalm.
116.3.
but the snares of death do compass them: then the greeues of the grave does
gripe them, and they find trouble and sorrow. And then does their soul
return to rest, when they have tasted of Gods mercy: and therefore in all
their troubles, the ground of their confidence and drawing near to God, is,
and ever has been, (...). ^.16.
his mercy. Therefore does the Apostle to the Hebrews will us to go bodly to
the throne of grace, that we may receive mercy, and find grace to help in
time of need.

Now come we to the quality of this mercy that moves God to call us to the
hope of life. The Apostle calls it his abundant mercy. It is most certain,
that all the creatures of God, do taste of his mercy toward them: yea the
very reprobates, and the very Devils themselves. For it is a great mercy that
they are referued so long unto the judgment of the great day, and that they
and the wicked are so long spared, vncast in hell fire. ^ud. 6.
Many a time does both the word of God, and daily experience teach us, that
God does give many blessings and deliverances to the wicked. Achab being a man
(as witnessed the book of God) who had not his like: who did sell himself to
work wickedness in the sight of the Lord, having heard the threatening of the
Prophet against him for the killing of Naboth, etc. and humbling himself
(albeit without true repentance) the Lord did delay his judgment all his
days, and did not execute the evil denunced against him, till his sons
days, for the Lords mercy is above all his works. Therefore, as we have
said before, he makes the Sun to arise on the wicked, and the good, and
sends rain to the just and unjust. Moreover, he gives to the wicked
kingdoms, Empires, and Dominions, yet does not this mercy that obtaines so
many blessings, procure to the wicked, that they should be renewed to the hope
of Eternal life, and receive remission of sins. For it is not a small mercy
that mooveth God to do so, that is, to justify a sinner: to call his enemies
to the dignity of the sons of God, and to give the^ the hope of eternal
life: it must be a mercy running over, and superaboundant, that must move the
Lord to bestow these blessings which are of greater value, then all the
kingdoms of the world. Therefore does the Apostle to the Ephesians call this
grace, a rich grace: Whereby the Lord has been abundant toward us in all
wisdom and understanding. Ephe. 1.7.^
And this abundance of Gods mercy and grace is most clearly manifested by that
which the Apostle speaks to the Romans, in declaring both the end of the
giving of the Law, and effects of the Law given, the end of it (says he)
was, that the offense should abound: whereby it might seem, that thereby we
should be put further from the hope of grace then before, but he adds for
our comfort: that where sin abounded, there did grace abound much more, ye
grace might reign through righteousness unto life eternal through Jesus Christ
our Lord, even there where sin had reigned unto death, Before sin having taken
occasion by the Law to work in us al manner of concupiscence, that sin might
appear sin, and to be out of measure sinful, in working death in us by that
which is good: And all this for no other thing, but for the praise of the glory
of his rich grace, whereby he does abound toward us above all abounda^ce of
sin in us, that his mercy may be known to be greater, then our iniquities,
yea to be greater then al his works. For it is said in the 108, Psalm. His
mercy is great above the heavens. And again: As high as the heaven is above
the earth, so great is his mercy toward them that fear him. For it is not
that common goodness and general mercy of God to all his Creatures, whereby he
gives life and being, and moving to all, and whereby he gives riches and
honors and Kingdoms, that mooveth the Lord to bestow this blessing of
remission of sins, and hope of eternal life. This teaches us never to
content our selves with that sense of Gods mercy, which arises only upon the
enjoying of te^porall blessings, be they never so great, though he should give
us the whole world: For this error does deceyve many, who think the man to
be beloved of God, with who^ he deals mercifully in things belonging to this
life. Albeit it be true, that a man may be made Monarch of the whole world,
and yet be void of the saving grace and mercy of God. The true rejoicing in
Gods mercy arises upon the hope of the glory of God, builded upon the peace
which we have toward God through Jesus Christ, Romans 5.1.2. and 11.
arising upon the remission of sins in his blood, or justification by faith,
and the atonement which we have receyved by Jesus Christ our Lord. Therefore,
1. Pet. 1.6. and 8.
get what we will get from God, we never shall be satisfied with all the
tokens of his love and mercy, until we get that gift of God, whereof Christ
speaks in the 4. of John, to the woman of Samaria, when she did deny him a
cup of water. John 4.10.
If (says he) thou knew, that gift of God: meaning himself: and showing us
that he knows nothing of the saving mercy of God, nor of the ground, or
warrant of eternal life, though he know all the gifts that ever God did give
to man, who yet knows not the Lord Jesus, and has not been a feeling
partaker of the mercy of God which is in him, and through him. This serves to
moove us to esteem more of the spiritual blessings of God, then of all
earthly things. Psalm. 4.6.7.
And with David to desire the Lord to lift up the light of his cou^tecance on
us, and not with the world to seek for earthly things, for thereby shall we
have more joy of heart, then they have, when their wheat and their wine does
abound. The uses of the abundance of Gods mercy.


The use of this point is threefolde: It serves for Instruction, for
consolation, and for conviction. For instruction in teaching us, seeing it is
an abounda^t mercy, whereby the Lord does call us to the hope of life, and to
this effect begets us to be his children: that sin and iniquity is a
thing most detestable before God, since that general goodness of God that
moves him to give all earthly things to man, makes him not to give remission
of sins to man: Therefore should we above all things abhor sin, and by
all means endeavor to eschew sin, as the thing most dangerous and
pernicious to man. For although thou be a sinner, God will bless thee with
honor and riches of this life, yet will give thee no portion of his
inheritance in the heavens. He promised to Abraham, when he prayed that
Ismaell might live in his sight, Gene. 17.1^
that he would bless him, and make him fruitful, and multiply him
exceedingly, that he should begett 12. Princes, and be made a great Nation,
but his covenant would he not establish with him but with Isaac. Therefore
ought we to beware of this common error of the wordlie, who do esteem so
little of sin, that when they so licentiously do commit all uncleanness, yet
do they think thimselues in no peril at all, there is, and has been ever in
the world, sin, and profane persons, who have deceived others with vain
words, as though the wrath of God should not come upon men for whoredom,
covetousness, etc. Therefore does the Apostle to the Ephesians warn us: That we
let no man deceive us with vain words. For, for such things (says the
Apostle) comes the wrath of God upon the children of disobedience. Let us
therefore learn not to extenuate sin, nor securely to give our selves to
sin, since no common mercy, but an superabundant mercy can obtain
remission of sin at the hands of our God. This point serves next for
consolation to all penitent sinners, how weary and laden soever they be:
since sin can not abound in so great measure, but the mercy of God abounds
much more: yea this is the very custom of God, that where he makes the sense
and sight of sin to abound, there he makes also the sense of his mercy and
grace to abound much more. Let us not therefore with Cain esteem our sin
greater then we can bear and distrust in the mercies of God, seeing the Lord
himself made us this promise by the Prophet Esai: Esai. 1.18.
Though your sins were as crimsin, they shall be made white as the snow: Though
they were redd as scarlet, they shall be white as wool. Therefore is it that God
has showed mercy to the chiefest sinners, that we should not despair in Gods
mercies, though our iniquities were never so great. This does the Apostle
Paul plainly teach us by his own example in the first cha. to Tim. 1. Tim.
1.16
showing that albeit he was chief of sinners: and albeit he was a persecutour,
yet was he receyved to mercy, by the exceeding abundance of the grace of God
toward him in Christ Jesus. And that for this cause, that Christ Jesus should
first show on him all long suffering, to the example of all them, which in time
to come should believe in him unto eternal life. And therefore declares that
this is a saying both true and by all means worthy to be received, to wit,
that Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners. Let not then the
haynousnes of our iniquities drive us away from God: who is able to remove our
sins from us as far as is the East from the West. Psalm. 103.12.
Seeing Christ does call upon all that are weary and laden, and does promise
them relaxation and case: Mat. 11.29.
and witnesses: That he did come into the world, not to call the righteous,
Psalm 106.4.6. and 45.
but sinners to repentance: but let us rather with the Psalmist pray, that the
Lord will remember us with the favor of his people, and visit us with his
salvation, that we may see the felicity of his chosen, and rejoice in the joy
of his people, and glory with his inheritance. For although we have sinned
with our Fathers, and have committed iniquity, and done wickedlie, yet shall
he remember his covenant, and call back his wrath, according to the multitude
of his mercies. Thirdly, this point serves for conviction of all who do
esteem that it behooves that their merits be added to Gods mercies, for
obtaining of eternal life: as though the mercy of God were not sufficient
alone to move God to grant us this benefit. For if grace does abound, much
more there where sin has abounded, then needs there nothing to be added to
grace, since the measure of Gods mercy give^ us in Christ, does always exceed
the measure of our sin. Therefore does the Apostle reason to the Romans from
this abou^dance of the grace of God, Romans 5.15.16. and 17.
and proves the certainty of eternal life by comparison in this similitude
betwixt the grace or gift of God in Christ, and the offense of Adam in three
respects. First, in respect of Adams sin, and Christ's righteousness, or
obedience. For the Apostle says, that the gift is not so as is the offense,
and he shows the reason, (for says he): If through the offense of that one,
many be dead: Much more the grace of God and the gift by grace which is by one
man Jesus Christ, has abou^ded unto many: Hereby declaring that the
righteousness of Christ give^ us by grace, is more abundantly bestowed upon us
to life, then Adams offense was of power unto death. Secondly, inrespect of
that which follows, there are two causes, to wit, guiltines, that comes
through that one offense of Ada^, and justification that comes of Christ's only
righteousness. Neither (says he) is the gift so, as that which entered by one
that sinned: And he adds the reason. For (says he) the fault came of one
offense to conde^natio^, but the gift is of many offenses to justification:
showing that justification by Christ, is far more large then the cause of
condemnation in Ada^. Seeing that not only that one sin, which alone has
brought condemnation on all men, but al other our sins are forgiven in
Christ: and so ye gift of grace abou^deth much more, and is of greater measure
the^ the guiltnes of the sin, that was the cause of all men's co^de^nation.
Thirdly, the Apostle reasons from the difference of power betwixt the death
that follows upon the guiltines of Adams sin, and the life that is given to
them that are justified by the righteousness or obedience of Christ Jesus. For
(says he) If by one offense death reigned through one, much more shall they
which receive that abundance of grace: and of that gift of it, Righteousness
reign in life through one, that is, Jesus Christ. The reason is employed in
this sentence taken from the abundance of grace, and of the gift of that
righteousness. By all which the Apostle will assure our hearts, that we, who are
partakers of the grace and mercy of God in Christ, shall be saved and that in
respect. Neither is Adams sin so powerful to make guilty unto death, as the
righteousness of Christ's to justify unto life: neither is the guiltines coming
from Adams only sin, so abundant, as the justification which is by Christ
only Obedience: seeing our guiltines comes from one finne, but our
justification is not only from that sin and guiltines coming from that sin
but from all sins and guiltines of them all: Neither is death which followed
upon the guiltines of that one sin of Adams upon all men, of such force to
reign, as the life that comes to all them that are justified by that one
obedience of Christ Jesus: seeing the causes of that life are more abundant,
then the causes of that death, and therefore the effect, that is the life, must
be more abundant or powerful in reigning: Hereby is it evident, that they have
never truly tasted of the saving mercy of God in Christ, who do so think of
it as if it were not alone, without adding something of our merit, sufficient
to bring us to life. Let us therefore magnify the mercy of God, which is so
abundant, plentiful, and running over, that it gives full contentement to
the heart, and perfect peace to the soul of man: and let us pray for our
selves, as the Apostle prays for the Ephesians, Ephe 3.18. and 19.
that being rooted and grounded in love, we may be able to comprehend with
all Saints what is the breadth, and length, and depth, and height, and to know
the love of Jesus Christ, which passes knowledge, that we may be filled with
all fulness of God, and so have our souls satisfied with his goodness.

Now follows the third point, The means whereby we are brought to hope.
which is concerning the mean or fitting midds whereby the Lord brings us to
this blessed hope, and that is our Regeneration, or new birth. For as Christ
says to Nicodemus: Except a man be borne again, Ioh. 3.3.
he can not see the kingdom of God, and consequently can have no hope of it:
therefore says the Apostle here, that God has begotten us again to hope.
Here have we to consider two things. First, what this begetting is. And
secondly, why it is called our begetting again, or second birth. Which words
have a manifest relation to a former begetting and birth. As touching the
birth, it is fully described to us in the word of God.

The Apostle in this same chapter of this epistle, and 23. verse, does show us
the sense of this conception and birth: both what kind it is of, and which it
is. As for the kind, he tells us, it is not mortal, and so perishing as all
flesh is, but immortal, which lives and endures for ever. And that he
declares to be the word of God, which was preached by the Apostle to the
world. Secondly, touching the mother, who must bear us, in whose womb this
seed is sown, and out of whose bowelles we must proceed: the Apostle to the
Galathians speaks plainly, Galat. 4.26
saying, It is Jerusalem which is above, or heavenly Jerusalem, that is the
true Church of God. whose property is: That she is free, and she says, the
Apostle is the Mother of us all, and was figured by Sara, the free woman, the
mother of Isaac, the heir and child of promise. Thirdly, the Evangelist John
tells us who is the Father, by whom we must be begotten. Ioh. 1.13.
and borne again, not of blood, nor the will of flesh, nor the will of man,
but God only. The first teaches us, to esteem much of the blessed word of
God, since without it, there is no Regeneration, and so no hope of life. That
there is no Renovation but by the word, it is plain by the speech of Christ
him self in the 17. chapter of John; verse 17. Sanctify them with the truth:
thy word is truth. And that without Regeneration, there is no hope, it is
manifest both by the Apostle and by the speech aforsaid of Christ to Nicodemus.
Heb. 12.4^
And by the Apostle to the Hebrews, where he says, that without holiness, no
man shall see God. Therefore should we al endeavor to have the word of God
abiding in us, and dwelling in us plenteouslie, according to the exhortation of
the Apostle to the Colossians. And as the Apostle says in the next chap. We
should as new borne babes, Colos. 3.1^
desire that sincere milk of the word, that we may grow thereby. For as
witnesses the Apostle to the Hebrews: we can not escape, if we neglect so
great a salvation, which at the first began to be preached by the Lord, and
afterward was confirmed to us by them that heard him: Hebr. 2.3.
seeing the word spoken by Angels was steadfast, and every transgression and
disobedience, received a just recompense or reward. And the Apostle in the 2.
epis. 2. These. 1.8.
to the Thessalon. teaches us, that Jesus Christ at his appearing, shall render
ve^gea^ce to all that obey not the Gospel.

The second point teaches us, not to forsake nor neglect (as says the
Apostle to the Hebr. our mutual gatherings together, Heb. 10.25
or the fellowship that we have among our selves, But with David: Let us
desire and require even this one thing of the Lord: That we may dwell in the
house of the Lord all the days of our life, Psalm. 27.4
to behold the beauty of the Lord, and to visit his Temple, Psalm. 36.8.
and that we may be satisfied with the fatnes of his house, and receyve drink
out of the Rivers of his pleasures. Psalm. 46.4.
For there is a River which makes glad the city of God, eve^ the Sanctuary of
the Tabernacles of the High. For this heavenly Jerusalem is fair in situation,
Psalm. 48.1.2 and 3.
the joy of the whole earth, and City of the great King: In the Palaces
whereof, God is known for a refuge: Psalm. 53. and 6.
and out of Zion comes salvation. Therefore do the Tribes of the Lord go up
to Jerusalem, according to the testimony of Israel, to praise the Name of the
Lord. For there are Thrones set for Judgment, Psalm. 122.
even the Thrones of the house of David: And therefore seeing this is the place
of safety and salvation, where the beauty of the Lord is to be seen, where
the voice of the Lord is to be heard from his holy Oracle, we should rejoice
with David, when we hear the people say: Psalm. 84.
We will go up into the house of the Lord. Our feet shall stand in the gates
of Jerusalem. For as witnesses David: Blessed are they that dwell in the house
of the Lord, Psalm. 42.
for they shall ever praise him: Therefore did his soul long and fainte for the
Courts of the Lords house: yea his soul panted after the Lord, as the heart
after the waters, being banished from the public worship of God by the
persecution of Saul; and his heart was poured out, when he remembered that he
had gone with the multitude, and led them in the house of God with the voice of
singing and praise, as a multitude that keeps a feast: Psalm. 84.11.
Because a day in the Courts of the Lord, is better then a thousand other
where: and better is it to be a door keeper in the house of the Lord, then to
dwell in the tabernacles of wickedness: Psalm. 87.
for glorious things are spoken of the City of our God. For of Zio^ it is
said, that many are borne in her. Seeing therefore that our spiritual birth is
in heavenly Jerusalem, where the seed of Gods word is continually sown. Mat.
13.
For which cause the kingdom of heaven is likened to a sower that went forth
to sow his seed: Hither should we resort, for God is in the mids of her. But
let us remember that it is Jerusalem that is above, and which is free, which is
the mother of us all, as says the Apostle. For Ismael, who was borne of the
bound woman Hagar, who was the type of earthly Jerusalem, was not the heir,
but Isaac, who was borne of Sara the free woman, who was the type of the
heavenly Jerusalem, the mother of all the children of God. He was the heir,
that is, they who are the children of the Law, and do remain in the bondage
thereof, are not truly borne of God to the hope of life, but they who are
begotten by the Gospel in the bosom of the Church, set at liberty, and
walking in the liberty, wherewith Christ has made us free, Gal. 5.1.
they are truly begotten of God to this blessed hope, because they are after
the manner of Isaac, children of the promise, Gal. 42.3.
whereas the other are borne after the flesh.

The third point touching the Lord, who begets us to this hope, does teach
us what sort of generation it is, that makes us to have this hope, to wit, a
spiritual, and no fleshly birth. For as Christ says to Nicodemus in the
third of John: That which is borne of the flesh, is flesh: and that which is
borne of the spirit, is spirit. And it is plain by the Apostle to the
Corinthians: 1. Cor. 15.^0.
That flesh and blood can not inherit the kingdom of God. Therefore is it
necessary, that we be borne (as says our Savior in the third of John) by
water and of the spirit, that is of the spirit of God: who is of the same force
and nature spiritual toward the soul, touching the spiritual filth of sin,
that water is toward the body in bodily filth in washing and purging of it.
Therefore also is the same spirit in the 4. of Esaias called the spirit of
burning, because as fire to gold, so the spirit to us, does effectually purge
the dross of sin. For this cause is it also that John the Baptist says,
Mat. 3.11.
That Christ shall baptize us with the holy spirit and fire: for we must be the
children of God, Romans 8.17.
before we can be his heirs, as withnesseth the Apostle, both to the Romans
and Galathians. Therefore does the Apostle here give thanks to God, Gal. 4 7.
even for this, that he has begetten us, and so has made us his children,
that we may have hope to inherit his kingdom. The use hereof is, to learn,
that it is the greatest dignity, and highest prerogative that man ca^ attain
too, to be made the children of God. Therefore does John call this a gift of
power, in the first of his Gospel, saying to those that receyved him, he gave
the^ this power to be the sons of God. And in the third Chapter of his first
Epistle, he esteems it the testimony of Gods greatest love to man, saying:
Behold brethren, how great a love the Father has given us, that we should
be called the sons of God. We have next to consider, that this birth must
be after a former birth, because it is said, that God has begotten us again.
And Christ to Nicodemus says plainly, that he that is not borne again, can
not see the kingdom of God. For our first birth neither makes us the children
of God: neither puts us in hope of eternal life. We may well be the
children of Kings, of great Lords, and Princes, and so have hope of their
inheritance by our first birth, but though an Emperor have begotten thee, it
makes thee not the son of God, nor heir of his kingdom. And though a
beggar have begotten thee, thou art no farther from the kingdom of God, then he
that is borne of a king: seeing the first birth helps nothing to this
prerogative, but it is the second birth that gives it. The estate of man, be
he what he will, Jew or Gentile, great or small, poor or rich, noble or
ignoble in his first birth, which is declared by the Apostle to the Ephesians,
to wit, Ephe. 2.3.
that he is the child of wrath by nature: and therefore can have no hope but of
wrath. For as David confesses of himself, it is true of all flesh: Behold I
was borne in iniquity, Psalm. 51.5. Romans 6.23.
and in sin has my mother conceyved me: and the wages of sin (says the
Apostle) is death: this is the inheritance that comes to us by our earthly and
natural Parents, of what degree, dignity, or estate soever they be in this
world. The use hereof of is twofolde.

First, it serves to beat down the pride of al flesh, and to teach men not
to glory in their blood, nor kindred: seeing it is not by blood, nor by the
will of man, nor by the will of flesh that we are borne the children of God.
For though a man might reckon to Abraham, as did the Scribes and Pharisees in
the 8. of John, as to their Father in the flesh, yet may he be still the
child of the Devil, as witnesses Christ of them selves in that same place.
For as the Apostle says: They are not all Israel that are of Israel:
neither are they all children, that are of the seed of Abraham. Yea though a
man might reckon his kindred to Adam, yet has he not wherein to glory: seeing
(as says the Apostle to the Romans) by that one Man sin entered into the
world, and by sin death, and not only entted, but by his only sin, all are
made sinners, and death went over all men. Therefore let us learn the lesson
which John the Baptist teaches the Pharisees and Sadducees in the Gospel
according to Matthew: Let us not think to say with our selves, Mat. 3.9.
We have Abraham to our Father: For God is able of stones to raise up children
to Abraham: but rather with the Apostle Paul to the Philippians: Phil. 3.3.
Let us glory in Christ Jesus, and put no confidence in the flesh, although we
had all matter of glorying in the flesh that ever man had. Let us learn with
the Apostle in that place To esteem all fleshly prerogative to be loss: yea
to be dunge, for Chrisles sake, that we may gain him.

The second use hereof is, to teach us, that there can be no hope of life in a
man, who is not Regenerate by God, and begotten of him again: seeing this is
the mean by which the the Lord brings us to this hope: and therefore the
boasting of the wicked, that they hope to go to heaven, is nothing but
vanity: and all the confidence they have, is nothing else but a vain and
deceitful thought of a blind and foolish brain: thinking they shall go to
heaven, because Christ dyed for sinners, not remembering that all who are
partakers of his death, must needs be renewed in the spirit of their mind to
the Image of God: and must find themselves cast in a new moulde, and fashioned
to another shape, and borne over again. Therefore we should diligently try
our selves, and consider if God at any time has bin effectual in us to the
alteration of the spirit of our mind, and renovation of our souls: and if his
spirit does possess and lead us so, that our conversation be after the spirit,
and not after the flesh. And as the Apostle Peter in his second epistle,
exhorts us, 2. Pet 1.10.
We should study to make our calling and election sure, by adding to our
faith, virtue, and so forth. For they can have no certainty of their calling,
that are not sanctified, and therefore no assured hope. For when God makes us
his sons, Gal. 4.6.
he sends the spirit of his son in our hearts, which cries, Romans 3.14.
Abba, Father, For if any have not the spirit of Christ, he is not his, says
the Apostle to the Romans. Romans 8.10
And if the spirit of Christ be in us (says the same Apostle) the same body
is dead, because of sin: the spirit is life because of Righteousness.
Therefore we may justly conclude with the Apostle Pieter in the first chapter
aforsaid of his second epistle, after he has exhorted us to join virtue to
our faith, and to virtue knowledge, and to knowledge temperance, 2. Pet. 1.9.
and so forth: that whosoever has not these things, he is blind and sees
not far off, and has forgotten that he was washed from his old sins, and
so consequently, that their hope is but a blind hope: their confidence, a
blind confidence: their boasting, a blind boasting. 2 Co. 5.17
For if any man be in Christ Jesus, he is a new creature, says the Apostle to
the Corinthes. So to conclude this point, it were better to a man never to have
been borne in this world, then after he is borne, not to be borne over again
by God: And woe is the man, who before the laying down of this natural life,
has not obtained another which is spiritual.

Now follows the fourth point, Hope follows Regeneration.
which is the benefit it self, unto the which God of his mercy does beget us
again: that is, a living, or lively hope, or hope of life. This shows us the
purpose of God in begetting us, which is to cause us hope. For as we have said
before: First, we must be made the children of God, before we can hope to
enjoy his inheritance. Therefore our Regeneration is a warning to us, that we
are the heirs of God, and coheires with Christ, and obliges us to hope for
the glory of God, seeing God has begotten us: Because (as says the Apostle
here) he begets us to hope, therefore where hope is not, there is no new
birth, for the Lord can not be frustrate of the end of his work: for he
that renewes us unto hope with renovation gives hope: Therefore the sanctified
man in Christ, may be sure of glory, and life everlasting, according as the
Apostle shows us: Whom he calls, Romans 8.30.
he iustifienh: and whom he justifies, him he glorifieth. In this benefit
we have two things to consider. First, what is the blessing, tot wit, hope.
Next, what is meant by the property of this hope, in that it is called, a
lively hope. Concerning the firist, the Apostle describing our estate before
the Lord do beget us, and make us partakers of the adoption, does declare,
that among the rest of our miseries, this was one, that we had no hope. For
when he has expounded to us the mercy of God in our salvation and
regeneration, showing that we are his workma^ship created in Christ Jesus unto
good works, which God had ordained that we should walk in them being
justified by faith, he wills us to remember what we were before, saying:
Remember that ye being in time past Gentiles in the flesh, and called
uncircumcision of them which are called circumcision in the flesh, made with
hands, that ye were, I say, at that time without Christ, and were aliaunts
from the common wealth of Israel, and were strangers from the covenants of
promise, and had no hope, and were without God in the world. This is the
miserable estate of us all, before we be called of God to the adoption of his
sons, and be begotten of him again, we are all without Christ, without
hope, and without God in the world. What greater misery can there be, Act.
17.28.
then have a being, and yet without him, in whom we have our being, our life,
our moving, and all things, as the Apostle says in the Acts: And knowing
that we must depart from this life, to have no hope of life thereafter.
Miserable indeed is our estate by nature, how much soever we glory in it, so
much the more miserable: that we have neither sense nor sorrow of this our
misery. Who is he that can rejoice in any thing, while he abides without
him, in whom are all things? And how can the heart sufficiently praise, love
and magnify the Lord, when it tasted of this his goodness, in begetting us
again? And so consequently, taking from us all our miseries, and making us
blessed in giving us hope, and himself to be our God and Father in Christ:
through whom (says the Apostle to the Ephesians) we both, Ephe. 2.18.19. and
22
that is Jew and Gentill, have one entrance unto the Father by one spirit, and
are no more strangers and forreners, but citizens with the Saints, and of the
household of God, and in whom we are build together to be the habitation of
God by the spirit. It is not without good reason, that the Apostle here in this
place can not speak of this mercy, without blessing him, who has brought us
to this blessed estate of hope. And great matter have we of rejoicing who have
tasted of the like mercy, If we consider that which the Apostle says to the
Romans, That we are saved by hope. Romans 8.24.
For as he says in another Epistle: We walk here by faith, 2. Cor. 5.7.
and not by sight, and therefore taking from us hope, our salvation and life is
taken from us, which we do possess by hope: for this is the difference of
faith and hope, that by faith we believe the promises of salvation in Christ,
which hope waits for: so that faith has respect to life and salvation, as it
is embraced by us here in this world: Hope, has relation to them as we shall
possess them in the world to come, so that hope does always follow faith,
and hangs upon it, although they be often times taken in the scripture the
one for the other indifferently: The one looks to life, and apprehends it
promised in the world, the other wayteth for the revelation of it from heaven,
as it is possessed by Christ at the right hand of the Father. This is now the
blessing unto the which the Lord begets us again, so that without
Regeneration we are hopeles, and so without happiness, and being borne again.
We may have faith and hope in God, according as says this same Apostle in
this same Chapter, 1 Pet. 2.21.22.
when he declares who they are for whom Christ was both ordained before the
foundation of the world, and also declared in the last times. For your sake
says the Apostle, which by his means do believe in God that raised him from
the dead, and gave him glory, that your faith and hope might be in God:
having purified your souls in obeying the truth, through the spirit: (and
further) being borne a new, not of mortal seed, but of immortal by the word
of God. Whereby it is plain, that as Christ is send into the world for none
but such as do believe in God by his means, so none can have any faith or
hope but they, who have their souls purified and borne a new.

The property of this hope is, The nature of true hope
that it is livelie, or living, and it is so called for three respects. First,
because of the livelie working that is in it. For all the spiritual gifts of
God which he bestows in Christ, are livelie, as he himself is life: And
this the Saints do find in themselves, that the faith of Jesus is a livelie
faith: their love is a livelie love, and their hope, a livelie hope. For these
graces do not lie dead in the soul where they are, but by their livelie
operation and working, do make themselves manifest. Therefore the Apostle to
the Thessalonians, speaking of their graces, describes them from their lively
and effectual properties: Remembering (says he) your effectual faith, your
diligent love, and your patient hope in the Lord Jesus. 1 These. 1.2
Therefore that faith, that hope, that love, that lies dead in them who
profess them, are no faith, no hope, no love at all. And so justly does S.
James dispute against that faith that has no works, as a dead faith: whereas
the faith, the hope, the love that God created in the heart, are all livelie,
as proceeding from him who is life it self. The second respect whereof it is
called livelie, is, because as it has life in it self, so gives it life to
the soul in which it is, and makes the soul which was dead in sin and
trespass before, now to live in Christ, and in him to bring forth the fruits
of life. Therefore says John in the third Chapter of his 1, epistle 3. and 5.
That whosoever has this hope, purges himself, as he is pure. For this is the
nature of their spiritual blessings, that they themselves have life in them:
and does quicken the soul in which they are. For God exercises his saving
power by them in the hearts of his Saints. Therefore says the Apostle
hereafter, 1 Pet. 1.5.
That we are kept by the power of God through faith. And the Apostle Paul to
the Colossians, does say: Colos. 2.12
That we are raised again from the dead in Christ, by the effectual working
of God, or by the faith of God which works mightily, so that we may justly
say, that as the faith is dead, which has no working, so he also is yet
without faith, who albeit he professes faith, yet is not quickened to the life
of God thereby: for even in this life by faith and hope we began to live
that life, which shall be made perfect in us in the world to come.

The third respect is, because that eternal life and glory which as yet is not
manifested, but is referved in the heavens to the appearing of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ, is now possessed by hope, so that we lay hold upon it,
and are made pertakers of it, albeit as yet not manifested. Therefore is it
that the Apostle to the Romans says: Romans 8.24.
That by hope we are saved: for no man hops for the thing which he sees.
Hereby teaching us, that albeit our life be hidd with Christ in God, Colos. 3.3.
as says the Apostle to the Colossians, yet by hope we possess it. According
as the Apostle to the Ephesians declares the estate of the Saints in Christ,
by the mighty power of God which is in them, to wit, that they are lifted up
with him, and set with him at the right hand of the majesty in the highest
places. As like wise the same Apostle Peter in this same chapter, declaring the
cause why they that believe in Christ, albeit they see him not, do rejoice
with a joy unspeakable and glorious, says. It is because that they receive the
end of their faith, 1. Pet. 1.9.
that is, the salvation of their souls. To these three we may add the 4.
respect, why this hope is called livelie, and that is, because in all the
tribulations and sorrows of this life, it is the only thing that sustaineth
us, and makes us in death it self, to live and rejoice, knowing what is laid
up for us in the heavens. For the only thing that makes the Saints endure
patiently, vea and joyfully, this troubles which swallow up the wicked, is the
blessed hope. The Apostle to the Hebrews confirms this, Heb. 10.34
showing that the cause why the Hebrews did sustain all affliction, and among
the rest, the spoiling of their goods with joy and gladness, was, because they
knew, they had a better and an enduring substance or riches laid up for them
in the heavens. Therefore does the same Apostle call this hope, the Ancor of
the soul, and deelareth that they who have their refuge to lay hold upon this
hope, have strong consolation. Heb. 6.10.
For by this hope we attain to the resurrection from the dead, so that death
it self can not spoil them of life, who are renewed to this blessed hope. The
use of all this is, to make us obey that lesson which the Apostle gives us to
the Hebru. which is, to hold fast the profession of our hope, without
wavering, seeing therein consists both our life and consolation, and
constantly to awaite for the appearing of it: 2. Tit. 2.13
as the Apostle Paul to Titus exhorts us, That we may in patience possess
our souls, and joyfully endure all afflictions of this life, since having
hope, we can not be spoiled of life.

Now follows the last point to be considered in this first part touching the
benefit whereunto we are begotten again by God: The ground whereupon our hope
is builded
which is the ground and foundation of this hope whereupon it is builded, which
is the Resurrection of Christ from the dead. For, as says the Apostle to the
Corinthians: 1 Cor. 15.17.
If Christ be not raised from the dead, our faith is vain, we are yet in our
sins. For we must understand, first, that the comfort of hope consists in
the resurrection from the dead: which being taken from us, we are of all men
the most miserable. Seeing, as says the Apostle to the Corinthians: ^. Cor. 15
No hope without knowledge of the resurrection
If in this life only we have hope in Christ, we are of all men the most
miserable: for besides the crosses and calamities whereunto we are subject in
this life, death comes in betwixt us, and our hope in Christ, and it seems
to cut us utterly from him, and all fruition of his bliss. For if death had
dominion over us, so that the sorrows thereof could not be loosed but that we
should be holden of it, what avayled it us to be in ieopardie every hour? 1
Cor. 19.18.
and wherefore should we suffer affliction for the name of Jesus? for all that
sleep in him were perished, as says the Apostle in the same place to the
Corinthians, If there were no Resurrection, Therefore to comfort us not only
againstal the afflictions of this present life, but chiefly against that last
and most fearful tentation of death, the Lord does instruct us in the
resurrection from the dead. This was the comfort that Job had in all his
miseries, as he says himself, That although after his skin, worms destroy
his body, yet shall I see God in my flesh, whom I my self shall see, and my
eyes behold, and none other for me, though my reins are consumed within me.
This also says the Apostle to the Corinthi. was the cause which made him not
only to faint, ^ Cor 5.1.
but also to sighe: Desiring to be dissolved, even because he did know, If this
earthly house of this tabernacle were destroyed, he had a building given us of
God, an house not made with hands, but eternal in the heavens: So that death
was no terror at all to him, who did know, that he which raised the Lord
Jesus, should raise him up also, and give him a glorious body. And for this
cause is it that Christ Jesus in the sixth chap. of John, willing to confirm
his assertion, and saying: That of all which the Father had given him, he
should loose nothing. so often brings in this promise: And I will raise him up
at the last day. And with this he comforted Martha, John 11.2
mourning for the death of her brother Lazarus, saying: Thy brother shall rise
again. And the Apostle Paul writing to the Thessalonians, willing to comfort
them, and to stay their excessive mourning for the dead, does bring in this
same reason, That they which are a sleep, 1 These. 4.13.
shall rise at the coming of the Lord. This point therefore must we carefully
hold, since without it we can have no comfort. And to this effect we have next
to consider, what it is that does assure us and certify our souls, that we
shall rise again. For it is a matter hard to be believed, The assurance of
our resurrection depends upon the resurrection of Christ
that the body which is once dead and turned into dust, shall raise again. The
thing that gives certain hope to us of out resurrection, is the Resurrection
of Jesus Christ our Savior. If he had not risen from the dead, we could never
have had any hope that ever our bodies should have received life after death.
For this is a sure ground, which, we must steadfastly hold, that our God
minds to do nothing to us which he has not first done to Jesus Christ our
head and Prince of our salvation, for our cause. For he is as the first fruits
in all things: Col. 1.18.
for in all things he has the pre-eminence, as says the Apostle to the
Colossians: therefore also is he the beginning, and first begotten, among the
dead. And again, to the Corinthians, the Apostle shows us that he is made
the first fruits of them that sleep. 1. Cor. 19.20.
Seeing then that in the first fruits the whole is sanctified, and no
otherwise: It must needs follow, that Christ behooved to (...) so from the
dead, before we could be raised: our resurrection depending upon his, and
flowing from his. For as says the Apostle in that same place to the
Corinthians: 1. Cor. 15.21.
As by man came death: so also by man comes the resurrection from the dead.
For as in Adam all dye, so in Christ shall all be made alive: but every one
(says he) in his own order: the first fruits is Christ, thereafter they that
are Christ's at his appearing. Therefore does he call him self in the 11.
John 11.25
chapter of John, speaking to Martha, The Resurrection and Life. Hereof it
follows, that he who knows not Christ to be risen from the dead, and
believes not that he is risen, can no ways believe that ever he shall rise
again to life. 1. Pet. 1.21.
For this same Apostle Peter in this same Chapter, hereafter plainly
witnesses, that God has raised Christ from the dead, and has given him
glory, that our faith and hope should be in God. Whereby he teaches us two
things concerning our hope. First, that it must be in God. Secondly, that it
can not be in God, but through Christ: and therefore that we could not hope
in God that he would raise us from the dead, if he had not first raised Christ
our head: seeing we must believe in God through him. The use of this point is
twofolde. First, it learneth us to discern the truth and verity of our hope,
from the right ground and foundation of it. Colos. 1.21
For every man's hope must have a foundation to uphold it: even as our faith
and hope is the foundation whereby we are vpholden, as says the Apostle to the
Colossians. From the which, if we fall, we fall from God, and from life: so our
hope has the same foundation, whereby it is vpholden in us, that we do not
cast away our confidence and rejoicing of our hope, albeit assailed with
innumerable and grievous tentations: this foundation is Christ himself. And
therefore while the Apostle does exhort us to constancy in our hope, and patient
running of the race that is laid before us unto the end, he wills us to
look still upon Jesus Christ, the author and finisher of our faith. For if
our sight be cast upon any thing besides him, Romans 4.18.
so that we draw our eyes from be holding him, then must our hope fail us. It
is said of Abraham, the Father of the faithful, who above hope, believed under
hope, that he should be the Father of many nations, according to the promise,
that he considered not his own body, which now was dead, being almost an
hundredth years old: neither the deadnes of Saraes womb: neither did he doubt
of the promise, but did look to him who did promise: being fully assured,
that he was able to perform herein this promise made to Abraham. If Abraham
had not cast his sight on him that promised, that is the Son of God, but had
looked to him self or Sara, he could have had no hope of the promise. So in
the promise of our Resurrection from the dead to eternal life, if we cast our
eyes upon our selves, and our bodies dying and co^suming and turning into dust
whereof they were made, we can never hope that we can rise again unto life:
but looking to Christ our Savior, ^. Cor. 1.20.
in whom all the promises of God are Yea and Amen, as says the Apostle to the
Corinth. we find sufficient reason and ground to believe the Resurrection
from the dead. Seeing he who was made man like to his brethren in all things,
except sin, albeit walking in the similitude of sinful flesh, being put to
death, did loose the sorrows of death, and was declared mightily to be the
son of God, touching the spirit of sanctification by the resutrection from
the dead. 2 Cor 4.14.
Therefore do we with the Apostle to the Corinths, know, That he which has
raised up the Lord Jesus, shall raise us up also by Jesus: for therefore is it
that we are baptized for dead, as says the Apostle to the Corinthes. For we
that are baptized into Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 2.15 29. Romans 6.3.
have been baptized into his death, says the Apostle to the Romans. And
therefore if we be dead with him, we believe also that we shall live with
him. For if we be planted with him to the similitude of his death, even so
shall we be to the similitude of his resurrection, says the same Apostle in
the same place. For he that is Christ's, has the spirit of God dwelling in
him, as is plain by the Apostle to the Romans. Romans 6.5. Romans 8.8. 1 John
3.24.
And John in his first Epistle says, That hereby we know that he abides in
us, even by that spirit which he has given us And if the spirit of him that
raised up Jesus Christ from the dead dwell in us, he that raised up Christ
from the death, shall also quicken our mortal bodies by his spirit that
dwells in us. Romans 8.1^.
So does the Apostle from the presence of the same spirit prove the like
effect in raising us from the death: 2 Cor. 4.13.
and therefore as he says to the Corinth. because we have the same spirit of
faith (as it is written, I believed and therefore I have spoken) we also
believe, and therefore speak, knowing that he which has raised up the Lord
Jesus, shall raise us up also by Jesus, and set us with him. So it is evident,
that the Resurrection of Jesus from the death, is the ground and foundation of
the hope of Resurrection from the dead to all that have the same spirit of life
that is in Christ Jesus dwelling in them: for the law of that spirit of life
which is in Christ Jesus, does free all those in whom he dwells, from the law
both of sin and death, Romans 8.2.
as testifies the Apostle to the Romans. Hereby are we taught two profitable
lessons: the first is, All the promises of God are first fulfilled in Christ
himself.
to carefully mark how far God accomplished his promises in Christ his
son. For so far may all that believe, be assured, that he shall accomplish
them in them through Christ. Therefore have we hope of sanctification from
sin, Resurrection from the dead, and glorification in the heavens, because
these promises are fulfilled in Christ, whom we see crowned with glory and
honor, as says the Apostle to the Hebrews: Heb. 2.9.
which was made a little inferior to the Angels, through the suffering of
death. For God he predestinateth all those whom he has foreknowen to be made
like to the Image of his Son, Romans 8.29.
that he might be the first born among many brethren. And therefore the
knowledge of Christ should be to us most precious, since we can know no more,
nor hope for no more blessing from God, then we first knew to have been
bestowed on Jesus Christ our head, 1. Cor. 30.
who is made to us of God, wisdom, sanctification justification and
Redemption. Phil. 3.8. etc
Therefore did the Apostle Paul esteem all things loss, for the excellent
knowledge sake of Jesus Christ our Lord: and did judge all things but dung,
that he might gain Christ, and know him: And the virtue of his Resurrection,
that he also thereby might attain to the resurrection from the dead. The
second lesson is, to pray to God day and night, to send us that blessed spirit
of promise, seeing the things which are wrought in Christ, shall not be
accomplished in any, but those who have the same spirit of life, that is in
Christ Jesus dwelling in them. And therefore they can not hope for renovation
to the Image of God, and restoration of their dead bodies to the life of God,
and glorification with the glory of God, wherewith Christ is glorified, who
have not the spirit of Christ This is the first use of this point, whereby we
are taught to discern true hope from the ground and foundation whereon only it
is builded, and that is Jesus Christ alone. The second use is, to teach us, A
distinct knowledge of Christ requisite.
not only co^fusedlie to learn Christ, but even perticularlie to consider all
the degrees and several parts of that great work of our redemption by him
for the more solid and steadfast fixing of our hearts in him. For albeit it be
most true, that he who is pertaker of the death of the Son of God, is also
pertaker of his life and of his glory, etc. yet neither can the faith and hope
be so stable, nor the comfort so great, as when in Christ our Lord we see a
particular ground and warrant for every article of our faith. Therefore in this
place does the Apostle lead us to the resurrection of Christ from the dead, for
establishing our hearts in the hope of our life with God in the heavens. For as
we go forward in consideration of the parts of Christ's working and several
actions done by him, for our full redemption, so does our faith increase, and
our hope by degree to degree: when we look to Christ dying for us, we learn
to believe remission of sins in his blood: when we go on to his
refurrectio^, we embrace the hope of life from the dead: when we look to his
ascension, we apprehend our ascending to the heavens: and in his glorification,
we are comforted by the hope of that same glory. Thus does it serve much for
our comfort, to know all the perticularities of Christ's humiliation and
exaltation, according as the Lord our God has revealed them in his word,
beginning at his Incarnation, going on to his birth in great baseness,
expressing thereafter the troubles of his youth: laying out next the sorrows of
his life, while he carried our infirmities: walking in the similitude of
sinful flesh, and subject to all the infirmities thereof, except sin:
proceeding to his death, and kind thereof being most accursed, Gal. 3.13.
as witnesses the Apostle to the Galathians. In all which the spirit of God
lets us see our infirmities, our sins, and our sorrows laid upon him,
and us acquitted of them in him. Thereafter are we led to his burial, wherein
is set before us the hope of the everlasting abolishing of sin. Then come we
to his Resurrection, the ground of our hope once to see death, that last
enemy, abolished and destroyed: and so we are guided on with him to the
heavens in his ascension, and at length to his glory at the right hand of the
Father. This distinct faith rising upon the distinct consideration and
knowledgd of the distinct operation of the power of God through Christ, in them
that believe, is lively set forth to us by the Apostle to the Ephesians. Ephe.
1.17. etc. and 2.1.
Praying for them that they might receive the spirit of wisdom and
revelation, to that same effect that they might know distinctly the parts of
his working in them that believe, and showing them perticularly certain of the
said effects of his power: First, their quickening with Christ: Secondly, the
raising of them up together with Christ: and thirdly, the making of them to
sit together with him in the heavenly places in Christ Jesus. And the same
Apostle writing to the Colossians, and showing that we are accomplished and
perfited in him alone, does manifest the same by particular induction, in these
words: In whom (says he) ye are etrcumcised with circumcision made without
hands, Colos. 2. and 11. etc.
by putting off the sinful body of the flesh, through the circumcision of
Christ, which he expounds thereafter more perticularlie in the parts of
this circumcision, and several grounds of every part, saying, in that ye are
buried with him through baptism. Secondly, in who^ ye are also raised up
together through ye faith of the operation of God, which raised him from the
dead. Thirdly, and you which were dead in sin, and in the uncircumcision of
the flesh, has he quickened together with him, forgiving you al your sins.
Fourthlie, and putting out the handwriting that was against us, which was
contrary to us, he even took it out of the way, and fastened it on the
Cross. And fiftlie, he spoiled the Principalities and Powers, and has made a
show of them openly, and has triumphed over them in the same Cross. Thus
does the Apostle lead us to the sight of our death and burial spiritual to
sin: of our rising from the dead: of our spiritual quickening with the life
of God: of the abolishing of our debt and dittay: in abrogation of the Law,
which was contrary to us: and of the utter overthrow of our spiritual
enemies, and our glorious triumph over them all in Christ Jesus our Lord: which
at length our God shall fully accomplish in every one of us, in the glorious
appearing of Jesus Christ our Savior, whose Name be blessed for ever. AMEN.

The second Sermon.
1. Epist. of Pet. Cap. 1. verses. 4. To an inheritance immortal and
undefiled, and that withers not, reserveth in heaven for us:

5. Which are kept by the power of God through faith unto salvation, which is
prepared to be showed in the last time.


WE must remember the truth of that which the Apostle speaks to the
Corinthians, 1. Cor. 2.9.
touching the things which God has prepared for those that love him, that
they are such, as neither eye has seen, neither ear has heard, nor has
come into the heart of man. Therefore did none of the Princes of this world
know them, as says the same Apostle in the same place. For no natural man
perceyveth the things of the Spirit of God, neither can he know them because
they are spirituallie discerned, for the wisdom of God is a hidd wisdom,
closed in a mystery, which is not given to every man to understand: yea the
very children of God to whom God has given his spirit, which searches all
things, even the deep things of God: although God do reveile to them his
secret, yet do they see here but through a glass, 1. Cor. 13.12
darkly, as says the Apostle. For our life (as witnesses the same Apostle to
the Colossians) is hidd with Christ in God. Col. 3.3.
And as says Ioh. in his first Epistle: 1. John 3.2.
Now are we the sonns of God, but yet it is not made manifest what we shall be.
For this cause we must content our selves in this life with the sight which
faith gives us, which is of that na ture and force, as testifies the Apostle
to the Hebrews, that it makes things invisible, Heb. 11.1.
to be evident, and as it were visible. For clearing of which sight, and so
consequently, the further establishing of our faith and further increase of our
spiritual joy, the Lord our God in his blessed word does set forth those
invisible things, under earthly similitudes of things known to us: Thereby to
lead our souls to the more livelie consideration and clearer knowledge, what
the hope of his calling is, and what the riches of his glorious inheritance is
in the Saints, that thereby we may be encouraged, with greater patience and
constancy, to run the race that is laid before us, and to hold fast the
confession of our hope without wavering unto the end: waiting still for the
manifestation of our blessed hope, in the glorious appearing of Jesus Christ
our Savior. Therefore is it that the Apostle in this place, having spoken of
the abundant mercy of God in begetting us again to the hope of life: in the
next place expounds the excellency of this life hoped for, that thereby we
may understand, that all things in this world are but vanity, and in
comparison thereof nothing but dirt and dung, and so to be accounted loss that
we may gain it. Afterward he declares to us the suertie and certainty which
the Saints have of enjoying this life hoped for: both in regard of the life,
and also of themselves. So that here we have the other two points of
consolation, touching our hope, to be considered, whereof we did speak in our
last Sermon, to wit, the excellency of the life which we look for: and the
certainty of our attaining to it. The first is expressed in these words, to
an inheritance immortal and undefiled, and that withered not. The other, in
the rest of the words which we have read.

In the first point we have two things to consider: one is the title or name
which the Apostle gives to our hope or life: the other is, the properties
which he attributes to it, by which he sets before us the preciousnes and
excellency of it: The title which he gives it, is, That it is an inheritance.
The properties are three, eternity, purity, and unchangeableness.

To speak then of the first: The Apostle calls eternal life, Eternal life
is an inheritance belonging to the sons, not to servaunts.
an inheritance, to inform us by what title we attain unto it, and by what
right we enjoy it, to wit, by the right of heirs. For seeing God only does
inherit immortality and life, as his proper possession, we can never attain
to it till first we be made the heirs of God, even coheires annexed with
Christ Jesus, who only is the righteous heir of all things, as says the
Apostle Paul to the Hebrews, because he is the only Son of God. Now we are
made the heirs of God, Romans 8.14.
by being first made his children, as says the Apostle to the Romans. If
(says he) we be children, we are also heirs, even the heirs of God, and
heirs annexed with Christ. Gal. 4.5.
And again to the Galathians: If thou be a son, thou art also the heir of
God through Christ. For it is manifest even among men, that the son either by
nature or by adoption, is counted for the heir. Now by nature we are not the
sonns of God, Ephe. 2.3.
but as says the Apostle to the Ephesians, by nature we are the children of
wrath, and by the redemption made by Jesus Christ, we receive the adoption of
the sons, as witnesses the same Apostle to the Galathians. Gol. 4.5.
God sending the spirit of his Son in our hearts, which cries Abba Father.
Thus by Jesus the only son of God, and so consequently, his only heir by
nature, we are first made the sons of God, and so also the heirs of this in
heritance of God. The use of this point is, to instruct us that we must not
think to enjoy eternal life as the reward of our service, but as the right of
heirs, being made the children of God: Christ in the eight of John says, that
the servaunt abides not in the house for ever, but the son abides for ever.
Thereby informing us, that he who thinks to dwell with God in his house
eternally, must needs be his son, so does the Apostle here teach us, when he
says, that God begets us again to the hope of life: declaring that we
must be borne of God, and so made the Sons of God, before we can hope to
inherit eternal life. For whosoever does remain in the house of God, noe
other ways, but as a servaunt, he shall at length be cast out, and shall be
deprived of eternal life, which is the inheritance of the sons. Christ
himself shows, that al our service is unprofitable, even when we have done
all that we can do, if we respect the merit of it. And the Saints themselves
confess, that even their righteousness is polluted, Isa. 69.6.
and like a menstruous cloth. How wonderfully therefore do they deceive their
own souls, who build the hope of their life upon merit of their works. The
Lord in Hagar the servant, and Ismaell his son, does livelie represent the
lot and portion of all the children of the law, that is, of all who by service
think to inherit heaven: having no other hope of eternal life then that which
is engendered by the covenant of works. Cast out, says the scripture, the
servaunt with her son: for the son of the servant shall not be heir with
the son of the free woman. Gal. 4.30.
By this does the Apostle to the Galathians show, that which Christ says to be
true, to wit, that the servaunt shall not abide in the house for ever. Because
as the Lord commanded to cast out Hagar the servaunt with her son out of the
house of Abraham which was the house of God, so shall he cast out of his house,
and deprive of the inheritance of eternal life, all those who are not his
sons, but crave eternal life, as debt for reward of their works.

Now we come to the properties of this inheritance, The blessed estate of the
Saints glorified.
which are three. It is called immortal, undefiled, and which withers not.
These are the special things which make a life happy and blessed: and the
three contraries do make it miserable and cursed. The three which make it
happy are eternity, purirte, and unchangeableness. The three contraries which
make it miserable, are mortality or death, sin or vneleannes, and
chaungeablenes or instabilstie. The spirit of God therefore by attributing
those three properties to our inheritance and life which we hope for, does
show us the excellency and blessedness of our life whereunto the Lord does
begett us again: thereby to teach us that we lose nothing, albeit we loose
all things, if so be we gain this life and inheritance. Let us therefore
consider those properties severallie. The first is immortality, unto an
inheritance immortal, that is, The blessed estate of the Saints in heaven
immortal.
an inheritance or life which is no ways subject to corruption, but which
indureth for ever: and therefore in the scriptures it is called eternal life,
to distinguish it not only from the life of beasts and other creatures, but
even from the life of man himself, which he has by nature in this world We
shall the more clearlie perceive the comfort of this point, if we consider two
things which the scriptures lay before our eyes. The first is, concerning that
which is in greatest price with man, for which he labors chiefly, as the
principal end of all his travels. The second is the vanity of his labor as
touching that end, and unprofitableness of al his pains, and so consequently
the unspeakable grief and sorrow wherewith his soul is pearched, when he
finds himself frustrat of his end. As for the first, The thing in the world
most dear to a man, is his life, which gladly he would preserve with the loss
of all that ever he has. Satan did know this, when to provoke the Lord against
Job he uses this argument: skin for skin, and all that ever a man has,
Job. 2.4.
will he give for his life. And Christ our Savior, knowing that the love of
this life does most of all sway our actions, perceyving this foolish
solicitude in Peter even toward him, he shows his Apost. that whosoever
will save his life shall lose it. Mat. 16.25
How glad the worldly man would be, if he could live in this world eternally:
this in deed is the foolishnes of men, they think their houses and habitations
shall continue for ever: and so rooted is the vanity in man's heart, that
albeit the Fathers that have thought so, do die like the beasts: yet their
posterity is not made the wiser, but go on in the foolish way of their
fathers, and delight in their talk, as says the spirit of God in the 49.
Psalm. 49.6.7
Psalm. mortal man stryving vainlie to eternise him self in this perishing
world. Which vanity the Lord expresses when he shows first that albeit a
man by his labors obtains aboudance of all things, Luc 12.15
yet his life stands not in his riches. Which he clears by that parable of
the rich man, who said to his soul: soul thou have much goods laid up for
many years, live at ease, eat, drink, and take thy pastime: but God said
unto him, O fool, this night will they fetch away thy soul from thee: then
whose shall those things be which thou have provided? The second argument of
man's vanity is, that as his life stands not in his abundance, so can not
all his abundance preserve a man from death, nor yet procure the restoring of
one dead to life again, as the Lord declares in the 49. Psalm. Ps. 49.6.7.
neither can any redeem his brother, nor give his ransom to God (so precious
is the redemption of their souls, and the continuance for ever) that he may
live still for ever, Eccl. 6.7.
and not see the grave. Thirdly, Solomon shows that all the labor of man is
for the mouth, yet the soul is not filled, and therefore man paineth him self
in vain, in traveling for the wind, seeing he never can fill his soul, nor
satisfy his heart with all his labors. Lastly, says the Lord in the
foresaid Psalm, Psalm. 49.17
Man shall take nothing away when he dies, neither shall his pomp descend
after him. When vain man sees this that all his labor is in vain, seeing he
can not thereby preserve his life but he must die, Eccl. 2. etc.
and lie like a sheep in the grave, then does his soul abhor all comfort,
nothing is there in the world that can be able to make him rejoice, Eccl.
3.18.19. etc.
feeing he must lose that for which all other things are desired, and without
the which, al things do serve for nothing. Eccl. 2.15.16.
Solomon does teach this, who seeing that he must die, and leave all his
labors to the man that should be after him, Eccl. 2.17.18.
and considering that me^ in them selves were as beasts, the condition of both
being one: seeing as the one dies so dies the other: all go to one place: and
all was of the dust, and al shall return to dust: and perceyving that
wisdom, nor riches, nor strength, etc. made no difference but that it did
befall to the wise as it did to the fool: then began he to hate all his
labor, yea even the life it self, because it was to end. A most evident
prove, that albeit a man do enjoy all pleasures, riches, and honors, yea all
whatsoever he traveleth for under the sun, or whatsoever his heart can wish
in this world: yet is there no peace to the heart of him, nor joy to the soul
of him, nor happiness in the estate of him, so long as he sees he must die and
his life must end, then does he with Solomon conclude, al, not only to be
vanity, but also vexation of spirit: yea the more he does possess of these
earthly blessings, the greater is his misery, and more greevous are his
sorrows when death comes to pluck him from his house to the grave. Thus even
the very life of man, wherein is the chiefest comfort of man: by mortality,
becomes a grief to man, and a vexation to the spirit of man: For all the joys
of this world, and all the comfortes of this life are eclipsed by death. This
being rightly weighed and well considered, we shall then apprehend what
infinite consolation this first property of the life, unto the hope whereof
our God has begotten us again, does minister unto us. for therein we see that
taken away which alone is sufficient to make our life miserable and cursed,
even mortality and death, which is the curse of God upon man for sin.
Surely let a man look to his life, albeit in the eyes of man never so happy,
yet if he look to it as it is in deed, that is to say mortal and deadly,
although it be busked with all the beauties of this world, and fortified with
all the strength of this world, and crowned with all the glory of this world,
yet shall he never have comfort in it: and it is most certain that they see
not what this life is who glory in it: and it is the very blindness of their
eyes which do not let them see their end, that makes the wretches of this
world to rejoice in any thing under the sun, seeing all shall perish and come
to naught. No, No, they see not life to rejoice in, that sees not this life of
the children of God, unto the hope whereof the Lord begets them: This is the
ground of the rejoicing and gloriation of the Saints, says the Apostle to the
Romans, even the hope of this inheritance which is immortal. And this same
sight of this immortality of that life was the thing that moved the Apostle
himself to desire with sighs to change this earthly tabernacle with that
which is not made with hands, but is of God. For he did know that it was
eternal, therefore desired he to be clothed with it, even to this end, that
mortality might be swallowed up of life. This then is the comfort of this
first property, that death shall have noe dominion over our life in heaven,
but it shall remain for evermore: And herein stands one of the chief points
of the happiness and felicity of the Saints in the world to come, that their
inheritance is immortal. All whatsoever a man inheriteth in this world, is
mortal, his life here ends, but in the world to come, it endures
eternally. The honor, riches and pleasures of this world, perish: but in
heaven there is prepared for us an enduring substance, Heb. 10.34
says the Apostle to the Hebrews. And the pleasures which are at the right
hand of God, are for evermore, says David: Psalm. 16.11.
These heavens shall pass away, and the elements shall melt with heat, and
this earth with the works that are therein shall be burnt up, says Peter: 2.
Pet. 3.10 and 13.
but we hope for new heavens and a new earth, according to the promise of God,
wherein dwells rigeteousnes. So whatsoever we understand by this inheritance,
all is eternal in the world to come, the life eternal, the heavens, the earth,
the glory, the riches, the pleasures, the reast, theioy that we shall enjoy
eternal. The first use of this point is, to make us who do find nothing
perfectly, happy, nor comfortable, which is subject to mortality, to take our
hearts and affections of this perishing life and world, and to cast away the
love of corruptible things, and to behold and affect the life and blessings
that are permanent and everlasting. The second use is to comfort us against two
tentatio^s wherewith we have to fight: the one is touching our present estate
and feeling: the other is touching the fear that might enter in our minds of
that might befall us in the possession of this life of God in heaven. In this
present life we have not only to look for an end of our life and of all
creatures, but the Saints they have a feeling of the daily decay of the
outward man, and themselves hasting to an end: now this death that comes in
betwixt us and our hope for life, can not but sometimes trouble and grievouslie
torment the mind that has no sight of that immortal state to come: Therefore
the wicked are weary in beating of affliction, and are altogether unable to
digest the dolours and pains which they conceive of death: having no sense,
nor sight, nor hope of a permanent and endless life: but the godly man, who
finds his inward man renewing daily, and feeling in himself the powers of
the world to come, and being established by hope, he is so far from fainting
with present afflictions, that he rejoices in them, as says the Apostle to
the Romans, Romans 5.3.
and so far is he from being discouraged or afraid of death, that he
chooses rather to be dissolved: yea many have refused to be delivered from
death, that they might receive a better resurrection. O if this wretched world
did know what great advantage the man renewed has above him who is not
renewed, in the time of trouble and affliction, and specially in the hour of
death, which puts an end to all the joys of this life: how much would they
esteem, of that renewing grace that brings men to the hope of an inheritance
immortal: and how careful would they be to find themselves begotten again
to the hope of this inheritance before that heavy day of death do come upon
them, that they might have comfort against the terror of it, by the sense and
feeling of the life of God begun in their souls, which never can be ended,
but rather perfited by the death of our flesh, the soul that hops even in
dying, apprehending eternal life: so the hope of this inheritance which is
immortal, does comfort us against the mortality of our present estate, and
future ruin and destruction of this present world. The second use is, to
comfort us against that which we might fear should happen to us being possessed
again with the life of God in heaven, eve^ the loss of that life again: the
grounds of this fear may be the experience past in Adam and in Angels: Adam
being created to the likeness of God, and being placed in Paradise, did
nevertheles lose his perfection and life, and was thrust out of Paradise. Thus
left to himself, he could neither keep his life nor the possession of
Paradise, but loosed both by obeying Satan, who did slay him in making him to
sin. Iud. 6.
The Angels that were in heaven with God, did not keep their first estate
wherein they were created, and which they did enjoy in the presence of God, and
now are reserved under darkness unto the judgment of the great day. Who would
not fear at these examples to be deprived of life, although once possessed
with it, and that also in heaven? Death having overthrowen the life both of man
and Angel, even then when they enjoyed all perfection of life, the one in
Paradise, the other in heaven. What then is our consolation, eve^ this, that
our life which in Christ we recover, is more sure then the life which Adam had,
even then the life which Angels had by creation, for theirs was subject to
hasarde, but our life is exempt from all hasard of death: therefore are we not
to fear that it shall befall so to us any more, as it did to them: For our
inheritance which we look for is permanent and immortal, therefore after our
resurrection we shall be no more in fear nor danger of death, For this
corruptible shall put on incorruption, and this mortal shall put on
immortality, 1 Cor. 15.53.
and then shall death be swallowed up into victory, and mortality shall be
swallowed up of life, 1 Cor. 5.4.
and death it self, that last enemy in that day shall be destroyed: for death
and hell shall be cast into the lake of fire, 1 Cor. 15.26. Revel. 20.14. 1 Cor.
15.55.
which is the second death, then shall we sing most joyfully that song of
triumph: O death where is they sting: O grave where is thy victory: Thus this
first point does enceedingly comfort us, and gives us ample matter of
glorifying God, that he called us, who are mortal and corruptible creatures,
from this miserable estate, to a life that endures for ever: yet does this
next property of this life and inheritance much more comfort the true children
of God, who have no further pleasure in life it self, then so far as it does
serve to the glory of God, albeit the wicked take no care of dishonoring God,
so being they may live. For he that is truly wise, knows that the life
which serves no ways to the honor of God, shall never procure honor to him
that enjoys it. And when the Author of his life is nothing benefited by his
life, it were better for him never to have had life, seeing it must needs in
the end procure his greater harm, and therefore seeing God is holiness it
self, and so by consequence, a mortal enemy of all uncleanness, there can be
no happiness in a life that is unclean and polluted. For it stands sure which
the Apostle says, Heb. 12.14
That without holiness, no man shall see God. For this cause it is, that the
Saints sighe continually in this life, 2 Cor. 5.4.
because of the burden of sin wherewith they are burdened, knowing that a
necessity of sinning is laid upon us, while we walk in this earthly
tabernacle, and therefore with the Apostle to the Romans, Romans 7.24.
finding that we are sold under sin, so that in our flesh there dwells no
goodness, and albeit by the grace of God to will be present with us, yet we
find no means to perform that which is good, because although we delight in
the Law of God, concerning the inward man, yet we still see another law in our
members, rebelling against the law of the mind, and leading us captive unto
the law of sin, which is in our members. Therefore I say with the Apostle: we
are compelled to cry out against our life, O wretched men that we are, who
shall deliver us from this body of death, ever wishing and desiring to be freed
from this life that is polluted, and in the which we can not preserve our
selves from uncleanness. And this is the second cause why this present life is
miserable in all men, of what soever estate they be: all men without exception
being defiled with sin, even from their first conception, Psalm. 51.5.
as being both conceyved and berne in sin: and therefore is it that the
Saints desire to be dissolved, because they know (as says the Apostle) that
if their earthly house of this tabernacle were destroyed, 2 Cor. 5.1.
they have a building given of God, that is an house not made with hands, but
eternal in the heavens: In which house they shall sin no more, because
corruption shall be swallowed up of incorruption. By this difference now, betwixt
this present sinful life, and that blessed life in holiness, to the which we
are begotten again, does appear the excellency of the one above the other,
and so does give just occasion to all the godly to cast the love of this life,
and all things in it far from them: being so disposed by the grace of God,
that they can not love, nor like that, whereby their God is dishonored, and
with as earnest diligence to preasse forward to that other life, which they see
to be freed from all uncleanness, and so from all occasion of offending or
dishonoring their God. And yet further to weigh the comfort of this point, we
must remember that which is contained in the former, which instructs us that
this inheritance is immortal. These two, so still accompany one another, that
the one that is immortality, can not be without this other property of
vndefilednes. For death is the reward of sin, Romans 6.23.
so that were sin is not, there is no death. Hereby appears that excellency
of this life, in that it is exempt from sin, and so consequently from death:
so that this property may very well be called, the cause of the other which
precedeth, that is, Immortality: Like as Immortality may be compted the cause
of the last property, that is unchangeableness, for sin is the sting of death,
1 Cor. 15.56.
says the Apostle. And therefore take away sin, which is the thing that
defiles both us and our life, yea the heavens, the earth, and al creatures,
death shall have nothing wherewith to annoy us: the strength of death, which is
sin, being taken away. Now to come to the use of this point, it serves for a
threefolde comfort to man, when either he looks to his estate, eve^ under
grace in this present world, or to the estate of man in his first creation, or
yet to the estate of Angels in their first creation. In his estate under grace,
albeit he have begun to live the life of God, yet still as we have said, he
finds a rebellion of sin in his flesh, resisting the will of God in his
mind, which we have shows to be a matter of continual grief to the godly,
now to the heart oppressed with this godly sorrow for sin, that daily
defiles him, what can be more comfortable, then that hope of that life, in
the which he shall cease from sin, and be wholly freed from all the bonds
and cords of iniquity in the full freedom and liberty of holiness. Herewith
did the Apostle take up him self from his grief, in his exclamation wherein
he lamented his own misery, in the seventh Chap. to the Romans After he had
said: Romans 7.24.
O miserable man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this death?
Looking to that blessed estate of perfect holiness, unto the which we were
called by God in Christ, he adds these words of consolation, to recreate his
own soul: I thank my God through Jesus Christ my Lord. This makes the
heart to rejoice, which never could otherwise have perfect pleasure nor joy in
the beginnings of grace, righteousness and holiness granted in this life, no not
in the greatest measure, that ever was given by Christ Jesus to any creature:
but this hope of victory makes us not to faint nor weary in our minds,
striving against sin, but patiently to fight unto the end, waiting for that
blessed hope. Now if man look further unto that case wherein Adam was in
Paradise albeit in the estate of perfection without sin, yet sin did
prevayle over him, and did both defile him, and all other things to him.
Furthermore, the Angels that were created in perfection, yet did not stand in
their first estate, but were overcome by sin. So strong a thing is sin, that
neither man in his integrity, nor Angels in their glory, were able to resist
it. Here now appears upon the consideration of this property of our
inheritance, how exceeding more happy is our estate in Christ, then was the
estate of Adam by creation: yea the estate of Angels in glory. Their estate
was subject to falling, as doleful experience in both did prove, but in this
estate whereunto we are renewed in Christ, there is no possibility of sinning
any more, after we are possessed with our life in the heavens and so the fear of
the like misery which might arise in our hearts upon their fall, is quite
taken away: for our life and inheritance is undefiled. For when we shall enjoy
the fruit of our high Priests oblation and reco^ciliation, Heb. 7.26.
as he is holy, harmeles, undefiled, separate from sinners, and made higher
the^ the heavens, so shall we also be holy, harmeles, undefiled, separate from
sinners, and made higher then the heavens. So then when our God shall be al in us
all, sin shall have no more place in our mind, in will, in affection, nor
any part of our flesh. And whereas now to those that are defiled, nothing is
pure, Tit. 1.15.
but even their minds and consciences are defiled. So then when we shall be
undefiled, all things shall be clean to us, the heavens, the earth and all
things, because we our selves, our minds and consciences shall be clean: and
therefore is it that we wait for new heavens, and a new earth, wherein
dwells righteousness. For in that kingdom, wherein no unclean thing shall
enter, all things shall be clean, and so established in cleannes, that nothing
shall be able to defile them for ever. Here is the comfort for them that mourn
in this life for their own sins, and the sins and abominations that are
committed in the mids of the house of God, even that they them selves, and
the whole house of God, Ezech. 9.24.
shall be delivered from filthiness of sin, being possessed with that everlasting
righteousness which is brought in by the son of God. The Saints in heaven not
subject to change.
Now follows the third property of our inheritance which is that it
withers not. This makes up the perfection of our estate in heaven: for
nothing can make a man happy, which is not constant and stable without change.
The rich man is not made happy by his uncertain riches, because as Job, he
may be turned to poverty, and his habitation made desolate. So is it of all
things earthly: for there is nothing constant under the sun, therefore all is
but vanity. It is true that not only the wicked but even sometimes the
children of God, being in prosperity, will be brought to say: Job. 29.18.19.
Psalm. 10.6. Psalm. 30.6.
That they shall dye in their Nest: that their root is spread out by the
water, and therefore they shall never be moved, nor suffer any changes, but
they find when the Lord shall hide his face, that they are troubled and their
estate changed. Moreover, albeit all other things should continue after one,
yet man's own frayeltie makes his life miserable: for albeit he grew up in
strength and activenes, yet age comes and changes him: So that the moisture
of his life being dried up, they wither as grass, even as the herb and grass
of the field, and trees of the forest, albeit they flourish in summer, yet in
winter they wither, and loose all their beauty of their life. 1 Pet. 1.24.
Therefore does de spirit of God compare all flesh to grass, Iam. 1.10.
and the glory of flesh to the flower of the grass, because as the grass
withers and the flower falls away: Esai. 40.6.
so does also all flesh, and all the glory of flesh wither and fall away, and
so by time is worn out. The consideration of this point made Moses the man of
God, to lament the misery of man's life, laying it out before the Lord, saying:
Man in the morning, he grows like the grass: inde the morning it florisheth
and grows, but in the evening it is cut down and withers: the time of our
life is threescore years and ten, Psalm. 90.5.
and if they be of strength, four score years: yet the strength is but labor
and sorrow, for it is cut of quickly, and we fly away. Now although a life
were everlasting and exempt from sin, yet could it not bring perfect
contentement to man, except it were such as could suffer no alteration. If the
strong man could continue eternally in his strength, and not become weak, he
might have joy in his estate: and so also the beautiful man: the rich man: the
honorable man, etc. but let a man be in never so good estate, in this life, and
as contented with his estae, as flesh can be, yet all his contentement is taken
from him by the necessity of Change, whereto all things under the sun are
subject. Therefore for fulfilling of our joy, our God has prepared a life and
inheritance for us in Christ, which withers not: but look what glory,
strength, power and majesty we shall be indewed with at the coming of Christ
in that same glory, strentgh, power, and beauty of life, and in that same
measure we shall continue for ever without changes: our life and inheritance
suffering neither diminution nor alteration of strength, nor beauty, nor
glory, but still flourishing in the perfection of strength, beauty, glory,
and riches, and honor. This shows and teaches us what is the difference
betwixt this present life and the life to come. This life is not perfited at
the first, but receyved increase and grouth, till we come to the perfect
stature and strength of a man. Therefore it continues not so, but admits
decrease and daily diminution, till at length after long withering, it be all
consumed, but in heaven at the first we are exalted to the accomplished
perfection of felicite: and in that perfection we shall continue etenallie: our
glory never beco^ming less: our joy never diminishing: our beauty never
fading: our strength never impairing. What would not a man suffer for such a
life, and what would he not forsake, to the end he might enjoy this life. The
world must either be blind, or beastly without measure, that does not long
to be out of this world, that they may enjoy this blessed estate, that never
changes. This serves to comfort us in the changes of this present life,
because we know that our estate in heaven shall be exempt from all changes, and
to encourage us against al fear that can come upon the change that came upon
Adam his life in Paradise: who being without shame, yet was turned to a
shameful state. But to conclude this point, the Apostle to the Corinthes
sets forth most livelie these three properties of our estate in heaven, in
the description of our Resurrection from the dead, opponing the present
condition of our bodies to the future qualities in heaven, and comprehends
the difference in these three specially: 1 Cor. 15.42.
That our bodies are sown in corruption, and are raised in incorruption: they
are sown in dishonor, and are raised in glory: they are sown in weakness,
and raised in power. And he concludes by the fourth point, which is as it were
the cause of the other three, to wit, that they are sown natural bodies, and
are raised spiritual bodies. Hereby incorruption is expressed, the first
property of our inheritance here mentioned, which is immortality: and in the
second is comprehended vndefilednes: and in the third this unchangeableness. For
our life shall be immortal, because we shall be raised in incorruption: and our
vile bodies, dishonorable for sin and fruits thereof, shall be raised in
glory, and therefore free from being defiled any more: and the cause why our
life shall not wither, is, because that our bodies that are here weak, shall be
raised in power, and the cause of all these three consists, in the different
manner of living that we have here, and shall have in the heavens, because our
bodies here are natural bodies, or animate bodies after the life of Adam, who
was created a living soul: therefore is our life subject to mortality,
dishonor and changes, for a soul can not give immortality, purity, nor
unchangeableness to a body, but in the heavens our bodies shall be spiritual
bodies, after the life of Christ, who was made a quickening spirit: for by the
spirit of life that is in Christ Jesus, shall we live altogether in heaven,
God being all in all. The principal use of this point, besides these before
spoken, is to comfort us in tentations of this present life, when we find our
spiritual changes, eve^ of our life in Christ: for the spiritual man is not
at all times alike, his faith being sometimes so strong, that he dares boast
with David, that although he walked throw the Galley of the shadow of death,
yet would he fear none evil: Psalm. 23.4.
and though an host pitcheth against him, Psalm. 27.3.
yet his heart should not be afraid. At other times his faith becomes so
weak, being sore assaulted, that his heart fails him: yea even at small
occasions. Peter that even now did boast, though all the world should forsake
his Lord, yet would he never forsake him. At the voice of a maid, is brought
to forswear him. The spiritual man sustayning the same changes that does the
natural man The natural life which now does flourish in strength and beauty,
does suffer changes by sickness, by age, and by affliction, that sometimes it
weakneth, sometimes it seems to be quite away, when it is oppressed, so that
the body lies as dead in a tranuce, even so the spiritual life has the same
fits, sometimes the Christian having great difficulty to hold his hope, and
sometimes being forced to mourn, as one already among the dead, and one
casts clean away from the presence of God, all sense of the life of God
being removed by some extraordinary tentation, or to great security in
spiritual exercises. This does even the spiritual man find, that in his
spiritual life, although it never be taken away, yet does it many ways seem
to decay, and sometimes utterly to be gone: against this grief have we to
comfort our selves with the hope of this estate in the which our life shall
never any more be subject to changes, Psalm. 77. Psalm. 98.
neither shall our souls be vexed with such tentations, as now do bring the
strongest Christian oftentimes to a most pitiful weakness, so that their soul
refuses comfort, and become so astonished, that they can not speak, and so
filled with evil, that they seem to be cut off, doubting of their life. And
that which I speak of faith, I speak also of the remaining parts of our
life: of our love to God and his Sanits: our sanctification: our zeal: our
joy: our peace: which all sometimes flourish, sometimes fade and wither. Which
all in the life to come shall remain eternally, and still flourish in their
full perfection. Thus much touching the excellency of our inheritance. Now
follows the third point, The certainty of salvation.
which is concerning the surety of this inheritance, which is the third thing
that works the fulness of our joy, when we know that there is a life after this
life to be hoped for, and that this life is most excellent. And lastly, that
it is impossible to frustrate us of this life. The other two do provoke a
thirst and earnest desire of this life, but the third brings peace and
consolation to the man that longs for it: when he knows assuredly that
he shall have it. Whereas the contrary is a very hell to the conscience. For
when it is given to a man to know there is a life prepared for a man in heaven,
and that this life is so excellent, that there is nothing worthy of it in this
world: What grief and unspeakable sorrow must it breed to him, to be deprived
of that estate, wherein he sees such felicity? Esau, Genesis 27.
when he heard that he was deprived of the blessing, following the birthright,
he cried out with a great cry and bitter out of measure, says the spirit of
God: for he would have inherited the blessing, and therefore sought it with
tears, but he was rejected, says the Apostle to the Hebrews, Heb. 12.
and found no place to repentance in his Father. This is the just judgment of
God against all profane persons, who prefer in their worldly necessities,
the pleasures of this life to the inheirtance of the life to come: to make
their vain and fruitles desires of that life, to torment their minds. 2 Pet.
2.1. Iud. 11.
The same moved Balaam, that profane prophet, which loved the wages of
unrighteousness (seeing the blessed end of the righteous, but no ways assured
to enjoy it) to cry out: Number. 23.
O let me dye the death of the righteous, and let my last end be like his. So
deadly a wound does pearce the soul that finds no assurance of that life,
wherein consists all felicity. Therefore to make us pertakers of that solid
consolation which is proper to the godly, our God does let us see how sure
and certain this life is to all that are begotten to the hope of it. For it is
this certain assurance of the enjoying of it that works strong consolation
in the Saints, as is manifest by the words of the Apostle to the Hebrews,
Heb. 5.17.18. etc.
God (says he) willing more abundantly to show unto the hetres of promise
the stablenes of his counsel, bound him self by an eath, that by two
immutable things, wherein it is impossible that God should lie, we might have
strong consolation: who have our refuge, to lay hold upon that hope, that is
set before us. Declaring hereby that the strength of our joy, depends upon
the infalliblenes of our hope. Therefore is it, that David does pray to God in
the hundredth and sixth Psalm, Psalm 106.4. etc.
That he would remember him with the favor of his people, and that he would
visitie him with his salvation. To that end he subioyneh himself that says.
That I may see the felicity of thy chosen, and so rejoice in the joy of thy
people, and glory with thine inheritance. Showing that without sight of this
felicity and certain assurance of it, no heart can joy nor glory, as do the
children of God. We come therefore to consider this point, which is set down
to us in two parts, according to the two fold danger which may seem to be
in the attayning to this life. The first is, in the life it self, to know that
it be sure. The second is in us, to know that we be sure to that life. For if
either that life might be taken away from us, or yet that we could be taken
away from enjoying that life, there could be no certainty of it to our
souls. Therefore first the Apostle declares, how this life is kept for us.
Next, he shows how we are kept for it: that neither it can be taken away from
us, nor we from it. The keeping of it is set down in these words: Reserved
in the heavens for us: and the keeping of us to it, in the words following:
who are kept by the power of God through faith unto salvation. And lastly, the
time of the manifestation of it, is set down to us by the Apostle, saying:
Which is prepared to be showed in the last time. As touching the first part of
the surety of our life, it consists first in the keeping of it. God the
keeper of our life.
Secondly, in the place where it is kept. And third lie in the end wherefore
it is kept in the heavens. It is kept (says the Apostle) in the heaven, and
that for us. First then we will speak of the keeping of it, which brings
great consolation to the believing soul. Angels lost their life, because the
Lord did not keep it to them: And Adam lost his life likewise, because it was
committed to his own keeping. But now the Lord does no more commit the keeping
of our life in Christ to our selves, because we should doubtless loose it
again. For if man in his integrity was not able to keep his life: how much
less is he able to do it in his corruption and infirmity? yea the very
Angels, that yet do continue in the life of God, were not able to endure, if
God did not preserve them in that life. Blessed therefore be God, who has taken
in his own hand the custody of our life. The Apostle does herein comfort
him self against the shame of the Cross, which he did suffer for preaching
the gospel, saying: For which cause I also suffer these things: 2 Timoth. 1.20,
But I am not ashamed, for I know whom I have believed, etc. This made Paul
rejoice, that God was able to keep his life, to whom he had committed it. And
this is the great mercy of our God toward us, that he does take the care of
keeping our life him self. Satan is most careful, sometimes against (...)
selves, sometimes against our life: for when he can not prevail against the
person to entise him to sin, and so to death, then does he assail his life,
putting at his faith, to see if he can wrest from him his confidence in God:
knowing that the destruction of our persons follows the loss of our
spiritual life in Christ. But thanks be to God, that it is not in our hand
to loose our life, since it is not committed to our keeping. And therefore in
our greatest tentations, when it seems, according to our sense and feeling,
that Satan has taken from us, our peace, our joy, our righteousness, our
confidence, our light, and communion with our God: so that it appears to us,
that we are utterly forgotten of God, and all hope of life taken from us: yet
we may boldly answer, that our life is not lost, although all sense be taken
from us of it: for our life is not in our keeping, but in his, who is stronger
then all, and therefore no tentation is able so to overcome us, that we be
compelled to cast away our confidence in God, who is faithful, unto whom in
all our sufferings according to his will, we commit our souls in well doing, as
to a faithful Creator: according to the exhortation of the Apost. Pet. in his
1. Epi. cha. 4. and 19. verse. For he does not expone our life to hazard, as he
did the life of Angels and of Ada^ in paradise. The gates of hell are not able
to prevail against the elect of God in Christ, since God him self is the
keeper of their life. The second part is, Our life is in the heavens.
concerning the place, where it is kept, and that is, says the Apostle,
Heaven. Doubtless, it is much more sure which is laid up in heaven the^ that
which is kept in earth, for there Satan has no such access, nor power to
execute his craft and malice, Job. 1.7.
as he has in the earth. For his labor is, in compassing the earth to and
fro, as he says himself in the book of Job. Therefore whatsoever is taken
out of the earth, and put in the heavens, is exempt from all danger of the
Divilles malice. Therefore is it that our God willing to assure us that our
life is in no danger, does show us that it is in the heavens. For that which
we enjoy here in this world, is an earnest of our life, but not the life it
self. For it is true which the Apo. Col. 3.3.
says to the Colossians: That we are dead, and that our lyse is hid with
Christ in God. The use of this point is, to make us lift up our mind to those
things which are above, as the Apostle in that same place exhorts us, and to
set our affections on these things which are above, because our life is above
with Christ, and therefore it becomes us to have our conversation, Phil. 3 20.
as Citizens of the heaven: From whence we look for the Savior, even the Lord
lesus, and so consequently for our life, for our life is with him: Col. 3.4.
and when he shall appear from heaven, then shall our life also appear with
him. Therefore ought we to mortify our members, which are on the earth. For
where shall a man's heart be but where his treasure is, and what ca^ be our
treasure more then our life? Therefore heavy is the judgment that the Apostle
teaches against them that mind earthly things, writing to the Philippians.
Philip. 3.18 19.
There is nothing can moove a man more to seek for heaven, then this, to know,
that his life is there, and nothing can serve to moderate our love of this
world, and of all things in this world, more the^ this, to know they belong not
to our life, which consists not in them, nor in any thing under the su^ne,
seeing that it is in the heavens. Moreover this warns the godly, with the
Apostle Paul, to think, that they have not yet attained to the Resurrection
from the dead, or that they are already perfect; Philip. 3.12 etc.
so long as they are in this world, seeing their life is not in this world: And
therefore that they ought to forget that which is behind, and endeavor
themselves to that which is before, and follow hard toward the mark, for the
price of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus. Further, it is a singular
comfort against the fall of Adam: For he had his life in Paradise, but not in
the heavens, therefore was his life subject to spoil, whereas ours is in the
heavens, and therefore not subject to spoil. And yet to augment our joy in
this point, we have to consider that which the Apostle says to the
Colossians concerning our life. It is (says he) hid with Christ in God. Col.
3.3.
First it is hidd. Secondly it is hid with Christ. Thridlie, it is hidd with
Christ in God. We our selves, who have further sight of things that are above,
the^ Satan has, do not see our life, it is yet hid from us, for never eye did
see, 2 Cor. 2.9.
nor ear has heard, neither came in man's heart, thethings which God has
prepared for them that love him: much more then is it hid from Satan, that he
can not see it. Secondly, it is hid with Christ, even with him who has given
his life for it, and purchased it to us by his own death. It can be with none
to whom we can more securely credit it, or who ca^ have more care to preserve
it. Johan. 17.12.
He was faithful in all that the Father did commit to him, for none of them
that the Father gave him, John. 17.2.
did he lose: And this is the Fathers will, that he should give eternal life
to all the^ that the Father has given him, and this life that he should give
us, is with him who should give it. Therefore it must be in sure keeping: yea
more it is hid with him, because he is our life it self, and now he being
taken out of our sight, and hid in the heavens, our life can not be seen, til
he be seen again: this is the surety of our life, that it is with our
Savior. Who in purchasing of it, did spoil the principalities, Colos. 2.17
Ephe 1.22. Colos. 2.10
and powers, and made a show of them openly, and triumphed over them in the
Cross: to whom all things are subdued, and who is the head of all principality
and power. Thirdly, it is in God. O what a comfort is this, that the Lord
himself is the place, even the Coffer or Christ, in the which our life is
kept, so that Satan must spoil God himself, before he be able to spoil our
life. The damned Angels had their life in the heavens, but kept in themselves,
and therefore lost they it. And therefore as the keeping of our life in heaven,
assures us against the fear of the like loss that befell to Adam, who had
his life in earthly Paradise, unto the which Satan found access: So this
keeping of it with Christ in God, assures us against the terror of the
Angels fall. This now concerning the place where our life is kept. Now
follows the end wherefore it is kept, Life is kept for us.
and that is for us, says the Apostle. It were no comfort to us how surely
soever this inheritance, so excellent, were kept by God, if God did keep it
for Angels, or if he did keep it for any other creature, or for himself only.
For no happiness of any other creature could comfort me, I being my self
deprived of it: but here is our comfort, that we know, this life which is kept
by God in heaven, is kept for us, and for none other. Therefore the wicked, who
have no assurance to gert this life, have no comfort in the sure keeping of it.
The very speech of the Apostle leads us to consider That blessed is the man,
who is in the fellowship of the clect, for whom this life is ordained, that he
may say, as the Apostle does here, That he is one of the number for who^ that
life is kept. This is the manner of the Saints speech, because they see that it
is in the communion of Saints, that they enjoy all the blessings of God in
Christ. Therefore to speak of their enjoying of them in this fellowship, as
being of that number. This is the third thing that shows the surety of this
life to us, even because it is for us that God keeps it. It was doubtless a
great tentation to the poor Cananitish woman of Sarophenica, when she heard
Christ say, that he was not sent but to the lost sheep of the house of
Israel: and yet more heavy, when she heard him say to her, That it was not
good to take the childrens bread, and to cast it to dogs, as though he had
neither ben sent to her, nor yet had gotten the dispe^sation of grace, to
bestow ought on her thereof, and if her faith had not overcome this assault, it
had been better for her never to have known, that he was the Lord of life,
sent into the world for the life thereof: but her consolation could not be
taken from her, nor her confidence drawn out of her heart, because she did
see through faith in him, that even the dogs of the Gentiles were to eat of
the crummes of the childrens table. This also made the Gentiles to rejoice in
their hearts and be glad, when they heard of the Apostle Paul, Act. 13.48.
that God had ordained Christ a Savior, and a light to the Gentiles. when
before they heard of the promise made to the Jews, and fulfilling thereof in
Christ, in whom forgivenes of sins was preached, and desired and besought the
Apostles Paul and Barnabas, that they would preach these words to them the
next Sabbath day. Doubtless they would have given all the world, to have been
sure that that consolation which was preached to the Jews, might also have
belonged to them. And therefore when the next Sabbath day they had it, out of
the Apostles mouth, confirmed by the scripture, that God had made Christ the
light of the Gentiles, that he should be the salvation unto the end of the
world: It is said, that they were glad, and glorified the word of the Lord. For
what avayleth it a man to hear that there is salvation for men in Christ, and
that there is an unspeakable felicity laid up in the heavens, except that he
know that he is one of the men for whom it is prepared: those men's religion
that consists only in the certain knowledge that there is a Savior, and
that there is remission of sins in his blood, and eternal life to all that
believe in him, and yet never labored to know if he was given to them a Savior
in particular unto the remission of their sins, and giving of eternal life
to them in particular, is nothing but a fantasy without fruits or comfort.
Here is then the chief point, that this life is surely kept, and that for us.
Neither can ever the soul of a poor sinner receive comfort, until it be said
to his soul, to thee belongs remission of sins, and to thee is reserved
salvation in the heavens. Then is his heart established in hope. Thus much now
for the suertie of our inheritance. Now follows the sure keeping of us to it:
and this is brought by way of a description of the Saints. For when the
Apostle had said, that this inheritance is kept in the heaven for us, then he
expounds whom he does understand by that word us, even those (says he) who
are kept by the power of God through faith unto salvation, which is prepared to
be showed in the last time. So that these words do both contain a description
of the children of God, and in their description, a declareation of their
surety unto life. The first point of this description stands in their
keeping: the second in the power whereby they are kept. The third, in the mean
whereby this power does keep them. And lastly, the end wherefore they are
kept. As concerning their keeping, it is a matter of great moment to the child
of God, for although he knows that his life be sure enough, because it is in
heaven, and there kept with Christ in God, for him, yet herein is his peace and
joy troubled: because he himself is yet in the earth, subject and exponed to
the tentations of Satan, of the world, and of the flesh: and daily in danger
to be overcome, and so to be spoiled from that life, that is sure in the
heavens. Being therefore in this danger, and by experience trying oftimes his
own weakness, and the strength of his enemies, in his manifest slydings and
fallings: never can he have solid comfort, till his mind be assured, that the
gates of hell shall not be able to prevail against him: 1 Cor. 4.8. etc.
finding the power of God magnified in his mortal body, in that (though he
be afflicted on every side) yet he is not in distres: though he be in
doubt, yet he dispaireth not: though he be persecuted, yet he is never
forsaken: and although he be often cast down, yet he perishes not. They that
trust in the Lord, being as Mount Sion, which can not be removed, but
remains for ever. So that they may sing in that song of the Saints in the
hundredth and twenty nine Psalm: Psalm. 129.1.
They have oftentimes afflicted me from my youth, May Israel now say. They
have oftentimes asslicted me from my youth, but they could not prevail
against me. For the same God, who has taken the keeping of ourlyfe, has also
taken the keeping of us to that life. Therefore the Apostle Paul, who rejoices
in this, 2 Timoth. 1.12. 2 Timoth. 4.18.
that God, to whom he had committed his life, was able to keep it unto that
day: does also boldly glory in this assurance: That the Lord will deliver him
from every evil work, and will preserve him unto his heavenly kingdom. Our
Savior willing to comfort us, against the grief of his bodily departure out
of this world, before his death, Ioh. 17.11.15.
did recommend us all, who are in this world, to his Fathers keeping, least
we should think our selves left withou a keeper, when he who while he was
in the world, did keep us, was no more in the world. It is impossible that
the Father should deney the Son any thing, that he shall ask: Ioh. 11.42.
for the Father hears the Son always. Christ Jesus likewise in the tenth
of John, speaking of the sure felicity of his sheep, that they should never
perish: he gives the reason, from the sure keeping of them in the hand of the
Father. My Father (says he) which gave them me, is greater then all: and none
is able to take them out of my Fathers hand. Neither (says he) shall one
pluck them out of my hands. And he adds likewise the reason. For I (says
he) and my Father (who is stronger then all) are one. The Saints are kept by
the power of God.
The second point of our consolation, is, from the power whereby God does
keep us, even the power of God himself. The reason why the knowledge of this
is requisite, may well be gathered out of the sixth to the Ephesians, where the
Apostle exhorting us to arm our selves with this power of the Lords might,
does give us a reason why we should do so, because (says he) we wrestle not
against flesh and blood, but against Principalities, against Powers, and
against worldly Governors, the princes of darkness of this world, against
spiritual wickednesses, which are in the high places. Therefore he bids us,
To take the whole armor of God. If we had only to do with flesh and blood,
it might be that the power of flesh and blood might be sufficient for us, to
defend us: for there is not, nor has been, any power of man so great, but there
has been and shall be a power of man able to withstand it. So if a Prince did
rise against us, we might fly under the shadow of another Princes wings for
our security, but no man, in the world, how great so ever he be, is abls to
defend him self, much less others, from the assaults of Satan, sin, and
death. These three are stronger then any creature. for sin has overcome both
Man and Angel and death, by sin, and Satan prevailed against man in his
integrity. Therefore it is most needful that we be guarded by another power
stronger then the power of man, yea stronger then the power of Angels, and yet
stronger then the power of sin and death, which have gotten dominion over all
men, and over a great many Angels. Now, a greater power then these is not,
except only the power of God: who is able only to subdue all things to
himself, by the power of his might. This serves first to comfort us against
all terror of the Devils power and malice, 1 Pet. 5.8.
who as says the Apostle, Goes about like a roaring Lion, seeking whom he may
devour. knowing that we are kept by that stronger one, who is able to bind
that strong one, that is, Heb 2.14.
Satan, and spoil him of his goods, even by that mighty Sampson, who by his
own death did destroy him that had the power of death, that is the Devil: and
by that strong Lion of the Tribe of Judah. 2 Cor. 12.5.9.10.
Secondly, it teaches us that lesson of the Apostle to the Corinthes, not to
rejoice of our selves, except it be of our infirmities, in the which we
gladly ought to rejoice, that the power of Christ may dwell in us. Moreover,
even in our infirmities, in reproaches, in necessities, in persecutions, in
anguish for Christ's sake, we should take pleasure: because when we are weak,
then are we estronge: for the power of God is made perfect through weakness, as
shows the same Apostle in the same place. Thirdly, this shows the vanity
of all those men, who do esteem them selves sure enough guarded against the
power of the Devil, by Crossings, by holy water, by ringing of Belles, etc.
and such like vanities. It is evident that these men did never yet
sufficiently know, either their own weakness, or the Devils power: against the
which by the Apostle in the place aforesaid to the Ephesians, it is manifest,
that no man is able to stand fast, who is not armed and made strong by the
power of Gods might. It is most certain, that Angels are not able to keep
us, If God did withdraw his strength from us. And therefore does David show us,
that only the man who dwells in the secret of the most high, and abides in
the shadow of the Almighty, is in a secure estate, that he needs not to be
affrayd, Psalm. 91.
neither of the fear of the night, nor of the arrow that flies by day: nor of
the pestilence that walks in the darkness, nor of the plague that destroys
at noone day. He shall walk upon the Lion and Aspe: the young Lion and the
Dragon shall he tread underfoot, because the Lord will deliver him from the
snare of the hunter, and from the noisome pestilence, and will suffer none
evil to come near him: for he is with him in trouble to deliver him and to
glorify him. Therefore may all the children of God boldly boast with the
Apostle, of their security, Romans 8.31. etc.
that no Devil, nor other accuser dare lay any thing to their charge: seeing
God does justify them, no creature nor Prince, nor power shall be able to
condemn them, for whom Christ has died, for whom he is risen, and for whom at
the right hand of the Father he makes intercession. None shall be able to
separate them from the love of Christ: no not tribulation, nor anguish, nor
persecution, nor famine, nor nakedness, nor peril, nor sword: in all which
things, says the Apostle, we are more then conquerors. But how? not by our
own might, not by the might of Angels, or any other creatures, but thorough
him that loved us: and therefore in the gloriation of faith, does he defy all
Principalities and powers, and Angels, and life and death, things present,
things to come: highness, deepnes, and all creatures, because he is persuadeth,
that none of the^ is able to separate him from the love of God which is in
Christ Jesus our Lord. For if God be on our side, who can be against us? the
power of God keeps us, against which no power is able to stand. The last use
of this is, to make us afraid of sin, and of the power of it, since no power
of the world is able to keep us from the power of sin and tentations of the
Devil, of the flesh, and of the world, except only the power of God him self:
and therefore they are wonderfully deceyved, that think it stands in man's
own power and in the strength of his own will, to preserve him self from
sin, and to keep him self in well doing. Let us learn to fly unto God, as
our only keeper, who by his own power defends us from all our enemies. Now
follows the mean or mids, whereby this power of God is exercised and
practiced in keeping of us, Gods power is practiced by faith.
and that is faith says the Apostle. Who are kept, says he, by the power of
God through faith. So it is faith in and throw which the power of God keeps
us. There be many midses and means in and by which the Lord utters his
power in preservation of his creatures from bodily and temporal dangers and
keeping of them in the strength, and enjoying of this present life: he uses
his creatures for nourishing us in this mortal life: He employeth diverse
means for our deliverance from sickness and other troubles, as Medecin, and
such like worldly helps. And he manifests his power in the government of
things in the creatures, both heavenly and earthly. In all which it may be
justly said, that God by his power does keep all things in the life, state
and condition wherein he puts them: but none of al these means do serve
to keep us from spiritual enemies unto eternal life: there is another mean
whereby God utters his power, and exercises it in us to keep us from
eternal death unto salvation, and that is faith. Therefore is it that the
Apostle writing to the Ephesians, Ephe. 1.19.
prays to God for them, that the eyes of their understanding might be opened,
to know what is the exceeding greatness of his power toward us which believe
according to the working of his mighty power which he wrought in Christ, when
he raised him from the dead, to teach us, that God utters his power and
practices it in his children to salvation, by faith. And that this power which
he exercises in us that believe, is a more strong power then any that ever God
uttered or manifested in any other of his works, either in creating all
things of nothing, or yet in governing or preserving all things created. For
the power and might which he imployeth to our preservation who believe, is that
same power and strength which he wrought in raysinge Christ from the dead,
and in glorifying him, and making him the head of all Principality and Power,
and giving him to be ye head of his church. Which we in greater measure the^
ever it was uttered in any other work, because it must be greater that makes
Christ the head of all power in subdewing all things under his feet, then that
power which made all other powers. Seeing the power of Christ given him by the
Father, over all Thrones and Dominions, over Devils and Angels, and sin and
death, is greater then all other powers which is subdued under his feet.
Therefore the Apostle speaking of this power of God toward us that believe,
says, That it is according to the working of the strength of his power, as
though God never had exercised the strength of his power, in the strength
thereof, but in Christ our head, and in us that believe. And therefore also our
faith whereby this power of God is exercised in us, both in quickening and
raising us from the dead with Christ, and in preserving us, is called by the
Apostle to the Colossians, Colos. 2.12
The faith of the operation of God: or rather, of the effectual working of
God. In the which place the Apostle shows plainly, that it is through this
faith of the operation of God, that God does raise us from the dead, as he did
Christ. Letting us know, that as it is the power of God only, that is able to
work these things in us that concern eternal life: so this power is never
performed, nor practiced in us, but throw faith. For this cause is it that the
Apostle to the Philippians, Philip. 1.27
declaring to us how we must fight, and with what armor against all
tentations and persecutions, he bids us fight together through the faith of
the Gospel. 1 Pet. 5.9.
And the Apostle Peter, teaching us how to resist our adversary the Devil,
wills us to Resist him by steadfastness of faith. And all this is to declare
unto us, that there is no surety, nor sure keeping of us against the Devil,
the world, and sin, but by faith only: according to that which John in his
first epistle teaches us, 1 Ioh 5.4.5
This is that victory, that overcomes this world, even our faith. For who is
it that overcommeth this world, but he which believes that Jesus is that son
of God. And the Apostle to the Ephesians cap. 6. verse. 16. knowing that our
chief strength stands in our faith, bids us above all other parts of our
spiritual armor, to take the shield of faith, wherewith we may quench all
the fiery darts of the wicked. And Christ when he declares unto his
Disciples, Luc. 22.31.
that Satan had desired to winow the^ as wheat, he says to Peter: but I have
prayed for thee, that thy faith fail not. Hereby showing, that howsoever the
Devil assault us, and buffet us, yet in none of our slydings obtains he a
full victory, so long as our faith fails not: and that in the sure
continuance of our faith, stands our sure keeping from all the Devils
sifting and winowing of us. Hereby it is manifest, that they which never
beleved, had never proof of the saving power of God, and that they whose faith
is nothing powerful in operation against Satan, and sin, never had any true
faith: but as James says, Their faith is nothing but a dead faith. For they
who truly believe, do find in them selves a power effectual, whereby they
are made able to fight against all Principalities and spiritual wickednesses:
and not only to fight, but also to overcome them. So that even it is a wonder
to the Saints themselves, who know their weacknes natural, that they should
be so stre^gthned by grace, that nothing is able to overcome them. The use of
all this is, to teach us, that above all things, we should pray to God, to
stre^gthen our faith, and to preserve it, that it fail not. For according to
the measure of our faith, so is the measure of our strength: and according as
we continue in faith, so does our strength continue with us. As by the
contrary, our faith failing, our strength fails us. Therefore was it that
Peter, albeit he receyved a great foil from the Devil in denying his Lord,
yet did he at length overcome the Devil, because his faith failed not, though
he failed in confession. The spirit of God in the 11. Chapter to the Hebrews
shows that whatsoever the Saints were able to do or suffer for the glory of
God, it was by faith: and therefore is it no wonder, although the wicked be
overcome with every tentation, to lust, to drunkenes, to chambering, to
wantonness, pride and covetousnes, etc. seeing the power of God, by which these
things only can be overcome, is not in the^, they being without faith.

Now have we to speak of the end whereto we are kept, The Saints are kept to
salvation.
that is, says the Apostle, unto salvation, as we said before of the keeping
of our life: That it were no comfort to us, except it were kept for us. So
likewise of us, it were no matter of joy to us, that we are kept, if it were
not to salvation that we are kept. For God does keep the very Devils in
chains under darkness. But whereto, Iud. 6.
unto the condemnation of the great day, says Jude. Even so also does he
preserve the wicked from many evils in this life, but all that keeping is no
comfort, seeing they are kept as beasts for the slaughter, unto the day of
wrath, and manifestation of the just judgment of God. But here is the comfort
of the Saints, that God keeps them unto salvation, because he keeps them by
his power, through faith. And this also serves to confirm us in the assurance
of inioying this life, because it is both for us that the Lord keeps it: and
it is unto us that he keeps us. That it is impossible to frustrate us of it,
though all the world should be against us. That same which the Apostle before
did call, a lively hope, and an inheritance immortal, etc. that same does he
call now, salvation: to teach us, that our inheritance is salvation, and that
salvation is our inheritance. For no man can be Gods heir, but he must
inherit life: and none can inherit life, but he must be the heir of GOD,
and Coheire with Christ. This for the surety of this life, to the hope whereof
the Lord our God begets us.

Now the last point is, concerning the manifestation of this salvation.
Touching the which there is three things to be marked. First, that this
salvation is already prepared. Seco^dlie, that it is to be revealed. And
thirdly, the time of the revealing of it, is the last day. To come to the
first, it is not to be thought that our salvation is not yet ready, Salvation
is now prepared.
although we be not yet in possession of it. Indeed before the coming of
Christ in the flesh, salvation was not prepared, nor made ready for us. For
Christ was the high Priest of good things to come, Heb. 9.10.11.
and his time is called the time of Reformation: for the way to the most holy
place was not yet opened, while as yet the first tabernacle was standing,
neither was that sacrifice offered that does purge our consciences from dead
works, to serve the living God, and whereby eternal redemption is purchased.
Neither was our foreru^ner entered in before us into the heavens for us, to
prepare a place for us, in purifying the heavenly things themselves with his
own sacrifice. For the Law had but the shadow of good things to come, and not
the very Image of the things. But now since our Passover is offered, and our
Advocat entered into the heavens, and crowned with glory and honor in the
flesh, so taking possession in his very manhood, of this inheritance immortal,
undefiled, and which withers not. Now, I say, salvation is made ready.
Neither is it holden back from us, nor we from it, because it is not yet
prepared, but because the time is not yet come in the which we must receyve it.
Heb. 11.39.40.
For as the Fathers received not the promise, God providing a better thing for
us, that they without us should not be made perfect, even so now, we receive
not the inheritance prepared, God providing a better thing for the Saints, yet
to be borne unto the end of the world, that we without them should not be made
perfect. For they receyved not by Moses the promised Messiah, least they only
should have bin saved and not the Gentiles also. Therefore did he not come unto
the end of that dispensation, at which time the Gentiles also were to be
called. God persuading Iaphet to dwell in the tents of Sem: even so now though
Christ be made a light to the Gentiles as well as to the Jews: and salvation
unto the ends of the world, and that he has already finished the works and
purchased salvation, yet do we not receive it until all those for who^ it is
prepared, be made ready as well as we. In the Revelation, the souls of them
which are killed for the word of God, and for the testimony which they
mainteyned, when they cried with a loud voice, saying: Revel. 6.10 11.
How long Lord which art holy and true, do not thou judge and avenge our
blood on them that dwell on the earth? It was answered to them, That they
should rest for a little season, until their fellow servaunts and their
brethren, that should be killed even as they, were fulfilled. For both the full
vengeance of the wicked, and full glorification and redemption of the Saints,
is delayed until the number, both of the wicked and redeemed, be fulfilled.
This serves to comfort us, when we know that our salvation is not now to be
prepared, and to be purchased as yet, but that it is ready and prepared
already: So that, if we were ready for it, it is ready for us. There is no let
therefore in our salvation, why we enjoy it not, for it is ready prepared, even
as a bryd ready for her bridgrome, but we are not yet ready, because we want
yet a number of those with whom we must enjoy it, and who with us must enjoy
it. For it is not kept for me alone, nor for us of this age alone, or for us of
this or that Nation alone, but it is kept for us al who belong to Jesus Christ,
as members of his body: which must be completed and accomplished in all the
members, not one wanting, before it put on the glory of the head. Next says
the Apostle, It is prepared to be revealed or showed. This yet serves to
increase our joy. It was doubtless a forcible argument, that Christ used, to
ease the hearts of the Apostles, Salvation shall be revealed.
and settle them from the grief and trouble conceaved at the news of his
departing from them, when he told them, That he did go to prepare a place
for them: but it doubled their joy, John 14.2.^^.
when he added, That he would come again, and receive them unto himself, that
where he is, they might be also. So doubtless it is with us. It is no small
matter of Consolation, when we know that salvation is prepared for us by Jesus
Christ in the heavens: but it does much more glad our hearts, when it is
told us that this salvation of ours, which now is hid from our eyes, shall be
showed to us, that we may see it with our eyes. Simeon with all the rest of the
faithful, rejoiced in the promise made to them of the Messiah. But Simeon had
this more then the rest, that he had this promise, that he should not see
death, before he had seen the anointed of the Lord: and therefore as all did
die with joy sufficient in the promise of his coming, yet Simeon behoved to
have more joy in his death, when he said: Lord now let thou thy servaunt
depart in peace, according to thy word: For my eyes have seen thy salvation.
No surely, it were no comfort to us to know that there is salvation in the
heavens, if we were secluded for ever from seeing that salvation: yea it were
better for the wicked never to have known there were a God: yea that there were
not a God at all, then to be banished from the presence of that God for ever,
as they shall be.

The use hereof is, to comfort us against the present longinge and earnest
desire we have of the sight of God, and of our Savior, and of that glory, 2
Cor. 5.2.
while we sighe. Desiring to be clothed with our house which is from heaven:
even that we know that our life which is now hid with Christ in God, shall once
be manifested. For during this life, neither are we seen to the world the
children of God: neither is our salvation seen of us. John 3.2.
For as John says, Though now we be the children of God, yet it is not made
manifest, what we shall be, Colos. 3.4.
but when Christ which is our life shall appear, the^ shall we also appear with
him in glory. And therefore is it, that the fervent desire of the creature
wayteth when the sons of God shall be revealed. Romans 8.19.
And we our selves are said to be saved by hope, and that for this cause we
do sighe and groan in our selves, waiting for the adoption, even the
redemption of our body. Now the time when our salvation shall be showed,
Salvation shall be revealed at the coming of Christ.
is, the last time. For so long as Christ is hid, so long must our salvation be
hid: for without him, it can never be seen, for he is our salvation: and
therefore seeing Christ is not to be seen again until the last time, our
life ca^ not be seen until that time. This is the cause that the Saints do
cry with a most earnest desire: Come Lord Jesus, come: and that that day,
which is the last of al days, may come, because they know their life ca^ not be
revealed till that day. This day of all days is the most longed for by the
godly: and of all days least desired or wished of the world. The reason is
evident, The godly do know that that brings to them the end of all misery,
and everlasting joy: whereas to the wicked it brings an end of al their
flesh lie pleasures and worldly delites, wherein they did put their felicity,
and does begin their endless damnation, Therefore would they wish it never came:
So contrary is the desire of Gods children to the desire of the wicked. For
there shall be two things in that day revealed that never were seen before, that
is, the salvation of the elect, and the vengeance prepared for the wicked. It
is true in deed that God shows his salvation, even in this world, in all the
deliverances of his children, like as he shows his vengeance in all plagues
powered upon the wicked: but we must distinguish betwixt al salvation enjoyed in
this life, and that salvation which is to be manifested in ye coming of
Christ: and betwixt all judgments in this life, and that judgment that shall be
revealed in the appearing of the Lord in flaming fire. For neither is the first
that full fruit of Gods mercy purchased by Christ, neither is the other the
just recompense of Gods Justice to the wicked. And therefore is it in the
script. that the life of the Saints, is said to be hid until the last time:
and the wrath of God and his Justice to be hid unto the day of wrath, and
manifestation of the just judgment of God. Romans 2.5.
For that day is the day both of the manifestation of Gods just judgment, and
of this riches of his mercy. This teaches us to have patience in this present
life: although our condition in Christ be not known of the world, nor we
accounted of, as the children of God: although here we be esteemed the
offscourings of the world, and the contempt of men, for our estate is not yet
manifested. As likewise it teaches us to rejoice, the more near the day of
Gods judgment be: because our redemption is the nearer. Yea this makes that
the godly do more gladly depart out of this life, then to remain in it.
Whereas the wicked esteems it a hell to speak to them either of death, or of
Christ's coming again to judge the world. Happy is the man that is begotten
to this livelie hope, for he finds what comfort is in both: while as the
wicked shall wish that the mountains might fall upon them, and the earth open
and swallow them, rather then they should see the day of Christ's appearing.
But let us who believe and knows that our life and salvation comes with
Christ. Let us I say with all our hearts pray Lord Jesus come, come Lord Jesus
come, even so be it, AMEN.

FINIS.

