(...) OR
A merry discourse, twixt him and his Joane,
That sometimes did live as never did none,
But now at the last she proves very kind,
And does what heed have her, as here you may find.
To three several tunes, called, But I know what I know, Captain Ward, and
Gilty Coat Peggy.


The Tune, but I know, etc.
Man. ^Ome Jo^^^ by thy own dearest husband sit down
And cast ^^ay from thee this impudent frown,
know I (...) love thee as dear as I do,
^e with a ^aylor that is honest and true.

Woman. ^y thou diss^^bling varlot away,
(...) leave this the prating and cogging, I say,
(...) whilst like a drunkard thou thus do remain
(...) ^^^er, shall lov^ thee, I tell thee again.

Captain Ward.
Man. (...) wife what would thou have me do
^ore then I now have done,
(...) not I pawn^^ my clothes for thee,
(...) likewise soul^ my shune,
(...) my shirt in lavender,
(...) cloak is likewise sold:
^ost thou Joane for all this love,
^in with Jacke to scould.

Woman. Why, thou deboist and drunken sot,
did do all this for me,
Or for the love you always bare,
to evil company?
And therefore hold thy self content,
and leave this idle prate,
Or as I am thy honest wife,
I Will lay thee over the pate.

Gilty Coat Peggy.
Man. Come chucke no more of this, but sit thee down by me,
And then what is amiss, I Will mend in verity,
My money I will save out of the Cup and Can,
And keep thee fine and brave, as I am an honest man:
Then chide no more my dear, but all my faults remit,
And then as I am here, I Will mend my drunken fit.

Woman. How many times have thou this promised unto me,
And yet have broke thy vow the more's the shame for thee
And therefore I Will be wise, and take your word no more,
But scratch out both your eyes if you go out of door;
And therefore sit you still and stir not for your life,
I once will have my will, although I am your wife,

The second part,
to the same tunes.
But I know what, etc.
Man. WEll, do what thou will, I am thine at command,
But let not my neighbors of this understand;
For that if thou do, I know it will be
A shame to thy self, disgrace unto me.

Woman. No matter for that, I Will make you to know,
What it is for to iniure a loving wife so,
In pawning her goods, and making her be,
A scorn to her neighbors, and all long of thee.

Captain, etc.
Man. Come Joane, be satisfied I pray,
forgive me what is past,
And I will thee never offend,
whilst life and breath does last:
My pots and my Tobacco too,
I Will turn, for to be brief,
Into a dainty household loaf,
and lusty powder-beefe.

Woman. Well, if I thought all this were true,
and that thou did intend
To do as thou relates to me,
I then should be thy friend;
But I am Jacke so fearful grown,
of thy relaps again,
That I can little credit give,
to what you now maintain.

Gilty Coat Peggy, etc.
Man. Here Is my hand sweet Ducke, what I have said to thee,
I Will keep, if I have luck* till such time that I dye,
And fore that I am dead my love I will unfold
To help thee in thy need, if that thou will not scould,
I will not cossened be, I tell thee gentle Joane,
But I will bring to thee my sheet, and I Will have none.

Woman. Why then sweetheart forgive the words that I have said,
For surely while I live, I Will never thee upbraid,
I will not scould nor brawle, but keep my clapper still
And come when thou do call do all things to thy will,
Then Jacke, forgive thy Joane, that is to thee so kind,
Or else as hard as stone I surely shall thee find.

But I know, etc.
Man. Why, here is my hand, I am pacified Joane,
And as I will live with thee never lived none,
Then be but as kind as I careful to thee,
And then none new married shall better agree,
For thou with thy Kitchin-stuffe I with my toys
My Hammer and Kittle, will make such a noise,
That all that does hear me shall tell it for true,
I mend well their work and pleasure um too.

Captain, etc.
Woman. Then Jacke take up thy budget straight,
thy kettles brass enough,
And I will follow thee and cry.
Maids have you any Kitchin-stuffe;
And then the neighbors seeing us
so fri^ndly for to go*
Will say that they are loving grown,
who thought it would be so.

Gilty Coat, etc.
Man. Then to the Alehouse we will go with mighty speed
And seal up presently what we h^ve now decreed,
A full pot of the best, a crust, and so away,
And then we will protest we can no longer stay:
This is a thriving course, if I do not mistake,
I am sure I have done worse but now amends I Will m^^^

Woman. Well say no more, sweetheart but let us both away
For friends you know must part, t^ough never so lon^
Go thou through Canon-street. I Will take the laines a^
And then at night we will meet at home for ought we kn^^
But if I be not Jacke, at home so soon as you,
It shall but little lack: and so sweetheart adieu.

But I know, etc.
And thus you have heard an end of my song,
Which I would be loath that any should wrong,
But if that you do, I tell you but so,
I little will say, but I know what I know.
FINIS.
Ed. Ford.

Printed at London for F. Coules.


