A SVRVEY OF THE APOSTASY OF MARCUS ANTONIUS DE DOMINIS, Sometime Archbishop
of SPALATO.

Drawn out his own Book, and written in Latin, by Fidelis Annosus,
Verementanus Druinus, Divine: AND Translated into English by A.M.

Permissu Superiorum. M.DC.XVII.

THE AUTHOR to the Reader.
GENTLE Reader, I wish thee to peruse this Treatise with the same mind and
affection wherewith it was written. We make trial, whether by whole some
admonitio^s we can reclay me an Apostata, by order a Priest, in dignity an
Archbishop, and (to use no worse terms) by nature, and in manners a Man,
sinning out of human leuity and folly.

We would not arraigne him upon other men's evidence; but make him (a course
most reasonable) both Plantisse and Defendant in his own cause, and the Holy
Scriptures, with the ancient Fathers, his Judges: To whose Sentence and
Authority if he yield, we will entertain with joy his Return, whose Flight,
and Apostasy we now commiserate. But if fear of shame be more forcible with
him, then love of Truth; if he will be stubborn in his errors, and obdurate
in his sins; he shall perish to himself: an example for others to beware,
and a means of salvation of many.

THE TRANSLATOVR to the Reader.
I Thought good to let thee understand (Courteous Reader) that the Author of
this Survey, in citing the pages of the Archbishops Book, follows the
London Edition, printed for John Bill. The words of the Archbishop I have
endeavored to translate faithfully into English, and have not followed the
supposed English Translation, which indeed is no translation at all, but a
vain and idle storish upon the matter, many times very opposite to the Text,
dark, and without sense; in so much that it may seem the Translatour thereof
either did not understand well the Latin tongue, or was ashamed at the true
conceits of his Arch-hishop, and therefore would not set them forth in English.

A SVRVEY OF THE APOSTASY OF MARCUS ANTONIUS DE DOMINIS, Sometimes Archbishop
of SPALATO. Drawn out of his own Book,
by Fidelis Annosus Verementanus Druinus.
NO sooner was your Book, Mark Antony, delivered into my hands by a friend of
mine, wherein you set down the purpose of your going, but I presently perused
it. I expected from such an Apostata some new and colorable reasons of reuolte
from the Catholic Church. When I found nothing but vulgar excuses, usurped by
ancient Heretics of all ages, grown (by long usage) worn, and thread bare, I
could not but wonder at your Project, how you could persuade your self, that
with a few, silly, and ill compacted leaves, a wickedness, of all others the
greatest and fowlest, could so easily be shrouded. And not only you bring
nothing wherewith to excuse your crime, but so unwarily and grossly you
discover your self, that from the steps left printed in your book, the whole
race of your Apostasy may not only be traced and tracked out, but fully shaped
forth. It is needless therefore for him that would know you, to seek out
matters a far off, or to listen to rumors, ever uncertain and often false. The
Rat by his own savor is sufficiently bewrayed: out of your own book may be
gathered enough, and too much, to declare Who you were, and who now you are.

From hence have I taken an Inuentory of your Apostasy, to the publishing
whereof four causes have moved me. First, least with the vain titulary sound
wherewith you set your self forth in the front of your book any be deceived,
to think that which Tertullian writes should not be true: Tertul. de praesc.
ca. 3.
That those are not to be esteemed prudent, nor faithful, nor learned, whom
heresies can pervert. The second, that by this your example, others may become
more wary in following your stepps whose fall so deservedly they dread to
behold. Thirdly, that the English Protestants may learn to be ashamed, to
glory so much in you whom over greedily they admitted, with promise to
themselves you would prove a fatal writer against Rome. They that know you,
what will they say? Doubtless, that one of weak sight may reign amongst the
blind; that beggars have nothing but a few rags to boast of; that men are
easily persuaded that shall come to pass which earnestly they desire. The
fourth cause concerns your self, who may reap this abundant fruit out of
this Survey, to know your self. The special end of my writing is your
salvation. Should not I write for him for whom Christ died? should I spare my
labor of writing for you, when God of sheding his blood for you made no end,
but with his life? Peruse then with a quiet mind what charity has suggested:
regard not how sharp the things are which you read, but how true, how
authentically proved, God being the Judge, your own conscience giving
evidence. Your disease will not permit, that I should deal coldly, or
dissemble with you: it has wrought into the in most parts of your body, it
has dispersed it self into the bowels, nor could I search into it, lurking
in the quick, without your pain and feeling.

Strong must the medicines be that must cure you. And nothing is stronger then
the Truth, nothing more wholesome to a man then the knowledge of himself, the
root of all evil and errors being not to know ones self. Christ threatens
that Pastor who knows not himself, with the penalty of Apostasy, which of all
other is the greatest. If thou know not thy self, Cant. 1. verse. 8.
go forth and follow after the steps of thy flocks, and feed thy kids
besides the tabernacles of the Pastors. Which place S. Augustine most
elegantly declares, and so, as he may seem plainly to speak unto you. Aug.
ep. 40.
If you know not your self (says he) go your ways, I do not cast you forth;
but get you hence, that those which are within may say unto you; he went out
from us, but he was not of us. Go tread you the footing of your flocks, not
of one flock, but of diverse and wandering flocks. Go feed your goats, not like
to Peter, to whom it is said, feed my sheep. Go feed your goats in the
shepherds tabernacle, not in the pastures where is one flock and one Pastor.
That this punishment is inflicted on your self, if you have not lost together
with faith all sense and reason, you cannot but acknowledge. We truly have not
thrust you out, but freely you went forth of your self. Scarce had you
departed, when you lighted upon steps and diverse path-wayes of doctrine
Lutheran, Caluinian, Zuinglian, Anabaptistcall, Arian, different and opposite
one to another. Proceeding further, you arrive not to the Tabernacle of one
Pastor, but to the shep-heards Tents, being not so much for the number of
persons as for variety of opinions, many. Wherefore now at last look back, by
what gate you entered into these mischiefs you knew not your self.

Had you but known your self, you would never have imagined, much less have
written in the sixth page of your book, I am not ashamed to auerre, that I was
had in as much esteem in our Provinces and Churches, as any other. Modesty
requires, that men should be bashful in speaking, though with great
moderation, things tending to their own praise: whereas you proclayme your
self second to none of the Bishops, either of the State of Venice, or of the
Catholic world besides, and this you profess to speak without blushing You
say true; Shamefastnes is not wont to wayt upon an Apostata. But we, howsoever
you dream of your being famous, had news of the Archbishop of Spalato his
flight, before we heard of his name. Mark Antony in the Northern parts was
sooner known by his face then by his fame; he came so fast, that he prevented
the messenger of his worth and estimation. The fugitive Primate himself first
declared to many that there was any such Spalatian Primate. Notwithstanding you
were not more unknown to the world then to your self, which is the cause you
insolently prefixe your name to your book, as already known and sufficient to
give it luster, Mark Antony de Dominis, Archbishop of Spalato, sets down the
reason of his going. So you style your book, as if you were the Pithian Apollo
ready to give Oracles, or some Dictator delivering Laws unto the people, or
Pithagoras prescribing to his scholars Aphorisms, or at least some Author
known by his former writings able to gain credit to any work by the
splendor of his name. Who, notwithstanding, were at that time (for afterward
you became more notorious through the stain of your fall) so unknown, that
many wondered at the title, nor were there wanting inquirers, who should this
Mark Antony be? What going is that he speaks of so uncertainly, without
naming either whither, or from whence? Is peradventure that old Mark Antony
revived again, and fled from Rome to Aegipt? that Antony so famous for wine
and venery, who having violated his former faith to his Roman spouse no less
renowned for chastity then noble of blood, joined himself to that Aegiptian
woman infamous for her many foul enormities: Thus did men, not yet acquainted
with your journey, descant upon the title of your book, framing conjectures of
the author of Mark Antonyes name. They could not speak more assuredly of a
person wholly unknown, neither did their rouing discourses much miss of the
mark. For you having left the Roman Spouse, and violated your first faith,
have matched your self to that Lutheran brat, who being of her Fathers
condition, no more able to refrain from venery, then from food, differs not
much from Cleopatra's manners. If you but resemble that drunken Triumuir as
well in life, as you do in name, by this match may that old saying be renewed,
Bacchus is wedded to Venus.

THE FIRST PART OF THE SVRVEY OF APOSTASY, or the Ladder of Mark Antonies
fall, consisting of eight steps, or degrees.
SINCE therefore you must be cured by the most true knowledge of your self, who
through your too high a conceit of your self, have slid down into hell in
this Survey, I put you in mind of your self, whom your self have so much
forgot, and I lay open your Apostasy, not so much to the Readers eye, that he
should detest it, as before your own conscience that you may bewail it.
Behold now at last, who you were when you seemed a Catholic, and by what
stepps by little and little you fell into this abyss. The degrees therefore are
these, secret Pride, close Infidelity, suspicious Lightness, abandoning the
Jesuits Order, ambition of holy Dignities, audacious Contention for
Pre-eminence, open Contumacy against the Pope, finally Presumption of your own
judgment and learning above the Church. I will handle all these in their order,
not led by variable rumors but by evident arguments, and for the most part
taken out of your own Book.

The first degree, Secret Pride.
HERESIES are in number diverse, divided by nations, but much more by manners,
rites, and errors amongst themselves: Yet all are sisters (says S Augustine)
borne of the self same mother Pride. To which purpose says S. Gregory, Pride
is the seat of Heretics, for were they not first puffed up in their own
conceit they would never fall into strife of perverse opinions. This also,
Antony, was the beginning of al your mischief long ago: through a certain
secret Pride you coueted to show your self wise, and zealous, for the union of
all Churches above all other Catholics, under which pretensed zeal, you now
at last leave the Church. Which pride of yours you discover in your 9. page in
these words: I ever cherished in me (say you) from my first entrance into holy
orders, a kind of innated desire, I had to see the union of all the Churches of
Christ. I could never brook this separation of the West from the East, in
matters of faith, nor of the South from the Northern parts. I was very anxious
to understand the cause of so many and so great schisms, and to spy out, if
there could be any way thought upon to reduce all the Churches of Christ to the
true ancient union. Yea I did burn with desire to behold it, and I was vexed
with inward grief for so many dissentions, which strangely tormented me.

2. If you perceive not the pride that lurketh in these your thoughts, I will
stir them up further. I let that pass where you call the Grecian Schism, a
Separation of the West from the East, when rather you should have termed it the
separation of the East from the West; for we left not the Grecians, but they
departed from us. We Latins are not the Church which departed, but that from
which departure was made. What principle of faith ever was common with us and
the Grecians, which we have forsaken? They after they had nine times in nine
general Councels (peace and union concluded) subscribed to the Roman Supremacy,
so often again with the note of leuity revolted. With no less apparent
falsehood you call the Lutheran defection, a separation of the South from the
North, as if the South (that is Rome and Italy) had divided it self from the
North, abiding still in the faith of their ancestors. It is not so: for what
is more known then at such time as Luther, Zuinglius, and Calvin, and the
first Nouellistes began to preach, that the North was Catholic, and embraced
the Roman doctrine, which now they abhor? The Roman Church made no division,
but suffers diursio^s made against her The North falling away into new
opinions, Rome still remained immovable in the faith which before she
embraced; nor did the haven leave the bark, but the bark the haven. But
against these your conceits, I proceed no further, because perhaps they are not
so much signs of secret Pride, wherewith you were then taynted, as of newer
errors wherewith now you are blinded.

3. I come to your Pride. Was it not a part of passing great arrogance, that
you being but newly, and scarcely yet admitted to holy Orders, would take upon
you to be the Judge of the whole Church? That you would cite before your
Tribunal, as guilty of Schism, as well the Latin Church, as the Greek, no
less the Roman (whereof you were a member) then the Lutheran? I would (say
you) feign have known the cause of the division, and Schisms of all Churches,
and find out some means to bring them unto the true, and ancient unity. A
great piece of work, Antony, and hardly to be dispacht in a general Council
of the Church; much less are the shoulders of a puny Clergy man, as you were
then, able to sustain the burden thereof. But what necessity was it for you,
to intrude your self into the search of this cause? General Counsels had
already heard this controversy of schisms, they had before hand condemned both
Greeks and Lutherans; Cyprian. l. 4. Epist. 6.
they had concluded with Cyprian, That Schisms, and Heresies do, and have ever
sprunge up from no other cause then this, that the Bishop which is one, and
gouernes the Church, by the proud presumption of some, is set at naught; and
the man by Gods ordinance honored, by most unworthy men is adjudged: nor that
there is any other way of union, and of extinguishing heresies, then that they
return to the fountain of unity, and embrace that Catholic proof, a short
an easy way of belief, co^teyning the Epitome of truth, which our Lord
appointed, Matthew. 16.
when he spoke to Peter: Thou art Peter, and upon this Rock will I build my
Church. That he that forsakes Peter's Chair, whereupon the Church is founded,
cannot be of the Church. This is the only cause of Schism, this the only way
to unity, this the definition of the Fathers, and of the Church. This, you
being then a Jesuit and a Clergy man, could not be ignorant of, nor doubt of
being a Catholic (if you were so indeed;) why therefore did not this judgment
of the Church quiet you? Why did you vex your self in the search of another
cause of Schisms, and another way of union.

3. Certainly you then began to breed that which you have now at last brought
forth, or at least you leave the Church, to the end you may bring it forth,
which is a certain strange, and wonderful device to unite all the Churches in
one, whereby all Christian societyes (although differing in Religion among
themselves, and from Peter's Seat) are thrust up into one Body of a Church,
without any universal Head or Prince to govern them. This is the special new
doctrine you come to preach, this the great supposed light, wherein you now
exult, a glimps whereof Satan transfiguring himself into an Angel of light,
long ago presented unto you. And what was this else but to make your self
wiser then all Catholics besides? then Counsels, Fathers, and the universal
Church? yea which is more, wiser then Christ himself, who when he saw that the
peace of his Church could not otherwise stand without a Governor, Leo ep. 84.
he made Peter the chief of his Apostles, That in fellow-ship of honor, there
might be a certain difference of power: Hier. cont. Iouin.
and that by appointing a head, the occasion of schism might be utterly taken
away.

4. If (as you would make us believe) you had been inflamed with the true zeal
of souls, you would never have so anxiously searched into new causes of
schisms, but rather have labored to remove those which are now already
discovered by Fathers, and Counsels, pestering the world to the ruin of many.
You would not have been so prodigal of your vain and proud tears for the
Christian Churches, and for the Roman it self with the rest, whose child you
were; but rather taking compassion of nations wa^dring from the Roman Church
you would have studied to reduce them to the head-spring of unity, by word,
example, writing, labors, perils, and lastly with your life laid down in
pawn for testimony thereof. This had been the part of a wise man, of one
burning in Charity, of a Jesuit. But whilst your fellows the Jesuits, with
other Preachers of the Faith, sweat out their blood for the union of Churches,
and the utter racing of schism, you, forsooth, burning with zeal, innated not
infused, humane not divine, at home in your idle and imaginary trauelles,
discover new found ways of conuersions, such as were never trod on by any
foot before. Thus you vanished away in your own cogitations: whilst you
toyled your self in seeking out new and unused ways, you lost the ancient
and ready way: whilst in the Catholic way, with the foot of pride you strove
to go beyond the rest, from the Catholic truth were you cast away, and could
not stand.

The second degree, Secret Infidelity.
FOR whiles you sit in your throne vmpiere of Churches, you begin your self to
stagger in the Catholic faith: that you might at last become an Apostata, it
was needful, that you should first doubt of your faith, that so the saying of
Hilary might stand for good. Hilar. l. 6. de Trin.
Well may heresy tempt an imperfect man, but it cannot supplant the perfect.
Cyprian says: Let no man think, Cyprian. de unit. Eccles. ca. 7.
that good men can depart from the Church; The wind blows not away the Corn,
nor does the tempest overthrow the Tree that is well rooted in the ground; The
slighter chafe is carried away with the wind; the weaker trees by force of
storms are overthrown. These are those whom the Apostle John notes, Joan. 2.
cap. 19.
saying. They went out from us, but they were not of us: For had they been of
us, they would no doubt have stayed with us. It is so indeed (Antony) you were
none of ours, even when you seemed most to be ours; you were ever of a
doubtful Faith, and of a wit propense to heresy: This, those that know you,
testify; this you seem not to deny of your self, and this will I demonstrate
with a double argument out of your own speeches.

6. First in your eight page you write, that continually you felt temptations
(which now you term sparckles of the inward spirit) about certain supposed
doctrines of the Roman faith, wherewith (say you) I could never rest satisfied,
nor free my self wholly from a vehement suspicion, which ever held me
perplexed, as I grew more ancient in the studies of sacred divinity. What
those temptations were, and against what articles of the Roman faith, you set
not down: you leave it to our choice, to think that you allways had a doubt
of the mysteries of the most holy Trinity, of the Incarnation, and the
Eucharist, with others; for these also are the articles of the proper Roman
faith, which it constantly manteynes against the old heretics, and many of the
reformed (or deformed rather) of this vpstart Gospel. Nor can you say, that
you signified your temptations only, but gave no assent or consent thereunto.
For this is confuted out of that which you write in the same page 8. I have
truly always thought it (say you) a matter not void of suspicion (as reason
teaches) that the books contrary to the Roman doctrine, should be barred from
the students, and from those that are well affected to the Catholic faith. You
plainly confess by this, that you had not only a motion of doubt against
faith, but an assent also: nor were you tempted only, but you assented likewise
to that which the temptation suggested, (to wit) that the Roman faith was, if
not false, at least wise not free from suspicion of falsehood.

7. From hence is derived the second Argument of your secret Infidelity. You
say that you ever have suspected the Roman Church, because she lays those
books out of sight which are any ways contrary to her doctrine. And by and by
you explicate more clearly your suspicion (to wit:) That something there was
no doubt in the books of heretics, which the Roman doctrine was not able to
convince. I take you at your word, that you always suspected the Protestants
doctrine to be sounder then the Catholics. What may be deduced from this? Even
this, that you were never a Catholic indeed, never truly endued with the Roman
Faith. For he that believes like a Catholic and a Christian, this thing of all
other first and chiefly he belieues, that nothing may be found surer or holier
then his faith. And this persuasion if it be unsteady and wavering, is no
Faith, nor the substance of things hoped for, nor the firm and immovable
ground of salvation. Tertul. praesc. ca. 8.
When we believe (says Tertullian) we desire to believe no more, for this
thing we first of all believe, that there is not ought else to be believed. And
again, Ibidem c. 11
No man seeks for that which he has not lost, or never had. If you believe
the things that you ought to believe, and yet imagine something else to be
sought for, then surely you hope, that there is something else to be found;
which you would never do, but because either you did not believe that which you
seemed to believe, or else now you have left to believe. Thus leaving your
Faith you are found a denyer. Thus Tertullian. Who seems (Antony) to speak to
you, your conscience he conuents: you say that, with reason you have always
esteemed the Roman doctrine to be touched with suspicion of infirmity. Is this
you speak, true or false? If false, who has so bewitched you to give the lie
to your own self? how is it likely that you will speak well of the Pope
whom you hate, that spare not your own self? he that is not good to
himself, to whom will he be good? If true, how were you ever a Catholic, and
a Roman Catholic, that have always judged the Roman doctrine (if not openly
false) yet lying open to suspicions of falsehood, and no way secure?

8. Since then you confess your Faith to have been ever so sickly and feeble,
we trouble not our selves with the searching out of those decrees and mysteries
of the Roman Faith whereof you doubted: But in reward of your ingenuous
confession, we do of our own accord vouchsafe you the grant of your suite,
which you so painefully endeavor in this writing to obtain of us. For you
desire, that your departure may breed no admiration in us; Your suite (Antony)
is reasonable, and not amiss for us. For it is the part of a Christian rather
to eschew heresies, whereof Christ foretold us, Matthew. 24.19. Act 20.
then to wonder at them: not to wonder I say, though the stars should fall
from heaven, or that, from among Bishops whom Christ has placed to govern
his Church purchased by his blood, there should arise men lying, and speaking
peruersly: Wonderers (as Tertullia^ says) by the fall of certain persons
which were held for learned, or holy men, are edified to their own
destruction: They understand not that we ought to receive Doctors with the
Church, and not with Doctors forsake the Church, nor to esteem the Faith, for
the persons that embrace it, but the persons for the Faith they embrace. But as
for you (Antony) why should we wonder at your fall, seeing you confess, that
you were never stable. Cypr. epist. 52. ad Anton.
Grave men (says S. Cyprian) and such as are once well and soundly founded on
the rock, are not shaken with wind or storms, much less removed with a sil^y
blast. It were a wonder indeed if such men so grounded in the faith should fall:
but you that never stood fast upon the Rock, against which the proud gats of
hell cannot prevail, Aug. cont. part. Donat.
you that always had the sails of you high mind spread to the winds of
nouelty, you that continually suspected the infallible doctrines of the Roman
Church for feeble, you being so doubtful, and uncertain; no marvel if at
last, tossed with diverse fancies, as it were with certain blastes of winds
rushing upon you, you were beaten from your first purpose. The Faith that in
your self already was false, could not long retain the semblance of standing.

The third degree, Suspicious Lightness, and Inconstancy.
BUT now if we do look into the causes of these your doubts, such causes
especially which you commit to writing, straight appears your suspicious
Leuitie, readily carried away with every blast. You object forsooth errors,
abuses, and innumerable novelties to the Roman Church, but they are but words
only: For in particular you do not so much as name them, much less prove them.
Namely and especially you urge two incitements of your change, two things that
scandalized you in the Catholic Church, which we will now examine, and lay
open the vanity you discover therein. The first in your 8. page, you set down
in these words. That which made me more doubtful, was the exact and rigorous
diligence used both at Rome, and in my own Country; Whereby a most vigilant
heed is taken, that no books contrary to the Roman doct^i^e, be handled or read
of any: good reason I thought there was, that the vulgar sort should be
forbidden them: But that students, and those very well affected to the
Catholic faith, and well known to be sound in doctrine, should wholly be
deprived of them, I have ever thought it a matter of suspicion. And in hiding,
suppressing, and destroying of such books, so much industry is had, that for
this cause only a man may well suspect, that there is something in them, which
our doctrine is not able to convince. Two things you say; first that you have
always had the Roman Church in suspision, because she prohibits the adversaries
books. The other is, that for this very cause her doctrine may well be called in
question By the first you bewray the instability of your mind, but in the
second your impiety also.

10. For the first then, what a lightness and inconstancy is it, upon so vain a
suspicion to renounce the Church, especially that Church that has bred you to
Christ? In whose lap (to use S. Augustins words) many just respects should have
held you: Aug. cont. Epist. rundam. cup. 3.
(to wit) the consent of people and notions, the authority which was first
bred by miracles, nursed by hope, brought up by charity, founded in antiquity.
The succession of Priests, even from the seat of Peter the Apostle, to whom
our Lord after his resurrection committed his flock, unto this present
Bishopric. Lastly the name Catholic; which not without cause this Church
only, amongst so many heresies, hitherto has enjoyed. But (say you) she
smothers, oppresses, and destroys the adversaries books by all means
possible: she does so indeed; like a mother she wisely, and piously tenders the
good of her children; like a shep-heard she looks carefully to her flock; as
the servant of servants, Whom our Lord has placed over his family, forbids
them to taste of poisoned meats, warily preventing, least such deadly food
should be brought into her house: what fault is there in all this? This is no
diffidence, but providence, nor is the weakness of her doctrine, which is
divine, the cause of her fears, but the frailty and inconstancy of man's mind:
For experience sufficiently approues (nor do you deny) that which S. Aug. cont.
Epist. Fund.
Augustine affirms: That there is no error whatsoever, but may be so glossed,
that it may easily steal in by a fair gate to the minds of the ignorant. And
who sees not, if dangerous Books for the use of the learned, should be freely
brought into Countries that are not tainted with heresy, that scarce truly, or
rather not scarcely can it be, but that they must light into the hands of the
ruder sort, especially if they should be permitted in such a number, as you
would have (that is to say) to all Bishops and Deuines, Page 9.
that have fully ended their studies: Yea, and moreover to Students and
scholars also, to see whether their masters truly allege the testimonies of
heretics. This were too great a multitude, and would make poison over common.
Wherefore the Catholic Church with great wisdom has thought it more
expedient that the learned, which may securely read such books, rather should
want this vain contentment of curiosity, or unnecessary furtherance of
learning, then that the unlearned, by so common bringing in of such infectious
merchandise, should be brought into manifest danger of their salvation.

11. Neither truly as you suppose does this danger of drinking falsehood, by
perusal of heretical books, belong to the common sort of men only, whom you
term void of judgment and discretion. I take it, you mean heardes-men,
shepherds, crafts men, and such like: which kind of people, notwithstanding
for the most part is safest of all, of they be not more by others example and
authority, then by their own reading perverted. The danger indeed threatens
the vulgar sort, but the vulgar sort of the learned. In which number are found
not a few rash and hot spirits, men rather died then imbued with sacred
learning, that seem to themselves, and many times also to the people learned
Catholics, and constant, when rather they are like unto men easily remouable
from their faith, unlearned, and apre to worship their own fancies as divine
oracles. Wherefore no Catholic unless some giddy fellow, void both of experience
and reason, will mislike this Roman solicitude, in providing so carefully,
that books condemned be not read rashly and promiscuously, even of those that
are otherwise held learned, but with choice, mature counsel, and regard had
to places, times, persons, and causes. And if there be any, that would read
these books, not out of an impious leuity to find out perhaps some better
faith, nor out of dangerous curiosity, by such reading to become more learned,
but with a purpose to confute them; the Catholic Church will never deny them
faculty, if charity be their motive, and they thought meet for the burden.
What is there here done but with great counsel and wisdom? What practice,
that the Church used not in ancient times? Above 800. years ago more or less
the seventh Oecumenicall Synod, the second Nicene, Canon the ninth, decreed,
that the books of the heretics which they had condemned, should be conveyed to
the Bishop of Constantinople his palace, there to be laid up amongst other
heretical books. You will say, that this Canon was directed only to the
vulgar, not to the Deuines, and to Bishops much less. Hear what follows. But
if there be any, that conceal these books, be he Bishop, or Priest, or Clergy
man let him be deposed: and if he be a lay man, or a Monk, let him be
anathematized. What can be more manifest? Leo ep. 48.
But Leo the Pope for learning and holiness surnamed the Great, but much the
greater by his office, with no less carefulnes, ordeyneth, that with all
Priestly diligence, care be had, that no books of heretics differing from
godly sincerity be had of any, yea and that some of the^, should he consumed by
fire. Moreover the fourth Council of Carthage, or rather the fifth held in S.
Augustines time, permitted not heretical books to be read; for Bishops
curiosities, but restrained them to their limits of time, Can. 16.
and necessity, Canon 16. ordeyning thus; Bishops may read heretical books
according to the time, and necessity. Is not this practice then of the Roman
Church, both ancient, pious, and full of wisdom? What will not the reprobate
catch at to their own destruction, that are offended with so wholesome a
custom? Aelian. lib. 4. cap. 16.
The spider suckes poison from flowers, the beetle being touched with the breath
of the purest Rose dies; yea that flower of flowers, by whose odor we breath
life, to the Jews was an odor of death to death. And you (Antony) are
scandalized with the Churches piety in suppressing heretical books; her
prudence in this practice strikes you blind; her motherly care you calumniate;
you wrest the motives of love to causes of bitter hatred.

12. Now as this other saying of yours, that the Roman Church for so severely
prohibiting the books of heretics, may well and justly be called in question for
her doctrine; is not only in it self false, but in the sequel impious. For
that which is said of a thing, hoc ipso, and per se, that is, as belonging to
the thing of it self, and by it self, is spoken likewise of every such thing,
according to Philosophy, nor any man, that knows what he says will deny it.
Therefore that which agrees to the Roman Church of it self, and merely for
this respect, that she prosecuteth her adversaries books, must agree likewise
to every Church, that with like industry suppresseth her adversaries books. If
you do grant but this once, then you must give sentence against the ancient
Church, and restore to life all those Heretics, who with their books have
been long since turned into ashes. For we have already declared, with what
diligence our Forefathers, and ancient Councels have prohibited their
adversaries books: which care and solicitude Christians, and pious Princes
have imitated by their Edictes. Justinian the Emperor, being in person at the
fifth general Synod, by an Edict of his, which was read in the same Synod
(action prima) prohibited the writings of Seuerus an Heretic condemned by the
Synod. In 5. Syno. genesis act. 1.
Let not (said he) the writings of Seuerus remain with any Christian, Et in
nouel. Constable. 42.
but be had as profane and odious by the Catholic Church, and let them which
have such books, Habetur in 5. generali Synodo collat. 5.
burn them, unless they will abide the peril thereof. With like severity
Theodosius, and Valentinian Emperors (both first of their names) did prosecute
Heretical books in these words. Let no man presume to read, possess, or
write such books, which withal diligence are to be searched for, and
whersoeuer they be found to be burned in the public view of all men: but
those that are discovered to have kept such books, let them be sent to
perpetual banishment. Nicepho. l. 8. cap. 15.
But of al others, the Emperor Constantine the Great set forth the sharpest
Edict against the books of Arius, saying. Our will is, that if any writing of
Arius be found, it be committed to the fire, that not only his wicked doctrine
may perish, but that also there may remain no monument thereof: yea and
moreover we enact, If any man be detected to conceal any book of his, and not
to burn it forthwith, that he be adjudged to die: For such a one being found
guilty of the crime, shall presently be put to death. Behold how rigorous, how
severe was Constantine. What say you (Antony) to these decrees of Fathers and
Princes? Will you now suspect, that for as much as the writings of Arius,
Nestorius, Eutiches, and Seuerus, were so roughly entreated, that there must
needs be something in them, which the Christian doctrine could not convince? Be
not so blasphemous I speak in a word: If you know not the severity of the
ancient Church in prohibiting the books of heretics, you are ignorant: If you
know it, and would suspect thereupon, that those Heretics arguments were
stronger then the Catholics, you are impious: If you molest the present Church
standing in equal terms with the ancient, you are unjust.

13. But now the other incitement of your suspicions and doubts is to be
looked into, which then hapened when you first began, being a Bishop, to turn
the Fathers. For before that time you had not so much as saluted them a far
of. For thus you declare the matter page 13. In the Theoriques I noted certain
sayings of the Fathers, in many things very repugnant to the common doctrine
wherein I was trained up in the Schools, and the same either passed over by my
Masters, or not faithfully alleged, or not sufficiently, or else falsely
explicated. Also the practice and form of Ecclesiastical discipline, and
spiritual government of our times, came to be very different from the ancient,
and thence my new mentioned suspicions were not a little augmented. So you. But
the holy Ghost says truly of you and your fellows, Prouer. 13.
He that will part from his friend, seeks occasions. For every where, even in
your old manuscriptes, did you hunt for calumnies, wherewith to charge the
Church, which you had resolved to forsake. And yet after all your diligence
used, with so great desire to find some show of reason, the causes you have
found out be most slender, and such indeed, as would have moved no honest or
prudent man to leave a private friend, much less the Catholic Church. You
found the Fathers sayings in many things very different from the common
School learning, either passed over by your Masters, or not faithfully cited,
or falsely explicated. First you say all these things, but neither are you able,
or do you go about to prove the^, and yet feign would you have your departure
allowed, even by Catholics. Shall your bare word be believed against the
Masters of the Church? Shall Catholics themselves against the Catholic
Church give credit to you a fugitive, an enemy? It were impudency to crave this
at their hands, and folly to hope for it But admit all you object were true;
how slieght is all you say; how ridiculous, and making nothing at all for the
mittigation of the crime of your Apostasy? Your Masters in the Schools did
explicate certain places of the Fathers not so fully as they should, or else
improperly: you perhaps were by their negligence brought into great straytes:
were there not other men in the Catholic Church learned enough, to resolve
your doubts, put case the Master had not satisfied you? Sometime they did not
faithfully allege testimonies: how common and ordinary a thing is it for
Scribes not to take well their Masters words which they dictate in Schools,
though also what Masters deliver in schools be not so exact as writings that
are prepared for the press Some things he wholly left out. Surely a great
fault. And are you so great a stranger in school matters, that know not this,
that the Masters cannot possibly in the compass of four years, to which the
course of Divinity is straytened, give full and ample satisfaction to all the
testimonies of Fathers, which are objected against the Catholic doctrine by
diverse Sects; of necessity many things are omitted which the Scholars
afterward are to find out by their private industry. But there are certain
sayings of Fathers which are very opposite to the doctrine, that now is current
in the schools. This spoken in so general terms is true. What Catholic
school man knows it not? Who ever denied it? Nor do there want examples. The
common consent of Deuines is, that those seven days in which God accomplished
the frame of the world, were true days indeed, distinguished by the heavens
revolution, and the rising and setting of the light: But who knows not, that S.
Augustine is of a contrary mind? The Schools agree that the Angels were not
created before the world; yet Nazianzen the great Light of Greece, esteems
them elder then the world. I could allege many more, but to what end? How do
they serve to cloak your Apostasy? Those Fathers sayings pretermitted, or not
fully explicated by your Masters, did they patronize your Sect? You tell us
not what kind of Sect yours is: nor do you plainly say, that those Fathers
sayings favor you at all. Suppose you should say they make for you; might we
not justly put you to your proof? Lastly supposing that were true which you
say only, but prove not, That the modern practice in many things now a days
is different from the discipline of the Church of old, what makes this for you?
Do you not see the times change, men with the times, with men customs? It is
the part of Ecclesiastical wisdom to suite their Laws and Statues with the
circumstances of times and persons, to which purpose S. Augustine says very
well: The former Counsels are bettered by the later. Therefore (Antony) you
bring nothing that sound is, for you excuse; what you bring are either bare
words without proof, or mere toys and fopperies, by which, seeing you are
moved to sequester your self from the Catholic Church, you show your self
more fleeting then a feather. Get you hence therefore, since you will needs
begone, and whilst you are going we will shout after you with that saying of
Tertullian; Let them fly away, as fast as they will, Tertull. praes. c. 3.
chafe as they are, of slender faith, blown away with every puff of
temptations, so much the cleaner will be the heap of corn, that shall be stored
up in the floor of our Lord.

The fourth degree, the leaving of the Jesuits Order.
THE three first degrees to Apostasy were inward, and had fully ingorged you
with secret Pride, Infidelity, and Rashness, which at last must needs be
disgorged forth. It was requisite that you should slide away by little and
little; and that to this great work of Apostasy from the Church, the bidding
adieu to the Jesuits Order should be the Preface. The Barbar-Surgeon when he
would draw a tooth, first with a little thread ties it fast, then with often
wagging, loosens it by the root, and so draws it forth: So does the enemy of
man's salvation, who being resolved at length to fetch a man from the Catholic
Faith, first in the very Catholic Church it self with frequent chaunges
turns him this way, and that way, and so slackneth him; nor ever doubts he to
make him renounce the true Religon, whom he has brought to forsake religious
perfection. You write (Antony) that you were once a Jesuit, and you seem to
glory in it; and yet you know, that he is not crowned that has only begune,
but he that perseuers to the end. Pithagoras warnes us not to meddle with
Breames, which the Grecians term melanorou: why should not we apply this
Proverb to the eschewing of Apostata's, those true melanoroi, which denigrate
and stain their youth, religiously and virtuously trained up, with a debaushed
old age, Jude. v. 10.
who having begun in spirit, conclude in the flesh, and having given up their
names to Religious families, afterward sever themselves like sensual men,
deuoyd of spirit. In which number you are one, but would not be so thought.

15. You tell us, that the Jesuits took your promotion in ill part, because
they had found you to be a very good labourer. You would have it seem to the
world, that you forsook not the Jesuits, but passed from them do be a Bishop.
No man that knows the Jesuits, will easily believe you. The Jesuits inhibite
most severely all suites of dignities, and if any be discovered to attempt any
such thing, he is forth with dismissed from their order. They never leave
importuning the Pope by themselves and their friends, to forbear, if they
chance to understand, that he do but consult to promote a Jesuit. Nor do the
Popes use to advance Jesuits, unless some great necessity of the Church do urge
it, or that the deserts of the promoted toward the same be very great, that
for the encouragment of others they may seem, as it were, to be rewarded with
such dignities. What therefore should move the Pope, that contrary to the
vows, and against the Rules of a most flourishing Order, and a thing so
unusual, to create you being a lesuite, the Bishop of Segnia? You may say the
necessity of the Church of S^gnia required it: Heresy increased, against which
Hydra another Hercules was sought for, the rest of Italy could not affoard him:
There must needs be a Jesuit chosen, and of all the Jesuits the most eminent:
In fine the lot fell upon Mark Anto^y. Pardon us, we believe you not. We never
yet heard any thing that the dignity, or the necessity of the Church of Segnia
should be such for which so great a Worthy as your self should so
extraordinarily be chosen to take the charge.

16. But you will say, the Pope was induced by your merits, not so much for the
necessity of the Church, as for the honor that would redound to the same, by
your being a Prelate: He would not have such a candle any longer lie hid under
the Jesuits bushel: He would needs set it on the candlestick, that it might
give light to the whole house. By the fame of your worthy name, you were grown
so great, that the Jesuits order spread through out the world could not hold
you. The numerous company of men famous for virtue, and learning was inferior
to your Worth. But tell in us (in good sooth) with what titles of praises were
you so conspicuous above the rest of Jesuits? Was it sanctity? You may do well
to tell us your self the wonders of your own virtues, who knows them only.
Perhaps for Wit? Bring forth some monuments, wherewith you have adorned either
Humane Literature, or Philosophical Studies. The sacred doctrine then? Amongst
so many Heresies of our age, name me but one, which you have oppressed with
your writings, or which, whilst you were a Jesuit, you did though but lightly
shake. In the Jesuits Catalogue of their Writers, so often by them renewed
with additions, you are no man, not so much as named amongst thousands. I see
well, what you will say: That you have compassed this name of yours, not by
writing, but by preaching. For this among the rest of your virtues, you account
for one; That the Jesuits would have you often preach in their Churchs. The
Jesuits (as I hear) in Italy, are wont sometimes to set up weaker preachers
in their Churches, that their others of note may take breath a while after
their Lenten toils, and that the people by a little discontinuance may return
again to their better Preachers with more appetite. Happily the Jesuits
sometims may have made use of your help in this kind, (to wit) that by your
tediousnes, you might whet the peoples appetites for more learned
Ecclesiastickes. I will not say it; but this I am sure, that if you speak the
truth of your self whilst you were a Jesuit, your were not so notable in
preaching. For thus you write of your self now being a Bishop, page 12. And
because now I acknowledged my proper Episcopal function in preaching, to
furnish my self with matter, I took into my hands the Sermonalls, and
Quadragesimalls, and as the fashion is began to make use of them. Now who may
not straight perceive by these words of yours, that you confess your self to
have been but a puny preacher, when you were first declared Bishop. Had you
been a well practiced and learned preacher, you would not have been forced to
fly to Sermonalls, and such triuiall helps, as beginners do use. And if now
being a Bishop, you stood in such need of Sermonalls, and Lenten provision of
Quadragesimalls for your preaching; a man may easily guess how poor a thing
you were whilst you were yet a Jesuit, at which time it seems you had not so
much as turned over a Sermonall. Nor can you say, that whilst your were a
Jesuit, you helped your self in your Sermons by reading of the holy Fathers;
for before your Bishopric you had not touched the holy Fathers, which appears
by that; that when your Sermonalls had bred a loathing in you: Omitting (say
you) the troubled streams, I wholly resolved with my self to repair from
thenceforth, to the fountain of the holy Fathers, with which reading for my
Sermons, I began to be very much delighted. What is more clear? At last being
a Bishop you applied your self to the holy Fathers, and by reading them
began to make use of them for your Sermons. Therefore seeing you were
destitute of such aids, by which glory is wont to be purchased; how should we
once believe, that you before all other Jesuits, should be chosen a Prelate to
honor the Church? If the Pope had thought good to set forth, and adorn his
Church by a Iesuite-Prelate, there was no want of most worthy men of that
order, both for learning and holiness. It had been a dishonor to have made
choice of you, whom neither preaching, nor writing, nor learning, nor opinion
of sanctity, nor any deserts toward the Church had commended.

17. There is no cause therefore, why you should vaunt so much of your being a
Jesuit. The more eminent you were, being a Jesuit, makes now your fall more
shameful. The corruption of the best (as the Philosopher says) is the worst.
That which is most opposite to the brightest light, is the vgliest darkness.
That vice of all other is the most foul, that is the furthest removed from the
fairest of virtues. The sowerest vinegar was once the sweetest and strongest
wine. Your example confirms that which S. Augustine writes of his own
experience. That as he had never met with holier men then those that persevere
in Monasteries: so had he never tried any more wicked then those that had fled
from thence. The stones sincke deeper into the mire, by how much higher the
hills or steeples were from whence they took their leave. Of this opinion was
Pope Gregory the thirteenth, in whom the virtues of Gregory the Great were
revived in our age. Who as he loved the Jesuits, so had he a true and perfect
knowledge of them. He therefore when the Cardinal (whom they call the
Datarie) had exhibited unto him one that had been of the Jesuits Order, that
stood for an Ecclesiastical dignity, would have the Cardinal consult with the
General of the Jesuits, before he resolved any thing in that business, and gave
concerning the Jesuits this lesson, worthy the great wisdom, and experience
which he had of such affairs. As for the forsakers of the Jesuits Order (said
he) let them be furnished with necessaries for meat, drink, and apparel, for
they for the most part are well brought up, learned, and therefore may stand the
Church in some steed, but in any case admit them not to Ecclesiastical
dignities; for it is not likely they would ever have forsaken their Order, if
they had not their wits somewhat crazed. Thus much that most prudent Pope:
which also may be confirmed by reason. For it is a token of natural heat and
vigor in a man's body to be able of it self to purge ill humors. And for no
other thing more is the Jesuits Order approved of all, then for this, that you
shall hardly find amongst them any man to fail in virtue and religion, that is
not first by them disscarded from their Order. But as for you (Antony) how you
behaved your self amongst them, and how you gave them the slip, though you
hold your peace, the event it self has abundantly declared. You see therefore
what a shame and reproach you have procured to your self, even by that wherein
you unwisely hunted for glory and estimation.

The fifth degree, Ambition of a Bishopric.
AMBITION of dignity follows next in the ladder of your downefull, A subtle
mischief, a secret poison, a lurking plague, The Craftes-man of deceit,
Hypocrisies Mother, Enuies Nurse, the Spring of Vice, the fuel of guilt, the
Canker of Virtues, the moath of sanctity, the miste of men's Minds, as S.
Bernard says. Bernard. in Psalm. 9.
The true mother indeed of all heresies, which she has bred in the Christian
Church. Eusebius. l. 4. cap. 21.
Eusebius relates out of Hegisippus, of one Thebulis, who for that he received
a repulse in the suite of a certain Bishopric, went about to stain the
Church (ever till then a Virgin) with note of error. This restless disease
was the chiefest thing, that vexed, afflicted, and overthrew you. For thus
being oppressed with the Episcopal charge (so unmeet as you were) you sanke
down into the gulf where you lie, and for ever we fear are like to lie. If
you answer, you sought not for a Bishoprike. Cannot I disprove you of falsehood
by your own book? You do earnestly endeavor indeed to dissemble this ill
beseeming desire of honor of yours; yet certain sprouts thereof which easily
bewray it unwittingly, shoot from you. I was at last (say you) promoted to the
government of the Church, now abouc 20. years ago, and made Bishop of
Segnia. What does that signify (at last promoted) but only this, that I
obtained the thing I sought for: (late) indeed, but yet (at last) -- into my
ginne
The wished prey fell in.
The word (at last) insinuates as much, that the advancement seemed long to you
in coming, which indeed could not come late, either in regard of your years,
or merits. For you confess, that when you were made Bishop, you were not 40.
years of age, nor had then read the sacred Scriptures, or handled the holy
Fathers. And how then were you (at last) and as you seem to intimate (lately
promoted?) Your wishes (Antony) made great have, so that the digniry which
soon enough over took your first years that were capable of a Bishopric,
but far outwent your merits, did seem slow and tardy to your desires that had
rid posting before. The hope that is deferred afflicts: things desired come
they never so fast, seem slack in coming, to the mind that burningly expects
them.

19. Besides, you say (which maks much to discover your ambition) That your
Fathers, the Jesuits, were much displeased with your preferment. The Jesuits
indeed are said to take nothing more haynously in theirs, the^ Ambition. The
Miters, even those wherewith the heads of theirs are adorned by compulsion, they
rather esteem a load to their Order, then any wise a laud unto them; but for
the Purples sought and suied for, they behold as a grievous stayne. How vainly
you wrest the Jesuits horror of Ambition to your own praise, as who would
say, they sorowed not so much for your behalf, as for their own loss, in that
they should be deprived of such a labourer as you were, not idle, nor
unprofitable, but industrious: so do you proclaim of your self: and yet cannot
I believe that you were a Jesuit when you were made a Bishop, nor had the
Jesuits in Europe such scarcity of laborers, who send often to the Indies men
more worthy then your self. They were indeed grieved to see you hoysed up to
Honor, whom they knew to be unworthy, prone to novelties, and whom they
feared, peradventure, not like to prove very steady in the Catholic faith. And
perhaps with prudent foresight they presaged in their minds this great
mischief now fallen upon you, and so lamented to see you decked with the Miter,
and other Episcopal robes, like a victime adorned to the slaughter. Yea by so
much the more their grief was increased, by how much they perceived you more
content and glad, even then, when you most deserved commiseration. For what is
more miserable, then a miserable man, who has no commiseration of himself,
but rather rejoices under a burden imposed upon him, at which the Angels
themselves would tremble? Foul is your sin (Antony) that being guilty of your
continual and daily increasing suspicions and doubts against the Catholic
faith, you would notwithstanding affect Prelacy. You felt your mind more light
then ashes, and yet would not keep your self low to the ground, or conteyne
your self at home, but in the open air; on the top of a tower you expose your
self to be tossed with the winds. You intrude your self to feed a flock,
who stands more in need of a feeder your self: you seek to be a confirmer of
others, who need one to support your reeling self from falling: you took to
your self the charge of sheep redeemed by the blood of Christ, and yet wanted
so much courage as to oppose your self for their safety against the wolf.

20. Neither do I charge you with this cowardice out of my own hard opinion of
you, but you confess it your self. Christ has placed me (you say page 24.)
as a dog amidst his flock: I must be mute no longer, as all the Bishops under
the Roman are mute. I press you not with your rashness, where you so resolutely
pass your verdict against all the Bishops of the Roman and Catholic Church,
that they are dumb men, that is, men knowing that themselves and the Roman
Bishop err, yet speak not a word. It is an easy thing to persuade our selves,
that others are as vicious as we are, and the fool (as the Wiseman says)
walking along, thinks all men as himself, and as foolish as he. Omitting
therefore your rash censure, I take hold of your plain confession, that you
were once dumb. I must (say you) be mute no longer: nay rather, you should
ueuer have been mute at all, especially being a Bishop, nor ever were you so
without a heinous crime. Do you not remember that famous discourse, which S.
Augustine makes speaking to a Pastor thus; You spied the wolf approaching,
Tract. in Joan.
and held your peace: you are a hireling, you fled: you are guilty of the blood
of souls, that is, of the blood of Christ. You have still sinned against your
erroneous conscience: so long as you have been Bishop, so long have you
been dumb. For you write page 12. That as soon as you were Bishop, you
perceived by reading of our Sermonalls, how miserably the people were deluded
under the Roman Bishop, and how the inventions of Avarice, and Ambition were
enforced and thrust upon them for holy Decrees of Faith. Behold (Antony) from
the first beginning of your Bishopric, you saw (in your own conceit) a huge
wolf, most pitifully devouring the sheep of Christ, yet were you dumb for
fear: you suffered them to be dispersed and woorryed. A grievous wickedness.
Now belike, being illuminated (as you believe) with greater light, you mean
bravely to oppose your self against the wolf, and wash a way the former blot
of your dastardy, with the effusion of your blood: nay rather you fly from your
flock, and you fly as fast as may be, yea and you fly to the utmost corner of
the world.

21. You seem to me like one of those little waiting dogs (their Mistresses
Jewels) who finding themselves alone amongst mastifes, do quake the while, are
still, or else for fear do whine and run away. But when they arrive once into
the parlour, or their Ladies lap, where they hold themselves safe enough,
they turn again proudly and bark fiercely: So do you hie you to the
safeguard of the King of great Brittany, where you consort your self not with
mastiffs that guard Christ's flock, but with those women-wayting-doggs, those
wiued Bishops, which are their Mistresses darlings, from whence (as you say)
you will bay against the Pope, joining your mouth with theirs. I ascend (say
you page 28.) into a place more secure, where the Catholic truth indeed freely
holds up her head. So do you idly talk: but what shall become mean while of
your flock? A pastor, and an Idol? whilst you are safe, and out of danger
your self, the wolf (for so you persuade your self) rusheth into your Fold,
raueneth, scatters, deuoureth them quite either body or soul; what succor
from their Pastor? I (say you) a little dog, certainly the least of all
others, Page 33.
shall at least (perhaps) with my cry, such as it is, awaken the sleepy
mastifes, which may chase away the wolf. Nay rather why do you not girde your
self for the combat? Christ has placed you as a dog in his fold. What,
does he use to put such barking Curres to guard his flock, that do nothing else
but bark, or rather mastife dogs that can bite also? It is not lawful for
you that are a Bishop to be but a little barking Curre: For why should you
thrust your self (being but such a one) into the charge and guard of Christ's
fold? Either take courage to encounter the wolf, or deny your self to be a
Shepherd? You will forsooth stir up others to look to your flock, that may
perhaps one day expel the wolf, if not in the mean time, let it be spoiled
for you. You at least will sleep in a whole skin; and that you may the better
awaken the mastifes, you will rustle with your Pamphlets (goodly ones in your
own judgment) against the Pope, from some huswifes lap, whom you may chance
to wed. I am ashamed on your behalf (Antony) that ever there was such a
sluggish Pastor in the Church; but more may they be ashamed, that so eagerly
received you for some jolly and redoubty Prelate. Certainly this rash thrusting
your self into so high a dignity, for which you were unworthy, was the great
beginning of your woes.

The sixth Degree, Contention for Prelacy.
NO man easily foresees with what mischiefs he shall entangle himself, that
once gives way to Ambition. Now then are you advanced to be Archbishop, and
with increase of your honor, is increased in you the thirst of increasing. To
your Suffragans you seemed too great, to your self, because subject to the
Roman, you seemed no body. Seneca.
Ambition is a fantastical thing; It cannot willingly abide any man before
him, or yet behind him; It is sick of a double malady; It enuieth the
Superior, and is maligned by the inferior. With this twofold Envy (Antony)
were you vexed; you wished the Metropolitan Privileges over your Suffragans
enlarged, but the rights of the Roman Bishop over you abridged. Hence arose
Spleen, Malice, Strife, with which whirlewind blown away, you were carried
headlong into Apostasy. You would not indeed have gone but you could not stay,
being once possessed with this passion; Even as weighty things which cast
headlong down, make no end of moving till they lie on the ground. These things
mean we to make good: For that you write, page 14. I was lifted up from my
Bishopric to be an Archbishop, from whence sprange to me a new, and more
urgent occasion of renewing my endeauours, and of a more fervent and exact
pursuit of them. For, when I began to be stirred with the molestations of the
Suffragan Bishops of my Province, but much more with the over much power of the
Court of Rome, disturbing my Metropolitan rightes, I was forced to search more
narrowly into the root and origin of all the Ecclesiastical degrees, powers,
functions, offices, dignityes, and especially of the Popedom. So you. I cannot
tell whether you wot what you say. For by this discourse, truly, you have wholly
dashed your own cause, and defeated your writings of all credit against the
Pope, which I trust so to demonstrate, that (perhaps) your self, or at least
every man (besides your self) may see it manifest.

23. Your Suffragans I know not, nor have I to do with the^. You are their
Primate, be you also Accuser, Witness, and Judge against them. They wrought your
vexations: I excuse them not. They envied your honor; they would have
diminishtit: It Was ill done. The Pope helped you not, but rather with his
authority oppressed you more: See now how favorable an adversary I am. I do
not deny but that it may have so happened. You grieved at it; you took it
hainously: You were incensed and set on fire with anger. This I allow not, yet
let it be held a pardonable fault, and, according to kind, to be sensible of
injuries. But you should not fret your self so much, as to leave the Church
for the matter, so to boil, as to sees over the pot, not to skip (as the
Proverb goes) from the frying pan, into the fire. If you will not learn
patience of any Man, yet (me thinks) you might of that worthy Matrone Paula
Romana, no less renowned for sanctity then for Nobility of blood. She (without
her fault) having incurred envy, and being by S. Hierome exhorted to give place
to fury, answered: Hieron. in Epitaph. Paul.
You should say well, if Satan did not in all places molest the servants and
hand-maydes of God, or if I could find my Bethleem in any other part of the
world. Most wisely, piously, and aptely spoken to our purpose. Satan is busy
every where: That the lesser do envy the greater, that the weaker be oppressed
by the mightier, is not Roman, but humane. If you think to eschew this
mischief, you must wholly fly from men also, and not from Rome only: There are
troubles every where, iniuryes, crosses, every where something to suffer, but
not every where Bethleem: that House of Bread is not else where to be found,
but in the Catholic Church. The bread of heavenly doctrine, that does satiate
us with Faith: The bread of the most sacred Body, that feeds us in the
Sacrament: you shall find Bread indeed in the Ministers Suppers, but profane
bread, such as those which do take it, stick not to share it to the dogs,
whose crummes and crustes, without awe of religion, they shake of on the
ground. Do you think this Holy Bread? I do not think you do, although to
please his Majesty of Great Brittanie you may feed of it with show of much
veneration; your anger therefore should not have lead you so far, as to carry
you from Bethleem. If there had been any such injuries offered you, either by
the Suffragans, or the Pope, which you object, but prove not; they should
rather have been for Bethleems sake, together with that divine bread,
disgested by you.

24. But take heed now in the heat of your anger, and being so enraged against
the Pope, that you utter nothing for which you may after repent you. You say
that the power of the Pope annoyed you much, and that he assaulted you, and
your Titles also, and that from thence arose in you that seruent and burning
desire to search out the root and origin of the Papacy. Do you say this? You
say it certainly; your words be witnesses thereof: nor could you with any other
words so much have wrought the utter overthrow of your own cause. For consider
I beseech what you do. You moved with the wrongs which (as you persuade your
self) the Pope has done you, oppressed with his power, and for that cause now
put into heat and distemper, set your self to read, and write, and search into
the first beginnings of the Papacy. First, who can believe that you will
disclose any truth in favor of the Pope, if happily you find it, who burn
with such passion against him? That you will discover (if you chance to light
on) the certain and firm root of the Popedom, the root whereof to no other
end you seek but to have it rooted out? That you will lay open the uttermost
extent of the Roman Bishops authority, which by a preiudicate opinion, you
judge over large now already before you know what it is? Secondly, can you hope
to find out the Truth seeking it in anger, and having so mighty a beam in your
eye, as is the power of the Roman Bishop, in the sight of the enuier thereof?
Know you not the verse (though vulgar, yet true) Anger does so the mind bereave,
That Truth it can no whit perceive?
Could none of these divines sayings occur unto you? Anger kills the
Foolish man. Job. 5.2.
In your wrath you do loose your soul. Job. 13.4.
An angry man raises strifes. Iac. 1.20.
Anger of man works not the justice of God? Could you not remember the
precepts of the Apostle; Give place to Anger, Romans 12.19.
not revenging your selves. Ephesians. 4.31.
Banish from amongst you all Bitterness and Anger, and Indignation, and Clamor,
and lastly Blasphemy, which is as it were a certain fume of boiling Choler?

25. Now therefore we shall not hereafter so much marvel, though your ten
promised Books Of the Ecclesiastical Common Wealth, abound with Blasphemous
untruths, which the fury of your breast, incensed (as you confess your self)
with supposed injuries done you by the Pope, has powered forth. I should wonder
indeed if that were true, which you witness of your self, in perusing the
Fathers in such heat of your provoked passions; That with your eyes more
opened, you easily observed; you saw now, and thoroughly perceived. It is a
strange thing that a man should have a beam in his eye, and not feel it; that
being stark blind, yet to himself he should seem quick sighted. But tell me
(Antony) what saw you there in that your fervor and passion of reading? I saw
(say you) and thoroughly perceived that at Rome, without all lawful foundation,
there were innumerable new articles of faith daily coined, and thrust upon us.
And do you not yet perceive your self to be blind, that you see an untruth;
that you see that which has no being at all; that you see a most huge nothing;
that at Rome there are new articles of faith coined, not in each age, in each
year, or in each day one, but every day many without number, and yet vouchsafe
you not to name us one. But rightly S. Ambrose: Anger waytes on Envy, it
festereth the mind, Precat. 2. ad Missam.
it dulles the senses, it doubles the tongue, it dims the eyes, it disquiets
the whole body: especially if the Anger be so impotent, as yours is, a against
the Pope, which most intemperatly you bewray in these words; The Majesty (say
you) of our Roman Pope is not so great, that it ought to be feared: that
temporal and statly Majesty is merely counterfeit, usurped it is, it is nothing.
So do you make show to contemn the dignity you cannot reach to, rather then
any man should enjoy it but your self. You would have it not to be at all,
seeing you cannot overthrow it with your deeds. You seek to beat it into
nothing by contemptuous speech. This is the nature of Envy, and the property of
enraged displeasure. The Majesty of the Roman Pope affrights you nothing. So
you profess, yet S. Hierome, borne in the same Dalmatia with you, a far more
learned man, more holy, and less timorous of to yes and humane vanities then
your self, was afraid of this majesty. Your greatness (says he, speaking to
Pope Damasus) dothterrify me, but your courtesy inuites me. Let the ambitious
greatness of the Roman dignity be laid a side, whilst I speak with the
successor of a Fisher man. But it booteth not to stand refuting of sayings
which only malice venteth. That is now clear which we intended to show; That
you have well trodden the steps of contention and envy, which is the sixth
downefal of your souls hasty running into Apostasy.

The seventh Degree of Apostasy, Contumacy and Contempt of the Supreme Pastor.
FROM the contumacy and contempt of the Pope, men do easily fall into heresies,
which S. Cyprian affirms, do spring from no other head, then that one Priest
in the Church for the time being, and one Judge the Vicar of Christ for the
time likewise being, is not regarded, nor is obeyed, according to divine
precept, by the whole fraternity. To you (Antony) as you were yet sparkling
flames of envy, a fit occasion was offered to pass to this degree, and make a
nerer approach unto Apostasy. For no sooner was the known difference between
the Pope and the Venetian Common wealth risen, but straight you bewrayed your
secret, and hardly concealed malice against the Pope by open contumacy. Thus do
you lay the matter forth before our eyes in your 14. page. Shortly after came
forth the Venetian Interdict; There was no end of Roman libells, oppressing,
vexing, and reuiling us Venetian Bishops, as so many beasts, rude fellows,
men ignorant, of no conscience. Hence new occasions were offered me of new and
more burning endeauours, as well to make our defense, as to clear the truth in
the Venetian cause. So do you set forth the business, and together do lay open
the increase of your flames: you burned but too much before and were over
hoate, yet you tell us, that new fires and ardencyes seyze upon you. You
perchance affect the style of Arch-heretike, and you would feign have us apply
unto you the sentence of S. Jerome; No man can plot an heresy, In Ose. c. 10.
that is not of a fiery wit. Such kind of Apostles does most please and
content this vpstart Gospel of our age, which the Kings Majesty of Great
Britany testifies in his Basilicon Doron, to have been brought into Scotland
in these later days by Preachers, that were of a fiery temper, and seditious
fellows. You delight belike, and would willingly be still more and more
enraged against the Romans, and that you may burn more hoatly, you faigne your
self and your fellow* Bishops to be reproachfully entreated, to be called
beasts, rude, and ignorant, men of no conscience. I have read diverse of the
Roman books written in the controversy of Venite for the Pope, but these
disgraceful and contumelious speeches you charge them with, I could never find
in those books. But I may think that to the end you may heat your self the
more against the Pope* you conceive by imagination injuries done you merely
devised by your self wherein you are like the Lion, who to whet himself to the
fight, lays load on himself with his own tail.

27. But seeing you desire to be thought fervent, I will not contentiously
deny, that you were more eager in the Venetian Contention, then any man else;
and that in your private contempt of the Pope you might exceed the public. I
make no doubt but to the flame, with which that most flourishing Commonwealth
wealth to their own perdition, was set on fire, you added oil and pitch by
your writings, and Sermons to increase it, which yet was quenched by the Popes
wisdom, benignity and patience. His Fatherly piety prevailed over the Majesty
of his power. He chose rather to yeald a little to his childre^s stoutnesse, and
to leave the heat of their courage to be allayed with time, then to master
their stubbornness, and pull down their stomachs with violent or irreuocable
punishment. The calm of this Peace liked not you very well, whose desires were
now sailing toward Rome presaging to the Republique, victories against the
Pope. You with a false and deceiptfull hope, such as Lunacy is wont to breed,
had in your idle fancye (perhaps) set the Papal diadem on your own head. But
this composition did not only thrust you out of your present hope, and
imaginary Popedom, but for ever excluded you as a discovered enemy, from Roman
dignities. Wherefore the Republike being quietted and friend with the Pope, the
flames of your anger and ambition also in outward show were somewhat slaked,
but inwardly they were no less quick and ardent then before. You intermitted
not your earnest and fervent endeauours, which you had taken in hand for
defense of disobedience; you studied still privately to find senten^ces of
Fathers and Counsels for your purpose. Ten years you spent in this passionate
study, hoping the Venetians would again break with the Pope, which not
succeding, a vehement terror assailed you and made you hasten your revolt: For
now you began to fear, least the league between the Pope and the Venetians
daily increasing, you at last should be turned over to the Pope to yield him
account for all your forepassed misdemeanors. This fear gave new fuel to
your former fire, which now for these ten years had closely burned, and made it
break forth at last into the public spectacle of Apostasy. Let us hear your
self declare the eue^t of your studying of the Fathers, whilst blinded with
passion you read them ten years together. In these (say you) I fully found
out what I sought for, and much more then I sought for. How well you set down
the manner of your fall? You hated Heresy, but affected Co^tumacy against the
Pope, and whilst you will not leave what you loved, you are fallen into that
which you abhorred. You would feign without loss of your religion have
remained an obstinate and stubborn Catholic, but behold you have made wrack
of your faith, and are become a rebellious heretic. You sought for Catholic
contumacy and contempt of the Pope, a thing not to be found; but in lieu thereof
you have found heretical perfidiousnes. Verily that have you found, which by
such an inquiry you deserved to find, Lib. 3. ep. 9.
and which all that have sought in this same manner have found. For the
beginning of Heretics (says S. Cyprian) is to take delight in themselves,
with a swelling pride to contemn their Superiors. Hereupon they rush into
schisms, and profane. Altars are reared up out of the Church. Malignant
fevers, near neighbors to the Pestilence (when the Plague is rife) always
turn to this mischief, so near of kin unto them; so when Heresies abound,
the Contempt of the supreme Pastor (a sin nearly allied to Heresy) can
scarcely be contained, but that at least it will empty it self into Heresy.
Let them learn by your example that go about to be rebellious, what they are
like to find at last. And let this be the conclusion, That very orderly you
descended on the steps of the ladder of Apostasy which I set you in the
beginning. You grow more sinful one day then other; you still more and more
fleet away from the Church, and every step you make, brings you nearer to Hell.

The eight Degree, Presumption of proper Judgment against the Church.
THERE now remains the eight and last degree, in the ladder of your descent, a
degree and step not only neighboring upon heresy, but also near allied unto
it, which it does not only touch immediately, but is the very beginning and head
thereof. This is too much presuming of your own learning and wit above the
Church. S. de vera Relig. cap. 16.
Augustine says excellently, That no error can be in the Christian religion,
did not man's soul worship her self for God. For it were impossible that a
Christian should be an Heretic, did he still submit himself, and inthrall his
understanding to God, and give him leave, by the voice of his Church, to
ouersway their wits which are blind, rash, erroneous; not only when they
wander without divine Scriptures, through the works of Nature, but the^ also
when within the bounds of sacred Writ, they discourse according to their own
fense and arbitrament. Hitherto, before you openly fled from us, were you
fallen (Antony,) and being in that case you did not so much tend toward
Apostasy, but rather were you arrived at your iourneyes end. You cannot abide
Subjection of understanding to the obedience of Faith; every where you impugn
it, and at last conclude: I am no child now, whom being nigh threescore years
of age, every man should persuade what he lists without weight of reasons.
This your girding at the Roman Church, contaynes either a gross calumniation,
or a vast arrogance. For if you mean to tax the Roman Church, as though she
did use to propose to be believed of her children with true submission of their
understanding, whatsoever a private man, or Doctor, or Prelate lists to
teach; truly you hatefully charge her with that she never does: But if by
whatsoever lists any man, you mean those points of doctrine which you call
proper decrees of the Roman Church, and namely the Supremacy of Peter and his
Successor, the doctrine that most of all offends you: If by every one, you
understand the witnesses and authors unto whose judgment the Roman Church
would have her childen submit the (supposed) weight of their reasons: If I say
you mean this doctrine, and intend to show your contempt of the authorities
that are by the Church alleged for it, refusing to submit your judgment to
them; then are you come to this last step, which consumates an Apostata. For
you know all Catholics, all Bishops through out the world, and the universal
Church now spread through Europe and the new found Indies acknowledge the Roman
Supremacy. I will not press you with the old Counsels, I will not urge you
with any thing that you may, or will deny. Only I say, that this doctrine was
defined by the Tridentine Council, by the Florentine, and by the Lateran;
which Lateran for the general concourse of all Christendom, and for the
number of Bishops that were in it, was the greatest of all Christian counsels
that have been hitherto assembled. Will you then submit your judgment to the
censure of these counsels? You will not. The assembly of so many, so great,
and so worthy men, by you is termed quisque, every one, ordinary fellows.
Their judgments you account no more then quod quisque libuerit, you reckon them
as trifles. Behold now appears the arrogance of your speech, which though you
harbored in your mind, yet you sought to cloak with ambiguous words.

29. You say, that every man shall not make you believe what they list, being a
man as you are of almost three score years of age, you say that you have
reasons of weight, that the Church shall give you better, or as good before you
will believe her. O craft of Heresy! what does not she invent to save her
self? she sees, that if the matter come to be tried by authority, she will not
be able to stand, nor show her self in comparison with the Catholic Church,
that her vpstart paucity will blush to appear before the Catholic authority,
which in former ages was, and now is spatiously enlarged over the world. What
shift then does Heresy make? With full mouth she cries, that she has weighty
reasons on her side, hoping by the promise of reasons to counterballance the
Churches authority. If you will not credit me that this is the trick of
heresy, then hear S. Epist. 56.
Augustine that long ago noted and discovered this fraud. Heretics (says he)
perceauing that they are utterly overthrown, if the authority of their
Conuenticles be brought to compare with the Catholic authority, they endeavor
by making show and promises of reason, in some sort to overcome the most grave
and grounded authority of the Church. For this kind of boldness is the common
and ordinary trick almost of all Heretics. So S. Augustine; which in truth
touches your right, who go about to poise the weight of your reasons against
the authority of the Church. Nor do I captiously intend to wrest your words to
a sense perhaps from your own meaning, as if before you will believe, you
demand of us weighty reasons, drawn out of Philosophy and natural Knowledge.
I deal not so hardly with you, for you mean (perhaps) reasons grounded on
Scriptures, but so, that except the Churches reasons do so fully convince you,
that it manifestly appear to you, that she proposes to our belief, that only
which is contained in the Scriptures: except you see this, I say, you will not
yield, nor do you think it meet that you should yield, being a man of such
years. Thus to stand upon reasons drawn from Scripture, is I say, an
heretical trick. For those ancient Heretics, amongst whom, as S. Augustine
says, it was ordinary to oppose their reasons and arguments to countermaund
the definitions of the Church; these heretics (I say) did not urge reason
without Scripture, but they boasted that they had, and exacted likewise of the
Church arguments out of Scripture, so clear and so perspicuous, that man's
understanding cannot resist against them. And the same kind of conuincing
arguments our Nouellestes require of the Catholic Church; nor will they grant
any man to be an Heretic, but such a oneas being convinced by testimonies of
Scriptures, clearly sees that to be affirmed in Scriptures which the Church
would have to be believed, notwithstanding he refuses to believe. This is
their doctrine, which if we once admit to be current, it is impossible there
should be any men in the world properly Heretics. For if that which the
Church proposes to be believed they find not cleerlie delivered in Scripture,
although they disagree from the Church, they be not Heretics as they say. And
on the other side, if they see the doctrines of the Church to be cleerlie
contained in Scripture, they cannot dissent from them, unless they believe
either that God can lie, or that the Scriptures of Christians be not the word
of God. And if they believe either of these two things, they be not properly
Heretics. For if they believe that God can lie, they are not Heretics but
Atheists: if they believe that God is true, but think that Christian
Scriptures be not his word, they be not Heretics, but Infidells; seeing they
wholly deny Scriptures, and, as Tertullian says, There can be no Heretic
without Scriptures. Praes. c. 39.
And if you say, they be Heretics that deny the Scriptures, not wholly, but in
part, then this follows, that there can be no Heretic which does not refuse
some part of Canonical Scriptures. And then I ask of Protestants how they can
tax us Catholics for Heresy, who from the Canon exclude no book which they
themselves admit; nor do we find the doctrines cleerlie delivered in Scriptures
which they so boldly, and clamorously contend to be contained in them. But my
purpose is not at this time to overthrow this proud Tower of Heresy, which is
not to believe the Church, unless they see with their own eyes, that her
doctrine is contained in Scripture.

30. This only I urge, that you (Antony) were come to this last step toward
Apostasy, which is not to yield to the Churches authority, without she make her
word good by weighty reasons; and that out of presumption of your Wit and
Learning, but especially out of a great opinion of the ten Books you promise
to print, you have shamefully revolted from the Church. That which we read of
Agar, Sara's handmaide, Genesis 16.
may very well be applied to you: Who perceauing that she had conceived with
child, set light by her Mistress. For as soon as you had conceived in your
brain that new form and plot of an Ecclesiastical government, and Christian
union, you forthwith contemned the judgment of the Roman Church, to who^ you
should have been obsequious, submitting and captiuating your judgment. But it
seems by your manner of proceeding, that you be of opinion, that in those your
ten Books, more is contained, then in the whole Catholic world besides. For
you promise many great, and wonderful Benefits, which by your Revolt from the
Pope, shall redound to the Church, to wit, the suppression of Schism, the
uniting of Churches, the extinguishing of Heresies, the pacification of Princes
from open Hostility, and the combining of their forces for the subversion of
the Turk, with the infranchisement of Christian Captives groaning under their
yoke. These are great and glorious things. Let us now see by what power you
will perform them? As David with five stones encountered Goliath, so you with
the same number of books twice told will enter into combat with the aforenamed
Monsters. The Church (say you) shall shortly hear my voice: I will speak to
the heart of Jerusalem, I will call her forth. Thus you, and yet (if I be not
deceived) God only is he, that speaks to the heart; as for men even the
greatest, the most learned, and eloquent, while they inuit men to heavenly
matters, of themselves can do no more but knock at their ears. Nor do I see
upon what grounds you may be so sure, that your voice should penetrate into the
heart of the Church; though I see very well, that you imagine there is no small
force, but rather some divine efficacy in your voice. Well, what is that you
will proclayme, that shall be heard over Christendom? Let us now hear it from
you own mouth. I will (say you) shortly put forth my ten Books of the
Ecclesiastical Common wealth, in which principally I endeavor that the Roman
Errors may be detected; the truth and soundnes both of Doctrine, and
Discipline may appear; that many of the Churches cast forth and rejected by
the Roman Church, may be retained still in a Catholic sense; That the way of
union between the Churches of Christ may be demonstrated, or at least pointed
at with a nod, or finger; And that if it be possible (that is, if it be
possible, my books will do the deed) we may all say and think the same
things, and so all Schisms may be repressed; that the occasions may be taken
away from Christian Princes of oppressing one another; that thereby the better
they may direct their forces, in such sort that the Churches of Christ, groaning
under Infidel Tyrants, may be recovered to their former liberty. Thus you
write of your Book. What victories will this your Child yet in womb get for
the Church. What overthrows, and woes will he work upon Heretics, if he may
be once happily borne into the world.

31. Whose birth therefore you judge a matter of such consequence, that any
wickedness may be committed, that he may be borne. For I pray you, is it not a
wicked thing to forsake the Church? Yes certainly: and yet you finding no
possibility to print your book in a Catholic Country, rent your self wholly
from the Catholic Church, that so your ympe finding no other way of passage to
life might work himself into the world, by renting his mother. Again, is it
not great wickedness for Pastors to forsake their flock, to the continual
tuition whereof the law of God severely binds them? Without question it is.
Yet you write in this manner: It was very necessary for me to leave my flock,
that so having broken also these bands, being at more liberty, I might be the
readier to praise the truth, and so much the safelier condole the ruins of the
Church, which it susteynes at the hands of the Roman. Mark, I beseech you,
your words. What is this else, but so say let the bands of the divine Law be
broken; let souls redeemed by the blood of Christ perish; all is well, so that
I with my ten stringed Psalter may get liberty to chaunt out the praises of
Truth, or to deplore the wretched state of Schism. You hold belike the tears
you spend for the Roman Church, at so high a rate, that the Blood of souls,
the Law of God must be set at naught and contemned for them. If you had such a
pleasure to singe and mourn, why would you be a pastor? Why entered you not
into some Religious family devoted to the quire and solitude, and there have
given your self to songs and tears? Lastly, what greater crime then to
dissemble in matters of Religion and with body to approach that Church whose
faith in your heart you approve not? Is not this wickedness? Now tell me (Antony)
have you so soon vomited forth all those Roman doctrines, wherewith you were
once imbued? or have you suddenly swallowed up all the articles of the English
Faith, that you have so without guide of Conscience embraced their Communion? I
cannot think it, but rather that you dissemble in many points, to give them
satisfaction of whom you expect your hire, and to get the Kings Protection, and
assistance for the privilege of your Book, that what you could not publish in
the light of Christianity, you may at last set forth in the darcknesse of
Heresy.

32. It is reported of a certain Zoilus that was wont to keep his bed like a
sick man, when (in truth) he was not so, that he might thereby take occasion to
show forth a purple Couerlet of his wherein he was much delighted. Such a kind
of languour is it, wherein you languish, with desire to publish your writings;
which that you might the better bring to pass, you feign your self an
Heretic in the English Church; you lay your self down at the feet of the
Kings Supremacy over the Church, as though you were sick of that
Parlamentarian Malady; and all this to get leave to print your Books, and
show them to the view of the world: and yet (alas) when these your so highly by
you esteemed treasures of learning, shall have passed the print, which by
committing so many sins you have found out at last, there will not want
diverse (I say not Catholics, but Protestants) that having read your so much
expected Book, will apply to you that which was spoken to Zoilus. These riches
are but vain,
Which make the sickness feign.
I wish you would rather follow the counsel that the Angel gave unto Agar,
Genes. 16.
being great with Child, which was: Return home to thy Mistress again, and
humble thy self under her hands. Return (I say) home again to the Church,
which you have forsaken. Cast prostrate at her feet, your self, your wit, your
learning, your books. Submit them to the Catholic and Roman Censure. As
Rachels servant delivered her children into her Mistress lap, so do you offer
up your Books to the pleasure of the Church. But me thinks I see you turn
your head aside at this, and say; This is base, this is servile, this is to
become again a little child. It is so indeed: But oh noble baseness and high
humility, whereby a Christian, transcending himself and his natural wit comes
to be united to God, revealing mysteries that surpass man's capacity, by the
mouth sometimes even of unlearned Prelates! Oh happy servitude that tieth and
makes men bondeslaues of the Truth, which only affoardes true Liberty! Oh huge
littlenes, which only art capable of heaven, which only can intertaine God!
So that (Antony) though you be welnigh threescore years of age; you shall
never enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, unless you be converted, and become as
a little child. They that scorn to be little ones, grow to be great ones
indeed, not in wisdom, but in malice and folly; which shall be further
demonstrated in the second part of this Survey of your Apostasy.

THE SECOND PART OF THE SVRVEY OF MARCUS ANTONIUS de Dominis, his Apostasy.
CONCERNING The state wherein now he is.
WE will not (there being no need) use circumlocutions, but plainly set down
the misery of your present state. By the former eight degrees not of beatitudes
but of maledictions, you are fallen into eight bottomless Gulfes, which within
the compass of Heresy are contained. I will first tell you what they are, and
then show that you lie plunged in them. These they are: Forsaking of the Church
of Christ: Not to be certain of any religion: Hypocrisy: Mendacity against the
Church: Contumelious speech: Arrogancy: Inuenting of new flattering doctrine:
Vain and idle talking. That you are swallowed into these pits belonging to
Heresy, I will make plain, and by no other arguments, then such as your own
book affoardeth. This book now pleads against you, but more dreadful
evidence will it give in at the day of doom against your obstinate
perseverance. Wherefore, Antony, rise out of this main deep of Heresy, wherein
as yet you lie not so low, but repentance may reclayme you.

The first Gulf of Apostasy, The forsaking of the Church of Christ.
TO abandon the Church of Christ, and the Catholic Communion, is the first
though not the shallowest gulf of Heretical peruersity. All Heretics (says
S. Hierome) are Apostata's, that is, Reuolters. The Apostle terms the
Heretic perverse, Tit. 3:11.
because no man is an Heretic that has not auerted himself, and swarueth
from the way of Truth wherein once he walked. He says also, that the Heretic
delinquit proprio iudicio condemnatus, that he is a delinquent, condemned by
his own judgment. That you are in this Gulf (Antony) is a thing so clear,
that it need not to be proved; yet seeing you deny it, I will prove it, not by
common arguments, but such as shall leave you convicted out of your own words.

2. He that forsakes the Church of Christ and the communion of Saints, is
perverse, a delinquent, an Apostata. This you will not deny, and that you do
it, your self most manifestly affirm. For that you fly from the Roman Church,
that you depart out of it, in the page 34. you openly profess. This my
departing, say you, this my going out of Babylon, or flight, I will have to be
clear from all suspicion of schism. You depart then out of the Roman Church
which you style Babylon; but the Roman Church, is the Church of Christ, the
Society of Saints; therefore you impiously go from it, impiously you call it
Babylon. If you ask me, how I can prove the Roman Church to be the Church of
Christ, the society of Saints: I answer even by your own words which are
registered in the 28. page. I may not (say you) be wanting in my charge, I being
a Bishop in the Church of Christ. And in the 38 page you name the Bishops in
the Roman communion, your most holy Colleages, or fellow Bishops. When you writ
this, you were in no Church but in the Roman, into no other Church or company
were you then by visible and external profession admitted. Wherefore you were
Bishop in no Church of Christ, but as you were Bishop in the Church of Rome: or
if you were Bishop in some other Church, then were not our Catholic Bishops
your colleags or fellows. If then you were a Bishop in the Church of Christ,
and the Bishops of the Roman, were your follow-Bishops most holy; it follows
out of your own confession that the Church of Rome is the Church of Christ,
the society of Saints. Which seeing you forsake, you cannot deny, but you
forsake the company of Christ, and of his Saints, which is to be perverse, to
be delinquent, and to Apostate. Praes. c. 8.
Well says Tertullian; Erring is without fault where no delinquishing is: He
wanders securely, who by wandering forsakes nothing. This is most true: but he
that forsakes the Church of Christ, he that abandoneth his Saints, he leaves
something, yea a thing of great esteem he leaves, and so delinquisheth; not
without fault, yea with great impiety is such wa^dring. And if also he leave
that company whom he judges, whom he terms most holy, which is your case;
then questionless he is a delinquent condemned by his own judgment. Sermon. 30.
Mark what S. Ambrose expounding these words of the Apostle, commenteth
against your Apostasy. The Heretic condemns himself, who casts himself
out of the Church of Christ, and not being forced by any, of self accord
departs from the company of Saints. Well does he declare what he deserves at
the hands of all, who by his own proper doom, is severed from the company of
all. For whereas other criminous persons by Bishops censures are driven out of
the Church; the heretic preuenteth all, and becomes a forlorn from the Church
by the choice of his own will. The Heretic then does suffer the like
condemnation that Judas did, being both delinquent and Judge himself, the
author and the punisher of his own misdeed.

3. You will say, that you forsake the Roman Church with body, not with heart,
that you fly for fear of persecution, but are most ready (so you may do it
with your safety) to have peace and communion with the Church of Rome. If you
now plead in this sort, you will not be long of so good a mind: neither can
this answer consort with your other deeds and doctrine. For in the 34. and 35.
page you write, that you are ready to communicate with any, that agree with you
in the essential articles, and creeds of faith, yet so (say you) that we all
likewise detest new articles, either openly contrary to the sacred scripture,
or else opposite to the aforenamed Creeds. Now I ask you, whether the Church of
Rome teach new articles manifestly opposite to holy Scripture, or no? If not,
then you fly from her without any just cause, she being subject to no clear,
or notorious error. If she teach new articles that clearly repugne with
Scriptures, and will not detest them, yea seeing you say of her, that she does
obtrude new articles that contain in them manifest falsity, and does persecute
all that dare but mutter against them, even to the death, this supposed (I say)
clear it is that you have carried away not only your body, but also your heart,
your love, communion, and profession from the Roman Church, which yet you grant
to be the church of Christ, and the Company of Saints.

4. You will say again, that you indeed abandon the Roman Church, which is a
Church of Christ, notwithstanding you forsake not the Church of Christ, but
from one Church of Christ defiled with diverse errors you pass to another
Church of Christ more pure and more sincere, both for doctrine and discipline:
but this devise will not serve to quit you of the crime of Apostasy. For
(Antony) the Churches to which you fly, be themselves fugitive and fleeting
Churches, Companies which have divided themselves from the Roman, which had
they not done, no Church, no Company had been now in the world, to have
received you in your flight. This do you your self in a manner insinuate, when
you call the Churches to which you depart, the Churches which Rome has raised
up to be her adversaries. The time then was, when they were not Romes
adversaries, when they were not raised up, but addicted to that which you call
Romish Idolatry, lay prostrate on the ground at the Popes feet. So that also
these Churches have abandoned the Church of Christ and the Company of Saints,
if the Roman Church be (as you grant it to be) the Church of Christ and the
Company of Saints. Now then, did these fly to a Church more pure, then the
Roman when they revolted from her? No, but forsaking the Roman Church, they
departed to themselves being made purer then the Roman in their own opinion,
not by cleaving to the purity of some Church before extant in the world, but by
the purity of a new Company raised up, and made more pure then any other, by
forsaking and abandoning the rest of the whole Christian world. So Calvin
says: It is absurd that we that have departed from the whole world should now
fall out and quarrel amongst our selves. Calvin. ep. 107.
Your strifes and contentions (M. Calvin) are in very truth absurd and
ridiculous, but much more absurd is this your confession that you made a
separation from the whole world besides. For straight out of S. Augustine I
subsume, they that forsake the communion of the whole world, must needs be
Apostata's. God forbid will you say; for we have justly revolted from the rest
of the world, we run away from errors and abuses, we have weighty reasons
for what we do. No (says S. Augustine) you have no just reasons, you are
without doubt reuolting Apostata's, Epist. 48.
for we are certain (says he) none could justly separate themselves from the
communion of the world; and again. Ibidem.
It is no way possible, that any should have reason to separate their
Communion, from the communion of the whole world, and to call themselves the
Church, because upon just reasons they divided themselves from the society of
all nations. Thus S. Augustine: leaving you (Antony) no way to escape from the
gulf of Apostasy, but by returning to the Roman Communion.

5. But (say you) I will have this my departure or flight to be free from all
suspicion of schism. You speak peremptorily like a Prince, You will; but you
should know you have not authority to ouerule the Natures of things. If you
will take another man's goods without his leave, and not be a thief; If you will
upon private revenge bereave a man of his life, and not be a murderer; If you
will abandon the Church of Christ, and not be an Apostata, or Schismatike,
verily you will miss of your purpose. Theft shall be theft, murder murder, and
Schism schism, will you, nill you, Antony. Well, but I fly (say you) from
errors, I fly from abuses, I fly that I may not be partaker of her sins, not
have part in her punishments. O how lively did the holy Ghost describe you long
ago. The wicked son says, Proverb. 30 ver. 12. as S. Augustine reads.
that he is just, yet does he not wash clear his going out. You say the Church
swarmeth with errors, is full of abuses, laden with sins, that you are pure,
just, and thereupon fly, not to be partaker of the punishments due to our
sins, who have no sins forsooth of your own to be punished. You say you are
just, but you do not prove it; notwithstanding though you should in your own
cause say the very truth, yet could not you thereby clear your self from the
crime of Schism; which I will make manifest, even by your own words. In the
37. page touching S. Cyprian you write in this manner. Cyprian made no doubt,
but that Stephen the Roman Bishop did err very grievously, yet rather then to
make a Schism in the Church, he chose to communicate not only with Pope
Stephen, whose belief and practice was contrary to his, but also with others
whom he judged impure, for this cause only, because Pope Stephen did admit
them into his Communion: which example S. Augustine as he sets it before the
Donatists, so likewise he sets it before us for imitation. Now I will judge you
by your one evidence. For why do you not imitate this example, which you say is
laid before you a purpose, that you should imitate it? If S. Cyprian could not
divide himself from Pope Stephen, whom he most assuredly judged to err,
without being guilty of the crime of Schism, may you revolt from Pope Paul the
fifth under pretense that he errs, and not be a Schismaticke. If S. Cyprian,
had he forsaken Pope Stephen, could not have justified his departure, by saying
(put case he might truly have said so) I fly his errors, his abuses, his
sins; do you think that your defection from the Roman Church can be washed
clean from the note of Apostasy, by your loud exclaiming, that you fly error?
A protestation vain though it were true, and indeed false, uttered without any
proof. You go about Antony, to wash a brick, you loose your labor, your
crime cannot be washed away without tears of repentance.

The second Gulf, Wandering uncertainty about Religion.
THE second Gulf wherein you are drowned, I call Nullity of faith, because you
abandoned the Roman Church and Faith, before you had made choice of any other
Church or religion, that should succeed in lieu thereof. You seemed at your
departure from us to be a blanke ready to preceaue any Religion or faith that
should be written therein so it were contrary to the Roman. A deep pit of
impiety which heretics do fall into, whose property it is not to establish, but
to overthrow faith, to beat down Christian Churches that stand, not to rear
up Christian Churches amongst Pagans. They join friendship and communion
indifferently with all Sects (says Tertullian) nor do they regard though they
be different from them in opinion, Praese. cap. 40.
so they will concur with them to overthrow the truth. This want of sound and
solid faith you show (Antony) by many signs and tokens. First by your
perpetual silence, not declaring either in the title or in the body of your
book to what sect or Religion you mean to pass from the Roman. In the title
you pretend to show the reasons of your going, but you tell us neither whence,
nor whither you take your journey. Motion (as Philosophers say) receaues form
and shape of the end and mark wherein finally the same rests; which being
true, your going, to which your title prescribes not any end, nor restraynes
within the compass of any marks, what may it seem, but a vast, uncertain,
blind, and inconsiderate wandering? This your omitting to set down in your
title the final mark of your journey, is the more blameworthy, because
straight in the very beginning of your discourse you require that even we
Catholics should approve your departure. For how can any prudent man possibly
approve your journey, before he know in what Country, Church, or Religion you
mean to take up your rest? We that know not for what place you are bound, can
we know or approve your course? Seeing then this circumstance whither is the
chief thing that gives light to them that are to judge in the undertaking of a
journey, and therefore is the first thing to be declared in the very beginning
of the deliberation, why did not you (Antony) express it in the Title of your
Book? why have you not once thoughout your whole pamphlet told it us in
plain and direct terms? The answer is easy: you told it not, because you
were certain neither of the Church nor of the Religion wherein you should make
your final abode. You compare your self forsaking the Church of Rome with the
great Patriarch Abraham, who following God, left his Country: which comparison
though in the main point it be very idle, yet herein you are not unlike to
Abraham, that as he departed from his native soil, not knowing whither he
went, so you abandoned the Roman Church and Religion, before you could tell,
what other Church or Religion you should embrace upon the forsaking thereof.

6. Secondly of this your doubtfullnesse in choice of Religion, which you did
but insinuate in the title, you make open demonstration in your book: in the
15. pa. whereof you write: Now mine eyes being more opened I might easily
perceive that the doctrines of the Churches, which being very many, Rome has
raised up to be her adversaries, which Churches though we sharply censure and
our Deuines maynly impugn, do little or nothing at all swerve from the true
primitive doctrine of the pure Church. So you write, nor could you have more
disclosed the vast pit of uncertainty in your breast, gaping for any doctrine,
so it be opposite to the Roman. For let us search into the matter. I demand of
you (Antony) whither are you going? to Churches (say you) that swerve very
little or nothing from the true Primitive doctrine. I hear you. But show me
these Churches; which are they? they be those Churchs which being very many
Rome has raised up to be her adversaries? O what a deal of uncertainty and
confusion lies couched together in these words? I let pass that uncertainty
very little, which how much or little it is, no man knows; you only may
determine, and at your pleasure stretch or contract it. I do not enquire where
about in the world those Churches are to be seen which you so highly commend.
Which question should I propose, I could pursue you from country to country,
and you would sweat to find such Churches in the world as you describe in your
book, Churches I say for number very many, in doctrine all opposite to the
Roman, and all agreeing among themselves in the pure primitive truth. But
pretermitting these questions, I only ask, when you say, that the Churches,
which being very many Rome has raised up to be her adversaries, do very little
swerve from the pure primitive doctrine, whether you speak of all the Churches
and Companies that in doctine are opposite to the Roman, or of some of them
only? You cannot with truth speak it of all, they being so many, and so
repugnant, the one against the other, Grecians, Lutherans, Caluinistes,
Libertines, Anabaptists, Arians, Trinitarians. How can it be, that they all
should very little or nothing disagree from the true doctrine, whose doctrines
disagree mainly and almost infinitely the one from the other?

7. If you say, that though not all, yet some of the Churches adversaries to
Rome, do very little disagree from the primitive truth, then I demand, Why do
you not distinguish these pure Churches from the other impure, before you
praise them? Why do you thus at random rashly (not to say impiously) cast that
great commendation to swerve very little from the pure primitive doctrine, upon
the confuse multitude of sects disagreeing from the Roman Church, in which
mass even your self being judge, all be not sincere, yea many be corrupt,
many impious, many most food and sottish? And yet by your words no man can
perceive whether this high praise be bestowed by you on the Grecians, or on the
Septentrionals, on the Lutherans, or on the Anabaptists, on the Caluinists, or
on the Arians. Verily you be not the mouth of God (Antony) you be not the
preacher of Truth, who to good and bad laid together on an heap, give your
approbation without any distinction, not seuering precious from vile, noxious
from wholesome, heretical from Catholic, impious from Christian doctrine. And
yet herein you are excusable. For what else could you do, who had not as yet
made choice of any certain Church you might magnify before al other, being
uncertain for the present, and ignorant what finally your choice might be, you
durst not condemn any Church of the many opposite to Rome, fearing you should
perchance condemn that Church, which you might be forced to fly unto. Had you
singled one Church out of that number, extolling it only above all other, the
rest perchance would with less willingness have entertained you, taking your
singular praise of that one Church, as a disparagement to them all; nor durst
you commend distinctlie and by name all the sects that are enemies to the
Pope, knowing that thereby you might expose your self to just exception that
Catholics might take at you, as being a friend of damnable errors. Wherefore
craftily you resolved to shoot at random in the praise of Churches that oppose
themselves to Rome, without specifying the name, or doctrine of any, that so
you might have both freedom to run to what sect you pleased, and shelter
against Catholics, should they except against you, as favoring the errors of
any particular heresy. Now (Antony) perceive you not, that your secret and wily
devise is laid open? and that this your book brings to light the things which
you most of al desired should have been hidden?

8. Thirdly, so great is your uncertainty, that you are not only ignorant to
what sect to fly from the Roman Church, but also you know not, from what
doctrine of the Roman Church you should fly. I confess you do particularily
mislike the Primacy of the Roman Bishop, but you were not ignorant, that the
hatred of this authority is common to all sorts of Heretics. Whosoever are
wicked in the world, the more egregiously that they are wicked, the more
mortally do they hate the power of the Pope, all being herein combined,
Grecians, Protestants, Lutherans, Caluinists, Anabaptists, Arians, Turks,
Jews, Atheists. What other article of the Roman belief do you condemn besides
this? You name no other, but in general you proclaim that you fly the Roman
sins errors, abuses, and innumerable novelties. Why name you them not? I will
tell you: the sects that band against Rome being very many, do not all mislike
the same doctrines in the Roman Church? What one condemns, another prayseth,
what some approve, others abhor: so your religion depending on future events
you could not show detestation of the Roman errors in particular till you had
made certain choice of your Church. You knew that you were to condemn in the
Roman Church, other articles did you become a Grecian, others did you fall to
be a Lutheran, others did you turn Caluinist, others did you cleave to the
Anabaptists, others should you stay in Germany, others should you fly to
France, others should you sail into England. Wherefore wavering in
uncertainties not able to forsee what shall become of you, without naming any
particulers, with all your might and main you cry out on the Roman Errors.
When you shall have made your election for your religion, and therein set up
your rest, then shall the Roman Church err in those points, and as damnably as
it please that company you live with to have you say.

9. But I pretermitt (say you in the 17. page) to set down particularly the
Errors of Rome, because in my book of the Ecclesiastical Common wealth I do
fully prosecute them, which book now a good while ready for the print I have,
and will set it forth out of hand, and bequeath it to the first printer in
Germany, that by the way I shall find for the purpose. I beseech you, Antony,
why did you not perform what here so solemly you promise? Met you with no
Printer in Germany that was for the purpose? or did the King of great Britany
countermand your purpose? or did you of your self shrink from your purpose? I
search not into this secret. This I say, that now you shall not print the book
you brought out of Italy with you, but another. Your self growing daily worse
and worse, will change therein diverse things, either taking away some points of
Catholic doctrine, or adding some new doctrines gotten by your reading in the
books of heretics, to say nothing of the things which Ministers by their
arguments will win you to alter. And what shall I say of his gracious
Majesty, so excellent for his knowledge? To change some things in your book,
and to add other things to it, he will persuade you by his learning, and to
leave out diverse doctrins that savor to much of Rome, he may compel you by
his authority: percha^ce also sundry of his sayings, though he urge you not,
yet you to please him, will put them into your book. Know you not what befell
Casaub one? How much changed he was from that affection and mind, that he
seemed to carry with him into England: which alteration he going about to
excuse to his friend, plainly confesses, that by entrance into the English
Court, he was become a slave, not daring in any thing gaynesay the Kings
pleasure; which baseness notwithstanding I am persuaded did proceed not from the
Kings disposition, but from Casaubons dastardy.

10. And as for the changes which I do now aforehand avouch will be in your
book, we have a fair presage, or rather a beginning of them in this Pamphlet,
which reprinted in England differs somewhat from that you set forth at Venice.
For in your edition of Venice, declaring the argument of the ninth book of the
ten you promise, you say that you largely show quam parca esse debeat
Ministrorum Ecclesiae sustentatio: How scarce the maintenance of the ministers
of the Church ought to be. The word scarce maintenance sounded harshly in the
ears of English ministers. Peradventure when you wrote at Venice, you provided
maintenance for Bishops only, not also for their wives and children. Wherefore
in the London edition the matter is amended, and you say, that you declare
qualis esse debeat ministrorum Ecclesiae sustentatio: What kind of maintenance
Church-ministers ought to have. And when your books come forth, you may
happily, to gain the good will of Ministers wives, change their scarce
maintenance into plentiful. You may see that without cause you brag that you
will publish a book brought with you from Italy, containing the Roman errors,
together with many clear sights and visions of truth you had at Venice, and
diverse doctrines different from the Roman, which you learned by the only
reading of the Fathers. For the book you now publish (Antony) is not that you
wrote at Venice, it is not I say that worthy work which you (as you vaunt)
placed in the midest of the darkness of Popery, not having the candle of any
heretical book shining before you, writ only by the light, which divine
illustrations falling down from heaven, yielded to your pen; these discourses
of yours so noble and divine be now lost, vanished away, perished. Not so (me
thinks I hear you say) for though some points of doctrine may be changed in my
Book, yet many, and very many will remain. Suppose this be true, who will be
able to discern the relics of the pure original, from so many the new
corruptions thereof? or distinguish the parts of your book untouched from the
parts changed? your ancient opinions from your new? your Venetian belief from
your English? his Majesty's conceyts from those that be properly yours? yours
which you lately got by perusing the works of heretics, from those whereof
you boast, as if you had received them immediately from heaven? No man
certainly, though he be never so sharpe-sighted.

11. Fourthly, you bewray your uncertainty in that to free your self from
suspicion, and to meet with these inconveniences, you have not in this your
writing, set down any confession of the faith you brought from Venice; which
thing was most expected, and it did greatly behooue you to have done it. For
this is the first thing which persons reclaymed from heresy have care to do,
that seeing they now openly forsake the Religion which once they followed, the
world may take notice of the Religion which in lieu thereof they embrace, least
otherwise they should think them plain Infidels, utterly without any certain
religion. Wherefore you should straight in the beginning of your reuolte, have
made a plain profession of your faith, set down distinctly the doctrines of
the Roman Church which you disliked, and also what you approved in the
pretendedly reformed Churches: for when you say of them; that they swerve from
the pure doctrine very little, you seem to insinuate, that none of them do
fully and absolutely content you. This you did not; but serving the time rather
then the truth, and (as S. Hilary says, Lib. 7. de Trinit.
Heretics use to do) being ready to frame your doctrine to the humors of men,
by this negligence you have changed the ten years of your clear light into
darkness eternal Neither shall any mortal man ever know, what was the faith
that ran away with you from Venice, nor what doctrine of Popery made you run
away; your writings will be not only charged with falsehood; but also suspected
of fiction, that you write to please others, what you believe not your self.

12. Nor may you say, that in this Book you have made confession of your faith
in the 29. page thereof, where you write. I am ready to communicate with all, so
long as we agree in the essential articles of our faith, and the creedes of
the ancient Church; yet so, if also we together detest new articles either
openly contrary to the holy Scripture, or else repugnant with the aforsayd
Creedes. This confession of faith is too wandering and wild, within which all
Heresies may range, or at least very few are excluded by it. And yet you are
not constant in this profession. For page 9 you command the Roman Church to
restore communion to all the Christian Churches that profess Christ by the
essential Creeds of faith. Where you do not mention what here you so
expressly require, the detestation of new articles that are openly contrary to
Scriptures. Moreover how uncertain and ambiguous is that phrase openly
repugnant with Scripture? For many kinds there be of errors openly contrary
to Scripture, and even Protestants themselves do mainly disagree, nor can they
define which of these errors must needs be detested under pain of expulsion
from the Church. Again you say nothing of the Judge, to whose censure it
belonges to decree which errors be new and clearly repugnant with Scripture.
For if you require of men, that they detest those errors and articles which to
themselves seem clearly repugnant with Scripture, there is not any Sectary
that will not do it. If you will have all men reject such errors and articles
which in your judgment be new, and do manifestly contradict the Scripture; you
do them wrong. For who made you their judge? If you will have the Controversy
decided neither by your judgment, nor by theirs; but remitted to the final
decision of a third Judge, why do you not name him? Finally you do not declare
what you mean, by essential articles, nor how many they be in number, nor
whether all the articles of the ancient Creedes be essential, nor what you
mean by Creedes essential, that being a new phrase with I do not remember to
have read in any Author Catholic or Protestant; yea the word may without much
ado be drawn to such a sense as no Heresy will reject any ancient Creed, so
far forth as it is essential. And why do you not rather exact full and
absolute profession of all ancient Creedes, but still with this restriction of
the Creedes essential? verily something lurkes in this phrase, In libro de
Synod. Nican. decret.
which we as yet understand not: nor without cause did S. Athanasius warn us
to suspect all the words and phrases of Heretics. Why speak you not plainly
and ingenuously? Why dally you with doubtful and ambiguous words in the business
of Religion? but only because not being resolved of what faith you would be,
you mean to frame such a profession of faith, as might suit with diverse
occasions and times, with sundry countries and sects. Wherein you do no new
thing which your ancestors did not practice in S. Hieromes days. They do
(says he) so temper their words, they range them in such order, they so mince
the matter with a^biguous speech, that they make a confession both of our
doctrine, and of our adversaries doctrine, that in one sense taken their
profession is Heretical, taken in another Catholic. Neither has this our age
been without such kind of Prothei, and Changelings, nor without these
Camelion-like confessions of faith, which change their color and sense
according to time and place. Such was the confession of Ausburge, which to
Charles the fifth Emperor, the first Fathers of your Gospel presented. The
articles of which confession Philip Melancthon the Author thereof, Hospin.
concordia discord. in an. Domi 1527.
did of set purpose and studiously cloth with doubtful words. The reason of
which his deed, writing to Luther he yields, saying, that those articles were
now and then to be changed, and made to suit with occasions. So it is: your
faiths be variable and monthly, but the verity of our Lord lasts for ever.

The third Gulf, Hypocrisy.
THE third Gulf of Heretical naughtines is Hypocrisy. Heretics (says S. Lib.
5. de ciuit. c. 8.
Augustine) be crafty people, endued not with the spirit of wisdom, but with
the spirit of wily deceit, wherewith their hearts are accustomed to boil, and
so trouble the quiet of Saints. And S. Hilary. Lib. 5. de Trinitate.
Upon defection from the faith (says he) wayteth lying Hypocrisy, so that they
keep the show of godliness in their words, the truth whereof they have cast out
of their conscience. But it is not easy within the compass of the skin of
one Lamb, so to shut up a whole wolf, that no part of him be seen. You feign
Piety (Antony,) but you dissemble in such sort, that by your own words you
may be detected to be counterfaire, which I will make evident with five
examples. First in the second page you take upon you the testimony of a pure
conscience. Our glory (say you) is the testimony of our conscience, that in
simplicity of heart, and in the syncerity of God, not in carnal wisdom, but
in the grace of God I have changed place. Thus you appeal from the Judgment
of the Church to the Chancery of your secret Conscience: you turn your self
from public knowledge, to your own priuity, that is, Confess. lib. 10.
says S. Augustine, from truth to falsehood. Shall I prove that you went away
moved by the wisdom of the flesh, out of care to sleep in a whole skin,
over which you feared some punishment was imminent? that had not this fear
given you wings to fly away, you might have been still a Papist at this day in
outward show, and have adored those things which you now term Idols? In the
23. page. Hatred against me (say you) was conceived and harbored in their
hearts at Rome, who now had smelt out my labors in writing against her
opinions: for more then once by the Nuntius Apostolicus abiding in Venice, was
I warned hereof and rebuked. Therefore it was my best course to take the wings
of the Done, and fly into the wilderness. Behold how clearly you confess that
fear gave you the wings wherewith you were carried away from us; fear, I
say, not of the Romish Idolatry, not fear to offend God, or to fall into Hell,
but fear to feel the sharpenes of Roman severity; fear lest the Republike
would deliver you up, or permit you to be taken and punished according to your
deserts by the Inquisition.

14. Secondly, you make show of great love of crosses, and of desire to suffer
for Christ, apparelling your affections in the words of S. Paul, burning with
divine charity. For my self, with Paul I say, it is a very small thing for me
to be judged of men: let me be a fool for Christ, let me be ignoble, let me be
buffeted and cursed, let me endure persecutions, let me be blasphemed, let me
be made the scum of the world, an outcast, and Anathema, so only that I make
satisfaction to Christ. Thus you speak, and forward you go with the words of
the Apostle, seeming to long to suffer disgraces and torments for Christ. But
all is faygned: for if persecution be your desire, why run you to a Country
where you may rather persecute others, then endure persecution your self?
Where you may securely rail on the Pope, blaspheme him, curse him to the pit
of hell, as the outcast of the world and Anathema? The motive of this your
running away you set down in the 23. page What should I (say you) have tarried
longer in the midst of a perverse and crooked Nation? If I would have taught
and exercised the true Catholic doctrine, I had hastened and brought upon my
head the most terrible Roman storms, and most foul tempests. And is it so
great a misery tody for Christ (Antony?) does death endured for the true
Catholic doctrine seem foul and hateful in your eye, it being honorable and
precious in the sight of God? for the Pilot being in a storm to abandon his
ship, is foul and shameful; but for him to encounter with the tempest, to
venture life for ship and passengers is glorious. You desire to be a Pilot, you
will needs govern the ship of the Church, but to be in storms and
persecution, to live in peril of your life you cannot endure. Verily you
dissemble (Antony) when you make show of desire to suffer, and little do you
feel the affections of S. Paul, whose words breathing forth a burning desire
of Martyrdom, you borrow for your self, which be no more fit for your desire,
then is Hercules shoo for a Childs foot.

15. Thirdly, you make great demonstration of condoling with the Church, and
deploring the ruins she suffers at the hands of the Pope. This grief and
sadness (say you, in the 10. page) did in wonderful manner consume me, and
still day by day, more and more consumes me. Which words I could not read
without smiling when I remember, how your fall gives evidence against this
your pretended pining away for sorrow. In your whole body from top to toe there
appear not any signs of the mortification of Christ Jesus, nor of any inward
grief, either wasting your flesh or drying up your bones. When you write that
you were in a consumption by reason of sadness, I wonder whether you smiled not
your self Nor is this any new fiction but the common mantell of Heretics,
Lib. 3. mor. ca. 19.
which S. Gregory discovered long since. Heretics (says he) make show to
condole with the Church, and with this sayre show of love do they bayte their
books of deceyt. You weep the tears of the Crocodile, wherewith that ravenous
beast moisteneth and makes slippery the ground, that when the passenger drawn
by that counterfayt weping approaches, his feet fail him, and suddenly
falls a joyful pray to the mourner.

16. Fourthly, you faigne that Scriptures favor you in the fifth page. Never
(say you) did I at any time square the motions and thoughts of my mind, by any
other ruler, then such as the Holy Ghost prescribes in Sacred Writ. This is
soon said: what Heretic said it not? Neither could their talking (says S.
Hierome) gain them believers, did they not make show to confirm their
perverse doctrine by divine authority. You still governed your thoughts and
inclinations by the rules of scripture, other ruler or direction you used never
at any time. A great praise, which I cannot say agrees to any of the Saints,
if from that number we exempt Christ and his Virgin Mother. If this be true,
surely you never sinned, unless one may sin, and do amiss in following the
rule and government of Gods spirit: perchance you mean not so rudely as you
write, and I can believe these your words may be more vain then your mind. I
only warn you not to be hasty to believe these thoughts and motions of the
spirit, that present themselves to you, vested with testimonies of scripture,
wherewith even serpents are covered and walk about. Will you not believe me?
then believe Luther, who writes, they are wretches that do not consider, that
the Devil does dart venomous fiery thoughts into their hearts, Tom. 2. Germ.
wit. fol. 122. art. 552.
which be nothing else but most fine thoughts adorned with testimonies of
Scripture, that they cannot perceive the subtle poison that lurketh in them.
Wherefore seeing you make your boast of Scriptures, you might not wonder, though
we should answer you, as S. Augustine did the Manichees. Being bad, you read
them not well, being ignorant you understand them not right, being blind you
cannot behold their truth.

17. Fifthly, you pretend to follow the Fathers. After the inward motions of
the holy Ghost only the holy Fathers (say you) have been the most honorable
authors and aduisers of this my enterprise. You be not wise to trim your
self with the show of a^cient Fathers authority, seeing you go toward those
Churches, that profess to follow neither Fathers nor Mothers, but only the
pure Word. And if you have your Passe-port from the ancient Fathers to leave
Rome, why have you not alleged so much as one clear testimony out of them in
your behalf, and against the Roman Bishops Preeminency? Page 35.
You bring indeed out of the Council of Carthage this testimony, which you
call, the most renowned saying of the most renowned Cyprian. We do not judge
any man (says he) nor remove them from the right of communion that be of a
contrary mind. For not any amongst us does make himself the Bishop of Bishops,
nor by tyrannical terror force his fellow-Bishops to obey him. You could not
(Antony) have produced a cleerer testimony to convince, that in truth you have
found no matter of substance in the Fathers, to object against us. Cyprian was
indeed most renowned for sanctity, learning, and eloquence, but he was also
renowned for an error, which God permitted this worthy light of the Church to
fall into. This error he sought by all means to establish in that Council of
Carthage, out of which you bring this testimony: so finding in the approved
writings of S. Cyprian not any saying, that might steed you, Septem libris de
baptismo.
you fly to the testimony of this erroneous and rejected council, which S.
Augustine has by name confuted in a most renowned work. And this seems to
be the weightiest authority of all that in ten years study you have gathered.
Moreover when you praise the charity, patience, and wisdom of Cyprian, in his
contention with Pope Stephen, depressing as much as you can the Pope, it is
clear, that hatred against the present successor of Stephen, makes you
forsake the known judgment of antiquity. For S. Augustine a most moderate and
friendly Censurer of S. Cyprian does say in plain terms that in his
contention with the Pope he wrote with so great indignation, Lib. 5. de Baptis.
c. 25
and adds this prudent advise, that it were best not to mention all the
things which Cyprian irritated against Stephen, powered forth in his anger,
which brought with them danger of pernicious dissension. Finally the words of
S. Cyprian, sound more of indignation, then of any error, nor do they cross
the power of the Roman Bishop in deciding the controversies of faith. For he
does not say, that none was in the Church appointed by Christ, whom the rest
of Christian Bishops were bound to obey, and endued with authority to put an
end to the controversies of faith; but he says, that in that concell of
Carthage, there was not any Bishop of Bishops, nor any that did challenge to
himself such authority: by which words he does rather insinuate, then deny the
known authority and title of the Roman Bishop, though perchance he grudged and
girded at the present exercise thereof, accompting it Tyrannous, because he
found it opposed to his error: which shows that S. Cyprian was then over
feelingly moved against the Pope, as S. Augustine says, who with great reason
exclaimeth against you, and such mates as would justify their rebellion by
Cyprians example Oh how detestable is their error who think they do laudably
imitate the faults of some worthy men, De vnico Bapt. cont. Petil. lib. 1.
cap. 13.
when they have not any part of their excellent Virtues.

The fourth Gulf, Mendacity against the Church.
NOTHING more notorious in former ages, nothing whereof the books of the
Fathers do more sound, then the impious mendacity of Heretics, whereby they
show themselves to be borne of him, that was false from the beginning, and the
Father of falsehood. They put their confidence in untruth, nor is there any man
held for perfect amongst them (says holy Irenaeus) that has not fruclified
and begot very great and mighty untruths. Antony, Lib. 3. ca. 1.
you desire to be perfect in your generation, and the fertility of your soil
is sufficiently proved by this little plant you now have set forth, which is
more stored with lies, then with leaves. Out of which multitude I will gather,
and present you with ten, which be both notorious for their sent, and very
remarkable for their bigness.

19. The first (whereof before we made mention) but here in the proper place
to be repeated, is set down in your 15. page I saw now most clearly, and did
fully perceive that at Rome, without any lawful authority, yea by great
violence and wrong, innumerable new articles daily were coined, and obtruded
unto us. If you mark well your own words, perchance you your self will
remain amazed at the hugenes of this untruth. You say, that doctrines new,
clearly false, without any ground, by extremest wrongful violence, are every
day without number coined at Rome, and forced upon the Church, even as articles
of faith. And yet you neither do, nor can name any article of the Roman faith,
which has not been ever entertained as a point of faith in former times, or
else defined not in Rome, but in some general Council.

20. The second untruth in greatness equalleth the first, in malice surpasses
it. This untruth stands recorded in your 24. page, where you say, that you
left the Church of Rome, and ran away, fearing the ordinary sequells of
hatred, that are, poisoning, and stabbing. For to this pass (say you) matters
are brought in this age, that at Rome, and by authority from Rome, the
controversies of the Church are committed no longer to Deuines, nor to
Counsels, but to racke-maisters, to hang-men, to cutthroats, to
bloud-suckers, to parricides. Here (Antony) you are seen to be in a fury, and
to have your heart imbued with the bloody disposition of the men you have named.
The Church of Rome does not practice that which you hatefully charge her with,
she referred the Church-controuersies of this age, not to be maintained with
poisoning and stabbing, by bloud-suckers, and parricides; but to be treated of,
and decided by Fathers, by Bishops, by grave and learned Deuines in the
Council of Trent. Such as obstinatly defend doctrines accursed by Counsels,
such as revive the controversies that have been already decided, such men, I
say, being convicted of the crime, and confessing themselves to be contemners
of the Churches Counsels, she delivers up to be punished, not to blood
suckers, nor to Parricides, but to Christian Princes, and to the Judges by them
appointed: she does not reprove the endeauours of Deuines who discuss points
of doctrine that are yet undefined, but the temerity of Heretics, whose
labors are (as S. Leo says) to seek for the things that already are found,
Epist. 60.
to revive controversies that are ended, to repeal the doctrines that have been
formerly established. You lay to our charge (Antony) the cruel demeanor of
your Caluinists, who with swords and weapons do not defend Decrees of
Counsels which were laudable, do not put an end to controversies that were
never before determined, which were an evil not altogether so intolerable:
but the doctrines that Counsels have builded, and set up, they with their
poyniards, swords, and lances beat down; the belief, which the tradition of
Ancestors, which the Decrees of general Counsels have rooted in Christian
breasts, together with their bowels, they draw out, and cast into the fire.

21. The third untruth is page 16. that We Romanists have contracted the Church
Catholic, to which Christ promised the perpetual assistance of the holy
Ghost, to be the very Court of Rome. What Catholic ever wrote, spoke, thought,
or so much as dreamed of this fond conceit? The particular Church of Rome we
term the principal Church, with which all Churches must have agreement and
access unto, in regard of her more powerful Principality; we term the
Church of Rome the head of that Catholic Church, to which Christ promised
perpetual infallible assistance: but we say not, that the sole Roman is the
universal Catholic Church, taking the Roman by it self, without the rest of
the Christian Churches adhering unto her.

22. The fourth untruth is in the same 16. page, where you say that, It is
exacted of us, that we believe firmly as an article of our Faith, that the
whole spirit of Christ is resident in the Court of Rome only, yea in the Pope
only. What greater falsehood can be uttered or devised? The spirit of Christ is
indeed but one, nor is he in any one man, in whom he is not whole, if we
respect his substance; and in this sense we say that the spirit of Christ is
whole in the Pope, yea in every Christian. But this one and same spirit works
very different and diverse things, according to which he is not whole in every
one; and in this sense to say, that we believe the whole spirit of Christ to be
abiding in the Pope only, is a great untruth. First the spirit of Christ
assisteth the Elect, whom through the dangerous miseries of this life, he
guides by sure means to the land of the living. Do we make this spirit
resident in the Pope only? Do we not acknowledge, that there be others Elect
besides the Pope? Secondly the spirit of Christ is the spirit of adoption, in
whom we cry Father, Father. Do we teach, that this spirit is in none but in
Popes? that the Pope only is Just, Holy, and the Son of God? Thirdly the
spirit of Christ signeth and seals the hearts of every one that is faithful,
and annointeth them that they may believe. And is this spirit also made by us
proper to the Pope only? Do we say that there is not any true believing
Christian besides him? Fourthly, the spirit of Christ teaches his Church so,
that the whole Church can never err. And do we not place this spirit
infallible in the whole Church? So that whatsoever has been in any age received
by the uniform belief of the whole Church, that without doubt as being a most
certain Christian verity, we embrace. Fifthly, the spirit of Christ decideth
the controversies, which concerning faith, in every age may arise in the
Church; neither do we make fast this spirit to the Pope only, but we teach that
the same is abiding in the rest of the Catholic Bishops who be the Judges of
Faith, and together with the Roman Bishop their Head, do determine assuredly
the controversies of the Church. Wherefore I wonder where your forehead was,
when you did not blush to write, that we make the whole spirit of Christ to be
abiding in the Pope only.

23. The fifth untruth is in the 26. page, That whatsoever has been formerly
fortould by the Prophets, for the honor of the universal Church, we by
extreme violence and wrong draw it all to the Roman Court only. It is certain
that some sayings of Prophets do particulerly concern the Church of Rome, and
have been accordingly performed in it. But that whatsoever is said glorious of
the Church in the ancient Prophets, we turn it all to the Church, yea to the
Court of Rome only, you speak it indeed in your spleen against the Pope, but
in speaking it, your knowledge cannot choose but give a check to your tongue.

24. The sixth untruth is, That the Roman Court has now a long while
suppressed the holy Counsels, and so has put out the eyes of the Church. If
you speak of the Counsels that have been celebrated already, none do more
Religiously observe their Decrees, then the Church of Rome. If you mean of
Counsels that should be gathered, that she hinders that they cannot be now
assembled; did not the Church of Rome (I pray you) call of late the Council of
Trent, to say nothing of National, Prouincial, and Episcopal Counsels, which
are very frequently held? And if your accusation be limited to General
Councels, you must know that to gather so great and universal assembly is not
an easy thing, nor necessary for the suppression of every heresy, as S. Lib. 4.
aduersusduas Ep. Pelag. cap. 13.
Augustine writes. You grieve I perceive, that the Roman Bishop is able to
condemn you without a general Council. Unhappy were the Church, could he not
do it. Out of pride innated to heretics you aim at this honor, that a
Counsel of the whole Church, should be called about you; which glory also the
Pelagians, as being most proud Heretics, sought, greiuing exceedingly that
every where by the Roman Bishop, and others without any General Council, they
were condemned and accursed. They desired (says S. Augustine) a general
Counsel, that at least they might trouble and disquiet the Catholic world,
seeing they could not (God being against them) pervert it.

25. The seventh Untruth is in the 22. page That the Episcopal administration
of Bishops, is wholly perished, the whole government of Churches is altogether
translated to Rome, the Bishops are scarce the vicars and servants of our Lord
the Pope. That Church-busines of most weight should be referred to the Roman
Bishop, the Fathers in all ages have ordained. This is now adays still
practiced in the Church, what besides and above this you add, is not the Roman
custom, but your slander.

26. The eight, That Bishops be subject, not only to the Pope, Cardinals etc.
but also to innumerable Religious Orders of Regulars, and to their Friars, who
by their privileges devour and swallow up the power of Bishops. Verily
(Antony) you seem to have lost all regard of your good name, that dare in this
manner range without the bounds of truth.

27. The ninth, That Catholic teachers, namely your masters the Jesuits, do
not furnish their Divinity with the sayings of holy Scripture, exactly
discussed and declared; that amongst them, and in the Church of Rome there is
extreme ignorance of Scripture. He that will but peruse some Catholic writers
in matters of sacred learning, specially the Jesuits, will soon see how false
a slander this is.

28. The tenth, That the books of our Adversaries are wholly concealed from us,
that such as are excellent for their piety, and knowledge, yea the learned
Doctors or Bishops we have, are not permitted in any sort to read them. Thus
you write, showing that hatred against the Pope so transports you, that you
mind not what you say. How could the Catholics of all nations confute your
heretical books, did none of us read them? Are they in no sort permitted, no
not to the learned of us all? You may see (Antony) that though your book be
forbiden, yet I have read it. Therefore S. Cyprian says truly, Lib. 1. ep. 2.
Amongst prophan men, that are departed from the Church, and from whose breasts
the holy Ghost is departed, what else is to be found, but a depraved mind, a
deceitful tongue, cankred hatred, and sacrilegious lying? To which whosoever
gives credit, shall at the day of judgment be found to stand on their side.

The fifth Gulf, Contumelious speech against the Pope.
AFTER the Falsehood of Heretics, follows their railing, as being a near
neighbor unto it. Heretics (says S. Lib. 16. mor. c. 14.
Gregory) with violency of words assail the weak minds of the faithful, and
rob the poor people. Not being able to supplant the learned, they take from
the unlearned the veyle of faith by their pestiferous preaching. I shall not
need (Antony) to search into your book for storms of angry and railing
speech, which in every page meet with the Reader, and rage against the Pope,
that so you may take from Catholics the veyle of faith, by furious blastes of
words, seeing you can not with solid reasons persuade them to cast it away. In
the 16. page thus you thunder out against the Church of Rome. At Rome many
things are made articles of Faith, which have not any institution from Christ,
yea moreover the souls of the faithful be miserably deceived, and
consequently being blind, together with their blind guides, be lead, and fall
headlong into the gulf of Perdition. And in the 22. page you rage yet more
angerly against Rome. It is not a Church (say you) but a Vineyard to make Noe
drunk; it is a flock which the Pastor does milk till blood follow, which he
pouleth, shaueth, fleaeth, and deuoureth. In the 32. page. It is not for
Prophets to deal with the Roman Bishop, that now does so mainly trouble,
scandalize, rob, oppress the Church. The Majesty of the Roman Pope is
counterfayt, temporal, proud, usurped, nothing at all.

30. Finally your spleen against this present Pope moves you to revile the
most holy Pope and Martyr S. Stephen. For in the 37. page you say, that S.
Stephen out of indiscreet zeal, by importune exco^munications, ran headlong
into a mischeiuous Schism; But Cyprian by his Patience, Charity, and exceeding
great Wisdom, was the cause, that the separation did not ensue. This you
charge the most holy Martyr, as though he had gone headlong into schism, a
sin in your opinion much worse then Heresy. How wrongefully, and without any
just cause? For no man could proceed more religiously, more modestly, and more
prudently then Pope Stephen did in this Controversy with S. Cyprian. When S.
Cyprian impugned mightily a doctrine, which (as he did not deny) was confirmed
by the perpetual custom of the Church; what did this most holy Bishop,
appointed of God to be Judge, and to give sentence in this Controversy, where
this perpetual custom of the Church was opposed against by the excellent
learning and sanctity of Cyprian? He showed a reverent respect to them both, as
far as truth and conscience would permit him. That the learning and sanctity
of S. Cyprian might not overthrow a perpetual custom, without the assent of a
general Council, Vincent. Lyrinens. com. c. 16.
he set out that Decree so much commended by the Fathers, Nihil innouandum
praeterquam quod est traditum. That nothing should be innouated contrary to
that which had been delivered by tradition. On the other side to show the regard
he had of S. Cyprians learning and sanctity, he would not have, that custom
should so preiudicate against S. Cyprians doctrine, that thereupon it should be
accounted Heretical, before a general Council, but that S. Cyprian, though
still cleaving to his opinion, should notwithstanding be retained in the
Catholic communion. A most prudent and temperate decision.

31. Neither did he with any bitter speech provoke S. Cyprian, who yet (as S.
Augustine says) too much moved against Pope Stephen powered forth such speachs
as it were better to bury them in oblivion then to record and revive them.
Wherefore by the judgment of antiquity, not only truth stood on the Popes side,
but also modesty, charity, wisdom in his proceedings for the defense of the
truth. Take heed (Antony) that you be not a member of him, Apoc. 15.
to whom was given a wide mouth speaking big things, and to blaspheme the
tabernacle of God, and the Saints that dwell in heaven. You are as good as your
word: according to your promise, de vtilitate credend. cap. 14.
you bark: But know, that you bark against that Church, which (as S.
Augustine says) by succession of Bishops from the Apostolic Sea, has
obtained the height of authority, Heretics her enemies round about her,
barking in vain against her. Sampson sent foxes into the corn of the
Philistines with their heads loose, but with their tails tied, which
signifies, says S. Hierome, that Heretics have tongues free to bark, but for
performing, they be shackled and cumbred. They bark fiercely, but they beat
but the air; sooner may they break themselves, then fright and remove the
Roman Church from the embracing of the faith, that has been delivered unto her.
She cleaving to the divine promises, as it were fixed in the firmanent, being
on high, secure, despises her railing adversaries, as the moon does the
dogs, Who bark, but wind drowneth their clamours base,
Diana chaste holds on her heavenly pace.


The sixth Gulf, Arrogance of Doctourship, and Authority over the whole Church.
THE power which from the Roman Bishop you would feign take, you challenge to
your self, so making your self the universal curate of the Church in the 29.
page. To every Bishop so is a particular Church committed, that he must know,
that also (when need is) the universal Church is by Christ commended to him.
In the 30. page you add, that any Bishop by his own proper authority, may
remove to other Churches that are afflicted and oppressed. Thus you make a
conueyance of power over the whole Church for your self, yet you do it
subtilty, thinking you should not be seen. You offer that universal power to
every Bishop, knowing aforehand that out of modesty they will refuse it, that
so this authority rejected by the rest, may return to your self, the first
author thereof, as being properly and peculiarly yours. Yea (say you) it is
most of all properly belonging to my office, to succor (as far as in me
lies) the Roman Court, that makes a schism and division by it self, and
teareth in pieces the flock of Christ. You are the new Atlas, you will support
the Heaven, the universal Church with your shoulders. For which enterprise you
think your self so sufficient, that if the Pope and the rest of Catholic
Bishops will yield to rely upon your advise, what will follow? I hope (say you)
that shortly it will so fall out that full peace and concord, and that so
necessary union of the holy Churches will thereupon ensue, so that we shall
believe all the same, and all abide in the same rule. Your hopes are vain
(poor soul) you take to much upon you.

33. Heresies were before you were borne, and will be when you shall be dead, and
the number of Heretics you now make greater by one through Pride, which
deserves to be pitied rather then confuted. For what? Put the case the Roman
Bishops would become your subjects, and remit the business of union and
reconciliation to your wisdom; do you think the matter ended, and that the
Sects opposite to the Roman Church, Grecians, Lutherans, Caluinists,
Anabaptists, will also without more ado become obedient to you at a beck? Such
is your vanity, that you seem not to doubt, but that all the rest of Christian
companyes, besides the Roman, will in this affair of peace bear humble duty
and respect toward you. You know not (Antony) and little do you imagine, what
fierce, and furious winds, I mean proud and peremptory sects rage in the
Northern parts, which if you can assemble to a general Council, or keep them
when they are there in peace, verily you shall be more omnipotent then Aeolus.
But aforehand I tell you, they will not set a rush for you. Maids and Boys
will laugh you to scorn, they will prefer their skill of Scripture before
yours, with sentences flowing thick and threefold from their tongues, and
uttered with one breath, they will ouerload you. If you dare but mutter against
what they say, you shall be styled Papist; if you do not straight yield to
believe them, they will take pity of your eyes, that having been so many
years together accustomed to Popish darkness, cannot now behold the clear
shining light of the Gospel. This is the Caluinian nature, which if you be
ignorant of, you will learn to your cost.

34. But to return to the care of the universal Church, which you
presumptuously take upon you, together with authority, to visit any Church at
your pleasure, which you shall judge to have need of your assistance. Herein
you commit a double error. The first is, to think that a Bishop, to help
other Churches that are afflicted, may abandon his own, and in such manner
adandon it, as to leave it destitute of the means of salvation, to be rauened
and devoured by wolves. For this in your conceit you do, and this you think
that lawfully you may do, to succor the Roman. But what ancient holy Bishop
can you name that did so? Which of them has left written, that such practice
is laudable? Even those Bishops whom you pretend to imitate, your self
confess, that they went to assist other Churchs, leaving their own well
appointed, and provided of sufficient persons to teach and instruct them.

35. The second error is, to think that every bishop at his own good liking,
and by his own authority, may visit other Churches that are in need, and put
them in order, though the proper Bishops of such Churches be unwilling. Which
doctrine were it brought to practice, would break and utterly overthrow the
peace and concord of the Church, as any man of judgment may soon foresee. For
if every Bishop may, whenever he shall think it needful, pass into the
bounds of another Jurisdiction, there sit as Judge of controversies, and
pronounce final sentence upon them; it cannot be, but Bishops will very often
encounter, and be beaten one against another by mutual discord; nor can I
imagine what other devise can be thought of, de unit. Eccles. c. 4.
or feigned so fit to trouble the quiet of Churches. There is (as S. Cyprian
says) but one Bishopric, whereof a part is wholly possessed by every one, yet
so is the Bishopric one, as the body of man is one, which has an Head that
commands the rest of the members. In this manner the one Bishopric of the
world has one Sea, supreme above the rest, l. 3. ep. 4.
which the same S. Cyprian terms, the principal Sea, from which Priestly
unity and concord flows, to which perfidiousnes can have no access. The
authority of this Sea spread and diffused over the rest, is that Glue of
concord, which joins them all together in peace and charity. This Sea has
care to provide for the necessityes of the universal Church, and to send as
Legates other Bishops, whose Churches be well provided, to give succor to
others that are in need. By this Sea were Osius, Athanasius, Eusebius Bishop of
Vercells, Lucifer of Calaris, and others sent, whom you name and affirm (but
as your manner is without any proof) that they put themselves into the business
of visitation of Churches upon their own head, and authority.

36. Theodoret writes, that Lucifer Bishop of Calaris, and Eusebius Bishop of
Vercells, went about visiting the Churches of the East, Lib. 3. c. 4.
and namely the Churches of Antioch, and Alexandria, to see whether the Decrees
of the Nicen Council were kept. That Lucifer at Antioch, ordained Paulinus
Bishop, that Eusebius at Alexandria together with Athanasius called a
Council, to which Lucifer sent a Deacon, by whom he signified that he would
agree to the things that, that Council should ordain. These things you think
that those two Bishops but of mean Seas, did perform by their own proper
authority, and that you have sufficient authority of your self to do the like
when, and whersoeuer you shall judge it expedient. Lib. 6. aduersus Julian.
I may with reason exclayme with S. Augustine. What dares not the pride of
rotten flesh presume? You should (Antony) have known what S. Gregory Nazianzen
writes, Monod. in S. Basil.
that Eusebius Bishop of Vercells, and Lucifer of Calaris were sent ex vrbe
Roma, from the City of Rome into the East, particularly to appease a sedition
and tumult at Cesaraea; De viris illustribus in Lucifero.
and that which S. Hierome left recorded of Lucifer, that he was sent Legate
into the East to Constantius Emperor, from Liberius the Roman Bishop. Whence
you may gather that by power delegated to them from the Roman Bishop, they were
able to command the East, and ordain such great affairs, and not by their
own proper authority. Wherefore you have not Lucifer the Bishop of Calaris,
but Lucifer prince of Pride for your pattern and president, when you go about
to raise your self a throne in the coasts of the North, that as Christ in the
South by the Bishop of Rome governs the Universal Church, so in the North,
he that seeks to be like to the highest, may by you, as Head, send forth and
display his counsels and devises upon all Christendom.

37. And what meant you to match your self with those most holy and famous
Bishops and Worthyes of the Church? Contrary things laid together deserve to
set forth mutually each other. In the practice of these Saints as in a glass
we may behold, how opposite all your proceedings are to the rules of sanctity.
They going left their Churches provided, and well commended to other pastors:
You leave your Church wholly destitute, to be devoured (as you conceive) by
wolves. They either went to the Roman Church for succor and counsel, or were
sent by the Roman to give succor and counsel to others: you fly from the
Roman Sea, you detest and blaspheme it. They being men renowned in the whole
Church for their learning and sanctity, being earnestly invited by diverse
Bishops, and by the secret suffrages of the whole Church for that interprise
designed, went to put an end to the Church Controversies: you being neither for
the dignity of your Sea emine^t above the rest, nor commendable for Knowledge
and Holiness of life, a man utterly unknown, who by your Apostasy now begin
to have fame: You, I say, offer your self for universal Superintendent and
Curate to the world, which before this your offer had never so much as heard of
your name. They labored for that faith which had been settled and defined by
Counsels: you seek to bring in Doctrine which you know to have been many ages
ago condemned by the authority of Counsels. They strove against Heretics,
that seeing they had bin accursed in Cou^cells, they might likewise be rejected
from the Catholic Communion: your labors are in favor of damned Heretics,
that though they be proscribed by Counsels, yet they may be retained in the
Church, if so be, that they will profess Christ, by the essential Creedes, as
you speak. And you seem to be of the same mind, that some Donatists were,
Epist. 48.
whom S. Augustine condemns that it is no matter in what part or side a man be
a Christian, nor do you consider, that it is sitting, that God should be served
in unity. Thus by comparing your self with the ancient holy Bishops, your
sanctity appears.

The seventh Gulf, New flattering doctrine.
THIS Gulf imbraceth two vices, and both of them properly belong to Heretics:
the one is to coin new doctrines, the other to flatter their auditors,
specially Princes. Lib. 1. ca. 1.
Of the first, S. Irenaeus says, That later Heretics do day by day invent some
new thing, which never any man had thought of before. Of the second S. Hierome
writes, Lib. 1. co^t. Pelag.
That flattering properly agrees to Heretics, and to them that study how to
deceive souls, according to the saying of the Apostle: such persons serve not
Christ our Lord, but their own belly, and by sweet speeches and benedictions
seduce the hearts of the innocent.

39. Many new doctrines you have in your book, Antony, as are these. 1. That a
Bishop for fear of persecution may forsake his flock, and leave it wholly
destitute. 2. That to every Bishop is given the care of the universal Church,
so that by his own proper authority he may intermeddle in the affairs of
other Bishoprikes. 3. That none who profess Christ by the Creeds essential of
the ancient Church, are to be repelled from the Catholic Communion. 4. That
Schism is a far greater sin then Heresy. These your new conceits have been
mentioned and refuted already.

40. Other four sayings you have, wherein you make fair with Kings, by
depressing the authority of the Church. The first is, That Kings can do many
things in the Church. The second, That the Church can do nothing at all in
temporalls, specially toward Kings. The third, That all jurisdiction, is to be
removed from the Church. These three propositions you have in the 28. and 29.
page. In the first, the English Parlame^tarians agree with you. The two other
be new, not only repugnant to the ancient Fathers, but also to the Heretics of
this age, to Puritans, and Protestants, and to the eager defenders of the late
English Oath. For these deny not the Churches authority over Kings, yea they
grant, that even in temporalls the Church may command them, though they
mantayne, that Kings obstinate and rebellious against the Church may not be
deposed from their government. And what is Jurisdiction, but power to appoint
what is right, to enact Laws, to call the transgressors of their laws before
them, to sit upon them, and punish the^ being convinced of punishable offenses?
Now that the Church did in former times exercise this power, as derived to her
from Christ, is so clear, that he that is ignorant thereof, or so impudent as
to deny it, I think him not worthy to be disputed with.

41. The fourth doctrine, I dare say is new and properly yours, then which
scarce any more base can be devised to flatter Kings. Which doctrine you may
seem to have coined of purpose, that thereby you might make your self a free
passage to the Court and Kitchen of the King of Great Britany. The doctrine is,
that Kings, though they sin, yet may not they be rebuked or checked, neither by
their Familiars, nor by Priests, nor by the chief Bishop, but only by
Prophets, whom God does extraordinarily raise and design for this office.
That you teach this new Divinity, I will convince, and leave you being
convinced to be judged by his most Gracious Majesty. The Roman Sage (were he to
give sentence upon you) would put you in the number of thieves, seeing you seek
to deprive Kings of their best treasure, Lib. 6. de beneficijs cap. 4.
whereof in Courts there is ever great scarsity. I will show you (says
Seneca) what is not be found in magnificent Palaces, what is wanting to them
that want nothing: they want one to tell the truth and deliver from error the
man that sits amazed, and besides his wits in the midest of a great multitude
of liars, brought, by long use of hearing pleasing things instead of true
things, to that pass, he knows not what truth is. Such an admonisher and
rebuker of Christian Kings, the Roman Bishop is by office designed by Christ,
the greatest treasure he could bestow on them, which you endeavor by your new
Deuinity to take from them. For in the page 31. to prove that a Bishop may
reprehend and rebuke the Pope, you begin to declare the matter by the
difference that is between an earthly King, and the Pope, writing in this
manner.

42. The Majesty of an earthly King is to be dreaded, who, as Tertullian says,
is second to God, inferior to God only; and over whom, says Optatus, none is
but God only. Wherefore when David was to be rebuked for his adultery and
murder, not the High Priest, nor any other, either Priest or Leuite, not any
man either friend or familiar, durst assume to himself that office: But God
himself for this purpose, appointed his own proper and peculiar messenger,
and sent the Prophet Nathan to reprehend the King. But for the Roman Bishop now
most of all troubling, scandalizing, robbing and spoiling the Church, it is not
for Prophets to deal with him, it is not to be expected that God should stir
up for this enterprise singular Prophets, nor send special messengers. The
Majesty of our Roman Pope is not so great, that it ought to fear us; that
temporal stately Majesty is counterfaite, usurped, no Majesty at all; the Pope
he is our brother, our Colleague, a Bishop as we are. All these be your own
words (Antony,) wherewith you breath forth that flattering doctrine which I
laid to your charge. You say the Popes Majesty ought not so to terrify Bishops,
but they may rebuke him. But the Majesty of an earthly King is so dreadful, so
much to be feared, that no man that is not a Prophet, though he be the chief
Bishop, may take upon him the office to reprehend him. Do you speak this of
base fear which Cowardes bear toward them that have power over the body, or
of pious fear and reverence which by right is due to Superiors; which if we
neglect, we do against our Duty, and offend God? If you speak of the first
kind of fear, you faigne a difference between the Pope and the King, where
there is not any at all.

43. For as the Popes Majesty ought not to strike into our hearts base and
servile fear, which makes us to neglect our duties: so likewise we ought not
to be in this manner affrighted by Kingly Majesty, Christ having given us an
express commandment not to fear them, that kill the body, but can do no hurt
to the soul. Luc. 16.
And de facto, as the King by the terror of his Majesty may fright men
unjustly, and make them not to discharge toward him the duty that they owe of
correction; so may the Pope also; for else why ran you away? Why fly you the
Popes painted Majesty, painted Prisons, painted sires, painted torments? You be
not so far besides your self: so that this fearefullnes of the Kings Majesty
above the Popes is devised without any ground, speaking of base and slavish
fear. For this sort of fear, as neither of their Maiestyes ought, so either
of their Maiestyes may strike into base minded men's hearts. You speak then (if
you speak to the purpose) of pious reverence and fear of Superiors, due by
right unto them, and therein you put the difference betwixt the Kings Majesty
and the Popes. So you say that the Popes Majesty ought not of right to be so
feared, but that Bishops may freely rebuke him: but the Kings Majesty by right
and by the Law of God ought to be so dreaded, that no man may reprehend him, no
not the Pope, except he have a Prophetical and extraordinary commission to do
it. Whence it is consequent, that none may without sin tell Kings of their
faults that be not Prophtes.

44. Now how ungodly and abject this your new conceyte is, may soon appear by
considering the arguments you bring to confirm it. They are three contained in
your former words, and derived from three differences which you imagine
between the Pope and the King. The first is, That the Popes Majesty is
counterfayte, temporal, feigned, no Majesty at al; but the Majesty of a
terrene King is exceeding great (tremenda) to be dreaded and feared: therefore
the Popes Majesty may and ought to be freely rebuked, but the Kings Majesty in
no case, not for any cause, nor by any man that is not specially sent of God
for that purpose. This diversity between terrene and spiritual authority, you
prove not. And no marvel: you found it not out by reason, but by revelation
of that spirit, which is prince over men, that mind earthly things, Philip. c.
3. verse. 18.
whose belly is their God, whose glory in their own confusion. By the same
spirit was Luther moved to compare the state of Virginity with the state of
Marriage, writing, In epist. ad Cor.
that the first state is heathenish, secular, terrene, mirery; the second
spiritual, heavenly, divine, golden. This doctrine flesh and blood revealed to
Luther, which also moves you to debase Priestly Majesty under the feet of
earthly. In the palate of the ancient holy Bishops, Priestly dignity had a more
divine savor, they had it in higher esteem, which they did so far extol
above Royal, as the heaven surmounted the earth, the spirit goes beyond the
flesh. You, Greg. Nazian. ad Praesid. iras.
O earthly Princes (says one of them) the law of Christ makes subject to our
bench, we likewise have power and command, yea power more excellent and
eminent then yours is, unless it be reasonable that the spirit should yield
homage to the flesh, and heavenly things give place to earthly things. Behold
what an high conceit these pious Prelates did frame of their Pontifical power?
You to whom power to bind both in Heaven and Earth, in respect of earthly
power seems unsavory and contemptible; what wonder though as salt without
savor, you were cast forth unto the dunghill.

45. The second difference between the King and the Pope devised by you, is,
that the Pope is the brother and colleague of Bishops, but the King is second
after God, inferior to God only. By the first, because the Pope is the brother
of Bishops, you infer, that the Pope may be rebuked by his fellow bishops.
And your inference is good, if the Pope give just cause, if the correction be
given with due modesty, in due time, place and manner, that it may be for the
good both of the Pope and the Church. By the other, because the King is second
to God, you gather that no man may rebuke him but God only, and the Prophets
that are stirred up by God, and sent purposely for that end. You be then of
this mind, that the dignity of a King which is to be next unto God; does make
him not to be the son of the Church, nor the brother of Christians. For if
his being supreme after God in temporalls, hinder not but that in spiritual
things he is the son of the Church, why may he not be rebuked by his Mother?
If he be the brother of Christians, the brother of the Children of the Church,
why may not they warn him of his faults, freely yet with modesty, with
prudency, and with Charity? Hebr. 12. verse. 7.8.
The Apostle says: What son is it whom the Father does not correct? If you be
not under discipline and correction, you be not sons, but bastards. You can
never exempt the King from being under the discipline and correction of
Bishops, except you put him from the number of the children of the Church.

46. But take heed you do not this, not because therein you should contradict
the ancient Fathers (for to do that, you would not greatly care) but for fear
least you offend his gracious Majesty of Great Brittany, whom by this
flattering divinity you endeavor to sooth. For William Tooker Deane of
Lich-field in his book called Duellum aduersus Martinum Becanum, in the 34.
page thereof, has these words. Our most gracious and potent King James does
account nothing more glorious, and more honorable for him, then with
Valentinian to profess himself the son of the Church, and with Theodoricus
King of Italy most willingly to acknowledge himself the pupil of the Church,
and the disciple of his Archbishops and Bishops. Mark me (Antony.) Either you
deny the King to be the son of the Church, or you grant it. If you deny it,
you take from the King the title which (if we believe Master Tooker) most, and
above all other he esteems. If you grant the King to be the son of the
Church, and yet will exempt him from being under her discipline, you make him
(if we believe S. Paul) not a lawfully begotten son, but adulterous. Which
way so ever you turn your self, you are in briars; you both dispute
impertinently, and flatter foolishly.

47. The third difference you put between the Pope and the King is, that it is
not for Prophets to meddle with the Pope, but to reprehend Kings, God himself
appoints special messengers, and Prophets. This difference you prove by the
example of David, who when he was to be rebuked for murder and adultery, no
man, no not the High Priest himself durst attempt it, because David being
King, was inferior to God only. Here you suppose things that are false, and
yet were your false supposalls granted you, yet your argument is naught. First
it is false that David was to be rebuked for adultery and murder. David sinned
closely, he cunningly made away with Vrias by the sword of his enemies. This
his wickedness mortal men could hardly know, much less could they reprove him
for it. Secondly it is false that the high priest durst not reprehend David,
because he was a King next unto God. He rebuked him not, because he knew not
that he was worthy of rebuke: for had he known it, why might he not have dared
to do that to David, 2. Paral. cap. 26.
which Azarias High Priest did to King Ozias, whom after sharp reprehensions
he turned out of the Temple? And how vain your discourse is, though your
premises were solid, hence may it appear, that by the same kind of argument,
I will easily prove, that the Pope may not be rebuked, but by some Prophet and
special messenger sent for that purpose from God. For God, to reprehend the
High Priest has sent special messengers. 1. Reg. cap. 2. and 3.
When Hely the High Priest out of fond affection and indulgence toward his
sons, permitted them to stain the worship of God with most heinous and
scandalous sins, and so deserved to be rebuked and soundly told of his
fault; yet none of the Priests, nor of the Levites, nor of his friends and
familiars durst (that we read of) rebuke him for it; but God sent singular
Prophets and special Heraldes for that purpose. Therefore the high Priest may
not be rebuked, but of Prophets, and by singular commission from God. This
argument is much stronger then yours is, yet if I should seriously bring it, as
placing any force therein, I were a fool. But you that would have earthly
power preferred before the heavenly, what wonder though your arguments in this
behalf be earthly?

The eight Gulf, Fond and idle Talking.
You write in the 28. page, that you hear a voice which does thunder still in
your ears, and say unto you, Cry. You follow the instinct of this voice; In
cap. 22. Isa.
you do as Heretics use to do, whose doctrine, says S. Hierome, consistes not
in knowledge, but in clamors; and in idle multiplicity of words without sense.
You power forth words and make a noise, wherewith you beat the air, and touch
no body; yea sometimes you strike your self, with one sentence destroying what
in another you had set up. Examples in both kinds of this fond talking are very
plentiful in your book, I shall gather you a few.

49. In the 35. page, being now Governor of the Universal Church, created by
your own authority, you very gravely exhort and rebuke the Bishop of Rome and
other Catholic Bishops in this manner. Articles in themselves indifferent that
were never yet in the Church sufficiently discussed, established or defined,
let us not admit as articles of faith, except they be first sufficiently
defined to the full, or be showed to be sufficiently already defined. Let us
not also condemn any for Heretics, except it be first clear, that they have
been formerly, or now are sufficiently condemned by the Church. In things
indifferent then, let free scope be left to every one, to think and practice
as they please: let every one abound in their own sense, till the Church,
taught and governed by the spirit of Christ, shall make an end of
Controversies, and separate the true chafe from the true grain. Thus you
talk. And to what end are so many words cast into the wind? Whom do they
concern? Who requires that doctrines questionable be admitted as articles of
Faith, before they be fully and sufficiently defined? Who would have any to be
accomted Heretics, before the Church instructed by the holy Ghost
hath-censured them? We Catholics hold the Primacy of the Roman Bishop as a
doctrine of Faith: the denyers thereof who have been accursed in diverse general
Counsels we detest as Heretics. This grieueth you, so many Counsels be not
full, because you the Pastor forsook of the universal Church, have not
subscribed unto them. And in the 38. page you thunder again without any bolt,
and give us idle prescripts. Let us (say you) hold different doctrines, let us
be of contrary opinions, till things be fully defined which are not yet fully
defined, but in the mean time let us continue in unity. Do not make the
schism greater then it is. Thus you idly spend pen, ink and paper. What
doctrine do we demand that you should believe, which has not been established
by the Decrees of general Councils. Well says Marcian the Emperor, that they
call in question, and dare publicly dispute against that which is already
judged and rightly ordained; offer great wrong to the judgment of the most
Reverend Synodes. The doctrine which most you mislike, to wit, that the Pope is
appointed of God, Head and Pastor of the whole Church, the Orient and Occident
has defined in nine General Counsels. What fuller Counsels can you desire?
Are you yet fully satisfied? No: but you puff, and go forward blowing and
still demanding fuller definitions, till you come to conclude your Pamphlet
with this sentence, which to me seems wholly deuoyd of any good sense. Let us
drive away, by the light of the truth Evangelical, without firm obstinacy,
the darkness of errors and falsities.

50. Secondly that you not only beat the air with idle words, but also fight
against your self, denying in one place what in another you affirm, these
five examples of your contradictions may make manifest.

51. The first contradiction. In the page 8. and 9. you say, that the Roman
diligence in forbidding the books of her adversaries did ever displease you.
This practice (say you) not to be void of suspicion, as reason does show, so
did I ever Judge. Ever, Antony? did you never dislike the reading books that
impugn the Roman doctrine? did you never above measure detest it? In the 4.
page to prove that you took not your resolution to depart from us, by reading
our adversaries books, thus you write. I Religiously call God to witness,
that I did vehemently abhor from the reading of the books, that the Roman
diligence had forbidden. Which books if any Prelate addicted to the Roman
Court has detested, then I by reason of vain fears conceived against this
reading in my childhood, did above measure detest.

52. The second Contradiction. In the 9. page you say, That you still suspected
the Roman Church, by reason of her forbidding of her adversaries books, that
her doctrine was weak, and not able to overthrow her adversaries arguments.
But in the 7. page you say the contrary, to wit, that the proper decrees and
doctrines of Rome, were with true captivity of your understanding wholly
imprinted, and rooted in your mind. How were they wholly imprinted in your mind,
if you ever supected them? if you still embraced them, not without fear and
staggering?

53. The third Contradiction. You say in the 2. and 5. page, That by going from
Rome, you incur great loss of wealth and dignity. And in the 25. page, That
under the Pope you had honorable dignities, and commodities not to be
contemned. But in the page 22. you say, that, Bishops under the Pope that are
not Temporal Lords (and such a mere Bishop were you) are scarce so much as
servants of our Lord the Pope, base, contemptible, oppressed, trodden under
foot, miserably subject. Now (Antony) make these things agree, base servitude
and honorable dignity, co^modityes not to be contemned, and miserable
subjection.

54. The fourth contradiction. In the 22. page you write, That the Church under
the Pope, is no Church, but a certain Commonwealth under his Monarchy, merely
temporal. These words import that the Church of Rome is no Church: but else
where you call it a Church, yea the Church of Christ. Page 29. I am Bishop in
the Church of Christ, who then were Bishop in no Church but in the Roman. And
in the 35. page, you call the Roman Bishops, your Colleages and fellow-Bishops.
And again page 39. you thus command the Catholike-Roman Bishops, Offer your
communion readily to all, that still retain their opinions against you, yet
so, that falsityes be driven away. None can make that common with another,
which they have not themselves. If the Roman Church be not a Christian
Communion and society, how can they offer readily their Christian Society and
communion to others? If it be merely and wholly a temporal Commonwealth, what
can it affoard to her friends but mere human peace and temporal communion?

55. The fifth Co^tradiction. In the 39. page you command Bishops, to restore
peace and charity to all that profess Christ by the Creeds essential. In
these words you require no more, then the profession of the Creeds essential,
but within three lines after this sentence follows: Offer readily your
communion to all, saving their opinions, yet driving away falsityes. Here you
will have them that communicate together, to agree not only in the profession
of your essential Creeds, but also in the abnegation of falsities, whereof you
express neither the quality nor the number. And yet also herein you agree not
with your self: for in the 36. page you praise S. Cyprian, because he did
communicate with such as erred, and whom he judged to err most grievously.
Here you will have errors to be tolerated, and communion not to be broken for
errors: but in the former speech you allow not communion, but with this
condition, that on both sides falsities be driven away. I demand of you
(Antony) whether errors and grievous errors be not falsities? If they be:
then how is communion to be given without rejecting of errors, and yet not to
be exhibited without driving away falsities? Here you shamfully contradict your
self.

The Conclusion.
I will now end. I have showed who you were before you fell, and by what stepps
and degrees you came to fall into the depth of Apostasy. I have also declared
who now you are, and into what a low gulf of Heretical Impiety you be
plunged. Why then may I not conclude, and in few words foretell, what will
finally become of you, laying upon you the Censure of the Apostle, 2. Timoth.
c. 3.9.
You shall not further proceed, for your folly shall be manifest unto almen.
You being thus discovered by this Survey, if you will not see your self, yet
Protestants will easily see who you are, and what great want of judgment you
have bewrayed in your writings. They will wonder that into so little a Pamphlet
written in your own defense, you could possibly lay together on a heap, so
many things openly false, absurd, impious, so many things wherein you
contradict your self, wherein you bewray the courses which you would feign
have hidden, wherein you utterly overthrow your own cause. Wherefore you can
never proceed further, except you return back to the Catholic Church, from
which you have failed. You are gone out of the way, you must needs return
before you can make forward.

56. The applause wherewith our Adueruersaries entertained you, let it not
detayne you from this return. Therein they did nothing that swarueth from the
nature of Heretics, or from the course that ancient Heretics held. Praesc.
cap. 40.
Being themselves Apostata's (says Tertullian) they joyfully receive our
Apostata's that fly unto them, they bestow on them benefices, they advance them
to dignities; so tying them fast to their sect by honors whom they cannot
bind sure to them by the truth. Nor let their exclamations, praises,
predictions allure you, wherewith they show their great hope conceived, that
they shall vanquish the Pope, you being their leader. These are but bubbles and
froath which your fall from so high a state, into so deep a gulf has raised,
and suddaynly will vanish away. Despise them. These are the oil of sinners,
wherewith wretches appointed for fire everlasting, be in this world anointed,
that in the next their burning may be the sorer. Abhor them. These are but
conceits, praises wherewith they make a vain show of triumph over us, and
flatter you to your face, who behind your back play upon you with scoffs,
loading you with the disgraceful titles you truly deserve, and with some also
which perchance you have not merited; when not long ago at S. Dunstans you made
a speech in the street, do you not know, what the people then present uttered
against you? They called you great-bellied-Doctour, made fat under Antichrist;
and some there were also that said, that before you ran away from the Pope,
you got your own Niece with child, and that fear to be punished for it, made
you trudge away with your great load of flesh in such have.

57. I do not relate these things as believing them, or as desiring that they
should be believed, but to show how vain be the praises of Heretics, and how
vain a prophet you were in promising to yourselfe, that your most beautiful
Sara (for so you term your good Name) should, remain pure and untouched in
the midest of Barbarians. For these things were vented against you, not in Rome
by Catholics, but in London by Protestants, openly in the streets. Many great
Personages also do not stick to mutter about you, that besides grossnes of
body you have brought nothing with you, that is answerable to the greatness of
your titles; that your book does not equal the solemn ostentation and
expectation you have raised thereof; that you do not perform therein what you
promise; yea some would not have it printed at all, fearing you may therewith
disgrace your self and their Gospel.

58. Now then (Antony) why tarry you in the midst of a depraved and perverse
nation? Why do you wretchedly draw on your gray hayres with grief and disgrace
to your grave? Seek for true renown, who have lost the vain honor that you
hu^ted for irreligiously. Enter into your own heart, remember whence you are
fallen, do penance, and turn again to your first works. Through Gods
goodness assisting you, raise your self a monument of the divine mercy, which
this present age, which the future times may admire, and make a lasting benefit
of. Let rejoicing posterity to the worlds end, be taught by your example this
comfortable truth, that the bowels of divine benignity be not so loathing of
sinners, but that they willingly take in again, even tepide Apostata's, whom
they were forced to cast up. Aim at the dignity of a Penitent, seeing you have
lost the state of Innocency. You that have let go the stern; you who beaten
out of the ship wherein you were Pilot, floate in the Ocean, lay hold on this
board which is reached unto you, whereon you may swim to a Kingdom. You are
threescore years old very nigh, the remnant of your years be bad, and few.
Withdraw these your bad years from vice, that you may see good days. Bestow
these your few years in penance, that you may gain years eternal. Let not
the bitterness of penna^ce discourage you, which by the dew of divine Comforts
falling from above will be sweetened: Where sin has abounded, there grace
will more abound. The deeper and darker that the dungeon is wherein you are
kept, by so much more sweet will the breath be, that being thence delivered,
you shall draw, in the lightsome mercies of your Redeemer.

59. Nor let it deiect you, that you have shamefully fallen, but remember that
as the depth of the divine Justice, so likewise the depth of the divine Mercy
is unsearchable. Who knows the mind of God? And whether he has not ordained,
that this your fall be for your own rising again, and for the rising of many?
The secret pride wherein you went mounting a loft in your conceyts against your
Creator, was to be beaten down by a mighty thunderclappe, that you and others
might feel it. For this your pride standing on foot, you could no ways be
saved by him, that looks upon low things, and high things knows a far off.
Wherefore I am not grieved with your defection, no not for your own sake, which
yet would grieve me, could I be persuaded, that you should have been saved, had
you continued in the Catholic Church. But when I consider the wavering
disposition, the dark and entangled proceedings of Apostata's both ancient and
new, I come to be settled in this opinion, That none perish by falling from the
Church, who would not as well have perished through their secret and concealed
errors, though they had continued outwardly in the Church. And these men are
by the secret course of divine Providence cast out of the Church, to the end
that being so forlorn, they may reflect on themselves, or else that by being
out of the Church, they may benefit others, who by remaining in the Church
would never have benefited themselves. This to me seems the opinion of S.
Augustine, whose golden words I here set down. de vera Relig. c. 8.
Seeing it is truly said, that Heresies must needs be, to the end that they who
are of proof amongst you, may be made manifest, let us make use of this
benefit of the divine providence. For Heretics be made of such kind of men,
who though they were in the Church, would we nevertheless err: but being out
of the Church they be very beneficial, not because they teach the Truth, for
hereof they are ignorant, but because they awake carnal Catholics to seek,
and spiritual Catholics to declare the truth. Thus S. Augustine.

60. I could name diverse Apostata's with whom in times past I have been
acquaynted, who even then, when to others, yea to themselves they seemed
Catholics, were covertly infected with Errors against the Roman Faith, and
possessed with secret malice against the Roman Sea. But you (Antony) are an
example of this truth that may stand instead of many. For (to say nothing of
your open enimity against the Roman doctrine in your last ten years) you that
still believed, that the Church of Rome was justly suspected of errors, what
could the external show and profession of a Roman Catholic have auayled you
to salvation? You that still were doubting whether some doctrine more firm
then the Catholic, did not lie hidden in the writings of Heretics; what good
would it have done you, that you kept your eyes from their books, and your body
from their Conuenticls? You had perished secretly, nor (such was your
carelessnes) had you perceived that you did perish. Now you err openly, that
many may be taught the truth; you perish in the sight of the world, that diverse
affrighted with your example, may be moved to work their salvation. And why may
not this your fall, turn to your everlasting exaltation? I will not despair,
but when you have been cloyed with the husks of swine, which now you feed in a
farmers house, that once were a feeder of sheep in the Church: I do not
despair, I say, but that one day you will call to mind the abundance of your
fathers house, and having learned by dear experience what a mischief secret
Pride is, retourning to the Catholic Church, you will say, I had perished,
unless I had perished.

FINIS.
Faults escaped in the Printing.
Page Line Fault Correction. 6. vlt. of out of 8. 9. hell in hell; in 12. 26.
union. union? 16. 3. your our 19. penult. false fallen 23. 12. of if Ibid. 21.
unto men unto you 25. 23. now as this now this 26. 5. prosecuteth persecuteth
31. 20. begone be gone 33. 14. do be to be 53. 3. to, rather to. Rather Ibid. 4.
your self. You your self, you Ibid. 6. deeds. You deeds, you 67. 2. Church.
Church? Ibid. 4. world. world? 68. 19. guide grudge 72. 19. swarueth swarued
79. 19. one own 98. 18. fall face 102. 2. so to 111. 6. are were 121. 12.
deserve do serve


