A SERMON PREACHED Before his Majesty At Dover Castle, On Tuesday the seventh
of June 1625.

By WILLIAM FVLLER, B. D. His Majesty's Chaplain, then attending in Ordinary.

Published by Command.

LONDON Printed by Edw: Allde for John Hodgets. 1625.

A SERMON PREACHED BEFORE HIS MAJESTY AT DOVER CASTLE.
EPHESIANS. 4. 7. But unto every one of us is given Grace, according to the
measure of the gift of Christ.
THE Church of God (in this like himself) is one and the Caietan. 2a. 2ae. qu.
39.
same in all Ages, Credit vnum, Sperat vnum, Amat vnum, It believes one God,
Hops one end, loves one Truth; the unity of the head is one, and one the
collection of the members, all are Soldiers of one Army, parts of one family,
Citizens of the same City, vnum Aquar. in 1. sent. did. 24.
non remouet multitudinem, nec multitudo vnum, unity excludes no multitude,
nor multitude unity: there may be an unity of Substance to cause Identitie; of
quality to beget a likeness; of quantity to procure equality; and yet a
plurality of persons in every section.

The Apostle, having set down a powerful persuasion to Ecclesiasticke,
unity; beseeching the Ephesians by his bonds and their vocations, v. 1. With
all humbleness of mind to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of
peace, Sets down the reason, v. 4. Because they were but one body, had one
Spirit, one Hope, one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, one God and Father, of
all* which was above them all, through them all, and in them all; above them
all by the altitude of his Divinity; Aquin. in lo.
through them all by the amplitude of his Power; in them all, by the largeness
of his Grace.

So the Spouse of Christ is One body, but compounded of many members; One, as
having one Governor Christ; one Law, the Gospel; the same Ensigns, the
Sacraments; the same end, Eternal glory: And yet distinguished within it
self; the Head is more excellent then the Body, the face fairer then the
foot: for to every one of us is given grace, according to the measure of the
gift of Christ.

The parts are three: First, the gift given, Grace. Secondly the receauers of
that Grace, Every one. Thirdly, the proportion, According to the gift of
Christ.

For the first: Christ to the Soul of a Saint Bern. Ser. in Cant. 47.
is as a Spouse; to the soul of a distressed sinner as a Physician: yet
comes to both, not because they are, but because they might be lovely, his
love having no cause, but being the cause of all things. Deus amat quia in se
habet quod amet, It was before our beeings, therefore much more before our
deseruings: whence it is well observed by Panagorola that the Fathers say, our
vocation was for our good works, non in ratione causae meritoriae, sed
finalis, that is, in the Scripture phrase, That we are called to do the works
of Charity, and predestined that we might be holy and unblameable before him
in love: Bona mea instituta tua sunt, and dona tua, mala mea delicta Confess.
l. 10 cap 7.
mea sunt, and iudicia tua, says St. Augustine. Have I any good things O Lord,
they are thy bounties: have I many evil, they are thy Judgments, and mine
iniquities Sin being infinite, it were mpossible that men should rise from
the fault, but by the assistance of a power infinite: which made Bonauenture
to conclude, that Creatiuum Breuiol. part. 5.
principium was recreatiuum, and he that made us must redeem us.

There be three things in the glorious work of man's salvation, which God does
wholly challendge to himself, and preuents copartners: our Predestination, our
Creation, our Renouation. The first before all time, the second with time,
Bern. in Can. Ser. 78.
the last in time, Vbi and quando vult Deus, where and when himself best
pleases: when the former were, we were not; when the last is, we are indeed,
but dead in sin; wherefore that likewise is a part of his Mercy: whence it
was a custom in the Primitive Church, to give Wine and Milk to the new
baptized conuerts, Hieronymus in locum.
because in Esaias, 55. it is said Come buy of me Wine and Milk without money or
exchange, insinuating by that Ceremony, that God in his Son does freely
bestow both those and all other benefits, why he should predestinate this man
rather then that: Hoc est profundum Crucis, says St. Augustine, De verbis
Apost. Ser. 7.
and I am not ashamed to confess that I know not the reason, why he should
create us Men rather then Beasts, or cause us to be borne of Christian rather
then of Heathen Parentage: his own will joined with goodness was the motive,
why he should, Secundum propositum effectually call the one Thief hanging upon
the Cross, rather then Barrabas ^ or the other, is a Secret I may well,
admire, but never reach to; for of the comparatiue will of God, no reason can
be rendered; and it is determined that Grace is Habitus infusus non acquisitus,
infused by mercy not gained by industry, it always preventing both our will
and understanding, Nolentem praeuenit vt velit, volentem subsequitur ne frustra
velit, says St. Augustine, No man comes to Grace except Enchiridi^^.
prevented by grace, nor no man to God except God comes first to him: for he
conuerteth the unrepentant, recalleth the wanderer, is found of them that seek
him not, and appears to them that never look after him, as is by Bellarmine
himself confessed; Tu Domine benedicis De cloricis. lib. 1. c. 1. Confess. l.
10. cap. 2.
iustum, sed prius eum iustificas impium, says St. Augustine, O Lord thou
always blessest the righteous Man, but thou first make him of wicked,
righteous: But the word here is of as large extent as are his benefits: when as
Influxus generalis, that same universal influence whereby we live, we move,
and have our being; when every good, both Natural and Divine, Gratis datum,
and Gratum faciens, as they speak, is a Gift unto us. To sum up all, when
by the Grace of God we are what we are, what is it that is not given? Or what
is it that we have not received? For it is an infallible consequence, Si Gracia
est, Gratis data est, Gods Justice (say Divines) being always distributive,
not communatiue: he giving freely like a Prince, not exchanging like an
Huckster: and therefore the ancient forms of Oblations in the Greek Church
was, thine own of thine own O Lord we offer thee. It were mere ingratitude,
Rettorsh. in saluian.
to draw water from Gods Ocean, and then say we had it from our own Cisternes:
Like the Moon borrowing her light, and then eclips the Sun that lent it.
Every good gift, and every perfect giving is from above: every donation is from
his Grace, and every Grace is his Donation: Aquar. in 4. Sent. did. 14 con. 9.
All our abilities and virtues rising from thence, as powers from their
Essence, or streams from their Fountains: and therefore Fate, Fortune, Merit,
which the World does rave upon, wise men do deride, and the Ignorant may daily
see convicted. For Destiny can have no place, sithence God is a free Agent,
bound to no Second Causes; giving Man a Will void of coaction, and sets
down Precepts negative and affirmative of acting and avoiding, as lines to
live by: Much less Chance or Fortune, a thing rather dreamed of, then in
being; being nothing but the ignorance of the true Cause: whence wise Antiquity
confounded or made one and the same, God and Providence: And the Stoics placed
her Palace above the Moon; that is above all things mutable. Nor could the
Heathen ever be persuaded that there was a God, except he could reserve things
past, moderate the present, and foresee the future. Least of all Desert, for
the very word savors of poison, 4. Sent. did. 43.
says Lombard, sithence we are Gods Debtors ex commisso, by our foul
offenses; he our Debtor only ex Promisso, by his gracious Promises: he is not
tied to any, though he has given to all: For in every Merit three things are
required. First, that a man be in via, not in termino; that is, alive, not
dead: And therefore I wonder why the Cardinal should auerre, that the Souls
of Paschatius and Seuerinus should mediate for others, De Purgatorio lib. 2.
cap. 15.
even in Purgatory; it being generally held that Purgatory (if any such place
be) is appointed for satisfaction of men's selves, not of others. Secondly, that
he be master of his own works, which no man is; for from God we have both the
will and the deed. Thirdly, that there be a proportion betwixt the Work and
the wages: But alas, what correspondency is there betwixt our Endeauours and
Heavens Glory? And therefore to conclude this point, God has framed the World
upon nothing, that the whole World should build it self upon him, and his
mercies. To ascribe Wisdom to Minerua, to Mercury Eloquence, other endowments
to other imaginary Deities, were to erect Idolatry in our hearts, and to rob
the true God of his honor. What though there be diversity of Guiftes? Yet but
one and the same Spirit, says the Apostle: 1. Cor 12. 4. etc. diversities of
Administrations; but the same Lord, giving all that all men have: yet not all
to all men: One has the word of wisdom, another the word of knowledge, a
third the Gift of Faith, a fourth of working of Miracles. Some, but not all
Apostles, Prophets, Teachers; every one having his proper gift of God; one
after this manner, another after that. 1. Cor. 7. 7. Some five Talents, some
have fewer, but all some: For unto every one is given according to, etc. And so
to the Second part, The Receivers, Every one of us.

The Beauty of the whole consists in the well composed variety of the parts;
so altogether make an excellent Fabric: thus the treble and the base, set
with means and tenors, do not jarre, but make good Musicque: high and low meet
together to make concord; each string has its several sound, each Instrument
its particular praise; and all joined in one, delight the hearer: And Quod
harmonia in musica, concordia in ciuitate, says St. Augustine, Heaven in our
contemplation is more sweet, because of the distinct variety of Saints, and
ineffable Hirarchie of holy Angels: And Hell more painful, because in it is
nothing but disorder and confusion. If the whole Body were an Eye, where were
then the Hearing? If all were Hearing, where were then the Smelling? 1. Cor. 12
17. Parity has bin always the Nurse of Ruin: It was never good world since
the Miters justled Scepters for the Wall: and discontented Faction would equal
(I had almost said pulled down) Prelacie. But the reason may be that of
Rodolphus Caesar in Aenaeas Siluius, every Comment. in dict. et fact. Alphon.
Regis. lib. 2.
man thinks him a fool that cannot Govern, Nemo autem seipsum stultum
iudicat, but no man thinks himself a fool; when as in truth of Judgment, why
should there be Ambition? When as we are like men upon a Stage, where, not he
that plaieth the greatest part, but he that plays his own part best, is most
applauded: Or as in a goodly Picture, dark shadows may have their praise
as well as brighter colors: yet not separated from them, but in relation. The
Hand and Foot may be commended, but if the one would be where the Arm is, and
the other where the head is, both were monstrous. It was a factious speech of
Crassus, that none should be his Consul, to whom he was not a Senator. And a
woeful president in Adam, to presume above the end of his Creation: for Dum
erexit se supra se, cecidit miserabiliter infra se, says Bonauenture. While he
aspired above himself, Breuioloqui.
he fell miserably below himself, from the state of Innocence to the state
of Sin and misery: As in Virtues, so in States, and Churches, Descretion
gives order: Order, life and perpetuity. God having given to every man a
several gift, to honor him with, and to profit others. There is not that
Plant, suruay them from the Cedar of Mount Libanon, to the Shrub that grows
upon the Wall, but has his use and virtue; nor that Wretch, that can without
the just taxation of envy, and ingratitude to God, and to his Neighbor,
repine, as at an over scant hand of his Creator or Redeemer. O bone Omnipotens,
qui sic curas vnum quemque nostrum, ac si solum cures, in Confess 3. 11
omnes, ac si singulos, says St. Augustine, O good God, that so regardest
every particular man, as if thou caredst for him only, and yet thou so carest
for all men, as thou do for any one: for Optimi est optima producere, the
best must bring forth the best: which rule holds true says Aquin: in 1. sent.
did. 47.
although not absolutely, yet in the several kinds of things, the world
being so excellently composed, as that Plato durst presume to say, Aug. de
ciui. lib. 11. c. 21
that God was transported with joy when he had finished it* The same hand
creating the moving Orbs, and the creeping Worms. Sure all things which God
did create, he made them Hooker ser. on Heb. 2. 4.
at the first, true, good, and right: True, in respect of correspondence to
that pattern of their being, which was eternally drawn in the Council of
Gods foreknowledge: Good, in respect of the use and benefit, which each thing
yields to other: Right, by an apt conformity of all parts, with that end that
is proposed for each thing to tend to, as learned Hooker) like himself
excellently. Thus his dixit and his benedixit, his Word and Blessing went
together, nor ever would have suffered, either Man or Angel to fall from that
Integrity, except he had likewise seen, Quibus bonorum vsibus accommodaret,
how he could have turned them to his own honor: As the good Husbandman, that
seeing the waters swell, and threaten danger, wisely cuts a Channel, and
turns them to his own benefit: that all ages might be as a neat Verse, where
words of long and short Quantities might run together, Et quibusdem quasi
antithetis honestaretur, and Mercy and Truth might kiss each other.

Every reasonable Creature has these ends Lomb. 2. sen. did. 1.
proposed unto him; to praise God, to serve him, and to enjoy him: and though
his Grace be transparent in every Creature, yet in Men more then Beasts; and
Saints more then Sinners: Secundum simplicem complacentiam, as we say, There is
not that Entitie that he has not loved, and graced, Secundum amorem efficacem:
There is no Rebrobate so honored; his love is alike to all, in respect of the
essential act; not so in respect of the consequent effect: Ab aeterno, non pro
aeterno; from eternity, not for eternity, as Aquarius ^^ 3. sent. did. 32.
speaks. His love is like the Sunbeams, shining upon the meanest Dunghill,
though not with such luster and reflection, as upon the Marble pauement: his
Eyes wait upon the Hindes which bring forth young, but not with so strict
regard as upon man his own Image: nor so attends Saul, as he does David; or
Esau as Jacob: and therefore the words ( to every one of us) may have a
reference to the Church, or those that walk worthy of their vocations, as is
insinuated. v 1.

The merit of Christ's Passion extends it self to us as the head to the
members, nor is his righteousness a curtailed coat, but a large robe of
mercy; himself being the Rose of the common field, and the Lilly of the lower
valleys; and such an one as imparteth his whiteness even to Thistles: being
made sin for us, that every one of us should be made the righteousness of God
in him. 2. Cor. 5. 21. For he is the propitiation for our sins, and not for
our only, but for the sins of the whole world. 1. John 2. 2. The Jew cannot
boast his prerogative over the Gentile, nor circumcision above uncircumcision,
the Donatists opinion of Africkes Meridies is ridiculous; all places, and all
ages are alike to him; Christ being to the Fathers in the old law, by
preuision, and acceptance although not corporally exhibited: the only
difference betwixt them and us, was only in circumstance of time; they
believed he should come, we believe he is come to save us: even then says he,
and swears to it by the Prophet Ezechiel, as I live I will not the death of a
sinner, Nolo mortem peccatoris, qui mori volui pro peccatoribus, says Hector
Pintus on the place: for then where were the efficacy of the operation of our
head, the benefit of his intercession as our Mediator, the merit of his Passion
as our Redeemer? And yet all this is on his part in whom nothing is wanting;
something is required of man to make him capable, namely Fides recta, and fidei
Sacramentum, A right Faith and a true use of the Sacraments; the first, is the
hand to apprehend it; the second, the Seal to confirm it: for want of the
first, the Infidel and the Heretic are not benefitted; for want of the
second, the negligent person is excluded. The shedding of the blood of the
Paschall Lamb, was not sufficient, if not sprinkled upon every door post.
Exodus 12. 7. nor Christ's blood efficient if not applied. As the general Pardon
of a Prince is auailable to them only that sue it out, or a sovereign
Plaster to him only that lays it on; the leaves of the Tree of life are
beneficial only to them that gather them; the barren Elm, and the laden
Vine, are both a like to the lazy sluggard, that will not work out his
salvation with fear and trembling: for he that presumes because God is good,
shall be sure to perish because God is Just.

And so to the third part. In which, me thinks two conclusions arise
necessarily to be observed. First, that his grace is above measure, that
gives ours by measure. Secondly, that man's is measured to him; every man has
some, but not any all.

For the first, that which gives being to another, it self is a more able
being; for nothing gives what it self has not, and therefore to prevent an
objection, where it is said, alluding to the birth of our blessed Savior, that
a Star there gave light unto the ^unne, a branch moisture to the root, that
a Virgin bore her God in her Arms, and her Savior in her womb, that the
Son should be Father to his own mother, and the mother daughter to her
Son, Sine quo Pater nunquam fuit, sine quo Matter nunquan fuisset, Without
whom the Father never was; without whom his Mother never had been, makes the
Pagan indeed incredulous; but the Christian, devout and pious, as knowing that
the fullness of mercy does not lessen the fullness of power, but were it
possible, augments it rather; as Majesty is adorned with clemency: thus,
though John baptized JESUS, yet JESUS gave life both of grace and nature to
John the Baptist; because of his fullness we have all received, who himself is
full of grace and truth, Ioh. 1. or as the schoolmen distinguish, full of
grace in his affections, of wisdom in his understanding, of merit in ^ombis.
his actions.

From his first conception, whether we consider the singularity of his
person, his head-ship over the Church, or his Divine union, there was not a
grace or virtue that he wanted, except we say faith and hope, because he was
Simul viator and comprehensor, and that which succeedes them both in us, he had
in present, that is Cognitio and comprehensio rei, and that not in measure but
in fullness: as the Devils they say, whilst they suggest ease to us, are
themselves tormented; so Christ and the blessed Angels whilst they labor here
for Gods glory, enjoy a happiness. And that his perfection of wisdom was
equal, Vidit se per se, and in se vidit omnia, he saw himself through
himself, and in himself he saw all things, either by the nature of his
Divinity, or by the glory of Comprehension; and therefore that saying of him,
Luke 2. 52. That he increased in wisdom, and stature, and favor with God
and man, is to be expounded, either extensiuely for the augmentation of
corporal dimensions, or ostensiuely for the public manifestation of his
grace and virtue, not intensiuely, as really increased in perfection, for so he
did not. And who did ever doubt that Denijse.
of Merit, if he remembers either the Person, God and Man; or the time, from
the Manger to the Cross; or the means, the height of love and charity, not
suffering one part only, as Head, Hand, Foot or Side, but his whole body to be
wounded; nor spilt his blood by drops, or ounces, but spilt it all, that
plenteous might be our Redemption: the Lord became a servant, that servants
might be Lords; Immortality put on mortality, that mortality might be
clothed with immortality, not taking our bodies only as if he would be
incorporated, nor our Souls only, as though he would be inanimated, but he
wholly took us wholly, that he might bestow Salvation on us wholly: for what
he took not could not be cured. Or lastly, the thing Merited, heaven and its
glory. The Devil was once Ambodexter, and foiled with both hands, leading us,
with one to sin, and with the other haling us to punishment; but thanks be
to God through Jesus Christ our Lord, who has quite cut off the one, and so
lamed the other, that he cannot force us: whence arises the position of the
wiser Papists, that all men's Merits which are satisfactorie for sin or
meritorious of life, cannot be radicated but in his fullness, because no
absolution from any absolute evil, nor consecution of an eternal good can
come from any other, then his plenarie perfection.

Now to come to the second: As this immense fullness of Christ is positive in
himself, not derived of others, so essential, as cannot be separated, yet is
imparted daily to Gods servants in such a quantity; as Man too, has a kind
of fullness. First, because he is fully freed from Satan; Secondly, because he
is fully reconciled to God; every man has as much as he is capable of. Thus
the new baptized Infant is full as well as the aged Saint; the little Cruise as
the greater vessel; We have the fullness of Grace of Redemption, and of Grace
given; the fulness of Grace of collation, and of Grace giving; we call a
tralucent peeceful of light, Sed aliter solemn, aliter quod a Sole* The Sun full
after one manner, and the Stars after another, Plenum mare aqua, plena ex
mari flumina, In John 1. 14.
vide quantum intersit, says Maldonat, The Sea is full of water, so are the
Rivers from the Sea, and yet a difference; Now again in us there is no
equality, but in some more, in some less, according to the gift of Christ,
for from that inexhausted fullness of superinfluence, as Denise calls it, three
others are derived; the first the fullness of eminence, which may be assented
unto without superstition in the Virgin Marie, according to the Angels
salutation, Aue Maria gratia plena: The second, of abundance, as in Stephen,
who full of faith and power, did great works and miracles among the people,
Acts 6. 8. And so likewise the rest of the Apostles: The third of Sufficiency,
evident in all the faithful, my Grace is sufficient for thee. 2. Cor. 12. 9.
And yet we are all in diverse manners, going from strength to strength; none
like the Angels upon Jacobs ladder, stand still, in Christianity, Non progredi
est regredi, He cease to be good, that desires not to be better, and
begins to be evil, when he stays to be good: and the reason is, ours is
but Plenitudo mensurata, and we children growing to riper years, so that our
Plenitudo viae, must empty it self in Plenitudinem patriae, And our several
Graces, shall receive several Crowns.

Which distinction Biel presses so far, for Lec. 32. in Can. Missae.
the Saints in heaven, as to ascribe to particulars, particular privileges and
endowments; so as we must direct our prayers to them for particular blessings
and favors, to mediate for us; as to St. Peter for obedience, (and yet by the
way he forswore his Master,) to St. John for Charity; to drive away Devils
Cyriacus the Deacon; to cure the eye sight, St. Laurence: for Cattle St
Hierosme, or St. Blasuis: but he may enjoy his speculation, without either
envy, or approbation of his Judgment, although none denies but that there is
a difference of glory in heaven, according to the works of Confessors, and
sufferings of Martyrs; yet not the essence but the accidents; not for them, but
according to them: Thus the Church both Triumphant and Militant, ranked in an
excellent order, as a rich Jewel, composed of diverse gemmes and of several
lusters, in which the palest has its praise and does grace the whole, though
but as a foil in comparison of some other brightness; and all without envy or
detraction. The doore-keeper does not malice ^^emlect, 30
him that kneeleth at the Altar, nor the inferior the superior order: heaven
and earth make but one Quire for Gods glory, singing one Anthem, set for all
sorts of voices: we that struggle here, and they that triumph there, are
still knit in one Communion; life and death can make no difference: they pray
in general to God for us; we praise him for them; and both they and we laud
him for himself, from whom we have received not our several gifts only, but
our selves also. A threefold cord is not easily broken, but a fourefold is
impossible; and such is our Communion with the Saints of God: First, we have
all one Head and Savior: Casaub. Resp ad Epist. Card. Perion obseru.
Secondly, one truth and doctrine: Thirdly, one love and Charity: Fourthly,
one hope and inheritance: and this has continued in all ages, past, present,
and to come. But in all these blessings conferred upon the younger Jacob, is
there not one left for the elder Esau? Was there a time when God did quite shut
up his loving kindness in displeasure, And suffered such palpable darkness
in the land of Goshen, that he should deny to give gifts to men; Neither
granting a Church to our Fathers living* nor salvation to them dead? Oh tell
not thiis in Gath, nor publish it in the streets of Ascalon, least the
daughters of the Philistims rejoice, least the daughters of the uncircumcised
triumph.

Sure, with what I began I must conclude; the Church of God was one, and the
same in all ages; the same in Luthers time that was before him, and the same
before that now is: no man of judgment that I can hear of, ever endeavored
to be of a new Church, but of one reformed; nor to create one of nothing, but
to repair one fowlie corrupted: as Naaman the Assyrian was the same man after
his cure that he was before, and Christ when he cured the blind man in the
Gospel, did not nullify his essence, but restored his sight: it were a
strange kind of Chirurgerie, to cut off the member, that way to cure the sore,
and with our Ancestors trash to burn up our Ancestors houses; abuse argues
there was once a lawful use, and corruption insinuates some inward
soundenesse, though ouer-spread and covered, and it is an argument, that like a
two edged sword, cuts on both sides, not easily warded, that Antichrist must
sit in the Temple of God. 2. Cor. 2. 4.

Sure our Fathers had the three things necessary to salvation: The first, in
respect of the precept, they had the ten Commandments: The second, in respect
of the condition required, they had faith and repentance: The third, in respect
of the means, they had Christ and his merits: although it cannot be denied,
but that they builded upon this foundation, gold, silver, pretious-stones,
timber, hay, and stubble. 1. Cor. 3. 12. In a word, many errors, yet additions
do not take away the foundation, nor are we so uncharitable to say, that
these proceeded either from contempt, or malice, especially in the ignorant
people, but merely out of ignorance, And I obtained mercy because I did it
out of ignorance, says the Apostle* 1. Tim. 1. 13. As those two hundred which
went out of Jerusalem with Absalon being called, and they went out in the
simplicity of their hearts, knowing nothing. 2. Sam. 15. 11. Nor is it to be
doubted, but when they dyed they had a sorrow, as Well for unknown sins as
known* desiring with David to be cleansed from their secrets sins: and
general repentance is held the antidote against unwilling and unperceived
errors, of either life or opinion; and there are daily trespasses, (the heart
of man being evil continually, and the just man sinning seven times a day)
which either passion burieth in oblivion, or our weak memories never remember.
And we should think that he did much infringe the extent of divine mercy,
that should preach that every one were damned, for these that had not particular
recognition and repentance.

But see from this our filial duty, and Christian charity, the Devil has
raised a misshapen consequence: then says every wrangler, be reconciled to
Rome, for there is a confessed certainty, and you shall find rest for your
souls; how poor an inference? and yet how dangerous to the state of Heaven?
for there is a large difference, betwixt those that would feign know, and
could not; and those that can, and will not: and I never yet read, that
affected ignorance was ever excused: for those that know their Masters will
and do it not, shall be beaten with many stripes: neither is it all one to
suck error with their milk; and first to suck the milk of Gods word, and
then to turn Apostat' as. But divine honor, vengeance, and judgment of
secrets in case of men's salvation, are Gods peculiars; and so I leave the^ and
the question. Yet as it was some glory in former times to be borne men, not
beasts, Grecians not Barbarians; and Philip would rejoice that his son was
borne in such a time, as Aristotle might be his Master; so me thinks it is a
great comfort for us to live in the time of Peace, and truth, and equal
honor; to keep the pile from undermining, and our selves from falling. God
has given his grace in all ages, but in several measures; truth in former
time, being as Christ in the old Testament veiled over, to us as in the new
openly revealed; that which they say of Logic and Rhetoric may be here
applied, the one is like the Fist shut, the other like the Hand open, all
truths to them (such was the uncontrolled height of error) were written in dark
letters, but to us in such large Characters, as he that runs may read them.
The only use that I can make is this, to be thankful to God, and his
means, and to show our thankfulness in perseverance accordingly. Which God
for his mercies sake grant, through Jesus Christ our Lord, to whom with the
holy Ghost, the blessed Trinity in unity, be ascribed all honor, etc.

FINIS.

