A DIALOGVE OR CONFERENCE Between Irenaeus and Antimachus, about the rites and
Ceremonies of the Church of England:

By SAMVEL GARDENER, Doctor of Divinity.

Psalm. 122. verse. 6. O pray for the peace of Jerusalem: they shall presper
that love thee.

AT LONDON, Printed by Richard Braddock, for Thomas Bushel, and are to be
sold at his house, in the Petty Cannons. 1605.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, AND MOST REVEREND FATHER IN GOD, RICHARD, BY THE
PROVIDENCE OF GOD, LORD Archbishop of Canterbury, Primate of all England, and
Metrapolitane.
ALBEIT the arc of Noah, which is the Church of god, be thoroughly pitched
within and without, with the Doctrine of the truth, and good and wholesome
discipline, and therefore is safe enough against all the waves of wicked
dooers, and ouerflowings of ungodliness, the Lord of hoastes that is with us,
and the God of Jacob that is our refuge, sitting at the stearne and houlding
it, and pronouncing this blessing upon it, I will be with you to the end of
the world: yet is it subject to the rage of many waters, to sirtes, sands,
rocks, Pirates, and to evil minded passengers, that will rather hinder, then
help in a storm or danger. The last is not the least, that this bark and
pinnesse is to fear. For as Epiphanius says, Omnem inscensorem vehere potest
nauis praeter fugitiuum, this ship may bear any passenger, better then a
fugitive. We divide these into two flocks, as Labans sheep and goats were
divided into two companies, whereof some were black, other some party
colored. Those of the black guarde are heretics, in doctrine: those that
are of sundry colors, and cannot agree among themselves what they would
have, but build with confusion of language, with the builders of Babell, Gen,
11 Iudic, 12
and with the Ephraimites cannot pronounce Shibboleth, are those that in a
singularity of opinion, make a defection, whom Augustine noting with his
inkehorne, gives them no milder name then Schismatiques. August.
Schismaticus es sacrilega discessione, haereticus sacrilego dogmate. Thou art
a schismatique (says he) in thy sacrilegious separation, and an heretic in
thy sacrilegious doctrine. August.
Augustine sampleth the first sort to a lion, and the second to a Dragon,
saying: Tunc leo fuit cum apeite saeuiebat, modo draco cum occulte insidictur:
Then he is a Lion, when he openly rages, and a Dragon, when he privily lies
in wait. Of this had worthy Epiphanius respect, when he suited every singular
heresy to a several serpent. A similitude that fell fitly into his purpose:
because no aspe, viper or venomous creature, scatter such filthy vomit against
us, and fasten such venomous teethe upon us, as schismatiques and heretics.
With the insolent neighborhood of these two, as with the malignaunt aspecte of
two unlucky planets, has the Church been miserably disquieted a long time.
The heretic, like Judas, has always led a band of soldiers after him,
and the schismatique has never been without his disciples and sectaries. Of
heretics we have had such swarms at all times, as if hell had emptied it
self, and clean degorged her stomach, on the lap of the Church: the sun
and the air, that is the clear sun and light of the word, has been
darkened by the smoke of the pit. Revel. 9.
The blame whereof is to be given to the perverseness of men's minds, that
love darkness rather then light, and to grope with the Sodomites, for a wall
at noone day, who will be blind with their eyes open, and will not with Eli
see the lamp of God burning in the Temple. The number of these without number
I shall not, if I might, go about to compute, and comprehend in this narrow
room and compass of an Epistle. They most of them were occupied about the
person of Christ casting their filthiness against his holiness: either
denying the eternal nature of the son of god, or calling into question the
truth of his incarnation, or else violating the unity of his person, or else
compounding and confounding the distinction of his natures. In his divinity
erred, very rankelie, these of auntienter time, Noetus, Praxeas, Hermogenes,
Sabellius, with whom we consorte Berillus and Marcellus, known by the title
and name of Patripassiani, or otherwise surnamed Vnionitae, because they would
not acknowledge three persons, but only three voices in the mystery of the
Trinity. Hereupon Arius, Photinus, Artemon, affirmed that the son had a
beginning, and was not everlasting. Again, Euomius and Aetius conceived the
son to be unlike his Father: which stumbling block while Ebion, Basilides,
Cerinthus, Carpocrates, Paulus Samosatenus, are wary to avoid, they take a
great fall, professing the Son of God to be but a mere man. Further, Cerdon,
Martion, Manicheus Valentinus imagined him to be but a cipher, fantasy or
vain imagination, or to have brought a body from heaven with him, and as
Apelles says, compact and conglutinated of stars, or a body without a
soul, as Apollonatius fantasyeth. Which stinking dunghill of rotten heresies
is stirred and dug up new, by heretics of this age, especially that
roguish opinion of Eutiches, who give to Christ a deified body. Now the
Nestorians tread as much awrie of the other side, giving two persons to our
Savior Christ, teaching that the word is present with Christ by assistance.
Thus is Christ's coat, that was without seame, miserably mangled with their
circuler questions: Neither has the mystery of iniquity thus ceased, but
Satan that cannot put off his nature, by his emissaries and factiue
instruments, the Papists, the incendiaries of these days, has kindled hot
coals of fire, in the Church, and has powered such poison into the bosom of
it, as it must be a great deal of Triacle that must purge is. But we should
discharge our selves of that well enough, if we could be at amity and unity
with our selves, and would fight with our ioynte forces against Edom,
Babylon, Ammon, and Aram, with Ioab and Abisai, and not strike our selves with
our own quilles, as the Baalites launced themselves, with their own knives.
If our kingdom were as strong as the devils, division would soon vnioynte,
and dissolve it. For if Satan be divided against Satan, how can his kingdom
stand, says our Savior Christ? But this is the carbuncle, botch, and byle of
our ecclesiastical body, we dissolve the brotherhood between Judah and
Israel: Zach, 11.14
whereas frater is called quasi fere alter, we are brethren in evil, divided
in Jacob, and scattered in Israel, Ecclesiae titulo armantur qui contra
ecclesiam dimicant: they are under the banner of the Church, that fight against
the Church. It is Chrysostomes observation, that there is engendered in every
thing, and proceeds out of it, that which in time, if it be not looked too,
will consume the thing: as out of wood comes a worm, out of a garmente a
moathe, out of a green herb a canker, by which the woodde is fretted, the
garmente is hindered, the herb perishes. This has too lively an application
to the Church. For in Adams house was a wicked Caine, in the arc of Noah was
an accursed Cham, in the family of Abraham was a flowting Ismaell, under the
roof of reverend Eli, were two ungracious waggestringes his sons, Ophni and
Phineas: in David's court, there was the rebel Absalon: in the the school of
Christ, was the traitor Judas, in the company of the Deacons was the crewe of
the Nicolaitans. How the settled state of our church has been disquieted with
home-borne cross biters, male contents and wranglers, to whom it is good
sport and gamesome, the distraction of the church of Corynthe, some calling
themselves Cephistes, 1. Cor, 1.
some Paulines, othersome Apollonians, styling themselves Brownistes,
Barowistes, of the fraternity of the family of love, and taking many such
odd titles to themselves, I would we could forget, as we well remember. If
the same moulde that now covers some of the authors, and ringleaders of
these rowtes, might have overwhelmed their factions, we would not have so
sharpened our pens against them. But because they are belluae multorum
capitum, beasts with many heads, and they infect like a byle in a body, like
a sink in a city, and they are sparks that set the whole church on fire, we
may not forbear them. For they have done more hurt already, then any can
divine, and like they are to do more, if their arguments be not in time
answered with a surioynder, taken from the magistrates scabbarde, that may
choke their lives, and put them to a non plus. For the open persecutor, is not
so nefarious as the preposterous zealous professor. Of which I must tell, what a
holy father says, Venit persecutor, and non fregit crura Christi: venit
Donatus, and dirupit ecclesiam christi, integrum corpus christi manet, inter
manus persecutorum. The persecutor came, and did not break the legs of
Christ: but in came Donatus, and broake the Church of Christ; the body of
Christ remained whole, between the hands of his persecutors. The due regard
hereof deals with us, to pray incessauntlie for the peace of Jerusalem, and
to ensue it (all we may) with contention of sides, intention of minds,
inventions of arguments: wherein, when we have done our vttermoste endeavor,
we shall never do enough. For be we more watchful then Argus, we shall
still find more to do. And here I may not let pass the desciplinarians of our
days, who in such nice differences between us will not be tractable: for whose
sake only I penned this treatise, in a love unfeigned toward them, as I
desire to live, as reuerencing many of their persons, and honoring their
religion, tendering their zeal, but wishing it were seasoned with more
knowledge. Herein the Papists and they are as Ionathans arrows, beyond and
short the mark. I would we were all of us middlings in the Kings high way,
without turning aside to any of these bywayes, of the left hand, or the right.
These labors I present to your Graces good learning, and liking, to commend
them to the press, or utterly suppress them, as it pleases your Lordshippe.
For to whom should I give them, rather then to the Father of our Church, that
stand no doubt most Fatherly affected toward us, and maynteineth the divinity
that is here handled? I have also twice tasted of the loving inclination of
your nature: and therefore these pains, as the abilitye of the whole man, are
consecrated to your Grace. The Almightye god give you to see many days in
honor, to the honor of his great name, and to the enlargement of the
Churches tranquillity, so many years now (blessed be his Majesty) continued
among us.

Your Graces in all duty, SAMVEL GARDENER.

To the learned brethren of the Ministry, discontented with the government of
the Church of England, and to all of that side, Grace and peace.
I Take god to witness, whom I serve in my soul, that in all singleness of
mind, in a tender regard of the peace of the Church, and the welfare of you al,
I have addressed my self to this treatise: his great name in my devotions
being first inuocated, that it would please him to sanctify these studies, and
to give me the tongue of the wise, and the pen of the ready writer, to put
forth things in season to the strengthening of the weak, to the encouragement
of the forward, to the instigation of the backward, and the conviction of the
obstinate. In the unquestionable assurance whereof, I speak now unto you, (my
certificate being the cheerfulness he has given me, all the while I was in
hand with the following discourse:) and am so zealous in the cause: the fire of
his spirit, the work of all good motions, kindling the coals of these
meditations. So that I take up the saying of the Poet:

Est deus in nohis agitante calescimus illo. Ouidius.


And though I speak but to your ear only, or rather to the air: yet my
witnesses are in heaven, with what affections I am trained to this treatise
that will bear me record, my scope is to show you: that the odds between you
and us are not of that importance to divide and sunder you from us: but that
seeing grave and godly authority will not that we should come to you, that you
for order and godly authority sake would apply your selves to us. That by our
joint conformity we might all proceed in the common cause of Religion, and
lead the people in the right way, of the knowledge of Christ crucified: as the
Israelites led David to Hebron, with a simple and perfect heart. That thereby
we might be built like Jerusalem that is a city that is at unity with it self,
Ezech. 37.
and as the Angles of the mercy seat, that turns face to face: and not thus
to be tied back to back, as Sampsons foxes that made nothing but spoil and
waste where they went: or to be as a disordered or confused army of such
several behavior: one part joining, another dividing companyes: Some standing
still, other some running away. Read with Judgment without prejudice, and let
me have but love for love again, and I desire no more. And so much I do
deserve: wherefore if thou be wanting therein, thou do me more wrong, and
the blame is only thine. Reason would that none should be so wedded to his
will: but that he should change it, when better reason moves. Farewell.

A Dialogue or conference, between Jrenaeus and Antimachus, about the rites
and Ceremonies of the Church of England.
IRENAEVS. Well met my good friend Antimachus, how do you, you look somewhat
sadly, what is the matter?


Antimachus. I am sad indeed, because I may not use the liberty of my
conscience, and because for conscience sake only, I am deprived of my living.


Irenaeus. Indeed if it be so, you have cause to be sad. But I marvel it
should be so in this Realm of England, where the gospel is freely preached
by public authority, and the preachers thereof are so countenanced, by the
king and state. I fear you are not conformable to the discipline of the
Church: and so have offended the law in that case, for which you are so
censured.


Antimachus. True, this is the only argument of my trouble.


Irenaeus. And why may not you with a good conscience, digest the orders of the
Church, as well as others, that are grave, and learned and are not to be
touched with Popery, for order and peace sake.


Antimachus. I have many reasons why indeed and in conscience I can not.


Iren: I pray let us hear them.


Antimachus: It is to no purpose to tell them you: for they will not move you:
for you will be an absolute formalist, when I have said what I can, and you
can conceive what they are.


Iren. Though I conceive most of them, yet I would gladly hear them all, and
confer with you about them, and if your reasons be better than mine, I shall
promise you to turn copy and to be of your mind, requiring the like condition
at your hands, if in disputation I shall vanquish you: And this is an equal
course of both sides, which no scholar should refuse, and we have both of us
been scholars in in our time.


Antimachus. I know enough in these matters already, and they are without
disputation or question.


Irenaeus. I would not have any that bears the name of a scholar to say so.
There is none so learned, but by reading and conference he may add more to his
learning. It was Solons saying, one of the Sages of Greece, senesco semper
multa addiscens. And Marcus Antonius, the Emperor, only to learn something
from his mouth, often went to visit Sextius the philosopher, at his house,
saying: Pulchrum senescenti discere, It is commendable in an old man to learn.
And Saluius Iulianus, a worthy lawyer, was wont to say, though he had one
foot in the grave, that he would still learn. Yea, he that is most learned,
may learn of another, as Moses did of lethro.


Antimachus. Well, I am content. Let us then walk, and talk together.


Irenaeus But will you then yield, if you have the weaker side, and subscribe
to the orders of the Church?


Antimachus. I will. And you again will reuerse your present mind, and concur
in judgment with me, if I snall persuade my cause by better reason.


Irenaeus. Else it were no bargain: I will with all my heart.


Antimachus. Then begin when you will.


Irenaeus. But let us begin with prayer, and so we shall speed the better.


Antimachus. It is well said, I like that well, conceive you the prayer, and I
shall join with you.


Irenaeus. O Lord thou have given us thy holy word, as a lantern to our feet,
and a light unto our paths: illuminate our understanding, thou that art the
father of lights, with the light of thy spirit: and let the sun beams of thy
holy word shine upon our hearts: that the eye of our inward man may be opened,
and we may see the truth, and follow it in love, and with one mind glorify
thy name, and seek the peace and tranquillity of the Church, and the common
salvation. Amen.


Antimachus. Amen.


Irenaeus. Well then Antimachus, that we may have some ground to stand on, what
are the points that you stand upon, that you do mislike?


Antimachus. I differ chiefly from you in two points: namely in the garments of
the ministers, and especially in the surplesse: but most of all in the cross
in baptism.


Irenaeus. Why in the garments?


Antimachus. 1. First, because this distinction of garments that are enjoined
us, do properly appertain to the priesthood of Aaron: which is now out of
date, and is not to be reuersed, answer me to that.


Irenaeus. That is a knot easy to be undone, and I thus answer you. In the
law and priesthood of Aaron, there were sacraments, by which it pleased God to
consigne his promises of Christ, that was to come, all which I acknowledge to
be repealed, and that we are to believe that Christ is given, and is not now to
be given, and, other new signs and charters of his promises, in the room of
the old, being ordained under the gospel, by the Lord himself, which are bread
and wine, we are not to bring into use again, the old seals and marks. But
yet notwithstanding, there were there some actions, that were of that nature,
as they could not kindly be called sacraments, for they served for decency,
and order, and some apt use, which as having good congruitie with the light of
nature, and somewhat appertaining to our good, I am of the mind, that they may
be revived and retained; who does not know, that the Apostles for the peace and
fellowship of the faithful, did give in commandment to the Church, that they
should abstain from things, offered to Idols, and from blood, and that is
strangled: which questionless, were prouisoes in the law, belonging to the
priesthood of Aaron, if we will generally respect what that law delivered.
Tithes also are in use, in most churches, which we shall not find mentioned in
the new Testament, which we doubt not to be due by the law of god now* it being
as free for any Christian magistrate, to deduct civil laws from the Jewish
policy, as for the Romans, to borrow from the Athenians, and some cities of
Germany, from the Venetians, certain of their ordinances, Moses was the
captain lawgiuer, with whom Theseus, Romulus, Minos, Numa, Solon, are no way
to be compared. We also give instance of Psalms and Hymns, which take not I
suppose any authority from the law of the gospel, but they have very good
foundation, in the old charter. Moreover, Ambrose expounding the fourteenth
chapter and 26. verse of the first epistle to the Corinthians, plainly says,
that the manner of prophesying, there delivered by Paul, was borrowed from the
synagogues, and brought into our churches. We have also festival days, in
remembrance of the birth, death, resurrection, ascension of our Savior Christ*
Shall we abolish all these, because they have so nigh neighborhood, and
cognation with the old legal, and leuiticall ceremonies?


Antimachus. You have here opened a gap, to many superstitions, as to holy
water, perfumes, and infinite such trinkets.


Irenaeus. Not so, for we reply further, that there is a mean and moderation
to be holden, in the entertaining of primative ceremonies, that the church be
not aggrauated or surcharged, with these things: and that we are not to give
any religion unto them, as there was to holy water, incense and such things.
Again, we warn Christians to be cautelous, that they endanger not their
Christian liberty, that albeit some antienter ceremonies, be restored, yet they
be not so received, as necessary to salvation. But so to tolerate and use them,
as when it shall seem good by higher powers, they may as superfluous or little
profitable, grow out of use, as it may well be done in these garments, when it
shall please our commanders. In the mean while, let us be contented, and
embrace the sweet peace and welfare offered us, under such gentle favorable,
and honest conditions. The learned brethren in the days of Queen Marie, would
have embraced with both arms, such a consideration as this for the purchase of
their lives and liberty.


Antimachus. It is to purpose that you say, but I assault you with a new
argument, thus. These garments that are enjoined us, are relics of Rome, and
old Popish trash: wherefore, as we have renounced the Pope and his religion, we
ought to have no thing to do with his relics of superstition.


Irenaeus. You shall never prove, that this different habit, of the
ministers, that you can not like, was first founded by the Pope. I am sure that
the Egyptians in the sacrifices of Isis long before ever there was a Pope,
were clothed with white garments, as the Poet Ovid testifies, saying;

Nunc dea linigera colitur celeberrima turba.

The goddess great, by every wight, Ouidlus.


Is now adored with garments white.

And we find in the stories of the Church, that John the Apostle ware at
Ephesus a pontifical breast plate. And the Deacon Pontius witnesses of
Cyprian the Martyr, that when he was to dye, he gave his surplesse to the
Deacons, and stood in linen robes. Hierome shows, that there was an uniform
habit of ministers in ministration and service of religion? Hieron. li. 13. in
44. Ezech.
and a diftering attire for the use of common life. This uniform habit which
was used in the religion of god, by the Bishop, priest, and Deacon, was the
white vesture as the same father elsewhere teaches, Hieron. li. 1. aduers.
pelag. lib. 1. cap. 9.
saying: Is it any enmity to god, if I wear a white garment, that is comely?
If the Bishop, priest, or Deacon, and the rest of Ecclesiastical rank, come
to administer the usual sacrifice in a white vesture, are they therefore
hereby Gods adversaries? Now that it was the received use of those times,
wherein that holy father Hierom lived, to put on white garments, in the
execution of divine service, and in the celebration of the blessed sacraments,
the counsel of Carthage makes proof, at which were present, two hundred and
fourteen Bishops, among whom was Augustine. The testimony of that Counsel is
this Diaconus tempore oblationis tantum vel lectionis alba induitur. Council.
Carthage Canon 46.
The Deacon only in the time of oblation or reading, is clothed in white
raiment. Chrysostom, also makes mention, of the white garments of the
ministers of the church. Ancient writers do report, that the Christians when
they were converted to Christ, changed their habit, and in stead of their
gown, took a cloak: for which when they were flowted by the heathens,
Tertullian wrote a learned treatise of the cloak. And we may not be ignorant,
that to such as were entered the church by baptism, an Albe or white garment
was delivered. Wherefore hence it is a clear case, that before the popes
usurped tyranny had beginning, there were no few differences of garments in the
church. But to yield you so much for further conference sake, that the Pope was
the Patron of these garments: your consequence will not hold, that therefore
they are to be absolutely refused. For to restrain us from every thing that the
Pope uses, is to nip the neck of the Church with too straight a yoke, and to
lay too great a burden of bondage upon it. Truly our forefathers in a good
discretion could appropriate the temples of Idols unto religious uses, and to
the true service and worship of god, and divert such revenues as had bin
formerly devoted to vild uses, as to the imaginary gods of the gentiles, to
theatricall pastimes, to their vestall virgins: to the maintenance of Church
ministers. Whereas before they served not only Antichrist, but the devil. The
Poets did dedicate the fruits of their wits, their verses, and pamphlets to
their several Muses and Gods, yet holy writers, where they have found any good
stuff, in them worthy of their use, they have bin bold to make benefit of
them, wherein they have the Apostle Paul their example, who brought three
quotatio^s of poets, as of Menander, Aratus, Epimenides, into the body of the
Bible. Who does not also know that wine was consecrated to Bacchus, bread to
Ceres, water to Neptune, oil to Minerua, learning to Mercury, Music to the
Muses or Apollo, and many other such things ye may read in Tertullian his
treatise, De corona militis, where he deals with this subject matter: all
which we make no bones to use, as well in sacred as profane uses, albeit they
had bin dedicated to Idols or devils?


Antimachus. You have set a good die upon a course cloth. This fashion and
form of ministers attire, is but an humane invention: is it any more?


Irenaeus. It is. For the linuen garment and vestiments of the church, have
very nigh resemblance of Aarons Ephod, and his other pontifical induments
ordained by god. The linen garment was after that a symbol of a professor of
religion, 1. Sam. 2. 2. Sam. 6.
as Samuels linen coat was to him, and as David's linen Ephod was, wherewith
he was girded when he danced before the Ark. And the roabes of our Bishops are
taken up in immitation of the high priests robes, enjoined at the appointment
of God by Moses. But let it be an humane invention, because it pleases you to
think no better of it. Are you in that mind, that all humane inventions, are to
be thrown out of the church? If you think so, then must we alter the time of
our Communions, it being at supper, and first of all celebrated by Christ at
night, and humane wisdom has lawfully enough dispensed with the time, Act.
4.37.
and translated it to the morning. So that received order of the primitive
church, that the price of such things, that were sold, should be laid at the
Apostles feet, was merely man's ordination and constitution: wherefore you may
as well stomach that, and except against it.


Antimachus. But I pray you what use is there of them, that you please to
plead so for them?


Irenaeus. Truly, much every way. For they are not without good and proper
signification. 1. For the linen garment in divine service is more co^me^dable
then that which is of woole, because it is a symbol and sign of innocencye
and purity: wherefore it is said in the Revelation, of the saints, that they
shall be clothed with long white robes.


Antimachus. Our sacred profession signifies so much, let us therefore sample
it, not signify that purity.


Irenaeus. You may tell Paul so much, when he decreed among the Corinthians, 1.
Co. 11.5.
that the woman should have her head covered and the man should be bareheaded,
and stands only upon the signification of it. You may herin say unto him, let
the man show himself his wives head, and let the woman's behavior declare that
she is subject to her husband, and let them not by dum signs demonstrate it.
But the Apostles wisdom thought it behoofefull, that both by sayings and
signs they should be lessoned in their duties.


Antimachus. Is there no other use of the garments but this?


Irenaeus. Pithagor as gives me this use beside, that the linen garment
puts me mind of my first estate, before sin came into the world, that I
should labor what I might to recover that again: as the woollen weed does set
before mine eyes, the miseries of this present life, of sin, of death, the
wages of sin due unto us all, by the fall of Adam. For you cannot have a
garment of woollen without the death or injury offered to the beasts that give
them, for which cause (as Pythagor as says) woollen was an abomination in a
garment: but line and flax whereof the linen garment is made, because it
grows out of the earth without wrong done to the life of that is had.


Antimachus. Can you yet make more meaning hereof?


Irenaeus. 3. Further the linen garment is the mark of my high calling, Mal.
3.1.
of the dignity of my place and person. For the ministers are called the Angels
and messengers of the Lord of hoasts: and Angels almost always appeared to
men clothed in white garments. Why should we therefore come with such shredding
knives, to pare the church of her lawful liberty in the garments that it
uses, and enioyneth, placing no religion therein, and being so spare of
ceremonies as it is? Jerome in his second book against Iouinian, inhibiteth
this white attire to Monks, because it was so triumphant and stately, as it
was ever so in account among the very heathens. Wherefore their magistrates were
called Candidati, because they came into the senate of Rome, in white robes:
Afterward, there were those that were thus clothed, that were called Candidati
Caesaris, who were Caesar's Secretaries, and read the Emperors letters openly in
the Counsel house. In those times none might wear such a garment, but great
men, such as were called albae gallinae filij, men of great fortunes, and
excelling in authority. Now then because we have obtained so high a name, as to
be the Lords Angels, and Ambassadors, let us be thus apparelled like men of our
degree. Achab and Iehosophat went in royal robes. And religious Queen Ester
was apparrelled according to her estate. 2. Ring. 22. 2. Chr. 18. Esth. 2, Esth
8. Dan. 5. Act. 12.
And her good uncle Mordechai, was arrayed like an honorable man. So was
Daniel, when he was advanced, suite accordingly. So was Herod. A long gown is
fitting a counselor, a short vesture is for a day labourer or vulgar lay
person, and the white ornament has best correspondency with the ministers
office, of such dignity and preheminency.


Antimachus. But in my mind the eyes of the people, that are wholly fixed upon
such objects, draw away their minds from better thoughts. For as children
delight more in the pictures, that are in their books, then in their lessons:
so the people, to feed their fancies, do more regard such apparel, then the
preaching of him that wears it.


Irenaeus. It will not be so if the outward ornaments of the church be but
such, as commonly have bin used, especially if they be plain as the surplesse,
rotchet, and the habit of our ministers and Bishop is. For the use, and
plainness of them prevent and take away al manner of admiration. I would also
think it more likely, that the people, whilst in wonder they behold such
things, would sall into further and deeper meditations of divine matters.


Antimachus. How happens it, seeing there is such multiplicity of good use in
these garments, that many other reformed churches entertain them not?


Irenaeus. Non est eadem ratio vrbis and orbis. Laws may differ according to
the nature and condition of the place. For other manners agree with other men,
other meats delight other stomachs, other air is more fit for other natures,
and so may other laws be for other countries. But it is needful that one
state should be under one discipline. lib. 10.
It is Curtius his saying, Eiusdem iuris esse debent, qui sub eodem rege
victurisunt. They ought to be under one law, that are under one Prince. For
division in laws, makes a division, and partition in the Kingdom. For as a
painter, though he be never so cunning a workman, and shaddoweth his work with
never such lively and orient colors, to make two boords seem one; yet if those
boords be not better glued together, they will be seen to be two: so, that the
church or common wealth may be one, the people must be coadunated or coanimated
in one; or else a rupture in the frame of government, Delegib. lib. 6.
will very soon appear. It is equality that conioyneth friendship, and is the
mother of friendship, as Plato says. And inequality as Aristotle says, is the
foundation and ground of suspicion. Polit. lib. 5 cap. 1. and 2.
Now there is no equality in this, that some should be square, and others
round: some white, some black. But hereof we will entreat more afterward.


Antimachus. But might we not have an absolute discipline and government for
the Church, though there were no cannons for apparel; but every one were left
to his own choice therein?


Irenaeus. Though there were no Prouiso in this case, yet reason should
persuade us that we should, as in other things, be uniform in apparel.
Gratian does advise us to suite our selves in our habit, to those among whom
we do converse: plainly saying, that he that does otherwise, is either
superstitious, or humorous. The glossary propounds us this rule to observe,
that in the form of our apparel, we would apply our selves to the custom of
the place wherein we live. Aug. de doctr. Christiana lib. 3.
To him consent Panoruntanus, Benedictus, Caprea, Baldus, Thomas Ierom, who
commends Nepotian for observing this rule. And it is Augustines direction in
his volume of Christian learning, that we divide not our selves in these
transitory things, from the unity of the church, and from the use of the times,
and places where we live. And Ambrose holds it very decent, and becoming our
duty, to accommodate our selves to the customs of the countries where we
converse, if we would not be offensive to any, or have any offensive to us. In
old time at Rome, and afterward at Constantinople, there were exercises and
games of running kept, which continued to the time of Phocas the Emperor,
where the actors and cursitors divided themselves by their colors in their
suites of apparel, some in green, some in a sadder white. Hereupon there grew
partaking among the people, and choosing of sides, and therwithall such envy,
emulations, affections, as after they had done their sports, they began to be
in earnest, and each part to fight under his colors, that it cost a deal of
blood in Egypt, Syria, Greece. Ochosias asked his Legates, who^ he had sent to
the god of Archaron for oracle, 2. King. 1.
of what form and habit the man was, that met them: and they answered, he was
a hayry man, and was girded about the reins with a lether girdle. Which was a
mark of knowledge enough to the king, though they knew not his name: It is
Elias the Thisbite says he. So, as the Prophet was known by his habit, it
were well that the Lords ministers might be known by their formal attire. It
can not be devised how we should tread awrie, in framing our selves to form
of law herein, seeing no religion is reposed in them, and that it is with
other externe ceremonies, a mixed matter of indifferrent and middle nature, and
may adessevel abesse sine interitu subjects. And as S. Paul says, Let no man
judge you of meat or drink, or in respect of an holy day, or of the new
moon, or of the sabbath days: so we may say, let no man judge us of
apparel. Col. 2.
For as meat, so raiment, commends us not to god. The superstition in this
ceremony is among the desidious and resty Cloisterers, the mopish monks, to
whom it is great religion to be buried in a Cowle, or monastichall habit.


Antimachus. You have said in the matter of the garments, enough, and I hold
them tolerable. But that which stabbeth my conscience, is the cross in
Baptism. And that is the hook I can not swallow: 1. because it is a dangerous
addition to the institution of the sacrament: 2. there is no warrant in the
word of god for it: 3. and no one thing so much as that, has bin
superstitiously abused: 4. and there is no use of it.


Irenaeus. All your reasons by your leave are loose, and we will prove them so
to be. 1. If your first supposall were true, you had said enough. For the vial
of the Lords curse is powered upon them, Revel. 22.
that shall add, or withdraw from his book, he shall be sure to be blotted
out of the book of life, and to have no part in the holy city. Be this
formidable presumption therefore far from every Christian: sure we are, it
concerns not our church. For the institution of baptism is performed by us,
as Christ commanded, and no otherwise. The form thereof is finished, the
sacrament absolved, and the child absolutely Christianized, before it is signed.

Your second argument, whereby you would conclude it to be unlawful, because
the word of God has not warranted it, is not so warrantable. Our consciences
are satisfied in this action, because the word stands not against us. I doubt
not that it is lawful for the chief magistrate, to give laws and Canons for
the church or civil state, though they concur not so absolutely with the word
of god: so as they no way be repugnant unto it. The Lord has put the sword
into the magistrates hand, and there withal power to ordain what decrees the
thinks good, in points of outward government, so as they cross not or
confront his royal laws. Adoniah, Ioab, Agag and sundry others in the old
testament, were cut off by the sword. But where find we this allowed, in the
old law? For these statutes deal but with these three kinds of death,
hanging, stoning, burning. David decreed four fould restitution of the stolen
lamb, and determined beside the fellone to the death: wherein two ways he ran
before the law, and strained it as it were a scrowle of parchme^t. 1. For
neither was the crime capital: 2. neither was the delinquent to make so large a
restitution. For the law case was this, If the theft were taken in the hand of
the thief, he was to redeliuer it. If he had killed it or sold it, he was but
to restore four oxen for one, and five sheep for one, now four fould are
eight, the duplicate of the oxen. Neither is there any exception to be made
against David, as of this course were exorbitant from Justice, or that he
wringed or wronged gods law, it being the prerogative of his place, according
to the circumstances of the crime, either to extentd or remit the punishment
awarded by gods law. I may yield that you say truth, in your third reason,
that nothing has bin so miserably abused, as the most sacred sign of the
Cross, and that from the beginning, while some have adored it, and have signed
their breast and forehead, with it, as armor of proof, against devils and all
mishappes: and we confess that the Christians, as Tertullian says, at the
first, did take the outward sign of the Cross for a supine security for their
indemnity. And Gregory of Rome, in his 3 book of Dialogues lends us a lie,
and that a lusty one, as he has pestered that book with a noisome company
of very fabulous and ridiculous things. A Jew (says he) entered by night into
the temple of an Idol, there to take his rest, but aghast at the sight of so
many evil spirits in that place, he armed himself with the sign of the
cross: now when the head devil perceived that a man was come, he dispatched an
under devil unto him to examine him, what he was, but when he had seen him he
returned and said. I found indeed an empty vessel, but it was sealed, and so
left the Jew and did him no harm: which while he recounted with himself, he
became a Christian. Also we are not ignorant what slauer and blasphemies have
been thrown up to heaven, in their adorations and orisons made to the Cross:
as when they have chaunted in this wise in their churches. O Crux aue spes
vnica, Hoc passionis tempore, Auge piis iustitiam, Ressque dona veniam. All
hail o Cross, our only hope in this time of the passion, Increase in the
godly righteousness, and give pardon to the guilty. All which words are the
very vomit of an Aspe. Again, they roar in the congregation thus: Ecce signum
cruc is venite adoremus, Behold the roode of the Cross, let us come and
worship it. Which is horrible sacrilege. Again, thus they power out the
surcharge of their stomachs upon the churches lap: Crucem tuam adoramus Domine
resurrectionem tuam sanctam glorificamus. Where, they set the Cross in the
higher room, and make the resurrection underling unto it. I dare not stir this
deuilish dunghill any more, least I stifle your stomach. The sacrificing
shauelings drink down deeply this damnable opinion, and feed upon it as upon
a restoratiue to the enchantment of their souls, that they consecrate and
sanctify all things, by the sign of the Cross. Thus we grant, that never
poor sign was so tormented, as the cross has been: they having stretched
every ioynte thereof, upon the rack of their most execrable blasphemies. But
what would you euict from hence? that therefore it is utterly unlawful to use
the sign of the Cross at all? Then I deny your consecution. For, is the use
of a thing to be taken away for the abuse sake, that is cast upon it? then take
away the Sun out of the firmament, for that has bin worshipped: take away
the Physicians sawes and instruments, because many dogleaches with their
unskillfulness have abused them, to the spoil of many. Take away all weapons
of warfare, and let us go naked into the field against the enemy, because many
have taken them up against their country; take away wine and strong drink,
because more have perished by that then by the sword. Take away our wits,
memory, health, strength, and the whole man, be cause every part, and the
whole, is miserably abused by us all, through our sins.

In your fourth reason you are wide, saying, that there is no use of the sign
of the cross. For it is used in a grateful remembrance of Christ, and him
crucified: whereby they would testify, that they are not ashamed of the
cross of Christ. And that this was the chief consideration in the use of this
ceremony, ordained by the church, Augustine in his 8. sermon, de verbis
Apostoli shows. For the Infidels insulted over the Christians, arguing them
of folly, for worshipping a crucified redeemer: whom that holy father
answers thus. Cor quide^ hahemus, non tamen quale vos habetis: nec pudet nos
crucifixi; sed in part vbi signum pudoris est, signum crucis eius habemus. We
have a heart, but not such an one, as you have: neither are we ashamed of him
that is crucified; but in that part where the sign of shame is, which is the
forehead have we the sign of his Cross. In Psalm. 141
In another place to the same purpose, he says: Insultet paganus crucifixo
Christo, videam ego in frontibus regum crucem Christi. Quod irridet, ibi
saluor. Nihil est superbius agro, qui irridet medicame^tum suum. Let the Pagan
ouercrow christ, let me see in the foreheads of kings the cross of christ.
That which he mocketh, saves me, there is nothing prouder then a sick man,
which scorneth his medicin. Ibidem.
In the same place he speaks thus: vsque adeo de cruce non erubesco, vt non
in occulto loco habeam crucem Christi, sed in fronteportem. Ibidem.
I am so little ashamed of the cross of Christ, as I bear it not in a secret
place, but in my forehead. Finally in the same place he says: non habea^ nudam
frontem, tega team crux Domini mei. O let not me have a naked forehead, but let
the cross of my Lord cover it.


Antimachus. But now that cause is removed, and we are all called Christians,
the sign of the cross which came in by that occasion may be removed.


Irenaeus. Christ shall be the mark and white, that scorners shall shoot at
to the worlds end. For Julian ^orphirie, Lucian, have their progeny among us,
and David ^^^nounceth him a blessed man, that has not sit in the chair or
^^omers. And David's noddy that says there is no god, or Savior Christ, lives
among us. Wherefore for all this, this ceremony may continue.


Antimachus. And why may we not take up some other sign and token, to remember
Christ by, in the room of this?


Irenaeus. I know none so lively as this: the sign of the cross being so
naturally expressed in many of our actions: as Ambrose does observe: For
seafaring men first set up a maste, Ambrose sermon. 56.
and then spread a sail in form of a cross, by which the sea is broken. And
the course and co^stitution of the heavens, shows us such a figure, dividing
it self into fowr parts, the East, West, North, South, contained as it were in
the four corners of the cross. Also man in his going, when he lifts up his
hand, is the very portaiture of a cross. These be the conceits of Ambrose his
wit: which albeit they prove nothing, we should not despise. Princes in their
crowns and diademes, have the engraven image of the cross, to which custom
we must not impute any superstition: because by that sign they do profess
and witness, that they worship and maintain the religion of Christ. For if it
be lawful for any Noble man to have the scutchion and arm^ of his ancient
house: it is also lawful in the sign of the cross, to profess Christ's
religion. Constantine the great did see the sign of the cross in the air,
with this title and Inscription added thereunto: Sub hoc signo vi^ces: under
this sign thou shall get the victory. Thus god by miracle would strengthen and
confirm him in the truth of his religion, which he had newly entertained.


Antimachus. You have given us some authorities for the cross: as from
Augustine, Ambrose, Constantine. But then the times were more degenerate and
corrupt. But can you give us testimonies, that make for the credit of it,
within the compass of three hundred years after christ, and in the plain
simplicity of times before the mystery of iniquity did begin to work?


Irenaeus. I can and will. What say you to Iustine Martyr, Cyprian, Origin,
Justinius Martyr ad Orthodox os adquaest n 8.
who speak most clearly, and are of our side in the cause of the cross? I
will give you their sayings. Dextra manu in nomine Christi eos consignamus, qui
sigillo tall indigent: with the right hand we sign them, in the name of
christ, who stand in need of such a seal, says Iustine Martyr: And Cyprian
twice speaks luculently enough to the point, Cyprianus de vnitate ecclesiae.
in this manner. Ozias rex l^prae varietate in front maculatus est, eaparte
corporis notatus, offenso Domino, vbi signantur qui Dominum promerentur. King
Vzza was smitten with the tokens and spots of leprosy, in his forehead, being
dodded in that part of the body, god being displeased, in the which Christians
are consigned with whom God is pleased. Cyprianus ad Demetrian: Orig. 8. set
in diuersos Ezech. 9.
And writing to Demetrian, he speaks of the regenerate who shall be consigned
by the cross. Origin is as plain, in the case, applying the mark of the
letter Tau (of which the Prophet Ezechiel speaks, with which they were
distinguished that were saved, when the Legatiue destroying Angels dispatched
by God had made a great slaughter of others) to the sign of the cross, and
indeed making it to be that very sign: quos T tau literaid est cruc is
pictura signauerit, whom he signed with the letter T tau, that is the stamp
and impression of the cross. Further, if you please to hear Tertullian, he is
no cold ad^^cate, and proctor in this point. Tertullianus de coronamilit. Lib.
3. aduersus Marcionem.
He doubts not to say, Adla^^cra, monsas, lumina, e^bilia, sedilia, quacunque
nos co^uersatioexercet front crucis signo terimus. And writing against
Marcion, he makes the letter T tau, hitherto cited out of Ezechiell, to
pretend and prefigure the sign of the Cross, which was afterward to be made
in the forehead, when he says, Litera Tau est species crucis, quam portendebat
futuram in frontibus nostris. With these reverend holy men of blessed memory,
golden mouthed Chrysostom goes hand in hand, in the behalf of the Cross,
speaking thus woorthily: Chrysostom. in 16. mat. Hom. 55.
Quando te cruce signas magna tuam frontem arma siducia, liberate anima^
munias. When thou signest thy self with the cross, arm thy forehead with
cheerfulness, and quiet thy mind, Finally, from them to descend to Basil, a
Reverend Father of very good regard, Basilius cap. 27. de Sp. S.
he allows it for a lawful and laudable custom, the use of the Cross, which
was of good age and time, in his time. In a tractate, entitled of the holy
ghost, excepting against such that would confront and bear down old customs,
in that regard that they had not warrant from the word, and there numbering the
many inconveniences that would arise from thence, he makes this the foremost
hurtful consequence in the rank, which shows his good mind and affection to
the cross: Siconsuetudines quae scrip to proditae non sunt tanqua^ haud multum
habe^tes momenti reiicimus, imprudentes etc. da^^^bimus, quae in Euangelio
necessaria ad salute^ habentur. ^, vt signo crucis eos qui spem collocaru^t in
christo signemus quis scripto docuit? If we shall cast up such customs that
the word touches not, as matters of no such quality and consequence, we shall
also indiscreetly condemn such things which are also accounted necessary to
salvation in the gospel. 1. for who has charged us by writing that we sign
those that put their trust in christ with the sign of the cross? Thus you see
how the fathers are for us: so if you will be ruled and led by the^, the
co^trouersy is ended, and we are good friends


Antimachus. But these Fathers flourished in the prime age of the church, and
as it were in the infancy and minority of the same. We have all the light they
could give us, but we have seen more light since, and therefore I covet to have
the cause persuaded, by the later writers. Have you any store of them of your
side?


Irenaeus. Without wrong done to the learning of any, I dare auerre it that we
have as deep men for learning and judgment, as any you can name, that this
age has brought forth, that are either patrones of the ceremonies of the
Church of England, and particularly of the ceremony of the cross, or else
allowers of them, and approouers of the cross, acknowledging the liberty that
the church has, as to cancel them, so to keep them and leave us to this our
lawful liberty, no way seeking to abridge us of it.


Antimachus. I would hear what they are.


Irenaeus. Peter Martyr, whom I reverence as much as any other, in his letter
to Bishop Hooper, and in three or four other letters, that are extant, as also
in sundry other places of his worthy works, all which I have given thee in
this treatise, as occasion did yield, and therefore it shall be needless to
repeat his wise sayings. Bucer that mighty learned man, as he easilye could
digest the established ceremonies of the reformed church in England, in the
days of that peerlesse prince, and another Josiah, Edward the sixth; so he
thought specially well of the cross, according as it may be lawfully used, and
according as we use it, and these are his words. Bucer.
Signum hoc no^ tam quod est vsue in ecclesiis antiquissimi, quam quod est
admodum sim^^^x, and praesentis admonitionis crucis Christi, adhiberi nec
indecens nec inutile existimo: si adhibeatur modo pure intellectum, and
religiose excipiatur, nulla nec superstitione adiuncta, nec elementi sernitute,
nec leuitate, aut vulgari consuetudine. I do hold it not unseemly, or
unprofitable, that the sign of the cross should be used: not so much because
it is of that long time and continuance in the church, as that it is of so good
use, and tends to such good end, as being most simple, and of present
admonition, as putting us in mind of the cross of christ: so it be rightly
understood and religiously entertained, without any addition of superstition,
or servitude of the element, or leuity, or common custom. Iuell that was the
Iulium Sydus, and the Jewel of his time among us, though he distasteth the
crowde of ceremonies, which were without measure, Iuel. in Apolog.
thrown upon the church, and were the surcharge thereof, in Augustines time,
against which that holy Father did except: yet he allows all the received
ceremonies, now at this present day in use, in the church of England. I will
acquainte you with his words. Concerning the multitude of ceremonies of idle
and vain nature, we know that Saint Augustine did much complain of them in
his time: and therefore we have greatly diminished the number of them,
because we know that they were troublesome to good consciences, and too
burdensome to the church. Yet we retain and have liking not only of those
ceremonies, which we are sure were delivered us from the Apostles: but some
others too besides, which we thought might be suffered without hurt to the
church of God: because we affected, that all things in the congregation, might
according to the will of the Apostle, be done with comlynesse and good order.
But all such things which we perceived to lean to superstition, or to be of
no use, or bald, or toyish, or against the sacred scriptures, or else unmeet
for sober and wise people, whereof there is a confused chaos, in the Romish
sinagogue, all these we have utterly renounced and cast off, because we would
not have the worship of god confounded, and combred with such follies. Whom
would not the even carriage of this so worthy and fine a Bishop move? For my
part I will suspect ten thousand men's judgments, that are of your side: before
I shall yield to think amiss of that man.


Antimachus. But you do tell me but of those of this church of England that
applaude and approve your opinions: but do any of the learned men beyond the
seas, run with you in that mind?


Irenaeus. That worthy man Theodore Beza, though I find him no great friend to
the cross: yet he misliketh not, that such churches as retain it, should
keep their liberty therein, these being his words in his answer to Frances
Baldwin. Bezae responsio ad F. Bald.
Scio no^nullos f^blat a crucis adoratione, aliquem signt crucis vsum
retinuisse: vt antur igitur ipsi sicut par est sua liberate. I know that many
make some use of the sign of the cross, taking away all superstition from it:
Let such as it is meet use their liberty. In the same place immediately before,
the same learned Father says, Fuerit sane tempus quo fuit aliquis istius
signaculi aduersiu christi crucifixt contemptores vsus: sit etiam diu and
libenter a christianis, vsurpatus pro externa verae religionis professione.
There was a time that there was some use of this sign, against the contemners
of christ crucifica: and let it be a long time and willingly taken up of
christians, for the outward profession of true religion. Heming. in 1. Cap.
Ioh. Zanchius de baptis.
Hemingius in the first chapter upon John says: Minime improbo signum crucis:
I do not disallowe of the sign of the cross. Thus you see how we would
sausfie you in your mind, every way.


Antimachus. Though you have proved the use of the cross out of many authors:
yet you show not that it was used in Baptism: I wish you should prove that.


Irenaeus. What say you to Tertulliau, who speaking of the sign of the
Cross, Aduersus Marcione. lib. 3. De praescript. ad. uersus haereticos.
there withal touches the sacraments of the church. thus coupling them
together: Quae omnia cum in te quoque deprchendantur and signaculum frontium,
and ecclesiarum sacramenta. I would also you should well weigh these words of the
same father: Sed quae itur a quo intellectus interpretetur coru^ quae aduersus
hareses faciunt? A diabolo scilicet, cuius sunt parts interuertendi veritate^,
qui ipsas quoque res sacramentoru^ diuinoru^ in idoloru^ mysteriis aemulatur.
Fing it and ipse quosdam, vtique credentes and fideles suos: expiatione
peccatoru^ de lauacro repromit^it, and sic initiat mithrae: signat ille in
frontib us milites suos: celebrat and panis oblatione^, Tertul: de resurrecti.
one carnis
and imagine^ refurrectionis inducit. I also charge you with this his other
saying: Caro abluitur vt anima emaculetur: caro vngitur vt anima consecretur:
caro signatur vt and anima muniatur: caro manus impositione adumbratur, vt and
anima spiritu illuminetur: caro corpore and sanguine Christi vescitur, vt and
anima deo saginetur. But most plain and plausible is this speech of Origin:
Origin in Psalm, 8 Ho^^^. 2. To. ^.1
Vt ergo no^ exprobremur ab insipiente, conuertamus nos ob omitibus
iniquitatibus nostris: ne deprehendens in nobis maculas pecca^orum idest suae
voluntatis insignia exprobret and dicat; Ecce hic Christianus dicebatur and
signo Christi signabatur in front meas autem volun tates and mea chirographa
gerebat in cord. Ecctile qui mih: and meis operibus renuntiauit in baptismo,
meis rursum operibus se inseruit, meisque legibus paret. Liberati ergo ab
omnibus inquitatibus, stude amus ne in die Iudicij, huiusmodi oppr^briis
inspientes diabols succumbamus. That we may not be vpbraided by the devil, let
us depart from all our iniquities, least finding in us the spots of sins,
that is the badge and ensigns of his will, he thus check and choke us,
saying: Behold, this man was called a Christian, and was signed with the sign
of Christ in his forehead but my will and handwriting was in his heart: Behold,
this man who forsook me^, and al my works in baptism, has again wrapped
himself in my works, and obeyed my law. Wherefore, being delivered from all
iniquities, let us have a care that in the day of judgment, we be not ouercom
of the reproachful speeches of this foolish devil.


Antimachus. Know you any further regard had in the constitution of this
ceremony?


Irenaeus. Our forefathers alluded herein to the old custom of the Jews, who
were commanded to sprinkle the posts of their houses with the blood of the
Paschall lamb: now our people, according to this similitude, signed the
forehead with the Cross, because the other legal ceremony ceased, and they
might not sacrifice after the coming of Christ. This reason Augustine touches,
in his book De catechizandis rudibus, in the 20. chapter. Christi passio in
illo populo figurata est, cum iussi sunt ouem occidere and manducare, and de
sanguine eius posts suos signare, and hoc celebrare omni anno: Cuius passionis
and crucis signo in front hodie tanquam in post signandus es omnesque
Christiani signantur. Christ his passion was figured in that people, when they
were commanded to kill the lamb, and eat, and to sign their posts with the
blood thereof, and to celebrate that every year: With which sign if his passion
and cross, thou art at this day, signed in the forehead as in a post, and so
are al christians to be signed. This he further presses in the very be ginning
of the 26, chapter of the same book, saying: vtique fignandus est, and
ecclesiae more tractandas: He is to be signed and handled according to the
order of the Church. Thus are all your former reasons answered, and they fall
before the face of better instaunces as Dagon before the arc.


Antimachus. But we should rather bear christ crucified in our hearts then to
profess him in this bare and outward sign.


Irenaeus. I know that the power and virtue of the cross is not in the
external sign, but in the internal faith, which takes hold of Christ,
nailed upon the cross: but it pleases god to teach his church by outward
signs, God wills Ezechiell, to take a scrippe, Ezech. 12,
a staff, shoes like a wayfaring man, in token that he should be a banished
man. The same Prophet by two tables which he joins together, Ezech. 37,
foresheweth that the kingdom of Israel and Judah, Isay. 20,
shall be consolidated, and become one poeple. Isaiah by going barefoote,
teaches Aegypte and Aethiopia, that so they shall go in their captivity.
Jeremiah by bearing yoakes and fetters, Ierem. 27,
and sending them to the kings of Edom, Moab, Ammon, Tyrus, Sydon, Judah,
gives them a visible and palpable sign of their indurance in Babylon.
Helyseus wills Ioas king of Israel, 2 King. 13,
who came to visit him in his sickness, to take up a bow and arrows,
thereby prophesying victory over the Assyrians, 1. King. 11,
unto him. The Prophet Ahiah rent Ieroboams new cloak in twelve parts, willing
Jeroboam to take ten of them in sign of the rent that the Lord had made of the
kingdom of Solomon into twelve parts, whereof ten of them should deuolue to
Jeroboam. Christ wills his disciples to shake off the dust from their feet,
Math. 10,
taken in that house, where the word of God offered was despised, in
testimonial of this presumption. Math, 18.
Christ checketh and conuinceth the ambition of his disciples, by setting a
little child in the midst of them. Ioh. 13.
He washed his disciples feet, by that sign reading them a lecture of
humility and charity. Acts. 21.
Agabus taking Paul's girdle in hand, said: So shall this man be bound that
owes this girdle. The very heathens used this kind of learning, to teach and
advertise by outward signs Scyllurus scytha in Plutarch being at the point of
death exhorts his children to concord in many grave words; but at last, by a
sheffe of arrows bound together, which afterward he seueted, he showed the
difference between Unity and Division: It is the saying of the Poet Horace;

Segnius irritant animos demissa per aures,
Quam quae sunt oculis subiecta fidelibus, and quae
Ipse sibi tradit spectator --
Wherefore Christ instituted the sacrament of his body, that not only the
ears might be instructed in the mystery of our redemption, but that all the
senses else should be stirred up thereby. The sign of the Cross therefore
in the childs forehead is outwardly instructiue, as the Cross of Christ is
spiritually instructiue.


Antim: To admit all that you haie said, how shall I satisfy the weaker
forte, that will cake offense at my conformity, and forsake my doctrine? This
is a very sharp thorn to my sides, and troubles me very much, whilst I
consider what the apostle Paul says; It is good neither to eat flesh, Romans
14.21
nor to drink wine, nor any thing whereby thy brother stumbleth, or is
offended, or made weak. And the apostle walked so warily this way, as he
took this solemn bond of protestation of himself; 1. Cor. 8.13.
If meat offend my brother, I will eat no flesh while the world stands, that
I may not offend my brother. What say you to this?


Iren: This rule of charity the apostle gives, is of necessary observation.
But we must put a difference between those that are weak; first, in a
simplicity: secondly, obstinacy. If they be obstinately and wilfully weak;
we are not to hang upon their sleeves, or to feed their humors, but to give
them over, though they be as hot as a toaste against us; for their infirmity
prescribes not the truth. Amicus Plato, amicus Socrates, magis amica veritas.
Plato is my friend, and Socrates is my friend, but the truth is the greatest
friend of all. Veritas Christia^orum est p^ichri^^ Helena Graecorum: Truth
among Christians is more (...) Helen among the Graecians. The Scribes and
Pharisees were thus preuishly and peruersly offended against Christ and his
disciples, but he weied it not a rush, but willed his Disciples to shake them
off: Matthew. 15.
Let them alone, they are the blind leaders of the blind. And he advertised
them to take heed of the leaven of the Pharisees. Neither did he regard the
froward and untoward Jews; neither the Apostles the eluish company: and we are
taught by Saint John, 2. John.
not to affoorde so much as the courtesy of our lips, to bid them God speed.
What although the whole brood of Papists take offense at us, because we detest
their abominable Masses, and damnable idolatries, and object to us these rules
of the Apostle? Because we have a Canon to the contrary, That we must not do
evil that good may come of it; and the Apostle in the former Lessons only
aymeth at offenses that arise out of matters indifferent. We regard not what
they say; we are tied to none, but to those that are weak in a zealous
simplicity, whose soars we are to handle with a soft hand; and to such only
did the Apostle apply himself. Otherwise he protested and professed the
contrary, That he was no man-pleaser; If I should please men, (says he) I
were not the servant of God. The harvest of offenses are so great, and of such
contrary course, as I know not what Sicle is able to cut them down. Some are
(...) the Giant in the second of Samuel that have too many fingers on a hand:
^. Sam. 21.
Others are like Adonibeze^k in the Book of Judges, who had his fingers and
toes cut off. Judge. 1.
Some would cloy the Church with an importable and excessive weight of
Ceremonies, and so are offensive in their excess: Others would have them all
done away, and offend in the defect; and the vulgar people, whom we seek so
to please, are constant in no thing so much, as in inconstancy, as the Moon,
the River Euripus, and Protens, that turns himself into all shapes. Show
thou thy self a workman, that need not be ashamed, and divide the word
aright; walk with a right foot in the way of thy vocation, by evil report
and good report, and stand not thou upon the mercies of men's lips: It is a
small thing (says Saint Paul) for me to be judged of you. Noah goes for a
Preacher of righteousness, though he was flowted of the first world for the
structure of the Arc David shall go for a godly wiseman, dancing before the
Lord in a linen Ephod, 1. Pet. 2.5. 2. Sam. 6. Acts 26.
though Michol his wife malepertly befoole him for his labor. Paul speaks
nothing but words of sobriety; howsoever Festus mis^termeth them as he please
in his partial opinion, and give them to his madness. As the Tailor shapeth not
a garment to another man's pleasure, but to the liking of him only for whom
he makes it: so the Preacher is only to regard to please God, whose servant
he is, and not to frame himself to every ones fancy. When wrong is done to
any in a lower Court, his remedy is, to appeal to a higher: this course are
we to take when men's tongues walk through our actions, as they please, and
their words are as prickings of swords; we make provocation from their
sinister censure to the just tribunal seat of Gods most sacred majesty; yet
God forbid but that we should have a special care of such that are weak in
conscience, and give the^ medicine to heal their wounds, and say with the
Apostle; Who is weak and I am not weake^ Wherefore, it essentially
appertains to the Ministers office to instruct such; and to travel with them
in the way of information, until he has strengthened them, and set them upon
their feet. And if their offense grow from the ceremonies of our Church, they
are to be taught the use and nature of them: I. as first, that they are things
indifferent, and so consequently lawful with these qualifications; first, that
there be no superstition in them: secondly, no just matter of scandal:
thirdly, no opinion of merit, or matter of religion reposed in them: fourthly,
that the Church be not oppressed with the multitude of them as it was in
Augustines time, Epist. 119. ad Ianuarium.
that godly father complaining, That the state of the Jews, in comparison of
theirs, was easier, and more tolerable: 2. They also are to be taught what
force the Laws of the Church are of, to the binding of the consciences. That
they are of such quality, as they bind them not; so as we cast no contempt
upon them: secondly, give no offense: thirdly, or in an insolent singularity
violate them: fourthly, or vnjoynt, or dissolu^, the common settled government
and peace of the Church: with these cautions first observed, the conscience is
not bound. Acts 15.29.
As for examples The Apostles gave out a decree, That the Gentiles that were
converted unto Christ, should abstain from that which was strangled, from
blood, from that which was offered to an Idol: in the which constitution, they
aimed at nothing but the peace of the Church. For otherwise there could have
been no agreement between the Jews and the Gentiles. If a man without breach
of the common peace, had eaten of any of those, he had not sinned against
his conscience. For otherwise Peter says; Acts 15.10.
Why tempt ye God, to lay a yoke upon the Disciples necks, etc. Col. 2.16.
Matthew. 15.11
And Paul says; Let no man condemn you in meat and drink. And Christ
himself, That which enters into the mouth defiles not the man. Likewise Paul
says, Whatsoever is sold in the Shambles, 1. Cor. 10.25.
eat ye, and ask no question: Thus is the use of them, Civil and Politic:
So that we have the warrant of a good conscience to conform our selves unto
them. 3. Let the people likewise be informed, that they are appointed for order
and decency sake* and how needful it is, that this order and comelines should
be kept, according to the straight direction of the Apostle; 1. Cor. 14.40.
Let all things be done honestly, and by order. The inhibitions of the Law,
That no man should sow his ground with mixed seeds: That beasts of diverse
kinds, as the ox and the ass should not go together in the plow; Leuit. 19.
that no man should wear a garment of confected substances, as linen and
woollen; shoot and drive at the unity and uniformity of the Church of God,
and bear down flatly division and confusion. Leuit. 1.
The parts of the Calfe that were to be offered up for an oblation and
sacrifice were orderly disposed and bestowed upon the Altar, a pile of wood
being first fitly laid, at the commandment of God. Joseph in Aegipt feasting
his brethren, had an especial eye to order, placing them in their ranckes at
the Table, Genes. 43. Luke 9.
seating every one according to their age. Christ himself approved this
course of order, and as duly practiced it, feeding the people miraculously in
the wilderness, and placing them by equal Companies, by fifties in a row.

I might also return your own objection against you, as a reason to induce
this conformity in cases ceremonial: for offenses are as usually taken at the
omitting them, as the committing them, which the Saints of God very well
perceiving, have yielded to the times, and have abridged themselves of their
lawful liberty, thereby also to bring the more benefit to the Church of God.
For this cause, (as the Gospel notes) our Savior Christ paid pole money for
himself and Peter; whereas being King and God, and the true Messiah, he was
free by law, and exempted from the tribute. He kept the common custom for
avoiding of offense: Lest we should offend them, go to the sea, and cast in an
angle, and take the first fish that comes up; and when thou have opened his
mouth, thou shall find a piece of twenty pence, that take, and give it unto
them for me and thee. Yet in his question before to Peter, Matt. 17.17.
he had showed his dispensation: Of whom do the Kings of the earth take tribute
or pole-mony? Of their children or of strangers? Thus Saint Paul accommodated
himself to the seasons in circumcising Timothy, whilst he considered how
gainesome it would be to the weaker sort. Acts 16.3.
The same Apostle shaued his head in Cenchrea, Acts 21.26.
and entertained purifications according to the Law, because he saw how that
course would satisfy the weaker sort, to toll them on to Christ. And this was
the usual practice of this Apostle in a subtle wisdom, which our Savor
Christ commends to his apostles in this piece of precept: Mat. 10.
Be as wise as Serpents. And so much he testifies of himself, saying; To the
Jews I become as a Jew, that I may win the Jews: to them that are under the
law, as though I were under the Law, 1. Cor. 9.^^.
that I may win them that are under the Law: to them that are without the
Law, as though I were without the Law, that I may win them that are without
the Law: to the weak I become as weak, that I may win the weak: I am made
all things to all men, that I might by all means save some. From this ensample
and saying of the Apostle, I dispute thus: If the Apostle held it so expedient;
to the better insinuating himself into the souls of his people, to beget them
to the Gospel, to repeat repealed ceremonies, and to renew them, being quite
out of date: the consequence is not to be rebuked that we infer upon it; that
we may as well admit of indifferent ceremonies, which candide simplicity first
delivered to the Church many ages fore-past, which the Church has still
continued. This was Ambrose his politic piety and precept, as Augustine
shows in an epistle to Ianuarius; Si non vultis errare facit^ quod ego soleo.
August. ad Ianuarium.
Ego enim ad quamcunque ecclesiam venis ad eius ceremonias me accommodo. If ye
will not do amiss, follow my course. For to what Church I come, I apply my
self to the Ceremonies thereof. For the Church is not to be deprived of her
liberty, which Christ would have always to be preserved whole, without any
maime or injury done unto it.


Autim. You seem to disagree with your own self: for whereas you make these
matters but indifferent, by your so earnest taking their part, you force them
from their nature, and urge them as necessary.


Iren. In themselves they are indifferent, but the Christian Magistrate
commanding them, whom we stand bound to obey for conscience sake, I hold them
necessary to be observed. Laws and Obedience are the two feet that bear up
the body, both of the politic and spiritual state, and the two arms that
feed it and defend it. If the laws had not been in these cases already
made, I should never, for my own part, wish to have them made: but seeing we
have now such prescription for them, and they are still enjoined us, I shall
not be one to mar them.


Autius. I cannot yet persuade my self to yield unto you, because I am at
such strife with my self, because heretofore I have with-stood them, and have
been so bitter against them: the ceremonies hitherto have been my
declamation, and the staff and stuff of many of my sermons. Now what shall
become of them if I shall subscribe? I shall seem to look under the brow, to
wagge with the times, and to halte with the people.


Iren. If you have exceeded your bounds herein, come into the way. Humanum est
errare: It is not a motion against nature to err. Bernardus non vidit Om^ia,
and quand^qu^ ^^xu^ ^^mitat Homerus. The Prophets of God have been deceived in
their opinions, and they have been ignorant in some things. Nathan encouraged
David in his intendment of building God a Temple, 2. Sam. 7.3.
whenas it was no part of the Lords meaning: but his will was. that Solomon
should perform it. Samuel, though a great Prophet, 1. Sam. 16.
and the Lord was with him, and suffered not any of his words to drop to the
ground; yet his judgment deceived him, when he was sent to anoint one of the
sons of Ishai, King of Israel, 1. King. 4.27.
and made his eye his Counselor, making choice of Eliab, because he was the
eldest, fairest, and highest. When a suppliant woman came before Elizeus,
casting down herself at his feet, and his servant Giezi would have thrust
her away; Elizeus said, Let her alone, for her soul is vexed within her, and
the Lord has hid it from me, and has not told it me. It is the saying of
the Apostle Paul; We know but in part, and we prophecy but in part.
Zachary and Daniel, at every vision they had, prayed that God would reveal
the meaning of it to them. The reason hereof is, the will of God that has his
differences and variety of gifts. To be led with a strict tenacitie of
opinion, because we have dwelt a long time in it, and have maintained it with
stiffenesse of affection; notwithstanding it is checked with better reason, it
is wilfulness, and not wisdom, and the very common disease of Nature. This
was David's disposition, which nature solitary in him, without grace suggested,
not to reuerse his sentence of Law, awarded against Mephib^sheth, upon false
crimination of Siba against him, although it afterward appeared as clear as
the Sun, 2. Sam. 6. 2. Sam. 19.
that he had punished him wrongfully. Contented he was to qualify the
judgment upon this full advertisement, that Siba and he should half the
lands between them; he would in no wise repeal that which he had once
pronounced. Such a one was Pilate, who would not alter any thing he had
written, but said; That which I have written, I have written. We show our
selves Pilates, rather than Prelates, in being wedded to our wills as unto a
wife, they two being in one flesh. It is the saying of Saint Ambrose, Inter
seruos Christi contentio non debet esse sed collatio: Not contention, but
conference ought to be among the servants of Christ. And it is well said of
Bernard; Paco^^ contemnentes, and gloriam quaerentes, pacem perdunt and
gloriam. Such as despise peace, and seek glory, they shall loose both their
peace and their glory. Our betters have not blushed to recant their errors.
John Baptist the greatest among the bundle of men (the Son of man only
excepted) was peremptorily resolved with himself, in the height of his
humility, not to suffer Christ so to abase himself to him, as to take his
baptism of him, Matthew. 3.
when he answered him, I have need to be baptized of thee, and come thou to
me? But when Christ had replied to those words, he left his former purpose,
and yielded to Christ's will. So Peter was fully determined with himself, not
to suffer Christ to stoop to wash his feet, telling him to his face; John 13.
Thou shall never wash my feet. But when Christ had rounded him in the care
saying; If I wash thee not, thou shall have no part with me: Then here signed
his former resolution, and was as forward as before he had bin backward,
saying to him; Lord, not my feet only, but also the hands and the head. David
had taken a solemn oath of himself, 2. Sam. 25.
to cut off root and branch from the stock of Nabal, even every one that
made water against the wall, not meaning belike to spare his dog: yet by the
timely interuenient mediation of Abigail, he was so charmd and warmed with such
coals of kindness as were cast upon his head, as his blood grew cooler, and he
forsook his oath, and blessed God for it. It is a wise man's part, not to
loose his care with Malchus, but to open it to good advise and counsel.
Counsel (as Plato in his Dialogues says) is a sacred thing. And it is well
spoken of Minutius in Liuie, Lib. 22.
Saepe ego audiui milites, cum primum esse virum qui ipse consulit, quid in rem
sit: secundum cum qui been monenti obediat. I have often heard (my Soldiers
says he) that he is the rare man that is able to minister best co^unsaile to
himself in all occurrences: and that he is next unto him that entertaineth
good counsel. Cicero pro Cluentio.
The like saying has Tullie in his Oration pro Cluentio; Sapientissimun^ esse
dicunt, cui quid opus sit, ipsiveniat in mentem: proxime accedere ilium qui
alterius bear viuentis obtemperat. He is accounted the wisest man, who can
concetue with himself what is best for him: and second to him, is he that
will be ruled by his best counselor. It is our best sometimes to distrust our
own learning and judgment, and not to stand upon terms of precedence and
sufficiency above others, but to listen to our inferiors, when they speak to
good purpose; as Moses did to Iethro a Madianite and Heathen: and as Naaman the
Syrian did to the counsel of his servants. Exodus 18. 2. King. 6.
Now Antimachus, if thou will take this course, I will bring thee out of thy
former sweat which thy conceit of thy former doings has cast thee into, and
do thee much good.


Antimachus You have spoken much of my retracting my error, and of apprehension
of better counsel. I will ask you afterward, what is that counsel that you
would I should follow? in the mean time, you that lay imputation of error
upon me, do you think the outward government of your Church so absolute,
as it is not to be charged or touched with error?


Iren: I will not say so: For Christ compares the Church to a draw net,
which brings to land with the good fish, Matthew. 13.
all kind of gatherings, with the pelf and baggage of the soil. To a field
wherein the enemy scatters his tares amiddest the good corn, which the
husbandman has sown. In many things we offend all, says holy James, Psalm.
25.
The prayer of the royal Prophet to God, is, That he would not call him to
reckoning for his ignorances. Romans 3.
And the Apostle Paul casts the lie upon the very nature of us; Every man is
a liar. If the Church might not be blacked with this coal of error and sin,
the Church should not need, by daily prayer, to beg at Gods hand remission
of sins: Errors grow up as naturally in the Church, as wild and
luxurious weeds grow up in a garden among good herbs. Ephesians. 5.
The Church that Paul speaks of, without spot and wrinckle, is not the church
Militant in earth, as the foolish Anabaptists have conceived; but the church
Triumphant in Heaven, which is in this perfect beauty, God wiping away all
tears from her eyes. Wherefore it is an idle question that is moved, Whether
the Church can err? So far forth as it hears and follows the word,
and keeps her faith whole and sound to her husband, it cannot err and go
out of the way. But because it often feeds upon her own fancies, and
trusts too much to her perverse opinions, it can not otherwise be, but that
she should forget herself, and tread awrie. Finally it often so falls
out, that hogs and asses have prefecture and chiefest place in the Church,
who wallow in the puddle of prodigious errors, and maintain most gross and
sottish superstitions. This was the case and face of the church in the Prophet
Isaiah his time, Isai. 1.
when he complains, that their silver was become dross, and their wine was
mixed with water. In Christ his time, the title of the church was with the
Jews: In which, though the Virgin Marie, Joseph, Zachary, Elizabeth, Simeon,
and Anna lived uprightly, and they bear this good report in the Gospel, that
they walked in all the commandments of God without reproof, the world being
not able greatly to charge them with errors of manners; yet some were among
them, whom common ignorance did mis-leade; and others whom the impiety of the
Sadduces did bewitch, 1. Cor. ^.
as they devoured their rank and wicked errors. And we know what Paul says,
That men build upon the foundation Jesus Christ, gold, silver, precious
stones, timber, hay, stubble, which shall undergo the fire of Gods trial, and
perish, the foundation remaining sure. We easily therefore yield, that there
may be things amended in our Church-gouernement, and I do wish of God they
were, and God (no doubt) when the time comes, will put his hands to this
work, maugre Satan's heart, that hinders it all he may. In the mean while
it shall well become us, to wait his leisure, and not to prescribe God his
season, and to say; It is time that thou have mercy upon Sion, yea the time
is come. Eccles. 22. Prou. 25.11.
Our inuectiues against the present State, are as music in mourning; they must
be reserved to other times, that they may be as golden Apples with pictures of
silver. When Archesilaus the Philosopher was solicited to dispute amongst the
cups in the time of a great Banquet: he refused it, saying; That it was in
the rules of his Philosophy, to know the opportunity of time for every
thing. Bless we the name of his sacred majesty for the Alcion days and
times we now enjoy, and these years of the right hand of the most High,
wherein, as in the days of Solomon, we sit securely under our vines and fig
trees, without fear of the enemy. The Lord has long blessed us with peace
under a nursing Queen; and he yet lengthening the time thereof under our
nursing King, so that we are the spectacle in the Stage of this World, of a
happy people, for all men to vvonder at. Our forefathers desired to see these
days, and could not see them; we have them, and are glutted with them, and
turn this grace of God into wantonness, niceness and eluishnesse. The
strong man the Pope, the Hammer of the Church, is (thanked be God) quite out of
possession, and he shall as soon wring Hercules Clubbe out of his hands, if
he were alive, as get footing again here; the Lord saving his anointed King
James, and his sacred Queen, the fruitful Vine of his Church, and virtuous
Prince Henry, the royal plant of the Lords hand, the doubled hope of the
Churches tranquillity. Baals Altars are thrown down, we have the same
Catholic doctrine in the Church in all points (I will put it to the judgment
of the wranglingest Anabaptisticall vrchin that is) that Christ the wisdom of
his Father has delivered, the Primitive Church preached, and the holy Martires
have confirmed with their blood. Is not this very well for the time? O happy
men if we knew our happiness! which Carendo potius quam fruendo, we must be
brought to know. Go with Cresset and Torch light throughout all the Churches
of the world, and tell me whether from the Center to the Circumference,
there be such a one as ours, in piety, and prosperity. When you have sounded
and fadomed them all by a right line and plummet, you shall have cause to say;
This is my seat, here will I dwell, because I have a delight in it. This is
the Eden and chosen Garden of the Lord our God, and the Jerusalem, that is,
the beauty of the whole world. Here Noah's Arc floateth upon the waters,
whereas other Barks and Keeles do sincke. Here Aarons Rod buddeth and
brings forth Almonds. This Church is the Apple of the eye, the Diamond of the
ring, the Heart of the body, a vine planted in a fruitful place: the Seal
upon the right hand of God, the writing in the palm of his hand, as the day
star in the midst of clouds round abour us, as the Moon when she is at
the full, as the flowers of Roses in the Spring season, as the Lillies by the
rivers of waters, as a vessel full of massy gold, embossed and fretted round
about with precious stones, and as the fat taken from the peace offerings.
What if there be a spotte or two in the white garment of the Church, a more in
the eye of it? Have we such straight throats as we can not swallow up a
Gnatte? What Pomegranate shall you find, in the which there is not a corrupt
kernel or two in it? What body is clean without blemish or wrinkle? what day
shines so clear over our heads, as a cloud is not to be seen in the sky?
The points we differ in are not worth the speaking, and they come not near the
vvoorth of the good things we enjoy, which other Kingdoms want. The body of
the Church waxes by degrees as the natural body of a man, which has not
his maturitie and full growth at the first. In Reformation it is impossible
that nothing should be wanting. Princes and Powers that be never so well
affected, can not have what they will, and when they will effected, but are
compelled to stay opportunity, or to leave it to others. David had a mind that
Justice should be done upon the person of Duke Ioah, for his cruel hand,
and upon Shemei for his spightfull tongue: yet his means served him not so
well, insomuch that he was driven to commit the care theereof unto Solomon
after him. And truly Antimachus, if such a form of government in England
took place, which you and your fraternity would give us, do you think that
the Church would be then at quiet, and not as much divided as it is now? When
we have labored all we may, Satan will sow and strew his unhappy cockle of
contention in the furrows of the Lords field: what factions were in the Church
in the times of the Apostles, when some said they were of Paul, others of
Cephas, others of Apollo. Paul varied from Peter and reproved him. And
Barnabas in a privy displeasure, departed from Paul. Theophilus, Epiphanius,
Chrysostom, Augustine, Ruffinus, Hierome, nourished implacable contentions
together. The East Church was divided from the West, about Leaven, and Easter:
in all counsels continually new Creeds and Decrees were coined. Of late, yet
the two names of Luther and Zwinglius, have made no small garboiles in the
Church. And the Papists would choke us with this bone of our home-borne
new-fanglenesse and factions. But therein they pull themselves by the noses:
for I know no greater wranglers then themselves. For their Scotists and
Thomistes, are together by the ears about the dunsicall distinction of Merits,
of Congruitie, and Condignitie; about original sin in the Virgin Mary;
about solemn and simple vow. The Canonists contend for auricular confession,
concluding it to be, Deiure humana and positiua: that it is of humane and
positive constitution: And the School men squabble with them for it, and
avouch, that it is Deiure diuino: it has foundation in divine ordination.
Albertui Pigghius differ from Caietan, Thomas from Lambard, Scotus from Thomas,
Oceanus from Scotus, Alliensis ^^^m Occan, the Nominalls from the Realists. How
many dis^entions have there been among the Monks and shauelings, which some
in fish, some in flesh, some in herbs, some in shoes, some in slippers, some
in a linen garment, some in a woollen weed, have reposed religion, while some
would go in black, other in white; others would be more broadly, others more
narrowly rounded and shaven, others would be in their slippers, and others go
bare-foote; others would be girt, others would be loose.


Antim. What of all this? be the peoples minds never so contentious, we cannot
be too religious: we must therefore come as nie perfection as we can, according
to Christ's precept; Be ye perfect, as your heavenly Father is perfect.


Iren. True, but this your conformity nothing derogateth from this your
Christian perfection or profession: but it will rather give furtherance unto
it. For it is a rule in Philosophy and reason, Vis vnita fortior: conjoined
help is strongest.


Antim. But how do we go forward in this perfection, when we keep at a
stay, as the Sun in Gibeon, or the Moon in the valley of Aiaton, in the
days of Joshua?


Iren. This stay is in yourselfe, or rather your backwardnes, that stop the
course of your good proceedings in the singularity of your affections. The
regions are not only white unto harvest, but dry to the fire: therefore we
cannot labor too much in the Lords harvest: now you put your self to silence
for these ceremonies.


Antim. These ceremonies came in with the childhoode of the Church, in the
minority of it, and the grace of them is gone now with the times: Gal. 4.
When I was a child (says Saint Paul) I did as a child: but since I was a
man, I did put away childishness. And now seeing we know God, or rather are
known of God, why turn ye then to the impotent and beggarly ceremonies of the
law?


Iren. The godly fathers of the Church, in the purest estate thereof, commended
them unto us; and antiquity, a testimony not to be reprehended, has
confirmed them, and ever there was good use of them, and never any harm in
them. Irenaus the ancient father, often appealed to those ancient Churches that
were nighest Christ's times; Antiquity is the seal of the grace of the
ceremonies, as it is of sundry other things: wine that is the oldest, is best:
for no man that may have old wine, will taste of new; for he says, that old
is better. It graceth wisdom, which is rather in the older then the younger
sort: weapons are for young men, Prou. 22.
and wisdom for the old. It adorneth the truth, for that is truest, which is
first: and custom that is oldest, is best approved. Wherefore it is provided
by law, not to remove the ancient borders which our fathers have placed. And
friendship that has been of longest continuance, is of best countenance.
Eccli 9.
Wherefore it is said; Forsake not thine own friend, and the friend of thy
father: for a new friend will not be like him. Old trained and practiced
soldiers are more skillful and coragious. Wherefore C^ytus said to Alexander;
Do thou despise thy father Philips Soldiers? The lands and possessions
that have been longest in the name and in the stock, is of chiefest
reckoning. Which respect was so great with Nabaoth, as no money that the King
could offer him, could prevail for the purchasing of it: but he shook him off
with this absolute denial, 1. Kings. 21.
God keep me from selling the inheritance of my Ancestors to them* And this
was Barzalia, his plea to David, when he would have induced him to live in the
Court with him: I am fourscore years old; I will therefore go into mine own
city, and I will be buried in the grave of my father and my mother.


Antim. I perceive that you are the ceremonies great master, and herein you
are not to be misliked, that your nature is according to your name, studious of
the outward peace of the Church: wherein I would concur for peace sake with
you, but that these outward Rites are so offensive to my conscience, and very
zeal draws my inclination from them to the other side.


Iren. You must not hold forth the target of Conscience, to defend disorder:
your conscience and zeal must have a good cause of its side, or else it will
be wrong with you. I will not any way prejudice this your zeal and conscience,
but I must tell you this; that the worst sort of all, take up this plea and
allegation for themselves, 2. Sam. 15.
to shadow their nefarious and ungodly doings. Absolon, when he went to
project his rebellion, made pretense and color to his father of religion; that
he was to go to perform his vows to the Lord in Hebron. 1. Sam. 15.
Saul pretended conscience and zeal of sacrifice and obedience, in reserving
the fattest cattle of the Amalekites, when he was most disobedient. Math. 2.
Herod seemed to be zealous to worship the child Christ, when his meaning was
contrary, John 12.
utterly to have destroyed him. Indas made as though conscience to the poor
touched him, when he murmured against the devotion of the woman, that brake the
sweet and precious box of ointment upon the head of our Savior, whenas he
cared not a farthing for the poor, but ravished and robbed them, being a
pursebearer, and a pilferer. The old Donatists in Augustines time, made a
conscience in breaking their own necks, as our modern Anabaptists that
sprang out of them, make it a matter of conscience, of breaking the neck of
the Churches government. Wherein Antimachus, I do not mean you, or any of
your fellows, God is my record, yet I must needs say you bear them company
a mile or twain in the way, though there your discretion serves you to leave
them. There is zeal in you, but yet it is such, as somewhat beguileth you,
with a copy and countenance that it has of the truth. For as the wicked hang
this mask and muffler before their eyes, when they fulfill their wicked lusts,
so the simple and unskillful are of enmis-led in the vain^ conceit and
imagination of zeal. This was the zeal that intoxicated the Jews, of which
S. Paul says; They have the zeal of God, but not in judgment: (...), not
according to knowledge. This knowledge like Captain Ioas should go in and out
before our zeal, and lighten the way of our zeal, and direct, as the pillar
of fire that gave light to the people of Israel in the night season. As John
Baptist was the forerunner of Christ, so ought knowledge to be the forerunner
of zeal, to make ready a way for zeal, as John made ready the way to
Christ. Knowledge is like the star that led the Eastern Wisemen to Christ,
Math. 3.
and that will lead our zeal unto the truth. The spirit of zeal is sampled
to fire, yet a boll of water is to be cast upon it, somewhat to quallifie the
fury of this fire. Wherefore, as Christ baptized with fire, so John the Baptist
did baptize with water. A great heat is naturally in zeal, which by letting
in acoole wind and air, Acts 2.
would be moderated: wherefore, as the Holy Ghost came down in fire, so he
came down in a mighty wind, that does much abate the heat of the fire.
There is a golden mean; as in all other things, so in Knowledge, in Zeal,
Romans 12.3. Exodus 16.18.
according to this saying of the Apostle; Be wise with sobriety. It was
unlawful in the Jews, to gather too much or too little Manna, wherefore their
measure was appointed them, and they were stinted in the proportion of it:
which has a good application to zeal, that it neither may redound. or be
defective. Isaiah was willed to cry, Isai. 58.
and to cry somewhat highly; but he was not bidde^ ^are and to rende his
throat and the air with his voice. Zeal, and that in some height, is good,
but there may too much strength be put to it, which will quite mar it. Mar.
10.28.
It was zeal in the Disciples that wrought with them, when they forsook all
to follow Christ, and it was good, and well esteemed of by Christ. And it was
zeal that kindled the coals of wrath in the breasts of the Disciples against
the Samaritans, Luke 9.55.
when they would have plucked fire from heaven to have consumed them, if Christ
would have suffered them: but this was preposterous, inconsiderate,
braine-sicke, wherefore Christ controled it. Iud. 4.
As Barak would not go to war without Deborah against Sisara, so let us not
war with our zeal, without our other companion of knowledge. Zeal without
knowledge, is as Sampson without eyes, who could not take hold of the arches of
the house: it cannot find out the principal things: Vaesoli: woe be to him
that is alone, says Wisdom: so woe be to zeal alone, not accompanied with
knowledge. Zeal and knowledge of God, 1. Kings 20.
are as the two Lions that were the supporters of Salomons Throne. And he that
combineth them and coupleth them together, he shall be like Moses in
meekness, and Phineas in fervor. Wherefore, as wine is delaide by water, so
is zeal with knowledge. As the Pinnesse without a Pilot, is in peril of
rocks, and as the body without the eye is in hazard of falling; so zeal
without knowledge, that is the eye of zeal and rules it, is in danger of mis
carrying. For it is not a bare good intention and zeal that must justify our
good actions: but such mature knowledge must lead us forth to them, as we may
be able to warrant them. The great variance among us, I wot well; not for so
great causes, I fear me is not warrantable. When the Lord willed Eliah to
stand upon the mount before the Lord, it is said, 1. Kings 19.
that a mighty strong wind rent the mountains, and brake the rocks before
the Lord, but the Lord was not in the wind: and after the wind, came an
earthquake, but the Lord was not in the earthquake: and after the earth-qake
came fire, but the Lord was not in the fire: and after the fire, came a still
and soft voice, and there the Lord was. In the stormy vvindes and tempests of
the Church, that offer to shake it in the very foundation, in the earthquake
and fire of our endless contentions, the Lord is not; but he is in the still
voice that seeks and ensues the peace of Jerusalem.


Antun. I have nothing else to say in the cause, but I promised to call for
your counsel: and therefore if you please, address your self to that.


Iren. My counsel shall be: first, That you weigh the points in controversy
between us, in equal balances, and that you strive not by invention of
argument, to hang lumpes of lead to the heels of them, to make them heavier
then they are of themselves, You may weigh our cause unevenly on the weights
two ways: for in any of these two, there may be deceit in all weights. First,
when a thing is weighed over hastily. Be not therefore too ready and rash in
judgment, in condemning such things as may well in any free estate be
tolerated. Secondly, when one part of the balance is heavier then another;
which is, when thou come aggrauated with preiudicate affections against the
settled ceremonies, when thou art rather led by thy will, then reason. When you
have set these ceremonies upon the tenters of your inuectiues, and ground the
face of them between the millstones of your fore-stalde affections, you shall
never persuade the wise, that either they are of hurtefull nature, or otherwise
contrary to the word of God: but in ordinary understanding they will be deemed
to be indifferent. Secondly, you are in the next place to be advised, how you
wrong other Churches, by your bitter sermons against these ceremonies, which
have always hitherto entertained them as lawful and laudable. Job 47.
Eliphas was very imperious over Job, not considering himself. The Jews very
notable hypocrites themselves, and loose livers, snebbed and snatched up the
Gentiles at their pleasure, which said; Isai. 63.5
Stand apart, come not near to me, for I am belier then thou. We are not
ignorant how far the authority of the Church may extend, and we willingly
confess, that it ought to rule by the Scepter of the word, and that it may not
any way countermaund that that stands like Mount Syon, that may not be
removed: the whole world, the Lords building, and the heavens, the beautiful
roof thereof, must perish before any tittle of the word must perish and fall
to the ground. But of this we are well assured, that it has leave and liberty
to authorize ceremonies that are of mixed kind, and that we are neither to
condemn such, or irreverently to esteem them. I agree with thee, that which
is not of faith is sin: Romans 14 2
yet that we may carry a quiet conscience, and have the testimonial thereof
in our actions, it makes much that the Apostle says; All things are clean
to those that are clean: as that also which he says to Timothy; Tit. 1.15.
Every creature of God is good. 1. Tim. 4.4.
Now it is not necessary, that we should have express mention of every thing
brought into use in the Church, in the holy Scriptures: it is enough, that by
faith in generality we know, that indifferent things cannot pollute or defile
such that are of a pure mind and conscience. Thirdly, I would further wish you
to give great respect to ecclesiastical laws, that tend to order, gravity,
decency, and are not blinded with any superstition or impiety. Socrates would
not wear Siconian shoes, though they were well made, and fit for his feet,
because they were not comely for his calling. But this exception takes no
place in the prescribed habit and attire of Ministers, it being as grave and
seemly as any can be devised. The very Turks themselves, are devoted wholly
to the custom of their Country, in their form of raiment, according to their
degrees: and shall not Christians show constancy in this case, according to
comeliness and sobriety? Customs are not to give place to men's humors, but
men must resign their humors to customs, unless they can infer better
reasons against them. Much have been attributed by the better sort, to good
and honest customs. Zacharias did not only perform sacrifices, but it is
said, Luke 1.
that he did this duty according to custom. Luke. 2.
The parents of Christ came yearly to Jerusalem, to fulfill the custom. Our
Savior went to the Mount of Olives to pray, Mat^ 26. 1 Cor. 11.
it being his custom so to do. The Apostle Paul cites the custom of the
woman, whilst they came together to the Church for prayer sake. Yea, bad men
have yielded to the customs of their times, to grant such liberty, which
otherwise of their own accord, without the authority of prescription, Matt
29. Acts 25.
they would not have affoorded. Pilate was contented to have Christ loosed,
alleging for it, the custom of the Jews, which was, to dismiss a prisoner
yearly at this feast of Passover. Festus, the Tribune of the people, urges
the custom of the Romans against the Jews, which intended the Apostles death;
whereby he escaped a strong and strange conspiracy proiected against him. The
Lord is witness to my soul, how little my meaning is, by these illustrations,
to hold up the head of absurd customs, that aim at superstition. But mine
eyes heerin are bent upon the customs of our church, by such examples as
these, to encourage all of the adverse part to conformity thereunto, and not
so boldly and baldly as they do, to abase our honest customs. Fourthly, If I
may also be meekely heard of you, I would put you in mind of your obedience to
law; and how ridiculous and contemptible it would be to an estate, to repeal
and change Laws, enacted by grave and learned judgment, at cuery idle motion
of a newfangle male content. It was the positive injunction of the Locrians,
Demosthenes cover. Demoer.
as Demosthenes bears witness, that he that should offer to put up a new
Law, should come with an halter above his neck to the Parliament, that if
there were better reason against his law, he should be trussed up for it. I
wish not the undoing of any ones life, that has a forge in his head for new
laws, but I wish him severe censure that is too busy with his bills, and
tender us for Cannons and Constitutions, the crochets and conceits of his
wooll-gathering wits. The Ephesian Heraclitus, as Laertius does report,
says; That Citizens ought to fight no less for their laws than for their
walls. The Graecians had their (...) their Prefects and Officers, whose charge
it was to protect enacted laws, and to censure the delinquents. Cice. pro
Cluent.
They confidered the necessity, and the nature of public laws, the Orator
calling them Vincula reipublica, furdamentum libertatis, fontem aequitatis, The
bonds of the common wealth, the foundation of liberty, and the fountain of
equity. What shall then become of the several parts that are knitte together
by the bands of good laws, and do very well when the bonds thereof are
broken? must not the whole structure and composition come down when the
foundation is undermined? ye may not disturb and trouble a public stream
that is to relieve the country, under pain of a great punishment: but the
fountain of our welfare is disquieted, in our immoderate contentious
communications. For how can a plant thrive that is often removed? It is
Senecaos proposition, and it is true in observation; Non conualescit planta
quae saepiut transfertur. And this has allusion to the alteration of laws by
Seneca in Oedipode; Nan expedit concutere soelicem statum: It is not good to be
busy with a well ordered state. Plato would not have a common wealth to be
cloyed with many laws. Fewer laws then we have already, and better executed,
might serve our turn. And commonly it is seen, that the older are the better.
It is the Item that Tacitus gives us; Super ommibus negotijs melius and
rectius elim prouisum, and quae connectu^^ur in deterius mutari: In all
matters, that which is best and rightest has been fareseene, and exchange
happens to the woorst. Wherefore Valerius would have nothing abated of old
custom, but would have every article and particle consist in his former
vigor; In minimis rebus omnia antiquae consuetudinis momenta seruanda: In the
triflingest things that are, all the appurtenances to ancient use are to be
retained. Of which mind was the Emperor Augustus, as may appear out of his
admonition to the Senate, saying; Obseruate leges quas habetis viriliter, ne
mutate vllas, na^^ quae manent in cedem statu et sipeiora sunt, vtilior a sunt
quam ea quae semper mutantur, et stapparent meliora esse. Observe roundly the
laws which ye have already, alter them not: for those that do stand in the
state they were before, albeit they be worser, are more useful than those that
are always changed, though they seem to be better. Thucidides li. 6
With whom consents Altibiades in Thucidide; Holding that people to be in
best case, who are governed by their present customs and laws, without
alteration, although they be not so good. The Epidaurians inhibited their
people to travel into foreign parts, or to use traffike in strange places,
fearing left they should bring home with them foreign and strange fashions. It
is dangerous to pull down an old wall; but more dangerous to pull down
old laws. Sudden alteration, as it is perilous to the natural body, so it
is as much hurtful to the body politic. A change must come, in testudinc^
gradu, sensim sine sensu, to be the better borne. We see how the days alter
in their increase and decrease, as the alteration is not discerned, which the
uncreated Wisdom has provided for the good of all creatures, which with a
sudden great mutation would not be alittle damnified; Ars artium, dsscsplina
disciplinarum regere hominem, says Gregory Nazianzene: It is an art of all
arts, and a discipline of all disciplines to govern a people. Nullum animal
morosius est, nullum maiori art tractandum: No creature is more froward than
man, and none is to be more politiquely handled, Xenophon.
says Seneca. Facilius regere omnes alias creaturas quam hominem: It is casier
to rule all creatures, than man. Now custom is an other nature with them, and
they easily do that which they have done always: but innouations will not be
admitted without division and dissension: wherefore providence and good heed
is to be taken, Cic. ad. Attic libr. 11. Epist. 19.
as the Orator prescribes in transposing laws; Vt quam minimo sonitit fiat:
That it may be done with the least dinne and noise that may be. It is recorded
of Augustus, that he compassed not all things that he had plotted, at the
first, but some things he brought about presently, the rest he dispatched at
his conuement time.


Antim. But alittle to interrupt your counsel: May not authority do well to
dispense with us that are contrary minded, for Conscience sake, and so hold on
the form of Law in use?


Iren. Aequalitaes prima pars aequitatis est, says Seneca, Seneca in epist.
The first and chief part of Equity is Equality. There be many beside you
that have but small devotion to some of the ceremonies, did not public law
commend them and command them. And why should they be bound, and you go free?
Such a dispensation would but breed more enny and division. For if there were
such heart-burning and affections in the brethren against Joseph, about a
party-colored garment, do you think that there would not be odds amongst us
in the difference of the garments, while the one side take the other to be too
Popish, and the other the adverse part to be too peevish. I do yield that
there may be diverse rites in diverse Churches, and that one may differ from
another in government. As in Rome and Asia they usually fasted every Sabbath
day, but in Millaine they did not. Aug. epist. 118.
Policarpus and Anicetus kept the peace between themselves, though the one
would not yield to the other in ceremonies, but each of them peremptorily
maintained their own customs, but they were of several Churches. But my
simple discretion can not see how it may stand with any conueniencie, thar we
should have a confected and compound estate of the Church, that it should be as
Bifrons Ianus, bear two faces in one hoode, and how such conniuencie and
toleration should be any way tolerable. It is the plea of the natural mother
before Salomons Tribunal, That the child should be in no wise divided, as the
wrong mother would have it, but that she might have all, or none at all. I am
the mouth of my brethren to our sovereign Solomon, that without partiality,
every one might be under law indifferently; that as we all of us serve one
Master, so that we may all of us wear the like liuerie; whether it be white
or black, we are indifferent, as it pleases those that are at the stern of
government, whose wisdom we know, and whose truth we do not suspect.
This was the cause that the Roman Empire continued so long, and that in such
prosperity, because the salt of Law seasoned all alike. For as Epaminondas
says, Then is peace established, when equality is preserved; Cic. in. A^^.
Morum similitudo coniungit amicitiam: It is similitude of manners that join
friends together; Wherefore Ius is called by the Orator Par: Ci^er diuinat.
libr. 2.
And this equality (as says Euripides) is the law of mankind. And this is
my decision and determination of your latter question. 5. Finally, I conclude
my counsel with my loving exhortation unto you, to entertain these tolerable
conditions, for the peace sake of the Church, which we ought to put on as our
own bowels, which is the sweet direction of the Apostle Paul, I know not in
how many places, 1. Corint. 1.10
as when he says; I beseech you brethren by the name of our Lord Jesus
Christ, that ye all speak one thing, and that there be no dissensions among
you: But be ye knit together in one mind and in one judgment. Romans 15.5.
Again, The God of patience and consolations give you that ye be like minded
one toward another, according to Christ Jesus; That ye with one mind, and
with one mouth may praise God, even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. 2.
Corint 13.
Again, Live in love and peace, and the God of peace shall be with you.
Again, Let your conversation be as it becomes the Gospel of Christ, Philip.
1.27.
that whether I come and see you, or else be absent, I may hear of your
matters, that ye continue in one spirit, and in one mind, fighting together
through the faith of the Gospel. Unity is the very body of Divinity, and
the very scope and end of Christianity, which whoso shall dissolve, brings
all things out of course. For, as the Apostle Paul disputes it, Ephesians. 4.
We are all of us but one joint body under one head Christ Jesus: one and the
selfsame spirit quickens this body; there is but one hope of our vocation,
one Lord, one faith, one baptism, one God and Father of all, which is above
all, through all, and in all. It is all that Christ prays for to his Father
for us, John 17.
when he went to suffer; Holy Father, keep them through thy name, whom thou
have given me, that they may be one as we are one. And that no man should
restrain this his prayer to the Disciples only, he says immediately after;
I pray not for them only, but for those also that shall believe; that they may
be one, as thou O Father in me, and I in thee, that they also may be one in
us. John 11.
For this cause was his suffering, as Saint John professes, saying; That the
Son of God was not to die for the nation of the Jews only, but to gather
together in one, the children of God that were scattered. This was the legacy
that our dear Savior be queathed at his death to us: John 14.
My peace do I give you, my peace do I leave you. If a Prince being to take a
far journey, shall leave a jewel to his wife at the time of his departure,
as a sign of his love toward her, and she should despise it when he is gone;
were she not to be charged with huge ingratitude? But such is our vile nature
toward our dearest Bridegroom Christ Jesus, when we so basely esteem of his
gift that he left with his wife the Church, when he took his leave of her.
Every Army has his proper flagge and banner by which it may be known; and
every noble House is known by the ancient arms and scutchian thereof.
Sheepeheards use to strike their sheep with a red mark on the sides, where by
they might be the better known: the army, family, sheep of Christ's are
distinguished by the banner, cognizance and rubricke of love, according to that
which Christ says; By this it shall be known, that ye are my Disciples, if ye
have love one toward another. The peace that we have with our selves, is our
cheifest outward comfort amidst the miseries of this mortal life, and is as
the meal that the man of God did cast into the pot, which took away the
deathfull bitterness of the Colliquintida or hear be that was in the pot. The
sick man, though he change never so often his chamber and bed, has never the
more rest, because he bears his infirmity about him: so we shall never be at
peace with our selves, though laws were changed according to our lusts,
bearing about us such humorous affections. More damages is imported both to
Church and civil state, by domestical dissension, then by foreign
persecution, yea, more then any man possibly can divine. It has bin an old and
unquestionable observation; Concordia paruae res crescunt. Discordia maximae
dilabuntur: by concord, Salustius.
small things attain to a great growth; and by discord, the great things of
all are dissolved. Concordia fulciuntur opes etiam exiguae. Plautus.
A poor estate is easily supported and borne up by concord. Cuidius.



Et quae non possunt singula, multa inuant

Et quae non laedunt singula multa nocent.

If the confusion of languages confounded the stately and magnificall building
of the Tower of Babel, how shall not the distraction and confusion of minds,
make a spoil of all things? To the generation and production of things
natural, there must necessarily be a combination of the elements, laying
apart their contrary quality, and agreeing among themselves, that by their
united force and virtue, gold, precious stones, and other kinds of mettalls
might be bred. By the joint association of the four humors, the health of man
is continued: and when strife and debate is between them, all manner of
maladies and diseases are engendered, and death it self follows it. The
melodious and tuneable music, consists in the concord and harmony of the
voice. Genesis 6.
The first world was overwhelmed with water: but in contention of life it was
first divided, which was between the sons of Seth and Cham. Exodus 14.
The Egyptians perished by water, but they first did break with the people of
Israel, and were at deadly fewd with them. The Israelites were led by the
Babylonians into bondage, 2. Kings 15.
but first ten Tribes were sundred from the other two, Judah and Benjamin. The
contention between Haimo and Hanibal Carthaginians, was the ouer-throw of that
City. The quarrel between the Lacedaemonians and Athenians, that were the
two great lights in the Firmament of Greece, made havoc and waste of the
whole Province. The division that arose among the Numantians, was the cause
they were subdued by Scipio: who being asked by the Governor Tyretius, how it
came to pass, that being hitherto a people invincible, they were now overcome?
they answered, that their concord saved them, and their discord spoiled them.
The Romans felt the smart of this, while Augustus and Antony were divided. It
was a plague to all Italy, the disquiet that was between Caesar and Pompey,
Scylla and Marius. But contention in the Church is a monstrous and mischievous
Hydra as ever was bred; and that examples show. There grew such hot strife
between the Orthodoxall fathers and the Arrians, in the Syrmita Synod, about
the word (...) and (...), as kindled such coals as fired all the Church: of
which, Theodoret says thus; (...), while they busied their brains about these
words they miserably distracted the Church of God. The contention in the
Church, between Ensebius Bishop of Caesarea and Basil the Great, was great and
grievous. The Apostle Saint Paul exhorting us to those things that make to
peace, shows the important necessity thereof, by implying the inevitable
inexplicable mischief in the case, by our recusancie that must come upon us:
If ye bite one another, ye shall be consumed one of another. Gal. 5. Psalm. 46.
It is the consequent the royal Prophet makes: The nations raged and the
Kingdoms are moved. This maxim and principle in Philosophy; Vis vnita
fortior: United help is surest, is by common experience approved. For two
oxen will bear a greater burden then one. Especial care is had in the
wars, that the Soldiers keep their ranckes and scatter not themselves, for
so they should be a prey to the enemy. Much more is it meet for the Church to
have such heedefull provision, that the Ministers thereof may keep their
standing, as form of law requires, that they be not exorbitant, and sallie
out of the classes of their due obedience that they owe to the doctrine and
discipline of the Church, that so such advantage might not be given to the
common adversary. How came it to pass, that the Preachers of the Primitive
Church were such strong Giants, as they subdued the whole world? Acts 4. Cant.
6.
The text tells us, The multitude of them that did believe, were of one
heart, and of one soul. The Lord in the Canticles giving high commendations to
his Church, he extolleth them for their order and conformity. Thou art comely
as Jerusalem, terrible as an army of banners. But what should be the ground
and cause of this malady and infirmity in the Church, that we may know how
to remedy it? The cause is double. The first is pride, self-love,
singularity of the mind, every one being wedded to his will, as to his wife,
checking all contrary reason without cause, and basely esteeming every ones
opinion, in respect of their own. Every ones own fancy, is as it were a Crow
which iobbeth at his eyes which feeds it, and strikes him blind; and that
which is worst of all, makes him in that case as he cannot see his blindness
and perdition. This Wisdom teaches us; Prou. 28.25. 1. Kings 16.9, 10, 11,
12.
He that is of a proud heart, stirs up strife. Zimri, through pride grew
contentious, and so seditious. For being Captain of half his Charets, be
conspired against the King, and slew him, and reigned in his steed. The
Apostle Paul, 1. Corint. 3.3.
a practiced Physician, casting our water, finds this to be the cause of this
disease, saying; Whereas there is among you envying, and strife, and divisions,
are ye not carnal? Wherefore, order this beastly affection of self-love, as
thou would thy beast: for if thou be to ride on an unruly beast, thou
have spurs at thine heels, and a bridle in thine hand. If he be too
forward and would cast thee, thou have a bridle to check him and hold him in:
if he be dull and will not go, thou have spurs to put to his flanks: so
control thy too extrauagant affections, and keep them in as it were with bit
and bridle, that they get not the upper hand of thee, and let better reason and
suggestion spur and stir thy dullness, that thou may go on forward in
the right way of thy Christian calling. In any wise take Wisdoms counsel with
thee, Eccles 18. Psalm. 72.
which says; Do not after thine own lusts: But say and pray with David;
Lead me in the path of thy commandments, for rude am I, and ignorant, and
as a beast before thee. Secondly, an other cause is, because peace is a jewel
of that rareness and price, that the world can not give it; wherefore it is
justice when one robs an other, he should loose that is his own: God
takes away the peace that is ours, because we take away the honor that is
his, and serve him no better. There be six things which the Lord does hate,
Prou 6.16.
yea his soul abhors seven, the seventh thing is, one that raises up
contentions among brethren. My brother, think of this, and flee from it as
from the face of a Serpent. It is dangerous to play by the hole of this Aspe,
and to nourish in thy bosom this lions whelpe, to thine own decay. The defect
of righteousness is the effect of discord: for men embrace peace for
righteousness sake; and by their unrighteous courses they are divided.
Wherefore the Kingly Prophet makes righteousness and peace to go hand in
hand together like Hyppocrates two twins in this piece of Antheme and Ode;
Righteousness and peace have kissed each other. Psalm 85.
As in a well ordered clock, the wheels and inward implements are so framed,
as they walk their circuites, circles and stations alike, and they all
concur in motion, and rest together, so that albeit there be very many
pieces, yet in course and concord are all one: So in a Christian Church and
commonwealth there should be such sympathy of affections, as, though the
parties be many, they should so suit and answer one an other in
correspondencie of mind, as if they were consolidated and coadunated into one
body and mind, in preserving the unity of the spirit, in the bond of peace,
Ephesians. 4. Romans 14.1^
in the faithful apprehension of the Apostles counsel. For the kingdom of
God is not meat nor drink, but righteousness and peace. As the spirit does
not give life to the members, unless they be joined together: so the Spirit
of God quickens not the members of the Church, unless they be united and
bound fast together by the bond of peace. When Salomons Temple was in building,
there was not within the Temple, so much as the noise of an hammer heard; Prou.
24.27.
the timber and stone were broken and hewed without; which answers the
precept delivered by Solomon, Prepare thy work without, and make ready thy
things in the field, and after build thine house. It is the burden of our
Ministry, to build a temple to the Lord God of Israel, by bringing a people
to God, whom the Apostle calls lively stones, to be joined to the corner
stone Christ Jesus: Wherefore let us handle our hammers without, and strike the
enemies of the Gospel, and not lift up hand one against an other. I wind up
this warning with the passionate speech of Augustine to Hierome, in the
controversy between him and Ruffinus, which was then the argument of every
ones mouth, the byword of the people, and the great disturbance of the peace
of the Church; Vt moncor, vt doleo, vt timeo, prociderem ad pedes vestros
flerem quantum valerem, rogarem quantum amarem, nunc vnumquemque pro seipso,
nunc vtrumque pro altere, and pro alijs and maxim infirmis pro quibus Christus
mortuus est, qui vos tanquam in theatro vitae huius, cum magno sui periculo
spectant, ne de vobis ea conscribendo spargatis, quae qua^doque concordantes
delere non poteritis, qui nunc concordare nolitis: And I speak to you, and to
your learned zealous brethren in like manner: How am I moved, how grieve I, and
fear? If I were with you, I should fall before your feet, so much as I loved
you, I should entreat you, I should weep my uttermost, I should beseech each
one for himself, and both for each other, and for others, especially for those
for whom Christ died, who behold you as it were in the stage of this life to
their great danger, that you would not scatter those things in your Sermons and
Writings of your selves, which you can not reuerse when you may be made
friends, who will not now be made friends. Sixthly, let my last words be as
the latter rain that may give fatness to the cloddes by the influence of the
clouds, that you put not off your calling, the Lord having made you so able
a Minister of the new Testament, in the conceit that you have taken against
lawful discipline, maturitie of Judgment scanning and examining it. You shall
not only thereby corrupt the occasion given you by God of doing much good by
your godly labors, but you shall be causa sine qua non, of much hurtful
consequence, while perhaps some Idol Shepherd may succeed in your room,
that will not only, not grudge at these orders, but will make no conscience of
discharging his duty in preaching unto them. If your own conscience do not
accuse you in this course, I shall not accuse you; go in peace. But be it
far from me, to make so little account of my function, as to cast it up for
so slender occasion. If the difference were in matters of faith, then you
should do well to contend with your uttermost sides, and not to give place to
damnable doctrine, though it should cost living and life too. Verse 3.
It is the exhortation of blessed Jude, that we should contend for the
maintenance of the faith, which was once given unto the Saints. So did Moses
against the idolatrous Amalekites, Joshua against the Canaanites, Sampson
against the Philistines, David against the Moabites and Edomites, Asa,
Ezechias, Josias against the Idole-mongers round about. Paul had very quick
and sharp contention against the Jews, in the fundamental and maine point of
out Justification by faith, and against the sect and school of Philosophers,
in the cause of the truth of religion: against idolatrous Gentiles and false
brethren, who craftily crept in, to steal away the Christians liberty. If the
Prince shall make laws for Popery, and command us to worship an Image, we
wilsay with Daniels godly consorts; Dan. 3. Exodus 32. Psalm. 16.2. Mac. 6.
O King, we will not worship the Image that thou have set up: We may not with
Moses endure a calfe in Israel, or with David the offenses of blood, or with
Eleazar the eating of swines flesh, contrary to law: and Timothy shall be
wished to take heed of Alexander, and every good Naboth to defend his vineyard
with his blood, even the vineyard of the Lord of Hosts: and Ambrose will first
die before he will surrender up his Church to Arrians; there must absolutely
be no league between us and Papists. But to strive thus de lana caprina, and
nodos in scirpo quaerere: to seek out knottes in rushes, so to ransake and
persecute the book of Common prayer, as Laban did Jacobs stuff, with the
sharpest edge and curiosity of wit, or wits curiosity; if you take such
felicity, Nobis non licet esse tam disertis, we have no such custom, or the
Church of God. Matt. 2
Jerusalem is now in as great an vproare, as it was when Christ was newborn.
Thus have you the abridgement of my counsel, the total sum whereof may be
reduced to these words of the Apostle; Philip. 4.8.
Whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever things
are just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things pertain to love,
whatsoever things are of good report, if there be any virtue, or any praise,
think on these things, which you have both learned and received, those things
do, and the God of peace shall be with you. The God of peace give a blessing to
these labors, and direct them to the praise of his name, the peace of the
Church, and the common good,

Amen.
Irenaeus to all Secular parsons, wishes more heed in their own vocations,
and less intermedling in matters of the Ministry.
THe school of the curious that busily pry into the affairs of others, Aug.
10. Confess.
and are careless of their own, of whom Augustine much complained in his
time, is very great, and more troublesome at this time. But no sort of people
under heaven are more in their sore eyes, and are nigher their stomachs, and
more set upon the rack of their torne-tongues, than the poor Ministers. The
very sowter and cobbler nowadayes, though his skill goes not beyond the slipper
and the foot, will be so bold as to give a blow to them that are his head,
with the fist of his cluishnes The Cook, though all his learning he in the
Larder-house, and his whole discretion is in dressing a dinner, yet will he be
sawcing Divinity and be too saucy with it: As that Emperors Clearke of his
kitchen was, who bartrayed the Bible as he thought good in defense of the
divinity of the Arrians, whom the ancient father Basil thus snebbeth and
censureth; Tuum est palmenia Caesari praeparare, non Euangelium expouere:
Cook, it is thy office to make sauce for Caesar, and not to conster Scriptures
like a Preacher. A frivolous Fiddler, if he be not harping upon this string,
the Churches government, as the biasle of the world now goes, is out of his
element. Every Tailer has his shredding sheares for the ceremonies, and has a
measure of his own for the matters of the Church. The Smiths prentise will not
stand out, but lists to blow the coals of contention among us. The common
people will take upon them to put on Aarons raiment, the Rochet and habit of a
Bishop and Minister, and teach him what to do, and how to shape his sermons to
suit their affections. Now to all of you howsoere ye be styled, that are of the
brotherhood of these busy bodies, I wish more heed and attendance be given to
your several vocations, and not so to leave your selves as you do, and take
such vagaries with the prodigal son in longinquam regionem, into so far a
country, the matter of Church government being so far and wide from your
profession, and not to be spanned and fadomed by the length and reach of your
discretion. It is the order our Savior Christ in the person of the Baylife
calls us all unto, Give account of thy Stewardship. Luke 16.
To make perfect the tickets and bills of our own accounts, is the never
finished work of our short lives, though we never chop into others actions.
We cannot bestow our time better than upon our selves: and never is it worse
with us at home, than when our affections are wooll-gathering, and abroad
pinking and poaring into foreign affairs. When the master of the house is at
home, the servants are more diligent, and follow their work the better: Be thou
at home, and with thy self, and the work of thy calling will be in more
forwardness. When a house is to be set up, if the master, woorkeman be at
hand, every vnder-labourer is more heedefull to his business: who easily lay
hold on the vantage of his absence to prate, playsleepe, and to give up
themselves to a supine negligence: It is thus with us when the heart that is the
chief commander that gives the onset, and learneth the hand to work, the tongue
to talk, the eye to see, and every part to do her duty and obey, is in
another commonwealth, and is a stranger in his own. The man that attends to
his own charge, and contained himself within the limits and listes of his
own duty: is like to Jacob that kept at home and obtained the blessing of
his father Izaac: but the straggler, that coasteth up and down, and will be a
medler, is to be compared to Esau, who while he roaued about for venison, lost
his fathers blessing. Ecclesiast. 9.
The fools foot trudgeth apace to his neighbors house, says the Wiseman;
the meaning is, that the feet of his affections never stand still, but walk
and trauise through every ones vocation. There is no other kind of merchants
beside this that will deal with such ways, as not only are not lucre, but a
certain loss unto them. It is not only commodious, but very odious, so to
wade up to the chin in the needless office of a scrutinor of others manners,
and to sift them to the courtest brain, and in the mean while ouerslip his
own in most remiss and careless manner. The river that ouerfloweth his
banckes, with his rage of inundation sweepeth like a beesome all the filth and
soil from the sides, and makes clean the banckes; but in the mean while,
while it licketh up the pelf of that place, it polluted and defiles it self
with it. So whilst thou exceedest thy bounds, as the stream his banckes by
ouer-running others doings, thou shall the more clarify and justify them, and
condemn thine own. The good husbandman sows his own ground only: Matthew.
13. John 21.
it is the devil that sows and stroweth his baggage of tares, and wild
weeds in another field. When Peter was so pert as he would needs know what
John should do: Christ ratled him roundly with this short and sharp answer;
What is that to thee? If we in as godly discretion and conscience as any that
withstand it, can willingly entertain the tolerable outward government of the
Church, what has any man to do with us? who art thou that iudgest and
condemnest us? and who made thee a moderator over us? who art thou that
iudgest an other man's servant, James 4.
says the Apostle James, There is but one Lawe-giuer, who is able to save and
destroy: Who art thou that iudgest and others servant? (says Saint Paul?) We
shall all stand before the Tribunal seat of Christ, Romans 14.
says the same Apostle, from whence he infers this sentence of
exhortation, as a just coherence and consequence. 2. Cor. 10.
Judge not therefore before the time, until the Lord comes, who shall
lighten those things that are done in darkness, and shall reveal the secrets
of the hearts, and then shall every one have praise of God. Place these
Scriptures in one classie, and sum them together, and they give thee clusters
of notable conclusions; Because he is an other out of thy skin, and of a
foreign body: secondly, and has another master: thirdly, and is thy
brother: fourthly, and that one Lawe-giuer his master has power of life and
death, and his Law must be the Judge: fifthly, and the time of Assizes and
judgment is not yet come. For these causes judge not another. If thou be a
magistrate, judge him by law: if a private man, judge him in love; and first
judge thy self, lest thou be judged. If these reasons may have no rule over
you: but your tongues must needs be the scourge of the ceremonies, and of
such as perform them; taxing and traducing us as Papists, or Proctors and
Protectors of Popish trash to such detractors, and carowsers rather than
correctors. We answer as Augustine against Petilia^^s, to his wrongful
defamation said against that father in case of heretical prauitie and
maintenance of the assertions of the Maniches; Now sum Manichaus, eligite ^^i
credatis, ego sum ex area Christi: si malus, tum palea: si bonus, fr^^^entum
bon^^ sum: Libr. 3. de Bap. contr. Donat. cap. 10. cap. 12.
non est autem huius curae ventilabrum lingua Petiliani: I am no Manichee,
choose whom ye will believe, I am of Christ's threshing floor: if I be evil
given, then am I chafe, if well affected, then am I good again: howsoever,
Petilians tongue must not be the same that must fifth me. Yea to such has this
sentence of Scripture application; Stand aparte, come not near to me: For I am
holier than thou. Isai. 65.5.
There have never such bin wanting, of whom Seneca speaks Qui etiam te per
ornamenta ferient: that shall strike thee by thy virtues: Seneca.
And it is the same wise man's observation: Vt quisque est contemptissimus, ita
solutissimae lingua est: the more the person is contemptible, the more is his
tongue soluble. There is nothing easier than to reprove an other, and nothing
harder than to know himself, as the Philosopher Thales speaks rightly; If we
have chosen the worst part in the apprehension of the modern government;
that is no dispensation to you to estrange your selves from our Sermons. Our
good sayings do appertain to you; our evil doings belong to us alone: leave
us that is ours, and in the fear of God, take you that is yours. If we heal
not our own sores, as it becomes us while we cure your wounds: If our salt
may season you, though it loses his savor in our selves: If we while we
are as a pillar of fire to lighten your darkness, are darkness our selves:
If while we frame you an Arc, suffer shippewracke our selves: If while we
lead you toward Canaan the promised Land, we our selves die by the way: If
while we preach to others, we become reprobates our selves: If we plant a
Vineyard, and eat not of the


