THE SECOND PART OF THE PARALLELE, OR CONFERENCE OF the Civil Law, the Canon
Law, and the Common Law of this Realm of England.

WHEREIN THE AGREEment and disagreement of these three Laws touching diverse
matters not before conferred, is at large debated and discussed.

Whereunto is annexed a Table containing the principal Questions, matters, and
points of the Dialogues ensuing.

Handled in seven Dialogues, by WILLIAM FVLBECKE.

LONDON Printed by Thomas Wight, 1602.

A Table of the several titles of the seven Dialogues ensuing.
1. Of Prohibitions and Consultations. fol. 1 a 2. Of Actions upon the case.
16. a 3. Of Debts. 27. b 4. Of Accomptes. 41. b 5. Of Waste done in a man's
ground. 49. b 6. Of Parceners. 55. b 7. Of Conditions. 58. b
TO THE MOST GRACIOUS AND Reverend Father in God, John by the providence of
God, Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, Primate and Metropolitan of all England,
and one of the Lords of her Majesty's most honorable privy Counsel.
RIght reverend, and right honorable, it is now a twelue-month past sithence I
presented to your Grace a comparatiue discourse of the laws: A subject
deserving the industrious search of some diuing brain, by me superficially
handled, and as it were left to others to be complementally perfected: but
sithence by good success and the favor of the Almighty it has gained the
approbation of men skillful and learned, who have persuaded and encouraged me
to make further progress in this business, least I might seem coy in
weighing lightly their friendly speeches, and careless in refusing so important a
task, though to me importable, as being the club of Hercules laid upon the
sholders of Hylas, I have again adventured upon this cumbersome province, and
drawn other furrows in this stony soil: and as I have continued the work,
so have I continued the dedication thereof in all constant observance to your
Lordship, whose regardfull countenance toward me has merited more at my hands
then such worthless pains, rather by the travail of my pen, and the
practicke of my contemplation, to publish and notify to the world my dutiful
thankful and zealefull affection toward your graces person, then by the
vnfeatured lump and disproportioned bearewhelpe of my misconceyuing, and
miscarying endeavor, to platform a consummate and exemplarie Parallele or
Trinomion, which is an object to be aimed at, and a pray to be pursued; not of
the Stonegall, the Muskette, and the Merlin, but of the Eagle, the Goshauke,
and other birds of an higher wing, and more surmounting flight: and for the
accomplishment thereof it were to be wished, that God would vouchsafe our Innes
of Court with some second Budaeus, that is a third Varro, whose skill in the
laws might be exquisite, whose pains extreme, whose reward excellent: for
mine own part though I be rather a rash then a voluntary soldier in this
camp, yet I am bound by conscience not to eat the bread of idleness, to do for
my country what I can, and to labor in my calling as I may. And whatsoever
this Book is, or whatsoever my self am, or whatsoever my prayer may prevail
with Almighty God, all these, if these be any thing, do with the knee of
submissiue reverence profess vassallage to your Lordship. And if the Heavens
would sympathize with my heart, and my heart should not by pleasing my self, and
others, displease your Grace, the very Heavens should be long without you,
that this land may be long the better for your Lordship. The God of heaven
grant this, if it be his will, for Learninges sake, Quae duplices tendens ad
sydera palmas, prays for the same: Virtue prays for the same: Strangers
pray for the same: Beneficence to the rich: Munificence to the poor, crave
the same: The Church with sacred vows: The Common weal with more then common
wishes implore the same. What period can be better then prayer? Therefore here
I cast anchor, and bind up these spreading lines.

Your Graces most humble to command: WILLIAM FVLBECKE.

The Introduction to the second part of the Parallele, or conference of the
Civil Law, the Common Law etc.
NOmomathes, when the first conference of the three Laws was finished, gave
himself to his recreation, which was the hunting of the Bucke, an exercise
commendable for Gentlemen, and used in ancient time of them, whose high
estates had entitled them with the names of Heroes, and Semidei. But when
winter began to shed his cold influence, and to replenish the air with
congealing vapors, to make the earth as it were a naked beldam, and to cause
the dugges of the sea to swell with surging billows, Nomomathes retired to his
books, and gave a farewell to the fields, betrothing himself that winter to
his study. And because the juice of the late conference of the Laws had
turned to good blood in his mind, he meant to recontinue the conference, of
which he had a more strict regard then of the former: For when it was rumord in
the country where Nomomathes dwelt, that such a conference was had: and
afterward certain copies were dispersed, and diuulgated, some were well pleased,
some were discontented with the Dialogues: Pro captu lectoris habent sua fata
libelli. Amongst the rest that were disconte^ted was a Parson, a plain
country man, and a gentle man not unlearned, who when they had heard, that
Nomomathes meant to revive and recontinue the conference, purposed to go to his
house, and to open their minds as they conceived of the conference. Their
purpose they followed, and to the house they came, where being kindly and
courteously entertained of Nomomathes, and in their by-talke glauncing at the
Dialogues: Nomomathes willed them to spare no speech, and professed that he
would willingly admit their censures, and that he would hear them in order:
They seeing his patience prepared, delivered in few words their private
conceits. And first the gentleman took exception to the discourses of
Codicgnostes: for that he in the first Dialogue, discussing matters of common
weal, and of the Civil Law, did forget to handle very important matters, and
to his profession not impertinent. The first was because he did not treat of
Dettes, a thing in the Civil Law not omitted: and yet in no Law sufficiently
debated. Secondly, he speaks nothing of Accounts or reckonings, whereas that
is a large and frequent title in the Civil Law. Lastly speaking ex professo of
the original of Tenures and services in the fourth Dialogue, he speaks very
little of Conditions, which very often are the constituent causes of these
Services: With this he concluded, and then spoke the Parson, who did
expostulate with the Canonist some injuries, because the Canon being so full
and pregnant in matter of Tithe, he did not vouchsafe to speak any one word
of Tithes: And whereas we have Parsons said he, have much impediment by
Prohibitions, and many times wrong, when they come to trial: for the country
people which are the Jurors, who have no more desire to pay their Tithes, then
the Devil has to lose his intercourse with the seven deadly sins; the Pope
to be a Protestant, and a Bear to go to the stake. If any Prohibition
concerning Tithes come to be tried by them, ar as sure to pass against the
Parson, as an old chimney is sure of blacknes. But let any matter come to be
tried touching common, which concerns themselves, and their own profit, they
will as surely go with the commoner, as the clouds go with the Northeast
wind: Therefore it seemed to him to be very convenient, that because the Canon
does so much favor Parsons, that therefore the Canonist especially should have
debated at large of these matters: And he thought the Canonist speaking so
little of them in the whole discourse, was much troubled with the toothache,
(the Canonist here being somewhat choleric interrupted him, and said he
iangled: for he said there were many things proposed in the Dialogues, which
the Canon Law never medleth with all, neither has it so much tasted of them,
as the dog licking of Nilus: And in some things which were in the Dialogues,
the Canon Law has nothing else, but which the Civil Law has: so that he
should not have kept decorum, but should have thrust his sicle into the harvest
of Codicgnostes, if he should have encroched upon such things, as the Canon
Law has as it were at the second hand streined from the Civil. But, said he,
as touching Tithes, if any question had been proposed, I would not have been
defective in the handling them at large. Then the poor Country man made a
low conge, and Nomomathes bowed unto him, as being willing to hear him. Sir
(quoth he) I am by your worships favor a poor country yeoman, dwelling near
a place called Aitipolis: and my years are more then my knowledge, my
patrimony better then my education, and my hand more nimble then my tongue: And
I have had a very great desire to have some understanding of Law, because I
would not swim against the stream, nor be unlike unto my neighbors, who are
so full of Law-points, that when they sweat, it is nothing but Law; when they
breath, it is nothing but law; when they neese it is perfect law; when they
dream it is profound law. The book of Littletons tenures is there breakfast,
their dinner, their boier, their supper, and their rere-banquet: Every
ploughswayne with us may be a Seneschall in a Court Baron: He can talk of
Essoines, Vouchers, Withernams, and Recaptions: And if you control him, the
book of the Grounds of the Law is his portesse, and ready at his girdle to
confute you. Surely sir, my neighbors are full of sension and tention, and so
cunninge, that they will make you believe, that all is gold, which glistereth:
So that for a man to be amongst them, and to have living and want Law: is as
if a man should have bread to eat, and want teeth to chew it: Which occasions
moved me at the first to seek for some skill in Law, and amongst other
books, I bought The Conference of Law, whereof has been spoken, and casting
mine eye upon the dial of common wrongs, and trespasses: I wondered that he
which maintains the Common Law, amongst his common wrongs and trespasses,
he spoke nothing of Wast done in a man's ground: and very little of an Action
upon the case, which is a wheel much turned about in the place where I dwell.
And though he has delivered much of Iointenants, and Tenants in common, he
speaks either little or nothing at all of Parceners. Now many of us country
people marry very often with landed women, and therefore would gladly be
seen in that learning. Truly Sir I bought the book for my more understanding
of the law, and for the novelty, and because it was in English: yet there is a
vengeance deal of Latin in it, which put me to the cost to buy a Thomases
Dictionarie, but it is no great matter for that, for it will serve my son
Reginold, when he shall be ten years old, or thereabout: But I pray you
sir at the next conference let us have somewhat of these matters, which I have
mentioned unto you: When he had ceased to speak, Nomomathes gravely and with
advise censured their censures, and spoke in this manner. I see now (said he)
the proverb to be verified Quot homines tot sententiae. there be as many minds
as there be men; And though ye have delivered your exceptions in sportfull
manner, which as I do not greatly dislike, so I do not greatly delight in, yet
I must confess every of them does fly to the mark, and the blame rests
upon me, who might have proposed these matters to be discussed; but because the
lucre, or loss of the conference, was to redownd wholly to me in all
correspondencie of reason, and not to others, but by my courtesy: I thought it
a more convenient course, and more free and ingenious to follow the thread of
mine own choice, then the uncertain winge of popular conceit. Again, all
things cannot be handled at all times, and nothing is to be intruded into such
a conference which does not relice to the su^drie palates, and tastes of these
several laws. For many things there be in the common law which has not any
affinity with any thing in the civil or Canon. But because your motions are
so co^sonant to reason, and so directly respective to your vocations and
functions, which in no well ordered common weal ought to be loosely regarded:
therefore I protest unto you in sincerity, that if all these things, which you
have mentioned may be cast in the molde of a tripartite discourse, the second
co^fere^ce shall bring forth that which you have before conceited, they
thanking him for this kindness departed, he immediately questioned of the
Lawyers, whether they could bring into the compass of their several
reckonings all these matters abouesaid, who anusweared that they could. Then
said he, because the Canonist has been so deeply charged, we will begin with
tiths which he is reproved for omitting. The^ the Canonist said, that they
might be discoursed upon according to the several laws under the title of
prohibitio^. That title the^ said Nomomat. shall be the first: the second of
actions upon the case: the third of debts, the fourth of accounts, the fifth of
wast, the sixth of parceners, and the seventh of conditions, wherefore bend your
selves wholly to this task, and let these things be diligently searched and
considered of you, and for this purpose take the deliberation of twenty days:
which being had, and the twenty days being run out, Nomomathes did thus parle
with Canonologus.

The first Dialogue of the second part of the Parallele, or conference of the
Civil Law, the Canon Law, and the Common Law of this Realm of England.
Of Prohibitions and Consultations.
NOmomathes. I am 1. Division.
very desirous Canonologus, to know the first and primigeniall existence of
Tithes: 1. The original of Tithes is inquired of.
that their original being known, their lawfulnes, and necessary use may
appear, which has not seldom by diverse objections and quarrellous surmises
been shaken, and some have engaged themselves so deeply into this
controversy, that they have suffered great affliction therefore, if not loss
of life. 2. The council of Constance is said to have condemned VViclif, for
holding Tithes to be pure alms.



Canonologus. It is true: And amongst the 189. Articles of Wiclif, condemned
by the Council of Constance, that was noted especially to be erroneous, that
he held Tithes to be nothing else, but pure, and frank alms: and that the
Parishioners might withhold them from their Pastors, if they were wicked men:
And for that especially he is said to have been burnt Rebuff. in tractat. de
Deci. 5. qu.
: for that which belongs to God may not at man's pleasure be derogated,
detracted, or diminished.


Nomoma. Yea, but how do you prove 2. Division.
that they belong to God?


Canonol. I can easily prove that by their 1. The original of Tithes is
demonstrated to be by the Law of God.
original and lawful institution of them, which was thus: God has set down
this rule in Exodus: Decimas and primitias tuas non tardabis offerre Exodus c.
22.
. And in Leuiticus more particularly he has appointed the payment of Tithe:
Omnes decimae terrae, sieve de pomis arborum, sieve de frugibus, domini sunt, and
illi sanctificantur Leuit. c. vlt.
. Neither is that dissonant which is written in the Proverbs of Solomon:
Honora dominum de tua substantia, et de primitijs frugum tuarum da pauperibus
Proverb. 3.
. Tithes certainly 2. God his deputies for the receipt of Tithes are set down.
are God his tributes; and as the Canon says, are given him in signum
specialis dominij c. cum non sit eod.
. And it is likewise set down, who should be God his deputies for the receipt of
such Tithes: Filijs Leui dedi omnes decimas pro ministerio quo seruiunt mihi in
tabernaculo foederis Numb. c. vlti.
. The reason is set down by Ezechias: Vt possent vacare legi Dei 2. Paralipo.
c. 13.
. And by the apostle Paul: Qui altari seruit, de altari viuere debet 1. Corinthians. 9.
. And of paying Tithes, the very Heathen 3. The Heathens which knew not God,
had great regard of paying Tithes.
which knew not God had great regard, as may appear by Plinies report, where
he says, That Frankensence being gathered, was conveyed on Camels backs to
Sabola, there being but one way to carry it, and to go out of that way was
capital, and at the gate which was at the end of the way, the Priests did
receive Tithes of the things that were carried for their God called Sabis: which
Tithe or Tenth part they took by measure, not by weight: And before such
payment of Tithe, there was not permitted any merchandise of them Plini. lib.
12. c. 14.
. And the Romans did pay such a Tithe unto Hercules. And they accounted
Lucullus, 4. Lucullus is specially commended for paying Tithe.
who was very skillful of their Laws and customs to have been greatly
increased in his wealth and stock, especially for this, because in the due
performance of his Tithe, he was always diligent and exquisite Alex. lib.
genia. 3. c. 22.
. And when Veios being taken, gold should have been sent to Apollo of Delphos,
in the name of the Tenth of the pray which Camillus had vowed unto 5. Camillus
is likewise commended for his diligence in procuring Tenth to be paid.
him, and in the treasury there was no great store of gold for that
defrayment, the Roman nations brought into the treasury as much gold of
their jewels and ornaments, as did serve for that purpose: rather having
regard of public duty, then private profit Liui. lib. 5.
. And Pliny likewise testifies, that the Romans 6. The Romans careful in
paying first fruits.
did not taste, nor make any use of their new corn or wine, until they had
given their first fruits unto the Priests Plini. lib. 18. c. 2.
. And Pharao in the time of the great famine of Egypt did allow to the
Priests a certain liuelode of corn out of the barnes Genes. 47.
, which is not discrepant from the ordinance of God, as it is set down in the
prophecy of Malachie: Inferte omnem decimam in horreum meum, vt sit cibus in
domo mea, and probate me super hoc Malach. 3.
. Certain it is that they which dutifully and plentifully pay their Tithes
without fraud and miserable pinching, or malicious quarrelling with their
Pastor, or Curate, do more flourish and prosper in their wealth, substance, and
their profits of the earth, then such as profanely and injuriously deteine
them:

Cura dijs dij sunt, et qui coluere colentur. Ovid. in Metamorph.
And there is a good similitude or observation collected by Rebuffe upon the
affliction of the Philistines, that whilst the Philistines withheld the Ark of God, they were punished with many scourges, penalties, and corrections: For
the fruits of their fields was devoured of the Mise, and Locustes: and so he
says, that the lay people as long as they with hold the lawful Tithes from
their Ministers, shall be with diverse losses and crosses afflicted Rebuff.
tractat. de Deci. qu. 15.
.


Nomomath. If Parsons ought to have tithes as you have plainly proved, then
they ought to be contented therewith and not to have any lands or tenements,
which now they have: for 3 Division. 1. Whether Parsons ought to have no more
living then tithe. 2. It is denied by Canonologus that they ought to have no
more living.
as there is an affirmative precept in the law of paying tithes: so there is
another negative ordinance that the Levites should possess nothing else.


Canonol. But that negative law was not made to be perpetual, as may appear
by the last Chapter of Leuiticus and by the 27. and likewise by the 25.
Chapter, where it is expressly said. Domus vrbium Leuiticorum pro
possessionibus sunt inter filios Israel, suburbana autem eorum non veneant,
quia possessio sempiterna est.


Nomomath. Whether by your law may a man prescribe in not paying tithes.


Canonol. No man by our law may prescribe 4. Division.
in not paying tithe: Dom. in c. 2. col. ill. de prae. in. 6.
and a man is bound to pay tithe though by an hundred years he have not
paid, because if it be an offense to pay slowly, it is a greater offense not
to pay at all: c. decim. in princip. 16. qu. 1.
and the longer the tithes are withheld, the offense is so much greater,
because as the reason of our law is: diutius detinent infaelicem animam
alligatam: c. fin. de consuetu.
but a Layman may prescribe in paying a special portion in lieu of the whole
tithe as to pay the twelfth part, or the twentieth part. Part. parisconsil. 25.
vidiat. 3. nu. 21. vil. 4
Yet if the Minister or Curate may not be maintained by the residue of the
Tithes, he may sue for the whole Tithe Augel. clauus in versic. 10.
. And if there be a composition betwixt the Curate, and his Parishioner, that
he shall pay no tithe this compositio^ is merely void: otherwise it should be
if the composition had been that he should pay a certain portion of tithe, as
the sixtenth or twentieth part, or that he should pay no tithe for certain
things: for though the composition were before the Bishop, yet it could be no
otherwise: Text* in c. venerab. de confir. vtil.
yet according to our law the Bishop may by way of composition alter the place
or time of paying tithes.


Codicgn. To this which you have said our 2 The civil Law agrees thereunto.
law agrees, and we have an express rule: sacerdoti petenti decimas non
potest obijci compensatio. Ludouic. de Romans in singular.
. and the reason is because fisco petenti tributa non potest obijci compensatio
l. 3. and 4. c. de com. pen. le. aufert.. qui compensati. ff. de iu. fisc.
. Therefore muchlesse may compensation be objected in tithes, quae deo
debentur. Gazalup. in ver. Decim.



Anglonomop. But by our law if a man grant 3 By the common law a man may
prescribe in paying a temporal recompense in lieu of tithe.
parcel of his manor to a parson in fee to be discharged of tithes, and he
makes an indenture thereof, and the parson by assent of the ordinary grants
to him that he shall be quit of the tithes of his manor for this parcel of
land, now if he be impleaded for the tithes thereof he may have a prohibition,
and if this deed have bin made from time out of mind, and he has bin
continually quit of the tithes of that manor he may have a prohibition in such
case, if he be impleaded: and so likewise it is if such discharge grow by
reason of a composition. Fitzher. N. B. 41. G. 43. K. 8. E. 4. 13.



Nomomath. I pray you let me know in what 5 Division.
cases tithes are recouerable at the spiritual law, and when at the common,
that so I may perceive the diversity of the jurisdiction of these Courts,
which in it self seems to me to be somewhat perplexed and difficult, unless it
be opened and explaned by cases accommodate to the purpose.


Canonol. There be two sorts of tithes, being parcel of the inheritances and
possessions of lay 1. Two sorts of tithes are set down by the canonist: some
feudall, some Ecclesiastical.
me^ of the first by your favor I will speak first, and then descend to the
other: when the right of tithes is in question, because that is a mere
ecclesiastical subject, the church hldeth conusance, 2. The Church only
holds conusans of the right of tithes.
gl. in c. ex tenor. de for, compe*
and there is an edict made by Phil. the 4. K. of France touching tithes in
this manner. De 3. The King of France his edict touching tithes is set down.
cognitione decimaru^ non feudalium in petitorio vel postestorio, praesertim
inter ecclesiasticas parts, ge^tes nostrae se nullatenus intromittant. Rubri^*
de* decim.
And this 4. When the question is facti and not iuris the examination of tithes
may belong to a lay judge.
is according to the rule of our law de causa spirituali solus ecclesiasticus
cognoscit vbi quaestio sit iuris. c. tuam de ordin. cogniti.
but where the question is facti, and not iuris the examination of the cause
may belong to a lay judge. Text in Cle^. dispendios. de iudicum c. teter. de
iur. calu^. c. fin. de rer. permut.
but if the controversy be mixed, and the property is as well to be decided as
the possession, the matter is to be discussed before an ecclesiastical judge,
Abb. c. literas and rubric. de iudic. number. 51.
and when tithes are leased or dimised unto a man, he may demand the tithes
before a lay judge, unless there be contraria fori praescriptio, as there is in
the city and diocese of Millaine: Gemin in c. vlt. in fide for. competen. in
6. gloss. in c. vest. de loc. monet* c. 8. de decim.
yet where the controversy is betwixt these that be mere clergy men, though
it be a possessory suyte, yet it is to be decided by an Ecclesiastical judge
Nauar. in repet. cum co^tingat.
. Neither may lay men Clergy men though it be merely possessorie: yet it
belongs to an Ecclesiastical judge.
be compromittes of a decimall cause if the right come in question: Council.
Barel. tract. mother. de compromis.. 2. gl. 1 number. 324.
but such tithes as be not spiritual, but as I have termed them before feudall,
may be ordered and disposed by lay compromittees.


Nomomath. You have satisfied me Canonologus touching the point of
Ecclesiastical jurisdiction where spiritual tithes are to be demanded: Now I
pray you show me the nature 6. Division.
and original of these feudall tithes, which as yet are more obscure.


Canonol. Their nature shall appear by 1. The nature of feudall tithes is
opened by the Canonist.
their original which was thus. Charles Martell after that he had obtained an
happy victory against the Saracens, who marching from Spain did spoil and
waste the lands, goods, and temples of the French, did mean to recompense his
nobles and peers of his realm with some great reward, and that he might
testify his liberality toward his said nobles, by the consent of the Bishops
of his kingdom, he did give unto them the tithes of many goodly Churches,
taking a solemn oath that if he lived any while, he would make the Church a
large amends for this matter, which notwithstanding he did not: but not long
after, as ( Guagni reports) for that sacrilege he died, and was carried to
hell, and his body being intombed in the temple of Saint Dennis, within a few
years after there was seen upon his ^. The Cano^^^t (...) a strange tale of
Ch^^l^^ Mar^^ll.
grave a great serpent, it might be it was the devil in the likeness of a
Serpent: but shortly after there was neither body nor bones of Charles found
in that place, and therefore some thought that he was carried body and soul
G^^^^^g^i. in v^^. Car. Ma^^ell.
to the devil: for that cause the wiseman has said, it is a destruction for a
man to devour that which was sanctified, etc. Proverb* c. 20. v. 2^.



Nomomath. It is not good to enter into the counsels of the Almighty. The
Bethshamites were not unpunished for their prying into the Arc. And the
proverbs of the heathens do admonish us not to bite the dead, nor to wrestle
with spirits. It is not good to charge the dead with any other thing the^ that
which happened in their life: for whosoever are departed this life stand or
fall to their Lord, who is the judge of the quick and dead, and I think (...)
thought of Nomomath. to be but a fable.
the report of the serpent to be but a mere fable discrediting the author, and
dishonoring that worthy protector of the Christians: but what say you
Codicgnostes of these matters.


Codicgnostes. I do not remember any thing in our law repugnant to that which
Canonologus has above delivered.


Nomomath. What say you Anglonomophilax.


Anglonomoph. Our law does neither fully agree with that which Canonologus
has uttered, neither in very many things disagree from it, as by your
patience I shall at large demonstrate. We have a rule in our statute law not
much differing from the edict of the King of France above recited by
Canonolog. In decimis 5 One of the ancient statutes of England is compared with
the edict of the king of France.
and mortuarijs quando sub istis nominibus proponuntur, prohibitioni nostrae
non est locus, dummodo decimarum illarum quantitas non ascendat ad quartam
partem bonorum ecclesiae Artic. cler. c. 2. 10. H. 4. 1. Registr. 49. b.
: And as to the diversity used in the Canon law where the question is facti
and not iuris, and where it is 6 The Canon law agrees with the common,
attributing of the division of the right of tithes to the spiritual judge.
de petitorio and not de possessorio, M. Fitzherbert has this assertion: that
if any parishioner do disturb or hinder a Parson or Vicar in the carrying away
of his tithes, which is an injury in the fact, whereas the carriage is through
the ways and passages used and accustomed, the Parson or Vicar may sue in the
spiritual court for this disturbance Fitzh. N. B. 51. A.
: for in this case the spiritual Court proceeds unto excommunication
Registr. 46. b. and 47. a.
: One Parson may sue a spoliation against 7 Where one parson may sue a
spoliation against the other in the spiritual court.
an other in the spiritual Court, for the taking of tithes which belongs to
his Church though they claim by several patrons, and by several
presentiments, but this is to be understood where the said tenth does not
amount to the value of the fourth part of the Church, for otherwise the party
grieved may have an Indicauit because the title of the patronage may come in
debate: But if they claim by the presentment of one patron the^ a spoliation
may be sued although the profits or tithes do amount to the fourth part, or
third part, or the moitie of the benefice: because in such case the title of
the patronage shall not come in debate. And if a prohibition be sued hereupon,
the party may have a consultation 2. H. 7. 12. Br. prohibit. 16. Fitzh. N. B.
51. C. 37. E. 45. B. 30. E.
: and if a man have certain sheep depasturing, and lying within the
precinctes of the parish of N. within a year, the parson of that parish may
sue in the spiritual court for the tithe wool of these sheep: and if the
party sue a prohibition he may have a consultation Fitzh. N. B. 51. D.
: for the suite for tithe does properly appertain to the spiritual Court, as
by statute 8 The executors may be sued in the spiritual court.
it is ordained 1. R. 2. c. 13. 24. H. 8. c. 12. 2. E. 6. c. 13.
: and it appears by the Register of writtes, that if the pattie which
withholdeth tithe make his executors and die, the executors may be sued
Registr. 48.
. And if a man detain tithes for his sheep which went in the parish of N. and
were depasturing and couching there so long time, if the party die, the parson
may sue his executors for these tithes in the spiritual Court. And so the
Parson may sue the executors for the arrerages of tithes due by reason of
certain milnes of the testator in the life of the testator Fitzherb. N. B. 51.
G. H.
: And the parson by prescription may in the spiritual Court claim tithes
vitularum and lacticiniarum of the beasts pasturing in his parish, as namely
milk, butter and cheese Fitzherb. ib. and Regist. 48.
, and the tithes of wool, and the tithes of honey and wax, Fitzherb. ib.
and for these he may sue in the spiritual Court, and by many authorities in
our law, the right of tithes is tryable in the spiritual Court. 22. E. 4. 24.
38. H. 6. 21. 22. Assis. 75.
But where a man is sued for tithes of great trees above the age of twenty
years, a prohibition will lie by the statute of 45. 9. Of what trees tithe may
be demanded by the statute of 45. E. ^.
E. 3. but of horn beams, salowes, and the like, of what age soever they be,
being not apt for timber, tithes ought to be paid. Ploid. Com. en le case
enter Soby and Mol.
And the branches of trees which be privileged from tithes shall be also
privileged: and the suit for the tyth branches of trees which are not
privileged, shall be in the spiritual Court as well as the suit for the tithe
of the trees themselves: for as Bracton says, non pertinet ad iudicem
secularem cognoscere de ijs quae sunt spiritualibus annexa. Bract. lib. 5. c. 2.
And thus it may appear, that as soon as the right of tithes comes in
debate, the lay Court ought to cease, and shall be out of jurisdiction: and if
it may appear that the right of aduowson comes in debate the spiritual
Court shall be out of jurisdiction: But if the parson of N. do lease for
years a certain portion of his tithes rendering a rent, he shall have an
action of Debt for the rent if it be behind ^^. That the rent paid for Tithes
upon a lease for years is a lay chattell.
at the common Law, and not in the spiritual Court, because the money is a lay
chattell 8. R. 2. Iurisdict. 2^. D. 5. 106.
. And if the Parson take Oats, or other grain, as his Tithe: and an other
takes them away from him, the nature is altered, and now they are become a
lay chattell, and the Parson shall have an action of Trespass at the common Law
35. H. 6. 39.
: Yea by the book of 2. Ed. 4. if they be severed from the ix. part, and not
yet in the actual possession of the Parson: Yet if a stranger carry them
away, he may have an action of Trespass 2. E. 4. 15. 20. E. 4. 3.
: But he may not in any case distreine for Tithe: for there is not any land in
demesne upon which the distress may be made 11. H. 4. 40.
. But if in such case debate happen betwixt Parson and Vicar, so that the right
of Tithes is to be tried, the suit is to be maintained in the spiritual Court
35. H. 6. 39. 47.
.


Nomomath. But what if Tithes be not duly paid, what punishments are there
to be inflicted by your Laws.


Canonol. In the demanding Tithes, if judgment be given for the demaundant,
there 7. Division. ^. A Precept issues with a monition under pain of
excommunication for the due satisfaction of Tithes.
must a precept issue with a monition under pain of excommunication, if he do
not within a certain number of days pay or satisfy the demaundant so much
Tithe. And the Law is that against such as be stubborn, Brachium seculare
inuocari potest Gl* in verb. praemonit. in cle. 2. de iud. c. postula^sti. de
hom^ci.
.

Codicgn. We have nothing in our Law contrary to this.


Nomomath. I pray you show me Canonol. the quality and force of
Excommunication, that I may be better satisfied.


Canonol. The Canon Law does observe eight 8. Division. 1. The degrees which
the Canon Law observes in punishing offenses in the Clergy.
degrees in proceeding to the correction or punishment of them of the Clergy,
in punishing any offense whatsoever: The first is a monition, vt desistant c.
vni. de vit. et hone. cler. lib. 6.
: The second excommunication, si non paeniteant c. cler. arma. de vi. et hon.
cler.
: 3. A suspension of their benefice, si differant c. praeterea de vsu.
: 4. The depriuatio^ of their benefice, si perseuerent c. cum delic. in sin. de
accusa.
: 5. A suspension of their orders, or degrees, si obstinate conte^dant c. cum
non ab homi. de in si.
: 6. A thrusting or intruding of the^ into a Monastery, or Religious house, si
indurati existant: 7. Perpetual imprisonment, si incorrigibiles existant d. c.
cum non ab homine.
: 8. A solemn degradation in the presence of temporal officers c. non de verb.
in si.
. And this order of punishment is always observed, unless the crime be so
great, heinous, and scandalous, that this solemnity is omitted, and then there
is a summarie, and immediate proceeding to degradation, and to the delivering
of the party up to the secular* power.

But there be two sorts of Excommunication, the lesser is not penal, but
medicinal, and is proporcionable 2. Sorts of Excommunication, are set down
by the Canonist.
to that lesser thunderbolt, which the Poet describes: Est aliud leuius fumen
cui dextra Cyclopum, Sauitiae flammaque minus, minus addidit irae Ovid. in
Metamorph.
. It does rather in some small proportion terrify, then in any great measure
hurt. Yet here a distinction is to be used: for either the sentence of the
lesser excommunication is pronounced ab homine, and then it is medicinable: or
else it is pronounced a Canone; as when a man is ipso facto excommunicate, for
then it is penal c. medicinalis de se* exco. lib. 6.
. But the sentence of the great excommunication does anathematize, and is
always penal d. c. medici.
. All these things may be thus resolved, either an ecclesiastical person does
commit some small offense, and then he is deposed, and not deprived, but for a
time suspended c. cum delic. de accus.
: But if he commit grievous offenses, then he may be deposed d. c. cum non ab
homi.
. But if he commit faults most grievous, such as by the Civil law he shall
suffer death for, then he may be condemned ad perpetua^ carcerem, to have
imprisonment during his life c. l. de here. lib. 6.
. Excommunication is termed in our Law mucro Episcopi: and therefore it is said
in the Canon law foelici mucrone Episcopi sacerdotum piacula resecentur 16. q.
2. c. visis in si.
. But the utmost punishment of a lay man for not paying of Tithes, or other
misdemeanour punishable by the Canon Law is excommunication only: after which
issues a writ of Excommunicato capiendo at the Common Law.


Anglo. It is true, but we have compulsarie Statutes 3. The compulsorie
Statutes of payment of Tithes are mentioned by the Barrister.
made for the paime^t of Tithes: As namely the Statute of 27. H. 8. ca. 20.
which is, That if the Ordinary of the diocese etc. do for any contempt,
contumacy, disobedience etc. of the party not paying his lawful Tithe, make
information or request to any of the Kings most honorable Counsel, or to the
Justices of the peace of the shire etc. to order or reform any such person
etc. that then he, or the Kings said honorable Counsel, or such two Justices
of peace, whereof one to be of the Quorum, to whom such information or request
shall be made, shall have full power and authority to attache the said person
etc. and to commit him to ward, there to remain without bail or mainprise,
till he have found sufficient suertie etc. to give due obedience to the
proceedings, decrees, and sentences of the ecclesiastical Court etc. And the
like Statute was made 32. H. 8. cap. 7. And by the Statute of 2. Ed. 6. cap.
13. it is provided, That if any person carry away his Corn or Hay, or his
other prediall Tithes, before the Tithe thereof be set forth: Or willingly
withdraw his Tithes of the same etc. that then upon due proof thereof made
before the spiritual Judge etc. the party so carrying away, vvithdrawing etc.
shall pay the double value of the Tithe so taken, lost, vvithdrawen etc. beside
the costs and charges of the suit etc. And as to these Tithes which Canonol.
has above called feudall which we call impropriate, 4. Impropriate Tithes at
the common Law, are compared with feudall tithes.
it is ordained by the Statute of 32. H. 8. c. 7. that they may be demanded
by a Praecipe quod redd^t.


Codign. Our law in all the matters abouesaid consents with the Canon-lawe.


Nomomath. But what if a man will not pay his Tithes in the time of vacation of
a benefice.


Anglonomoph. Then the Ordinary ex officio 9. Division.
may cite him to pay them Registr. 51. Fitzherb. not. bre. 52. G.
. 10. The Ordinary ex officio may cite men to pay Tithes.



Canonol. That seems not to be repugnant to our Law Goodal. lib. de lib.
Eccles.
.


Codign. Nor to ours.


Nomomath. Now that you have proceeded so far in matters of jurisdiction, I
pray you let me move you for other doubts concerning the same point. Whether
is the crime of Heresy subject to the censure of the Canon Law only, or to
the jurisdiction of all your Laws, I pray you show me how, and how 10.
Division.
far forth it is punishable.


Canonolog. There be two things which make Heresy: First it must respect and
concern the Articles of our Faith: Secondly there must be a stubborn, and
pertinacious affirmation: for there must be error in ratione, and pertinacia in
voluntate Cle. 1.. porro de sum. trini.
: for where there is error, but not obstinacy, there the party can 1. Two
Sorts of Heretics, formatus and suspectus.
not be said to be formatus, but suspectus haereticus, and then he holds the
error inquisitiue, but not adhaesiue. But he that is formatus haereticus is
thus punished in our Law: he is excommunicated, he is bereaved of all
ecclesiastical promotion, he is delivered up to the secular power, and all his
goods and lands be confiscated, and taken away from him c. ad abolend. de
haeretic. c. Excommunicamus de haeret. et c. secundu^ leges eo tit. lib. 6.
. But in two cases their lands are reserved, and left to their children:
First, if they reveal their fathers heresy c. Vergent. in sen. de haeret. c.
vt inquisit. de haere. lib. 6.
, 2. If they have been so long in possession 2. In what case the wife and
children of Heretics shall enjoy their lands.
that they may prescribe c. vt officium de haere. lib. 6.
. But the dowry of the wife of an Heretic is not forfeited, unless she do
marie him knowing of the heresy c. de creu. eo. tit. lib. 6.
.


Codicgn. Our Law agrees to that which you have said: And further prescribes
an other punishment, which you have not mentioned against such offenders: for
it says, that they shall be burnt alive l. quisquis C. ad l. Iul. may. Et
c. vt inquisitionis de haeretic. lib. 6.
.


Nomomath. Yet I have read in a learned Ciuilian, that in the whole body of
the civil 3. Heretics by the civil Law not punishable by fire.
Law it is not recorded, that Heretics should be put to death by fire: and
therefore he is somewhat bold with the Canonistes, and calls them igniuomos
canonistas Alber. Gentil. lib. lecti. 2.
.


Codign. Indeed our Law as to that point is wholly grounded upon the Canon c.
ad abolend. de haeretic.
.


Canonolog. It is not grounded upon the Canon, for we refer the matter wholly
and finally to the secular Magistrate: as your writ de Haeretico comburendo
Anglonomoph. does testify.


Anglonomoph. Indeed in our Realm in ancient 4. The Canonist poasteth the
punishment of Heretics to the common Law.
time, he that was to be burnt for Heresy, was first to be convicted of the
same before the Bishop of the diocese etc. and ought to abjure it: And if he
did after relapse into it again, and were thereof condemned in the said
Dioces: then he should be sent to the secular power to do with him whatsoever
should please the king Fitzherb. not. bre. 269.
. But afterward by the Statute of 15. of king Henry the eight 15. H. 8. cap. 14.
, it was ordained, that he who had once abiured heresy, and was relapsed, 5.
The professor of the common Law bandeth back again the punishment of Heretics
to the Canon Law.
and was convicted hereof before his Ordinary, that notwithstanding the
Ordinary ought not to commit him to the lay power without the kings writ
first purchased hereupon to burn him.


Nomomath. Then I perceive the whole act both of adiudging to the fire, and of
sending the party to receive that punishment, depends now wholly upon the
Canon Law, and the sentence of the Bishop framing the style of his judgment
according to the Canon Law.


Canonol. The secular power puts him to death: but we are discharged of it.


Nomom. Nay verily, no more then Nabuchadnezer can be acquitted of exposing the
life of Daniell to hazard: for he might as well have excused himself and said,
that he did not mean to kill him, but did only commit him to the courtesy of
the lions: And as he did not personally put him into the cave, and within the
grate: so neither do ye personally thrust these which you term Heretics into
the fire, nor bind the^ unto the stake. Nabuchadnezers punishment I have read
of, which was grievous and horrible: But I do not read of the admittance of
such excuse. And when the Judge of Judges shall examine such fiery proceedings,
it will be in vain to excuse themselves by the fire, and the chain, and the
stake: or by the Shirife and the Bailifes, if the Judgment have been wrongful
and unjust. It will be like the excuse that Phillip king of Macedonia made,
when he was charged with the expugnation and overthrow of the City of Chius:
Neque ego Chium expugnaui, sed Prusiam socium and amicum expugnantem adiuui
Liuius lib. 32.
: for so Prusias might have said, that he did it not, but only encouraged his
men to do it. So Brutus and Cassius might be excused from killing themselves,
because they did non inflict the wound, but did will and command others to
do it Flor. lib. 4. histor.
. After as bad a sort Dido clears her self of her death, though not any way
to be cleared:

Praebuit Aeneas et causam mortis et ensem:
Ipsa sua Dido concidit vsa manu Ovid. Fastor. 3.
.
But I will insist no more of this matter. Now 11. Division.
resolve me, whether any Church-land be demaundable at the Spiritual Law.


Codicgn. Religious houses and lands belonging 1. What things may be termed
Church-land by the Civil Law.
unto them deputed to holy use are comprehended in our Law under the name of
Church-land or living: And all lands which belong to Oratories or private
Chapels, annexed to the particular houses of lay men, by the authority of the
Diocesan, and the lands belonging to them are comprised under the name
Church-land or Church living C. de epis. and cler. in lib. Orpha.
: Likewise that plott or parcel of ground in which a dead man is buried, or
wherein his head or any part of him is buried becomes consecrate, and
religious, and therefore cannot be morgaged nor pledged ff. de reli. and sump.
fune. C. quae res oblig. poss. l. 1.
: and of such lands our law takes notice and holds full jurisdiction.


Canonol. But in strict reason such things do belong to the jurisdiction of the
spiritual court 42. Disti. oratorium.
.


Anglonomoph. These matters are diversely taken in our law: for in action of
trespass conceived by the Vicar against the Parson for the breaking of his
close, and for his lambs taken away, whereas the close supposed was the
Churchyard parcel of the vicarage of the 2 Of Churchyards the spiritual court
shall hold jurisdiction by the common law.
plaintiff, it was held by the better opinion that in this case wherein the
close supposed in the writ is admitted by both parties to be a churcyard,
the spiritual Court only should hold jurisdiction 13. R. 2. iurisdict. 19.
. And an assise likewise was brought of a house against a Parson, who pleaded
in bar, that he was Parson of P. and that the house demanded was parcel of his
said church, from time out of mind, and that there was sepulture of dead
persons there: wherefore Perseis opinion was that the court temporal ought not
to hold plea in this case 44. Ass. pl. 8.
: but if 3 The right of gleabe land is triable by the common law.
the Parson of A. and the Parson of B. do contend in suite for a parcel of
land, the one claiming it to be his gleabe, the other his: it has been held
in this case, that the spiritual court shall not hold jurisdiction 19. H. 6.
20.
. And Bracton likewise affirms, that a thing given in frankalmoigne remains
lay fee Bract. li. 5. c. 16.
: and by 4 Lands devised not subject to the jurisdiction of the ecclesiastical
court.
our law a prohibition lies for chaunteries, chapels, prebendes, and
vicarages Fitzh. N. B. 40. G. and 35. b.
: and if a man devise lands or tenements deuisable, the party to whom the
devise is made shall not sue in court spiritual, and if he do the other shall
have a prohibition: and therefore as Bracton says, the deuisee may enter
without the 5 Suites for chattels real must be in the spiritual court.
license of the executor Bracton vbi supr. Perk. tit. deuis.
: but if a devise be made of goods, and chattels real, as of a lease for
term of years, or of a ward, there the suite must be in the spiritual
court Fitzh. N. B. 43. G.
: and if a termor of certain land do devise his croppe and dye, the
spiritual court shall hold plea for this croppe 8. H. 3. prohibit. 19.
: and if a man devise corn or other goods to a man, and a stranger will not
suffer the executor to perform the testament in this point, they may sue the
stranger hereupon in the spiritual court: but if a man take goods devised out
of the possession of the executors, the law is otherwise, for then they shall
have an action of trespass at the common law 4. H. 3. prohibit. 28.
: but if a man sue another in the spiritual court for a rent reserved upon a
lease of tithes or offerings, a prohibition will lie in such case because it is
a lay rent 44. E. 3. 32
.


Nomomath. Let me now know Canonol. when 12. Division.
a man grants to one ius patronatus of the church of Dale, if this title be
controuersed in question, whether shall the ecclesiastical court or temporal
hold jurisdiction.


Canonolog. Surely I think it is determinable 1 That ius patronatus by the
Canon law is determinable in the ecclesiastical court, and that it passes by
the word ecclesia.
in the ecclesiastical court, because the right of patronage may pass by the
word ecclesia: as if a man said unto me, dono tibi ecclesiam S. Petri in Dale,
the aduowson of the church does pass c. quod autem de iur. patronat.
.


Anglonomop. The word ecclesia is otherwise taken in our law, for it is most
commonly used for a place wherein baptism and the sepulture of men's bodies is
celebrated 34. E. 1. quar. impedit. 187.
. And M. Fitzherbert says, that by this word ecclesia is meant only a
parsonage Fitzh. N. B. 32. G.
: and therefore if a presentment bemade to a chapel as to a church, by the
name of this word ecclesia, this does change and metamorphize the nature of it,
and makes 2 The diverse significations of the word ecclesia at the common law.
it presently a Church 17. E. 3. 58. 47. E. 3. 5. and 21 13. H. 4. Brief. 870.
: and because by this word (church) is meant a church parochial, therefore if a
man have an oratory or chapel within his manor of Dale and he gives part of
the demesnes of the said manor to a Chapleine for life to sing there, yet he
has not by this made it a Church, but it remains still an oratorie, and his
freehold: for here was no effectual operation of law to force such a change
36. E. 3. 13.
. But if a writ be brought of a Church in Dale, and in Dale there be both a
Church, and a Chapel, yet the writ shall stand good for the reason above
showed 20. E. 3. Brief. 684. 13. H. 6. 4. 9. E. 3. 451. 22. E. 3. 2. 8. H. 6.
33.
: and sometime it signifies the Church which consists of stones, walls, and
roof 8. H. 5. 4. Rolf.
: and sometimes the demesnes and profits of the benefice 45. E. 3. 4.
: but very seldom, if at any time it is used for ius patronatus. But if as
you say, the patronage should pass by these words dono ecclesiam: in all
reasonable understanding the patronage is to be distinguished from the Church
or benefice. And therefore Pollard 12. H. 8. 12. H. 8. 7. Prior. de Hunting. c.
does well 3 The interest of the patron, parson, and ordinary in the church is
showed.
distinguish the interest of the parson, patron and ordinary as in a several
thing: the parson (says he) has a spiritual possession in the church: the
ordinary has charge of the church to see the cure served: the patron ius
presentandi to the church; which being well weied does clearly bewray the
imbecilitie, and in consequence of your proposed argument Canonol. neither can
you by any solid reason of law entitle the spiritual court to jurisdiction in
this case, as I shall hereafter show.

Nomomath. What say you of this matter Codign.


Codign. We rely wholly for these matters upon the Canon law which in these
points is very pregnant and copious.


Canonolog. It is so in deed: but by that law ius patronatus is merely
spiritual, and not temporal, as Anglonomoph. would persuade: for it is wholly
after a spiritual manner carried and ordered: for though the patronage do
arise of three things the foundation, the edifying, and 4 What things do make a
patron by the Canon law.
the endowment 26. q. 7. filijs ca. quicunque 18. q. 2. Abbat.
according to the ancient saying patronum faciunt dos, aedificatio, fundus: yet
it is no temporal thing, because though a man be condemned, and his goods be
confiscated, yet he shall not lose his right of presenting Gl. est. in ver.
subject. rursus in fi. c. pastor al. in Cle. de re iudi.
: neither is this repugnant, that to a Church parochial he may present, to a
Church collegiate the law is, that though his assent go not to the election
of the party who is to be the governor: yet our law commands that after the
election it should be registered c. nobis de iur. patronat.
. Yet it seems to be spiritual, because if a lay patron do present one,
and after will vary and present another: now it is left to the arbiterment of
the Ordinary, which of them he will admit 2. did. c. ecclesiastic. et c.
quod autem de iur. patronat.
: and he which is so refused by the Bishop, has no remedy against the second
presentee, but he may have remedy against the Bishop for his unjust refusal
or wrongful delay: and his remedy in this case is a duplex querela against an
inferior Ordinary: and this must be handled in the spiritual court Pastoralis
co. tit.
.


Anglonomoph. Yea but the reason of that is given in our law, because the
right of patronage shall not come in debate Regist. 55.
.


Canonol. This is petere principium, but let me proceed. There is such a
mutual correspondence betwixt the patron and the Church, that they may not be
severed either in government, or in jurisdiction: for though the patron has
aliquid honoris, as we said, because he is to have the first place in the
procession 16. q. 7. piae mentis.
: yet he has also aliquid oneris, for he is bound by our law to defend the
Church from all oppressions 17. q. 7. filiis.
: and in that regard if he fall into poverty, he is to be maintained de bonis
ecclesiae Praealleg. c. filijs.
.


Anglonomoph. These circumstances do not infer the conclusion which you
labor for. It shall appear to you Canonologus, by our law and by very strong
reason, that the right of patronage 5 Ius patronatus is one of the proper
objects of the common law.
or the aduowson of the Church, is one of the proper objects of the common law.
First it is a rule with us, that if a man be sued in the spiritual court for a
lay fee, a prohibition will lie, that is, for lands and tenementes as M.
Fitzh. well expounds it Fitzh. N. B. 40. I.
. Now that an aduowson is a tenement, and lies in tenure, may 6 That an
aduowson lies in tenure.
by several authorities be avouched: and therefore a tenure ought as well to
be found by office of an aduowosn, as of a manor 14. H. 7. 28. ^ Bri. 17. E.
3. 10.
: and a lease for years may be made of an aduowson, and if the lessee alien in
fee, this is a disseisin to the lessor * 7. E. 3. 11.
: and 15. H. 7. all the Justices agree, that an aduowson lies in tenure 15. H.
7, 8.
. And for that cause, if one hold and aduowson of the king, and grant it to
another without license, the grauntee shall pay a fine 21. E. 3. 31. 20. E. 3.
Estoppel. 187.
. And generally upon any surmise, that a man is sued in the spiritual court
for a temporal thing, a prohibition will lie Fitzh. 43. h.
. Now the aduowson is temporal, though the admission and institution be
spiritual.


Nomomath. Let me ask you further this question: 13. Division.
if a man swear to me that he will make me a feofement of certain land before
such a day, and he does it not, whether may I sue him in the spiritual court
pro laesione fidei.


Anglonomoph. No: for if you do, a prohibition 1 Punishment pro laesione fidei
concerning a temporal act, is not to be adjudged in the ecclesiastical court.
will lie by our law, because the act which is to be done is a temporal act,
and is to be tried by the common law 38. H. 6. 29. Fitzh. 43. D. 2. H. 4. 15.
24. E. 1 Br. praemuni. 16. D. S. lib. 2. c. 24.
: and if men be sworn to give true evidence to a jury, and they do so,
whereupon certain persons be endited of some misdemeanor, if they which be
endited do sue them that gave evidence against them in the spiritual Court for
this diffamation done with an oath, they may make a prohibition Fitzh. N. B.
42. F. 11. H. 4. 88. prohib. 12.
: but if any perjury be committed in a spiritual 2 Perjury in an
ecclesiastical court, punishable in an ecclesiastical court.
court, there the spiritual court shall have jurisdiction Stat. de
circumspect. agat. 13. E. 1. 5. Elizab. c. 23. etc. 9.
: but the Ordinary in temporal cases may punish the party which has
committed perjury ex officio, though not at the suite of the party 20. E. 4.
10.
: and if a woman have title to sue a Cui in vita, and she makes oath to the
tenant of the land, that she will not sue any cui in vita against him, if after
she sue a Cui in vita, and thereupon the tenant sueth her in the spiritual
court pro laesione fidei, she may have a prohibition, because the oath
touches a temporal thing, namely land Fitzh. N. B. 42. ^. 4. H. 3. prohibit.
19. Bracton. lib. 5. c. 2.
. And if a man swear to one that he will pay to him twenty pound which he
owes him at a certain day, and at the day he fails of the payment, he may
not now be sued in the spiritual court for the perjury, because an action of
debt lies at the common law for the principal 22. E. 4. 11. H. 4. 88. prohib.
12.
. But 34. H. 6 it is said, that if a man buy an horse for five pound soluend.
such a day, and swears to make payment at the day, but when the day is come
fails of payment, an action of debt lies at the common law, and an other at
the spiritual law pro laesione fidei, and a writ of prohibition lies not
because they be two distinct things 34. H. 6. 30 Br. prohib. 2.
: yet 2. H. 4. is that a prohibition lies in such case 2. H. 4. 10.
.


Canonolog. But Lindwood shows that a libell may be so framed, that no
Prohibition will lie in your last recited case: as namely, the libell may be,
( That the party has damnablie broken his oath, pretending that he was not
bound by it Lindw. in capit. aeter. sanctio. verb. periur.
.


Anglonomoph. That is but a weak support 3. Linwoods authority touching
punishment pro l^sione fidei in temporal matters at the ecclesiastical Law is
not admitted.
of the spiritual jurisdiction: for it is one thing to be punished for
perjury, an other for his irreligious pretense. And surely I take it to be
agreeable to all Laws, that pretenses and intents are not punishable, but
only in crimine laesae Maiestatis. And a man may sue a Prohibition directed
to the Shirife, that he shall not permit, nor suffer the Queens lay subjects
to come to any place at the Citation of Bishops, ad faciend'aliquas
recognitiones, vel sacramenta praestanda, nisi solum in causis matrimonialibus
et testamentarijs. And M. Fitzherb. thinks that 4. The Barrister disproueth
the general citations of Bishops ad sacramenta prestanda by the common Law.
these general Citations, which Bishops make to cite men to appear before
them pro salute animae, without mentioning any special cause is against Law
Fitzh. not. bre. 41. A.
.


Nomomath. Why may they not use such general Citations, as well as a Justice
of peace 5. Nomomathes encountreth him in this point.
by your Law may make a precept to bring one before him, to aunsweare to such
things as shall be objected against him without showing any special cause
Crompt. Just. p. 131. et 132.
. And if by your Law they can receive no oath but only in matters
Matrimonial and Testamentarie, then it must needs be intended, that though
their process be general ad sacramenta praestanda, yet it is specially meant
of Matrimonial or Testamentarie causes: For I remember a good rule in the
Canon Law to this purpose: Quando constat de lege, sufficit generalis allegatio
28. q. 1. sicut enim in si.
. But what say you to this matter of oaths Codicgnostes.


Codicgn. Our Law differs little or nothing 6. The Civil Law agrees with
the Canon, in matter of Oaths.
from the Canon law in the discourse of oaths. And as the Canonistes, we make
two sorts of Oaths, Conuentionale and Iudiciale: Conuentionale, or
Promissorium, is when we swear de futuro that we will give some thing, or do
some thing etc Bartol. in l. si quis ff. de si d^nstrum.
. Iudiciale is when the Judge for the trial of the truth of a controversy,
and the infourming of his own conscience urges the party to take an oath ff.
eo. tit. l. ius iurand.
. Of both these rises an action triable well enough by the Canon Law: for in
this matter the Canon is the stern and motive of our judgments: and therefore
we hold the rule of the Canon Law firmly: Praestans et recipiens iuramentum,
contra Canones punitur Gl. verb. paena. capi. grauis. de censi.
.


Nomomath. Well, I will trouble you no further about questioning of things
belonging to several jurisdictions, but will now pass to inquire somewhat of
such things whereof an Action of the case will lie.


The second Dialogue.
Of Actions upon the Case.
NOnomath. I have some time meruailed Codicgn. wherefore an Action upon the
case, which you term actionem iniuriarum, should not have a special name,
as well as other actions, when as at the Common Law every action beside this
has his special name: As an action of Debt, of Account, of Wast, of Detinue,
of Covenant, etc. And in your Law there is 1. Division.
Actio ex stipulatu, actio empti, actio depositi, actio de pauperie etc. I pray
you therefore let me know the reason hereof.


Codicgn. What is more ebbing and flowing then man's invention: for some things
it has words too many, for some it wants names: Therefore Iuuenal, when he
sought for an apt name for that age which ensued the four famous ages, being
this last age of the world, and worse the^ the iron age, he names it by giving
it no name, (for his inue^tion could not find out any proper appellation) and
thus resolves:

-- quorum sceleri non inuenit ipsa
Nomen, et a nullo posuit natura metallo.
And because our sage Masters of the Law could not devise as many several
names, as there be several injuries: for what Dictionarie could contain so
many names? and because the name of the sign should be ample, and large enough
for the thing named or signified: 1. The reason is showed wherefore actio
iniuriarum has so general a name at the civil Law.
therefore they devised that actio iniuriarum might serve for all wrongs, for
which they could not frame particular names.


Anglonomoph. Indeed as D. Stephens his water was fit for many diseases, and
yet had never any special name, but was generally 2. The Barrister compares
an Action upon the case at the common Law to D. Stephens his water.
termed Doctor Stephens his water: so likewise an Action upon the case
stretches as a remedy against many offenses: Yet it has no other name then
an Action upon the case. And it is therefore so termed, because every man's
case must be in that action specially and at large set down: for in that
action the writ ought to comprehend the special matter, as well as the
declaration 7. H. 6. 47.
: Wherefore in an Action upon the case brought against one who was retained to
buie a Manor for the plaintiff, which he after purchased for himself, in
deceit of the plaintiff: and the plaintiff did not show of whom the Manor
should be bought in the writ, but only in the declaration, the writ was
abated 16. H. 6. Action sur le case 44. 48. E. 3. 6. Brief 627. 33. H. 6. 26.
11. H. 6. 2. 22. H. 6. 53.
.


Nomomath. I pray you satisfy me in this: If 2. Division.
a man be enterteined, or lodged in an Inn, and some of his goods be taken
from him out of the Inn by a stranger, whether may he have an Action upon the
case against the Inne-keeper.


Anglonomoph. Doubtless he may, if it were a common Inn in which he was lodged
2. H. 4. 7. 5. Mar. 158. Dyer.
. And if the party so prejudiced do bring an 1. An Action upon the case lies
against the keeper of a common Inn if goods be imbeasiled.
Action upon the case against the host, it is no plea for him to say that the
plaintiff did not deliver any goods unto him: or that the plaintiff himself
had the key of the chamber. And an Elegit has been awarded in such case of the
land, which the defendant had the day of the judgment given, and not the day
of the writ brought. And a Capias ad satisfaciendum lies not, because it was a
laches, and no wrong 42. E. 3. 11.
: And therefore the words of the writ be pro defectu ipsius B. Fitzh. not.
bre. 94. B.
: But the opinion of Hill, is 11. H. 4. that if the Inne-keeper in such case
do notify unto the guest, that he can not attend upon him, and
notwithstanding he will needs be harbored there at his peril, the
Inne-keeper is discharged 11. H. 4. 45. per Hill.
. And 22. H. 6. the difference 2. If a stranger lodge with me by my consent,
and do imbeasill goods, the Inne-keeper shall not be charged.
is taken, that if a man do lodge in chamber with me by my consent meerlie,
and not by the appointment of the host, and he robs me, the host shall not
be charged: Otherwise is it if he be harbored there by the host. And if my
servant rob me, the host shall not be 3. If my servant imbesill my goods,
the Inne-keeper shall not be charged by the common Law.
charged 22. H. 6. 21. per Curiam.
. And 39. H. 6. it is said, that an Action upon the case lies against the
Inne-keeper, if he will not lodge a man; and the Constable may enforce him
thereunto. But Danby there holds, that he is not bound to give bread (or
prouander) to his horse without present money paid in hand 39. H. 6. 18.
.


Codign. By our Law, if thorough the negligence 4. By the Civil Law the
Inne-keeper is to be charged with action, if his servants steal goods.
of the servants which wait, or attend in the Inn, if any thing be stolen
out of the chamber of the guest by any such servants, the Master or Inne-keeper
himself is to be impeached by way of action, and he whose goods are stolen
may recover double damages against him ff. si ad verse. nan. l. 1*
: because the receipt of such goods into the Inn is an implicatiue promise,
that the goods shall be safe ff. furt. adu. nan. can. sta. l. 1.
. So likewise if a man have 5. If through the default of the Master of the ship
goods be stolen, the owner of the ship is to make recompense.
a Ship wherein he uses to transport and convey men or goods into foreine
nations, and has appointed a Master of the said ship, by whose default or
wilful offense the goods of some that are in the ship are imbeasiled or
impaired, an action in this case will lie against the owner of the ship ff. de
exercit. act^. l. 1.
: for the Master of the ship is he cui totius nauis, anchora, et cura commissa
est ea. l. 1.. Magistrum.
. And in the Tertorike or Almaine language, such a person is called by the name
of Stir-man: and the owner of the ship is therefore in this case charged,
because he prefected him, and made him Master of his ship ea. l. 1.. non autem.
, and because to him the daily profits, rents, and gains of the ship do
appertain and come ea. l.. exercitatorem.
.


Canonolog. I do not remember any thing in our Law contrary to that which you
have said.


Nomomath. I would be resolved of this Codignostes, 3. Division.
whether according to your Law in all contractes there must be a mutual
consideration on both sides.


Codicgn. It is not necessary, that there be 1. By the Civil Law it is not
necessary that there be mutual consideration in contractes.
mutual consideration, but so there be a mutual consent, it is sufficient in
our Law, and it is therefore called a contract: because by couenanting diuersae
voluntates in vnum contrahuntur Instit. de actio.. 1. Gazal. verbo contractus.
. D. Baldus notes, that there is a triple kind 2. Three sorts of contractes by
the Civil Law.
of contract. A proper contract, an improper contract, and a most improper
contract. The proper contract, is when both parties are vltro 3. What is a
proper contract by the Civil Law.
citroque bound l. Labeo. contrac. ff. de verb. signif.
: As if I buy of you a Horse for five pound, I am bound to give you the money,
and you are bound to give the horse unto me. An improper contract, is when one
of the 4. What an improper contract is by the civil Law.
parties only is bound by the contract: As in a gift of goods, or chattels,
the donour only is bound to deliver the things given l. Aristo. ff. de donat.
canmor.
. And so when one lends to an other, he which boroweth is only bound ad
tantundem reddendu^ ff. si cer. pe. l. 2.
. The most improper contract, is when neither 5. What a most improper contract
is by the same Law.
of the parties is bound, but a bond or contract is dissolved and defeated: As
when a man sells to an other a silver Cup for three pounds, to be paid at
such a day, and the vendour delivers the cup to the servant of the vendee,
who presently runs from his Master: so that the vendee sueth the vendor for
the cup, and the vendor sueth him for the money, if depe^ding these two
several suites, both the parties do after friendly agree, that suites shall
surcease betwixt them, and that the one of them shall be quite against the
other, this transaction as we term it is a contract, though most improper
Saly. in lib. sieve apud acta. C. de transact.
. Likewise when a man will acquit one of money which he owes unto him upon a
contract, which in our Law is called acceptilatio: as when I say unto one with
whom I have bargained: Have not you received of me all the money which I did
owe unto you by way of contract? and he aunsweareth: I have received it all,
whereas in truth he has not received a penie of it: this is a good acquitall,
and one of the most improper contractes Instit. qui. mo. tol. oblig. et in l.
vbi pactum. C. de transact. per Bar.
.


Anglonomoph. Our Law medleth with no contractes, but such as you have termed
proper contractes: For our Law requires in all 6. The Common Law admits no
contracts, but such as be proper.
contractes a mutual consideration, and one part of the contract challenges
and begets the other. And therefore the case was thus: The servant of A. was
arrested in London upon a trespass, and two which did know his Master did
bail him: and after A. promised them for their friendship to save them
harmless of damages and costs, if afterward they were charged: And so it
befell, that afterward they were charged: yet it was held that the Action
upon the case would not lie upon the promise, because there was no
consideration, for the bayling was of their own head, and was executed before
the assumpsit: But if the Master had requested before, and assured afterward
then perhaps the law would have been otherwise: as in consideration that you
have married my daughter at my request I will give you an hundred pound. This
is a good consideration because the marriage did ensue my request, and in like
sort land may be given in frankemarriage after the espousals 10. Eliz. 272. Die.
. And so whereas Oneley brought an action upon the case against the Earl of
Kent and his Lady, and declared upon an assumpsit of the Lady, whilst she
was sole, that in consideration that he had taken great pains and had expended
1500. li. about her business and suites, that she would repay the 1500. li.
and beside that twenty pound more. This was held a good consideration 19.
Eliz. 356* Die. Oneleys case.
: and 29. Eliz. the case was such: A man being found in arrerages upon his
account did promise to the dettee that if he would forbear him per paruu^
tempus, that he would pay him the money without further delay, and the dettee
did forbear him accordingly, and after upon this assumpsit brought an action
upon the case: and it seemed to three of the Justices of the common pleas, that
the action would not lie, because that paruu^ tempus was no good consideration,
neither could it be beneficial to the party: but one of the Justices said,
that if the dettee had brought an action upon the case without any
consideration alleged, and had proved the debt, that would have sufficed for
that had been an assumpsit in law: and that there must be a reciprocal
consideration in such case may most clearly and evidently be proved, by 44. E.
3. A writ of debt was brought, and the plaintiff declared that the defendant
did owe unto him five pounds for a house which he had sold unto him: the
defendant said, that there was a covenant betwixt the plaintiff and the
defendant, that the pr should remove the same house at his own costs and
charges within a certain day to a certain place, and when he had so removed
it, that then the defendant would pay him his money, and that the house (or the
frame of the house) was not as yet removed: and this was held a good plea 44.
E* 3. 28.
. And where two considerations are to be accomplished, the performance of them
both is to be auerred: Wherefore the case was, that in an action of trespass
the defendant pleaded a concord, that he before a certain day should make
certain windows, and should pay certain money, and he said that he paid
the money by virtue of the concord before the day, and demanded judgment si
actio etc. But he spoke nothing of the making of the windows, and the
plaintiff replied, Null tiel accord, and it was for the plaintiff, and it was
held by all the court a ieofaile. For when they accorded that the defendant
should do two things, the concord is not performed, unless both be done, and
so the matter of the plea is not good, and therefore the replication cannot
make it good 6. H. 7. 10.
: And if I buy a horse of you for six pound, you may deteine the horse till I
have paid you 10. E. 4* 1^.
: and so if one buy an horse of an other in Smithfield and do not pay to the
vendor money presently, but does only promise it, the vendor may sell it to
another immediately, and the other can have no remedy against him: for
otherwise he may be compelled to keep his horse in perpetuum against his will
17. E. 4. 1. per Choke.
: And to this agrees the book of 21. H. 7. where it is said, that in the
bargain it is employed, that the bargainee shall pay the money presently,
otherwise he shall not have the thing sold; but if it were for a certain
day, the money were not to be paid before the day, because the bargainor
has given unto him express liberty to pay at any time within the time
prefixed 21. H. 7. 6.
: And so is the book of 28. H. 8. that a contract or bargain is not good
without present payment, unless there be a certain day limited, so that one
of the parties may have an action of debt for the money, and the other a
writ of Detinue for the wares 28. H. 8. 30* Die.
: and if a man assure and promise to one that he will make for him certain
waines for carriage etc. and he takes parcel of the money before hand to do
it, and after he does it not according to his assumpsit, the other may have an
action of trespass upon his case Fitz. N. B. 94. A.
: so an action upon the case was brought because the defendant promised to the
plaintiff, that if the plaintiff would discharge I. S. of execution, in which
he was at the suite of the plaintiff, that then he would pay unto him his
debt, and in truth the promise was made to the wife of the plaintiff, to which
the husband agreed, and thereupon he discharged the party, and it was ruled by
the court, that the action was maintenable because a feoffement of lands or
gift of goods is available to the wife if the husband do not disagree, so it
is of an assumpsit 27. H. 8. 24. 25.
.


Nomomath. Trouble your self no further Anglonomoph. let me ask this one
question of Codicgn. whilst it rests in my mind. Suppose that I have hired a
ship or gallie to transport my family, and some of my household 4. Division.
goods, by lawful permission, and I agree to pay for the carriage of every
poll or person of them a certain sum of money, admit that three or four of
them die in the ship, whether shall the owner of the ship have the entire
sum of money, or shall it be apporcioned for them, that be dead before they
be brought to the land Ludou^c. de Romans in singulari.
.


Codicgn. To clear your doubt this diversity must be understood: if the
owner of the 1 That no fare ought to be paid for them that die in a ship, if
the master of the ship did assume to bring them safe to shore.
ship did make a covenant with you, that he would bring them safe to such a
place, then surely you ought to pay no fare for them that be dead Id. in d.
singu. ad regu. praedict.
: but if the covenant were to take them into the ship, and to carry them to
such a place, the^ the law will be otherwise: and so if a 2 If a child be borne
in seafaring nothing is to be paid for that child.
child be borne in the ship whilst it is upon the sea, there is nothing due in
respect of that child ff. locat. l. si adest.. si quis mulier.
.


Canonolog. All contractes are bonae fidei, and what is a contract but
stipulatio verborum? so that it is to be taken as the words do sound, no
violence being offered to apparent equity. Pecki. ad reg. iur.



Anglonomoph. In our law there is a case not much swaruing from this purpose,
if we stand not too much upon the common and verbal way to go to the end of a
question, I. B. did 3 The barrister puts a case of carrying a horse safe and
sound over Humber.
declare by bill that A. at a certain day and year upon Humber did assume to
carry his horse being taken into his barge over the water of Humber sound and
safe, and the said A. did surcharge his barge with other things, by which mean
his horse perished in the water, and this was held a good cause of action 22.
Assis. pl. 41.
: but surely in this case without ferrying over the horse there was nothing due
unto the bargeman by reason of the covenant.

Nomomath. Canonologus, you have yet spoken nothing concerning the necessity
of mutual consideration in bargains, I pray you let us hear the
determination of your law hereupon, and then we will insist no more upon this
point of contractes.


Canonol. Our law does not refuse or abiudicate 4 The cannon law agrees with
the civil in cases of improper contracts.
the kinds of improper contractes, as by the report of Anglonomoph. the common
law does, for if two should contend for an ecclesiastical benefice, as namely
for the aduowson of a parsonage or prebend, and one of them agrees with the
other, that he shall have one turn of presenting, and the other an other
turn, and so successiue per alternas vices, here though there be no
consideration properly: yet in our law this is a good contract and a good
consideration: but if one of them should have given to the other twenty pound
to have had the presentation wholly, and solely to himself, 5 Division.
this had bin void in law and symoniacall c. si quando cleric. de offi. de leg.
etc. statuimus de tra^sac. nisi effet de preben.
.


Nomomath. How does your law Anglonom. punish defaultes for want of skill, as
suppose that I do hire one for a certain sum of money to make for me a
frame or fabric of an house of good timber, well seasoned, and in a certain
form, and he makes it of very weak timber, ill seasoned, and very rudely in
form, whether in such a case will an action upon the case lie against him or
no.


Anglonomoph. I doubt not but it will, for where a man undertakes to do a
thing well and perfectly, and through ignorance and default of skill he
fails, remedy is given by an action upon the case: for the case was 11. R.
2. that in an action upon the case, the plaintiff declared that at a certain
day and year in London there was a covenant made betwixt the plaintiff and the
defendant, that the defendant should cure the pr of a certain malady, and he
took of him for it a certain sum of money before hand, in 1 That by the
common law want of skill is to be punished by an action upon the case if there
be an assumpsit either implicatiue or expressed.
consideration whereof the said def. did undertake to cure the pr of his
malady, who ministered unto him medicines contrary to his disease, whereby he
was empeired and became worse then he was before 11. R. 2. Act* sur le case 37.
: so 19. H. 6. an actio^ upon the case was brought because the def. did assume
to cure the plaintifes horse, and that he adeo negligenter, and improuide
imposuit medicina^, quod equum etc. And it was there said by Newton, that if I
give counsel to a man to give his horse certain medicines, who does it, and
thereupon the horse dies he shall not have an actio^, unless I had undertaken
to heal him, which must be trauersed: And Paston granted this, and said, that
if I have a disease in my hand, and a man applies a medicin to my arm, by
which negligence my hand is empeired, yet no action will lie unless he had
undertaken to cure it 19. H. 6. 49.
; and as I take it, so is that case to be understood which M. Fitzh. has: if a
smith do hurt my horse with a nail, I may have an action upon the case
though he did not warrant the well shooeing of him: but he says not (though he
did not assume) for in deed the shooing of him is an implicatiue assumpsit, and
if there were no consideration, but the smith did it of mere good will, I do
not think, that any action will lie Fitz. N. B. 94 D. 14. H. 6. 18. 46. E. 3.
19. 48. E. 3. 6. 21. H. 6. 55.
: so that the action lies not merely and directly for want of skill, but
because the assumpsit was not accomplished for want of skill.


Codign. But by our law the want of skill is a 2 That by the civil law want of
skill only is punishable.
sufficient ground of action: for if in the case proposed of the making a frame
of a house, it be not done well and artificially, our law is that the artificer
shall render damages in toto, but if some part be well done, and some ill, so
that it is evident that if the workman had used convenient diligence, all of
it might have been well consummated, so that there is no default in skilfulnes
but in carefulnes, then the workman shall not be condemned in toto, but in
tanto that is for so much, as is not well done Gazalup. in ver. ignorant.
.


Canonolog. The rule of our law is, that crassa 3 By the cannon law Crassa and
supina ignorantia non excusat.
and supina ignorantia non excusat Ber. in c. regni. fiuit. de ordi ab epi. qui
resig. epi.
.


Nomomath. Let me know this of you Codicgnost. when one man through fraud and
deceit ouereacheth another, whether is this punishable in your law as a thing
injuriously done. 6. Division.



Codicgnost. Yes if he do circumuent him 1 Circumuention dolo malo punishable
at the civil law.
dolo malo.

Nomomath. It must needs be so intended: for I am sure your Law reputeth no
deceit to be good.


Codicgnost. Yes, there is a distinction in our Law of Dolus bonus, and Dolus
malus. Dolus 2. A difference at the civil law betwixt dolus malus* and dolus
bonus.
bonus, is when a man does machinate or devise any thing to entrap a thief,
or a traitor ff. de leg. 2. lib. cum pater. Titia.
, and such deceit may not properly be termed fraud, but it may more fitly
be termed by the name of Solertia, or cunning. Such a kind of cunning is much
used in war-fare, by which more victories are achieved then by strength of
hand. To which purpose I remember certain verses of an uncertain author,
that may well be accommodated to this purpose: Nil refert Armis conting at
palma doloue,
Nam dolus, an virtus fuerit quis in host requiret.
But Dolus malus is a craft or subtle devise used to the deceiving of an other
ff. de do. mal. l. 1.. 1.
, or to frustrate the Law ff. de leg. l. contra legem.
: As the Law prohibiteth a man to give any thing to his wife. And Titius
gives a horse to Sempronius, who gives it to the wife of Titius by the
secreat compact of her husband l. si sponsus in pr. ff. de dona. inter virum et
vxor.
, this is done in fraudem legis, because the purpose of the giver at the first
was to give to his wife. But if there be a Statute, that every one which
guides any wayne over such a bridge being fraught with carriage, shall pay
iiij. d', and the party causes all the things in the wayne, when he comes
to the bridge, to be carried over the bridge on men's backs, here is no
defraudation of the Law: But if he should give iiij. pence for the carriage over
the bridge, but not current money, now the Law should be defrauded Io. in.
penult. Insti. de ^dop.
. And when a man is prejudiced by the fraudulent dealing of an other man, he
may by our Law have an action against him, which is called actio doli, an
action of Deceit.


Canonolog. Indeed the difference of Dolus is used likewise in our Law. And we
have a rule of that which you have termed dolum bonum: 3. The same difference
the common Law observes.
Frangenti fidem, fides frangatur eidem 23. q. 1. noli existimare C. de pac. l.
cum proponas in glo. Accur.
. And likewise an example of it used in our law: namely of Solomon, who did
use such cunning betwixt the two harlots, in searching out who was the true,
and natural mother of the child. But the deceit, which of you has been termed
dolus malus, is in our Law nomen reatus, which it does punish, as being done
against the Law: for qui peccat, non peccat de legis authoritate 23. q. 4. qui
peccat.
.


Anglonomoph. That deceit which of ye both 4. Dolus malus punishable at the
common Law by an action upon the case, or a writ of Deceit.
has been termed dolus malus, does not in our Law escape punishment: but for
the more strong inhibiting and repressing of it, it does afforde a double
remedy against such as endammage others by deceit: namely, either a writ of
Deceit, or an Action upon the case. For if a man play with an other at dice,
and he has false dice, with which he plaieth, and wins the other man's
money, he that loses his money in such sort may have an Action upon the case
for this deceit. And in other like cases an Action upon the case, or a writ of
Deceit will lie, at the pleasure, and election of the plaintiff. And if I
present one to a Church, whereof I am Patron, to the Ordinary, and one T.
disturbeth me: wherefore an other man purchases a Quare impedit in my name,
retournable in the Common place (I not knowing thereof) against the said T. and
after causes the writ to be abated, or me to be nonsuit in the action, I may
have a writ of Deceit against him 5. 5. E. 3. Quare impedit 37. 20. H. 6. 20.
Fitzh. not. bro. 96. A.
. And in every case an action upon the case is maintenable against him which
sueth an original in the name of the plaintiff against his will 7. H. 6. 45.
. So if a man forge a statute merchant in my name, and sue a Capias thereupon,
whereby I am arrested, and had in execution, I may have a writ of Deceit
against him that forged it 19. H. 6. 44. 58. 34. H. 6. 19. Fitzh. Not. be. 96.
B.
. So if the Warden of an Infant vouch one by couin, who is not sufficient, or
pleads some bad plea, whereas he might have pleaded a better plea, the Infant
shall have a writ of Deceit against him, and shall recover the full value in
damages 9. E. 4. 34.
. And 11. H. 6. a writ of Deceit was brought against an Attorney for
acknowledging a satisfaction, whereas his master was not in truth satisfied 11.
H. 6. 34.
. And in a Praecipe quod reddat, if the Shirife return the tenant of the land
to be summoned, whereas in truth he was never summoned, whereupon the tenant
loses by default upon the Graund cape returned: Now the tenant may have a
writ of Deceit against him that recovered, and against the Shirife for his
false return Fitzh. Not. bre. 97. C.
: But the writ of Deceit in this case does not determine the right of the land,
but does only defeat the judgment 35. H. 6. 44. 18. E. 4. 11. 33. H. 6. 43.
41. E. 3. 2. 43. E. 3. 31. 50 E. 3. 18.
. And 5. E. 4. is that no damages in this case shall be recovered against the
Shirife, but he shall be only fined 5. E. 4. 49.
. And if a man recover in a writ of Wast by default, whereas the defendant was
never summoned, the defendant in this case may have a writ of Deceit 20. E. 3.
Disceit 5. 29. E. 3. 54. 48. E. 3. 59. 19. E. 2. Disceit 56. 19. E. 3. Disceit
3.
. And if a man bargain with an other, and assume upon consideration to
enfeoffe him of certain land, and he enfeoffeth an other: he to whom the
assumpsit was made may have a writ of Deceit 20. H. 6. 36. 16. E. 4. 9. Fitzh.
Not. br. 98. F.
, or an Action upon the case at his pleasure 3. H. 7. 14. 2. H 7. 11.
. And if one sell to an other a Horse which he knows to have a secreat
disease in his body: or sells certain quarters of Grain, which is full of
gravel, a writ of Deceit lies 20. H. 6. 36.
. So 13. H. 4. a writ of Deceit was brought for selling a certain quantity of
wool, and warranting it to be 50. sackes, whereas it wanted of that measure:
the defendant pleaded in bar that it was weyed before the sale, and that the
servants of the plaintiff being his factors did accepr it, and carried it beyond
the sea, whereupon the plaintiff demurred 13. H. 4. 1.
. And if a man lose his land by default in a Praecipe quod reddat, whereas he
was never summoned, and die, his heir may have an action of Deceit, and shall
have restitution of the land 8. H. 6. 5. per Rolfe. 15. E. 3. Disceit 43. 18.
R. 2. Disceit 50. Fitzh. Not. bre. 98. Q.
. And 1. E. 3. in the book of Assizes it is said, that if a recovery in such
case be had against the father by default, whereas in truth the father was dead
at the time of the recovery, the heir may avoid this by writ of Disceit, or
Error 1. Ass. p. 16.
. And whereas there be two tenants for life, the remainder to the heirs of one
of them, and they both lose by default being not summoned, and the tenant for
life dies, the suruiuor shall have a writ of Disceit for the whole: Otherwise
it had been if the recovery had been against the tenant for life only by
default 8. E. 3. Disceit 7.
.


Nomomath. You have sufficiently discussed 7. Division.
the point of deceit; Now I would crave your opinions of an other matter.
Suppose that a man by slanderous and opprobrious speeches is impeached, and
his good name impaired, this being but a verbal injury: whether do your
Laws inflict punishment upon such as offend by contumelious and reproachful
speeches or no? and what punishment do they inflict?


Codicgn. Such outrageous speeches either proceed 1. Contemptuous speeches are
not punishable by the Civil Law.
of pride, and tend to contempt, and against such the Law allows no remedy,
because the party himself may frustrate them by contempt: Therefore the
saying of the Rhodians in the senate did argue wisdom: Superbiam, verborum
praesertim, iracundi oderunt, prudentis irrident: vtique si inferior is
aduersus superiorem est, capitali paena nemo vnquam dignum iudicauit: etiam
Deos aliqui verbis ferocioribus increpant, nec ob id quenquam fulmine ictum
audimus Liui. lib. 45.
. The disgrace, especially of words, irefull men revenge with hatred, wisemen
with laughter: yea though it happen that the injury be done by an inferior
person to his superior, and no man ever thought such injury worthy of capital
punishment: even the Gods have of some been reviled by insolent terms, yet
we do not hear that any man has been stricken with thunder bolt for that
fault. But if the contumely do rather flow 2. Opproprious speeches which
proceed of malice are punished.
from malice then from pride, and tend rather to discredit then to contempt,
the case is altered, and then a capital punishment has in ancient time been
inflicted, if the fault were public. For of the Romans S. Augustine says
thus: Romani probris et iniurijs Poetarum subiectam vitam famamque habere
noluerunt, capite etia^ puniri sancientes tale carmen condere si quis auderet
D. Augusti. lib. 2. de ciuit. dei c. 12.
: The Romans would not have their life and credit subject to the reproaches and
injuries of Poets, making it capital for any to devise a slanderous libell. And
he cites the words of Scipio in another place: Nostrae duodecim tabulae cum
perpaucas res capite sanxissent, in his hanc quoque sancienda^ patauerunt, si
quis actitauisset sieve carmen condidisset, quod infamiam faceret, flagitiumue
alteri D. Augusti. lib. de ciuit. dei 2. c. 9. Cicer. lib. 4. de rep.
.

Nomomath. Yet the Graecians did allow such 3. It is objected that the
Graecians did tolerate sarcasmicall speeches against wicked men.
taunts and biting sarcasmicall speeches, as the same S. Augustine reports D.
August. ibidem c. 9.
. And Socrates did not take it grievously to be noted of Comoedians, for which
he gives this reason: Si merito reprehenderint, emendabimur: sin falso, tum
illa nihil ad nos attinebunt. And it seems to keep men in awe, and to
restrain them from offending, when as wicked men well deserving infamy, are
touched by such reprochful inue^tions.


Codicgn. Your three arguments against my assertion are but three words,
Graecians, Socrates, Terror; to which by your permission I will particularly
answer. The Graecians did many times sleep, when the Romans did awake, and
in matter of ambiguitie the Romans were by many degrees more to be imitated
then the Graecians: Yet the Graecians did not always suffer this licentious
rage and inuectiue of Poets. For when Aristophanes in one of his comedies would
make known unto the people the extorcious and tyrannous spoils of Cleon, a man
of high estate Aristoph. in Equit.
, he was so inflamed with rancour against him, that when he could hire none for
money to personate Cleon, he performed the part himself, and did with such
indignity and disgraceful terms abuse Cleo^, that Cleon pursuing the matter
against him, he was fined 5. talents: and as himself confesses, though he
gained much by his acted Comedy, yet he lost fully as much by his fine: And as
himself further confesses (to express it in Latin) reuomuit quantum hauserat
Aristoph. in Acharnens.
, being a tart-tounged detractor, whose works are scarcely to be read,
unless a man would taste the gall of bitterness, much less to be imitated, and
(as Viues censureth him well) multa per ebrietatem conscripsit Ludouic. Vi. in
comment. ad lib. 2. de ciu. de. c 9.
. And whereas he was corrupted 4. Aristophanes is condemned for his bitter
detractions.
by money received of Anitus and Melitus, the enemies of Socrates, to scourge
and lash Socrates in his comedy called Nebulae, (which the same Viues prettily
terms fabulam nebulonicam) with contumelious speeches, Socrates in this
should not have been pacient, because it was crimen facto non leave, exemplo
admodu^ grave: But Plato, who was more exercised then Socrates in matters of
common weal, did banish out of his common weal such railing Poets Plat. lib.
2. de rep.
. And whereas you think it convenient to salt the corrupt manners of men by such
piercing speeches, that they may fear to offend: the truth is, such salt is
very unsavory, and such courses very corrupt: for if they be suffered to taunt
Hyperbolus a lewd fellow, they will not spare Pericles an excellent man, (as
Cicero well affirms in the person of Scipio Cicer. lib. 4. de rep.
:) for he was likewise more then nipped of Aristophanes, and Eupolis. And S.
Augustine reproves such means of reproving, saying gravely, wisely, and
divinely: Iudicijs ac Magistratuum disceptationibus legitimis propositam vitam,
non poetarum ingenijs habere debemus D. August. d. li. 2. c. 9.
: And disorderly persons, as Cicero says well, a censore melius est quam a
poeta notari: rather of a Censor which is Magister morum: then of a sour
Satyrist or gibing comical-poet, which is Corruptor morum, and such faults are
rather to be rebuked of a preacher curing with his zeal, then scurrilously
touched of a prater wounding with his style: for such carpers ought to take
religious heed least tincta Lycambeo sanguine 5 The deuisors and publishers of
libels punishable by the civil law. 6 The canon law is severe against such.
telagerant: But that I may show what our laws have ratified touching this
abuse: if any man do devise any slanderous libell against one, and it happens
that another finds it, and he does not cancel it and tear it in pieces, but
does publish it to others, he is punished with capital punishment ff. de
iniur^^. lex torm. ent.. si quis liberum.
, and so is the author likewise punished Azo. in sum. C. de iniuri.
.


Canonol. We account in our law such detraction to be summam iniquitatem, and
the censure of our law is that omnis qui detrahit fratri suo homicida est c. 1.
de maledi. 6.
.


Anglonomoph. Our law is too charitable dealing a mother, and therefore it
allows the administration of goods circafuneralia, though it be done by a
stranger, who has no authority to intermeddle 21. H. 6. 28.
: because it is a work of charity 7 Reprooachfull speeches punishable at the
common law by an action upon the case.
21. E. 4. 5.
: but slander and diffamation, which blemisheth the good name of others it
detesteth and utterly disfauoureth, condemns, and punishes as a stepdame
unto rancor and violent speeches the abortiue children of malice. Wherefore an
action upon the case will lie at our law for calling the plaintiff thief 27.
H. 8. 22.
: and for calling the pr a false and perjured man 28. H. 8. Br. Acti. sur le
case. 3. 30. H. 8. Br. Acti. sur le case. 104.
: so an action upon the case lies for calling the pr false justice of peace 4.
E. 6. Br. Acti. sur le case. 112.
. But to publish one for his villain, who in truth is his villain is no
slander nor actionable 2. E. 4. 5.
: nor to publish one to be a bastard, who is in deed a bastard, if the
defendant do make title to the bastardes land, and did therefore term him
bastard that the matter might be produced into question and trial 25. Eliz.
Ba^isters case.
.


Nomomath. Enough of this, we will pass now to other matters.


The third Dialogue.
Of Dettes.
NOmomath. I pray you let me know 1 Division.
Codicgnostes all the ways and means whereby one man may become indebted to
another, so that remedy may be had by process of law for the debt.


Codign. A debt may grow by writing or especialtie: 1 Debt may grow by
writing or especialtie.
as when the dettor confesses himself to be obliged and bound to his
creditor, and such bond or obligation may be by deed indented sub eadem forma
verborum, and by mutual delivery it becomes the deed of them both l. seruu^
filij. eum qui chirographum. ff. de leg. 1.
. Such a kind of writing we call instrumentum 2 An obligation may be by deed
indented at the civil law.
priuatum, because it is done in the name and by the hand of a private man, not
in the name of any king or prince: and this kind of instrument ought to have
the subscription of three witnesses C. de proba. l.
: but there is a private instrument of more solemnity, which is called of 3
What instrumentum garra^tigiae is at the civil law.
us instrumentum garrantigiae, an instrument of warrantie, upon which a man
shall have present execution: as if it do specify that one man is indebted to
another, this being presently exhibited in place of judgment, the judge ought
presently to awarde execution ff. de re iudi.
: and such writings obligatorie if they have any razure in them in any
material place are of no credit in law c. ex liter. in glo. 2. de fid.
instrument.
: and there be in our law three sorts of bonds, Naturalis, Ciuilis, Praetoria.
Naturalis 4 Three sorts of bonds by the civil law.
is, when as by mutual contract one of the parties becomes mutually bound
to the other. Ciuilis, is that which is made in form of law, whereof we have
above spoken, wherein one of the parties confesses and acknowledges himself
to be indebted to the other in a certain sum of money, and binds himself
for the payment of the said sum. Praetoria, which is devised and conceived
of the Praetor, and Judge, in precise terms specifijng the debt Insti. de obli.
in prin.
. Likewise debt may accrue 5 Debt may grow by way of contract.
unto one by way of contract, which is nothing else but the consent of 2.
persons for a thing to be done or given by the one to the other, and it is on
both sides obligatorious de pac. l. 1.. 1.
: for if two do consent in this true proposition: Titius est homo, or in this
false assertion, Titius est Asinus, yet this is no contract, because non
vtrobique obligat Gazalup. verb. pactum.
: for if the words or act be obligatorie, then the contract is obligatorie,
as contrariwise, if the words or act tend to acquittance, then the contract is
nothing else but an acquittall, as if the creditor do redeliuer the writing
obligatorie unto his dettor, this is an acquittance in law: for otherwise the
redeliuerie should work nothing ff. de pac. l. labeo.
: but if the creditor should redeliuer a pledge unto the dettor, this will not
amount to any acquitall or release of the debt, because the redeliuerie in
that case may have an other effect, namely the use of the pledge for a certain
time l. sequent. ff. eo. ti.
: And if the instrument or especialtie of the debt be come to the hands of the
dettor, the law will intend prima facie that it was redeliuered by the cteditor
in lieu of an acquittance l. si chirograph. ff. de pig.
: but this must be limited with this restreint, if the dettor be a mere
stranger in facto unto the creditor, but if he be his servant or one of his
family, conuersing in house with him, then the intendment will be otherwise:
for then the law will presume that he might easily come by the bond without the
priuitie of the creditor l. vnica.. ille. C. de lati. li. tol.
.


Canonol. I have not at any time observed any thing in our law which makes
head against 6 The canon law agrees with the civil in matters of bonds or
dettes.
these determinations of law by you mentioned.


Anglonomoph. Our law with some of these assertions fully agrees, and from
some flatly disagreeth, as I mean to manifest by examining 7 Debt may grow by
contract by the common law.
in order the particulars of Codicgnostes his speech. Dettes with us may grow
many ways, and every way an action of debt will lie: for it may grow by
contract as Codicgnost. has auowched. For if the husband sell trees growing
upon the land of his wife, and the wife dies before they be cut down, yet the
husband may maintain an action of debt: so it is of a vendition by the tenant
in tail: so where a man has a horse by wrong and sells him to another for a
certain sum of money, and before the delivery of the horse, he dies, or
the owner takes him away, yet an action of debt lies upon the vendition 18.
E. 4. 6.
. So if a man sell ten acres of land to another for ten pound, and after he
will make no assurance of the land, yet he may maintain an action of debt for
the money, and the other is put to his action upon the case, but if it be
agreed, that the assurance shall be made before a certain day, and the ten
pound to be paid upon the perfecting of the assurance, then the law is
otherwise. For if he make not the assurance before the day, but after he
shall not have an action of debt for the ten pound 22. H. 6. 50. per Newt.
. But if a tailor do make a garment for me, if we be not agreed before what
I shall pay for the making, he can not have an action of debt, otherwise it is
for victuailes and for wine 12. E. 4. 8.
. Likewise an action of 8 An action of debt lies at the common law for a loan
of money.
debt lies upon a loan of money, made by the creditor to the debtor Fitzh. N.
B. 119. G.
: or it lies for a mere duty, as when an Attorney brings 9 An action of
debt lies at the common law for a mere duty.
an action of debt for money expended in the suite of his client Fitzh. N. B.
121. L. 10. H. 4. Debt 158. 3. E. 4. 29.
: or upon an obligation, as when the especialtie is Nouerint vniuersi me teneri
etc. And after the deed says, ad fideliter computandum de proficuis, in this
case the obligee may use an action of debt, or an action of account at his
pleasure 41. E. 3. 10. 42. E. 3. 9. 28. E. 3. 98.
. Upon which case Baker 28. H. 8. in Cores case thus distinguishes, that if
the delivery of the money were to this intent, that an increase or profit
might rise of it, and not that money might be repaied, there no action of debt
will lie, but a writ of account only 28. H. 8. 20. Die. Cores. C.
. And if a man do make a contracte to pay certain money for a thing bought by
him, if he make an obligation 10 An obligation made after a contract
dissolueth the contract by the common law.
for the money, the contracte is discharged, and he shall not have an action of
debt upon the contracte 9. E. 4. 25. 28. H. 6. 4. 21. H. 7. 5. 1. H. 6. 8. per
^ab. 20. H. 6. 23 35. E. 3. det. 83.
. But if a man make a talie, and writes words obligatorie upon the talie, and
ensealeth it and delivers it as his deed, yet this shall not bind him, but
he may plead nihil debet against it, or may wage his law, for an obligation
ought to be writ in parchment or paper, and not upon a piece of wood 25. E.
3. 40. 44. E. 3. 21. 2. R. 2. dett. 4. 12. H. 4. 13.
. But the Queen may maintain an action of debt against her Farmour upon
such a talie 5. E. 4. 10.
. And a man shall not be fined for denying a talye ensealed 4. E. 2. en le
title de fine.
. And whereas you say that a man may be bound by deed indented, that is
likewise so with us: 11. A man may be bound by deed indented by the common law.
For if one acknowledge himself by indenture to be indetted to another man in
an hundred pound: for which he delivers him certain Velvet, that the other
may sell it after the best manner that he can, and to reteigne it for payment,
and if any thing remain of the debt, that he will pay it, the other may sell
the Velvet for twelve pence, and use an action of debt for the remnant 18. E.
4. 5.
. and 11. H. 6. an action of debt was brought for an hundred marks devised by
the last will and testament of A. being in the hands of the defendant, the
def* by Indenture acknowledged that the said sum of money remained in his
hands, and the deuisee made his executors and died, and the abouesaid action of
det was brought by the executors, and it was allowed: the law is likewise so of
an account 11. H. 6. 46.
. And if the words of an indenture be so: Ita conuentu^ est inter nos quod A.
soluat B. 20. li. ad festu^ Pasch. B. may have an action of dett hereupon 30.
H. 6. per Yeluert. Stath. tit. Covenant.
. So when a man makes such a bill, namely this bill witnesses, that I A. have
borrowed so much money of C. without saying more, this shall charge the
executor as well as an obligation, and the testator could not have waged his
law against this bill: for these words recepisse, or debere, or teneri ad
soluendum 20. li. do make a good obligation and shall bind the executor: for
every word which proves a man to be dettor, or to have a strangers money in
his hands, though it be by bill, yet it shall charge the executor 28. H. 8. 20.
Cores c. per Fitzia. et Mountague.
. As for your instrumentum garrantigiae, an instrument 12 A statute bond is
resembled to an instrument of warrantie at civil law.
of warrantie as you have termed it, it is fully and proportionably resembled
by a recognisance upon a statute merchant or staple: for thereupon the party
to whom the reconisance is made upon the certifying of the same in Court shall
have present execution. For if a stranger to the reconisance of a statute come
into the Chauncerie and show the statute, and pray execution, he shall have it:
and if a statute merchant be acknowledged to two, and one of them comes into
the conrt with the statute he shall have execution in both their names 11. E. 4.
9.
: And 17. E. 3. two sued a Cerciorari of a statute merchant, and after the
Cerciorari returned the parties came not, but others, as executors proffered
themselves, and showed forth the testament and prayed execution, and had it 17.
E. 3. 31.
; But the opinion of Hill is to the contrary 18. E. 3. for a Ceciorari was sued
upon a statute merchant, and before execution the plaintiff died: wherefore
Green prayed execution for executors; But Hill said, that he should have sued
a Scire facias for the the executors, for it may be that the testator has
released: Wherefore you must sue a Scire facias out of the certificat 18. E. 3.
10.
. And upon a statute staple the party shall have execution of the body,
lands and goods by one writ: And upon a statute merchant, first a Capias till
a quarter of a year be past, and upon a return of Non est inuentus, the
party shall have a writ to have execution of his lands and goods 15. H. 7.
14. Fitzh. Not. bre. 131. D.
. And a man may sue an action of Debt upon a statute staple, upon a statute
merchant, and upon any other recognisance Fitzh. Not. bre. 122. D. et fol. 17.
. And whereas you have said, that a deed razed 13. A deed razed is not good
at the common Law.
is not good in your Law, no more it is in ours, if it be razed or interlined,
and in such case the obligour may conclude his plea, if he be impleaded in an
action of Debt, with a Non est factum 1. H. 7. 14. Doves C. per Keble.
. And whereas you have affirmed that there be three sorts of bonds in your
Law, Naturalis, Ciuilis, and Praetoria: For the first 14. The common Law
agrees in substance with the Civil Law in the three sorts of bonds.
two I have showed that our Law agrees with yours: and as to the last it
agrees in the substance of the thing, though not in the sound of the name: For
an action of Debt may by our Law be brought upon a recovery or judgment
containing the debt. For if a man recover damages in a writ of Wast, he may
sue a writ of Debt upon this recovery, if he will Fitzh. Not. be. 122. C. 20.
H. 7. 3.
. And so for damages recovered in a Redissesin, a writ of Aiel, Cosinage, and
a writ of Enter sur disseisin 43. E. 3. 2.
. But in that you said that 15. The common Law dissenteth from the Civil, in
not making the redeliuerie of, a bond an acquitance.
the redeliuerie of a writing Obligatorie unto the obligee is in steed of an
acquitance, this is not so in our Law. For though it be notably well objected
by Fineux 1. H. 7. that there be as many ways for him to whom a deed is made
to dissolve the deed, as for him who makes a deed, to make it a deed: as
where as it is ensealed, he may break the seal: and whereas it is delivered as
the bond of the party, he may redeliuer it in steed of an acquitance 1. H. 7.
Dones C. per Fin.
: Yet it is better answered by Mast. Keble, that a redeliuerie may be either
of a deed executorie, or a deed executed: The redeliuerie of a deed
executorie has some operation in Law ibi. per Keble.
, (as if a man deliver a writing obligatorie as a scroule to I. S. to deliver
as his deed to I. N. upon a certain condition performed: if I. S. deliver
the scroule back to the bailor, before the delivery of it to I. N. and before
the condition performed, the bailor shall not any way be charged by virtue of
this bond: But if it had been delivered at the first as his deed to I. N. upon
a condition performed Perkins tit. Faits.
:) Now the redeliuerie of it neque ligat, neque soluit, works nothing:
because a deed can have but one delivery, and if the first delivery be good,
the second is void, if the first be not good, the second may be good 1. H. 6.
4.
. And so it is of a release executed: for if a man be disseised, and after
release to the disseisor, and after the disseisor redeliuereth the deed of
release to the disseisee, and says that he will not have advantage of it, yet
this is to no purpose: for by the release executed no right may be demanded
by him to whom the deed is redeliuered: but a right may be defended by him who
is in possession, to whom the first delivery was 1. H. 7. Dones c. per Vauisor
and Keble.
. (But if the disseisee reenter upon the disseisor, and the disseisor brings
an Assise, and has not the deed of release ready to entitle himself to the
land, the other may still hold possession of the land: but then the redeliuerie
of the deed of release does him no good directly, but only per accidens,
because the want of it does hurt to the disseisor.)


Nomomath. Now I pray you resolve upon 2. Division.
this, whether shall the Executor or Administrator be charged in all respects
with the dettes and Legacies of the testator, or how far forth they shall be
charged: For I account a Legacy to be a kind of debt.


Codicgn. The making of an Executor, which 1. By the Civil Law the Executor
succeeds in vniuersum ius desuncti.
of us is termed haeredis institutio, is to appoint one to be an universal
successor in the right of all his goods after his death by his Testament or
last will C. de haere. l. 1.
, which is not of force till the death of the testator, but until that time it
is kept clausum and signatum, and as Isiodore says, rather according to the
truth of the thing, then according to the true deriuation of the word (as many
times he does) it is therefore called Testamentum, quia non valet nisi post
testatoris monumentum, until the testator be laid in his grave Isiodor. li. 5.
. And such Testaments must be insinuated to 2. Insinuation of a will necessary
by the civil Law.
the Official or Commissarie of the Bishop of the Dioces within four months
after the death of the testator: which insinuation is appointed by Law, Ad
euitandum falsitatem, et sciendum veritatem Testamenti L. iubemus. C. de test.
l. si. C. de fideicom.
. But de iure Praetorio though a Testament be not made, yet some person may be
appointed by the Praetor to administer the goods Iusti. de bo. poss.. 1. et
ff. eo. tit.
. And as well the administrator, 3. By the Civil Law the executour or
administrator ought to make an Inventory of the goods of the party deceased.
as the executor ought to make an Inventory or sufficient Catalogue of all the
goods of the party in whose right they succeed, which shall come to their
hands. And it is a good and safe way for them so to do: for if they do so
they shall not be charged further with any debtes then the goods of the
testator, or him that died intestate will extend. And such an Inventory by our
Law cannot be disprooued, unless the number of the witnesses that disprooue
the Inventory be twice as many in number as they which do prove it, which
are commonly called Prizors cum Io. de si. instru.
. And the Inventory ought to be begun by the Executor within 30. days after
the death of the testator, or at least within 30. days after that he has
notice that he is made Executor: and it ought to be finished or consummated
within thirty days after, or at least within a year after, if the things be
far distant, and dispersed in remote places, and then he shall be charged no
further, then the goods will stretch: otherwise he shall be charged in solidum
for the whole debt Gazal. in verb. Inuentar.
.


Canonolog. These things which you have proposed are not rejected of us, but
are of validity in our Law.


Nomomath. I pray you Anglonomoph. rip up the particulars of Codicgnostes his
late discourse as distinctlie as you can: for these things uttered by him are
of great importance and use at this day: wherefore I would have you studiously
and with care to discuss these things.


Anglonomoph. In the substance of these matters 4. The power of the Executor
depends wholly upon the will of the Testator by the common Law.
which he has mentioned, I do not see at the first glimse any discordance in
our Law, but in the circumstance there will be some dissonancie, and variance.
First to speak of the power of an Executor by our Law, it depends wholly
upon the will and designement of the Testator: For if a man make three his
executors, and all refuse the administration but one, yet the others shall be
executors by virtue of the will, and may administer when they please, and an
action ought to be brought in all their names, otherwise the writ shall abate.
And if a man have goods in diverse Provinces, he may make his executors of his
goods in one of the provinces, and die intestate as to the other goods: And
if the Ordinary do commit the administration of the goods which are in the
other province unto him, now is he both executor and administrator 35. H. 6. 36.
. And 4. H. 6. in an action of Debt brought by the Executors upon an
Obligation, the defendant demanded oier of the Testament, and he had it, and
the plaintiff showed forth a Testament nuncupatiue, being thus in effect:
Memorandum quod A. constituit B. et C. executores suos, and this was under the
seal of the Ordinary: and the opinion of the Court was, that this was
sufficient matter to maintain the action 4. H. 6. 1
: and if there be not special caution to the contrary. By our Law likewise
the executor does universally succeed in the right of the goods of the dead,
and he may enter into the lands of the testator to take the goods P. 9. H. 6.
Stath. tit. Execut. ou Entr.
. But if a man devise goods to one, and die, the deuisee cannot take the
goods without the delivery of the executor 37. H. 6. 30. 11. H. 4. Execut.
58. per Thirn.
. And the executors do so fully, and viuelie represent the person of their
Testator, that if an action of Debt be brought against two executors, and the
one of them pleads misnosmer, and the other pleads that he is
administrator, and not executor: the opinion of the Court was that they should
not have both pleas, because they did represent their testator, who could have
but one only plea 37. H. 6. 30. 7. H. 4. 13.
. But it seems by the book of 8. Ed. 4. that they shall have several pleas,
and the most peremptory shall be tried 8. E. 4. 24. Execut. 31.
. And an executor or administrator may have a writ of Error upon a judgment
given against their Testator concerning debt or damages Fitzh. Not. bre. 21.
M.
. And that a testament and a devise 5. According to the common Law a Devise is
of no force until the death of the deuisor.
are of no force till the death of the deuisor, may appear by diverse good
authorities in our Law Littlet. lib. 2. c. 10 sect. 8. 27. Ass. pla. 60.
. And whereas Codicgn. has said, that by their Law there must be an
insinuation of the will to the Bishops Official, 6. The common Law agrees
with the Civil in the insinuation of wills.
doubtless it is so in our Law, for there must be such an insinuation and
probate of the will, before the executors may bring any action of Debt 7. H.
4. 18. 10. Eliz. Com. Brets c. et en Greyst. case.
. And the Ordinary may sequester the goods of the dead, until the executors
have proved the Testament: And the Metropolitan may do the same, if the
goods be in diverse dioceses 9. E. 4. 33.
. But our Law differs from the Civil Law in this, that the administration of
the goods of him that dies intestate is not committed by the Praetor, but by
the Ordinary: For if a man be indebted, and die intestate; or if the Executors
of one that has made a Will refuse to be executors, whereby the goods do come
to the hands of the Ordinary, the creditors may have a writ of Debt against
the Ordinary by the statute of Westminster 2. cap. 19 Fitzh. Not. bre. 120. D.
. and in this case he must be sued by the name of Ordinary 9. E. 4. 34.
. But after administration committed the Ordinary shall not be sued 8. Elizab.
247. Die.
. And if Sede vacant, the Deane and Chapter be guardian of the spiritualties,
if a man do then die intestate, and the Deane only administreth the goods,
it is sufficient for the Creditors to use an action against the Deane only:
Otherwise it is if the Deane and Chapter as Ordinary should use an action 17.
E. 2. Br^e 822.
. And so if the Ordinary make his executors and 7. That an action of Debt
will lie against the Ordinary.
die, the Creditors may have an action of Debt against the executors of the
ordinary Fitzh. N. B. 120. D. Vieux Not. br. 61.
: though 11. E. 3. in the title of Executors be directly to the contrary 11.
E. 3. Executors 77
. But a man shall not have an action of Debt to charge the Ordinary (as
Ordinary) unless he do administer in his own dioces 12. R. 2. Administr^ 21.
. But the Ordinary can not have an action of Debt against such which were
indebted to the party intestate, because that action is given to the
Administratour, and the Ordinary may commit the administration of the goods
when it pleases him. But before the statute of king Edw. the 3. ann 31. ca.
11. the administrators could not have an action of Debt: therefore it seems
before that time the Ordinary might have used an action of debt, otherwise
remedy should have failed Fitzh. N. B. ibid.
. but the Ordinary may and might at all times have had an action of trespass
for the goods of the dead taken out of his own possession 18. H. 6. 23. 7. H.
4. 18. 11. H. 7. 12.
: but not for goods taken out of the possession of the party intestate 17. E.
2. Brief 822.
. But if the Ordinary without formal letters of administration granted, do
give one license and authority to sell the goods of the party deceased
intestate quae peritura essent, and he does it accordingly, he which does so
administer shall be punished as an executor of his own wrong 9. Elizab. 256. Die.
. neither can he commit administration by word of mouth, otherwise it is if it
be entered into his register though letters of administration be not formally
drawn 21. H. 6. 23.
. And it may come in issue whether he that grants administration were
Ordinary in the place where the administration was committed, as if the
village do extend into two dioceses 35. H. 6. 46.
. And it may come in issue whether administration were committed by the
Ordinary. And whereas Codicgnost. has also affirmed, that if the executor or
administrator do make an Inventory, 8 The Canon law agrees with the civil
in administering the goods comprised in the Inventory according to the
testament.
and dispose the goods comprised in the same according to the testament of the
party and appointment of law they shall not be further charged, our law in
this consorteth with the civil law: for it is a good plea for the executor to
say that he had fully administered before he had notice of the writ of the
plaintiff 7. H. 4. ^0. Plowd. com. 277.
: for though he do pay debtes upon contractes, the writ depending against
him upon a bond, whereas he had no notice of the suite, he shall not be in
such case charged 2. H. 4. 21.
. And 3. H. 6. in an action of debt upon an obligation of twenty pound brought
against executors, they pleaded riens enter maines, that they had nothing in
their hands, and it was found by verdict that they had ten pound in their
hands: wherefore the plaintiff had judgment to recover so much as was found
of the goods of the dead, and the damages of the goods of the executors for
their false plea 3. H. 6. 4.
. But in Dauises Case in the Commentaries it was otherwise ruled that nothing
should be put in execution upon such a plea but only the goods of the dead
Dauis. C. com. 440.
. But in a Fieri facias upon a recovery against executors the Sheriff
returned a deuastauerunt, wherefore the Court did grant a writ to have
execution of the goods of the dead, and if there were no such goods, then of
the goods of the executors 11. H. 4. 70.
. And 4. E. 3. in an action of debt brought against the executors, it was
found that they had fully administered, and the opinion was, that the Jurors
should set down in certain how much they had administered, because they shall
not be charged but only according to that which is found by inquest 40. E. 3.
Statha. tit. executors.
. But it was said 34. H. 6. that when the executors do plead (fully
administered, but only for so much) and their plea is found, the plaintiff
shall have judgment to recover all his debt, but he shall not have execution
but only of the goods in their hands 34. H. 6. stath. tit. Execut.
. But it is good to be considered what may properly be said assets in the
hands of the 9 What may properly be said to be assets in the hands of the
executors.
executors: if the executors do merchaundize with the goods of the testator,
the increasall of them shall be assets in their hands, and shall charge them,
and they cannot plead that they have fully administered when they have such
assets 11. H. 6. 35. per Bal.
. And if executors do sell the goods of the testator, and do buy them
again, they remain in their hands as assets, because they were the same
goods which were the testators 18. H. 6. 4.
. (But then it seems that the money which they had for the sale of the goods
was wasted by them, and not converted to the use of the testator: for otherwise
there is no reason, but that they should have a property in them to their own
use) for if the executors pay the debtes of the testator of their own goods,
they may retain the goods of the testator to the value in their hands, to
their own use 6. H. 8. 2. Die.
. But it was held by M. Fitzherbert 27. H. 6. that where a man is indebted 40.
pound to one, and 30. li. to another, and dies; and has but 40. li. and his
executors or administrators agree with the creditor of 40. li. for 10. li. and
have an acquittance of the 40. li. yet the thirty pounds which remains in
their hands shall be assets 27. H. 8. 6. per Fitzh.
. And so a gage being ransomed shall be assets in their hands, but according
to M. Frowikes opinion it shall not be assets if it were ransomed with their
own money 20. H. 7. 2.
: But as M. Brook notes well abridging the case abouesaid of 20. H. 7. the
money which comes in lieu of a pledge, being gaged to their testator shall
be assets in their hands. So it has been adjudged, that if a man make a
feoffement upon condition that the feoffee shall sell the land, and distribute
the money to the use of the testator, whereupon he sells the land, and the
feoffor makes him his executor, the money taken for the land sold shall be
adjudged assets in his hands 2. H. 4. 21. Executors. 51. 3. H. 6. 3.
. So if the executors plead (fully administered) and it is found for them, and
after certain goods of the testator come to their hands, wherefore he which
brought the first action of debt brings the same against them again, this
action is well maintenable 7. E. 4. 8. per Littlet. and Danby.
.


Nomomath. You have satisfied me for this point Anglonomoph. Now I pray you
Codicgnost. strain your endeavor a little to resolve me upon point of
execution to be sued upon these dettes. I have read that in ancient time it
was a law amongst the Romans, that if a man greatly indebted were not able to
discharge the debt, his body was mangled and cut in 1 The rigorous law of the
Romans in their execution for debt.
pieces, and the greatest portion of it given to his greatest creditor, a
lesser to him to whom he did owe less, and so pro rata Paul. Manut. lib. de
legi. Roma.
: which law beside the monstrousness of it in such a common weal was very
inhumane: for the creditors might, if they would in their fury, by this law
cast the members and parts of the bodies of their debtors to dogs, and other
brutish beasts, so that that the Romans had not so much care of their
Senators, gentlemen and citizens, as the friends of Diogenes had of him. For
when the Cynicke lay upon his deathbed, his friends which were then about him,
asked him in courteous manner, where he would be buried, he thinking perhaps that
a man was nothing but a mind, answered them that he would be buried in the
dunghill, and they replied that that would be very inconvenient: for the
dogs would then rake him up and devour him: Then (said he) lay some staves
by me to beat away the dogs; but they told him that he could have no sense
in his body after his death: then (quoth he) what need I fear the dogs.
This was but the glaunce of Diogenes, who made more account of his scoff then
his state. But others more civil do think it a great loss, shame, and
indignity that a man's body should not be buried, wherefore Lucan sharply
inueyeth 2 The execution of the Romans greatly to be reproved, because it did
deprive men of burial.
against Caesar: Tu, cui dant paenas inhumato funere gentes Luca. lib. 7.
: And it is the judgment of all antiquity that without very heinous fault
the parts of a man's body should not be debarred from sepulture. Romulus
though he had caused to be slain his brother Rhemus, and after his death did
continue his fury as his speech imports: Sicque meos muros transeat hostis
ait. Yet he gave him sepulture, and attended upon the hearse himself: for as
the Poet says Oui. Fasto. 4
:

Dat tamen exequias, neciam suspendere fletum
Sustinet, and pietas dissimulata patet:
Osculaque applicuit posito supremaferetro,
Atque ait: inuito frater adempte vale.
And therefore the Ambassador of Darius does exceedingly praise the great
courtesy of Alexander mourning for the death, and having special regard of the
sumptuous sepulture of the wife of Darius his professed enemy: Vultum tuum
video qualis Darij fuit cum dimitteremur ab eo, and ille tamen vxorem, tu
hostem luges. Iam in acie stares, nisi cura tesepulturae eius moraretur Curti.
li. 4.
. And Solomon says divinely: If a man begette an hundred children, and live
many years, and the days of his years be multiplied, and his soul be not
satisfied with good things, and he be not buried, I say that an untimely
fruit is better then he Ecclesiast. c. 6. v. 3.
. Then surely (that I may recourse unto that from which I digressed) for the
Romans to add shame to affliction, and when the hard debtor is not able to
maintain himself with meat and apparel in any reasonable sort, after
strait imprisonment and extreme want, to cut his body in pieces, and to
distribute it in recompense of of vile money, is a thing very immane, and in
my opinion greatly obscuring the bright and glorious dignity of the ancient
Roman common weal. Miserable doubtless is the state of them which have
nothing but domi inopiam, foris aes alienum, malam rem, spem multo asperiorem,
and nihil reliquum praeter miseram animam Salusti. in Catilin.
. The Lord in his year of Jubilee signifies his pity toward decayed
persons. Septimo anno facies remissionem, quae hoc ordine celebrabitur. Cui
debetur aliquid, ab amico vel proximo, ac fratre suo repetere non poterit, quod
annus remissionis est domini Deuteron. c. 15.
. And to prevent the cautelous sophistry of miserable worldlings he gives
this caveat. Cave ne forte subrepat tibi impia cogitatio, and dicas in cord
tuo: appropinquat septimus annus remissionis, and auertas oculos tuos a paupere
fratre tuo nolens ei quod postulat mutuum comodare, ne clamet contra te ad
dominum etc. Augustus Caesar that wise Emperor was of so merciful disposition
that for establishment of peace and concord amongst the Romans, he relieved
the common stock, which was greatly impaired by civil wars with his own
private wealth, and them that were indebted to the common treasury, the bills
of debt being burnt with his own hands he did free from the danger of the
roll Dio. Nicae. in vit. August. Carol. Sigo. in fi. lib. fast. and triumph.
Roma.
. Mercy doubtless, and pity is to be extended to such as have nothing to
help themselves withal, and therefore do not pay debts, because they can not:
Non manca est voluntas, sed potestas mutila. To such I say mercy ought to be
exhibited. The richest man in the world, be he never so good, is a greater
debtor to God, then any man is to him: yet God does forgive, and will not man
forgive? Quis persequeretur canem mortuum. What horsleach would suck for blood
out of a bloudlesse member? Bitter was that saying of tyranicall Tyberius to
one that requested death, rather then long imprisonment: No^dum tecum redij in
gratiam? Blessed are the merciful for they shall obtein mercy Mat. 5. v. 7.
. I speak not this as if favor should be showed to covetous churles, which
had rather lose their bowels the^ their bags, and devise fraudulent shifts
and knottie conueiances to bereave and defraud the creditor of his due debt:
and whereas they may make payment in ten days, do defer it ten years. It
were a blessed thing, if the bodies of such miserable Midasses might be changed
to gold, whilst they were in prison (so their souls might be saved) that by
such means at the least their creditors might be satisfied. But let every
Creditor use conscionable discretion, and distinguish betwixt them and these
that be otherwise minded.

Diuexet coruos, parcat censura columbis. Let them use mercy to such as be
humbly minded, and anguished in heart, because they are not able to discharge
their debtes: Let them remember that charity seeks not her own: that she
freeth the bondsman: cheareth the weak: fatneth the poor: does good against
evil. Some think it great charity to spare a man's goods, when he has but a
little left, and to imprison his person: if that be charity.

O mites Diomedis equi: Busiridis arae
Clementes tu Cinna pius: tu Spartace lenis Claudi. lib. 1. in Ruffi.
.
Let the Creditor think that he may fall into the same calamity and extremity
himself which the dettor suffers: And (that I may use the words of the
noble-witted Curtius,) Suam quisque fortunam in consilio habeat, cum de aliena
deliberat. The Trojans were once a flourishing people: Ferus omnia Jupiter Argos
transtulit Virg. in Aenei.
: Troy a goodly City: Iam seges est, vbi Troia fuit Ovid. in epistol.
. Hecuba in her youth a gallant Princess, in her age a captive, deploring her
estate with Me videat et te Troia Senec* in Troia.
. And Seneca the artificer of sorrow says well:

Quem dies videt veniens superbum
Hunc dies vidit fugiens iacentem.
Most divine is the saying of that deep divine: I have seen servants on
horses, and Princes walking as servants on the ground Ecclesiast. c. 10. verse.
7.
.


Codicgn. You have insisted a long time upon 3. That the rigorous Law of
execution for bette was afterward abrogated by the Romans.
a Law antiquated, and made a large comment upon a supposed text: for the Law,
which ministers occasion of your copious discourse, though it were allowed and
used by the Romans for the terrifying of unconscionable men, which made no
scruple to ouerwhelme themselves with debt, and never to discharge it, or
compound for it, or to show any thankfulness for it: yet when the horror of the
punishment seemed grievous and too shameful unto them, that Law for the
bitterness of it was out of their authentike diskalendred: and many years are
past sithence it was repealed and abrogated Hotom. lib. illustr. quaest.
. But now according to our Law 4. By the Civil Law execution for deuelieth
upon the goods of the party, and how far forth the word (goods) extends.
execution lies upon the goods of the party which we term bona: but the
signification thereof extends further then the name of goods at the common
Law: for it signifies res nostras quae sunt in dominio nostro, vel quasi: and
it signifies as well inheritance as goods.


Canonolog. In this we dissent not from you.


Nomomath. Let me know Anglonomoph. what manner of execution ye use for debt at
the common Law.


Anglonomoph. The execution is fourfold, 5. A fourefold execution for debt
by the common Law.
either of goods only by Fieri facias, or of the moitie of lands by Elegit:
or upon all the lands by an Extendi facias, upon the reconusance of a statute,
or of the body by Capias ad satisfaciendum: every of which by your patience I
will explane by cases and examples, or by showing their original. A Fieri
facias issued out of the Eschequer for the king against 6. The execution of
goods by Fieri facias is opened.
a Parson for money due to the king out of an Abbey, to which the Church of the
Parson was charged in xx. marks, and for two marks behind a Fieri facias
issued to the Shirife in these words: Fieri fac. de bonis et catallis
spiritualibus, et temporalibus prouenientibus de Rectoria de R. and the Shirife
by his bailie took two books in the Church, and sold them for the kings debt
8. H. 5. 4.
. And whereas A. did recover damages in a special assise before special
Justices, and brought an action of Debt for the damages: it was resolved that
the defendant was dettor of record, and therefore ought to be discharged by
matter of record, and for that cause the Fieri facias is: ita quod habeas
denarios hic, to the intent that the payment of the money to the plaintiff may
be of record, and the defendant discharged by record 11. H. 4. 58.
. Execution by Elegit is warranted by the Statute of Westminster 2. cap. 18.
which says: Si quis recuperet debitum aut damna, sit in electione querentis,
an habere velit Fieri facias de terris and catallis (it should seem to be
meant de bonis and catallis) vel quod Vicecomes liberet, (it seems to be
better, et quod Vicecomes liberet ei omnia catalla debitoris, exceptis bobus et
affris carucae suae and medietatem, it seems more agreeable to the purpose,
vel medietatem terrae suae, quousque debitum fuerit leuatum per rationabile
pretium et extentam.) The execution upon 8. Execution upon statute merchant is
opened.
Statute merchant may appear by this case. A man had execution out of statute
merchant, and the Shirife returned an Extent of the lands of the reconusor in
this manner, sciz. that he had sent to the baylie of the fraunchise etc. who had
return of writs to extend the lands, which were within the fraunchise, and
so he did, and that which was within the bayliwicke of the Shirife namely in
guildable, himself caused to be extended by parcels, and at the end he put the
sum of the value, and after the sum he put the charges, as rents, and other
charges which were due out of the said lands, and amongst other charges he
returned that the land was charged to the reconusee with xx. li. yearly for
ever: And the Justices cast all the charges of the lands, and the value, and
they did perceive that the charges passed the value by xl. s'. and after it was
showed that the Shirife had sent to an other Baylife of an other fraunchise in
which the party had lands, and of these lands he made the third extent, so
that by that extent the value passed the charges by ten shillinges, wherefore
execution was awarded 29. E. 3. 1.
. And 9. E. 3. one sued a writ to take the body of him, who had made a statute
merchant to him, and the Shirife returned that he was dead, wherefore he
prayed a writ to the Shirife to deliver unto him all the lands which he had the
day of the reconusance, or at any time after, and he had it 9. E. 3. 24.
. Execution by Capias 8. Execution by Capias ad satisfaciendum is showed.
and imprisonment is after this manner. Damages were recovered against I. in a
writ of Trespass in the kings bench, in the time of king Henry the fourth, and
after in the time of king Henry the fifth he was condemned in London at the
suit of an other, and put in Newgate, and he at whose suit he was condemned in
the kings bench had a Capias ad satisfaciendum to the Shirifes of L. which did
send the body, and did certify that he was condemned at many men's suites in
London, and now he that sued the Capias came into the Court and did acknowledge
agreement to be made, and the defendant was ready to make a fine to the king,
and prayed to be delivered: But because he was condemned in the time of an
other king, and the Justices which be now have not knowledge of the persons,
which were parties to the pleas in the time of an other king as the Law does
intend, and likewise, because if he be acquitted here, he must be sent back
into London, because he is condemned there: and thirdly, because by couin
betwixt him which acknowledges agreement, and the defendant, he may defraud
him at whose suit he is condemned of his execution: for if he be delivered, the
other is without remedy, therefore a Scire facias was awarded 8. H. 5. 7.
. The like Law is in an execution upon an Action of Debt, and in an acquitall,
the fine to the king being excepted.


Nomomath. Well, I will trouble you no further about questions of Debt. Now
let us pass according to the platform of the conference to examine doubts
touching Accomptes.


The fourth Dialogue.
Of Accomptes.
NOmomath. Suppose Codicgnostes 1. Division.
that I deliver unto you my horse or hawk, to sell him for five pounds, and
to deliver me either the five pounds, or redeliuer the thing again: Shall you
not be accomptable to me in this regard?


Codicgn. Yes truly, and that by an action 1. In what case a man is
accomptable at the Giuill Law per actionem aestimatoriam.
which we call Actionem aestimatoriam, because it is conceived upon the
special and prescript words of the valuation of the thing ff. de aestima. ac
in rubro. et l. 1. et Insti. de actio.. actionum.
.


Anglonomoph. So by our Law we have a 2. The difference of a special bailie,
and general bailie at the common Law.
special bailie, and a general bailie: A special bailie is he which is
bailie after a special manner, and to a special purpose. For if a man deliver
an Obligation to an other to receive so much money as he can get of that which
is contained in the bond, if he receive no money upon the bond, a writ of
Account lies not, but a writ of Detinue for the bond: (But it seems that if
he receive a less sum, then a writ of Account will lie:) But if he receive
the very sum contained in the bond, then a writ of Account will lie against
him, as receiuor of his money. But if his bailie be also bailie of his manor,
and this Obligation be delivered unto him as bailie of the manor, then an
Account will lie against him as bailie of the manor habentem curam of this
Obligation 2. R. 2. Account 46.
: for a bailie of a manor may well be termed a general bailie. And Brian 2:
R. 3. puts an express difference betwixt a general, and a special bailie:
A man says he may be bailie of a manor, or of an house, if he be bailie of a
manor, he has 3. What things belong to the charge of the bailie of a manor.
charge of all the oxen, horses, ploughes, belonging to the manor, and of all
the profits arising, and growing out of the manor, and he shall be
accomptable for them. But if he be bailie of an house he shall not be
accomptable, but only for the house 2. R. 3. 14. per Br.
. But this is the difference betwixt a bailie, and a receiuor, according to the
bringing of a writ of Account. A writ of Account will not lie against one as
bailie for a certain and a peculier thing: But whereas A. gives twenty pound
to B. to merchandise for him, and to his use, for the profit hereof, because
it is a thing uncertain, a writ of Account will lie, to the end that by the
writ of account the incertaintie may be brought to certainty 9. H. 5. 3. per
Hyl.
. But in your case proposed, the bailie is to be intended a special bailie.
But this general and current rule we have touching all bailies, as well
general, as special: If the bailie be prejudicial to his his master, he is
to make recompense to his master: As if my bailie sell a quarter of corn 4.
That by the common Law if the bail be prejudicial to his Master, he is to
make recompense.
for forty pence, whereas he might have sold it for vj. s'. viij. pence, he
must aunsweare for this 6. R. 2. Account 47. per Belkn.
. So if he buy things for xx. pound, which are not worth x. li. he shall not
be allowed this upon his account, though he did as much as he could according
to his knowledge 41. E. 3. 3. per Finch.
. But if a baylie do a thing which touches his bayliwicke, and which duty
binds him to do, as if he pay rentes or other duties which are due of the
manor, he shall be satisfied for this: otherwise it is if he do any thing
which touches not his bailiwike, for then he ought to have special warrantie
42. E. 3. 6. per Belkn.
.


Canonol. Our law dissenteth not from these assertions.


Nomomath. Suppose I give money to Titius 2 Division.
to buy for me and to my use the land of Sempronius lying in dale, whether is
Titius accomptable to me for this.


Codicgnost. There is no question but he is ff. acti. mandat. direct. l. si
vero.. fi.
. but if your self or some other to your use do 1 By the civil law the
bailie is discharged if the master intermeddle.
buy the land of Sempronius, now is Titius discharged unless he more
expediently, and with less cost might have bought it of Sempronius ff. eod.
tit. l. si procurator.. mandat. act.
.


Anglonomoph. This is not repugnant to our law: and in all cases a writ of
account lies where a man is put in trust to procure the profit 2 That by the
common law as well as by the civil he that is put in special trust to puocure
the profit of an other is accomptable.
of another, and is not his apprentice: for if the king grant to a village
certain toll of things which shall be fold in the same village, and the
townsmen of the village make collectors to receive the toll: if afterward the
collectors will not make account hereof, they may have a commission out of the
Chauncerie to enquire who has received this toll or money, and to hear their
accomptes and to determine the matter Fitzher. N. B. 119. f. 114. c.
. And 8. E. 4. it was said by Nedham, that the Churchwardens of a certain
parish might have a writ of account against their predecessors, but the
parishioners could not 8. E. 4. 6. per Nedh.
: And so the master of an hospital may have a writ of account against him
that was receyuor or bailie in the time of his predecessor Fitz. N. B. 117. F.
. And 30. E. 3. a writ of account was made by a master of an hospital against
one, as the bailie of his Church, and this form of writ was allowed, and the
action was brought by him as parson, he being not named parson in the writ, and
yet the writ was allowed because he demanded nothing which might continue to
the Church for ever, as he must do in a Iuris vtru^ 30. E* 3. 1. 13. H. 4.
Account. 124. 29. E. 3. 60.
. And 4. E. 3. a writ of account was brought for a receipt of certain money in
the time of his predecessor 4. E. 3. Account. 97.
: and 34. E. 3. in a writ of account against one as the bailie of his wood,
the pr declared, how the def. was the bailie of his wood to cut it, and to sell
it; and the declaration was allowed without saying that he did any way
administer: for this must come in by way of answer, and so the writ may be
against the bailie of a manor habente^ administrationem bonorum: and Moubrays
opinion was that the bailie of a wood ought to make account for the fruits of
the trees, herons and hawks 34. E. 3. Account. 131.
. But a writ of account cannot be brought against one as his bailie, unless he
be the bailie of his house, land or manor 9. E. 3. Account. 95.
. And if one ought to be bailie by reason of his tenure though he do not
occupy the office, yet he shall be charged in a writ of account 18. H. 8. 2.
. And if a receiuor or bailie do make a deputy, yet the writ of account ought
to be brought against the bailie himself, or against the receiuor himself, and
not against their deputies: for the deputies resceiue the money, and administer
the goods to the use of the master Fitzh. N. B. 119. B.
. but a writ of account will lie for the receiuor against his deputy, as for
the vicount against his deputy 11. R. 2. Account. 48.
. And a man may have a writ of account against a woman as receptrix
denariorum 8. E. 2. brief. 847. Fitzh. N. B. 118. D.
. And 4. E. 4. there is an excellent difference taken where a woman is bailie
or receiuor to a man, and after she takes a husband, a writ of account lies
against them both (as econuerso it lies for the^ both 28. H. 6. 7.
:) de tempore quo etc. dum ipsa solafuit: but whereas a man and a woman be
receiuors, and they after entermarie: in the writ they shall be both named
receptores 4. E. 4. 26. 19 H. 6. 5.
: but a writ of account will not lie against an infant as bailie or receiuor to
any man, because the law will not intend that any man will put confidence or
trust in him who wants discretion, and experience. 17. E. 2. Account. 121.
16. E. 3. Account. 57. 27. E. 3. 77. 19. H. 6. 5.



Canonol. There is nothing in our law which oppugneth any thing that you have
said.


Nomomath. If the master of the baylie happen to die, whether may his executors
charge 3. Division.
the bailie with an account.


Codicgnost. By our law they may ff. acti. mandat direc. l. si vero. f. 1
.


Anglonomoph. That likewise is warranted by 1 Account ought to be made to
executors by the civil law.
our law: for if any have cause to have an actiof account against his bailie or
receiuor, if he dye, his executors may have this action, yet the common law at
the first was otherwise 7. E. 3. 62
. But now it is altered by the statute of Westminst. 2. c. 23. and agrees
fully with your law in this: For 38. E. 3. one was bailie of a wood to two
ioyntenants and a writ of account was maintained by the executors of him that
suruiued 38. E. 3. 8.
: to which accords 19. E. 3. and that the heir shall not have a writ of
account against him 2 The same is warranted by the common law.
that was receiuor to his father 19. E. 3. Account. 56.
: And 3. Eliz. the administrator brought a writ of account 3. Elizab. 202. Die.
. 3 That a writ of account by the common law will not lie against executors
unless it be in some special cases.
But a writ of account will not lie against the executors or administrators
of a bailie or receiuor for the receipt and occupation of their testator Fitzh.
N. B. 117. C.
: unless it be in the kings case Littlet. tit. socage.
. But if the executors do once enter into an account, a writ of account will
lie against them in the case of a common person 12. E. 4. 10.
. Or if the bailie or receiuor be found to be in arrerrages of account, and
die, an action of debt lies against his executors upon an insimul
computauerunt 2. H. 4. 13.
. And it appears by that book that in the writ he must be named executor:
and a bailie may have a writ of debt against the executors of his master for a
surplusage of account 13. H. 6. executor. 21.
.


Canonol. This I can not withstand by any reason in our law.


Nomomath. I pray you let me know the force 4 Division.
and substance of the authority which the master may give to the bailie.


Codicgnost. It is no more but when a man 1 What authority may be assigned to
a bailife by the civil law.
may do a thing by himself, he commits it to another to be done of him
Gaxalu. verb. mandat.
. And he that does execute the authority ought not to exceed the limits of
his authority Iusti. manda.. si is qui.
. But this difference 2 The difference of an authority a charge, and command
by the civil law.
we put betwixt an authority, a command, and a charge: The command is
determined by the death of him that commands, the authority is not, neither
is the charge, as by this verse though somewhat obscure is not obscurely
signified In his de verbo sig.
.

Praeceptum non praecipitat mors praecipientis:
Mandatum mandatore cadente cadit.

Canonol. But some hold opinion, that all these 3 The canon law is against the
difference, so likewise is the common law.
three: authority, command, and charge do expire by the death of him that
commands, charge, or gives authority Joan. 14. q. 1 quod praecipit.
.


Anglonomoph. In deed that is more agreeable to our law especially in this
matter of bailieship, as may appear by diverse authorities in our law 2. Eliz.
177. Die. 5. Eliz. 219 Die. 2 E. 4. 4. 10. Eliz. 270. Die.
.


Nomomath. I pray you let me know the difference ^. Division.
betwixt a bailie, a solicitor, an attorney, and deputy, that I may have more
distinct knowledge of that which I endeavor to know.


Codicgnost. A bailie is he to whom a special charge of procuring a man's
profit, and the valuable 1 The difference betwixt a bailie, a solicitor, and
attorney, and a deputy, is showed out of the civil law.
increase of his wealth is committed Gazalup. in ver. villici.
: an Attorney which we term by the name of Procurator adiudicia is he which
in place of judgment does for an other man by his warrant complain or defend
ff. mandat. l. 1.. 1.
: and this may be done either in the presence or absence of the master: but a
solicitor which of us is termed Procurator ad negotia, is he that handles
the cause of his master being absent. And an Attorney by our law must at the
least be of the age of xxv. years: but a solicitor may be, though he be but
seventeen years old c. fi. de procu. l. 6
. A deputy is he to whom a special authority is committed to deal in a
certain business c. de offic. eius qui vic. gerit.
. And there is this difference betwixt a bailie or a deputy, and an attorney
or a solicitor: because in a baily or deputy the business which is committed
to them, which we call negotium extra iudicium begins at the ministerial
party that is the bailie or deputy, and is transferred unto the Lord or
master: for the effect of the business whether it be profit or charge
belongs to the Lord: but the business of the Attorney or solicitor, which we
call negotium in iudicio is originally in the Lord or master, and after (as we
say) transfunditur in procuratore^, it is conveyed to the attorney or
solicitor l. si procurator meus ff. de neg. ge.
.

Canonol. We make no such difference in our 2 The difference holds not in the
canon law.
law: for every one which does administer an other man's business, we call by the
name of procurator 1. q. 3. saluat.
.


Anglon. The common law does in this more agree with that which Codicgn. has
said. I will 3 The common law according to the aforesaid difference does more
agree with the civil then with the canon law.
speak of this difference as the cases in our law concerning it shall come to
my memory. The name and office or duty of a solicitor stretches very
far in our law: for it may extend to the procheinamy the next friend, by whom
an infant or one within age shall sue an action: or to the warden of the infant
by whom the infant shall be defendant in an action 13. E. 3. Attorney. 76. 40.
E. 3. 16.
: And an infant was received to sue a writ of error by his warden 27. Assi.
pl. 53. Fitz. N. B. 27. H.
. And an infant shall not remove her warden, nor disauow his next friend, which
sueth an action for him 34. Assis. pl. 5. 27. Assis. pl. 53.
. But by a writ out of the Chauncerie the infant may remove his warden, or
the Court by their discretion may remove him Fitzh. N. B. 27. M. 27. Assis. pl.
53.
. But as to the making of an Attorney we have this rule in our law. Nemo
potest facere Atturnatum nisi habeat proprietatem in re, and ideo custos non
potest facere Atturnatum quia non habet proprietatem 13. E. 1. Attorney. 103.
. In a writ of Attaint the defendant made an Attorney in the Chauncerie by a
common writ de Attornato faciendo, the tenor whereof was ad lucrandum and
perdendum in loquela quae est coram Iustitiarijs per breue nostrum inter I. S.
petentem, and I. N. tenentem de placito terrae etc. but the warrant of the
plaintifs attorney must be thus ad conuincendum 12. Iur. de placito terrae
etc. per viginti quatuor etc. 2. E. 3. Garrant. dattour. 21.
But the power and authority of the attorney is by the judgment determined
and carried back to the master. Wherefore it was said 4. E. 3. that after
judgment the attorney was not received to release the damages, nor to
acknowledge satisfaction 4. E. 3. Attorney. 18. 34 E. 3. 95. 34. H. 6 51. 1.
E. 2. Garrant. 22.
: contrary to the book of 33. H. 6. k But there is great difference betwixt a
bailie, and a deputy: for though a bailie have a larger scope of authority,
and power then an attorney or solicitor: yet he has but an authority: but a
deputy has an imperfect interest mixed with an authority, which by cases
accomodated to this purpose shall be evident. The bailie of a manor cannot
lease the lands of his Lord but only at the will of the Lord: for I do not
take the book of 2. E. 4. to be law, that the bailie may lease lands to hold
at his own will, yet that book gives an action of debt, if a rent be
reserved upon the lease to the Lord, not to the bailie 2. E. 4. 4.
: but 8. E. 4. is the better law in my opinion, where it is held, that the
baily of a manor cannot make any lease of the manor, nor of any parcel of it
without special commandment of the Lord to do it 8. E. 4. 13.
. But if he cut down trees, or kill any beasts going upon the land of the
manor, without lawful cause, an action of the case will lie against him 2. E.
4. 13.
. And 19. E. 3. it was held, that by no usage in the world a Bailie or Steward
of a manor could lease the freehold 19. E. 3. Feoff. 68.
. But it is held by Catesby 8. E. 4. that the Lord may give power (in express
words) to his bailie to lease land, and if the bailie having received such
authority do lease an acre of land unto a stranger, and does not give to the
Lord notice thereof, if the Lord enter into this acre, the lessee may punish
him by an action of Trespass, and yet he had no notice thereof: but the reason
is because he had before given such a power to the bailie 8. E. 4. 1. et 9.
Dutch. de Suffolkes c. per Catesb.
. And therefore I think that the book of 2. R. 3. which is, that the bailie
has power to lease land, and to improoue it, is to be intended (by special
warrant, and authority of the Lord committed unto him.) But it seems that of
himself he may sell trees if there be great abundance, and may repair houses
with them, but he cannot reedifie houses with them, if they be fallen 2. R 3.
14. 12. H. 7. 25
. But that a deputy has an interest conioined with an authority in the
thing, which is deputed unto him may be thus proved, 11. Elizab. it was
clearly resolved, that two daughters being heirs to the Constable of England,
might make their sufficient Deputy to exercise the office for them, and after
marriage that the husband of the elder only might perform the office 11.
Elizab. 285. Die.
. And 39. H. 6. it was agreed by all the Justices, that if a man have an
office, and makes a deputy, which misuseth the office, the grauntee or
inheritour of the office shall forfait it, for the deputy is sub officiario,
and the officer remains officer until the forfaiture 39. H. 6. 32.
. And these words (that the deputy is sub officiario) are so in my conceit to
be understood: as the lessee at will is under the lessor, in case of a demise
of land: But there may be a forfaiture in the one case, and not in the other,
because in the office deputed there is a special authority mixed with a
special interest. And Quaere, whether for the debt of the deputy the office
may not be extended whilst it is in the deputies hands.


Codign. Surely it seems that the deputy 4. That by the civil Law,
contrary to the common Law, there is no manner of interest in a deputy.
has no interest at all in the office, and that may appear by the observation
of ancient times. For if a man may compare greater things with less, the
Quaestor of a Province was a deputy to the President or Governor of a
province in his absence: but yet their power was diverse, and the interest was
not assigned, but resembled, as Caesar does rightly distinguish them: Aliae
sunt legati parts, aliae imperatoris, alter omnia agere ad praescriptum, alter
libere ad summam rerum consulere debet Caes. lib. 3. de bello civil.
. The office of a Deputy or Lieutenant, and the office of a Governor, or
Commaundour are diverse: the one of them (that is the deputy) does all things
by the prescript of his commaundour: the other freely provides for the maine,
and principal consequence of things. And briefly and substancially he thus
describes the duty of a Deputy: Officium legati fiduciariam operam obtinere
Caes. lib. 2. de bell. ciui.
: And that a deputy is but as a minister to the principal officer, may
appear by Ciceroes precept to his brother: Sit annulus tuus non vt vas
aliquod, sed tanquam ipse tu, non minister alienae voluntatis, sed testis tuae
Cicer. ad Q. fratr.
. Let not thy ring be as a vessel to be used at any man's pleasure, but as thy
self, not as a servant to an other man's will, but as a witness of thine own.


Nomomath. What if the Master do promise ^. Division.
unto his Bailie or Attorney, that if he can procure him the possession of the
land in question, he shall have the half, or some part of it for his reward:
Will your Laws allow of such an assumpsit?


Codicgn. Our Law does not allow it: But 1. That the bailie or attorney may
not take half the land for purchasing or compassing the other half.
he may safely take a special collateral reward for that particular effect
Gazalup. in ver. procurat.
.


Canonolog. So in our Law, he that gives part of the profits of a benefice to
be admitted to the benefice, is so far from being allowed, 2. That the like
matter is forbidden by the Canon Law.
that his fault is accounted to be enorme, and indispensabile 13. disti. nerui.
: For it is held to be simonie, and corrupt cheuisance, if any valuable
consideration be given in such regard pacto, vel facto. And he that buyeth so,
is called Simoniacus of Simon Magus, and he that sells so, is called
Gieziticus of Giezi 1. q. 1. Studet.
.


Anglonomoph. In our Law it is held, that 3. The common Law agrees with them.
there is no diversity, where a man sells land depending a writ petitorie of
the same land, or do give it depending the writ: for in both cases there is
Champertie 8. E. 4. ^9.
.


Nomomath. I pray you let me know whether 7. Division.
any persons be accomptable by the mere and sole operation, and enforcement
of Law.


Codicgn. Yes, there be two sorts of accomptes: public, and private. The
public 1. Two sorts of accomptants by the civil Law.
accomptes are such as are to be made by a public officer, who is charged
with some special administration appertaining to the common weal L.
officialis c. de epis. et cler.
. For the Presidents of Provinces amongst the Romans did customablie use to
make up their accounts before they departed out of the Province, to which
account they were obliged by Law: Therefore Cicero says: Illud certe factum
est quod Lex iubebat, vt apud duas civitates Laodicensem et Apamensem, quoniam
ita necesse erat, rations confectas et consolidatas deponeremus Cicer. ad
Rufum.
. Private accomptes are such as belong to private men by the administration of
their goods or affairs, as the proxies or bailifes of private men.


Canonolog. The same difference do we 2. Likewise by the common Law.
hold in matters of account d. l. officialis ibid.
.

Anglonomoph. And by our Law there be 3. And also by the common Law.
some which be accomptable by Law: some by a particular charge imposed upon
them, or undertaken of them. And in the former case a writ of Account will lie,
though there be no priuitie infacto, but only in Law. Wherefore Mast. Prisot
said 33. H. 6. that the king might bring a writ of Account against one, as his
bailie, who did occupy the land de son tort demesne, of his own wrong. And
the same Law is (as he there affirms) if a man occupy the manor of a common
person de son tort demesne. And according to Wangf. opinion, if a man seize an
Infant as wardein in Socage, and is not the prochein amy, yet a writ of Account
lies against him: but there he claims to the use of the Infant 33. H. 6. 2.
per Prisot et Wangf.
. And the same Law seems it to be to Mast. Brook Brook Account 8.
, where a man presumptuouslie and of his own head undertakes to be my bailie,
a writ of Account will lie in such case: But if he enter to his own use, there
it seems (says he) that a writ of Account will not lie: for there Ne vnques
son Receiuor pur account render, is a good plea. And 49. E. 3. a writ of
Account was brought against the Lord by the tenant, as occupier of the land
which the tenant now plaintiff holds of the defendant in Socage, and the def.
said that the auncestor of the plaintiff did hold the land of him by knights
service, wherefore he seized the land in ward 49. E. 3. 10.
. By which case it appears that a writ of Account is admitted to lie against
the occupier of the land without any priuitie in facto. And 4. H. 7. it is held
by Brian, that if a man receive my rent of my tenants without my assent, yet I
shall charge him for the possession, and receipt of the rent 4. H. 7. 6.
. But a writ of Account will not lie against a disseisor, because that cannot
be without priuitie in Law, or in facto, as by assignement, or as Warden, or in
like sort, or by the pretense of the defendant of occupying to the use of the
plaintiff 2. Mar. Br. Account 89.
.


Nomomath. I will not press you any further with moving doubts of Accounts,
but will now make transition to other matters that remain to be discussed.


The fifth Dialogue.
Of Wast done in a man's Ground.
NOmomath. The next matter that by order offers it self to your conference,
is to treat of Wast done in a man's land: And for my more perfect apprehension of
the things concerning that point, I will prescribe unto you certain
particulars, wherein you may employ your travel for my further instruction.
First, of what things Wast may be committed. 2. What thing properly your Laws
censure, and determine to be wast. 3. What punishment by your laws is to be
inflicted upon these that commit wast? You shall do me great pleasure in
unfolding the secrecy of your knowledge hereof. And first to begin 1. Division.
with the first, let me know of what things wast may be committed.


Codicgnost. Wast may be committed in suffering 1. Of what things wast may be
committed by the civil Law.
the walls of houses, or closes to fall Gazalup. verb. rudera.
. So if there be a wood which is thick with great timber trees, which in Latin
is called Saltus, or which is but thinly set with slender trees wherein hunters
may ride up and down, which the Latinists do call Nemus, spoil or hauock made
in such woods may be accounted wast C. de ^un. pa. et Salluen. li. 11.
. But 2. Cutting of wood in silua caedua by the civil Law is ^o wast.
to cut wood in silua caedua which is apt to be cut is no wast, and therefore it
is said apt to be cut, because it grows easily again. Neither does wast
seem to be committed in silua pascua, if brush-wood, small wood, or underwood
be cut for the better pasturage of the beasts that go upon the soil. Likewise
wast may be committed in cutting down trees which grow sparsim, here and there
in the land which is demised to farm: for this is wast in the land it self,
because Arborum non est seperatum corpus afundo. But this word Arbor extends
by our Law very far, for it may be affirmed of Vines, which notwithstanding by
reason of the tenderness of them may seem to obtain a middle nature betwixt a
tree, and an herb. Likewise to iuie, though that do rather cleave to trees,
then participate the nature of trees: And the name of Arbor does extend to
reeds, and to willowes. But the cutting of some trees, that is the lopping or
pruning of them may be more available for their growth, so that only their
cutting down, and not their cutting only shall be adjudged to be Wast. Such
trees are named of us Arbores caeduae: which may grow again either by the same
stock, or by some other impes, which may be grafted upon them. Such are the
Cherie tree, the ash, the medlar tree, the oak, the laurel, the alder tree,
and the poplar tree ff. Arbo. furtim. caesa. l. 1. et l. vitem. et in gl. ff.
de arbo. ceden. l. 1.. arbo.
. But the cutting down of such trees may well be called wast, and is punishable
by our Law. And to open the sluices of the river Nilus is sharply punished C.
de Nili. agge. non rumpen. l. vnica.
.


Canonolog. Our Law does not in any of these things vary from yours.


Anglonomoph. Of all these things, unless it be reeds, iuy, and the like
things which do more approach to the nature of weeds, then of trees, we hold in
our Law that wast may be committed.


Nomomath. Well, then I pray you show what may properly be termed Wast by your
Law Anglonomoph. and for that purpose consider well of the points of the former
speech of Codicgnostes, who has showed promiscue, both of what things wast may
be committed, and what may be said to be Wast.

Anglonomoph. I will by your patience severally confer the parcels of his
discourse with the determination of our law concerning that which may properly
be said to be waste (for the other point will be thereby manifest,) as he has
before pronounced by their law. Waste may be committed in the decay or
demolishment 3 The common law agrees with the civil that wast may be in the
decay of an house.
of an house: this likewise is waste by our law; therefore in an action of
waste, 42. E. 3. the declaration was that the tenant had done wast in certain
tenements demised unto him by the predecessor of the plaintiff for term of
life, and the wast was assigned to be in a chamber, a furnace, and a graunge:
and the defendant said, that there was no chamber at the time of the lease
made: but by the opinion of Cand. he ought to have said (nor at any time
after) wherefore so he did 42. E. 3. 22.
. But the termor is not bound to repair houses which were ruinous at the time
of the lease made unto him 12. H. 4. fol. 5 10. H. 7. 3. 12 H. 8. 1. 7. H. 6.
40.
. And if all the house in such case do happen to fall save only the posts,
and the termor abateth the posts, this is not waste, because waste must be
assigned in a house (or some like tenement) so it is if a house newly edified
be abated, which house was never covered 40. Assis. pl. 22.
, (and therefore may not properly be said to be a house, as I take it by the
civil law: for a house according to the civil law does consist of
foundation, wall, and cover Spi. egeli. verb. aedes and domus.
.) And 38. E. 3. waste was assigned in a graunge, which was worth but 4. S. and
because it was of so small value, that none would hold it nor maintain it, it
was held to be no waste 38. E. 3. 7.
. Yet M. Fitzh. cites a case out of 34. E. 3. that if waste be done by the
warden to the value of 20. pence, this shall be adjudged waste, and the
plaintiff shall recover Fitz. N. B. 60. c.
. And the book 14. H. 4. is, that if a man cut trees, but to the value of
three shillings 4. pence. This shall be adjudged waste 14. H. 4. 11.
. But a wall or pale, which has been covered with thatch or timber, if the
tenant suffer it to be discovered, this shall be said to be waste 44. E. 3. 44.
10. H. 7. 21. 22. H. 6. B. 16. H. 7. per Fin. waste. 131.
. But if a house become ruinous for default of some covering, at the time of
the death of the auncestor, and after the tenant suffers the house to be more
ruinous, the heir may have an action of wast for the late ruin, which
happened after the death of the auncestor 2. Mari. Br. wast. 117.
. Neither is it sufficient in bar of a writ of waste of a house that the
defendant has built a new house in lieu of that which is fallen, but the
defendant must say that it is as much in length, and as much in latitude as the
other was, or at least he must say, that it is as profitable: but when a house
is ruinous and decayed at the time of the lease of it made, and it afterward
falls, and the defendant builds a new, it is not necessary that he
should make an other house of equal longitude or latitude 22. H. 6. 18.
. And the necessity of building a house ought to come in question, as if the
lessee have great need of a stable: and if no house be built upon the land at
the time of the lease, the lessee may not cut trees to make an house 11. H.
4. 32.
. But if waste be made by the kings enemies or by tempest, the tenant shall
not therefore be punished by a writ of Waste 43. E. 3. 6.
. Yet in such case a special covenant will bind the tenant. And therefore it
was adjudged 15. Elizab. that whereas the termor did covenant and agree pro se
and executoribus, to repair and maintain the houses, and to find principal
timber, which is decayed by the default of him or his executors, and dies, and
the house is burnt in defaulte of the executors, that a writ of covenant in
this case would lie against the executors, and that damages should be
recovered de bonis testatoris, and not condicionally, if there were none such,
of their own goods: and yet this happened by casualtie 15. Eliz. 324. Die.
. But the reason thereof is given in an other place, Modus and conuentio
vincant legem 28. H. 8. 19. Die.
. And 29. Henrici octaui, the lessee of a meadowe did covenant and agree to
keep and maintain the banks in good repair, and the said banks were
drowned and ouerflowed by high waters or sudden flood, yet the lessee is
bound to repair and maintain them because of his covenant, but according to
the opinion of Fitzh. and Shelley, because the decay of the banks was the act
of God, he ought to have convenient time to repair them 29. H. 8. 33. Die. 35.
H. 8. 56. Die.
. Now I will show how and in what cases the cutting of wood and trees is wast
by our law. It is clear by our law, that the tenant may cut trees for the
amendment of houses, 5 The tenant by the common law may cut trees for the
reparation of houses.
and the reparation of them, but if the houses be decayed by the default of the
tenant, the cutting of trees to amend them is waste 44. E. 3. 21. and 44. 11.
H. 4. 32.
: but the lessee may not in any sort cut apple trees for the amendment of
houses Temps E. 1. waste 122.
. And 7. H. 6. it is said, that he shall not meddle with great timberwoode
without the assent of his lessor: otherwise it is of seasonable wood which is
but of the age of ten years or therabout 7. H. 6. 38.
. But the cutting of dead wood is not waste Fitzh. N. B. 59. M.
: And the termor has house-wood, hedge-wood, and firewoode belonging to his
term of common right: and he may cut wood for that purpose 21. H. 6. 50.
. But if he cut wood to burn where there is dead wood sufficient this is
waste 20. E. 3. waste. 32.
. And it is not waste to cut seasonable wood which has used to be cut every
twenty years, or within 6 The common law agrees with the civil in the
cutting of Silua caedua.
that time 7. H. 6. 40. 11 H. 6. 1.
. And the cutting of thorns is no wast because they are not fit for timber 46.
E. 3. 17.
. Neither is the cutting of willowes waste, unless they lie about the site of
the manor 40. E. 3. 15. 10. H. 7. 2. 12. H. 8. 1. 12. E. 4. 1.
. And the termor may cut vnder-woode growing under the great trees, and the
high wood, but if there be no high wood, or great trees there, he can not cut
at all 40. E. 3. 25. 10. H. 7. 2.
. And whereas Codicgnost. has said, that the lopping and pruning of some 7 The
common law agrees with the civil in tollerating the lopping of trees, which
may be auailable for their growth.
trees may be more auailable for their growth, and therefore the cutting of
them is not wast, because they may grow by the same stock or by some other
imps grafted upon it: In very truth our law runs with this stream. For as
I have showed before, to cut seasonable wood is no waste: but if certain
sprowtes or branches do grow upon the stock, the cutting of these sprowtes
or branches or the destroying of them is wast 5. E. 4. 102. 9. H. 6. 42. 11.
H. 6. 1. 22. H. 6. 14
. And plants which can not be conveniently sold, neither bear any fruit, yet
(because of the possibility of the fructifying of them) if they be cut
down, this is waste 20. E. 3. waste. 32.
.


Nomomath. Well, I pray you satisfy me in this: If a man ought to keep
certain banks in repair, whereby the land adjoining, and which he has in
farm, may be better kept and yield more profit, and he does not repair
these banks, but suffers the sea to ouerflow them, and so to make the land
a great deal worse, whether is this by your law accounted waste
Anglonomophilax, according as Codicgnostes has showed of opening the sluices of
Nilus.


Anglonomoph. By our law if such banks be not repaired, whereby the land
demised that is adjoining is ouerflowed and made unapt for 1 That both by the
civil law and common law where land is empeired by the inundation of water
this is wast. 3 Division.
present profit, this in our law is accounted waste 20. H. 6. 1.
.


Nomomath. Well, now I pray you resolve me in this, whether is it lawful for
the termor to dig in the land demtsed, for water, mines, or treasure hid, or
this shall be accounted wast, if he do it without the permission of the lessor.


Anglonomoph. He that comes to land or to any other thing by an other man's
grant or 1 That by the common law he that comes to land by an other man's
grant ought to use it according to the grant.
demise can not use the land or that which is granted, further then the
grant or demise being reasonably construed will permit. Therefore if a man be
seized of a stagne or pond stored with fish, and he sell and the fish in the
pond to a stranger, the grantee may not dig the land etc. to make a trench,
because he may take the fish with nets or other engines Perk. tit. Graunts.
23.
. But if a man grant to me license to make a trench from such a fountain in
his land to my manor of Dale, and that I may put a conduit-pipe in the land to
convey the water to my manor, if after the pipe be stopped, I may dig in the
land to amend the pipe 13. H. 8. 15.
: because that is as it were implied in the grant: but if a man plough up
meadows demised unto him, this is waste 20 H. 6. 1. 16. H. 7. wast. 131.
Fitzh. N. B. 59. N.
. So if the termor do alter wood into arable, this is wast, or arable into
meadow, this is wast. For this is prejudicial to the inheritance: for the
evidence concerning the land serves to prove an other thing 29. H. 8. 35. Die.
Maleuerers. C.
. And so it is if land be ouerflowed for default of repayring banks 20. H. 6.
1.
: but of this I have lately spoken, and therefore will rather apply other cases
to the opening and explaning the reason hereof. The digging in the land
demised for claye, or for 2 The digging for clay or cole in the land demised is
wast by the common law.
stone, or for coals shall be said to be waste 2. H. 7. 14. 22. H. 6. 21. 9.
H. 6. 42. 17. E. 3. 7.
for the reason abouesaid: and likewise because the soil by that mean
becomes worse 22. H. 6. 18.
: and according to M. Fortescues report 20. H. 6. if the particular tenant have
not kept the water from the ground, so that it is made waste by the growing of
rushes and other weeds, this has bin adiuged to be wast, and the words of
the writ were: Quod permisit aquam terram illam inundare, 3 The suffering of
the ground to become rushie or weedie, by the common law is waste.
ita quod deuenit iuncosa 20. H. 6. 1. per Fortesc.
. But 33. E. 3. the defendant justified in a writ of waste because he did
cut down an elm tree in the place where the waste was assigned, and did
make a ditch in that place to water cattle, which went upon that ground, which
was necessary, because the water was very low, and almost dried up in that
place, and by that mean he deduced water out of the earth, and this was
adjudged a good answer 33. E. 3. Double plea. 9
.


Codicg. That which you have said is to reason consonant, to our law
correspondent: for as to your first case of the clearing or amending of the
conduit-pipes etc. Though it be in another man's ground, this in our law is not
accounted injurious l. 1. c. de quae duc. l. 11. and l. de cernimus eo. ti. li.
2.
. But we have a rule in our 4 That the civil law agrees* with the common law*
in suffering and to amend conduit-pipes in another man's ground.
law: that if a man ought to convey water per subterraneos meatus, through
certain chinkes or crauies of the earth in an other man's ground, he must not
do this by a leuill of stones, but with pipes of lead, because the other man's
ground is by stones more annoyed and empaired ff. de contrah. emp. l. si aquae
duct.
. But for the improouing of ground from worse to better, is clearly permitted
by our law. As to turn waste ground into arable, or fennish ground into firm
ground, this we account rather a benefit to the owner of the soil, then an
injury c. de fund. patr. l. si. li. 11.
. So it is, if a wood become arable c. quod per noual. de verb. signif.
: but to destroy any thing in an other man's ground, or to dig a pit, and so
to alter the form and nature of the soil, and by that mean to make it worse
is accounted of us very injurious, but to repair an old building, or to make
some commodious addition, is not wrongful, but beneficial, because Non
videtur nouum opus facere, sed vetus reficere ff. de noua. l. 1.. nouum. et. si
quis aedificium.
.


Canonol. Our law does not withstand any of these assertions.


Nomomath. Well, now I pray you proceed 3. Division.
to speak of the penalty which he is to suffer by your laws that commits
waste.

Codicgn. By our Law he that in such case 1. The punishment of wast by the
Civil Law.
will deny the wrong done shall be punished with double damages: But if he
justify, and it be found against him, with single ff. de insti. l. 1.. 1.
. But he that does break the sluices of Nilus, so that very great injury is
done, and to very many, he is burnt in the same place, where the fault was
committed, in a fire of the height of twelve cubits, and his goods and lands
are confiscated, because it is crimen, quasi laesae Maiestatis C. de agge. Ni
non rump. l. v^. ^^.
.


Canonol. Our Law in this does not gainsay you.


Anglonomoph. By an action of Wast at our 2. The punishment of wast by the
common Law.
Law, the plaintiff if it be found for him, shall recover treble damages
Fitzh. not. bre. 58. H.
: and execution may be had by Elegit of the lands, which the defendant had at
the time of the inquest taken 17. E. 3. 5. 18. E. 3. 38. 31. E. 3. Execut. 66.
: and he shall recover likewise the place wasted Stat* Glouc. cap. 6.
.


Nomomath. I will put you to no more pains in this matter, but will descend to
other things which have not yet been discussed.


The sixth Dialogue.
Of Parceners.
NOmomath. Let me know Codign. whether in your Law there be any definition set
down and established 1. Division.
touching Parceners, as they are termed at the common Law, and concerning the
making of Particion betwixt them, agreeable to the common Law.


Codicgn. I would first that Anglonomoph. should show who be Parceners at the
common Law, and in what sort partition is made: otherwise I should but roue at
an uncertain mark.


Nomomath. I pray you do so Anglonomoph. for that course is not to be disliked.


Anglonomoph. Mast. Littleton, a learned man 1. Two sorts of Parceners:
Parceners by the common Law, and Parceners by custom.
in our Laws, and a great patriarch of our profession, makes two sorts of
Parceners: Parceners by the common Law, and Parceners by custom. Parceners by
the common Law are when a man or woman seized of lands or tenements in fee
simple, or fee tail, have no issue but daughters, and die, and the tenements
discende to the daughters, and they enter into the said lands or tenements,
now they are Parceners, and how many daughters so ever they be, they are but
one heir to their auncestour. And they are called Parceners, 2. Who be
Parceners by the common Law.
because by the writ, which is called de Particione facienda, the Law will
compel them to make particion of the land. Also if a man seized of tenements
in fee simple, or in fee tail, do die without issue of his body engendered,
and the tenements discende to his sisters, they are Parceners by our Law. So if
his lands discende to his Auntes Littlet. lib. 3. c. 1. fol. 54.
. And none be called Parceners in our Law, but women, or the heirs of women
which come to lands and tenements by descent. For if two sisters purchase
lands or tenements, thereof they be called Iointenants, and not Parceners
Littlet ibidem fol. 56.
. But brethren may be Parceners by the custom, as by the custom of Gauelkind
in Kent Littlet. ibid. 59.
.


Codicgn. We have an action in our Law 3. Who be Parceners by the Custom.
very like to your above mentioned writ of Particione facienda, and it is
called actio familiae herciscundae, and it lies for them which have a common
inheritance to be divided betwixt them: As when two sisters, brothers, or
kinsfolks are instituted heirs, and by that mean are reputed as several
heirs to the auncestor, or him that instituteth them ff. famil. hercis. l. 1.
et 2. C. de verb. sign* l. sin.
. For if the Testatour pointing with his finger at three several persons do
say unto them, quilibet vestrum haeres mihi esto, his 4. That by the Civil
Law where three heirs are instituted, they are not reputed as one heir.
meaning by our Law is taken to be this, that every one of them should be heir
in part, non in solidum, for maeteria subiecta the thing it self does require
it, because it is impossible by our Law, that every one of them should have the
inheritance in solidum L. hoc artic. ff. in fi. ff. de haere. insti.
. But if he do not speak distributive, but collectiue: as if he said,
Quisquis mihi haeres erit, det Titio centum solidos: now whether there be one
heir or more heirs then one, yet Titius shall have but five pounds, because
of the collectiue word quisquis L. ab omnibus in princip. ff. de leg. 1. et l.
si quis in fundi vocabul. in fi. eo. ti.
. But if the Testator do say, Quicunque primo ingressus fuerit Castrum,
habebit centum solidos, and two do enter the Castle together, they shall every
of them have five pounds, because of the distributive word quicunque, which
may be verified either in one or more doing the same act at one time, because
primus est qui alium ante se non habet L. qui filium. 1. ff. de leg. 1.
. And if the Testator say, Quilibet haeredum meorum, det Titio december solidos,
Titius shall have as many ten shillinges as their be heirs L. si pluribus.
et ibi no. gl. ff. de leg. 2.
: which proves that by our Law, the several heirs are not accounted as one
heir.


Canonolog. Our Law holds not the contrary.


Nomomath. You have good reason for it. But I pray you resolve me Anglonomoph.
are these which you call Parceners reputed in your Law as one heir to all
intents.


Anglonomoph. Yea to all intentes in regard 5. That by the common Law parceners
are reputed as one heir, as to the descent of lands.
of the descent, though as to the making of particion it accompteth them as
several persons Fitzh. not. bre. 197. A.
. For a Nuper obis^ ought to be brought by that Coparcener, who is deforced
from the 6. Parceners in regard of the particion are accounted as several
persons.
tenements against all the other Coparceners, which do deforce her, although
some of them have nothing in the tenancie 32. E. 3. Nuper obijt. 7. 9. Ass.
pla. 8.
: For several tenancie, or nontenure is no plea in a Nuper obijt, because of
the priuitie of blood 7. E. 3. 16. 9. E. 3. Nuper obijt 8. 8. H. 6. 8.
.


Nomomath. Whether shall a writ de Particione 2. Division.
facienda be used against Iointenants or tenants in common, as well as against
Parceners, or some other remedy, shall be used against them.


Anglonomoph. Before the Statute of 31. H. 1. The statute of 31. H. 8. gives a
writ de Particione facienda as well to Iointenants and tenants in common, as to
parceners.
8. Iointenants and Tenants in common were not compelable by writ to make
particion of lands and tenements which they vndiuidedly held. But by that
Statute a writ de Particione facienda may be sued against them as against
Parceners 31. H. 8. c. 1. Rastall Particion 3.
. But by the common Law Iointenants may make particion by mutual assent
without deed 47. E. 3. 22. 19. Ass pla. 1.
. And by such particion the iointure is severed 30. Ass. pla. 8.
. 2. The three several actions against Parceners, Iointenants, and tenants in
common at the Civil Law.



Codicgn. By our Law several remedies are used against these which be both of
one blood or one family, which you have termed Parceners: as an action de
familia herciscunda: and an other manner of action against such as come to the
land by joint title, though not by one descent, which you have termed
Iointenants, namely an action which is called of us Actio pro socio: and an
other against these which come not in by joint title, but yet claim under
these which came to the land by joint title, as by your Law are Tenants in
common, against whom, or betwixt whom, for the effecting of particion, an
action lies at our Law which we call Actionem de communi diuidundo.


Canonolog. To this our Law is not contradictorie.


Nomomath. Let me now understand in 3. Division.
what sort particion of lands or tenements and other things is made by your
Laws.


Anglonomoph. Of lands and tenements the 1. Diverse kinds of partion at the
common Law.
particion by our Law is to have a several part or portion, as to have a third
part, if there be 1. A particion to have a third part, or a fowerth part.
three Coparceners, or a fowerth part, if there be four etc. And if there be
two Coparceners, and one of them releaseth to the other 2. A particion by way
of release.
with warrantie: this has been held to be a good particion in Law 44. E. 3.
Counterplee de vouch. 22. 34. E. 1. Partition 17.
. And particion of lands is sometime made by the grant of 3. Particion by the
grant of a thing de nouo.
a thing de nouo: as if an hundred shillinges of rent be granted by one of the
Coparceners to two of her sisters for equality of particion 2 H. 6. 14.
. So when land entailed is divided betwixt Parceners, and a rent is reserved
upon 4. Particion by way of reservation.
the particion for equality, the rent reserved shall be in tail, and of the
same condition whereof the land was at the time of the particion made 2. H. 7
5. 15 H. 7. 14.
. But a particion of a Mill is by taking the third part, or the fowerth part of
5. Particion by taking the 3. part, or the 4. part of the profits.
the profits, as the case requires 11. E. 3. Brief 478.
. And 45. Ed. 3. it was ruled, that Milles, Douecots, and the like, could not
be actuallie, locallie, and as I may say artuatim, as it were by iointes
divided. But if a woman ought to be endowed of the third part of such things,
the third part of the profits ought to be assigned unto her 45. E. 3. Dower
50.
. Yet 47. Edw. 3. the case was, that two Iointenants were of a Mill, and they
agreed to repair the Mill, the one of them of the one side, and the other on
the other side in perpetuum, and after the Mill was leased to farm, and they
took the rent severally according to the moities, and the Inquest said, that
their meaning was, that the particion should be good against them, and their
heirs 47. E. 3. lib. Ass. pla. 22.
. But Quaere, whether the Shirife by writ de Particione facienda may make any
such particion. Likewise particion may be of a reuersion, that one of the
parceners shall have the reuersion of three acres, and the other the reuersion
of other three acres, and it may be without deed Fitzh. not. bre. 62. D. 28.
H. 6. 2.
. And so particion may be made of a way 21. E. 3. 2.
. And also of a seigniourie 27. E. 3. 29.
. But of an aduowson the particion is to present by turn 38. H. 6. 9. 42.
Eliz. 87. Corbets case per Just. Walmesley Co.
.


Canonolog. Our Law agrees fully with 6 A difference in the Civil law where a
thing that has parts coh^rentes is divided, and where it has parts
distantes.
yours in this, for either a thing has parts cohaerentes, as a house, and
this may be divided by a several occupation: Or else it has parts distantes,
as a load of wood, or a flock of sheep, and this may be membratim or
corporally severed and divided Ber. de exces. prae lab. lib. 6.
.


Codicgn. The very same difference does our Law retain L. non ampli.. cum
bonorum. ff. de legate. 1.
.


Nomomath. Well, I will stick no longer in this plain title. Now prepare your
selfs for the sifting of more intricate points, then have heretofore been
handled by ye sithence the beginning of this second conference.


The seventh Dialogue.
Of Conditions.
NOmomath. In the treating of Conditions, I will not trouble you with any
exquisite definition of Conditions, because I do imagine that I shall draw
that out of the resolution of the cases, which I shall propose unto you. My
first question therefore is this: Whether does the word 1. Division.
( Si) always import and signify, a condition in matter of contract and
limitation of estate.


Codicgnost. It does not always signify a condition, 1. Si does not always
signify a condition in the civil law.
but sometime it signifies an uncertain cause, as I promise to Titius ten
pound, if he do accomplish my business. Sometime it signifies 2 Sometime it
signifies an uncertain cause 3 Sometime it signifies a certain cause. 4
Sometime an uncertain event.
a certain cause, as if the judge do give judgment for me: sometime it
signifies an uncertain event conditional, as I promise thee twenty pound if
I. S. be in Westminster hall such a day, and sometime it signifies a condition
or 5 Sometime a condition.
a conditional disposition, which always suspendeth the premises or matter
precedent l. itaqueff. si cert. pet. l. de monstra. ff. de condi. and demonstr.
fi. Insti. de verb. oblig.
: as if I promise unto you Stichus my bondseruant, and if I do not deliver him
unto you within such a day, then I will give unto you twenty pound nomine
paenae, here is both a condition, and likewise conuentio paenalis, which is
presently to take effect upon the breach of the condition l. Stipulatus.. 1.
ff. de verb. obli.
. So if the testator say, if my bondwoman shall bring forth three children at
three labors, let the^ be free: now if the woman bring forth four children at
two labors, they shall all be free: for though there be four children, yet
there is but a double labor, and in the eye of law bringing forth but two
children: for all that be brought forth at one birth, are but as one child in
regard of their nativity, as our law intends, because the law respects
that quod plerunquefit, and for the most part one child is borne at a birth,
and not two or more l. Aretusa. ff. de stat. homi. l. cum matter. fi. ff. de
fidei commis.
. And in this case, benigna interpretatio facienda est in fauorem libertatis.
And because it can not be well understood whether of the two children shall be
free, therefore both by construction of law shall be free.


Nomomath. This seems strange to me, that two children should be one
child, two procreations one birth, unless it be because the parents were one
person in law, when they begot them. And surely Quintilian makes two distinct
procreations in your case, and therefore he says. Quid refert an ex eisdem
prima illa duorum corporum animorumque compago seminibus oriatur? sibi quisque
firmatur, sibi quisque componitur, and duo pluresue fratres nascuntur fato
singulorum Quintil. in Gemin. languent.
: And Esau and Jacob famous twins were borne so continuatly (as I may say)
together, that the later did hold the fate of the former Genes. 25.
. Yet God forbid that we should account these two one. Saint Augustine boldly
and wittily distinguishes them thus: Vnus duxit mercenariam seruitutem, alius
non seruirit: vnus a matre diligebatur, alius non diligebatur: vnus honorem,
qui magnus apud eos habebatur, amisit, aliter ademptus est. Quid de vxoribus,
quid de filiijs, quid de rebus, quanta diuersitas August. lib. 5. de ciuitat.
De. c. 4.
? And therefore surely in this point I take your law to be contrary to the
course of nature.


Codicgnost. It is not in the supposall of one procreation of two twins,
either contrary to nature, or art: not contrary to nature, because as there
is one conception of two twins, so there is one puerpercie, though it be
finished at diverse times, for the labor still continues, not contrary to
art: for the Astronomers hold, that twins are always borne under one
Horoscope, under the same constellation, and the same situation of the stars:
for the Horoscope in Astronomy, if it be formally taken is nothing else but
horae inspectio, if it be materially taken, it is that part of the Zodiac
which ascends upon our hemisphere: for the Zodiac circle is always rolled
about, and some portion of it does always arise to us, some does always
decline: some is in one region of the heavens, some in another, and children
being borne under one situation of the stars, as they be like in the qualities
both of the body and mind: so in the producing them to light, there is but
one labor: in their cressence in the womb, there is but one operation of
nature.


Nomomath. You have rather answered me, then satisfied me: for I am
persuaded, that I shall never be of your opinion whilst I live, neither will
I applaude to your law in this. But Anglonomophilax, I hinder you from
examining the parcels of Codicgnost. his precedent speech of conditions.


Anglonomoph. I will not meddle with Codicgnost. his midwiferie in handling
matters of law, but will turn sail from it: as Cato disliked to prattle with
women in the Senate house Liui. li. 34.
. But as to the assertions of law, which he has set down, they shall not
glance from me without touch. Whereas he has said that this word ( si) does
signify an uncertain cause in 6. Si does signify an uncertain cause at the
common law.
their law, so it does likewise in ours, as appears by Boldes case in my L.
Dyers reports which was thus. R. Bold brought an action of debt against
Molineux for 30. pound, upon an obligation endorsed with this condition, that
if it fortune Ioane Molineux to decease before the feast of S. John baptist
which shall be in the year of our Lord 1553. without issue male of her body
by the said R. B. lawfully engendered then living, that then etc. and the
defendant said, that after the making of the said writing and before the said
feast the aforesaid Ioane at B. in the county of L. dyed without issue male of
the body of the said woman by the said R. B. lawfully engendered then living:
and the plaintiff said, that he ought not to be barred from his action: for
he said that after the making of the said writing, and before the said feast,
namely the 12. of June, anno etc. the said plaintiff at M. in the county of
Lancaster, took to wife the said I. and they had issue betwixt them H. Bold,
and after and before the said feast the said I. and the said B. dyed, the said
H. being the son of them both at the time of the death of the said I. being
then full living, and after and before the said feast, namely the twelfth of
June the said H. B. at B. aforesaid dyed, and the defendant hereupon did
demurre in law. And the question was whether this word ( tunc) in the condition
should be referred to the time of the death of the wife: and it seemed to
Mountague and Baldwin that it should not, but that it ought to be referred to
a time certain: for every tunc relates to his quando, but they thought that
it should be referred to the feast which is certain, and not to the death of
the woman, which is uncertain: but Shelley and Knightley thought otherwise.
For in diverse cases relation shall not be made ad proximum antecedens: as if a
man make a lease for life the remainder in tail the remainder over to I. S. in
forma praedicta, this shall not be referred to the estate tail, which does
next preceed, because it wants the word (heirs) to make an estate tail, and
therefore it shall be referred to the first estate. Which later opinion if it
be law, then by our law ( si) may signify and may make other words to
signify an uncertain cause of the accomplishment of a condition 28. H. 8. 14.
Die. Boldes C.
. And whereas he has said that sometimes it signifies a certain cause (as
if the judge do give judgment for me:) So likewise it signifies a certain
cause in our law, 7. Si, signifies a certain cause at the common law.
for 8. E. 4. the case was this. An action of debt was brought upon an
obligation by the Duchess of Suffolk: the defendant said, that it was
endorsed with this condition that if the defendant should stand to the
arbiterment of the said Duchess touching all manner of suits etc. betwixt him
and one B. that then the obligation should be void etc. And this was admitted
to be good, and thereupon it may be concluded that ( si) sometimes in our law
imports a cause certain, as the Duchess in this case was a certain cause
of the arbiterment 8. E. 4. 1. and 9 Duchess de Suffolk C.
. So 23. Eliz. the case was that two were bound to stand to the arbiterment of
two, if they did make their awarde within two days after the date or making of
the said obligation, and the obligation bore date die Sabbati ante prandium,
and the award was made the same day post pra^dium, and this was held to be
good, because it shall be intended that it may be made at any time after the
date of the obligation until two days immediately following be past. And as in
8. Si, by the common law may signify an uncertain event.
the civil law, so likewise by our law ( si) whether it be expressed or
employed may signify an uncertain event: for if a rent be granted for life to
I. S. the remainder to him that shall first come to Paul's the next day in the
morning, this remainder is good, though it be upon a ( si employed) if I. S. dye
not before the next day, and if one come to Paul's the next day in the morning,
and if he which comes thither be a person able to take by the grant Assis.
pl. 47. Perk. 13. sect. 56.
. And whereas he says, that by their law it signifies 9. Si. signifies a
condition by the common law.
a condition, or a conditional disposition, so it does likewise in our law, as
it is well recited in my Lord Dyers reports out of Bracton: Scito quod, vt
modus est, si conditio, quia causa. And as l 4. Mari. 139. Die.
to his conceited case of the puerperie, I take his reason to be very good,
that benig na interpretatio facienda est in fauorem libertatis.


Codicgnost. What say you now sir?


Nomomathes. I say that as for such a paradoxical fantasy, Non persuadebis
etiamsi persuaseris. 2 Division.
But I pray you resolve me this: If I sell to another certain land for an
hundred pound, unless another the next month following do give more for it
by five pound at the least, whether does this word (unless) make a condition,
or it is an idle clause and ineffectual.


Codicgn. I take it clearly to make a good condition, for though the sale be
pure and vnconditionall, 1 The word ( nisi, or unless) does sometime signify
a condition at the civil law.
yet it is resoluble and defeasible upon a condition contingent l. 2.. si in
diem ff. pro emp.
: for the words following may qualify and govern a direct grant or devise:
as if the testator say, I devise unto A. a C. li. for the making of my tomb l.
quib. diebus.. fi. ff. de condi. and de mon.
: or if he said, I devise unto him a hundred li. pro eura liberorum meorum
sustinenda: or if he said, I devise unto him so much to endow certain poor
maidens, or to ransom certain prisoners out of captivity, here there is no
condition employed, but only a limitation or modification to what intent or
purpose the devise is l. mill. C. de epi. et cle.
. So if the testator say, I devise to Titius C. li. 2 Law is a modification or
limitation of a grant is made.
which I will shall be paid unto him out of my money which I have in such a
place, as namely in such a closet, or such a chest: if in the closet or chest
there be no money, then there is nothing due, but if there be a less sum,
yet all the money is due by reason of the intent l. quidam testamento. ff. de
leg. 1. l. Lucius. ff. de ali. and ciba.
. And if the testator devise to every one of his free men a several and
certain yearly maintenance out of his lands in Dale, if his lands in Dale
be not sufficient for these several maintenances, yet they ought to be
supplied of his other lands l. Paulo Callimacho.. fi. de leg.
: because the adiection and mentioning of the place was only used for a
certain demonstration of the land which should be charged with payment, and
not for the taxation or restraint of the legacy: for legatum non restringitur.
But if a man devise ten pound to his daughter until she mary, by this is
intended a yearly payment of x. li. l. legatum ff. de annu. lega.
, because the word (until) does signify in this case a limitation. And
though there ought to be a multiplcation of paiments: yet there is a limitation
ad tempus nube^di, that afterward the payment shall not be due: but if a man
devise to his daughter his lands which he bought of Cornelius until she marie,
this signifies not a yearly legacy, because subject a materia non patitur vt
sit multiplicabile: But it only signifies an extinction of the legacy when
the marriage is accomplished. For if a man devise his land in Dale to A. until
he be Shirife of London, as soon as he is Shirife of London the legacy is
determined, and immediately reuerteth to the heir L. fi. C. de leg.
. For as it is in the power of the Testatour to make the legacy begin at a
certain time, so likewise it is in his power to make it end at a certain time.


Nomomath. You have put good and perspicuous diversities betwixt a condition
and a limitation. I pray you Anglonomoph. show what your Law determines of
this difference.


Anglonomoph. The very same difference is 3. A difference betwixt a limitation
and condition at the common Law.
in our Law, which by cases shall be explaned. A man grants to an other his
manor of B. so that he pay 10. li. yearly to the lessour, during the life of
the lessour: and if the said rent be behind, that then it shall be lawful for
the lessour to distraine for it in the lessees manor of S. the lessour has a
franktenement in the rent sub modo, depending upon the will of the lessee (and
the lessour,) and there is a limitation implied by Law, though not verbally
expressed 3. E. 3. 15. Assise 172.
. So if a man make a Lease to one for life, paying the first six years 3.
quarters of corn, and if he will hold it longer a C. s. the word ( If) in this
case makes but a limitation 15. E. 3. Execution 63.
. So if a rent of 5. pound be granted to I. as long as the grauntour, his
heirs or assigns shall hold the manor of W. this was adjudged to be a
freehold in the grauntee, but yet with a limitation 10. Ass. pla. 8. Br.
Estates 31.
, ( as long as the grauntour should hold the manor of W.) So if a man grant a
common in his land in Dale, when he puts in his beasts, or grants an
estouer of Wood, when he comes to his manor of D. the grauntee has a
freehold, but qualified with certain limitations 17. Ass. pla. 7.
. So it is if the king grant an office to I. S. donec been and fideliter se
gesserit 3. Ass. pla. 9. et 6.
. So if land be leased to one quamdiu se been gesserit 37. H. 6. 29.
. So if a man devise his land to his eldest son in tail, with several
remainders in tail, and that the party morgaging, incumbring, entangling, or
aliening the land, shall be clearelie discharged, excluded, and dismissed
touching the intaile, and the conueyance of the intaile shall be of no force
unto him, this is not a condition, but a limitation: for if it were a
condition, the right heir might enter for the breach, and defeat all the mean
remainders in tail, which is not consonant to the intent of the Deuisour 13.
et 14. Eliz. Com^ Newyses c. 403.
. And whereas you have said that a man by way of limitation may devise money to
be paid out of his chest or coffer, and if there be no money in the chest or
coffer, there is no money due, our Law deals 4. The common Law is more ample
and large then the Civil law in matter of limitation.
more amply and beneficially in like cases. For if a man grant to me an
annuitie of x. li. to receive out of his coffers, if he have neither coffers,
nor money in the^, yet his person shall be charged with the annuitie Fitzh. Not.
bre. 152. A. 9. H. 6. 17.
, because the grant it self induces a charge upon the grauntour. Yet an
annuitie may be granted with a limitation: as if an annuity be granted to take
at every time as often as the grauntour shall come to his manor of S. or as
often as the grauntee shall come to the house of the grauntour 14. E. 4. 4.
. So if I grant an annuitie of x. li. out of my land in Dale, and I have no
land in Dale, this grant is not void, but my person shall be charged 9. H. 6.
53. per Newt. et Cot.
.


Nomom. Pause here Anglonom. What is Canonologus drowsy, or entered into some
dream?


Canonolog. I was neither drowsy, nor dreaming, but the eyes of my mind were
somewhat closed and shut, as the hares be when she watches for the hounds:
for if I could have taken any advantage of the speeches of my two companions, I
would not have been so long silent. But in truth our Law in the matters of
condition before handled, has no other oracle but the Civil Law, if hereafter
there happen any variance, I will not conceal it from you.


Nomomath. Let me then ask you this question 3. Division.
Codicgn. A man deuiseth to R. x. li. and if he wast or spend it, then he
deuiseth unto him x. li again: Suppose that he do spend twenty pound,
whether may he afterward demand 10. li. because the devise is indefinite.


Codicgnost. The devise is not indefinite: 1. Rursus, or the word (again)
signifies once again by the Civil Law.
for this word (again) signifies as much as once again, according to the
rule of our Law: Rursus verificari potest in vna vice l. fidei commiss.. si
quis ff. de leg. 3.
: Otherwise it might be that the executor should be charged to the full value
of all the goods of the Testatour: For if the deuisee were an Acolastus,
though the executor were by the executorship a Craesus, yet all would not serve.


Anglonomoph. Your reason is good, but yet I would not be peremptory in this
matter, for it is not in our Law so clear: For two Judges were opposed against
other two in the like case. There is a Prouiso in a Lease, that 2. How far
forth a word of restraint is to be extended at the common Law.
neither the lessee nor his assigns, shall not alien to any without the assent
of the lessour, but only to the wife, or the children of the lessor, and the
lessee alieneth to one of the sons of the lessour: It was left ambiguous,
whether the restraint were now determined Mar. 152. Die.
.


Nomomath. Let this be the case. I am bound to pay you twenty pound, if your
ship come 4. Division.
from Russia, and after the ensealing and delivery of the bond, we make this
condition, that the twenty pound which I did before owe unto you upon the
aforesaid condition, I shall now owe unto you absolutely and without
condition, whether in this case is the agreement of any force to defeat the
condition.


Codicgn. By our Law it is of force to overthrow 1. An agreement by word may
defeat a condition in writing at the civil Law.
the condition: for it is a renewing of the bond (as we term it) and so the
later bond shall prejudice, and swallow up the former ff. de nous. et C. eo. ti.
.


Anglonomoph. Our Law holds the contrary, 2. The common Law is quite
contrary to the aforesaid assertion of the Civil Law.
and the reason is this, because it is an inconvenience in reason, that an
especialtie sealed and solemnly delivered, should be avoided by the bare
agreement of the parties, which is but a mere matter in facto 1. H. 7. 14.
Dones case per Dauers.
. Yet in some cases it is not inconvenient, that an obligation should be
avoided by a matter in fasto where there is a strong and peremptory operation
in Law. As if a man be bound to a feme sole, and afterward he marieth her: Or
if a man be bound to a villain, and after he purchases the manor to which
the villeine is regardant, the marriage and the purchase may be pleaded in
auoidance of the especialtie. So in an auoydance of a statute merchant it is a
good plea to say that part of the land is purchased by the reconusee. So in a
writ of Annuitie, it is a good plea to say, that he has paid it in a foreine
county. So if a man by deed grant a rent, if the grauntee surrender the rent
with the especialtie, this is a good auoydance of the especialtie 1. H. 7.
Dones case per Keble.
. But where a man was bound to pay xx. nobles at a certain day, and if he
failed, that then he would loose x. li. paiable at the same day: an action of
Debt was brought for the x. pound, and it was allowed 26. E. 3. 71.
: for here there were two several bands, one of them consequent upon the
other, but not abolishing the other. And if a defeasance upon a statute
merchant be, that the payment of the money should be made at Bristowe, and the
conusee received it at an other place, this is a good discharge of the statute,
for now the Law has discharged it 46. E. 3. 4.
. But one matter of record may be avoided by an other: Therefore the case was
20. E. 3. in a writ of Account the defendant said that the plaintiff by a
deed, which he showed forth did grant, that if the defendant did make a
reconusance upon statute merchant such a day at Canterbury to the plaintiff,
that the writ of account should be held as void: This was admitted by the
Court to be a good agreement to avoid the writ of annuitie, as soon as the
statute is delivered to the plaintiff 20. E. 3. Account 79.
.


Nomomath. I would know Codicgn. what your Law does determine of impossible
conditions, whether it does utterly reject them or what force and effect it
assigns unto them.


Codicgn. Impossibility, our Law makes 1. Three sorts of impossibilities at
the Civil Law.
threefold: iuris, facti, et naturae. Iuris, as when there is a repugnancie in
the condition, so that the Law does wholly frustrate, and disanull the
condition, or else it is directly contrary to the Law: As if a man should
contract with a 2. What impossibilitas iuru is at the Civil Law.
woman si prolem euitauerit, or si adulteram se praestiterit, the one of these
being against the Law of nature, the other against the Law of God, both of them
are by our Law made void C. fi. de condi. appo.
. And indeed there is a repugnancie betwixt the contract and the condition,
marriage being a thing instituted and ordained for the procreation of children,
and the avoiding of fornication. Impossibilitas facti, is when 3. What
impossibilitas facti is at the Civil Law.
there is great difficulty in the thing that is to be done, and it is not
possible to be easily done, howbeit it is not absolutely impossible to be
done, this impossibility of the condition does frustrate the act precedent: As
if I say that Stichus my villeine shall be free, if he will give a thousand
pound for his freedom, this though it be not impossible, yet it is very
difficult for a villein to perform, and because of the difficulty, the Law
will imagine that I did but trifle by this form of enfranchisement, and so
Stichus shall gain nothing by it L. cum haere.. 1. ff. de sta. li.
. So it is if a man being at York be bound to pay to an other at London x.
pound before sunne-set, this though it be not impossible in it self, because a
Pegasus or poast-horse may help the matter, yet because it can not with any
facility be pefourmed within so short time, our Law holds the condition to
be void Insti. de verb. obli.. loca.
. Impossible by nature that is said to be, which is 4. Impossibilitas naturae
by the Civil Law.
repugnant to natural reason, and contrary to the course of nature. As if I
give a horse to one upon condition that he shall touch heaven with one of his
fingers: or that he shall extinguish fire with oil: or that he shall build a
village in the clouds Joan. ad reg. Nemo. li. be reg. iur.
.


Nomomath. These differences have been well opened by Codicgnostes. Now I will
request you Anglonomoph. to explane and illustrate them by cases.


Anglonomoph. I will particularly speak of 5. Which be conditions against Law
by the censure of the common Law.
them all: And first of Conditions against Law. If estates in land be made
upon conditions contrary to Law, the estates be good, and the conditions
void: But then the estates must not begin, neither take effect by force of the
condition, neither depend upon such conditions, as to the existence of them.
But if a man seized of land do enfeoffe a stranger upon condition, that if
the feoffour do kill I. S. one of the Queens subjects, it shall be lawful
for him to reenter, the estate is good, and the condition void 4. H. 7. 4. 2.
H. 4. 9.
. So it is if one enfeoffe an other upon condition, that if the feoffour do
burn the houses of I. S. it shall be lawful for him to reenter Perk. Condic.
139.
: for such conditions are impossible to be good by Law. But if a lease for
life be made, or a lease for years of land upon condition, that if the lessee
kill I. S. within such a day that then he shall have and hold the land to him
and to his heirs forever, notwithstanding that the lessee do kill I. S. within
the day, yet his estate is not enlarged, because the condition was against law
and the estate should have been enlarged by the performance of the condition,
but notwithstanding such condition, yet the lease is good, because that did not
begin by the condition. But if an obligation be endorsed with a condition
directly contrary to law, both the obligation, and the condition be void 8. E.
4. 13. 2. E. 4. 3.
. And if a man be bound that he shall keep the obligee without damages, and
do not show wherein such condition is void, because he may suffer damages
for committing treason, murder, or other felony which things are against law,
and it is also against law, to save him without damages for such things, so
that the condition is void, but the obligation is not void, because such things
are not expressly rehearsed within the condition, so that the condition is not
directly contrary to law 9. H. 4. Conditions 6.
. And conditions which are repugnant in themselves are void in law: as if a
feoffement or gift in tail be made, that the feoffee or donee may not take the
profits: or upon condition, that they shall make no waste: or upon condition
that the wife of the feoffee etc. shall not be endowed, or if a lease for life
be made upon condition that the lessee shall do no fealty, these estates be
good, and the conditions void: or if an annuitie be granted, prouiso that it
shall not charge the person of the grauntor, the grant is good the condition is
void 21. H. 30. 20. E. 4. 8.
. But if a man seized of land in fee lease the said land for years by
indenture rendering rent, prouiso that the lessor shall not distrein for the
rent, this is a good prouiso because the lessor may have an action of debt 5.
H. 7. 7.
. but land or rent may be given to a man in tail so that he may alien to the
profits of his issue, and this is a good condition: for it is agreeable to law
and the donor may as well give conditionally as simpliciter in the tail 46. E.
3. 4. G. garrantie 18.
. And 7. H. 6. it was held by all the Justices in the eschequer chamber beside
June, that if a man make a feoffement with warrantie, prouiso that the feoffee
shall not vouch him and his heirs, and that if he do, the warrantie shall be
void, this is a good prouiso. But if the prouiso had been that he should
neither vouche nor rebutte, the prouiso had been void: for that had cut off
all the force of the warrantie 7. H. 6. 44.
. And if two grant custodiam parci de A. to I. capiendo feoda quae B. nuper
parcarius cepit, prouiso quod scriptum non extendat ad onerandum un des
grauntors, this prouiso was taken to be void, because it restreyneth all the
effect of the grant in regard of him, and if land be given in tail the
remainder in fee, upon condition that if the donee, or his heirs do alien in
fee, that the donor or his heirs may enter, the opinion of the court was that
this was a good condition: for a man may make a condition in the negative of
any thing which is prohibited by the law, as if he make a feoffement, prouiso
that the feoffee shall not not commit felony, or that he shall alien within
age, or in mortmayne: and a man may enfeoffe A. and his wife upon condition,
that they shall enfeoffe none other, for that were a discontinuance: otherwise
it is that they shall not levy a fine, for that is contrary to their estate
10. H. 7. 8.
. So if a man make two executors, prouiso that the one of them shall not
administer, this is a void prouiso, because it restrayneth all the authority
given in the premises as to him, and the intent which agrees not with law is
to no purpose 19. H. 8. 4. Die. p Brud. and Englef.
. And it has been agreede, that if a man do limitte an use in tail with a
prouiso, that if cesty que use do such an act, his estate shall cease during
his natural life, that this prouiso is repugnant, and against law, for the
estate can not be determined in part. And Justice Walmsley said, that when an
estate is given to one, it may be defeated wholly by condition or limitation,
but it cannot be determined in part to one, and given in part to another:
for that is repugnant to the rules of law, as if a man make a lease for life
upon condition that if the lessee pay not twenty pound, that a another shall
have part of the land, this future limitation 6 What conditions impossible in
fact are at the common law.
is void 41. Eliza. Corbets case 86. b. Com^.
. And as to conditions impossible in fact, such conditions if they go to the
defeasans of an estate, the estate notwithstanding remains good: but estates
cannot be enlarged by such a condition impossible: and if an obligation be
endorsed with a condition impossible, the obligation is good, and the condition
is void. Therefore if a man seized of land do enfeoffe a stranger upon
condition that if the feoffor go on foot from London to Stamford in a day,
that then it shall be lawful for him and his heirs to reenter, the condition
is void, quia impossible, the estate good 14. H. 8. 32.
: but if A. be bound to B. that C. shall appear in the common place Octab.
Trin. in an action of debt brought by the said B. against C. retournable at the
same day, and C. appears the same day, and his appearance is not recorded,
now the obligation is forfeited. But if in this case C. had dyed before the day
of the return the obligation had been saved, because the condition became
impossible by the act of God 9. E. 4. 25. 15. H. 7. 2. 38. H. 6. 19.
.


Nomomath Now I pray you show unto me 6. Division.
whether conditions are to be expounded strictly and according to the rigorous
sense of the words are according to equity and the exigence of the case, so
that the circumstances of a man's speech or actions, shall have the regiment of
conditions.


Codicgn. Conditions are in our law taken 1. Conditions in the civil law are
taken according to equity.
according to equity. For if I grant to one an annuitie of ten pound yearly,
quamdiu res meas gesserit, the law makes this sense of these words that he
shall have ten pound yearly, si res meas gesserit together with a limitation
l. pater. fi. ff. de condi. and demon.
. So if I buy of one the fishes which are taken by him, though he have not
already taken any fishes, yet the words do imply a condition, that that the
buyer shall have them if any be taken. So if I say, Acceptis centum solidis a
Titio instituo eum haeredem, it is not meant that in regard of five pound
received of Titius I do make him my heir or executor, but the words are
conditionally meant: if the testator do receive 5. li. of Titius etc l. a
testatore ff. de condi. and demon.
. So if I devise to one xx. li. pro docendo talem discipulum, this ( pro) does
signify a condition, because by common usage prius docendus est discipulus
quam soluendu^ salarium magistro l. nec semel. ff. qu. di. le. ce.
. So if I do contract with a woman in this sort, I promise unto you A. that
you shall be my wife donec terra ponatur super oculos meos, these words are not
generally to be understood, for so the party may lay earth upon his eyes, and
slip the collar and break promise: but they must be understood according to
common intendement, that she shall be his wife until his carcass be covered
with earth, that is, until he be buried, so it is, if he should have said,
Donec oculi, and os mihi claudantur c. ex literis. 1. de spon.
.


Angl. Our law many times takes the words 2 The common law takes conditions
many times strictly.
of a condition strictly to preserve an estate. A lease was made to one upon
condition, that the lessee shall not alien to A. the lessee alieneth to B. who
alieneth to A. the co^ditio^ is not broken: for a condition which goes to
defeat an estate must be taken strictly 31. H. 8. 45. Die.
. And 28. H. 8. the case was thus: A lease for years was made by indenture,
the lessee did covenant and grant, that if he his executors or assigns did
alien, that it should be lawful to the lessor to reenter: after he made his wife
his executrix and dyed, the woman took an other husband which aliened. The
first question was whether the words of the covenant abouesaid did make a
condition. And if it were a condition, the 2. question was, whether there were
any breach of condition in the case. Some held that there was no breach of
condition, because the husband was possessed of the term by act of law, and
is not an assignee no more then a tenant by the courtesy is, or the land of a
villain. But Brown and Shelley held that the husband was an assignee in law,
and that the land was subject to the condition into whose hands soever it did
come 28. H. 8. 6. Die.
. But lately in Ridgeleys case the condition was exte^ded by equity for the
safeguard of the party. The case was thus: A man was bound to another in a c. l.
that he should discharge the obligee and save him harmeles of all suits and
encumbrances against I. S. and after the said I. S. sued the obligee, and
proceeded unto judgment, wherefore the obligee brought an action of det upon
the obligation, and the defendant pleaded non damnificatus est. And Beamond
Sergeant did maintain the plea in his argument, because that he was not
damnified in the eye of law until the goods or the land, or the person of
the plaintiff were actually charged. For before that time he was only
chargeable, but not charged. Sergeant Harris argued to the contrary: for he
said that he was chargeable to the execution of the party, and so not saved
harmless, and two sorts of damages were held by Justice Walmesley the one
executorie, the other executed executorie, which a man may in future time
sustain: Executed, as if the land or the person should be in present
execution. And if the disseisee make a release to the disseisor, and a
stranger cancelleth the deed of release, the disseisor may have an action of
trespass against him: and yet the disseisor does continue possession, and is
not as yet actually damnified. And Justices said, that the land of the party
was in some sort charged, for none in such case would buy the land of the
party, but only under the value, because of the judgment executorie 33.
Eliz. Ridgeleys c.
. But we have a rule in our law, that when a condition is to be performed to
a stranger it is to be performed most strictly: and if the condition be
performed at an other place, this is not sufficient 36. H. 6. 8.
. And 21. H. 6. it is said that if a man be bound, that he or his feoffees of
the manor of W. shall grant to the obligee 20. s. rent for term of life, and
he has three feoffees, two of the feoffees cannot grant this rent 21. H. 6.
19.
But 7. E. 4. it was affirmed in the kings bench, that if a man were bound to
make one a sure sufficient and lawful estate in certain land by the advice of
I. S. if he make an estate according to the advice of I. S. be it it sufficient
or not, or lawful or not, he is excused of his bond: and a like matter was in
the common place the same term, and they were of the same opinion 7. E. 4. 13.
.


Nomomath. I would gladly be satisfied in this, when a man makes one his heir
or executor, 7 Division.
and if he refuse to perform any thing that is comprised in his will, then he
wills that I. S. shall be his heir or executor, and shall perform his
will, and shall seize his goods and enter into his lands post haereditate^
aditam, though the heir or executor have intermedled with the will, and have
performed some things according to the intent of it: Now if the Testatour die,
and the heir or executor have performed some things of the will, but
refuses to perform other some, and has seized the goods, and entered into
the lands of the party deceased: Whether may I. S. enter upon him for the
condition broken and defeat his whole interest in the lands or goods: or
shall he still retain part of the lands, and goods, because he has
performed part of the will?


Codicgn. I. S. or the substitute of the Testatour 1. There may be a
substitution of one heir after an other, or of one executor after an other at
the Civil Law.
is now by the will and breach of the the condition become directly the heir
or executor to the Testatour: And all the authority or interest of the fomer
heir or executor is utterly determined, frustrated, and defeated Insti. de
vulga. substi.. quo casu.
: 2 The heir at the civil Law must succedere in vniuersum ius defuncti.
for the authority or interest of the heir or executor by our Law may not be
apporcioned, but he must succedere in vniuersum ius defuncti ff. de verb.
signif. l. nihil aliud est haereditas, et l. bonor. eo. tit.
. And there is an other substitution in our Law, which we call a reciprocal
substitution, and it is thus: The Testatour says, I do make S. and T. my
sons within age my heirs, and I substitute the one of them to the other,
that is, if the one die, the other shall have all, and the mother nothing at
all Gazalup. verb. substitutio brem loqua.
.


Anglonomoph. I have noted in your words Codign. two things, which have no
small coherence and agreement with matters of our Law. First in that by will
according to your Law, an entry may be limited to a stranger. 2. In that ye
hold that he which defeateth the estate of him that breaks the condition
shall defeat his whole estate, and shall entirely claim the possession. Which
two assertions I shall severally prove by cases of Law beginning with the
first: A man seized in fee of lands deuisable, 3. By Will according to the
common Law an entry may be limited to a stranger.
did devise them to one for term of his life, and that he should be a
Chapplein, and that he should chaunt for his soul all his life time, and that
after his decease the tenements should remain to the Cominaltie of a certain
village, to find a chappleine perpetual for the same tenements, and he died,
and the deuisee entered, and held the lands six years and was no chappleine,
and the heir of the deuisour outed him, and he brought an Assise: And it
seemed to the Court that the limitation that he should be a chappleine was no
condition, and that the heir could not enter, for then the remainder should be
defeated, which may not be, because by the intent a perpetual chappleine ought
to found 29. Ass. pla. 17.
: Whereby it appears that they in the remainder were to take advantage in
this case of the breach of the thing that was to be done, and not the heir. So
in Fitz James his case, the clause of entry was limited to him in the
remainder for breach of the condition by the particular tenant: for it was
held that the limitation might determine the estate, and that being
determined, he in the remainder might enter 13. et 14. Elizab. Com^ 403.
Newyses case.
. Also 34. E. 3. the case was, that a man had issue a son and a daughter, and
devised land deuisable to one for life, upon condition, that if the son
should disturb the tenant for life, that the land should remain to the
daughter, and the heirs of her body, the father dies, the son disturbeth
the tenant for life, who dies, the daughter brought a Formedon, and it was
allowed 34. E. 3. Formedon pla. vlt.
: But yet the advantage of 4. The advantage of entry limited to a stranger is
in the late reports doubted of.
entry by virtue of the limitation is not in other late reports so clear,
but has been greatly doubted of: Stubes being Cestuy que use devised to his
wife certain land during her life, ita quod non faceret vastum, the remainder
to his younger son in tail, and died, after the Statute of 27. of joining the
possession to the use is made, the woman dies, the question was who should
enter for the condition broken, the heir, the feoffees, or he in the remainder
3. Mar. 117. Die.
. And an other case was equally doubtful, Wilford was bound in an Obligation
without day of payment limited, and devised his land to his executors upon
condition, that if they did not pay the said sum according to the
obligation, that the devise should be void, and that then A. should have the
land to him and to his heirs upon condition that he paid the money, Wilford
died, A. died, the executors are requested to pay the money, and they would not
pay it, the question of the book left undecided, is whether the heir of A.
may enter into the land, and pay the money 3. Mar. 128. Die.
. In like manner land in Gauelkind was devised to the eldest son upon
condition, that he should pay 100. li. to the wife of the deuisour, he failed
of the payment, it was questioned by Manwood, whether the younger son might
enter into the moitie, as by an implied limitation 15. Eliz. 317. Die.
. But touching such entries by force of some special limitation or condition,
Mast. Frowike gives a good rule 21. H. 7. that an estate of inheritance can
not cease by virtue of a condition broken only, but there ought to be also an
entry: But otherwise it is of a particular estate, and the reason is, because
such an estate may be determined by word as by surrender: and by the same
reason it may cease by the words of the condition 21. H. 7. 12. per Frowike.
. Now that the 5. That the entry for the condition broken, defeateth the whole
estate.
whole estate of the feoffee or donee is defeated by the breach of the
condition, and the entry of the party, may be proved by diverse authorities
in our Law, and that there can be no fraction of the condition, 14. Elizab. all
the Justices agreed: And so was judgment given in Winters case, that by the
grant of the reuersion of part of the lands, with which a condition runs,
the condition is wholly confounded, because it is a thing penal and entire,
and may not be apportioned nor divided 14. Elizab. 308. Die.
. And 33. of Henry the eight, according to Mast. Brooks report, it was held
for Law, that if a man give land in tail, or lease it for life, rendering rent,
with a condition for default of payment to reenter: now if he lease part of the
land to the donour, or lessour, or if the donour or lessour enter into part of
the land, he cannot enter for rent behind after, but the condition is wholly
suspended, because a condition cannot be apportioned or divided. Therefore some
scruple may with good reason be made of the case 16. Elizab. in my Lord Dyers
reports, A man leased land for years, upon condition that the lessee should
not alien the land to any person without the assent of the lessour, nor any
part of the land, the lessour gives license to alien part, and the lessee
alieneth the residue without license, it was adjudged that the lessour may
enter notwithstanding the dispensation of the condition ex part 16. Elizab.
334. Die.
. Howsoever 5. Edw. 6. be to the same purpose, that a man enfeoffed two upon
condition to make back a lease for life to the feoffour, the remainder in fee
to a stranger: the one of them only makes estate accordingly. And by the
opinion of many, this is good for a moitie by the dispensation of the party,
who might take advantage of the condition by his acceptance of estate 5. Ed. 6.
69. Die.
. For 23. Elizab. the case was such: A man was bound in an hundred pound to
give to the obligee the moitie of all the fishes taken by his water-mille, he
took twenty one fishes, and gave ten to the obligee, and an action of Debt
was brought upon the obligation, and the plaintiff recovered, because he did
not give unto him the moitie of the other fish. This was adjudged in the
Kings Bench. But now suppose that the condition does extend only to some
particular estates, whether shall the other estates depending be totallie
defeated by the breach of the condition? And surely our Law is, that the
breach of the condition shall defeat no estate, but only that whereunto it is
annexed. For the case was 3. Mar. that a man devised land to his wife upon
condition, that she should bring up his eldest son, the remainder to the
second son: The elder son enters for the condition broken, he shall
only defeat the estate of the wife. And if the tenant for life, and he in
the remainder join in a feoffement upon condition, that if such an act be
not done, that the tenant for life shall reenter, this does not defeat the
entire estate of the feoffee 3. Mar. 125. Die.
. And if a gift of land be made in tail, the remainder to the right heirs of
the donee, upon condition that if he alien in fee, then the donour may enter,
if the donour enter for the condition broken, the estate tail is only
defeated 11. H. 7. 6. 13. H. 7. 23. 10. H. 7. 11.
. So if a man lease land for life by deed indented, the remainder over in fee
rendering a rent with clause of reentrie for non payment by the tenant for life,
and to reteigne the land during his life: If he enter for the condition
broken, he shall have the land only during the life of the tenant for life 29.
Ass. pla. 17.
.


Nomomath. I give ye great thanks for the unwearied continuance of your
pains, and though I be in questioning at a nonplus: yet I see your invention
and memory are not grauelled nor dried up, parched as it were with summers
drought. I pray you therefore let us still converse together under one roof (
within my walls there is no Sinon, no Dauus, no Momus, but chaste learning
cabboned with frugall contentment,) that if God do still vouchsafe the
Moone-diall of this darksome life, with the reflexe of his intellectual
illumined influence, this triple-wheeled clock may still be kept in motion, by
the divine agilitie of his Lawfauouring spirit.


A TABLE OF THE Sections or Divisions of the principal points, matters, and
questions, which are handled in every Dialogue.
The Divisions and principal contents of the first Dialogue of Prohibitions
and Consultations.
The 1. Division. 1. THe original of tithes is inquired of. 2. The council of
Constance is said to have condemned Wicklife for holding tithes to be pure
alms.

The 2. Division. 1 The original of tithes is demonstrated to be by the law of
God. 2. God his deputies for the receipt of tithes are set down. 3. The
heathens which knew not God had great regard of of paying tithes. 4. Lucullus
is specially commended for the paying of tithes. 5. Camillus is likewise
commended for his diligence in procuring tenth to be paid. 6. The Romans
careful in paying first fruits.

3. Division. 1 Whether Parsons ought to have no more living then tithes. 2. It
is denied by the Canonist that they ought to have no more living.

4. Division. 1 A lay man by the Canon Law may prescribe in paying a special
portion in lieu of tithes. 2. The civil law agrees thereunto. 3. By the
common law a man may prescribe in paying a temporal recompense in lieu of
tithe.

5. Division. 1 Two sorts of tithes are set down by the Canonist: some
feudall, some ecclesiastical. 2. The Church only holds conusaunce of the
right of tithes by the Cannon law. 3. The king of France his edict touching
tithes is set down. 4 That by the Canon law where the question of tithes is
facti, and not iuris, the examination thereof may belong to a lay judge. 5.
Where the suite of tithes is betwixt clergy men though it be merely
possessorie, yet it be longs to an ecclesiastical judge by the Canon law.

6. Division. 1 The nature of feudall tithes is opened by the Canonist. 2
Charles Martle is accused of Church-pillage. 3. The Canonist tells a strange
tale of Charles Martle. 4. It is thought of Nomomathes to be but a fable. 5.
One of the ancient statutes of England is compared with the aforesaid edict of
the king of France. 6. The common law agrees with the Canon in the
attributing of the decision of the right of tithes to the spiritual judge. 7.
Where one parson may sue a spoliation against the other in the spiritual
court. 8. The executors may be sued in the spiritual court. 9. Of what trees
tithes may be demanded by the statute of 45. E. 3. 10. That the rent paid
for tithes upon a lease for years is a lay chattell.

7. Division. 1 A precept issues with a monition under pain of
excommunication for the due satisfaction of tithes.

8. Division. 8 The degrees which the Canon law observes in punishing offenses
in the clergy. 2. Two sorts of excommunication set down by the Canonist. 3
The compulsorie statutes of England for payment of tithes are mentioned by the
barrister 4. Impropriate tithes at the common law are compared with feudall
tithes.

9. Division. 1 The Ordinary ex officio may cite men to pay tithes.

10. Division. 1 Two sorts of heretics: formatus, and suspectus 2. In what
cause the wife and children of heretics shall enjoy their lands. 3.
Heretics by the civil law not punishable by fire. 4. The Canonist poasteth
the punishment of heretics to the common law. 5. The professor of common law
bandeth back again the punishment of heretics to the Canon law.

11. Division. 1 What things may be termed Church-land by the civil law. 2.
Of Churchyards the spiritual Court shall hold jurisdiction by the common law.
3. The right of gleabe land is triable by the common law. 4. Lands devised not
subject to the jurisdiction of the ecclesiastical Court 5. Suites for chattels
real must be in the spiritual court.

12. Division. 1 That ius patronatus by the Canon law is determinable in the
ecclesiastical court: and that it passes by the word ( ecclesia.) 2. The
diverse significations of the word ecclesia at the common law. 3. The interest
of the Parson, patron, and Ordinary, in the Church is showed. 4. What things
do make a patron by the Canon law. 5. Ius patronatus is one of the proper
objects of the common law. 6. That an aduowson lies in tenure.

13. Division. 1 Punishment pro laesione fidei concerning a temporal act, is
not to be adjudged in the ecclesiastical Court. 2. Perjury in an
ecclesiastical court punishable in an eclesiasticall court. 3. Lindwoods
authority touching punishment pro laesione fidei in temporal matters at the
ecclesiastical law is not admitted. 4 The barrister disproueth the general
citations of Bishops ad Sacramenta praestanda by the common law. 5. Nomomath
encountreth him in this point. 6. The civil law agrees with the Canon in
matter of oaths.

The Divisions and principal contents of the second Dialogue of Actions upon
the Case.
1. Division. 1. THe reason is showed wherefore actio iniuriarum has so
general a name at the Civil law. 2. The barrister compares an action upon
the case at the common law to D. Stephens his water.

2. Division. 1 An action upon the case lies against the keeper of a common
Inn if goods be embeasiled. 2. If a stranger lodge with me by my consent,
and do embeasil goods, the Innekeeper shall not be charged. 3. If my servant
embeasill my goods, the Inkeeper shall not be charged. 4. By the civil law
the Innekeeper is to be charged with action if his servants steal goods. 5.
If through the default of the master of a ship goods be stolen, the owner of
the ship is to make recompense.

3. Division. 1 By the civil law it is not necessary, that there be mutual
consideration in contractes. 2. Three sorts of contractes by the civil law. 3.
What is a proper contract by the civil law. 4. What an improper contract is by
the civil law. 5. What a most improper contract is by the civil law. 6. The
common law admits no contracts, but such as be proper.

4. Division. 1 That no fare ought to be paid for them that die in a ship, if
the master of the ship did assume to bring them safe to shore. 2. If a child
be borne in seafaring, nothing is to be paid for that child. 3. The
barrister puts a case of carrying a horse safe and sound over Humber. 4. The
Cannon law agrees with the civil in cases of improper contractes.

5. Division. 1 That by the common law want of skill is to be punished by an
action upon the case, if there be an assumpsit either implicatiue or expressed.
2. That by the civil law want of skill only is punishable. 3. By the Canon
law crassa and supina ignorantia non excusat.

6. Division. 1 Circumuention dolo malo punishable by the civil law. 2. A
difference at the civil law betwixt dolus malus and dolus bonus. 3. The same
difference the Canon law observes. 4. Dolus malus punishable at the common law
by an action upon the case, or a writ of deceit.

7. Division. 1 Contemptuous speeches are not punishable by the civil law. 2.
Opprobrious speeches which proceed of malice are punished. 3 It is objected
that the Grecians did tolerate sarcasmicall speeches against wicked men. 4.
Aristophanes is condemned for his bitter detractions. 5. The deuisors and
publishers of libels punishable by the civil law. 6. The cannon law is severe
against such. 7. Reproachful speeches punishable at the common law by an
action upon the case.

The Divisions and principal contents of the third Dialogue of Debtes.
1 DEbt may grow by writing, or especialtie. 2. An obligation may be by deed
indented at the civil law. 3. What an instrumentum garrantigiae, is at the
civil law. 4. Three sorts of bonds by the civil law. 5. Debt may grow by way
of contract. 6. The canon law agrees with the civil in matters of bonds, and
debts. 7. Debts may grow by contract by the common law. 8. An action of debt
lies at the common law for the loan of money. 9. An action of debt lies at
the common law for a mere duty. 10. An obligation made after a contract
dissolueth the contract by the common law. 11. A man may be bound by deed
indented by the common law. 12. A statute-bond is resembled to an instrument of
warrantie at the civil law. 13. A deed razed is not good at the common law. 14
The common law agreeeth in substance with the civil law in the three sorts of
bonds. 15. The common law dissenteth from the civil law in not making the
redeliuerie of a bond an acquittance.

2. Division. 1 That by the civil law the executor succeeds in vniuersum ius
defuncti. 2. Insinuation of a will necessary by the civil law. 3. By the
civil law the executor or administrator ought to make an inventory of the
goods of the party deceased. 4. The power of the executor depends wholly
upon the will of the testator by the Common law. 5. According to the common
law a devise is of no force until the death of the deuisor. 6. The common law
agrees with the civil in the insinuation of wills. 7. That an action of debt
will lie against the ordinary. 8. The common law agrees with the civil in
administering goods comprised in the Inventory according to the testament. 9.
What may properly be said to be assets in the hands of the executors.

3. Division. 1 The rigorous law of the Romans in their execution for det. 2.
The execution of the Romans greatly to be reproved, because it did deprive
men of burial. 3. That the rigorous Law of execution for debt was afterward
abrogated by the Romans. 4. That by the Civil Law execution lies for debt
upon the goods of the party, and how far forth the word (goods) extends. 5.
A fower-fold execution for debt at the common Law. 6. The execution of goods
by Fieri facias is opened. 7. Execution by Elegit is opened. 8. Execution upon
statute merchant is opened. 9. Execution by Capias ad satisfaciendum is showed.

The divisions and principal contents of the fourth Dialogue, of Accomptes.
1. Division. 1. IN what case a man is accomptable at the Civil Law per
actionem aestimatoriam. 2. The difference of a general and a special Bailie
at the common Law. 3. What things belong to the charge of the Bailie of a
Manor. 4 That by the common Law if the Bailie be prejudicial to his Master,
he is to make recompense.

2. Division. 1 By the Civil Law the Bailie is discharged, if the Master
intermeddle. 2. That by the common law as well as by the Civil, he that is put
in special trust to procure the profit of an other, is accomptable.

3. Division. 1 Account ought to be made to the Executors by the Civil Law. 2.
The same is warranted by the common Law. 3. That a writ of Account by the Canon
Law, will not lie against executors, unless it be in some special cases.

4. Division. 1 What authority may be assigned to a bailie by the civil Law.
2. The difference of an authority, a charge, and command by the civil Law.
3. The Canon Law is against the difference: So likewise is the common Law.

5. Division. 1 The difference betwixt a Bailie, a Solicitor, an Attorney and
a Deputy, is showed out of the civil Law. 2. The difference holds not in
the Canon Law. 3. The common Law according to the aforesaid difference more
agrees with the civil, then with the Canon Law. 4. That by the civil Law,
contrary to the common law, there is no manner of interest in a Deputy.

6. Division. 1 That the Bailie or Attorney may not take half the land, for
the purchasing or compassing of the other half. 2. That the like matter is
forbidden by the Canon Law. 3. The common Law agrees with them.

7. Division. 1 Two sorts of Accomptants by the Civil Law. 2. Likewise by the
Canon Law. 3. And also by the common Law.

The divisions and principal contents of the fifth Dialogue, of Wast done in a
man's ground.
1. Division. 1. OF what things Wast may be committed by the Civil Law. 2.
Cutting of Wood in Sylua caedua by the civil Law is no Wast. 3. The common Law
agrees with the civil, that Wast may be in the decaie of an house. 4. A
special covenant will bind the party to repair houses and walls battered
down by violence irresistable, by the common Law. 5. The tenant by the common
Law, may cut Trees for the reparation of houses. 6. The common Law agrees with
the Civil in the cutting of silua caedua. 7. The common Law agrees with the
Civil in tollerating the lopping of Trees, which may be available for their
grows.

2. Division. 1 That both by the Civil and common Law, where land is empeired
by the inundation of water, this is wast.

3. Division. 1 That by the common Law, he that comes to land by an other
man's grant, ought to use it according to the grant. 2. The digging for coal
or claie in the land demised is Wast by the common Law. 3. The suffering of the
ground to become rushie, or weedie, by the common Law is Wast. 4. That the
Civil Law agrees with the common Law, in suffering one to amend conduit-pypes
in an other man's ground.

3. Division. 1 The punishment of Wast by the Civil Law. 2. The punishment of
Wast by the common law.

The divisions and principal contents of the sixth Dialogue, of Parceners.
1. Division. 1. TWo sorts of Parceners: Parceners by the common Law, and
Parceners by Custom. 2. Who be Parceners by the common Law. 3. Who be
Parceners by the Custom. 4. That by the civil Law where 3. heirs are
instituted, they are not reputed as one heir. 5. That by the common Law
Parceners are reputed as one heir, as to the descent of the land. 6. Parceners
in regard of the particion are accepted as several persons.

2. Division. 1 The Statute of 31. H. 8. gives a writ de Partitione facienda,
as well to Iointenants, and Tenants in common, as to parceners. 2. The three
several actions against Parceners, Iointenants, and Tenants in common by the
Civil Law.

3. Division. 1 Diverse kinds of Particion at the common Law. First: A
particion to have a third part, or a 4. part. 2. A particion by way of release.
3. Particion by the grant of a thing de nouo. 4. Particion by way of
reservation. 5. Particion by taking the third part, or the fourth part of the
profits. 6. A difference in the Civil Law, where a thing that has parts
cohaerentes is divided, and where a thing that has parts distantes.

The divisions and principal contents of the seventh Dialogue, of Conditions.
1. Division. 1. ( SI) does not alwaie signify a condition in the Civil Law.
2. Sometime it signifies an uncertain cause. 3. Sometime it signifies a
certain cause. 4. Sometime an uncertain event. 5. Sometime a condition. 6. (
Si) does signifies an uncertain cause at the common Law. 7. ( Si) signifies
a certain cause at the common Law. 8. Likewise an uncertain event by the
common Law. 9. Likewise a condition.

2. Division. 1 The word ( Nisi,) or unless, does sometimes signify a
condition at the Civil Law. 2. How a modification or limitation of a grant is
made. 3. A difference betwixt a limitation, and a condition at the common Law.
4. The common Law is more ample and large-handed then the Civil Law in matters
of limitation.

3. Division. 1 ( Rursus,) or the word (again) signifies once again by the
Civil Law. 2. How far forth a word of restraint is to be extended by the
common Law.

4. Division. 1 An agreement by word may defeat a matter in writing by the
civil Law. 2. The common Law is quite contrary to the aforesaid assertion of
the uill Law.

5. Division. 1 Three sorts of impossibilities at the Civil Law. 2. What
impossibilitas iuris is at the Civil Law. 3. What impossibilitas facti is at
the Civil Law. 4. Impossibilitas naturae by the Civil Law. 5. Which be
conditions against Law by the censure of the Canon Law. 6. What conditions
impossible in fact are at the common Law.

6. Division. 1 Conditions by the civil law are taken according to equity. 2.
The common law takes conditions many times strictly.

7. Division. 7 There may be a substitution conditional of one heir after
another, or one executor after an other at the civil law. 2. The heir at the
civil law must succedere in vniuersum ius defuncti. 3. By will according to
the common law an enter may be limited to a stranger. 4. The advantage of
entry limited to a stranger, is in the late reports doubted of. 5. That the
entry for the condition broken defeateth the whole estate.

Errata.
Faults. Page. Corrections. nations fol. 2. a. matrons. (There want these
words, fol. 4. a. There be two sorts of tithes ecclesiastical and feudall.)
stand fol. 6. b. sue. (There want these words, fol. 10. a. (or Darius) linea
22. Tertorike 17. b. Teutonike. hard 38. a. pore. fate 59. b. foot.
puerpercie 60. a. puerperie. land 69. b. Lord.

FINIS.
THE PANDECTES OF the law of Nations: CONTAINING several discourses of the
questions, points, and matters of Law, wherein the Nations of the world do
consent and accord.

Giving great light to the understanding and opening of the principal objects,
questions, rules, and cases of the Civil Law, and Common law of this Realm of
England.

Compiled by WILLIAM FVLBECKE.

Opinionum commenta delet dies: Nationum iudicia confirmat.

LONDON Imprinted by Thomas Wight.

1602.

To the courteous Reader.
CVrteous Reader, when Sulpitius returning out of As^a, sailed from Aegina to
Megara, he began to cast his eye, and bend his contemplation to the regions
round about him: behind him was Aegina, before him Megara, on the right hand
Piraeus, on the left hand Corinth, which had been in ancient time very
flourishing Cities, but were now ruinated, prostrated, and buried in dust: that
wise Roman whose eye did always aim at some convenient mark, and whose mind
made perfect use of her selected object, when he saw these carcasses of towns,
considered his own estate, which was far more brittle. I likewise wandering in
my thoughts through the paradise of learning, amongst many delightful
apparitions espied four excellent laws: the first was the canon law, to which
for the gravity I bowed: the second the Civil, which for the wisdom I admired:
the third the Common law, to which I did my homage: the fourth the law of
Nations, which I submissiuely reverenced, yet the hew and state of her seemed
to be much changed, and the iniquity of crabbed times had set the print of
her metamorphosis upon her: Her other three sisters did condole with her, and
deplore the injury of the times which did cause her crasines. I perceiving
this, waied mine own frailty, which in one and this very spring tide have in
my self known the force of seasons, and to the glory of God acknowledged it:
I had no means of comfort wherewith to refresh this drooping Lady, but only
with a plain English mantle to attire her, and recommend her unto thee. She
will report many things unto thee of the renowned Assyrians, the valiant
Persians, the spirit-guided Hebrews, the prudent Grecians, the admirable
Romans, the noble hearted Carthaginians, the victorious Macedonians, the
deliberatiue Turks, the politic Italians, the chiualrous French, the most
puissant and inuictis Romano Mart Britannis, Tibul. 4. Elegi. 1.
she will manifest unto thee their judgments, their censures, their aduises,
and practices:

Et quae mox imitere scias: nec desinet vnquam
Tecum Graia loqui, tecum Romana vetustas:
Antiquos audito duces: assuesse futurae
Militiae: Latium retro te confer in aeuum. Claudi. de quart. Consulat. Honor.
.
I commit this book gentle reader to thy courtesy: it is the first to my
knowledge that has bin written of this matter: if my pains be not
correspondent to the dignity of the subject, the pardon lies in the
beneficence of thy courtesy: Every one cannot be a Scipio, or a Laelius, to
overtake every thing which they undertake: every one cannot say as one of
them said: Sapientis non est dicere, non putaram. Appelles could but only
describe the head and face of Venus: Achilles killed many Troianes, could not
surprise their city: and Virgill before he comes to the death and tomb of
Aeneas, fails, and slippeth into the description of the death and tomb of a
Gnat. Perfection is a rare bird, which flies from many, that with sweating
and breathing follow it. Yet some handle that, which they can not gripe, and
their endeavor is not disliked. Some make a bold attempt, and fail of the
victory, whose audacitie is accounted a virtue: Some in not despairing of that
they purposed, have been thanked for their hope. For mine own part I crave no
thanks, but good words, and good will, and thy favorable acceptance
(friendly Reader) which being an effectual benefit may perfect all
imperfections. Farewell in the Lord.

March 30. Anno Domini 1602. Thine in all kind respect WILLIAM FVLBECK.

A Table of the contents of the Chapters of this book.
Chap. 1. OF the differences of Times and seasons by the Law of Nations. fol. 1
Chap. 2. That by the Law of Nations, Emperors, Kings, and absolute Monarchs,
have full power and authority to seize the lands and goods of their
subjects, condemned for heinous offenses. fol. 9 Chap. 3. That the worthiness
of blood has been principally respected of all Nations. fo. 14 Chap. 4. That
in making Title by prescription, and continuance of time immemoriall, all
Nations have consented. fol. 19 Chap. 5. That by the consent of all Nations,
consent principally makes a lawful marriage. fol. 22 Chap. 6. That by the
practice of all Nations Democracie has been bette down, and Monarchy
established. fol. 28 Chap. 7. Of the Law and Justice of Arms, of Leagues, of
Embassages, and denouncing of war, of Truce, of Safeconduct, Captives,
Hostages, Stratagems, and Conquestes, according to the Law of Nations. fol. 33
Chap. 8. That in the Laws and Constitutions touching Cities, corporations,
liberties, franchises, and immunities, and the good government and
administration of them, all Nations have agreed. fol. 52 Chap. 9. That the
distinguishing of demesnes, and the difference of the degrees and callings of
men, is according to the Law of Nations. fol. 60 Chap. 10. That in the Law of
Tributes, Subsidies, and Prerogatives royal, all Nations have consented. fol.
68 Chap. 11. That all Nations have both secretelie, and by the course of their
ouert actions acknowledged and yielded to the Truth of the Laws and
commandments of the second Table of the Decalogue. fol. 75 Chap. 12. That the
rules of war and Law of Nations are not to be observed, and kept with
Pirates, Rebels, Robbers, Traitors, Reuoltes, and Usurpers. fol. 81 Chap. 13.
That by the Law and practice of Nations, war is not to be maintained against
Infidels only, because they are Infidels: And that Princes in their Realms
may inflict punishment for strange worships. fol. 85.
The first Chapter.
Of the differences of times and seasons by the Law of Nations.
AL Nations in putting difference betwixt times and seasons have rather
followed a populer and common observation, then the precise rules and
principles of Astronomy, accompting it more convenient and requisite, that
sithence all contracts and matters of intercourse do fall within the listes
and precincts of time, that therefore the moments and measures of time should
be publicly and familiarly known to populer conceit: In setting down the
definition of Time, they agree in the substance and matter it self, though in
words and terms they be somewhat dissonant. Aristotle a great Philosopher
amongst the Graecians defines Time to be the measure of motion, according to
prioritie and posterioritie, a short and subtle definition, but yet true and
sound. Varro as great and famous amongst the Romans defines it to be
interuallum mundi and motus, the space of the world and motion, a brief
definition and very nimble, if it be nimbly understood: for by the world he
means the course of time, by motion the course of things. Others, as the
Egyptians have defined it a dimension perceived by the conversion of the
heavens. Plato, who of these matters had in his travail conference with
Arabians, Egyptians, and Chaldeans, defines it to be a moveable and
chaungeable representation of Eternity; Plat. in Tim.
and truly and aptly does he term it a chaungeable representation or image
of Eternity: for as Censorinus notes, Time in regard of Eternity, is but a
winters day. Censo. c. 4. de di. na.
But though time be as much obscured in eternity, as a small penny is amongst
the riches of Craesus, yet as that was part of his riches, so time must needs
be a part of Eternity. Cicero defines time more vulgarly, to be a part of
Eternity with a certain difference, of a yearly, monthly, daily, and
nightly distance, Cic. lib. de sin. 4.
so that Plato his definition has relation to the cause of time; Ciceroes to
the persons that make use of time. Philosophers have left to posterity many
subtle, deep, and learned discourses of time, but bidding their definitions
and disputations farewell, I will examine and weye the distinct parts of time
with a popular balance, and according to common sense, taking that course to
be most suitable to my profession. The parts of time according to the general
division of Nations are a year, a month, a day, an hour, and a moment: for
the Olympiads and Lustra, as being proper to the Graecians and Romans must be
secluded from this Treatise, and Seculum as being a thing not usual in law,
which now we handle must likewise be cassierd. Yet in speaking of time we may
not forget to handle the circumstances of time as they be accommodated to the
Law, and to the actions of men: As namely of a long time, a short time, a late
time, an ancient time, a certain time, an uncertain time, a continual time,
a convenient time, time past, time present, and time future. But first to
speak of the year, Annus according to the Etymology learnedly searched out
by Varro, is nothing else but a circuit: for as the little circles are called
annuli, ringes; so the great circles or compasses of time are called Anni,
years Var. lib. 5. de lingu. lat.
. The year is a time, wherein the Sun perfitteth his course, and that is
accomplished in the space of three hundred, three scoore, and five days, and
six hours almost: And this has our Law well observed, as may appear by
these verses: Ter centum, ter viginti, cum quinque diebus,
Sex horas, neque plus integer annus habet 18. Elizab. 345. Dyer.
.
by which account (if you subtract the hours and half days) the quarter of
the year will fall out as it is in our Law set down, to be nintie and one
days; and the half year, a hundred eighty and two days, Ibidem.
which was almost fully signified by Ianus his image in Rome, in whose right
hand was the number of three hundred, and in his left hand fifty and five.
Macrob. lib. 1. Stur. ca. 9.
Others have made the same difference betwixt the year and month which the
Merchants of some Countries make betwixt the ounce and the pound, delivering
their conceit in this verse: Vnciaque in libra pars est, quae mensis in anno.
And though it be a common received opinion, that the Romans at the first, and
a long time after the foundation of their City did account but ten months
for the year, so that Ovid quarrelleth with Romulus his Astronomy in this
manner: Ovid. lib. 1. fastor.
Scilicet arma magis quam sydera Romule noras. Yet if the course and
circumduction of their year be well observed, it will appear to have
contained the full space of twelve months, as may appear by Pliny Plin.
lib. 2. ca. 9.
, Macrobius Macrob. 1. Satur. ca. 12. et lib. 1. in some. Scip. c. 6.
, and Plutarch Plut. in Number.
. And this was likewise the year of other Nations. The Romans did begin their
vulgar year at the beginning of Winter, as appears by Ovid: Bruma noui prima
est veterisque nouissima solis. Which course seems to be agreeable to the
course of nature, because then the sun begins to return unto us, and
therefore we may rightly derive the beginning of his circuit from thence: The
year is divided into the Spring, Summer, Harvest, and Winter. The Romans did
account the spring that space of time which was betwixt the Calends of March
and the Calends of May, Liuy. lib. 34.
but the most common and current entrance of the spring in the reputation of
all the nations of the world, was when the plants or herbage of the earth began
to wax green: and therefore it is rightly termed ver a virendo, as summer is
called aestas ab aestu, and then is said to begin when heat begins. Tacit.
de mor. Germ.
The name of Autumn nor the thing it self (as Tacitus reporteh) was not
known to the Germans in his time, and diverse countries have made diverse
limitations of the spring, and therefore if it be agreed betwixt Titius and
Seius that the beasts of Titius shall pasture in the grounds of Seius all the
spring time, the time shall be limited according to the dimension of the
springtide in that country where the bargain was made: and so it may be said
of the other times, and seasons of the year, and if the occupation of a man's
ground be granted to Titius, Seius, Caius, and Sempronius, so that Titius shall
have the occupation of the land in the spring time, Seius in summer, Caius in
winter, Sempronius in harvest, if the interest of any of the same come in
question, the Judge had need be well advised of the certainty, and the
peculiar difference of these times according to the customarie observation of
the country in which the grant was made, that he may suu^ cuique tribuere, and
give no erroneous judgment. Some make a bipartite division of the year into
winter and summer without mentioning the spring, and harvest, defining the
summer to begin at the Equinoctial of the spring, and to end at the
Equinoctial of harvest: Vlp. in l. 1. aestat. de ag. co. et aest.
so that summer and winter are divided by six months: then I put case that
land is demised to one to have and to hold during the space of the whole
summer, whether may the lessee put in his beasts in the spring time, and it
seems that the spring is to be excluded notwithstanding the division
aforesaid, for the summer being named aestus ab aestu the spring can have no
part in the summer, for the spring is mean betwixt heat and cold, and
therefore the said division seems to be improper, for proprie non dicitur
quod non dicitur secundum quod sonat; Baldus in l. vlt. c. de haer. instit.
and in Swetia and other nations lying under the Northern Poale this division
can take no place: but if a man devise the dwelling of his house every summer
to Sempronius, there it may seem that the spring shall not be omitted, because
our dwelling is divided into the summer and winter dwelling: but if a man
devise his ground with all his summer instruments of husbandry, it seems
that the spring is in this case to be excluded because there be other
instruments of husbandry used in the summer time the^ such as be used in the
spring, winter, or harvest: But the imperial laws do extend summer from the
Calendes of April, to the Calendes of October: the residue of the year they
allot to winter; and this division I will not deny to be grounded upon good
reason if we respect the year in general not in particular; for in the spring
time the Sun mounting to the top of one of the lines of the Equinoctial
circle he comes by degrees nearer unto us and so makes summer, but in
harvest he transce^deth the other line of the Equator and so being far
removed from us causes winter, and therefore not amiss by the cause of heat
and cold, are the times of heat and cold distinguished.

The month had his name of the Moon which in the Greek tongue is called
Mean: and the reason of the name is because the month is measured by the
circumuolution of the Moon, as Plato, Plat. in Cratil.
Varro, Cicero, and others have expounded it. Some do assign to the t Varro
lib. 5. de lingua Lat. Cicer. lib. 2. de nature. de or.
month twenty seven days, and eight hours: others twenty nine days and
twelve hours: they do measure by the motion of the Moon from point to point
in the Circle, that is, when it is reuolued from one point to the same point:
These do set down for the month that course of the Moon in which it does
tend reciprocally to the Sun, from which it newly digressed. The Athenians
did observe the later order of the month, from whom though the Romans did in
circumstance agree, yet in substance they accorded; for their twelve months
did not exceed that number of days which does consist of the twelve lunarie
months; so that it is apparent that both these nations (as all other) follow
the Moon in this business: and for the more perfect observation of this course
Sosigenes the Aegiptian persuaded and moved Caesar somewhat to alter the
months, and by consequence the year, Plut. in vit. Caesar.
neither is this abhorrent from commen use; for let the case be that A.
promises to B. that he will for some consideration pay unto B. the next
month 20. li. and the assumpsit is made the eight day of March, whether may A.
have the space of the whole month of April to pay the money in, or he must
needs pay it before the eight day of April next ensuing, accompting the
month from the eight day of March: Surely by common intendement he has the
whole month of April to pay it in: for the common people making more account
of the Calender then of the Calendes do set down for a month as they find in
the calender, not as curious wits may measure by the calendes or by like
proportion. L. 4. Sti. si haered. de statut. Et stat. August. lib. 1. emend. c.
2.


The name of day in Latin dies, Varro deriueth a deo or dio, both which tend
to one purpose. In this discourse my endeavor is rather to open the natures
then the names of things. The day is thus defined by Plato in his book De
definitionibus, if that book be his: Dies est ab ortibus ad occasus: so that
how many risings and settings there are of the Sun, so many days he makes.
Aristotle more exquisitly, Dies est motus Solis supra nostrum horizontem.
Aristotle Topic. 5.
Two kinds of days are most in use, the civil day and the natural day: the
civil day it is therefore termed because diverse cities and countries made
great diversities of days, to which they did allot several compass of time.
The Romans did deduce the day from midnight to midnight Pliny lib. 2. c. 77.
next following, placing the day as it were betwixt two nights, as in the
beginning of the world night was before the day, and night followed it: but the
day of the Vmbrians was from midday to midday: of the Athenians from Sun set
to Sunne-set: of the Babilonians from the rise of Sun, to Sun rising: the
natural day is that which consists of 24. hours being the space wherein the
Sun is rolled about by the motion of the whole body of the heaven from a
certain point to the same point. The Astronomers make the beginning of this
day at noone day or midday, as the Vmbrians; because to all inhabitants of
nations continuing still in their regions the sun comes always at that time
to their Meridian, and to that circle which is carried through the tops and
poales of the heaven: and every region has his meridian of one sort though
they have diverse meridians in number and in particular, but the rising and
falling of the sun is not in any region always of one sort, because the points
are changed, and we see the sun diversely to rise and fall: so that the
Vmbrians may seem in this to have done rightly, the Athenians and Babilonians
not rightly, the Romans most rightely, who have not as the other nations
contrary to the order of nature, placed the night in the midst of the day,
but have made the night as the two extremes of the day, and therefore have
placed part of the night in the beginning of the day, and part in the end: of
which consideration our law may seem to have taken regard in that the forepart
of the night it assigns to the day going before, and the later part to the
day following, which may evidently appear by the inditements of burglary:
Crompt. I. P. tit. indictamenta in sin. lib. fol. 224.
but the reason of the Roman constitution is learnedly delivered by Plutarche:
Plut. in quaest. Roman. qu. 83.
at midnight (says he) when the day of the Romans does begin, the sun is in
that region in the lowest point of the heaven, from which it begins to tend
and to return to us and to ascend to our Hemispheare: wherefore rightly does
the day begin then when the sun that is the cause of the day does move
toward us, and therefore this constitution of the Romans must needs seem more
probable then that of the Vmbrians, because the beginning of a thing is rather
to be referred to that time when the thing grows to existence, then when it
declineth and begins to leave his existence, so that the opinion seems to
be good, 11. Elizab. in my Lord Dyer his reports; that whereas the case was
that a lease was made to one of land the eight day of May to have and to hold
for twenty and one years thence next after ensuing, and the lessee entered the
eight day, and his entry seemed lawful, and that he did not enter as a
disseisor, for by the word ( thence) the first instance of the day in which the
demise was made is to be intended, and not the next day ensuing the date: 11.
Eliz. 2^6. Dyer.
so that I cannot see upon what reason in the accompting of the six months
according to the statute of 27. H. 8. of enrolments the day of the date of the
deed of bargain and sale shall not be accounted for any; 5. Eliz. 2^^. Dyer.
but the vulgar and common sort of men of all countries do account the day
from light to darkness, which order the Canonistes do observe; Comment. ad l.
Titius Luci. de lib. and post.
the night as Plato defines it Plat. in lib. de definit.
according to common admittance is nothing else but darkness: Euentide is
immediately after Sunset: twilight is a doubtful time equally consisting of
light and darkness, which is always after euentide. For as betwixt knowledge,
and ignorance there be two means, namely doubting, and opinion, so betwixt
day and night there is euentide and twilight. Ignorance is like to night,
doubting like to twilight, opinion is like to euentide, because as opinion
knows after a sort, but knows not truly and surely, because it is not
grounded upon certain reason: so euentide is after a sort day, but absolutely
and fully it is not, because it is destitute, and bereft of the clear light of
the sun: knowledge which relyeth upon the sound foundation of things known
is answerable to the day, which is full of clear, and perfect light. Now as
opinion is more like to ignorance then to knowledge; so euen-tide is more like
to night, whereupon ensues that twilight must needs be more like unto night:
but now suppose that a payment of money is assumed to be made within the
compass of such a day, whether is it to be intended of the Roman day, or
some other civil day, or the natural day which is wholly in use amongst the
Venetians: for in Venice the clock is told four and twenty times for the day:
and it is meet that this question should be decyded by the custom of each
country.

Now come we to speak of hours, which to the Romans were not in use during
the space of three hundred years: therefore in their laws of the twelve
tables, times are otherwise set down, namely, Sunne-rise Noone, and Sunsett:
the first, second, third, and fourth watch, plenum forum, full market, boum
solutio, the time of the loosing of the oxen from the plough, accensa lumina,
candle light, and such like names. But to know the proper use of these hours
that are fit to be observed, which Paulus the Ciuilian notes: Cuiusque diei
mayor pars est horarum septem primarum diei, non supremarum: he means not
that there should be fourteen hours of the day, because it is manifest that
there are but twelve, but his meaning is that the greatest part of the day is
spent in the first seven hours, if you account from the first hour to the
seventh inclusiue, as namelye, from six a clock in the morning to twelve a
clock: for then there will remain to the other part of the day but five
hours; And the former part of the day is not only the better for the number
of hours, but because men in these hours are more apt for the dispatch of
their business: Wherefore Nonius Noni. lib 9. de compendiosa doctrine.
upon these words of Virgill: Nunc adeo melior quoniam pars acta diei est
commenteth thus. Our youth is the best part of our age, and so Maro wisely
calls the first part of the day the better part, as being the youth of the
day: for if a man should number seven hours from a eleven of the cloak to
five in the afternoon; yet these hours will not be so convenient for
perfitting of business, as the seven abouesaid: and therefore he that demands
six pence for trauayling to a place on foot from eleven to five, to which an
other has gone for a groat from six to twelve, is not altogether unjust,
because in the afternoon men be more unapt and more unable to travail.

The last and least part of time (if it be any part of time) is a moment, which
may better be imagined then described, for it is as swift as a man can imagine:
and what is more swift then imagination? It has received a definition somewhat
obscure of Plato: Momentum est quod nullo prorsus in tempore est Pla. in Parmen.
* It is taken by some to be punctum temporis: for as a mathematical point is
that cuius nulla est pars, so a moment is a point of time cuius nulla est pars:
yet Pliny seems to distinguish more rhetorically then truly punctum temporis
from a moment when he says: Quod momentum, aut immo quod temporis punctum, aut
beneficio sterile, aut vacuum laud Plini. in Panegyr.
, the existence of a moment cannot possibly be discerned, and therefore is not
so much as the twinkling of an eye. The use of a moment is more fit for the
operation of Law, then for the act of a man: for the Law does operate without
compass of time in an instant, but man never; for every act of man must have
space longer or shorter, according to the quality of the work: But the nature
of such instants or moments which the Law does imagine is such and so sudden,
vt omnem respuant moram, as in the Civil Law is well noted l. 23.. vlt. D. de
adult.
: And the reason is because in the operation of Law, that which it does imagine
to be done, is dicto citius, presently, and without delay done l. in suis. D.
de lib. et post.
: and therefore it is commonly said, it is done ipso iure, or it is said ipso
iure, or ipso facto. But this course can not be observed in the actions of men,
who can not do any thing without space of time, because their act is always
continuate, and therefore must needs be done continuo tempore. And whereas the
act of man is mixed with the act of Law: though in regard of the same thing the
act of the Law be momentary, yet the act of man must needs bear some delay.
Those things by the civil Law which are taken from enemies, do incontinent
become his who does seize and take them l. 5.. vlt. de acquir. re. ^o.
, The Law does give them unto him presently, but yet there must be a time to
take them, that the Law may give them. And so if when a Lease is made to A. of
land for the term of the life of B, and A. dies, C. enters into the land,
and inioyeth it, as an occupant; the Law because it will not have the freehold
in suspense, does imagine that it was presently and immediately in C. after the
death of A, and that he entered presently: but if we respect this entry as the
act of man, we must needs imagine that he had some time to enter into the land,
and by his entry, which is an act consisting of motion, to gain the freehold.

It remains now according to our purpose, that after this discourse of the
parts of time, some thing should be spoken of the differences of time, which I
will handle very briefly: for the matters precedent have given some light
thereunto, and they are not of themselves very obscure.

And first to speak of the time which we call a continual time: that in the
civil Law is sometime taken for as much as (during a man's life l. 1.. pe. de
off. pre. vrb. l. 2. C. de his qui latr.
) and therefore he that has purchased land for his life, is termed
Perpetuarius Alci. lib. 1. parer. g. c. 37.
: and in the common Law these words ( a touts iours) make but an estate for
life Littlet. lib. 1. cap. 1. fo. 1.
, yet in proper sense it extends unto the last mark of time: A long or short
time is distinguished either by the measure of the parts of time abouesaid, or
by the measure of the Law, which is the discretion of the Judge. The difference
which is made of ancient time and of late time in the civil Law, is rather
plain the^ ponderous, Vetus accipietur quod non est nouum In l. 11. de triui.
leg.
: And therefore the law of the twelve Tables they call their ancient Law, and
that which follows it the new Law l. 1. l. 3. D. de pet. haered.
. But in this sense the Law of Nations should be the ancient Law, and all
other humane Laws, new Laws, but ancient by the interpretation of a good
Ciuilian is that, cuius initij memoria non extat l. 2. in prin. de ag. plu. ar.
c.. idem lab. aut si in agr.
, and he expounds this to be: if there be none alive which knows when it
had his beginning: Neither has any heard of the beginning of the thing of
those which did know it Idem Lab. aut cum quaeritur eo.
. A certain time is that which has a certain beginning and ending; An
uncertain time is directly contrary: Certain times are the year, the day,
the month, etc. An uncertain time is signified by these words; before,
after, in times past, some time, about such a time, etc. But there be diverse
sorts of uncertain times: First, either that which is altogether uncertain,
as when such a ship shall come out of Asia: for we know not whether it shall at
any time come from thence, or when it shall come. Secondly, that is said to be
uncertain, which though it be uncertain whether it shall be or no: yet if it
be admitted to be, it is certain when it shall be: as if I grant unto one the
Corn that shall grow in such a ground, for I know not whether it shall grow or
no: Or if I promise to be a godfather to that child which shall be borne of
Martha, within three days after it be borne, for I know not whether any shall
be borne: Or if I promise to pay such a sum of money when Titius shall be of
full age: here it is well known when Titius shall be of full age, but it is
uncertain whether he shall live till he come to full age. 3. that is
uncertain, which though it be certain that it shall be, yet it is uncertain
when it shall be; as the hour of death. The present time is so small and
insensible, that it is almost of no continuance, and it is but the conioyning
of that time which is past to that which is to come; Time past is that which
wants his beginning; And time future is that which never had ending. A
convenient time is after diverse sorts: First, either it is convenient for some,
and not for all; as when some causes are to be heard, and not other some:
Secondly, or profitable for all, but not always; as the Terms whilst there
are no days of vacation, dies non iuridici: Thirdly, or it is profitable for
all, and always; as the Assizes.

The second Chapter.
That by the Law of Nations, Emperors, Kings, and absolute Monarchs, have
full power and authority to seize the Lands and Goods of their subjects,
condemned for heinous offenses.
IF any man be so straightly minded, that he thinks this prerogative to be too
large and ample for an absolute Monarche: let him think there withal that
himself is so base minded, that he cannot sufficiently judge of the great
worth and demerit of so high an estate: for the name of a king imports so
great pains and charge, that a kingdom seems not to be a sufficient or
counteruailable recompense: For Themistocles his choice must either be very
reasonable, or exceeding desperate, when he accounted it better to sink into
his grave, then to ascend to a throan: Wherefore not doubting of the great
charge of it, let us examine the continual custom of Nations in the executing
of this power. S. Lewis the French king, famous in that nation for integrity,
and justice, doubted not by public judgment to prescribe the farms,
lordships, and lands of Peter the Earl of Dreux: And so were the goods and
possessions of Charles Duke of Burbon seized and forfeited Bodi. lib. 5. de
repub. c. 3.
. And they have a Law in Scotland, that the goods of persons condemned shall
go wholly to the Eschequer without any deduction or reprisall to wife,
creditor, or children. The Romans did allot their fines, penalties, and
forfaitures to the sacrifice, and service of their Gods, and therefore they
were called Sacramenta Festus in verb. sacrament.
. But the Athenians did give only the tenth part of the goods that were
forfeited to religious uses: as may appear by the record of the condemnation
of Archiptolemus and Antiphon, which runs in these terms, Archiptolemus
and Antiphon vndecim-uiris capitalibus ad extremum supplicium traditi: bona
eorum publicata, decima Mineruae data, domus eorum solo aequatae: And although
Justinian the Emperor did upon some scrupulous conceit abrogate the Law of
giving the goods of condemned persons to the public treasury, and did
therefore establish a Law, that they should remain to their children Authent.
bona damnato. de bonis d^mnator. C.
. Yet diverse held this Law to be new, and different from the course of ancient
Lawmakers: for even in the most ancient times in case of high Treason in all
commonweals of the world, such forfeitures have been admitted: for it was
thought that the goods of such persons condemned, were either by fraud,
violence, or other corrupt courses wrested from the common weal: and therefore
were to be restored to it again: or else because such persons having offended
against the common weal should satisfy it that way: and therefore were such
goods conveyed away by Law from wife and children, because for the most part
they were unjustly heaped together for the advancement of wife and children.
But such prerogatives have been in ancient time so firmly annexed to the
Septer and estate royal, that by the civil Law such things which are properly
called iura maiestatis, by the common Law iura regalia, cannot be severed from
the regal dignity, and therefore Baldus calls them g sacra sacrorum, and
Cynus, indiuidua h, the inseparable incidents of a kingdom: And by the civil
Law such things can not be severed from the princely Diadem, neither can any
man prescribe in them Bald. con. 174. lib. 3. et con. 193. eo.
. And so it is said in our Law, that where the King has any commodity in the
right of his Crown; as if he have a Mine containing in it gold or silver, by
the grant of the land in which it is contained, the Mine does not pass,
because he has that by his prerogative royal, and they be two several
things and of diverse degrees 10. Elizab. Com. Informacion pur Mines 310. per
Wray.
. And whereas the Priorie of Wenlocke was one of the ancient Priories which
were of the foundation of the Crown, and the King granted the said Priorie in
ample words: yet the King only did meddle with the Mines of gold and silver
that were in it Fitz. Na. br. Corrod. 232.
: And by the grant omnium and singularum Minerarum, these Mines shall not
pass Com. Inf. pur Mines ib.
. And though the king grant to one the return of all manner of writtes, yet
he shall not have the return of the summons of the Eschequer, because that
touches the Crown, and is not betwixt party and party 22. E. 3. lib. Assis.
pla. 49.
. Neither by the Law of England can any man prescribe in such things: For it
is said 1. H. 7. that no fraunchise may prescribe to hold plea of Treason; and
whether the king may grant any such liberty or no, the Justices were in great
doubt 1. H. 7. 23.
. But 46. E. 3. it was held by Kniuet Justice, that a man might claim a
fraunchise of Infangtheefe, and Outfangtheefe, and waife and straye by
prescription; but he cannot have the chattels of Fugitives or Felons, unless
it be by especial grant, because that it belongs unto the King as to his
Crown, and therefore can not pass from him, but by special grant: 46. E. 3.
16.
and 21. H. 6. this diversity is taken: such things as accrue to the king by
matter of record, as the fines, issues, and amerciamentes of courts do not
lie in prescription: but in such things as belong to the crown, and the title
of the^ does not grow by matter of record, as waife, stray, wrecke of the sea,
treasure found, and the like a man may praescribe in, 21. H. 6. praescript. 44.
but as these are special prerogatives which are granted to a prince so they
are granted for special causes: by which princes must be directed not by
their own voluntary conceits or insatiable desires, least it happen that magna
imperia, be magna latrocinia: for good governors will not imitate the lewd
monarchs of nations, as Caligula, Nero, Caracalla, Carinus, Roman Emperors,
nor Seleucus, nor Alexander the great, or rather the proud, which did claim a
general and absolute power indefinite and illimitate over all me^, over all
things, without difference or exception: which did think that they might give
laws to others and not to be bound by any; which pretended that there was but
one law for all commonweals, and that was to obey every thing which the king
commanded, and that that was just in regard of the subjects which was
profitable to their ruler, like to that prince of pirates and robbers in
Heliodorus, Heliod. lib. 1. Aethiop. histor.
Si imperij lege vtendum fuisset, prorsus mihi velle suffecisset: Like to that
saying of Julius Caesar the usurper. Sylla literas nescijt qui dictaturam
deposuit: mecum homines consideratius loqui debent, ac pro legibus habere quae
dico: Sueton in Caesar.
like to that of Iulianus though spiced with some sprinkle of mildness:
Polliceor absque omni praerogatiua principum, qui quod dixerint, vel sensuerint
pro potestate authoritatis iustum esse existimant: Ammian Marcell. lib. 23.
or like to that sinister clause of the Popes insolent vanity ( de plenitudine
potestatis,) the last of which words Baldus playing withal, puts in stead
of it tempestatis: Alciat. reg. 3. praes. 8. et ad L. 2. C. de in ius voc.
yet I will easily grant, that if any prince do by sword and conquest subdue
any country; as the whole country is gained and possessed by this exploit: so
all the lands and goods of every inhabitant in that country are his, until
he did give them or restore them unto the former owners: As by the law of
this realm of England, if a man be attainted of felony, and the Queen
pardons him all fellonies, and executions, and does likewise pardon and
release all forfeitures of lands and tenements, and of goods and chattels, this
pardon and this release cannot serve but only for the life of the party, if
the office be found, for then the land is the Queens by matter of record, and
therefore there must be express words of restitution: and as to the goods,
the Queen is entitled to them without office: 29. H. 8. Br. chart. de pard.
52.
so if it be found by office that I. N. the Queens tenant was seized of
certain lands, and dyed seysed, and that W. his heir intruded, and after by
act of parliament the Queen pardons all intrusions, in this case the entry
and offense are pardoned and released, but not the issues, and profits: for the
Queen was before entitled by matter of record 33. H. 8. Br. charters de par.
71. intrusi. 21. Issues ret. 22.
for when any thing comes to princely possession which did before belong to
any inferior person, it cannot be restored to him without actual donation.
And Xenophon says, that it has been a perpetual law amongst all men,
that all things taken by war, whether they be money, goods, or men, do
belong to them which took them: Xenoph. lib. 7. Cyropae.
and Thucydides affirms the same to be a common law to all nations: Thucyd.
l. 3
howbeit the Romans rather by mercy then rigor of law were only content with
the tenth part of the goods, and did remitte the residue to the conquered
persons. Appian. lib. de bell. civil. 2.
And it has always been accounted the property of barbarous nations to have
no law written nor ratified by common consent, neither touching these rights
nor prerogatives, nor other matters, but only the voluntary conceit of the
monarch, as Liuie has iudiciously observed: Liui. lib. 37.
But Aristotle makes one exception from the rule, and that is of the Spartan
Kings, whom he affirms to have directed their actions by prescript of law:
and Diodorus f) Ar. 3. polit.
Siculus says, that the Egyptian kings did first begin to rule by a settled
and determinate law, and that all other nations were governed by the
chaungeable will of their sovereign, Diodor. Sicul. lib. 2.
and the Romans did after refine themselves as appears by Pliny speaking to
Traian; Te legibus subiecisti, legibus Caesar, quas nemo principi scripsit: And
presently after he says, Quod ego nunc primum audio, nunc primum dico: non est
princeps supra leges, sed leges supra principem. Plin. in Panegyr.
But to open and declare further the sovereign and ample authority of
monarchs over the lands and goods of their subjects, though it have been in
ancient times held and affirmed by the civil law, that such things as are
parcel of the law of nations could not be taken away by the prince from his
subjects: and therefore they might not be deprived of their demesnes or
inheritance of lands, or of the property of their goods and chattels which they
enjoy by the law of nations: Sed natural. instit. de iu. na.
as I have sufficiently showed in my Direction to the study of the Law, Cap. 7.
and 8. but only of such things as belong to them by the Civil law: yet by
the opinion of the later Ciuilians this is held to be no law, but that the
Princes have for special causes free disposal of their lands and goods as
Decius fully proves Deci. Cons. 209. in casu 2. 69. consultus. 390. quoniam
519. visis. 557. accurate.
, and this later opinion seems to be more reasonable, and more consonant to
the truth: for first though the distinction of demesnes and the property of
goods be parcel of the law of nations, yet the means whereby they are acquired
are prescribed by the civil and common law: so that they are not altogether
parcel of the law of nations: Bal. and ^a. in l. omnes. C. Si con. ius vel
vtilitat. pub.
Again the right of demesne and property is not alike in all nations, Herodot.
li. 4. Strab. lib. 11. Arist. lib. 2. polit. Tacit. de mor. Germa. Caes. lib.
4. and 6. de bell. Gal.
but is moderated, and ordered by the laws of particular commonweals; But
suppose that the king will take away from any of his subjects the right and
power of using and pursuing an action for the recovery of their lands, goods,
chattels, or damages: Surely this is permitted by no law, but by the civil l.
2. C. de prec. imp. off.
and common law expressly prohibited: for the king cannot grant to any person
that he shall not be impleaded or sued, in this or that action: and though his
highness may grant that I. S. for trespasses or any thing done wrongfully in
his manor of Dale shall hold conisance of pleas within the same manor, yet in
this case he does not take away the action of the party, but does only
restreine him to bring his actio^ in a certain place: 8. H. 6. 19.
But here it may be objected that a king or absolute monarch may p) li. vlt. C.
de consul.
without cause seize the lands and goods of his subjects: for it is plain that
a king has more power over his subjects, then the father has over his
children: but by the civil law the father may take away the goods of his
children when he will: l. placet. 79. D. de acquir. haere. l. acquirit. 10. D.
de acquir. re. do.
therefore the king may take away etc. To this reason grounded upon the civil
law, I do thus answer, that by the law of nations kings have not such an
indefinite power over their subjects as fathers by the civil law have over
their children: for by the law of nations kings were chosen and ordained at
the first for the safeguard and protection of the lands goods and persons of
their subjects, so that they may not without cause bereave them of their goods,
and therefore there is a good rule in the civil law that in priuatorum agris,
nihil ne publico quidem consilio cum ipsorum iniuria capi ius est. l. Venditor.
13. D. de com. praed.
And to that purpose Cicero speaks well: Videndum erit ei qui rempub.
administrabit, vt suum quisque teneat, neque de bonis priuatorum public
diminutio fiat: and for this cause God did appoint a certain portion of land to
every tribe of the Israelites: Deutero. 17
and by reason of a private title Naboth would not sell, or change his
vineyard with Achab 1. Reg. 21.
and in the inauguration of the king of Hungary this was exacted of him by
oath: vt iura regni integra conseruaret: C. in tellect. 33. ex tr. de iureiuran.
And in the civil law it is said, Qui pleno iure Dominus est, alienandi,
dissipandi disperdendi, ius habet: l. 7. cod. de relig. l. sed etsi l. 25..
consuluit D. de hae^ed. petit.
And again, suae quisque rei arbiter, ac moderator est. l. in remandat. 21. C.
de mand.
So that it is evident that without cause, the property which subjects have
in goods and lands may not be altered by their prince. And therefore wittily
says D. Gentilis, that they which argue to the contrary do not dispute, or
draw their arguments ex castis fontibus Philosophiae, aut ex ipsis
iurisprudentiae riuis, sed escholis sophistarum: hallucinati sunt Theologi,
adulati sunt iurisconsulti, qui omnia principibus licere asceuerarunt: Alberic.
Gentil. Dec. 1. disput. 2. disput.
I would not be mistaken in this Chapter, sithence I hold an indifferent course
betwixt prince and people: neither consenting to them which say, that princes
may seize the lands and goods of their subjects without cause, nor to them
which think that they may not seyse their lands and goods for any cause: but
my resolution is, and the sum of this discourse is, if it be diligently and
impartially observed, that princes may lawfully claim, and take to their own
use the lands and goods of their subjects for the causes abouesaid, and
prescribed by law, and not otherwise: and by this word (Princes) I mean none
but absolute Monarchs: for the law of nations allows this prerogative to
none other. And therefore I do greatly like of that saying of Hipocrates urged
in the civil law: Lex est rerum omnium domina, quia scilicet and ciuitatis
cuiusque and ciuium singuloru^ patrimonium constituit, definit, tuetur: Lex
sola dominiu^ rerum confert: sola dominij acquirendi modos constituit, citra
quos acquiri nullius rei dominium potest.. 2. de bon. posses. and apud Vlpi eo.
tit. reg. 19.
This foundation being laid, I hope my assertion may firmly stand that the
law of England in giving to the Queen the lands and goods of subjects for some
peculiar causes is just and reasonable: as when a true man is pursued as a
felon, and he flies, and waiueth his own goods, these are forfeited as if
they had been goods stolen. 29. E. 3. 29. 37. H. 8. Br. Estray. 9. Stam. fol.
186. a.
And so if a man be outlawed of felony or treason, he shall forfeyt all the
lands and tenements which he had at the time of the felony or treason
committed, or at any time after, as well as if he had been attainted by
verdict: 28. H. 6. 5.
howsoever M. Parkins holds opinion that attaynder by outlawrie shall have
relation to the exigent, as to the lands and tenements: so that a feoffement
of land, or a grant of rent made before the exigent awarded by him that is
attainted in such manner is good in his conceit: but he says that as to an
attainder by verdict, that it shall have relation to the time of the felony
done, according to the supposall of the indictment, as to lands and tenementes:
and so it is of an attainder by confession: Parkins Graunts. 6.
But M. Stamford being better advised says, that as soon as any of the
offenses aforesaid are committed, he is restrained to make a gift or any other
alienation of his land: and if he do, it shall presently be made void by his
attainder, and it is not material whether the attainder be by outlawrie or
verdict, and this is agreeable to the book of 38. E. 3. fol. 37. Stamford fol.
lib. 3. 31. ^.
but he says that the forfeiture of the goods by attainder by outlawrie shall
have relation to the exigent, and forfeiture by attainder by verdict shall have
relation to the verdict. Stamford. 192.


The third Chapter.
That the worthiness of blood has been principally respected of all nations.
THe division of inheritances in stirpes, and in capita, has made great
division in diverse commonweals, yet in all of them the worthiness of blood
has been regarded: By the Roman law the son of the elder son who is dead
shall equally succeed in the inheritance with the second son. And whereas in
Germany there was a contention betwixt the uncles and nephews of the right of
inheritances, and for the deciding of it, the Emperor Otto the first, did
cause a Parliament or general assembly of estates to be held for the
disceptation, and deciding of this doubt: When after much business and argument,
no determination could be had, the matter was ordained to be tried by single
combat, an usual thing in these days (for it was about the year of the
incarnation of our Savior nine hundred forty and two Witichindus lib. 2.
histor. 2. Sigebert in chronic. Ottonis 1.
) and a formal trial referred to God, when man's wit was at a nonplus: But in
this case, that part overcame which did account the sons of elder sons as
sons; and therefore it was ratified by Law, that they should equally divide
the inheritance with their uncles. Amongst other nations diverse contentions
have risen about this matter: for when Eunomus the King of the Lacedaemonians
had two sons, Polydectes the elder, and Lycurgus the younger, and Polydectes
deceased leaving no son living at the time of his death, and therefore
Eunomus being dead, the septer of that kingdom came to the hands of Lycurgus:
afterward when Polydectes his widow had brought forth a son, Lycurgus did
willingly, and readily yield to him the septer Plut. in vit. Lycurg. Justin.
lib. hist. 3.
: Which act of Lycurgus agrees fully with our Law, whereby it is ruled, that
if a man have a son, and a daughter, and the son purchases land, and
dies, and the daughter enters, and after the father begets an other son
of the same wife, this son shall have the land 19. H. 6. 6.
. So if a man enfeoffe an other upon condition, and the condition is broken,
and the feoffor dies without issue his wife priuement enseint, and the brother
of the feoffor enters for the condition broken, and after a son is borne, he
shall avoid the possession of his uncle, and may lawfully claim the
inheritance 9. H. 7. 25.
. And it is likewise said, that after two, or more discents, the heir
afterward borne claiming by descent may enter into the land; but he shall not
have a writ of Account for the mesne profits, nor any writ of Wast 9. H. 6. 23.
. But in cases of purchase the Law takes a difference, and therefore it is said
5. E. 4. by Billing, that if a man devise land to a man, and his heir, and the
deuisee dies having issue a daughter, his wife being priuement enseint with a
son, who is afterward borne, the daughter shall retain the land in perpetuum,
which the Court granted 5. E. 4. 6.
. And 9. H. 6. it is said, that if a remainder cannot vest in any at the time
when it falls, it shall not vest in him that is borne afterward, where an
other has entered before 9. H. 6. 23. 2. Eliz. 190. pla. 18.
. But to return to the examination of this matter by history, Pausanias
reports that Cleomenes the king of the Lacedaemonians being dead, a
controversy sprung betwixt Areus the son of Acoratus the eldest son of
Cleomenes, who died before his father, and Cleonymus the second son, the
uncle of Areus, but by Senate-decree the kingdom was adjudged to Areus Pausan.
lib. 3.
. And Polydore Virgill reports that king Edward the third being deceased,
Richard the second, the son of his eldest son obtained the kingdom, and
was preferred before John, Edmund, and Thomas, the sons of king Edward Polyd.
virg. in hist. reg. Angl.
. Paulus Aemilius an excellent writer of the matters of France likewise
tells, that when Hanno had invaded the kingdom, and expulsed Erkenbalde the
son of his elder brother, this matter was brought into question: in the end
Hanno was constrained to lay aside arms, and to stand to the judgment of
the Peers, who adjudged that Erkenbalde should have the same power and
interest in the kingdom, which his father might have had if he had suruiued
Paul. Aemil. in tit. Carol. Crass.
. Neither will I deny that examples may be produced on the contrary part: as
namely the contention betwixt Artemenes and Xerxes for the kingdom of Persia:
for it is delivered by Herodotus Herodot. lib. 7.
, Justin Justinius lib. 11.
, Plutarch Plut. in Artaxerx.
, that a controversy being raised in the kingdom of Persia betwixt
Artabazanes (as Herodotus) Artemenes, as ( Justinius calls him) and Xerxes the
sons of Darius Hystaspes about the succession in the Monarchy of Persia,
Demaratus was at the same time there, who was driven and expulsed out of the
kingdom of Sparta, and he signified unto them, that the Law and custom of the
Spartanes was, that the son that was borne after the father had attained to
the kingdom, was to be preferred before the elder brother who was borne
before; for which cause the kingdom was adjudged to Xerxes the younger son,
who was borne of Darius being king, whereas the other was begotten of him being
a private man: But this judgment was after reuersed; For when after the death
of Darius, the same controversy was handled betwixt Arsica begotten of Darius
being a private man, and Cyrus being borne of him after his advancement to the
kingdom, and Parysatis the mother did in the behalf of Cyrus urge and revive
the controversy betwixt Xerxes, and his brother, the Persians notwithstanding
the former judgment, did now adiudge the kingdom to Arsica Plut. in vit.
Artaxerx.
. Neither am I moved though in the contention for the Dukedom of Millayne,
betwixt Lodwike and Galeatius brethren, whereof the one was borne before his
father obtained the Dukedom, the other after, the contrary were determined
for Law Guicciard. lib. 1. histor.
: For by the most examples of every common weal, and by the continual
practice of nations most civil (which only course I observe in this
discourse) the right of Primogeniture, or elder-brothership is fenced,
supported, and defended against this last decree of the Millanasses, and that
first of the Persians: For Herod the king of the Jews, did prefer in the
succession of his kingdom Antipater, who was borne before he was king, before
Alexander and Aristobulus begotten after he was king Joseph. lib. antiquit. 16.
. And many years after in Hungary, Bela their king being dead, Geysa being
borne when he was a private man was invested with the Crown Fl. Blondus Decad.
2. lib. 6. Micha. Ritius lib. de regi. Hungar. 2.
: and before that Otto the first could be settled in the Empire of Rome, his
brother Henry made a quarrel to it, because he was borne when his father was
Emperor: But the matter discending to arms, and battle, victory did adiudge
the Empire to Otto Sigebert. in Chron.
: Wherefore two or more contrary examples are not in this case to be regarded;
As that of Genzericus the king of the Vandales, who made his testament in this
form, or rather this Law in form of his testament, Si Rex moritur, qui ei
genere proximus, et natu maximus erit regni haeres esto: for Procopius notes
his great age when he made this Law, and it may be that others will note him
for his dotage if he did amiss, for his discretion, if he did it to prevent a
danger Procop. lib. de bell. Vandal. 3.
. So when Charles the king of Sicely died he had two sons, Charles Martell,
and Robert: Martellus died living his father, but leaving a son, whereupon
the Lawyers had plentiful matter of disputation offered unto them, whether the
sons son should be preferred before the uncle in the possession of his
graundfather: but by the Popes means, Robert obtained the kingdom: But the
Emperor Frederick reuersed this sentence, and the Pope cancelled his rescript
r. But D. Bartolus gives this reason of the Popes doings, because the
kingdom of Sicilia was one of the fees of the Church of Rome, so that it did
not belong to Robert by any lawful succession, but by the grant and
inuestiture of the Lord of the fee Barto. in Arth. post fratr. C. de legit.
haered.
. Neither is it material that the Nomades, Barbarians, did prefer the younger
brethren before the children of the elder brethren, as Strabo reports:
(...). Strabo lib. 16.
yet I will grant that in the succession of regal dignities, the worthiness of
blood is less to be respected, then in the succession of common inheritances,
because in that case the commodity of the subjects, and the ability of them
that are to succeed is politikelie to be respected: And therefore diverse
Ciuilians do with united consent pronounce that the good estate of the
kingdom and subjects, the profit, peace, and safety of the same, is more to
be heeded quam sanguinis series, the course of blood Luc. de Pen. in 5. nepot.
C. qui number. lib. 10. et in l. 1. C. de lyro. lib. 12. Bald. in c. 1. de feud.
March.
. And Roboam preferred Abias his younger son, before his elder brethren in
the succession of his kingdom 2 paralip. 11
. And Solomon the younger brother 2. Reg. 1.
was preferred before his elder brethren: But this must be done warily, and
by the warrant of a good conscience, otherwise it can neither please God, nor
profit man, least a king do by his choice prejudice his subjects; as Micipsa
did by the adoption of Iugurtha Salust. in bell. Iugurth.
. But the reasons are many and forceable, wherefore the worthiness of blood
shall in the course and conueiance of inheritances be principally respected.
First, Ius quod personae inest per modum substantiae, est ab ea inseparabile,
et in nullo alio subiecto potest verificari Arg. l. for did. C. de excus. mun.
lib. 10.
. But ius primogeniturae is in the eldest son, or in his issue per modum
substantiae: therefore it is inseparable from him, and cannot extend to any
other. Secondly, the authority of Vlpian proves it, affirming that he is a
patritian, who is borne before his father was made a Senator, as well as he,
who is borne after that he is possessed of the Senatorie calling l. Senator.
S. D. de Senate.
. Thirdly, it is apparent by many places in the feudall Law, that sons and
nephews may succeed in the fees, and inheritances of Dukes, Marquesses, and
Earls: and so it is of the inferior and vulgar sort of men. And it is well
said of D. Hotoman: Ius sanguinis quod in legitimis successionibus spectatur,
ipso natiuitatis tempore quaesitum est. Fourthly, it should be against all
Laws proximitatis graduum, that they which are in a more remote degree the
worthiness of consanguinitie should be preferred before them that are in a
nearer degree. Fifthly, because Primogenitura is an inseparable incident to the
eldest son, and whatsoever is claymed by this, must be claymed by the person
of the eldest son, and none can succeed in the place of the first begotten
as first begotten, because there cannot be two first begotten: But no Law more
respects the worthiness of blood then the common Law, which prefers the
brother before the sister in case of descent: the elder brother before the
younger, whereas the middle brother purchases land: the sister before the
uncle, and the uncle before the cousin Littlet. tit. Fee simple.
, and all these particular prerogatives of kindred Mast. Littleton windeth up as
it were in one clew, when he says, that when a man purchases land in fee
simple, and dies without issue, every one, that is his next cousin collateral
for default of issue may inherit: and therefore it was well and wisely agreed
by the Justices decimo quinto Elizab. in Cleeres case, that in a collateral
descent from any which purchases lands, and tenements, and dies without
issue, the heirs of the part of the father and which are of the blood of the
ancestors males in the lineall ascension by the father in the same degree, as
the brother of the graundfather of the fathers side, and his issues be they
male or female shall be preferred before the brother of the graundmother of the
father side and his issues: And so the brother of the great graundfather of the
fathers side, namely the brother of the father, of the father, of the father of
the purchasour and his issues be they male or female shall be preferred
before the mother of the great grandmother, namely the brother of the mother of
the father of the father of the purchasor and his issues. For the female sex
is more base then the male in law. And it was likewise agreede, that if the
purchasor dyed without issue, and has not any heir of the part of the father
that the land shall descend to the next heir of the part of the mother, that
is, to the race of the heir of the males of whence the mother is descended,
rather then to others, and in this case of Clear because the blood which was
betwixt the uncle of the part of the mother of the heir, and the heir
himself came immediately by the woman, but the blood which was betwixt the
cousin germane of the fathers side, and him though it came originally from the
woman, namely the grandmother, yet it is derived to the heir by the males, so
that the dignity of the blood does surprise and excel the proximitie of the
degree; therefore it was adjudged that the cousin should have the land. 15.
Eliz. comm. cleres case. 442.


The fourth Chapter.
That in making title by prescription and continuance of time immemoriall, all
nations have consented.
OF all worldly things time is most puissant: for it ends some things
quickly, some things once, and at last, some things it preserves, some things
it continues unto the end of the world, and the force of time is pretily
described in these poems.

Res omnes, aeurum, chalibem, deglutio, ferrum,
stagna, lacus, fontes, ebibo, tum fluuios,
Tabida consumit lignum, lapidesque vetustas:
nullaque res maius tempore robur habet.
If by the course of nature time be such an incroacher upon other things, then
surely art and law does imitate nature which give unto it such power and
authority, as to change, to raise, to alter, to defeat, to strengthen and to
establish titles, neither does the law of nations attend the strict
circumstances of the civil or common law, in which these two laws do square:
for by the civil law there is required just title which the common law
requires not: and bona fides Gl. si. c. illud de prescrip.
which the common law requires not and continual possession, which the common
law only requires. Prescription was first brought in, that there might be a
certainty of titles and peaceable possession without contradiction, for a long
time might turn to a right: wherefore it is well observed in the civil law
bono publico intraducta est vsucapio, and praescriptio vt sit aliquis litium
finis: b. lib. 1. de vsucap.
whereupon that speech of the Lacedaemonians in Isocrates is grounded: We hold
this land given unto us by the posterity of Hercules, confirmed by the
Delphicke Oracle, and the inhabitants of it being overcome of us (here note a
triple title in show, and yet all these in effect but a prescription) ye
know well that all possessions either private or public to be confirmed by
prescription of long time: we have held Messana more then four hundred years.
Isocra. in Arch.
And so Iepthe did plead prescription against the Ammonites; Iudic. c. 11.
This land (said he) have we possessed three hundred years. The French
maintain their title of France only by prescription, as Bodinus confesses:
Bodin. lib. de repub.
for conquered it was by king Edward the third that happy and triumphant
Monarch: assured to King Henry the fifth and his heirs, Graft. in H. 5
not to Queen Katherine and her heirs: Pet. Mar. comm. in lib. iud.
And some Divines hold (for others do oppose themselves against this law of
prescription) Aug. de te. ser. 105. Epiphan.
and observe that the Jews never made question of the title of their Semi,
because the Cananites did defend themselves by the prescription of 500. years:
wherefore Artabanus the Parthian king did, as Tacitus says, Per
vaniloquentiam vainly demand of Tiberius the territories and possessions of
the Macedonians having bin h) Tacit ann. li. 6
a long time possessed of Cyrus and Alexander. And Soliman more soundly did
demand the rightes of Constantine the Emperor after a thousand years.
Ioui. 30. 34.
But most unadvisedly of all did the king of Persia demand all these things
which did belong to the Persian Empire from the first foundation of their
Monarchy unto the conquest of Alexander Magnus, of Constantine and his son,
and of Alexander Seuerus: Herodia. li. 6. zon. Ammi. lib. 17.
as if the ancient inhabitants of Pannonia should now claim Hungary which
the Hunnes did conquer, name, and to this day keep: and vain was the quarrel
which Masinissa made to the Carthaginians land, Liui. lib. 34.
alleging that they ought to have no more then Dido the Tyrian Queen
enjoyed, which was no more then could be compassed by the hyde of an Ox
being curt into thonges, for they had possessed these lands almost seven
hundred years: likewise weak was the title which Antiochus the great
pretended against the Aetolians and the Ionians, because these people were once
subject unto his ancestors: and he is well confuted of the Romans by the
law of prescription, that though his great grandfather, did atchiue these
cities by war yet his grandfather and father never enjoyed them, but the
cities enjoyed their liberty. There be some interpreters of the law, which
think the king of France by prescription to be exempted from the Emperors
subjection, Fulg. Sacc. lib. 1. C. tit. 1.
against whom rather adulatoriously then aptly Alciat replyeth, that no
prescription of time will hold place against the Empire: Alciat. lib. 5. de just.
for that is not true in a prescription of time, which is immemoriall, that is
when no man as it may be commonly believed, has either seen or heard the
contrary: and this by the civil law is the space of one hundred years.
Alexan. 5. Cons. 16. Alciat. 3. cons. 24.
But here before I will grant that such prescription will hold against a king or
an Emperor, this is only in such case where neither possession has been had,
nor claim made against the said king or Emperor, for if claim only have been
made as the kings and Queens of England have done in entitling themselves
kings and Queens of France, and bear in their scutchions the ensigns and
arms of that kingdom, and so keep the civil possession of that kingdom,
though they have lost the corporal possession in such case I do not think
that the prescription of a thousand years ought to prevail: but in a case of
a common person prescription will hardly run against the prince. Therefore it
has been held in our books, that if the kings tenant in Capite be seized
of an aduowson, and the church happens void, and he dies, and the six
months do pass, (nay suppose six score years do pass) p) 14. H. 7. fol.
22.
then an office is found, the king shall have the presentment notwithstanding
the laps before the office. But if the question be asked whether the ordinary
may present by laps against the king, and if he may not, how the cure shall be
served in the mean time betwixt the laps, and the kings presentment: Ibid.
fol. 21.
It is answered by some that the ordinary may present one who shall be
remouable at the kings will, and some think that he shall sequester the
profits of the benefice to serve the cure: but in some case the King may not
surcease his time, as if the tenant for term of life do forfeit his estate to
the king, if he be not seized during his life he may not afterward seize it,
8. H. 5. Trauers. 47.
but in this case the reason is because he can have no other estate then he
which forfeiteth, and he which comes in of the estate of an other can have no
greater right then he had: for if a man have land in the right of his wife, or
in the right of a Church he can not have it otherwise then the Church or the
wife has it: 18. E. 3. 20.
so if there be Lord and tenant, and the tenant alieneth in mortmaine, and the
Lord enters, yet he shall have only such right in the land as he has in
the seigniorie, notwithstanding that the statute do say, Quod proximus dominus
intrabit and retinebit in feodo: 39. E. 3. 38. 50. E. 3. 21. l. 5. E. 4. 61.
For this is grounded upon natural reason, and naturalia sunt immutabilia: and
the princely prescription must be maintained bona fide. Wherefore the Duke of
Sauoy which had the City of Nice in pledge of the French King, did unjustly
withhold that City from the king being the lawful owner then, because he had
inueterate possession in the same, for by the civil law a man may not prescribe
in a pledge: l. 9. C. de pl. act. Deci. 3. consi. 108.
and Iouius is likewise angry against the king of France himself for keeping
Perpinianum in the like sort: Parum sincera fide (says he) veteris pacti
conditionem multis cauillationibus inuoluebat: Iou. lib. 1.
for it is true that Cephalus says, in quaestione valde dubitabili non est
praescriptio. Ceph. cons. 102.
But surely bonafides is requisite in such matters of prescription, except it
be apparent that the will of God is for the prescription: Wherefore Bellarmin
confesses, that the Turk does lawfully possess such things as he has
taken from us because God his will is that for our sins we should be cast out
of the land, wherein we and our ancestors inhabited. Bellar. 5. contr.
But he does not possess them bonafide, because he can not by any special
mean convey them particularly to himself, for as Doctor Gentilis has well
observed: An Turcae opinio latrocinantis cogitat de iusta voluntate Dei. Alb.
Gentil. lib. de iu. bell. 1. 22.
Aratus the Sicyonian was so strong and peremptory for the title of
prescription, that he did not think it convenient to remove or take away from
the usurpers any thing that they have violently taken from the owner, if they
have had possession during the space of fifty years only. Cicer. 2. de offic.
Prescription has always been of force to hinder these that had right to
pursue their claim: Wherefore Demosthenes says well; He that has held an
other man's lands or goods a long time should not please himself therewith,
but impute it to fortune which has hindered the lawful owners. Demosth. ad
maca.
Is any thing more to be laughed at then that which is said of some
interpreters of the law, who are not to be laughed at, that the kingdom of
Spain may now be claimed by the Roman Emperor, by reason of his ancient
imperial right, whereas it is manifest that sithence the time of the ancient
Roman Emperors, it has been a long time possessed of the Saracens, a long
time of the Spaniards.

The fifth Chapter.
That by the consent of all nations consent principally makes a lawful
marriage.
IF a man should examine the several rites, circumstances, and ceremonies of
the diverse people of the world in the knitting and celebrating of marriage, he
might as well number and observe the diuerse-couloured spots of the
Chamaeleon: for every nation has had in this by some fatal lotte both their
custom and change of custom: I will only endeavor to prove that which is
contained in my assertion, that by the consent of all nations etc. The
definition of things is always the best proof: therefore it is good to begin
this discourse with the definition of marriage: Marriage is the lawful
conjunction of man and woman, containing an individual society of life, and
the participation of divine and humane right 30. q. c. nullam.
, where it is said, a lawful conjunction, nothing else is meant, but a free
consent executed by the contract, which as it is the beginning of the
definition, so it is the ground of the marriage, and these words, containing an
individual society of life, do signify that they shall continue forever
together as long as they live: Howbeit the rule of the common Law do in this
savor of the irregular Religion, Post contractum matrimonij ante carnalem
copulam possit alter altero inuito religionem intrare Gazalup. in verb. nuptiae.
. And for the further proof that the ground of marriage is consent, there be
three things by the Canon Law required to marriage Codi. ap. C. vlti. c. 27. q.
2.
, Fides, Proles, and Sacramentum: Fidelity which is put in the first place is
the heart of marriage, and it springs of consent: and therefore if a man do
contract with a woman in this sort, Contraho tecum si te pro quaestu adulter
andum exposueris, this is no contract of marriage, because it is contra bonum
fidei, which consists in this, that neither of the married couple shall break
the bond of marriage, but shall faithfully and vnitedly observe it. Likewise
Progeny is an other thing that marriage requires, and therefore it can not be
a good contract of marriage, if it be made in this form, Contraho tecum si
generationem prolis euites, or si venenum sterilitatis accipias, because
marriage was instituted of God for the solace of man, and the multiplication of
mankind by children. Thirdly, a solemn promise is requisite in marriage: and
therefore if a man do contract with a woman donec ditiorem, vel pulchriorem
habeat faeminam, this is no good league of marriage, because it is contrary to
the oath of an individual society. And so if any man in a foreine land
sucking as yet the smoke of the Popes Tobaccho be a votarie to Religion, and a
bondslaue to his cloister; for England (the Lord be praised) is at this day as
free from Monks, as it is from wolves. Three things are required at his
hands, namely, chastity, obedience, and the abdication of property, as well
in lands as in goods Gazalup. in verb. matrimon.
: But that consent has been the ground of Matrimonial contractes, may appear
by the usual course and practice of nations: Wherefore Virgill exclaymeth
against Romulus for marrying the Sabine women against their wills, and
accompteth it rather a rape, then a marriage, Raptas sine more S^binas: sine
more, that is, contrary to the custom of nations Virgil. 8. Aeneid.
. And Propertius inueyeth against him for this more vehemently Propert. 2.
Eleg. 6.
: -- tu criminis author,
Nutritus duro Romule lacte lupae
Tu rapere intactas docuisti impune Sabinas.
Yea divines Tertullian and S. Augustine have sharply reproved this fact of
Romulus Tertul. de de spect. et adu. val.
, and Cyprian agrees unto them, reprehending Romulus in this manner, Vt
Matrimonium facias rem concordiae per discordiam auspicaris, rapis, faerocis,
fallis, and nuptiae tibi sunt rupta hospitij faedera Cypri. lib. 4. de ido. na.
. By the Civil Law marriage may be concluded by an oath, which being but a
contract, it called sponsalia de futuro ff. de verb. sing. l. verbum erit.
: And so in ancient time the Law seemed to be, as may appear by these wrested
words of Cydippe to Acontius: Iuro tibi sane per mystica sacra Dianae,
Me tibi venturam comitem sponsamque futuram Ovid. in epistol.
.
The marriage betwixt Dido and Aeneas was by consent accorded, by consent
prosecuted, by consent executed, being witnessed and celebrated coelo tonante,
and no otherwise Virgil. lib. 4.
: for the Phrygian and Tyrian Lords followed their hunting, whilst the great
hound of all carried away the hare. And the marriage betwixt Martia and Cato
wittily described by Lucan had no public attestation, but the presence of
Brutus only: Pignora nulla domus, nulli coiere propinqui,
Iunguntur taciti contentique auspice Bruto Luca. lib. 2.
.
But I would not be so understood, as though I should have this meaning, that
nothing else is requisite to the perfection of marriage, but only the bare
consent: For to explane my meaning more at large, I hold that even by the Law
of Nations, consent is only the efficient cause of marriage: but the material
cause is corporum coniunctio, the formal, the bringing of the wife into the
husbands house, et aquae, et ignis interuentus: and therefore in my opinion D.
Hotoman is not justly reproved of D. Gentilis Alberic. Gentil. lib. 3. lectio.
et epistolar. c. 6.
, for holding that this deductio in domum is the formal cause of marriage, for
though the Emperor say L. 15. D. de cond. et them.
, vxor fuisti: deductio in domum ostendit, so that by the opinion of Gentilis,
this deductio shall be only a proof, and argument of the marriage and no
substantial form of it: yet by his favor this is nether logike nor reason;
for may not an argument be drawn a causa formali, and because anima is a sign
corporis animati: for a man may reason thus, animam habet: ergo est corpus
animatum: therefore shall not anima be the form of a living body? But if we
will be ruled by Justinian, the opinion of D. Hotoman seems in this to be
nearer to the truth, though his learning and judgment, if I have any
judgment, be far inferior to the worthiness of Gentilis: yet I acknowledge
them both to be worthy men, et vitulo tu dignus and hic. But to examine the rule
of the Emperor, which before I spoke of, non impletur nuptiarum conditio nisi
nuptiarum accedat festiuitas L. sancimus 24. C. de nup.
, it seems that there must be necessarily deductio in mariti domum, as may
appear by the ancient custom of the Romans in their marriages, which is
briefly glaunced at by Virgill in these words, Sparge marite nuces Virgil. in
Bucolic.
, to which there is a custom in some part of England somewhat correspondent,
which has been much used, namely, that the husband breaks a cake over the
head of the wife, as soon as she is within the threshold of his house: which
custom and the like I will neither commend, nor discommend, but will only
censure them somewhat agreeably to Senecaes Augusti. lib. de ciuit. dei. 6. c.
10. ex Senec. lib. de super stiti. et matrimon.
censure of certain points of the civil theology of the Romans, Haec
omnia populus seruabit tanquam co^suetudine recepta, non tanquam deo accepta.
And though Gentilis press Hotoman with this objection out of the civil Law,
that the marriage may be celebrated by an other, viro absente; but not muliere
absente l. 5. D. de ri. nup.
: Yet that is no ordinary course of marriage, but extraordinary: As when the
parties cannot conveniently come together, as being severed by Sea, which
happened lately in the case of James king of Scots, who was married to Anne the
sister of the king of Denmark, by a substitute or enter-deux, as Chythraeus
reports Chytr. lib. de reb. orb. arcto. ab anno 1580. vsque an 1590.
Eyzinger. in these. princip.
. And the cannon Law which D. Gentilis too hastily calls irrationale,
erroneum, caecum, auarum totum Alberic. Gentil. lib. 1. lecti. et epistolar. c.
11.
, will show this difference unto him: for it makes two sorts of marriage, both
lawful and perfect, yet the one it terms verum, the other praesumptum.
Verum Matrimonium is thus defined: Which is made betwixt lawful persons by apt
words, all impediment of law removed: The other is thus defined, which by the
interuention of some other is celebrated betwixt lawful persons by the
arbitrage of some others, and there does not immediately succeed copula
carnalis Gof. in tract. de contrah.
. But in deed these very words, duxisse vxorem, which signifies the
complementall act of marriage does sufficiently import the necessity of the
form of marriage above mentioned. The efficient, material, and formal causes
of marriage have been above showed: The final cause, as all will agree, is the
propagation of children l. si vicin. 9. c. de nup.
, and the restraint of wanton lust: If this assertion should be examined by the
civil Law, it might receive great disputation, varying and straying wholly
from scripture, the authentike of Religion, yet wholly for consent: for the
civil Law is so strange for consent, that it is positiuely set down by a
great Ciuilian; That if a man do use too familiar acquaintance with a
gentlewoman that sets not her body to sale unto him, that this is not
concubinage, but marriage Modestin. in l. in liber. 24. D. de rit. nup.
. An other Ciuilian holds, that a woman to whom one has showed an husbandlie
affection, ought in continuancc of time to be accounted his wife Papin. in l.
donation. 31. D. de donat.
: To whom agrees Vlpian saying as boldly and libidinously, Betwixt a
concubine and a wife there is no difference, except the wife be a more worthy
parsonage Vlpian. in l. item legato. 49.. 1. D. de leg. 3.
. Yea even in the body of their Law it is set down for a rule, that inter
concubinatum et matrimonium nihil nisi affectio interest L. 3.. 1. D. de donat.
inter vir and vxor.
: ingenuaque mulier domi ante testationem pro vxore habenda est d. These are
the oracles of the parots and parasites of the Roman Emperors, who sought to
sholder out the truth of God his word, and to varnish their own sins, by the
dreams of such dissolute Lawyers, who thought perhaps that they might as well
defend, as commit fornication, and concubinage: Upon whose reverend opinions
the Pope sprinckleth the holie-water of his dispensations, yea and dispenses
for incestuous marriage, not only with Dukes, and noble men, but as Angelus
Perusinus shows, even with Barbors, Tailors, and Butchers Angel. Per. in l.
matrem. filiam ad Treb.
. But it is fitly said by some, that he does rather dissipare quam dispensare
Felin. post Doct. in C. quae ecclesiaru^ de constit.
. And others have been bold to say, that he which obteineth such
dispensation, perhaps will hardly escape in foro poli, in the court of heaven,
howsoever he be safe in foro Romae, in the court of Rome Arg. C. fin. de
praescript. et Alci. in l. 5. pedum C. fini regund.
. Howsoever the Canonistes, whereof the most part do bear the cognizance of
the whore of Babylon, do avouch that by such dispensation, veritas naturae per
Papam non tollitur, (which he cannot do though he would) sed inumbratur: and
therefore say they, the dispensation is lawful Arg. c. seeds de rescript. l.
3.. permit.
, an argument drawn from the owls nest, and from no place of Logike: But the
Emperor Theodosius speaks only of a lawful and honest consent, in more
modest terms, saying: Matrimonium absque vlla pompa et celebritate nuptiarum,
atque adeo absque vllis dotatibus instrumentis firmum est, liberique ex eo
suscepti iusti sunt: Here the Emperor excludes pomp from marriage, but not
consent: Neither does he admit concubinage to be marriage l. si donationum. 22.
c. de nup.
. It is now showed that consent is required by the imperial Law to the
constitution or making of marriage. It shall not be amiss to inquire, whether
it were necessary or no by the ancient Law of the Romans, which was in the
time of their flourishing estate, the Law almost of all the Nations of the
world, as Ouids speech imports: Gentibus est alijs tellus data limite certo
Romanae spatium est vrbis, and orbis idem Ovid. 2. Fastor.
.
And Claudian avouches the same, though he lived when the Roman common weal
was much empaired: Armorum legumque parens quae fundit in omnes
Imperium, primique dedit cunabulacuris Claud. 3. still.
.
By the ancient Law of the Romans, if a woman had been kept in a man's house
by the space of a year, he might claim her as his wife Hotomanus in comment.
ad duodecim tabul.
: And by that Law a man might lend his wife to his friend, for the procreating
of children Strabo lib. 11. Plut. in Cat. Tertul. in apologet.
; as Cato lent his wife for that purpose to Hortensius, which though Plutarch
account fabulous: yet Appian reports it as true Appian lib. 2. de bell. ciui.
, and Quintilian affirms the same Quintil. lib. 2. c. 5.
. Neither is it unlikely that it was a custom practiced of the Romans: for
this lending of wives was permitted by the Laws of Lycurgus: and as Plutarch
reports, it was a Law established by Numa Plut. in comparat. Lyc. et Number.
: A brutish Law doubtless, and one of the maine errors of these great common
weal men, who (as the Apostle says) became vain in their thoughts, and
their foolish heart was full of darkness and as they regarded not to
acknowledge God, so God delivered them up unto a reprobate mind to do those
things which are not convenient: D. Paul. ad Roman. 1. v. 2^ and 28.
Now that we have showed that consent is necessary for marriage, it remains
to be declared how far forth it has been accounted necessary. When the
Roman Empire was in her infancy and first rising, it seems that a very
slight consent would have served, as may appear by these words of Suetonius,
writing the life of Caligula: Mar. L. Cassio Longino, consulari collocatam
abduxit, et in modum iustae vxoris propalam habuit. But of the Emperor
Constantine furtiue and privy marriages are utterly condemned and abiudicated:
l. vxor. 7. Cod. de repub.
because it is against Christianity, to which (the Lord therefore highly be
praised) all the nations of the earth begin to open their eyes and give their
free consent. Such marriages as have the public testimony of the Church are
greatly commended of Tertullian: Vnde sufficiam ad enarrandam foelicitatem eius
matrimonij, quod ecclesia conciliat, and confirmat oblatio, and obsignatum
Angeli renuntiant, pater rato habet. Tertullian lib. ad vxor. 2.
And the Emperor Leo has determined that the marriages of Christians should be
confirmed by the testimony of holy and ecclesiastical prayer, and that these
marriages which are otherwise contracted should not be held for good, and
Harmenopolus testifies that by ecclesiastical Canons it is provided, That
there should be no privy marriages, and that no marriages should be celebrated
out of the Church: Harmenop. lib. 4. c. 4.
And by the common law as M. Fitzherbert says, a woman married in a chamber
shall not have dower of her husbands c) Fizh. N. B. 150. N.
lands: but he modestly says, that it seems reasonable that she should have
dower, M. Parkins peremptorily affirms, that the law in his time was
directly to the contrary, that the law was so in his time, I must take upon M.
Parkins credit: for I have not read (to my remembrance) any year book which
was written in his time or since, wherein that is recorded for law, as to that
which M. Fitzherbert says, that it seems reasonable, how could it seem
reasonable unto him, unless the marriage it self had seemed reasonable, and if
he thought such a marriage to be good and lawful, therein saving reformation
he failed, for beside the authorities which immediately before I have cited, to
prove that marriage must be celebrated in a public place, and in public manner,
it appears, that in the Jewish common weal, that course was followed in the
time of our savior, by part of a similitude which he uses: Let your loins be
girt about and your lights burning: and ye your selves like unto men that wait
for their master when he will return from the wedding, whereby it is manifest,
that some testimony of friends and neighbors is d) Luke c. 12. v. 35. 36.
requisite to the celebration of marriage: and Pope Innocent the third
reports, that this was no new guise, nor any popes invention, but the custom
of the ancient Christian Churches, that conuentiones matrimoniorum in ecclesia
promulgentur. cap. 4. extr. de cland. desp.
And this promulgation is in Lumbardie called Bannum, c. cum tua extra despons.
in England the Banes, or asking in the Church: and by the custom of diverse
commonweals, it is called manasse, the giving of hands: in c. cum tua. 6. qui
matr. accus. poss.
and so is the rule of Justinian the Emperor, who says, that if any diuinis
tactis scripturis shall swear unto a woman that he will marry her, this says
he is sufficient for the contracting of marriage, but yet there must be a
public celebration of the marriage according to the rite and solemnity used
in Christian churches: Justin. Non. 74.. 4.
so then it is in some clearenes that consent principally makes marriage, as
the ground of that strait society, and the celebration is as the form rising
out of this material cause, which makes it to be known, and to be
publicly notified and ratified: for as to the age of the party, who is to be
married, that he should be plenis nubilis annis, or that he should have
power of ingendring, vt iusto accedat robur amori, or that they may be equal
in degree, because dulce iugum paritas, these do not make marriage, but cause
it to be a more convenient marriage, but the consent that makes marriage must
be ouert and express: for though the parties will, do appear in a secret
will, and which may only be proved by circumstances, yet consent is only
verified in an express and unfolded will: wherefore D. Baldus says well, that a
neutrall consent, which is not demonstrated by word, nor by deed, is not
correspondent to the acts of men, neither does it make them essentially
perfect. Now if any man doubt whether the consent of the parties only do knit
the marriage, or the fathers consent be necessary, as to that point the civil
law, which in this matter all nations follow for the reasonableness of it,
stands thus. Eorum qui in potestate patris sunt sine voluntate eius
matrimonia iure non contrahuntur, sed contracta non soluuntur: contemplatio
enim publica vtilitatis (that is to fill the City or common weal with people)
priuatorum commodis praefertur: Pant. l. 2. senten.
And again, Si forte pater concordans matrimonium, that is, a fit marriage) and
forte liberis subnixum (that is, confirmed by procreation of children) velit
dissoluere, et certo iure patriae potestatis turbare, sic erit res tractanda,
vt patri persuadeatur, ne acerbe patriam potestatem exerceat. lib. 1. de lib.
exh.


The sixth Chapter.
That by the practice of all nations Democracie has been bette down, and
Monarchy established.
DEmocracie I have always taken contrary to the ancient division of
Monarchy, aristocracie, etc. to be no form of a common weal, if it be
properly taken for the equal sway of the people without any superiority: for
the heel can not stand in place of the head, unless the body be destroyed
and the anatomy monstrous: it is against the nature of the people to bear
rule: for they are as unfit for regiment, as a mad man to give counsel,
which Anacharsis well perceiving did laugh at the assemblies and counsels of
the Athenians, because they did commit the sum of their affairs to the
peoples fury: and Xenophon writes thus of the Athenian, that is, his own
common weal: I can not allow the state of the Athenians because they embrace
that form of common weal, in which wicked and lewd persons do more flourish
then good men and innocent: Xenoph. in lib. de repub. Atheni.
which commonweal notwithstanding Bodinus calls untruly omnium popularium
laudatissimam, Plutarch as untruly, omnium minime vituperandam, but if it be
true that they say, in how miserable estate are other popular commonweals,
all which (the Roman commonweal only excepted) are far short of the
Athenian estate: and Machiauel did abuse his own pen, and the patience of
others, in one place preferring Democracy before al other kinds of government,
Machia. in obseru. in Li^i.
yet in another place, showing how he would have Italy restored to the ancient
glory and excellency, he shows that that can not be done but by a
monarchy, and only by the Popes monarchy, Machiauel. in lib. de princip. c.
9.
in this point accomplishing the part rather of a magician, then a
mathematicke, wishing for that which the devil would desirously effect, but
imagining that which in truth can never be: yet again he departs from this
opinion, when he prefers the Venetian commonweal before al commonweales.
Machiau. in Liui.
Plato was wont to call Democracy, Nundinas populares, the peoples fair:
wherein every thing was sold for money. Aristotle disagreeing from him in many
things, yet he agrees with him in this, utterly condemning Democracie, using
not only strong reasons of his own, but Homers authority for it (...), and
Maximus Tyrius a worthy man in his time, that he might e) Maxim. Tyri. orat. 3.
convince Democracie to be a most pernicious evil, brings for proof hereof,
the examples of the Athenians, the Carthaginians, the Siracusans, and the
Ephesians: and if a man should seriously respect the brittle dependence of
things upon the peoples brains, he shall easily and clearly perceive, that
whosoever shall but ground his own estate, much less the estate of the common
weal upon the peoples fantasies, domu^ ex luto facit, and finds nothing more
certain then uncertain accidents, and if a man should compare honor to vulgar
reputation, he might as well compare a course packthreed to the fine twist of
the silkeworme, and a garland of iuie to a crown of gold: to be straight way an
honest man, because the multitude commend him, is no more necessary then that
a man should be evil, because few are like unto him: I would rather like a
contrary argument: he is liked of the most, therefore he is not to be followed
of the best: who was more favored by the gretest part of the Trojans the^ the
strumpet Helena? she that was recovered and recaried forsooth for her excellent
beauty by so many thousand ships, by so many valiant and unconquered
captains, after the downfall of a goodly city, after the flames of so many
wars, after so many spoils, and homicides. The people did wonder at that
paragon, as having excellent felicity to be carried home in so glorious a
triumph, and to be transported from Troy to Greece, from a flood of honey to a
sea of nectar, being the blazing star to that famous war which the brauest
soldiers do at this day admire: At Capis and quorum melior sententia menti,
what thought they of this popular miracle? what thought Eneas? that she was
Troiae and patriae communis erinnis: what thought Antenor, a wise, just, and
virtuous nobleman, Antenor censet belli praecidere causam. But if every thing
that the common people approves be commendable, what is then discommendable?
even that which deserves most commendation, namely virtue it self. When one
told Antisthenes that the most part liked him, he demanded of him
incontinent for what vice they liked him, as if it were impossible that virtue
should please the common people. Anacharsis thought it very inconvenient that
artificers should contend in cunning, and these that had no art should be
judges of their cunning: by the same reason they that are not virtuous, can not
judge of them that be virtuous, and if they can not judge of them, how can they
with conscience praise them: and if not them, how can they with safe conscience
praise others. Is it not therefore a madness to gape for their suffrage, which
are incompetent judges, and to care for their controlment which are insensible
censors. Phocion liked nothing that the common people liked. Seneca thinks
that none can please the people to whom virtue is pleasant. Senec. epist. 29.
The multitude have this proverb very rife in their mouths (too many to be
good) and yet in this glass they can not see themselves, as they likewise said
( ^mnia plena stultorum) forgetting themselves.

This beast of many heads has a threeforked tongue: with the one part it
tickleth the ears of them whom they flatter: with the other it licketh their
wounds: with the last, and sharpest it pricketh their hearts: with the first
they flatter them, lulling their senses with fair words, and with soft
speeches sliding into the bosom by forgeries and fables: with the other they
lick their wounds, excusing their crimes, extenuating their faults, cooling
and calming their rage, that are incensed against them: with the third they
prick: for let the popular idol be once crushed, none will sooner tread upon
him then the people; and if perhaps they weep for him in this especially the
proverb verified, lachryma nihil citius arescit: They deal with their idols
as the devil deals with witches: when they are in prison they leave them:
Nay, for the most part none are more proan and ready to accuse when time
serves, then these adulatorious excusers, Quo teneam vultum mutantem protea
nodo? The wayward people may be justly compared to a bundell of thorns, which
will bear up a great man, but will prick him if he lean or lie upon it: They
are like the winds, which Neptune trussed up, and delivered in a bag to
Ulysses Ovid. in Metamorph.
, being sure as long as the mouth of the bag is shut, but if there be never
so little a chinke or riffe, they quickly glaunce out, one raunging one way,
an other some other way, like to Samsons foxes with fire-brandes at their
tails. What a frenzy is it therefore for any to plant his credit upon such
restles brains: as if a man should endeavor to make the sea solid, to make
mountains plain, to build a castle in the air, and to measure a flies foot:
for these blind puppies, follies natural children, melius, peius, profit,
obsit, nihil vident nisi quod lubet Terenti.
. But who list to know the manners and practizes of the people more fully, let
him bend the right eye of his mind to historical contemplation, then he may
see Verres accused and convicted of diverse villainies, of notable spoils and
robberies, of a thousand excessive briberies at the least, and false judgments
in number more: yet by plebiscite or popular determination to be quitted and
freed, but by the sentence of the same Judges, Rutilius, Metellus, Coriolanus,
Scipio the elder, Affrican, and Cicero, men of rare virtues, are confined and
banished out of Rome: innocent Hermodorus is thrust out of Ephesus, Aristides
chased out of Athens, Themistocles dies in exile, Socrates ends his life in
prison: so unjust a measure to good deserts is the fantasy of the multitude.
Phocion a mirror of integrity, the glory of his time, and the honor of
Athens, who was forty and five times chosen by the earnest desire of the
people to be their chief Captain, which he administered to the great good of
that estate: yet in the end they condemned him to death Plut. in Phoci.
. But Antiphon that vicious varlet, and steigne of Athens, was by the people
absolved and acquitted, as altogether innocent: which absolution Demosthenes not
brooking, did so hotely pursue the matter, that he caused him afterward to be
condemned, and put to death by the decree of the Areopagites Plut. in Demosth.
. And alas, what praise can there be given to the people for any action
commenced and carried by them? did Rome flourish by popular effects? no, Salust
says that the credit thereof belonged to some few excellent governors Salust
in princip. Cat^l.
. Liuie says, Sub vmbra Scipionis vrbem terrarum dominam latere, nutus eius
pro decret is patrum, pro populi iussis este: Under the shadow of Scipio the
City, the Lady of the word did cabbon, his beckes were the decrees of the
Senate, the commaundes of the people Liui. lib. 30.
. So did the Thebane state a long time flourish, but it was by the wisdom of
Pelopidas, Epamondas, and other special men. So the Athenians having lost
their prudent governor Pericles, they lost the true and essential form of
their City, which being as a ship in the midst of the sea, without mast and
rudder, whilst one casts the anchor, an other spreads the sail, one
keeps the haven, an other moves the stern, all goes suddenly to wrack
Polyb. lib. 6.
. Foolish were the Argentinians, Lindouians, they of Seen, they of Genoway,
they of Florence, who seeking to settle popular government, did pluck up from
the root their ancient nobility, and having made three degrees of Citizens:
some great, some mean, some vulgar; They of the two last ranks did utterly
subvert the government of the first, and then contending amongst themselves,
did burn in such fury one against an other, that streams of blood did run in
the streets, and the state being now couched, and deuolued to the dregs of
the people, they never left of killing and slaughtering, till by the advice of
the Pope, and the neighbour-cities, they had wholly submitted themselves to a
strange governor Anton in. et Machiauel. in hist* Flor.
. Thus in the end they came to a Monarchical estate. And these Nations which
have no resemblance of a city in them, do create a Duke or Captain, who may
govern the rest, and prescribe Law unto them: as in Guzula a region of
Affrike, and in the borders of the kingdom of Fez: They that dwell near the
mountain of Maguano, if they perceive any stranger passing by, who excels
in wisdom, they do entreat him, or enforce him if entreatie will not serve,
to devise Laws for them Leo Afer. in lib. de reb. Affric.
. The Romans in all their dangerous accidents did acknowledge the government
of one to be the best, and therefore chose a Dictator, whose government Appian
prettily calls regnum negatiuum, either because it denied a regal power
only in show, or because he had authority to deny that which the rest had
affirmed. Trepidi patres (says Liuie) ad summum auxilium decurrunt, dictatorem
dici placuit Liui. lib. 6.
: And again he says, that when Hanniball did molest Italy: ad dictatorem
dicendum remedium iamdiu desideratum ciuitas confugit Liui. lib. 22.
, and such was the reverence of the Dictator, that, as the same Liuy says,
Dictatoris edictum pro numine semper obseruatum Liui. lib. 6.
. And Appius being Consul, gives advise to create a Dictator for the
brideling of the rage of the people, affirming minas esse consulum, non
imperium, vbi ad eos qui vna peccauerunt prouocare liceat, agedum Dictatorem a
quo prouocatio non est, creemus Liui. lib. 2.
. But Monarchy has been embraced by the people of all Nations, Democracie
rejected: as namely, by the Medes, Persians, Egyptians, Parthians,
Macedonians, Arabians, Indians, Aethiopians, Scythians, Tartarians, Turks,
Danes, French, Mosconites, Polonians, Britanes, Affricanes, and Perusians. The
name of a king says Salust, is primum in terris. By scripture it appears,
that kings were ordained of God: for it is said in Deuteronomie: Thou shall
make him king over thee, whom the Lord thy God shall choose: one from among thy
brethren shall thou make King over thee, and thou may not set a stranger
over thee, which is not of thy brethren Deuteron. 17. verse. 15.
. And it is said of Moses: He was in Israel as King when the heads of the
people, and tribes of Israel were gathered together Deuteronom. 33. ver. 5.
. And aftere the return of the Hebrews from Babylon, where they were
captives, to their ancient country of Palestine, they did obey the kings of
Persia, Syria, or Egypt, till Judas Machabeus an Asmonite did recoyle from
Antiochus the great king of Syria, and transferred the high-pristhood and
kingdom into his own family. And as all Nations have embraced Monarchy, so
the wisest men in all nations have approved it: As Homer Homer. lib. Iliad. 1.
, Herodotus Herodot. lib. 5.
, Plato Plat. in politic.
, Aristotle Lib. vlt. Metaphisic.
, Xenophon Xenoph. in cyrop.
, Plutarch, Philo Plut. in lib. de creati. Regis.
, Apollonius Thyanaeus Philostratus.
, S. Ierom, S. Cyprian, Maximus Tyrius Maxim. Tyri. in orat.
, and Bartolus the deep Ciuilian Bartol. in tractat. de Regim. ciuit. nu. 10.
, Lucan Luca. lib. 1. et 2.
, Aquinas Aquinas in lib. de princip.
, Erasmus Erasm. in lib. de instit. princip.
, Tacitus, S. Augustine D. Augustine. lib. 5. de ciuit. dei c. 1.
, and S. Ambrose whose particular and plenarie assertions I omit, because I
hasten now to an other matter which has not been so much discoursed of as this.

The seventh Chapter.
Of the Law and Justice of Arms, of Leagues, of Embassages, and denouncing of
War, of Truce, of Safeconduct, Captives, Hostages, Stratagems, and
Conquestes, according to the Law of Nations.
IN purposing to speak at large of the Law of Arms, and the members and
parcels thereof, I do respect the good of the Ciuilian, who in these matters
is very often employed: And of the professors of common Law, who shall not do
amiss, in considering of these things that shall be delivered, for the more
full opening and explaning of the Statute of 13. Rich. 2. cap. 2. which is
thus: To the Constable and Marshall it belongs to have conusans and knowledge
of contractes, touching feats of Arms, and of war; out of the Realm, and
also of such things as touch Arms or War within the Realm, which can not
be determined, nor discussed by the Common Law etc. For the better entering into
this discourse, I think it best to begin with the definition of War, which
may be thus: War is a just contention of men armed for a public cause, for
though many things be done in war without weapons, yet there is no war
without the furniture of weapons, and there is nothing in war which does not
lie hidden as it were under the safeguard of Arms, and which may not be
referred to the same: And it must be a public contention, because war is not
the quarrelling fight and enmity of private men: for war is therefore called
Duellum, because it is the contention of two equal persons Varr. lib. 6. de
lingu. lati.
: And therefore the Syrians (as I am infourmed) do thus translate the words
of our Savior: What king goes to war against an other king Luc. 14.
, in this form: What king goes to war against his fellow king: that is an
other king equal unto him: Therefore Lipsius his definition is to be
disliked, in that he defines, War to be force and arms against a strange
Prince or people Lipsi. in polit.
: for by that he makes the outrage and violence of private men and pirates to
be war: for war is a just contention, and by this word ( just) excursions
and depraedations are excluded: Wherefore Scipio did account them robbers and
ringleaders to theefes; which did deal by such kind of spoil and pillage
Liui. lib. 28. 40. 41. Flor. 2.
. And Liuie censureth the Ligurians rather to be robbers then just enemies,
because being poor at home, they did invade the dominions of others, and were
more easily overcome then found out: Neither did they observe the Law of
Arms, because they did slaie captives, and cruelly dismember them. And Iouius
speaking of the truce betwixt the Turks and Hungarians says, that by an
ancient custom, they did make small skirmishes and extraordinary incursions
upon the borders, if they were not resisted by the preparation of Ordinance
planted against their walls Ioui. lib. 36.
. War was first brought in by necessiitie, for in that decisions of Courts
of Law, and the determining of controversies by their rules, could not be
betwixt two strange Princes of aequall power, unless they should willingly
agree to such an order, because they have no superior nor ordinary Judge, but
are supreme, and public persons: therefore the judgment of arms is
necessary because such war (says Demosthenes) is against them which can not
be brideled by Law Demosth. de Cherson.
; But process of suit is only for them which are subject: For as there be
two kinds of contention; one by trial of Law; the other by trial of Arms:
so we may not use the later, if we may have help by the former. This was the
cause that the Romans were wont to move them, with whom they dealt, that
their quarrels might be ended by mutual debating, and course of judgment,
rather then by blows, and weapons. And so the Ardeates, and Aricines, the
Neapolitanes, and Nolanes did refer their controversies to the judgment of
the Romans Liui. 3. Dionys. vlt. Cicer. 1. de offic.
. So the Samnites did provoke the Romans to debate their common cause betwixt
their common friends Liui. lib. 8.
. And Archidamus said, that it was not lawful to wage battle against them
which did offer themselves to be ordered by peaceable judgment: Thucid. l. 1.
and Cyrus who is proposed as a pattern of an excellent prince, by Xenophon, a
principal Philosopher and very wise Governor makes the king of the Indians an
Vmpier betwixt himself, and the Monarch of Assiria: Xenoph. Cyropaed. 2.
therefore they which fly from this peaceable kind of trial, which is nothing
else but a disseptation of of words and reasons do digress from justice,
humanity, and commendable examples: but it is good to be provided for arms,
when the parties will not tolerate indifferent hearing of the cause, which the
poets seem to have signified when they feygned Chiron the Centaure, whose
upper part did resemble a man, the inferior part a horse, to be tutor to
Achilles, Statius Achilles lib. 1.
that they might give us to understand, that when a controversy could not be
moderated by reason, the strength of the horse should be used: for against
them, which will not be ruled by equity and reason, force is not unjust. But
(as Scipio said a governor in war ought like a Physician to use iron and
launcing in the last place; Plut. in apophth.
And as to the bearing of arms, it is certain and manifest, that private men,
and people subject, and inferior princes, have no such necessity to make
trial by battle, because they may pursue their right by other lawful means
in some court of justice: neither have private men any authority to assemble a
multitude. It is Pl^^es law, Si quis prinatim sine publico scitu pacem b^^^^ue
fecerit capital esto: Plut. lib. vit* de legi.
If any man privately without public knowledge do make war or peace let it
be capital unto him: for it belongs to the power of the supreme governor to
make war or peace: Deci. cong. 20.
and therefore by the law of Julius it was high treason for any to levy arms
without the consent or command of the prince, l. 3. ad l. Iu. ma.
and the Romans did think it convenient to yield such a man into the hands of
them whom he had provoked by weapons: Appian. and Plut. in cat. mi.
and upon such occasion they demanded the person of Annibal: and so the
Philistines upon like cause demanded Sampson, to whom the Jews yielded him;
Iudic. 15.
and Cato thought that the army was to be recalled, and Caesar to be yielded
up into the enemies power, because he maintained war in France without the
warrant of the people, in whose hands the commandment of war and peace was:
Liui. lib. 4. 16. 18. 19.
but without urgent cause and lawful authority there should be no taking of
arms or raising of multitude, and therefore it is well provided by the statutes
of the two sovereign Queens and sisters, Marie and Elizabeth of England: That
no man without authority, by ringing of any bell, or by sounding of any
drum, trumpet or horn, or any other instrument, by the fiering of any
beacon, or any other instrument, etc. with force and arms shall alter any
laws or statutes. 1. Mari. parliam. 1. c. 12. 1. Eliz. c. 7.
And in ancient times kings had the supremacy over other, of commanding or
commencing war, and of m^stering men, as appears by the sacred history ^et
sometime upon a great or u) 1. Reg. cap. 8
necessary cause, as if there be danger in delay, or the sovereign prince be
absent, war may be undertaken without the commandment of the prince, if it
be upon occasion of just defense, which by the law of nature is granted to
every one, and there is an excellent example to this purpose in the Roman
history of L. Pinarius, who was the captain of a garrison at Enna in Sicely,
who when he did foresee the revolt and defection of the citizens of Enna to the
Carthaginians, and he could not conveniently send ambassadors to the Consul
Marcellus, though he were not far from thence, suddenly he did kill all the
citizens, by which act Enna was still reteigned for the Romans, and Marcellus
did not disallow the deed: Liui. lib. 24.
therefore Cicero commends the enterprise of Octauius Caesar, who not
expecting the decree of the Senate, did of his own head undertake war against
Antonius: for the time of co^sultation was not yet come, but if he had the^
omitted the time of battle, he did well foresee that the common weal being
oppressed, nothing could be decreed by Senate: Cice. Philip. pic. 8.
and the Senate did after allow by public authority the war vndertake^ by
Octauius of his own private advise: Cic. Philip. 5.
so Scipio Nasica did deserve exceeding commendation, who did voluntarily offer
himself a captain to all good Romans for the oppressing of Ti. Gracchus,
together with his treacherous confederates. Valeri. Maxi. lib. 3. c. 1 Appi. de
bell. ciui. lib. 1.
For it is necessary (as Cicero says) in such perturbation and tumult rather
to obey times then customs: for in peace we must follow custom, in war
profit: but now as to the justice of wars, e) lib. 2. de rep c. 5.
if bellum have his denomination a belluis, as some do imagine, it should
seem to be indecent and discrepant from the nature of man. Hear of that
matter Sencea: We punish homicides and particular murders, why do we not
punish wares and the glorious sin of people slaughtered. Covetousness and
cruelty know no measure: By Senate-counsell and popular assent bloody actions
are executed and publicly commanded, which are privately forbidden. Senec.
epist. 96.
Men, a mild kind of creature, are not ashamed to boast of bloodshed, when as
dumb and reasonlesse creatures have peace amongst themselves. Cuia. Critic.
not. 1. etc. 2. de cla. desp. Lipsi. 2. mili. Romans 12.
And at the first sight this is a great argument, that if dumb creatures, which
can not debate the causes of their anger have peace amongst themselves, how
much more ought men to do the like, unless they will be more beasts then the
beasts themselves. Cyprian has the like saying: Homecide when particular men
do it is accounted a fault: when it is publicly done it is accounted a virtue
the greatness of cruelty not the reason of innocence does purchase impunitie
and pardon. And fitly to the same purpose, though not purposely for the same:
Laws have agreed to sins, and that is admitted to be lawfully which is
public: Cypr. 2. ep. 2
And Seneca again, Small theftes are punished, great are carried in triumph.
Senec. ep. 88
Tertullian says, that wrong is proper to war, and as far as his
authority stretches, prohibiteth battle to Christians: Tertullia. adu. Iud.
but sithence the time of Tertullian, these opinions have been confuted of
Divines, Ciuilians, and Philosophers: for war is according to law though
many mischeefes do steigne it: for there does ensue good of it when rebels are
reduced to obedience, and when peace is accorded: and that whose end is good,
is also good it self: for the end of war is peace, to which and to common
equity without bloodshed, and these injuries of war men do seldom attain.
Neither does Seneca disalow all wars: for he praises the wars of Hercules:
Senec. lib. 1. de benefi.
as to Tertullians saying, he did speak it upon the consideration of such
things which are unjust, and are often done in war, not impeaching that which
is usually done of them that be just: to Lactantius and Cyprian answer may be
made after the same sort. Notwithstanding I would not have this poison of war
admitted into any commonweal, unless it be to expel an other poison: nor
this fury to be let loose, unless it be to cool the fury of others, or
upon like necessity. But now let us sift the precedent definition of war
more narrowly, and consider how war may be justly maintained on both sides:
which both Divines and Ciuilians Conua. reg. peccat.. 18. Soto. 5. de just. q.
1. 7. view. relect.
have thus expounded, saying that it may be truly and verily just on the one
side, and on the other by ignorance, as by the voice of God the Jews did
justly move war against the Cananites, and the Cananites did justly resist
the Jews, not knowing God his will and defending themselves: and therefore it
was well said of Pope Pius the second to the ambassadors of the king of
Hungary, who did speak against the Emperor, that he thought the king of
Hungary would not depart from right and reason, and he knew likewise that the
Emperor was a lover of justice, howsoever now they did descent by war, and
that neither of them thought that he had an unjust cause of war. Com. Pij.
2. lib. 3.
Cicero speaks fittely to this purpose of the faction of Caesar and Pompey:
There was some obscurity, there was variance betwixt two excellent Captains:
many doubted what was the best, many what was expedient for them, many what was
decent, some, what was lawful: Cice. pro. Marcel.
but the Civil law does attribute the rightes of war unto both parties, the
things that be possessed by war it gives to the possessor: captives it
makes bond servants to both. Now it is convenient to descend into a more
particular consideration of the causes of war, which must not be attempted
only upon an immoderate desire of enlarging dominions or increasing riches. To
assault thy neighbors by war (says Augustine) and to vex people that do
thee no hurt through an ambitious desire, what is it else but a great robbery.
D. August. in. 4. de ciuitat. Dei.
Therefore the saying of the Barbarian was as barbarous as himself: That is
most just in prosperous fortune, which is most forcible, and that it belongs
to a master of a family to keep his own but to a king to contend for that
which other men possess. But Attila which did not attend any cause or occasion
of war, did therefore worthily dedeserue the hatred of all men as being an
enemy to q) Tacit. Ana* li. 15.
all men: Ior. de o^.
but the Turks do otherwise, who most commonly pretend a cause of warfare: and
therefore Soliman when he endeavored to win the kingdom of Cyprus from the
Venetians began to consider what pretenses he might make for the taking of
arms, because it is not (as one says) the custom of the Ottomans upon a rage
or heat of mind to enterprise war. Natal. com. lib. 1.
It is a beastly part having received no injury, to commit slaughters of men,
and depopulations of cities and countries: therefore princes many times
pretend causes of war, where in truth there is no cause. And Moses sought for
a good cause of quarrelling with the Emorites, though he had a cause
absolutely just, namely the commandment of God. For when by virtue of the same
commandment he was to make war against the Emorites, and utterly to destroy
them, he sent messengers to their king which might signify thus much: I will
pass by thy land, we will not turn into thy field nor vineyard, nor drink
the water of thy well, we will keep the right path until we be past thy
borders. Therefore let there be a cause of war, and let it be no small cause:
for parum a nihilo vix distat. And as Propertius says: Frangit and attollit
vires in milite causa,
Quae, nisi iusta subest, excutit arma pudor.


Just cause of war is the defense of our country, our selves, our friends,
our fellows, and goods. A defensive war is grounded upon the law of Nature,
therefore C. Pontius the Captain of the Samnites said well, That war was
just unto them, to whom it was necessary, and that their arms are honest
which have no hope of safety but in weapons. Likewise it is a just war which
is taken in hand for the recovery of things wrongfully, and by force taken
from us by our enemies: c. iustum. q. 2 August. q. 10. sup. Iosu. lib. 2.
or that the authors of the injury, at least, may be yielded up into our hands
to be punished, if they did it not by public decree, but by private malice:
therefore David after the death of Saul did maintain war against Isboseth the
son of Saul, who did go about to usurp the kingdom of Israel, which God by
Samuel the Prophet had given unto David: 2. Reg. c. 2.
and Romulus did therefore fight against the Sabines, because their Dictator
Cluitius would not restore the things taken from the Romans by violence, nor
yield up into his hands them that did wrong. Dionis. Halicarn. lib. 3.
And the revenge of an injury most despightfully done, is likewise a good
cause of war: Therefore David did justly wage battle against the King of the
Ammonites for the disgrace and abuse offered to his ambassadors: 2. Regu. c. 20
and duob. sequenti.
and that prince has just cause of war, who pursues by arms rebels and
such as swerve from obedience: c. auctor. it. us. quaesti. 6. cap. scir. 103.
quaest. 8.
for great injury is done to God, and to the prince, when his subjects will
not be ordered, nor ruled by his authority: for there is no power but of God,
and he that resists power as S. Paul says, resists the ordinance of God
Ep. ad Roman. c. 13.
, and the injury done to a sovereign Magistrate, is done unto God: Who said
unto Samuel, of whom the people craved an other king: They have not cast off
thee, but me, that I may not reign over them 1. Reg. c. 8.
. And David did wage battle against Seba the son of Bochri, who solicited
the people to revolt from David to him 2. Reg. c. 20.
. But because a Rebel may not properly be called an enemy, when any such
arms are borne against rebels, it is not to be called a war, but an exercise
of princely jurisdiction, upon traitorous and disloiall persons Innocent. in
c. olim 1. de resti. sp. et l.
, which was well declared by Pompey, in justifying the war maintained by the
Senate against Caesar, and his accomplices Lucan. lib. 2.
: -- neque enim ista vocari
Praelia iusta decet, patriae sed vindicis iram.
And this is confirmed by Ciceroes opinion, who did not think it convenient to
send Ambassadors to Anthony, nor to entreat him by words, but that it were
meet to enforce him by arms to raise his siege from Mutina: for he said that
they had not now to deal with Anniball an enemy to their common weal, but
with a rebellious Citizen Cicer. philipp. 5.
. And the said Cicero writes also to Plancus, that peace ought not to be
concluded with the Anthonians, who had besieged Brutus at Mutina, calling them
shameful theefes, which either ought to crave peace, laying aside their
Armor, or if they will persist in their fury to obtain it by fight, not by
composition Cicer. lib. 10. epistol. episto. 6.
: Wherefore it was unadvisedly done by the late Earl of Essex, in admitting
any article of composition with Tyrone, and namely for the restitution of
such lands and possessions, to which the Rebels might pretend right before
the rebellion: for so upon every judgment given against them, they would
presently have returned to weapons. And this slipperie revolution of titles,
might perhaps have stirred them to Arms, who were in peaceable possession of
these lands: so that this would have been nothing else, but a cutting off of
one of the heads of Hydra, that an other might grow: for surely there will
always be some cause and occasion of tumult, if men may bring into question,
antiqua et antiquata. The Romans would grant nothing at all to Rebels,
because their course was to be stern to the proud, and rebels in that they
are rebels are proud in the highest degree: Neither ought any of their kindred
to regard them, but to be of Seneca his resolution: Si arma quis patriae meae
inferret, quidquid de me meruerat perdidit, and refer illi gratiam scelus
haberetur Senec. lib. vlt. de beni fi.
. And exccellent is the saying of Frederick the second to the Fauentines: Qui
dum potest delinquit, dignus est vt quantum potest puniatur Sigoni. lib. 18. de
re. Ital^.
. But to return to the causes of War; There be some causes of making war,
which we refer to God, as commanding war; as when the Jews did refer
to God the cause of the war moved against the Cananites Deuteronomy. 34. 4. Exodus
23. 29. Number. 33. 51. Deuteronomy. 20. 16. 17. 18.
. And God denounces irreconciliable war against the Amalekites, and he
charge his people with perpetual enmity against them Exodus 17.
. That kind of War (says Augustine is without all doubt just, which God
does command, with whom there is no iniquity, and who knows what ought
to be done to every man, in which action the army is not so much to be
accounted the author of war, as the minister thereof August. in Ios. q. 10.
. And so the Prophet Esaie said, that it was not necessary for king Ezechias
to aunsweare any thing to the Ambassadors of the Philistines of the
Israelites right in Palestine, but only this, That God would have that land
to be his peoples Esai. 15.
: Naie, the very Heathen as the Aethiopians did undertake every war by the
Oracle of Jupiter Herodot. lib. 2.
. And the Spartanes by lottes and miracles, were moved to make war and to
fight with the Argiues Xenopl^. 4. Graec.
. And Aeneas comes into Italy to maintain war by destinies, and Oracles
Not. com. 6. 14.
. And the Turks do always pretend this cause of their war, that it is the
commandment of Mahomet, that they should persecute men of diverse Religion:
therefore they and the Persians, the one seeming haereticall to the other, are
in continual war. And the late king of Spain Phillip, did pretend this
defense of his wars (as some testify) that they were against Infidels, and
Heretics Ferrat. de inimic.. 7. et 17.
. Yet a Doctor of his own sect Baltasar Ayala thinks that war is not to be
levied against Infidels, because they be Infidels, although the Emperor or Pope
should command it: for their infidelity does not deprive them of these
demesnes, which uu Baltas. Ayal. lib. 1. de iur. bell. c. 2.
they have by the Law of Nations: for the earth was not given to the faithful
only, but to every reasonable creature: for the earth is the Lords, and the
fulness thereof, the round world and whosoever dwell therein Genes. c. 1. Exodus
9. 29. Psalm. 24. 1.
. And the Lord makes his Sun to shine both upon the good and the bad Math.
5. in fin. et c. 6. in princip.
, and though Nabuchadnezer were an Infidel, yet the Lord did give unto him
kingdom and principality Ierem. 27. 6.
. But in grounding war upon divine causes, it is good to be certain of God
his will, and not to credit the aequiuocall prophecies and fantasies of men
lightheaded and possessed of fiery spirits, fit to kindle tumults and vprores:
for the warrants of such men are nothing else, but the wrack of a number of
men. Such was the oracle of that Scot unto his king, consulting with him of
war against England, Ibis, redibis, nunquam in bello moriturus, which fell
out afterward to be true, being thus distinguished: Ibis, redibis nunquam in
bello moriturus. Such was the warrant of the Eremit, moving the imperial
army to fight against the Ligurians Carol. S^gon in vit. Andr. Anti.
. Such were the fond prophecies of Ball, or according to some Chronicles Wall a
priest, who stirred up a rebellious army in the time of king Richard the
second I. Stow in Rich. 2.
. But from wars which displaie the banner, I will pass to leagues which wrap
it up: 2. As wars have been by the Law of Nations maintained, so leagues have
been concluded: for as Cicero says: It a bellum suscipiatur vt nihil aliud
quam pax quaesita videatur Cicer. 1. offic.
. Such was the opinion of S. Augustine, as appears by the Canon Law: Pacem
habere debet voluntas, bellum necessitas: non enim pax quaeritur, vt bellum
excitetur, sed bellum geritur vt pax acquiratur C. 3. 23. q. 1.
. And that is expedient for the Conqueror, according to the saying of
Euripides: Pacem reduci velle victoria expedit, victo necesse est. But the
Conqueror ought to be of that power, that he may be able to make perpetual
peace: for it is one of the natural properties of peace to be perpetual: For
such was the form of peace, which the Romans concluded: Romany and Latinorum
populis pax esto, dum coelum et terra stationem eandem obtinent Dionys.
Halicarnas. lib. 6.
. And so the Roman Emperor, and the Persian king did establish peace sine
termino Procop. 1. lib. de bell. Pers.
, in concluding peace, public profit must be especially regarded; which
Hanniball therefore termed vinculum maximum Liui. 36.
: and before him Demosthenes termed it so Demosth. ad Ep. Phi.
. And sometime private profit is respected, when it is a mean or way to
public profit: Wherefore Duaren says pleasantly and fitly: We see very
often, that as of a comedy, so of a war, the final conclusion is a marriage
Duar. c. 3. de rit. nup.
: But it is good to make peace, so that there be no fear of future tumult, and
unquietness: Therefore Lentulus his counsel was good against the
Carthaginians: Quoniam perfidiam non possumus tollere, ante omnia debilitemus
potentiam Appia. in bell. punic.
. And Cato of this matter speaks to the Spaniardes: Id ne fiat vno modo
caueri potest, si effectum erit ne possitis rebellare Liui. 34.
. And Iphicrates does well answer the Lacedaemonians, promising all
faithfulness, and all possible security, that he could not rest upon any other
faith, or other security then this, that it should be apparent unto him, that
they could not do any hurt, though they would. The reason of this sure and
wary dealing with enemies, Saint Ierom wittily shows: Quis vnquam mortalium
iuxta viperam securos somnos capit, quae etsi non percutiat, certe sollicitat:
Securius igitur est perire non posse, quam iuxta periculum non perijsse Hieron.
ep. 47.
: Who did ever rest quietly, sleeping near to a Viper, which though she do
not stinge, yet she does vex? It is therefore more secure to be able to
avoid danger, then not to have perished, where there is hazard of perishing.
The effects of peace concluded are diverse, for either weapons are laid aside,
or the parties agree upon condition, or the fight receives some restreints, or
limitations: for when both parties are weary, both of pains and of expense,
this is rather an ending of war, then a concluding of peace; as Tacitus says
in the like case: Bellum magis desierat quam pax caeperat Tac. 4. annal.
. And the like matter Cicero, in the like sort censureth: Summum otium sed
senescentis magis ciuitatis quam quiescentis Cic. ep. ad Qu. fr. lib. 2. ep. 14.
: Wherefore it is good to make and ratify perseueraunce of peace, because the
relics of the disease after the crisis do many times work the ruin and
subversion of our health. And according to the rule of Physic: The ashes of
putrified bodies will soon inflame the humors Hippoer. 6. epid. 2. et Merc.
ad 2. de mor.
: And therefore Tullus that artificial warrior, in articulating peace with
the Albanes, puts them in mind, that they ought not so much to settle
present peace, as to provide for future agreements Dionys. 3.
. And worthelie does Isocrates reprove the Graecians, because they did not
compounde, but delaie enmities, until such time as one of them might destroy
an other Isoc. in panegyr.
. And excellent is that saying of Cicero: Pax est non in armis positis, at in
abiecto omni armorum metu Cic. 10. lib. epist. Iam. epist. 6.
. But to speak some what of the diversities of making peace, if this clause
be comprehended in the Articles, That one of the parties should preserve the
Majesty and authority of the other with all kindness and faithfulness. Doctor
Baldus terms this simplicem adhaerentiam Bal. 5. cons. 106.
, whereby (as Romanus expounds it) the weaker part does adhere to the
mightier: non vt subditi fiunt, sed vt defendantur Romans cons. 417.
. This adherence is less then protection: and he that is an herent, or under
protection, is not presently under jurisdiction, but is only defensible from
injuries and violence, and that by soldiers and armor: Wherefore I wonder at
Alciat, when he says, Faederati Latin loquentibus subditi sunt, non sotij
Alcia. 7. cons. 13.
, aut adhaerentes. Neither is it any subjection, though they give somewhat in
sign of superiority Castal. de imp. q. 109.
. Neither were the Carthaginians and Macedonian^ subject to the Romans, though
they did pay unto them a yearly tribute. But if a League be once contracted,
it binds very strongelie and effectually; and that certain ministeries or
dutiful respects were by reason of such Leagues due and demaundable, may
evidently appear by the League contracted betwixt the Romans and the
Lacedaemonians, wherein it was expressed, that they should live according to
their own Laws, and should not confer any thing in name of tribute, save
only certain friendly ministeries, and offices Strabo lib. 8.
. And for the further proof of the straitnes and strength of this public
bond, this form of League was found engraven in an ancient stone: Batari
fratres, and amici populi Romani Dio lib. 69.
: So that Bodinus is not to be harkened unto, who thinks that by freindship
or league contracted betwixt nations, no aid is due unless it be expressly
mentioned Bodi. lib. 5. de rep. c. vit.
: for Baldus teaches him otherwise, that there is one body of two cities or
two commonweals, by reason of friendship concluded: Bal. cons. 29
but for the better understanding hereof it is to be noted that there be two
kinds of society or public friendship: one which is termed (...), the other
which is named (...). Suid. Thucyd. 1. Rhod. 11. an. le. 6.
(...), is when the parties contracting league are by force of the league to
have the same friends, and the same enemies, which manner of society was much
used by the Romans: the other is but as it were the moitie or half part of
this, as namely when one of the league is to help the other when he suffers
injury: but not when he offers injury for it is a good rule in the civil
law, rei turpis societas no^ intelligitur: l. 5. 7. vbi Bal. pro sor.
Therefore he that couenanteth to defend a castle or farelet is not bound, if
war be raised through his fault, to whom he made the covenant: Alexand. 3.
cons. 114.
and Castrensis avouches, that this ought to be understood of a necessary,
not of a voluntary war: But this is clear and certain in this case, that
he that is bound so to defend, is bound to defend by weapons: Deci. li. 59. de.
reg. iur. and 3. cons. 117.
and he that is bound in such case personally to help an other is much more
bound to help him with money Alci. 3. consi 2.
yet that must be thought to be only then required at his hands, when the
other can not provide for his own necessities. Now it is to be considered,
whether either of the parties may depart from the league. And I think upon
just occasion such a departure may be made: Faedus non violatur si ab eo
disceditur ob rationem iustam l. 14. 15 16. pro soc.
: But this must not be for a light cause: for light* causes are always
arising: and all contracts would be most weak, if for a small and worthless
cause it should be broken or not regarded. But a prince may safely depart from
the league if some part of the league be broken by the other party: Cagnol.
l. 41. Cod. de. trans.
and leagues as all other contractes be indiuidua Deci. Cons. 265. cep. 455.
461.
: for there be always exceptions understood in every league as these for
example; Nisi causa superueniat: nisi culpa accesserit eius cui promissio ista
fit, and pactio foederis: rebus sic stantibus. Thus we have spoken of war and
peace generally, now it remains to discourse of the particular circumstances
of these two principal points and moments of a common weal.

3 Before war be maintained by one prince against an other, it behooves him
that commenceth war to denounce the war solemnly by ambassadors, and by that
mean to certify him of his purpose. For this course is prescribed by the law
of God Deuteronomy. 20. Joseph. 5. antiquitat. Aug. iudic. q. 49.
. And it was practiced by the Grecians, Barbarians, and most of all by the
Romans Aerod. lib. 5. Xenop. Ages. Diony. 2. Liui. 1.
: Whereupon Cicero says, Nullum bellum iustum haberi videtur nisi nuntiatum,
nisi indictum, nisi repetitis rebus Cice. 1. de offi. n. c. 1. 23. q. 2.
: Which saying is cited and auowched in the Canon law c. 1. 23. q. 2.
. And this is likewise affirmed in the civil law. l. 24. de capt.
And therefore it is held by the interpreters of the civil law, Proditorie
agit qui non indictum mouet bellum: Ias. Bald. l. 5. de just. l. 4. c. de obs.
p.
And Varro reports, that just wars did cease to be waged in his time,
because they ceased altogether to be lawfully denounced Var. lib. 4. de ling.
Lati.
. For the ancient Romans did not affoarde a triumph to any, unless the
war were solemnly proclaimed Sigon. de anti. iur. pro vin.
: And Alciat accompteth this the law of nations Alcia. 14. de si. cor.
. And because war is a public contention, if in private causes summons and
citations be used, surely in undertaking war, denuntiation ought to be used
Bald. l. 12. de serui. vrb. praed.
; for which cause the Romans were in this point so precise, that they did
often denounce war when they needed not; even when the law of nations was
apparently violated by other nations, so that they might justly have enforced
them, as the rule of the common law is to have taken notice of their own
wrong. In this sort they proclaimed war against the Senones who had slain
their ambassadors: against the Illyrians and Tarentines, who had contumeliously
abused them Liui. 12. 20.
. And this is noted of them in the case of the Saguntines: Non statim ad arma
procurrunt, dum prius more legitimo queri malunt: Flor. lib. 2.
So Liuie reports of the Frenchmen; Erant qui extemplo Romam eundum
censerent, sed vicere seniores vt legati prius mitterentur questum iniurias,
postulatumque vt pro iure gentium violato Fauij dederentur: Liui. lib. 5.
Wherefore Xerxes does greatly inuey against the Graecians because they did
not first aslay to end their controversies without weapons: Herodot. l. 7
and for the same cause Ioab is justly reproved in the scripture of the wise
woman: 2. Sam. 20.
neither was he unwise in this point that said: Omnia prius experiri verbis
quam armis sapientem decet. Qui scis an quae iubeam sine vi faciat. Ter. in
Eunuch.
Yea even Tullus a most warlike man is of this opinion: Quae verbis componi non
possunt armis decernantur: Dionis. li. 3.
So Theseus a notable Captain says in Euripides. Si oratione non persuadeo
bellum laudo. Vade, dic Creonti: Theseus amanter repelit a te cadauera: hic
primus sermo: si nihil efficis, secundus, vt f) Eurip. in Supp.
me armatum expectet. And so Theodorius said truly to Alaricus: Tunc ad arma
cum locum apud aduersarium iustitia non potest inuenire: And again, Quid opus
homini lingua si causam manus agat armata. Cassiod. 5. Var. 1. 7.
Thus it is evident that by the law of nations war should be denounced.

4 Somewhat must be spoken of truce, which is thus defined in the civil law:
Induciae sunt cum in breue et in presens tempus conuenit, ne inuicem se
lacessant: lib. 19. de capt.
And Gellius makes mention of a truce which was made for an hour only: Gel.
li. 1. c. 25.
Vergill calls truce pacem sequestra^, because it sequestreth as it were, and
suspendeth war for a time. Varro terms it, Ferias belli, wars holiday.
Virgil. 11. Aenei.
In that it is called sequestra pax, it is to be noted that it is not simply
a peace. In the Cannon law it is called tregna: it is of this nature, that by
it war is not ended but deferred only, and so it is middle betwixt war and
war even as sequestration is middle inter duos altercantes betwixt two
parties that are at variance. But peace properly so termed is of another
nature, because it is perpetual, and under the name of peace truce is not
comprehended, no though truce be concluded for a long time: as the Veientines
made a truce during the space of an hundred years with the Romans: afterward
for forty years, and after for twenty: as the Tuscanes had a truce first for
thirty years after for forty, and then peace was concluded. Neither is it so
much as a league, as may appear by Liuie: De foedere negatum: induciae in
biennium datae Samnitibus: And so he reports of the Tuscanes: Pacem
faedusque petierunt, inducias in tringinta annos impetrarunt. Liui. 1. 2. 4. 9.
10.
So Plutarch reports of Pelopidas, that he would not conclude peace with
his adversary, but that he granted him truce Plut. in Pelop.
. Ancharanus does thus distinguish them there is a time of war, a time of
truce, a time of peace Anch. cons. 88.
. And an other Ciuilian avouches truce to be more like to war then to peace
Corn. 3. cons. 167.
. And an other says fitly, Induciae non interrumpunt hostilitate^, sed actus
hostiles: Aug. l. si un vis. de pact.
But this must be observed in observing truce, that in time of truce advantage
may not be taken either in regard of the place, of the fight, or of other
circumstances. Therefore Phillip may seem to have done unjustly and against
the law of arms, who having obtained q) Liui. lib. 31.
truce for the burying of his dead, did in this time of truce convey his army
into safer places. And the D. of Mompensier was likewise guilty of this fault,
who having couenanted to yield up a forcelet if help came not within one
month, in the time of truce departed from the forcelet, having left it
sufficiently fenced Guicciar. li. 2
. And it is thought to be against the law of truce to receive soldiers at
that time into a town besieged: Com. Pij. 2. lib. 5.
For it is an usual clause in the concluding of truce: Nil nouari securitate
pendente: Vital. tract. clau.
So Scanderbege does sharply reprehend the Turks, who having promised to
yield themselves if aid did not come within a certain number of days, do in
the mean season repair the breaches of their walls and munition: Scanderb. 8
Neither can Tissafernes be excused from the violation of truce, who in that
time did make himself more strong for war. But Agesilaus is noted to have
done the contrary: Corn. Nep. Agesil.
Neither can the act of Belisarius be justified, who in the time of truce
surprised certain towns, out of which the Goths departed, howbeit he
answered to this objection, that he might well enter into such towns as the
Goths had left and waiued: but the Goths did not wave them; for they departed
out of these towns through penury, and want of victuailes Procop. l. 2. de
bell. Goth.
: Now by the civil law he that departs out of a place, or casts any thing
away being enforced by necessity cannot be said to leave that thing behind
him pro derelicto l. 1. 7. pro derel. l. 8. de Ie. Rho.
: Yet the common law may seem to sway with Belisarius, which extends
derelictum, both to that which is voluntarily forsaken 16. Eliz. 138 Die.
. And to that which is waiued and left by necessity 29. E. 3. 29. 12. E. 4. 5.
: yet it clears not Belisarius, his act: for during the time of truce no
warlike action should have been enterprised: so that if the Goths had left
these towns voluntarily, and not by necessity, this had not exempted him from
doing apparent wrong.

5 Because safeconduct is a thing much used amongst nations in politic
respect, and therefore is parcel of the law of nations, I may not omit or
ouerpasse it. Safeconduct because it is in Latin fides publica, does argue
that it may not be granted regularly but of a public person who is an absolute
Monarch, or of some public estate or common weal; and in England it has
been used to be granted by parliament, as appears by the statute of Magna
charta: Omnes mercatores, nisi ante prohibiti fuerunt, habeant saluum conductum
exire, and venire in Angliam ad emendum and vendendum praeterquam in tempore
guerrae: and si sint de terra contra nos guerrina, si mercatores nostri in
patria illa sint salui, and salui sint illi in terra nostra. I mentioned before
this word (regularly) because by commission and special warrant he that has
potestatem explicandi ardua: or he that has causae cognitionem, may grant
and affoarde safeconduct for the better performance of his task Decia. 3.
^onsi 96.
. But safeconduct is to be understood largely, by equity, and without cauils:
and therefore if safeconduct be granted to one, to come safely to a place it is
intended that he ought safely to depart, and he that has license to pass
safely may send safely Bar. li. 1. C. de nan. Alex. 2. cons. 46. 5. Alci. 4. 14.
: and he to whom safeconductt is granted for himself and his company, may
bring with him in his company odious persons, as Jews and infidels Alc. l.
cons. 11. 25. Dec. cons. 51.
: but fugitives, reuolters, rebels and traitors he may not bring with him, for
no law of nations nor benefit of common weal belongs to l) 8. 38. de pae.
such, reuolters or runnagates are by the civil law burnt alive, or else hanged
upon a gibbet. Marcellus and Cato the Censorian did whip them and put them to
death Plut. in Mar. and Cat.
: Others in setting forth of their games and shows did cast them to beasts:
others did lay them under Elephants to be trod and torn in pieces, others did
with other extremity work their death Liui. 24. 26 Val. Maxi. 2. c. 7. Front.
4. c. 1. Appi. in bell. Hispan.
: neither do I think that safeconduct may extend to men of another nation, then
he is of, to whom safeconduct is granted. For example, the Fleminge, the Turk,
the English are enemies to the Spaniard, if safeconduct be granted to the
Fleming, he may not take Englishmen, or Turks with him in his company. But
safeconduct being granted to the husband must needs extend to the wife, and to
such things as be necessary to him ad been esse Bal. 5. cons. 413.
: And to such familie-seruauntes or retinue as to be agreeable and
proportionable to his dignity and estate Aug. l. 8. de in of. test.
: for according to the rule of the civil Law, in personalissimis actibus
inseparabiles personae includuntur Bal. 1. 3. de constable. pri.
.

6 I will now speak of Captives, and of the rightes that belong to them (for
misery needs some solace) by the Law of Nations. A Captive as the name
imports is he, who is taken in war, and though he be borne of a captive
woman, yet is he free, until such time as he be seized into the hands, or to
the use of the Lord, and though he be so seized, yet it must needs be that he
was borne free: for the rule is true: Quae iure gentium acquiruntur, ea non
acquiruntur nisi vera interuenerit apprehensio l. 3. de acqui. po. vbi Ias.
, otherwise he should possess the treasure who possesses the ground in which
it is, yet he does not possess it, howbeit he knows of it, and therefore
that rule is not in the Law of Nations true: Si quis habet id quod continet,
habet id quod continetur: For in the Law of nations this general maxim
holds place: Vera et realia non ficta, et verbalia amat ius gentium: yet such
a precise seizure is not here meant that every part of him that is taken should
be touched, even to the very shirt of a man, as long as he that seiseth has a
will and power to seize: for he that touches a man's ear, is in the civil Law
held to touch the whole man Alc. d. 41. d. l. 3. l. 21. de fur.
. Some hold opinion that he is not a Captive, until he be brought into the
tents of his enemy l. 5. de capt. Alex: l. 1. de acquir. po. tt. 4. reg. 6.
, howsoever it be, it is plain, that Captives may not be put to death; as the
prophet said to the king of Israel: An quos captiuos abduceres, gladio tuo et
arcu tuo eos percuteres? And though bloody Pyrrhus desirous to kill Polyxena
did pretend, that lex nulla capt^ parcit aut poenam impedit: yet Agamemnon
answered him well, quod non vetat lex hoc vetat fieri pudor Senec. in Tro.
. To which purpose the other Seneca says excellently: Augusta innocentia
adlegem bonus esse, et latius officiorum patet quam iuris regula, multa exigit
pietas, humanitas, liberalitas, iustitia, fides, quae omnia extra publicas
tabulas sunt. The Scots therefore are greatly to be commended, who as Buchanan
reports, though great danger were imminent, yet did not slaie their
prisoners Buchan. lib. 9.
. Neither did the English ever (that I read) unless it were once in that
notable fight, in which they did utterly destroy the French dominion, who
having more prisoners then themselves were, and finding their captives to tend
to conspiracy and mutiny, having singled the most noble, did kill the baser
prisoners Com. Pi. 2. lib. 6. Polydor. 17.
. But doubtless the Turks cruelty was barbarous, who did kill four thousand
prisoners, that they might not be a burden or charge unto him Ior. lib. 3.
. And this fault was committed by Henry the second king of France Not. Com.
lib. 8.
, who did cause certain obstinate prisoners, and perseuering in fight to be
hanged: a kind of death unfit for Captives, who are not so to be punished
without great and urgent cause, because it is a point of immanitie, and
cruelty, bitterly to rage against them which defend their Prince, and their
Country.

A Captive one may be, and yet not a bondslaue: for he can not be a bondslaue,
unless his Lord will have him so. There was a ceremony therefore used to make
him bondslaue, which was called Nexus; And it seems that the Praetor had some
authority in this matter: which I ground only upon the last will and
military testament of a Roman, engraven in stone as Sigonius reports, who
would have his villains manumitted by the Praetor Car. Sigo. in vit. et trinu.
ph.
: and sithence eiusdem potestatis est ligare and soluere, I am of opinion
therefore, that he had some intermedling in the making of them villeines. But
in the making of them villeines, chains doubtless were used: and therefore
Vespasian when he had taken Josephus prisoner, would needs have his gyues to
be broken, not to be loosed, that he might seem never to have been a bondslaue
Joseph. lib. 5. de bell. Iud.
. And whereas the Law says, that such things as are taken of enemies
capientium fiunt l. 5. de ac. re. do.
, it is not meant nolentium: therefore though the power of him that takes make
a captive, yet his will must make a bondslaue. But surely the state of
captives, if they become bondslaues is very miserable: for they are as it were
dejected from their nature, and are in account of Law turned into beasts: And
whereas before they were accounted in Law persons now they are accounted things
ad leg. Aquit. 209. Bald. 2. cons. 358.
, and therefore of the Graecians they are generally called Samata bodies. But I
do not think this servitude to be contra naturam: For Aquinas his distinction
is not to be reproved, that seruitus is a natura, though not secundum primam
intentionem, by which we are all made free: yet ex secunda by which God does
punish whom it pleases him: but such bondslaues must not be used like beasts,
but like men: wherefore the speech of some is intolerable ( Seneca reports
it) who did affirm domino in seruum nihil non licere, pictori nihil non
pingere Sen. 1. contr. 5.
. And Plato writes not well when he says, that bondslauesl) Plat. lib. 6. de
leg.
. are to be handled roughly. Aristotle more truly, that they ought to be
handled mildly Arist. 1. polit.
. Cicero more iustilie, Meminerimus et aduersus infimos iustitiam esse
seruandum, Macrobius more modestly, Dominum patremfamilias, seruos familiares
appellauerunt nostri maiores omnem seruis contumeliam detrahentes Macrob. 1.
saturnal. 11.
. Clemens Alexandrinus more compassionatelie: Famulis vtendum tanqum nobis
ipsis: sunt enim homines tanquam nos Cle. Alex. ^lt. paed.
. Nunquid canes saginabuntur, homines pascentur male? said Diogenes. In Athens
there was a Law de iniuria seruili Athenae. lib. 6.
. Amongst the other Graecians there was a Law, that bondslaues might depart
from their cruel masters. In some commonweals they had license to purchase
lands, and goods, as Athenaeus q) Pollu. 7. Plat. de superst.
reports, according to the Roman Law, as appears by Seneca, Dominus
praestare debet seruo cibarium, vestiarium: est enim seruus perpetuus
mercenarius Senec. lib. 3. de benefic.
.

7 Enough of Captives: Now let us not be unmindful of Hostages, which are in
state not far distant from Captives: Therefore Quinctius did cause the son of
Phillip, and the son of Nabis to be led before his triumphall chariot, though
they were but Hostages Oros. lib. 4. c. 20. Liui. 34.
. And the Parthians were wont to say: obsidaetus nihil aliud est, quam
seruitus Joseph. lib. 18. antiqu.
. By the Civil Law they can not make a testament no more then others, which
are in the enemies power l. 1 1. qu. test. fa. po.
. The definition of Hostages is thus delivered in the civil Law: Obsides sunt
qui fidei publicae seruandae causa, principi, aut duci exercitus dantur Bal. l.
2. c. de pa. qui fidi.
. To whom this danger is incident by the Law of Nations; That if promise be
not kept to him whose Hostages they be, they may presently be put to death: As
may appear by the examples of the Thessalians Plut. de cla. mu.
, the Romans Liui. 2. Diony. 6.
, the Goths Procop. lib. 1 de bell. Goth. ^
, the Dacians Bodin. 1. de rep. c. 10.
, the English Polyd. lib. 5. 7. 15.
.

8 I may not omit to speak somewhat of the Law, and lawful use of Stratagems,
which have been so much favored and practiced in ancient times, that it has
been generally and peremptorily affirmed: Nullo discrimine virtutis ac doli
prosperi omnes laudari debent bellorum euentus Ammian. Marc. lib. 17.
. And S. Augustine his authority is urged in the Canon Law: Cum iustum bellum
susceperis, vtrum aperta pugna, vtrum insidijs vincas nihil ad iustitiam
interest Aug. Ios. q. 10. c. 2. 23. q. 2.
: To which agrees the saying of the Poet: Dolus an virtus quis in host
requirat? And counsel has been given by Oracle, that men must not only
fight by warlike instruments, but by nimblenes of wit Pausan. lib. 4.
. And Brasidas says in Thucydides, that the theft of war is most honest. And
Silius censuring Fabius using such cunning plots says: Exin virtuti placuit
dolus Sili. lib. 15.
. But yet great regard is to be had, that all kind of deceit and fraud may not
be used and admitted: because Law must be used in dealing with enemies. But the
Law admits not dolum malum, being the art boni et aequi. And in concluding
any matter with enemies, all captious and scrupulous disputations and
interpretations are to be avoided: for as Cicero says: Leguleiorum est
syllabas and apices aucupari, (non militaris simphicitatis Cicer. 1. de ora. l.
25. de prob.
.) Wherefore Pericles dealt unjustly, who having couenanted with his enemies,
that they should be safe si ferrum deponerent, did afterward kill them, because
they had about their harneys certain iron buttons: for this word ( ferrum) was
to be understood of weapons: as appears by that saying of Pyrrhus in Ennius:
Ferro non auro vitam cernamus vtrique. And h) Fronti. lib. 4. c. 7.
they of Plataea were unjust, who having promised to restore certain prisoners,
did first kill them, and then deliver them Thucyd. lib. 2.
: as if the carcasses of men were captives, and a dead man were a man. Unjust
was Alexander, who having promised to certain persons a safe departure out of
the city, let them go safe out of the city, but having gone a little of their
way, he caused them to be slain Diod. lib. 17. Polyen. 4.
. The Samnites were unjust, who having promised their enemies that they would
take away but a stone all along the wall, did take away the foundation-stones
and so destroyed the whole wall Polyen. 6.
. And that Roman can not be excused from blame, who when Antiochus had
promised him that he should have half of his ships, caused all his Navy to
be cut in the midst Valor. Max. lib. 7. c. 3.
. And the craft of the people of Lacros is to be reproved, who having promised
perpetual friendship whilst they should tread upon that earth, and whilst
they should carry on their shoulders their heads, did cast out of their shoes
the earth that they had put into them, and removed from their shoulders the
heads of garlike which they had privily laid on them, and then they levied
war Polyb. lib. 6.
. For as Cicero, though a pagane says divinely: Se^per in fide quid senseris,
non quid dixeris cogitandum Cicer. 1. et 3. de offic.
. Neither is it material that some examples, and namely these abouesaid may be
urged for the defense of such sinister dealing, for these few examples make not
the Law of nations. Neither in this treatise do we imagine what has been done
of some men, of some nations, in some cases, upon some occasions. But what has
been done of the most part of the best men of all Nations, upon grounded
advise, and free election. And surely diverse such great and eminent parsonages
have sometime used such stratagems in good sort, and without breach of national
justice. Judith that wise and valiant woman, for her plot intended and
practiced against Olofernes is commended of diverse, yea even of Divines: of
Clemens Alexandrinus Clemens stromat.
, of Ambrose Amb. 3. de offic.
, of Ierom Hieron. apo. Ru.
, of Augustine Aug. de te. 228. 229.
, of other. So Augustus Caesar did promise to Cleopatra what she would, if she
would effect the death of Antonius Dio cassi. lib. 51.
. Such snares were laid against Timoleon, against Eumenes, against Lucullus by
Mithridates, as Plutarch reports. They were assayed by Metellus and Marius,
and performed and executed by Sylla against Iugurtha, as Salust avouches.
They were compassed of the Aetolians against Nabis Paus. lib. 8.
. And attempted of Perseus against Eumenes Liui. lib. 42.
. And likewise of Decebalus the king of Dacia against Traian Zona. Dio. 68.
. They were procured lately of Tiruultius against Sforza Duke of Millaine
Iovi. lib. 11.
. And in time past performed by Totilas against the Governor of Perusia
Procop. lib* 3. de bell. Goth*
. And in this age of Selymus the Turkish Emperor, against king Aladolus Ioui.
lib. 17.
. And heretofore of a certain Triballian against Amurathes Catachond. lib. 1.
. Many such cunning practizes were devised and executed by Annibal that
admirable soldier, in whom the two several natures of the Fox and the Lion
did constell and accord: but he was fully countermated by the Romans, of whom
therefore he said: video Romanos suos habere Annibales.

I must conclude with showing the universal and absolute right, advantage,
liberty, power, and prerogative of the Conqueror. The question has been
heretofore, whether all these things that any way belong to the people
subdued may be claimed by the Victorer, or only such things Quae pede
praemit, manu tenet. It has been agreede, that when Alexander did surprise
Thebes, he was an universal and no particular possessor of all their rightes
and inheritances Bald. 2. Consi. 202.
: And whereas the Chalcedonians being dangerously assaulted by the army of
Alcibiades did privily and closely convey their goods for safety unto the
Bithinians, Alcibiades having conquered them, made earnest demand of these
goods, to be delivered him by the Bithinians Xenoph. 1. Graec.
: And the Romans did demand the bodies of certain kings Demetrius and
Mithridates, being overcome and put to flight, of them to whom they fled Liui.
7. 22. Plut. in Luc. App. in Mithr.
: but without all doubt these places, and the things of these places which the
conquering army does possess, do justly belong unto the conqueror, and
therefore that is said to be the conquerors territory, vbi exercitus eius
terret Panor. 2. cons. 62. Bald. lib. 3. de. off. praes.
: And Alexander might well laugh at Darius, who in the articles of peace would
have yielded these things to Alexander, which he did already possess Curt.
lib. 4. and 5.
: And Hanniball did disdain the Roman simplicity (though they did it of
great policy) in selling that ground which he did possess with his army
Liui. lib. 26.
: And Brasidas the Lacedemonian said well, that that was not the Boetians
land, which the Lacedemonian army had seysed: Thucyd. li. 4
And when a Monarche or free city yields, all the members and inferior parts
do yield implicatiue: wherefore Baldus says well, A submissione capitis
sequitur submissio me^broru^ and reru^, quia seruie^te capite membra seruire
necesse est. And it is certain, that the ornaments and riches of the people
subdued they may take away iure imperatorio, as Cicero says: Cicer. Verr. 3.
So Camillus a most strict obseruer of the law of arms did take the image of
Juno from Veios Liui. lib. 4.
: Marcellus carried away many things from Siracuse, Plut. in Marc.
and Mummius conveyed great store of Church-ornaments out of Achaia Zonar.
: And Sir Frauncis Drake that sea-flowre of England did (as I have heard) bring
home with him the great golden statue of S. Christopher which he took in one
of the Churches of Porto Rico when he sacked it. And though there be somewhat
in scripture Dani. c. 5.
spoken against the spoylers of the temple of Jerusalem, the cause was for that
God had chosen that temple to be his house and the spoilers of it did it in
reproach of his majesty. But it is plain that cities surprised may be
sacked: cities yielded upon condition may not Liui. lib. 37.
: and cities surprised may be sold, and the walls may be destroyed, and the
cities themselves Plut. lib. 4.
. The walls of Athens were destroyed by the Spartanes Thucyd. li. 1.
. The walls of Sparta by the Achaeans Liui. li. 38.
: the walls of Jerusalem by the commandment of Pompey Tacit lib. 5
: part of the walls of Giscala by Titus Joseph. 4. ^elli. Iud.
: the walls of Argentina by Attila, which he would needs have afterward
called Polyodopolis, as now having many ways to come unto it. Bon. sin. 1.
vng. 2
Frederick was brought in triumph through the walls of Millaine yielded unto
him Sigon. lib. 13. de re. It.
: Alponsus through the walls of Naples: (as Guicciardine reports) Julius the
Pope of Rome through the walls of Mirandula: was it because the gates were
thrown down? or because such a holy man would not make a profane passage
through the gates, but through the walls which are commonly consecrated? or
because his ordinary course is to enter by the window, his extraordinary at
the wall? or because he wanted the Aspe and the Basiliske to walk upon, he
thought good for that present to trample upon stone and mortar? as to general
subversion of cities after a victory obtained, it is manifest that Thebes was
destroyed by the general concord of all the Grecians, because they took part
with the Persians Diod. li. 15.
. Liuie makes mention of Alba, Pometia, Corbio, Cortuosa, Contenebra,
Satricum, Antipatria, Phaleria, and others, which were so destroyed Liuie. l.
1. 2. 3. 6. 7. 24. 31. 32.
: Carthage, had the same fortune, which is said to have suffered the plough, a
ceremony used of the Romans in razing of the foundations of a city conquered
l. 21. qui* mo. us. am.
: the same fortune had Jerusalem c. 7. did 76. 1. Mich. 3.
, according to the prophecy of Micheas: Sion vt ager arabitur l.

The eight Chapter.
That in the laws and constitutions touching Cities, corporations, liberties,
franchises and immunities, and the good government and administration of shem,
all nations have agreed.
COrporations in the whole course and constitution of them do very much
resemble the natural body of man: for as there be in it great diversity of
parts, so is there likewise great distinction in cities and corporations, of
mysteries and degrees. In Egypt there were in their several corporations
diverse sorts and callings of people; Kings, Priests, Warriors, and Workmen:
which last kind was subdivided into four members, Shipmen, Artificers,
Husbandmen, and Shepherds, Arist. lib. 7. polit. c. 10. Herod. lib. 2. histor.
. And as a natural body does consist of things bodily, and of a soul, which
is vnbodilie, so that it consists of things merely opposite. So likewise a
city or corporation consists of multitude and unity, whereof multitude is
as the body, unity as the soul, both different in nature. That multitude is
as the body of a City needs no great proof: Yet hear thereof Florus: Cum
populus Romanus, Etruscos, Latinos, Sabinosque miscuerit, and vnum ex omnibus
sanguinem ducat, corpus fecit ex membris, et ex omnibus vnus est Florus. l. 3.
c. 18.
. Hear the opinion of the Stoics, comparing the world to a corporation.
Ciuitas totius mundi vna est, and omnes homines populares, municipesque and
veluti armentum vnum compascuo in agro compascens Cice. li. 3. de fi. Plut. de
vi. Alex.
: Hear also Seneca. Homo homini in maiore ciuitate ciuis est, and in
adiutorium mutum creatus Senec. 1. and 2. de ira.
: and that unity is the form and as it were the soul of a corporation may
diuersely appear Florus says excellently (for he either could not or would
not write but excellently) Augustus Caesar sapientia sua atque solertia
perculsum vndique et perturbatu^ ordinauit imperij corpus. Quod it a nunquam
haud dubte coire and co^sentire potuisset, nisi vnius praesidis nutu quasi
anima, and mente regeretur. Florus. lib. 4. c. 3.
And Seneca says wittily: Societas haec nostra lapidum fornicationi simillima,
casurae nisi inuicem obstarent and sustinerent se lapides; Seen. epist. 96.
This our society is like unto an arche of stones, which would soon fall if
one stone did not hinder and bear up another. S. Ambrose diuinly: Lex naturae
ad omnem nos stringit charitatem, vt alter alteri tanquam vnius parts corporis
deferamus. And the saying of Cicero, though an heathen is not heathenish.
Spurca eorum sententia qui ad se omnia referunt Cice. lib. 7 ad Attic. ep. 2.
. And both he and S. Ierom Hieron. ep. 24.
do condemn certain Philosophers, who whilst they think it sufficient to
be without all kind of injustice, and bend themselves wholly to that, that
they may not hurt any man, yet offend greatly in this, that they do not seek
and endeavor to profit other men, but forsake sake that part of justice,
whilst they follow the other: from which fault all the Rhetoric in the world
cannot exempt the cloistered Monks and couchant Friars of the Romish liturgy:
Claudian speaks aptly of this matter Claudi. 4. cons. Honor.
: Nonne vides operum qui se pulcherrimus ipse,
Mundus amore ligat.


Thus it is evident, that a multitude lawfully and for a politic end assembled
is the matter of a corporation, unity the form. Likewise as a natural body
has his diseases, so has the body politic. Wherefore Liuie his comparison is
incomparable. Nulla magna ciuitas diu quiescere potest: si foris hostem non
habet, domi inuenit, vt praeualida corpora ab externis causis tuta videntur:
sed suis ipsa viribus onerantur Liui. li 30
. And again, Discordia ordinum est venenum vrbis huius Liui. lib. 3.
: yet in some things the body natural and a city or corporation do differ:
for the natural body is transitory and mortal: but a body politic dies
not as it is showed by M. Townsend in the Mayor of Norwitches case. The
comminaltie is the substance of a corporation: and of them depends all the
inheritance: for the Mayor and the Sheriffs may die, and be changed, but so
can not the comminaltie 21. E. 4. 7. 12 27. 67. May. de Norwich. c. per Towns.
: which is elegantly avouched by Liuie speaking in the person of Scipio that
worthy man: Si ego morerer mecum expiratura respub. mecum casurum imperiu^
populi Romani esset? ne istud Jupiter optimus maximus sinat vrbem auspicat^
Dijs authoribus in aeternu^ conditam, fragili huic and mortali corpori aequalem
esse: Flaminio, Paulo, Graccho, Posthumio Albino, M. Marcello, T. Quinctio. C.
Fuluio, Scipionibus meis, tot, tam praeclaris imperatoribus vno bello
absumptis, superstes est populus Romanus eritque mill alijs nunc ferro, nunc
morbo morientibus Lui. li. 28.
. And Tacitus speaks of this matter pithily though shortly: Principes
mortales, aeternae resp. Tacit. annal. 3.
And there is an other difference taken in the said case of the Mayor of
Norwitch: for a man restrayning the hands of an other man's natural body,
does restreigne his body, but if one do imprison the Sheriffs of a city,
the comminalty is not imprisoned. By this comparison the nature of a politic
body may sufficiently appear. Now I will speak of the incorporating and
enfraunchising of citizens which has been very ancient, as may appear by
Tacitus. Conditor nostri Romulus tantum sapientia valuit, vt plerosque populos
eodem die hosts, dein ciues habuerit: and he shows it more particularly,
Neque ignoro Iulios Alba, Cornucanos Camerio, Portios Tusculo, and ne vetera
scrutemur, Lucania Etruriaque, and omni Italia in senatum accitos. And he
gives a good reason wherefore it should be so: moribus, artibus, affinitatibus
nostris mixti auru^ and opes suas inferant potius quam separati habeant:
condemning the Lacedaemonians and Athenians, who used it not. Quid aliud exitio
Lacedaemoniis et Athenie^sibus fuit qua^ qua^ armis pollere^t, nisi quoth victos
pro alienigenis arcebant Tacit. lib. 11. annal.
: Amongst the Romans at the first none were admitted into their city, but
such as did inhabit in that part of Italy, which was called Latiu^:
afterward it was imparted to the other people of Italy, such as dwelt beyond
the river Poe, and the Alps, and the sea. Claudius Caesar bestowed the
freedom of the city upon many barbarous nations: and under these Emperors
which were Spaniardes, Thracians, Affricans by little and little whole
provinces, yea and the whole Roman empire was endowed with the freedom and
liberties of the city: whereupon that speech was uttered, Romanus vbicunque
vicit, habitat: and whereas at the first all nations beside the Grecians were
accounted Barbarians, yea even the Romans, who afterward were Lords of all,
and being Lords did exempt themselves and other nations which they had
conquered from such reproach, and then they only were noted for barbarous who
lived not under the Roman Empire: Herodian. Sparti. Eutrop.
wherefore Rhenus was said to have two banks, the furthermost of which was
allotted to the Barbarians, the nearer to the Romans, according to the saying
of Claudian: O quoties doluit Rhenus, qua barbarus ibat.
Quod te non geminis frueretur iudice ripis.


And that which Tacitus says, that the Romans did grant unto the Rhemenses,
the Lingones, the Bituriges, the Meldinenses, the Xantones, and the Hedui free
people of France, the liberties and free use of their city ( the suffrage and
giving voice at the election of Magistrates and Officers only excepted and
foreprised) it is more plainly and vnderstandinglie opened by Liuie in these
words: Iam indemorem Romany colendi socios, ex quibus alios in ciuitatem
atque aequum ius accepissent, alios in ea fortuna haberent, vt sotij este quam
ciues mallent Liui. lib. 26.
. Though Augustus Caesar at the first blossoming of the Roman Empire did make
some scruple to enfraunchise strangers, and to admit them into the City of
Rome: Neither would he bestow the liberties upon a Frenchman, though earnestly
requested by his Empress Liuia, whom he dearly loved, disallowing the act of
C. Caesar his adoptiue father, who enfraunchised a whole legion of his French
soldiers, and reproved likewise M. Antonius for selling the liberties of the
city unto the Sicilians for money Tranquil. in vit. August.
. Yet his posterity was not so precise, but did abundantly admit strangers:
For Antonius pius did enfraunchise all that were subject to the city of Rome,
that Rome might be the common country of all Nations L. in orb de statu ho.
ff.
, imitating perhaps Alexander magnus, who accounted the whole world a common
City, and his pauilion l) Romans ad municip. ff.
the tower of the city Plut. in Alex.
. And Seuerus did grant to the citizens of Alexandria, that they might be
Senators of Rome, and that other Egyptians should not be free of the city of
Rome, unless they were before free men of Alexandria. Plin. lib. 10. epist.
The Heluetians did bestow the liberties of their city upon Lewis the
eleventh, and other kings of France Bodin. lib. 1. de rep. c. 6.
. And Artaxerxes the king of the Persians did grant such liberties to the
whole family of the Pelopidae Plut. in pelopi.
. So the Athenians did make free of their city Euagoras king of Cyprus,
Dionysius the tyran of Sicelie, Antigonus and Demetrius the kings of Asia, yea
even all the Rhodians Liuius
: which the Rhodians requited with like courtesy, which was nothing else but a
comburgeosie, such as Bodinus Bodin. vbi supr.
reports to have been made betwixt them of Valoys, and certain towneships of
the Heluetians: Betwixt the men of Berne, and them of Friburge: Betwixt them of
Geneua, and them of Berne. The nature of which comburgeosie is, that there
should be mutual community of their cities, and mutual league of friendship
betwixt them; And if any of these so leagued in society should forsake their
city, and come to the city of them with whom they were in league, they should
be ipso facto Citizens without any special enfraunchisement, enroulment,
cooptation, or any other circumstance: before which time they were not subject
to the command and Laws of that city, but were only Ciues honorarij, as
Hercules and Alexander magnus were of Corinth. Such a league of society as
seems by the year book to have been contracted betwixt the Citizens of
Lincoln, and them of the town of Derbie, that they of Lincoln should be
quite from murage, pontage, custom, and toll, within the village of Derbie,
for all kind of merchandise 48. E. 3. 17.
. This was the difference betwixt very and honorarij ciues: the former were
subject to the Laws, orders, and charges of the city: the other were not.
Plutarch Plut. in Solon.
wondreth at Solon, in that he made a Law, that all strangers should be barred
from the liberties of the city of Athens, except it were such as were in
exile: but indeed he perceived not Solons meaning, being a man of deeper reach
then Plutarch, as also was Polybius, and Thucydides, and Dionysius, of
Halicarnassus amongst the Graecians his countrymen, whom notwithstanding in
learning, wit, and eloquence he exceeded: for Solon his purpose was in the
making of that Law, that none should enjoy the liberties of the city, but such
as should be bound and subject to the Laws of the City. And there was
likewise an other difference betwixt very and honorarij Ciues: for they which
were very ciues did loose the liberties of the city of Rome, whenever they
did purchase the freedom of any other city: Which may appear by this, that
though Pomponius Atticus being borne in the city of Rome, was a citizen of
Rome, and more then that, being a Senators son, was eques Romanus, who was
therefore called Atticus, because he had the Athenians in such reverence and
estimation (a man of great birth: for three Emperors do refer their
original to him, Senec. in epist. ad Lucil.
) yet this man could not be made a citizen of Athens, least (as Cornelius
Nepos reports the plain truth Senec. in epist. ad Lucil.
) he should loose his freedom of the city of Rome. But as to them which were
honorarij ciues, if they were enfraunchised of a w) Cornel. Nep. in vit. Attic.
hundred cities, yet they could not loose their freedom of any. In England not
Cities only admit others to their liberties, but very Societies of Students;
as namely the houses of Court, and to mine own knowledge, the worthy
society of Graies Inn, to which be admitted such a number of excellent noble
men, great divines, surpassing gentlemen, whereof some have sued and been
desirous to be admitted: other some have rather been called, then ordinarily
consorted, for their preeminence and worth, according to the rule of Solomon:
As is the fining pot for silver, and the furnace for gold, so is every man
according to his dignity. I pray God this fining pot may still continue her
silver of Learning and Law. I beseech him likewise that this furnace of gold,
may still sever the gold from the dross, that is religion and loialtie, from
paganism and papisme: which hitherto, the Lord be praised, it has done. But
to return to my purpose of handling the nature and properties of Cities and
Corporations, Though in the generaltie of admittance all commonweals have
accorded, yet in the special manner of admittance they have dissented and
varied: For in Athens they could not bestow their fraunchise upon any without
the suffrage and voice of a thousand citizens at the least Demosth. contr.
Eub^lid.
. But in such places and regions, which by reason of the barrennes of the
soil, or by reason of the distemperature of the air, are not very well
habitable, not only the originarie inhabitants, but even strangers and
aliens are forbidden by the Rulers of the places to depart out of them: As
namely in Moscouia Sigis. in hist. Moscho.
, Tartaria, and Aethiopia Francisc. Aluares. in hist. Aethiop.
: But amongst the Venetians and Rhagusians none can be admitted to their
cities, unless it be for a great sum of money, or some principal desert.
But now sithence we have spoken sufficiently of Corporations in general, let
us examine the first foundation and beginning of guildes and fraternities,
which as Corporations do support the good estate of a Realm; so they do
preserve the good estate of Corporations. These Fraternities are derived of the
greek word (...), which is to be interpreted a well, or pit: for in drinking
at one pit or well society was at the first contracted: thence is derived
(...) fraternity. So likewise Pagi, towneships, are derived of the Doricke
word (...), which signifies a fountain, and in the Atticall dialect is (...).
By the meeting together at the first at one water or fountain grew love
betwixt man and wife, then betwixt brethren and sisters, then betwixt uncles
and nephews, then grew affinity: All which would have been cold, if there
had not been corporations, colleges, guildes, fraternities, and societies
crected and established. By the common Law, no Corporations can be made but by
the king, yet his highness may depute this authority to an other, for so it
comes originally from the king: howsoever Mast. Keble his opinion is, that a
Corporation must be made by the kings express and immediate words 2. H. 7.
13.
. But 22. Edwardi 4. and 20. Hen. 7. the opinion of Read is to the contrary
22. E. 4. Graunts 30. 20. H. 7. 7.
, and both Mast. Fitzherbert, and Mast. Brook Br. Patents 44.
abridging the case, are in this contrary to Mast. Keble: f) Fitzherb. Graunts
36.
And so is the opinion of Choke and Brian, that if before the dissolution of
Abbeys, the king had licenced one to make a Chaunterie for a chaunterie Priest,
and to give unto him and his successors certain land, this had been a good
Corporation 21. E. 4. 56.
. But to all unlawful Gorporations, all gifts, grauntes, fines, and
feoffements are made void by the Satute of 23. Hen. 8. cap. 10. The first
Lawmakers and founders of commonweals, at the first did account no foundation
more stable to support a common weal then societies and fraternities. For Numa
Pompilius the king of the Romans did ordeine certain guildes of workmen and
merchants, and did bind them by solemn sacrifices and feasts, which might be
at certain set days celebrated to preserve love, and friendship amongst the
people, that they might with more joy and comfort proceed in their private and
public affairs Plut. in Number. Dionys. Halicar. lib. 2.
: And this he seems to have done by Solons example, who made fraternities of
all sorts of men, and permitted them to make Laws touching their fraternities,
so they were not contrary to the Law publicly received Plut. in Solon.
. But Lycurgus did not prescribe certain feasts to be observed, but
continual meetings and comessations, that friendship might not at any time be
intermitted. In other cities of Greece, societies called (...), and throughout
all Italy sodalitia were observed. To this end and purpose the Cretensians of
all ages, orders, and sex, did banquet together in public place Arist. in
polit.
. And in the famous City of London, there is annual and solemn observation
of their feasts in every guild, which mightily preserves the wealth,
tranquillity, and flourishing estate of that city. Neither is this custom
dissonant from God his own ordinance in the Jewish common weal, who appointed
certain feasts and sacrifices to be observed of the Jews, that religion
toward God, and friendship amongst men might be maintained Numer. 1. Leuit.
23.
. But as to the making of private Laws by such guildes and fraternities,
Solons Law abouesaid has been observed almost of all commonweals: But the
Statute of 15. Henr. 6. gives somewhat a larger scope to guildes and
fraternities in these words: Guildes, and fiaternities, and companies
incorporate shall not make, nor use any ordinance, which may be to the
diminution of the Kings fraunchise, or of other fraunchises, or against the
common profit of the people, unless it be first discussed by the Justices of
peace, or the chief governors of the village, and before them entered of
record etc. But when I speak of colleges, companies, meetings, feastinges,
and assemblies, I do with the maine force of my heart exclude unlawful
societies, conuenticles, and secreat meetinges of malcontents, fantastical,
and private humored persons: But to colleges, fraternities, and companies
erected and created by Law, I see no reason but that lands and yearly
maintenance may be given and allowed unto them: yet not without the Princes
permission, who for some special causes foreseen may stop and hinder such
donations: And therefore wisely by diverse Statutes in this Realm is remedy
provided against this, and a writ of Ad quod damnum devised Statut. de
Religios. 18. E. 3. pro clero. cap. 3. 15. R. 2. cap. 5.
. Antonius the Emperor did first of all permit legacies and donations to be
made to colleges and companies, excepting the colleges of the Jews, whom
notwithstanding he suffered to meet together, and to have their synagoges for
religious use L. 1. de Iud. C.
. Alexander magnus did bestow upon his city Alexandria, built at the
seauen-folde mouth of Nilus, many great privileges, fraunchises, and
immunities Joseph. lib. 3. bell. Iud.
. So Frauncis the first, being the founder of that city which stands at the
mouth of Sequana, gave great immunitie to such as should inhabit it Bodin.
lib. 1. de republ. c. 6.
. And so diverse of our kings of England have bestowed many liberties
fraunchises and benefits upon several cities, which M. Camden has very
profitably and very learnedly amongst other things in their due places set
down, whom I need not further commend to my countrymen of England, to whom
by his great worth and desert he is more dear and precious.

Quam si illum Veneris commendet epistola Marti. But I will further proceed in
showing the great prerogatives granted by princes and other supreme estates
to cities and corporations: In all ages and all commonweals cities and
corporations have not only had their courts, folkemote, and the like, but even
common councels (as they are commonly termed) and public meetinges for the
general good of the corporations. For as great profit does arise by such
societies and meetinges: so nothing does more debilitate and weaken the state
of a common weal then the taking away of such Councels: therefore the Romans,
when they had overcome Macedonia, because they would make the estate of it
weak and impuissant, they did utterly forbid all common Councels, and
public meetinges: so they did when they had overcome the Achaeans: Memmius the
Consul (says Liuie) did dissolve all the common councels of the particular
nations of Achaia, and of the Phocensians and Baeotians, and the other parts
of Greece Liui. lib. 35
: But when these regions and provinces were sufficiently quieted and soundly
knit to the body of the Roman Empire: then (as Strabo reports) their
ancient Councels were restored unto them: but the Romans did never alter the
liberties of any city unless they were abused to their hurt, as appears by
the words of Florus: Critolaus causa belli, qui liberate a Romany data
aduersus ipsos vsus est Flor. lib. 2.
: Neither were the liberties of the Aetolians impeached until they revolted to
Antiochus, as Justin shows: Offensi Aetoli, quod non ex arbitrio eorum
Macedonia quoque adempta Phillippo, and data sibi in praemium belli esset,
Antiochum in Romana bella impellunt Justin. lib. 3.
. And such abuses many times happen in cities: for as Liuie that excellent
writer, in wit diligence and history, matched by none: in wisdom and gravity
by very few, in piety overcome only of one of the heathens, 1) Varro. 2)
Cicero.
and but of one in eloquence well avouches: Nulla est ciuitas quae non et
improbos ciues aliqua^do, u) Liui. lib. 45.
and imperitam multitudinem semper habeat: but as they did favor lawful and
convenient councels, so unlawful and secret conuenticles they did greatly
abhor: wherefore the nocturnall meeting at the sacrifice of Bacchus was
justly abiudicated and disanulled by the whole Senate: and the conue^ticle of
the black-religioned Brownists by the L. Archbishop of Canterbury, and the
high Commissioners, who though a greater number of them were women and
pretended themselves to be harmeles, and unapt to do hurt; yet as Liuie says;
A nullo non genere summum periculum est, si coetus and consilia et secret as
consultationes esse sinas Liui. lib. 34.
: And this ought especially to be feared and prevented, when contumelious
contumacy is veiled with the shadow of religion and reformation: for as the
same Liuie says again very well: Nihil in speciem fallacius praua religione,
vbi deorum numen praetenditur sceleribus, subit animum timor Liui. li 1. 39.
: O lord how long shall Satan abuse the souls created by thee with a vain
sophistry in stead of true religion! and such societies, and such families,
whether of love, or of lust, I can not well define, which delight in latebris,
are worthy to be sent ad carceres, that they may there live in tenebris: for it
is fit to send corrupt humors, which ouerloden and pester the body in
latrinam: For surely such Fanatickes may do as great hurt in a common weal as
the Pythagoreans did in Greece and Italy, who pretending themselves to be
professors of wisdom did bring a great number to the admiration and imitation
of them: and finding such strength in the weakness of the multitude, they
began to plant their ram and set their force against kingdoms and commonweals, and had thought utterly to have subverted them, but their companies
were quickly dispersed, and the greatest part of these companions was
destroyed by fire and sword Polyb. li. 3.
: Now to speak somewhat of the liberties of a city. S. Paul when he was by
the commandment of the magistrates apprehended, being accused that he troubled
the public tranquillity by seditious assemblies, professing himself to be a
citizen of Rome he appealed to Caesar Act. 25. v. 11
though he were by nation a Cilician, by blood an Israelite, by tribe a
Beniaminite, yet because his father c) Acto. 22. v. 28.
had been a citizen of Rome: the liberties were affoarded unto him: he
likewise, when he was commanded to be scourged pleaded for himself that he was
a Roman ibid. v. 25.
. But because the abundance of liberties of all the cities of Asia, Afric and
Europa, are sufficiently known, I will not stay any longer upon this point,
but will pass to matters of greater importance, and more difficulty.

The ninth Chapter.
That the distinguishing of demesnes, and the difference of the degrees and
callings of men, is according to the law of nations.
COnfusion breeds always contention, partition peace, according to the old
proverb, Divide et impera: for which cause our ancestors did think it best to
distinguish their dominions and inheritances by lottes and boundaries, as
Abraham and Lot in Palestine, Masinissa and the Carthaginians in Numidia and
Mauritania, the Romans and Nolanes in Italy, the Romans and Carthaginians in
Spain and Sicilie, the Emperor Valens and the Goths in Missia, and the
regions on this side Danubius, and through the whole tracte of the Roman
Empire was a partition made by Theodosius betwixt his son Archadius whom he
prefected over Bizance and all the oriental parts: and his other son
Honorius, to whom he allotted Room, and all the occidentall countries: and so
Darius would have made a partition with Alexander of the whole world, that the
one of them should have all on the one side of Euphrates: the other all on the
other side, yet in the first age and infancy of the world this kind of
partitioin was unused and unknown, as may appear by these authorities first
of Virgill, who says: Ne signare quidem aut partiri limite campum Fas erat.
Virgi. Georg. 1.
And of Tibullus: non fixus in agris
Qui regeret certis finibus arua lapis Tibul. 1. Elegi. 3.
.
And that of Seneca: Nullus in campo sacer
Diuisit agros arbiter populis lapis Senec. in Hippoli. act. 2.
.
yet the case was altered when Ovid writ thus: Gentibus est alijs tellus data
limite certo:
Romanae spatium est vrbis and orbis idem Ovid. 2. Fasto.
.
And upon good reason was it altered, for as Boethius says well: Dimensiones
terrarum, terminis positis vag antibus, ac discordantibus populis pacis vtilia
praestiterunt Boeti. in geomet.
: And the great use of limits and boundaries Plutarch shows, when he
condemns the insatiable covetousness and illimited encroachment or invasion of
Romulus very wittily: Noluit Romulus mensura proprij agri prodere mensuram
alieni siquidem virium compedes terminos esse nouit seruarentur, and iniuriae
iudicium, si non seruarentur Plut. in Number. and pr. R. 15.
. And this was the cause that Numa Pompilius the king of the Romans did cause
as well a publik perambulation to be made throughout his whole kingdom as
private limitations and bounds betwixt party and party, and for the more
solemn and effectual confirmation and establishing of this course he did
dedicate a chapel upon the top of the Tarpeian hill unto Terminus, and this
idol was made of stone Plut. in Number.
: He was set in a chapel as not fit to be removed: he was made of stone as
hard to be removed: he was placed upon a high rock as not possible to be
removed: and to this idol nothing was sacrificed but cakes, pulse, and the
first fruits of the field: the meaning doubtless of Numa was good, if it had
not been signified, and set forth by an evil mean. For to make him
immovable was to good purpose and agreeable to the truth of divine justice:
Wherefore Salamon says: that which also is commanded in Deuteronomie: Thou
shall not remove the ancient bounds which thy fathers have made Deuteronomy. 27. 17
Prou. 22. v 28. and 23. v. 10.
: but the manner of dividing lands and dominions according to the custom of
nations is fully set down by M. Littleton, though applied to another purpose,
and it is fiue-fold: 1. By setting out an equal rate of the lands to be
divided. 2. By the agreement of friends or intermediation of others. 3. By
casting lots. 4. By writ de partitione facienda at the common law, and the
action de herciscunda familia at the civil law. 5. By making an unequal
partition equal, by a foreign reservation Littlet. lib. 3. c. 1.
. Distinctions likewise of the degrees of men has been in all nations, in all
ages established observed and used. For the advancing of noble men above them
of less note; and the preferring of the gentleman before the yeoman, and
peasant is very ancient, and has been uniformly reteigned: neither is it to
be marvelled at, for nature her self has tought the nations her scholars
this lesson. Travail through all her kingdom, that is through the whole
world, you shall find this difference in force and of great validity. Consider
the situation of the celestial orbs, and ye shall note, that the fiery
heaven is placed above the chrystaline, as more worthy, both these above the
firmament, the firmament above the other Spheres as surpassing them: Mark the
birds of the air, ye shall perceive that the Eagle, the Phaenix, and the
Parott hold pre-eminence above the rest. Look upon the rivers, ye shall
observe Euphrates in his form and compass of his stream to be more excellent
then Ganges: Ganges better then Danubius, Danubius better then Tagus, Tagus
then Padus, Padus then Tempse, Tempse then Seuerne: Note the fishes of the sea:
yea shall find these to have place above the rest the Whale, the Dolphin, the
Sturgeon, the Salmon, and the Conger. Cast an eye upon the beasts of the
field, the Lions, the Pardes, the Elephants, and Panthers do excel: look into
the bowels and matrice of the earth, ye shall have gold, silver, brass, to
exceed all other metals: search into the inwards and the very closet of
nature, the best of the grosser stones are the Loadstone, the marble, and the
Alabaster: amongst the precious stones, the Diamond, the Topas, the Turkoise,
the Smaragde, the Sapphire and the Chrysolite. Wherefore the difference of
estates, and degrees is well limited and expressed by the custom of nations
and the discrepance betwixt noble and ignoble well constituted, which first I
will generally handle, and as it were opening the signification of the words:
and afterward more fully and particularly as drawing it in a map by pencill.
This world nobilis if it be generally taken, extends as well to gentlemen as
to them which by pre-eminence we call noble; for nobilis is quasi noscibilis
either for his stock, or for virtue: the nobility of stock or blood has
been more observed of the Hebrews and Grecians; of virtue by the Romans and
them of the Northern regions: and so he has been accounted ignoble, who has
not been known, nor noted for some eminency, and rarenes, according to the
verse:

Solus vbi in siluis Italis ignobilis aeuum,
Exigerit:
Amongst the Graecians at the first, they only were accounted noble, who
could derive their pedigrees from kings or princes, or some other great and
famous men; as from Hercules, Cecrops, Aeacus, and the like, or such as by
public decree, and singular demerit had obtained a crown of gold, or some
statue to be erected for them: And amongst the Jews, they only were
accounted noble, which descended from the stock of Aaron, or the kings of
Israel and Judah. But the Romans were far otherwise minded: for as Salust
says, Hostem ferire, murum ascendere, conspici dum tale facinus facerent
properabant, eas diuitias, eamque bonam famam magnam nobilitatem putabant
Salust. in Iugurth.
. And an other Roman says, Genus qui laudat suum aliena laudat Senec.
. And an other namely Ovid: Nam genus et proauos and quae non fecimus ipsi vix
ea nostra * Ovid. Metamorph. lib. 13.
voco, which golden saying so much pleased that worthy and noble knight Sir
Philip Sidney, Learninges champion, Englands miracle, Europes favorite, of whom
the words of Horace may be verified, if ever they might be truly pronounced
of any: Dignum laud virum Musa vetat mori. I say they so much pleased him,
that he used them for a mot: And I know not whether Ovid his invention, * Ovid.
or Sir Phillippes election be more to be commended: And nobility without
virtue and merit was accounted as an image without life: For Salust says,
Reliqui sunt inertissimi nobiles, in quibus sicut in statua praeter nomen nihil
est additamenti: for what difference was there betwixt Ciceroes statue, and
Ciceroes drunken son, sithence both of them had the name, neither of them the
qualities of Cicero. But as well the Graecians as the Romans did agree in
this, that for the rewarding of virtue, and the honoring of desert, and the
animating of others, they did allow Scutchions and Armorie, Crestes and
Cognisances to men of special note: Which our ancestors (says Pliny) the
representations of their dead fathers were proposed to view, their countenances
were resembled and engrailed in their Armorie, that there might be some
ornaments to deck and beautify the celebration of public funeral.

Now to speak more particularly of the degrees of men, according to the Law
of Nations: The degrees of Citizens are to be understood these, which make a
difference by state or place, not by sex as Bodinus grossly imagines Bodin.
lib. 3. de rep. c. 8.
: for if there were none but males in a city, yet it should be a city:
otherwise how was Rome a city before the entermariage of that people with the
Sabine dames Liui. lib. 1.
. By the customs of Perusia and Florence every one that follows the
standerd, and is initiated and entered into military profession does presently
of a yeoman become a gentleman Bartol. in lib. 1. de dig^it. ci^.
. But in France as Bodinus reports, gentry is not gained by undertaking
service in war, but by continuing in the same: if their issue or posterity
do also manage arms, their issue and posterity are reputed gentlemen Bodin.
lib. 3. de repub. c. 8.
. But the Venetians do measure gentry and nobility by Senatorie state: yet I
take it to be after the manner of the ancient Romans, who did not account any
Equitem Romanum, which was not a Senators son: yet many mere soldiers were
admitted of the Senate: Which facility of the Romans in bestowing dignities,
did afterward turn to their great danger and molestation: for C. Marius was
only a soldier, having spent his very Consulships, even six Consulships in
wars, and the seventh should not have been unlike to the rest, if God had
not prevented him by death: and continually before that time he was employed
in war, either under Scipio the son of Paulus Aemilius, or some other great
Captain: But this man being more in conuaie then counsel, did more hurt then
profit the Roman common weal. So did Julius Caesar: so did M. Antonius,
though these later were somewhat more then mere soldiers. But amongst the
Egyptians none could be soldiers, but the Calasyri, and many years after
when it was under the dominion of the Sultanes, the Memmeluci, who therefore
had special immunities and liberties granted unto them: but a mere soldier
amongst the ancient Romans, though he were of excellent desert, yet was
accounted but as a plebeian, and not noble, which may easily appear by the
speech of L. Siccius Dentalus madein the Senate house, who boasted that he had
served in war forty years for his country, that he had fought in an
hundred and twenty battles, that he had received forty and five wounds,
and twelve of them in one day, and all of them aduerso corpore encountering the
enemy face to face, that he had purchased fourteen cibicall crowns, three
obsidionall, foure-score and three golden chains, a hundred and threescore
golden bracelets, ten goodly spears, five and twenty fair and costly arming
saddles Dionys. Halycar.
: Yet this man having no other means to attain to gentry and nobility, was
accounted of them in the number of ignoble persons Salust. in bell. Iugurth.
loq. de Mar.
. Augustus Caesar a notable wise Emperor did supply the want of Senators with
rich men Tranquil. in August.
, though not very wise, because he perceived that the notable order of
Senators, which stood much upon cost and expense, (whereupon I am persuaded
these words issued from him, Duas habeo superbas filias, Iuliam et Rempub.
Macrob. in Saturnal.
) would otherwise utterly fall to the ground: But in other respects he did
wholly favor such as virtue had ennobled. For Aemilius Scaurus, though he were
a poor man (poverty is no dishonestie) yet he was noble Valor. Max. lib. 2.
, for sometime nobility is severed from riches: Therefore Tacitus says of
Cassius, and Syllanus: Alter opibus vetustis, alter generis claritudine
excellebat: yet a man may be noble, and very rich, as Tullie says of Roscius,
That he was, nobilitate et pecunia municipij facile primus. But it is good to
be known whether base artificers are to be enseated, and bestowed in places of
worth and credit. Xenophon reports that amongst the Egyptians, Scythians,
Persians, Lacedaemonians, Corinthians, they which did use base and mechanical
trades were excluded from places of account, and were accounted ignoble Xenoph.
in oecumen.
. Aristotle likewise writes, that amongst the Thebanes it was a Law, that no
man could be admitted to place of honor, unless he had left off merchandise by
the space of ten years before Aristo. in polit.
. And the Romans followed them in this: for as Liuie says, Quaestus omnis
indecorus patribus visus est. And Hippolytus a collibus writes, that it has
been generally received, that whosoever is a gentleman, or possessed of an
honorable estate, begins presently to be ignoble by using merchandise,
unless it be otherwise provided by the Statutes of some particular Provinces
or Cities: as by the Statutes of Venice, of Florence, of Genoa, of Luca, and of
London, where many of their Senators, magnificoes, clarissimoes,
illustrissimoes are Merchants Hippolyt. a collib. in lib. de princip.
. And it is the rule of a divine, moral, and politic writer, that husbandmen,
carpenters, potters, caruers either in wood or stone, and the like workmen, are
wholly to be debarred from honorable or judicial places Ecclesi. c. 38.
. And by the imperial Laws, Merchants may not be advanced to any honorable
estate L. ne quis de dignit. C. L. si cohortat. de cohort. L. humil. de incest.
C.
: neither might they have any regiment of soldiers L. 1. negotiator. ne
milit. C.
. And Plato In lib. de legi.
, Aristotle Lib. 7. polit. c. 9.
and Apollonius Philostrat.
, do hold merchandising to be an enemy to virtue. Neither will Ciceroes
distinction be of any force against them, where he says: Mercatura si tenuis
est, sordida putanda est: si magna, et copiosa, multa vndique apportans,
multisque sine vanitate impartiens, non est admodum vituperanda Cicer. lib. 1.
offic.
: For though his commendation of merchandising be not very great: yet his
opinion in this is not greatly good: for Maius et minus non variant speciem.
And the ironicall saying of the pyrate to Alexander, was a confutation of this
distinction Cicer. 3. de repub.
, who told him in plain terms, That because he did rob on the Sea with
one small pinnasse, he was accounted a pyrate: but because Alexander did the
same with many great Galleys, therefore he was termed the governor of a
fleet: For as Lucan says well: Facinus quos inquinat aequat. And the same
Lucan calls Alexander Luca. lib. 10
, Foelicem predonem, a fortunate Robber: And this aunsweare of the pyrate to
Alexander is liked of Ciceto himself Cicer. 3. de rep.
, of S. Augustine D. August. lib. 4. de ciuitat. dei.
, and Alciat Alci. 1. consi. 1.
.

Likewise it has been a question sometime sifted, whether he that uses
husbandry may properly, and in strict reason be accounted a Gentleman. In
the common Law we have this rule, that where a Gentleman is sued by the name
of Husbandman, he may say, that he is a gentleman, and demand judgment of
the writ, without saying that he is no husbandman: for though a gentleman may
be an husbandman by the said Law, yet he ought to be sued by his more worthy
addition 14. H. 6. 15. 1. E. 4. 2. 21. H. 6. 55. 12. H. 6. 8.
. Neither does our Law in this dissent from the practice of other Nations. For
Cyrus did very often boast of his labor, and industry in matters of
husbandry Cicer. lib. de senect.
. And these noble Romans, Serranus, Curious, Cincinnatus, Torquatus, and Cato,
are commended of Historians and others, for this that they did establish the
safety of the common weal by their hands, which were worn and grown rough
by the plough, and labor of husbandry Valor. Max. Varro. Cicer. Liui. Florus.
. In Iewrie and Egypt how much it has been esteemed may appear by this, that
neither could Phara^ pleasure Jacob more to his contentment: Neither could
Joseph procure a greater pleasure unto him, then the meadow ground, and
pasturage of Gozan, in which he inioyed the comfort of his age. In Scythia,
Arabia, Parthia, Arcadia, and other places; as India, Thracia, Mesopotamia,
Sicilia, etc. Husbandry has been greatly practiced, and in other Nations not
so much addicted to husbandry, exceedingly praised. Divines have in all ages
and countries possessed the reputation, either of gentlemen, or of reverend,
right reverend worshipful, and right worshipful men, and that upon good
reason, which by and by, (God giving leave) I will demonstrate. Whether
Physicians may bear any of these aforesaid titles or no, it has been in all
ages questioned, in some debated, in this decided: Though amongst the ancient
Romans, physic was accounted base and sordid by the space of six hundred
years L. Thais Lucius de fidei commiss.
: yet about the imperial time it was received into the city L. quidem C. de
decuri.
, and highly esteemed. But the Hebrews and Graecians did always make great
account of the professors of that science, and so did other nations also, when
the Arabians first of all had severed Surgeans, Emperickes, and ignorant
Apothecaries from Physicians: But let their account be great in a city or
common weal, yet they must give place to the profession of the Law, as being a
princely discipline, the center of commonweals, and the science of
government, as I have at large showed in the first Chapter of my direction to
the study of the Law: And this even Philosophers have adjudged Plat. in Gorg.
Aristo. lib. 1. polit. c. vlt.
.

But now whether mere Grammarians and Rhetoricians, I mean sole and single
professors of these Arts may challe^ge to themselves the title of gentry and
worship, it has very much been doubted. Cicero says of Rhetoritians:
Rhetores M. Crasso, et Domitio Censoribus, claudere ludum impudentiae iussi
Cicer. lib. 3. de orat.
. But after his time it was received into the city, and obtained many great
immunities: yea even these which taught boys their Alphabet, or first letters
were so rewarded l. 6. de exe. tut. l. vlt. in fi. de mu. et ho. l. 2. p. vlt.
de vac. mu.
: Vaspatian granted and allowed to Rhetoricians great franchises, and
privileges, Dio. Cassi. in Vespa. Gelli. lib. 1. c. 11.
which made Rhetoric to flourish in that common weal in these times: Tacit.
lib. 11 an^al.
For as Tacitus says well, Sublatis studiorum pretijs, etiam studia peritura,
vt minus decora: and before him Plato affirmed it: Arts illuc confluunt, vbi
ipsarum pretium est Plato in mayor. Hippi.
. And how much it flourished in other commonweals may appear in that
Demosthenes, Aristotle, Demetrius Phalereus, eloquent and wise men were
credited with the honor of embassage, and such have been in all ages well
esteemed, unless it were that they have miscarried at the hands of some
covetous churles, and pennie-fathers, or vainglorious pictures of mankind,
which as they measure a man's strength by his stature, so they way his inward
ability by the outward apparel of his body, whose childish humor Iuuenall
gibingly touches.

didicit iam dives auarus
Tantum admirari, tantum laudare disertos
Vt pueri Iunonis auem.
This is to esteem a book by the cover, a horse by the his trappinges and
caparison, and a Greyhound by the collar: O quantum est in rebus inane! When
will worldlings judge uprightly of things! never: for the blind cannot judge of
colors, r: and M. Brutus was wont to call such gawdie, and garish fellows,
which were rather fine by the tailors needle, then the university learning,
aurcas pecudes.

Having particularly and severally spoken, and as it were by way of anatomy,
of the diverse callings, estates, and degrees of men, it is good to marshall the
callings and degrees in order as well as I can conceive them. In the first
place must be reposed the person of the king, who as the image of God agrees
with every man, as the lieuetenant of God with the magistrate, as the
anointed of God to rule and govern with neither of the former, but with God
onley, whose pattern he is: after the king if we will discourse according to
reason and ancient example the chiefest of the clergy are to be ranged: for as
Josephus notes, the Hebrews had but 2. sorts of nobility the one sort of the
stock of kings who did successively reign: the other of the lineage of Aaron
which only were made priests: for that people reposing all their good in
religion and the worship of God, did account such holy men to be very noble:
therefore whenever God did threaten the destruction, and overthrow of that
people he does threaten them thus, that the state of the priest and vulgar sort
of men shall be alike Esa. 24. Ose. 4.
; and they which in ancient time did inhabit the Cellicke or Northwest part of
France did prefer their Druidae, who had charge of their sacrifices and
judgments, before all sorts of people of the knights, and of the nobility
Caes. lib. 6. de bell. ciu. Plut. in Anton.
: So the Turks and Arabians have appointed certain great men called Mophtae
to be their high priests, whom they do greatly reverence and the sum of all
weighty ecclesiastical matters they refer unto them. The next place should
be possessed of Dukes, Marquises, Earls, Vicounts, Barons, etc.

The tenth Chapter.
That in the law of tributes, subsidies, and prerogatives royal, all Nations
have consented.
AS it behooves every Monarch to have a watchful care of his subjects good,
and to bend the force of his mind to the preservation and maintenance of their
safety and good estate: so subjects should not grudge to pay unto them
tributes and subsidies, and other public impositions, that all necessary
charges may be substantially defraied, al convenient designs produced into
act, and solemnly exploited. Princes therefore must have great care of the
furnishing of their treasury; for who is ignorant that money is the strength
and sinew of a state, howsoever Machiauell Machiau. in lib. obseru. in Liui.
paradoxically would infer the contrary, a man very unfit to defend
paradoxes: by it the bounds of the Monarchy are guarded, the pore are relieved,
they that have deserved well are rewarded, the public and necessary business
of the commonweal is dispatched, and therefore that country proverb Pecunia
sine peculio fragili^.
may very well be admitted into the princes ear, Money without stock is
frail and brittle: And if war be to be undertaken or maintained, how can
this be done without money, sithence soldiers are never kept in order without
salarie, and reward paid and distributed unto them. Consilium principum fuit
(says Pollio) vt milites, quo solent placari genere, sedarentur: promissis
itaque per Martianum aureis vicenis, and acceptis etc. Tr. eb. Pollio in
Gallien.
Philip king of Macedonia was wont to say, that there was no sconce, tower, or
forcelet so strong, into which an Ass lodened with money might not enter, and
it has been noted of Phillip late king of Spain, that he effected more by
his Indian gold, then his Spanish iron. Therefore Horace says: Aurum per
medios ire satellites
Et perrumpere amat saxa, potentius
Ictu fulmineo Horat. 3. Carmi. od. 16.
.
Therefore it is good for a prince in time of peace to provide for the
maintenance of war: for that which is said of a city or common weal may be
applied to a prince or Monarch: -- foelix
Tempore qui pacis bella futura timet.
And how can provision be made for an army without money, and how can an army
fight without provision: for as Cassiodorus says: Disciplinam non potest
seruareieiunus exercitus, dum quod deest semper praesumat armatus, necessitas
moderamen non diligit: one of the ordinary means used in all kingdoms for
the dispatch and accomplishment of public affairs has from all antiquity
been tribute paid by the subjects to their prince, a thing as ancient, so
necessary: and Tacitus wisely collecteth the conueniencie of it: neque quies
gentium sine armis, neque arma sine stipendijs: neque stipendia sine tributis
haberi possunt Tacit. lib. 5. annal.
: The Romans did maintain their wars by tribute; for after Pompeies victory
which he had against Mithridates, they had out of Asia mayor six millions and
a half, out of the lesser Asia only two millions, which none will marvel at,
that knows Asia to be a fertile and fruitful country, greatly replenished
with the variety of the fruits of the earth, with the largeness of pasture,
and the rankness of the soil, and the multitude of such things as are
transported into other countries for sale: but the tribute of other provinces
was so slender, that it scarcely sufficed for the defense and protection of
them Cicer. pro leg. Manil.
. And all France did not yield the third part of that tribute unto the
Romans, which some part of France did afterward pay unto their kings, as
Alciat has observed Alci. l. 27. de V. S.
: neither am I of the mind of Phillip Commineus, who denies generally that
princes may command tributes Philip. Commi. comment.
: for I make no doubt but a conqueror may command tribute, and all that come
in under the conqueror by the law of nations: and therefore the Roman
general says unto the French men: Iure victoriae tributum vobis addidimus
Tacit. 4. histor.
: And Justinian does command that tributes may be imposed upon the Zani being
conquered vt victos se agnoscerent: and the Jews though they had been clearly
conquered (for their city was sacked, their temple possessed, their Sanctum
sanctorum looked into: for as Florus says: Impiae gentis arcanum illud vidit
sub aureo vti coelo Flor. lib. 3. histor.
:) yet craftily after their manner, because they would have Christ to have
challenged their earthly kingdom, by that mean to draw him into hatred with
Caesar, they demanded of him whether it were lawful to give tribute to Caesar:
but he that always professed, Regnum meum non est ex hoc mundo, gave them a bone
to gnawe, Date quod est Caesaris Caesari, and quod Dei Deo Mat. 22.
: for in deed tributes are allowed by the law of God Deuteronomy. 20.
: and therefore Cicero says excellently, that tribute is victoriae praemium,
poena belli Cicer. in verr. 5.
: And Orosius almost as excellently, that it is vinculum pacis, monumentum
belli Oros. lib. 5. c. 1.
. And though the Spaniards, Germans and English, do seem rather to offer a
tribute to their Monarch then the Monarch to command it, (for the courtesy of
England is great, the clemency of their princes greater) yet for England thus
much I dare speak, and under the rule of modesty protest, that sithence the
universal conquest of William, who first commanded and imposed tribute upon
this land (for conquerours may command) tribute and subsidy have been as
justly both by the law of God, and the law of nations, paid in England as in
Iewrie, yea and justly continued as a remembrance of a conquest: wherefore it
is divinely said of that great divine Tertullian: Agri tributo onusti, hominum
capita stipendio censa, notae sunt captiuitatis: Lands charged with tribute,
polles with tax, are signs of conquest Tertull. i^ Apolog.
. Bodinus in my mind gives good counsel to princes to set a great impost upon
such things as corrupt the manners of their subjects, as namely upon these
compounded perfumes, these paintings of the face, these Margarites, these
Marchpanes, Wines, Bodin. lib. 6. de rep. c. 2.
and Tobacco: but vainly and contradictorily to himself does Bodinus say,
that Haec principi prohibenda non sunt, nec si velit possit, proving it out of
the fifth book of Plato because such is the nature of men, that these things
quae sanctissime vetantur, auidius expetant; By this reason there could be no
fault, nor default forbidden: as for Bodinus I excuse him thus: Nullum fuit
magnum ingenium sine mixtura dementiae, which Seneca observes Senec. in fin.
lib. de ira.
: And as to Platoes authority this is but errare cum Platone, Plato did err
with Plato. Sometime he did err, as in the discourse of intemperate banquets,
in the brutish lust and inward itch of Alcibiades, in his fond and unclean
fables: and of Athenaeus he is more sharply noted to be inuidissimus,
rabiose male dicentissimus, mendacissimus, improbissimus, ridicule
ambitiosissimus: lib. 4. 5. 11.
and by his dark and amphibologicall writing, he is said to be the cause of
the death of that thrise-worthy Roman M. Cato, Plut. in Cat.
whose death at Vtica gave him his dismal name, and Solons laws though he
were his ancestor, a great deal wiser, and far more employed in matters of
estate, could not content him but he must have visioned laws, such as were
never used sithence his time, and therefore as it is likely, never shall be
used: For what is it that has been, that that shall be, and what is it that
has been done, that which shall be done: And there is no new thing under the
sun, Eccleast. c. 1.
and that that shall be has now been Eccles. c. 3.
. But to come to my purpose again, and to another prerogative of princes.

Princes likewise maintain their realms and their estate royal by importing
and bringing in such things, as be of value or price. Wherefore Liuie notes of
Carnileus Consul Liui. lib. 9.
, that all the brass and all the silver he brought into the treasury: and he
says of Fuluius, that he brought out of Spain into the treasury an hundred
forty two thousand pound of silver: and an hundred twenty seven thousand
pound of gold: and of Camillus Liui. li. 3.
, that when he had overcome the French nation beyond the Alps, he brought in
a hundred threescore and ten thousand pound of silver, and of brass three
hundred twenty thousand: and of Flaminius Liui. lib. 34.
that he brought out of Greece eighteen thousand pound of silver in bullion,
and two hundred and seventy thousand of plate, fourscore and four thousand
shillinges, and three thousand seven hundredde and fourteen pounds of gold:
a buckler of gold entier. Of Phillippes money a hundred forty and five
thousand pound, and an hundred fourteen pound of golden crowns, which the
cities bestowed on him. And Paulus Aemilius Liui. lib. 45.
that president of a captain, when he had surpised Macedonia, brought into
the treasury a thousand and two hundred sestertians. And Caesar having
overcome France, four thousand sestertians. Fabius Maximus Liui. lib. 27.
brought in fourscore and three thousand pound of gold, beside great
quantity of silver. And Scipio commonly called Asiaticus Liui. lib. 36. 38.
39.
did bring in after his victory had against Antiochus, two hundred thirty and
three pounds in golden crowns, two hundred forty and seven thousand pounds
of silver, of Phillippes rials a hundred forty thousand, and a thousand and
twenty four pounds of gold. Who can number that which Cato brought from
Cyprus Flor. lib. 3.
: that which Pompeie Lucan. lib. 3.
brought from the Eastern and Southern wars? These by doing thus did make
that common wealth great: others by doing the like may make others like. And
Alexander the great did replenish all Greece with silver, when he had atchiued
the victory of Darius and the Persians: Look upon my whole army (said he)
they which before had nothing but coats of steel, do now lie in silver beds
Curti. lib. 8.
. And much did Anniball enrich the Carthaginian treasury, when after his
victory at Cannae he sent into the Senate of Carthage Liui. lib. 23.
, three strike of golden ringes, and so compassed them by measure, though by
number he could not D. Augusti. lib. 3. de ciuit. dei c. 19.
. And in the holy Scripture it is reported of king Solomon: That the weight of
gold, which was brought unto him from foreine countries yearly, did amount to
the value of six hundred, sixty and six talents of gold, beside that which
his collectors levied upon his subjects, and tributaries, and the custom
which he had of merchants, together with the tribute of the Kings of Arabia,
and the Lieutenants and Governors of nations any way subject or subordinate
unto him 2. Chronic. cap. 3. 3. Reg. cap. 10.
.

Custom likewise is a prerogative and benefit to which Kings and Princes are
by the Law of nations entitled: It was of the ancient Italians called
Portorium, because it was to be taken of things that were to be carried out,
and to be brought in Cicer. in oration. pro leg. Manil.
. The Turkish Emperor takes the tenth part of the value of the things that
are to be carried out of strangers, and the twentieth part of his subjects
Bodin. lib. 6. de rep. c. 2.
. And the king of Spain takes in India the tenth part promiscue, as well of
strangers as his subjects The book entitled (The present state of Spain.
. And by the Law of England, Merchants strangers being made denizens, shall
pay custom as strangers that be not denizens 11. H. 7. ca. 14.
.

It is good for every Prince to have special care and regard of mainteining
merchandise, because by that mean, not only things profitable are brought
into a kingdom, but many things are carried out to be sold, and exchanged for
public good: and many sudden chances do arise, wherein no small dangers are
put aside by their means. Plutarch reports, that in Solons time
merchandising was held in great price, and he gives this reason for it,
because by that mean diverse foreine commodities were brought in, friendship
was procured with strange kings, experience in many things was attained
Plut. in Solon.
. And the use of merchandising being once taken away in the kingdom of
Naples, was the cause that all the provincial people was presently brought to
poverty Pont. c. 45. de liberalit.
. And for the alluring of strange Merchants into a Realm, their privileges
must be inuiolablie observed, especially at the times when they hold their
martes, or fayres, that they may safely go, return, tarry, and stay with
their wares, which diverse of our Statutes of England have provided for, Magna
Chart. cap. 28. 9. E. 3. cap. 1. et 2. 14. E. 3. cap. 1. 25. E. 3. cap. 4. 27.
E. 3. cap. 2. Of this matter Kings and Princes should have good regard: for
Platoes admonition is to be followed, when he says, Peregrinorum commercia
respub. ne auersetur Plat. lib. 12. de legib.
. And Amasis the Egyptian king was so glad of strangers resort and their
commerce, that he granted to the Grecian merchantes mere strangers, the use
and exercise of their rites and religion in their own language, and for their
more expedite negotiation in that Realm, there was a certain place appointed,
namely Naucrate for the receipt of foreine wares Herodot. lib. 2.
. And Aristotle is of opinion, that a principal city must be erected in some
convenient place whereto things which be necessary to this life may be
abundantly conveyed, and this he would have situate near to the sea Arist. 5.
polit. c. 7. et 6. politic. c. 7.
. And the people of Megara did justly complain against the Athenians, who had
utterly secluded them from their Havens, and from marting with them Plut. in
Pericl.
. This therefore must needs be a good mean to increase the riches of a
kingdom. But it is the Princes prerogative to permit and to forbid merchant
strangers at their pleasure and discretion: and therefore the Statute of Magna
charta has in it a good clause for this purpose: Omnes Mercatores, nisi ante
prohibiti fuerint, habeant saluum conductum exire, and venire in Angliam etc
Magn. char. cap. 28.
. otherwise some Merchants may sow bad seed, even the seed of seducement of
the Princes lieges, shrowding themselves under the curtain of exposing wares
to sale: But these which are honest Merchants, and of just meaning are not to
be forbidden.

Other benefits, and prerogatives there be, which the Law of Nations does
allow to Princes in regard of their exceeding costs and charge that they are
at in the defending, and governing their Realms: For though I have showed
before, that a mass of wealth almost infinite was brought into the Roman
treasury: yet he that considers their great expense, and exceeding charge,
will, I am sure, confess, that this great wealth had need to have been very
well husbanded for the mannaging of their ordinary affairs, otherwise it
would never have stretched to the defrayment of their charges. Their forces did
consist of two hundred thousand foote-men, of forty thousand horsemen, three
thousand warlike chariots, two thousand ships, a thousand five hundredth
pinnasses, fourescoore galleys, double furniture of armourie, and three hundred
Elephants, and in their ships were a hundred thousand soldiers, and
mariners Lipsi. de magistr. Romans lib. 1. c. 4. 5.
: So that Cicero says plainly, that the Romans, notwithstanding all their
great revenue and treasure, were scarce able to maintain their army Cicer.
parad. 6.
. In consideration of which great and extreme charges, the subjects of all
Nations have given and yielded to their princes, diverse princely and royal
benefits and prerogatives for the magnifying of their estate: As first the use
and benefit of salt Mines, (for as the Italian proverb is: Vino, oleo, e sale
suono mercantia reale: Wine, oil, and salt, are the merchandise royal.) And
the Veientines in ancient time being overcome of Romulus, were straightly
forbidden to abstain from the salt Mines, which were about the mouth of the
river Dionys. Halycar. lib. 2.
. And these salt Mines were brought into better form, and were made more
commodious for the common weal under the reign of Ancus Liui. lib. 1.
. And Aurelius victor does note, that at the self same time an impost was made,
and ordained for the same Victo. lib. de vir. illustr.
. And an other impost was made when Liuie was Censor, who of this word Salt,
had the name of Salinator given him Liui. lib. 29.
. And Paulus Aemilius having subdued the Macedonians did reserve the
prerogative of salt unto the Romans, and did forbid the Macedonians to use any
salt, that perhaps they might find out, without the permission of the Senate.
Yet the commerce of Salt he did afford to the Dardanians or Trojans, the
ancient progenitors of the Romans Liui. lib. 45.
. And the Publicanes had Salt in farm, as may appear by Ciceroes report, and
other authorities Cicer. pro le. Ma. l. sed et hi. D. de publica. l. ^. C. pro
fo. l. si quis C. de vect. et com.
. A princely thing doubtless it is, and for it there has been great contention
betwixt great estates: as namely betwixt the Burgundians, and the Almannes,
betwixt the Hermunduri, and the Catti, together with that of Perusia under
Paulus the third, and that of France under Frauncis the first, and diverse
others dangerous quarrels have been about pretensed titles to Salt Ammian.
lib. 28. Tacit. lib. 13. Guicciar. lib. 12. 14. 16. 18. 19.
. Neither is it to be meruailed that Princes make so great account of it: for
Homer accounted it divine, if it be true which Plutarch reports of him Plut.
in symp. 5. q. 8.
. But what shall we say now of the other entralles of the earth: as Pitch,
Chalk, lyme, quarrie stone, brimstone, and the like: As for gold and silver I
make no question, but by the Law of nations they belong to the Prince. I would
ask this question, Sithence God has treasured in the mines gold and silver,
and other metals: for whom has he treasured them? if all the Mines of gold
and silver should be in the lands of one subject: is it lawful for him to
coin money of this silver and gold? no verily, as may appear by that
question of our Lord and Savior, when he asked whose stamp or impression the
money did bear Matt. 22. ver. 20.
, what shall he then do with it? shall he make plate of it: by this mean a
subject shall have plate, and the king none, which is not convenient: Therefore
I take the judgment given in the case betwixt the Q. Majesty and the Earl of
Northumberland, touching the title of these royal Mines to be sound and
grounded upon invincible reason: howbeit the grant was omnium et singularum
Minerarum: for the diversity is there by Wray well taken, that there be two
sorts of Mines, mines royal, and base mines; Now mines royal may be
subdivided into two other kinds, those which contein in them silver or gold
entierlie: or which have brass or copper in them, and have some veins of gold
intermixed, both these belong to the Prince: for the gold as magis dignum
attrabit ad se minus dignu^: But such as have in them merely brass, iron,
copper, or lead, may belong unto a subject by special title 10. Eliz. Com^ 310:
Informac. pur Mines.
, notwithstanding Dio a wise and judicial writer makes all Mines of metal in
general public, as belonging to the Prince or common weal Dio lib. 52.
. And mines of Pitch Cicero allotteth to the Prince by the like ce^sure Cicer.
in B^ut.
. And doubtless there is great reason for their opinion, because it should seem
that these mettalles were created of God, not for a private, but a public use
at the first: for iron and steel do principally serve for armor, and there
is a rule in the Civil Law, De armis public asseruandis Nou. 85.
. Pitch is principally ordained for the glewing together of the bordes of
ships, and ships were principally ordained for the common weal. Copper
and Brass have in all ages and commonweals been compaignions of the
aforesaid Metals, and have been used with them, and passed with them as the
shadow with the body. Yet if a Prince have transmitted his title or right
unto the base Mines to any of his subjects, I think he cannot by royal
claim wrest them out of his hands. And this Suetonius reckons as one of the
concussions of Tiberius, who took from cities and private men the Metals in
which they were lawfully interested Suetoni. in Tiber. c. 49.
. And Laurentius Medices has been touched likewise for the same fault Molin ad
Dec. cons. 292.
, that the lands and goods of Traitors and Felons do by the Law of Nations
belong to the king or Monarche has been before cleerelie proved in the second
Chapter of this Treatise. But what shall we say of Treasure found in the
earth will not the Law of Nations assign it to the Prince? Yes verily,
notwithstanding Plato his strange conceit, that they should be immobiles, and
Dijs inferis sacri: for should there be no use of so precious thing, and one of
the most gorgeous creatures of God. It is an argument of a froward and a
brutish humor to make use of quarrie-stone and not precious stone, of coal,
and not of gold. The Romans were as superstitious as Plato, but a great deal
wiser, for they dedicated a temple to Pecunia that they might be pecuntosi,
stored with money D. Augstin. lib. 4. de ciuit. dei. c. 21.
. Wherefore Iuuenall by his leave was deceived, when he writ: -- etsi funesta
pecunia templo,
Nondum habitas, nullas nummoru^ ereximus aras Iuuen. Satyr. 1.
.
But it is no marvel if this poet were ignorant that it was idolized: for
Varro writes, that to many of the learned their gods, their sacrifices and
ceremonies were hidden and unknown, but M. Stamfords reason wherefore treasure
should belong to the king is unanswerable, and it is this quia dominus rei non
apparet, ideo cuius sit incertum est 22. Assis. pl. 99.
: and it is a current rule in all nations, In ambiguis casibus semper
praesumitur pro rege. Adrianus Caesar made a law as Spartianus reports, that
if any man had found treasure in his own ground himself should have it: if in
an other man's he shall give the half to the owner of the soil: if in a
public place he shall divide it equally with the treasury. This law was
abrogated by other laws following, and revived by Justinian, but now and long
time ago the civil law has transferred it to the prince in whose realm it
is found l. 3.. Nerati. D. de acqui. posses.
: and it is a firm conclusion in the common law: Quod the saurus competit
domino regi, and non domino libertatis, nisi sit per verba specialia Fitzh.
Coro. 281. 436.
.

The eleventh Chapter.
That all Nations have both secretly and by the course of their ouert actions,
acknowledged and yielded to the truth of the laws and commandments of the 2.
table of the decalogue.
HOw far the light of nature stretches, may appear by the lives of virtuous
heathen men, who knowing that the six last precepts, which almighty God
prescribed to his people were to be observed and kept, yet wanted grace to
refer them unto God, who ought to be the mark of all our actions, and in
regard of whom only they may be termed good: and M. D. Barlow in his deep and
learned discourse against the shallow-headed Papist reasons soundly and
proves by the Apostles words, quidquid no^ est ex fide est peccatu^, and by
other undeniable proofs that such works could not be acceptable to God,
because howsoever they proceeded from God, yet they were not referred to the
glory of God: for though God moved them to do well, and some of them
confessed: Est deus in nobis agita^te calescimus illo: yet before the end he
left them, because vainglory was their end, and so they did their suite at a
wrong court. But now let us particularly examine the observation as well of the
gentiles and Christians of these commandments and ordinances. The obedience
that children ought to give to their parents has been straightly commanded by
God and severely enjoined by Emperors Exodus 20. v. 12. Deuteronomy. 5. v. 16. Acto.
4. 19. Pompon. l. 2. ff. de just. et iur. pius Imperat. l. 1. C. de alen. lib.
: and Homer divinely according unto the words of this precept does threaten
that the life of disobedient children shall not be long Homer. in Iliad.
: and Plato has an excellent speech to this purpose: He which mainteineth his
parents when they are old in his house let him think that his house shall be
never be possessed of the like ornament Plat. lib. 11. de legi.
: therefore it has been ordained of God, that children which were disobedient
to their parents, should be punished of the magistrate Deuter. 21. v 18.
, and his judgment is thus set down: If any man have begotten a stubborn and
froward child which will not obey his father and mother, and being corrected
continues still in disobedience, let the^ bring him to the elders of the
city, and to the judgment gate, and the father shall say to the people: this
our son is stubborn and despises our admonitions, and gives himself to
riot and incontinencie, then the people shall stone him, and he shall dye: that
the evil may be taken from the midst of you: Yea even they which had only
cursed their parents were adjudged to death: In former time he that had slain
his father or mother grandfather or gra^dmother, was first bet with rods until
the blud trickled down, and then being thrust into a sack together with a
dog, a cock, and a snake, he was thrown into the bottom of the sea, and
by Pompeis law it was provided, that if the sea be not near, he should be
thrown out to devouring beasts. At Rome this fact was not heard of, till L.
Ostius did slay his father, which happened after Hannibals war Plut. in Romans
l. 1. Et l. paena. ff. ad l. Pomp. de parricid. Cicer in oration. pro Rosc.
Amerin. et in orator.
: And Plato his law is, that if a man in his fury or madness do kill his father
or mother, and they before their death do pardon him the fault, yet he is to be
adjudged guilty of slaughter, of impiety, of sacrilege Pl. lib. 11. de legi.
. But what shall we say of Orestes, who did slay his mother because she did
slay his father: though there be diverse opinions which do acquit Orestes, as
namely the opinions of Cicero Cicer. in Milon.
, Paterculus Paterc. lib. 1.
, and Quintilian Quintil. lib. 5. c. 11.
: yet against them are Socrates Plat. in 2. Alcibiad.
, Diodorus Diodor. l. 5.
, and Aristotle Aristot. l. 2. Rhetoric. c. 5.
, but why should we depend upon the judgment of man in this case, when it is
manifest that the judgment of God was in the highest degree, if we respect the
pains of this life only, executed upon Orestes: for he was plagued with
madness a terrible sign of the revenging wrath of God.

And murder has been so much detested that, a beast which had slain a man
was commanded to be stoned, and that his flesh should not be eaten Exodus 21.
v. 28.
and by the civil law if a man be bitten of an other man's dog, the owner of
the dog is chargeable unto him that is hurt, because he did not tie up his
dog or musle him l. 1.. sed etsi canis, ff. si quadrup. pauper fecer.
: therefore Solon devised a pretty punishment of such wrongs, namely that the
dog who had by biting hurt any man should have a clogge of four foot tied
to his neck, and so should be yielded up into the hands of him whom he had
hurt, which Plutarch calls bellum commentum ad securitatem Plut. in Solon.
. They which had killed a man in Greece did usually fly to foreign princes,
and there if he who was slain was a stranger, they used to sit at the
threshold of the door with his head covered with the sword wherewith he was
slain: if he were one of the same country, the sword was broken in two, and
the point of the sword was held under one arm, the hilt under the other
Sophocl.
: a lamentable sight no doubt, but done to this purpose, that they which had
slain the men might by these foreign princes have expiatio^ of their fault,
which expiation was fully as bad or rather worse the^ the murder; for the
princes who were to expiate the^, did by enchantments invoke and make suite
to the wicked spirits, that they may absolve them from the fault which is done
by sprinkling them seven times with water, the predecessor of the Popes
holiwater, and to this feate seven garments were therewith sprinkled, then
they kill a swine, a fit sacrifice for the devil: then they call upon
Jupiter Hospital, praying him that he would not vex with fury the party that
had offended: thus the absolution is worse then the offense, and like to that
of the merry Monk: Absoluo te ab omnibus benefact is tuis, and peiorem te
relinquo quam accepi Erasm. in colloqu.
. Then there are boughs spread along the houses, that the devil might tread
soft. Some of them washed themselves in the sea, till they had almost drowned
themselves: murder is the forerunner of death: and that foolish solemnity
Catullus glaunceth at: Nec genitor Nimpharum abluat Oceanus, Likewise Ovid: Ah
nimium faciles qui tristia crimina caedis
Fulminea tolli posse putatis aqua.
after this manner Adrastus fled from Thebes to Tydeus: Peleus fled to
Patroclus, when he being but a boy had slain Clesonynus a boy likewise: and
Paris though he had stolen away Helena the wife of Menelaus; yet when he had
slain Antheus Antenors son, whom he loved, he fled to Menelaus (a great
judgment of God) his very enemy for expiation, like to that judgment of the
almighty executed upon Cosby an Irishman, who when he had slain the towardly
Captain the Lord Burgh, sought by-pathes, and had thought to have fled from
the slain body, as far as the Sun is from the Moon, but the Lord put a
ring into his snowt, and brought him back again, almost as near to the
murdered Lord as the grass is to the earth: a fit admonition for these times
wherein homo sacra res per iocum occiditur Senec. lib. de ir.
: In Egypt and Babylon he which had slain a man did penance by doing
pilgrimage on the mountains, and then sacrificing upon the tomb of the dead,
and so being cleansed of the Gymnosophistes. The Persians under the reign of
Semiramis did shave the head of him that had slain an other and confiscated
his goods: and caused him to go upon burning coals or firebrandes, and then
sprinkled him with water, the pattern of the Popes purgatory Sard. Ferrar.
de mor. gent.
: The Jews did usually kill such by sword or by rope Card. Sigogoni. in lib.
de rep. Hebr.
: according to the commandment of God. Qui effuderit sanguinem hominis in
homine, sanguis eius effundetur, quia ad imagine^ Dei fecit hominem Genes 9. v.
6. Matt. 26. v. 52.
. How murder has been punished by the civil law, the canon law, and the
common law of this realm, I have showed I hope sufficiently in my Parallele of
the laws, so that I shall not need here to roll the same stone.

After the hurt of a man's own body, nothing can happen to him worse then the
abusing of the body of his wife: for (as Solomon says) iealousy is the rage
of a man, therefore he will not spare in the day of vengeance Proverb. 6. v. 34.
. This last did first cause the diluge: and after the diluge, the destruction
of the people of Sodom and Gomorra voluptuously mingling themselves with the
women of the Moabites, where there were twenty and four thousand slain Number.
25. v. 9.
: For the uncleanness of the Gabeonites with the Levites wife, the whole tribe
of Benjamin was destroyed Iud. 20.
: By the law of Moises if any had committed adultery with another man's wife,
the adulterer, and the adulteress were both condemned to death Leuit. 20. v.
10.
: and so was adultery punished by the Roman law called the law Iulia
howsoever it slept in Iuuenall his time, one that had been wanton himself:
Vbi nunc lex Iulia? dormis? yet after this law was recalled by the Emperor
Alex: l. Castil. C. ad l. Iul. de adulter.
therefore Constantine did punish sacrilegious destroyers of marriage by the
sword l. quamuis. c. eo.
: therefore the Popes stews are to be abandoned, by whose contagion all Europe
has offended: Let his holiness and his fulminant foolish deity as well in all
other respects as in this, be measured by the law of God, and it will appear
to be abomination by the law of nations and desolation by the law of God,
which all nations owe unto him. God has said. Non erit meretrix in Israel, nec
scortator Deuteronomy. 23. v. 17.
. By the imperial law it is forbidden, that no bawdrie should be exercised, or
any stews suffered in any place through the whole Roman Empire Novel. Constable.
14.
: Lactantius writes Lact. lib. 6. c. 23.
that the devil consecrateth stews (as the Pope does Jesuits and Seminary
priests, the one for spiritual lust and idolatry, or if that fail, for
treason: the other for carnal) that he may solemnly laugh both at the
adulterer and the adultresse, and so make a banquet of both, which is signified
by the Italian byword. The woman is the fire, the man is the roastmeate, in
comes the devil, and he plays the cook. Flor. giardin. de recreat.
In Germany they use to cut off the hear of an adultresse, and the husband
whippeth her out of his house through the street Far. lib. de mor. gent.
: and I have seen some of them balded here in England with a white sheet on
their shoulders on the market day: but that custom is now, as far as I can
perceive disused: I could wish that it were recontinued, that we might know a
knave and a queen by their colors. And they were wont likewise to have a
bell runge before them, which was a custom used amongst the Romans, as
Perseus shows, who because it was wont to be runge at nine of the clock,
calls them therefore Nonarias, a custom discountenanced and broken by
Theodosius, but for what reason I know not: shall we use nothing that the
Gentiles have used? Mahomets law is too light for this fault: for the adulterer
is punished but with an hundred stripes. But in Egypt in ancient time he had
a thousand, and the nostrils of the adulteress were slitted. Solons punishment
likewise was too light, yea, and against reason, who imposed upon him that
ravished a maid, the mulcte of ten groates, upon him that allured a maid to
naughtines twenty. But in Athens afterward the rauishour was punished with
death, if the ravished party would not marie him Far. lib. de mor. gent.
.

In the prohibition of theft, all Nations have likewise consented. They that
steal a sheep out of the flock, or an ox out of the heerd, are both by the
Civil and common Law theefes. Vlp. lib. 1. ff. de abig.
They which steal Doves out of a douecote, are by the civil Law accounted
theefes Instit de rer. diuisi.. sermon. l. 3.
. But by the common Law, felony cannot be committed by the taking of beasts
that be savage, if they be savage. item fer. ff. de acquir. rer. poss. Iustit.
de rer. diuis.. gallinar. l. si pauon. ff. de furt.
and untamed at the time of the taking: nor for taking of Doves being out of a
douecote: nor for taking of fishes being at large in a river: for such taking
is not contrectatio rei alienae, sed quae est nullius in bonis 18. H. 8. 2. 22.
Ass. pl. 95.
. And the stealing of a Do which is tame and domestical is felony. But as
Mast. Stamford well notes, it seems that he that steals it should have
certain knowledge that it is tame: but if the Do be killed, and then stolen,
this is certainly felony Stamf. lib. 1. cap. 16.
. And he that theeuishlie cutteth a man's vines, by the civil Law is punished as
a thief L. scien. ff. arbor. furt. caes.
. And by the Law of the twelve Tables, if any man did cause his beasts to
feed upon, or himself did cut and carry away Corn growing upon the ground,
if he were of full age he was ordained to be hanged and to be sacrificed to
Ceres, if not; he was whipped, and did yield either the damage: or if he were
obstinate, the double. Wherein the Decem-virs did seem to have imitated the
severity of Draco, who did inflict no less punishment upon the stealers of
grapes and herbs, then upon homicides, and sacrilegious persons: But the
Romans succeeding altered this, and inflicted no other punishment then that
which is above mentioned to be imposed upon him, who is within age: But as the
Law of Moses Deuteronomy. 23. ver. penult. et vlt.
, so it seems the Law of Nations did permit a trauailer to relieve his
hunger, and to taste so many grapes as his present use did require, but not to
take them away with him. But by the common Law, if a man cut Trees, and at the
same time carry them away, this is not felony, but a trespass: But if they
lie upon the ground a long time as the goods of the owner of the soil, this is
felony 22. E. 3. Corone 256. 10. E. 4. 15. Stamf. 25.
. The Praetors of Rome did punish a thief poena quadrupti: and the Jews with
the seauen-folde, or if his goods would not amount to so much, with all the
substance of his house Proverb. 6. verse. 31.
. They of Mysia do break the legs of theefes Far. lib. 2. c. 26.
. The Scythians do punish petie larceners with whippes: But if a thing of good
value be taken away, they must render the nine-folde, or else be put to death
Far. lib.
. Amongst the Phrygians he was put to death that stole any instrument of
husbandry, or did kill an ox that was fit for the plough: because the living
of these countrie-people did much consist of husbandry id. ibid.
. As in Halyfax, he that steals but a yard of cloth is presently put to
death: because the whole liue-lode of the most of them rests incloth.

And as to the interdiction of false witness or testimony, all Nations have
subscribed. The Graecians did enforce their witnesses to swear at the altar.
And Plato says, that witnesses were wont to swear by Jupiter, Apollo, and
Themis: signifying c) Cicer. pro Flac.
by Themis that they which did swear falsely did offend contra ius diuinum and
humanum: signifying by Jupiter that they should not escape the revenge of the
wrath of God: by Apollo that their falsehood and perjury could not be
concealed: and one witness that has seen a thing done, has been more
credited then ten that do only testify by heeresay. Pluris est oculatus
testis vnus, quam auriti december says Plautus Plaut. in Trucu.
. And to this purpose Homer did imagine two gates of dreams: one made of
iuorie by which false shadows did pass, the other of horn by which true: By
the iuorie he meant the teeth, signifying that by report many fables did
grow: by the hornie gates he meant the eyes, showing that the eyesight makes
the truest report Hom. in Ili.
. Justinian calls it oculatam fidem when the thing is known by the eye sight
vlt. Just. de grad.
. And he has diligently provided by his Laws, that innocence might be safe
against sycophants Nouel. constit. 13. et 16.
. And it is a divine saying in the civil Law, Testimonia, instrumenta non tam
ad praestigium probationum, quam e conscientiae quae mill testium loco est
fide producenda sunt L. propriet. l. vlt. C. de probat. l. eos test. C. de
testib.
. In England it is severely punished by the Statute of 5. Elizab. and this is
according to the Law of God: Non iurabitis in nomine meo mendaciter, neque
polluas nomen dei tui: ego dominus Leuit. 19. v. 12.
: For truth was so much favored amongst the Heathen, that the Egyptian
Judges had the image of Truth hanged about their necks.

And the coveting of the things that belong to an other man is likewise
forbidden: of his wife, Qui aspexeret vxorem proximi sui ad concupiscendam eam,
iam adulterium perpetrauit cum ea in cord suo Matt. 5. ver. 28.
. And Justinian his Law is tarte: Si quis non dicam rapere, sed attentare
tantummodo virgins sacras auserit, capitali poena feriatur C. de Episcop. et
cler. l. si quis non dicam.
. And S. Chrysostom says well: Si mulier or nature vt viros irritet, etiamsi
neminem vulneret, tamen adultera est Chrysostom. in Matthew. 1. homil. 17.
. But some who are glad with fig-leaues to cover their faults, and to purge
their black iaundise with a glister of ink, do excuse their sin by David's
example, having committed adultery with Bersabe the wife of Vria, and make
that their protection, for which David craved a pardon: But their souls are
therefore more sinful, because they followed David as he was a sinner: the
woman was far off, but temptation was near, as S. Augustine says August. in
com^ sup. Psalm. 51.
, his own flesh was his betrayer, and when he opened two eyes to behold her
beauty, hell opened two gates to sin: by the one of which came adultery, by
the other murder into David's heart. The desire likewise of an other man's lands
or goods has been even of the Paganes detested: Vicinorum sulcos non
transgreditor, neque interuertito, says Justinian the Emperor Iustini. l.
Georg. tit. i.
. Ne transgrediaris terminos antiquos says Plato Plat. lib. 8. de legib.
: And therefore as I have showed before, Terminus was worshipped of the
Romans: for as the Poet says:

Omnis erit sine te litigiosus ager. And the Law of the twelve Tables was: Qui
terminum exarassit, ipsas et boues sacri sunto. Cu. Pompeius is highly
commended of Pliny, because he would never buy any man's ground that lay and
so have been put to death Heliod. lib. 1
: Therefore some Alberic. Gentil. lib. 1. de iur. bell. c. 4.
do wonder that D. Hotoman dare affirm that the Law of Nations does extend
to fugitives and robbers Hotom. 7. vlt. quaesti.
: and his first reason is, because there is no Law which does interdict or
forbid to covenant or contract with them: and such things as are not verbally
forbidden, are implicatiuelie permitted: This reason is of no force, for in
that they be enemies to all, and do spare no man, they ought not to protect
themselves by that which is the Law of all men. The question is not what may
be done unto them, and how many have dealt with them, but how by rigor of Law
and strict reason they ought to be dealt with. To dispute of Law, is to dispute
of a bond whereby we are bound, but we are not bound to such. He brings
likewise for proof the saying of Caesar: Should it not be lawful for
Citizens to send ambassadors to their fellow citizens: when the same has been
permitted to roagues and theefes haunting the wild woods of the Pyrenean
mountains Caesar. lib. 3. de bell. civil.
. But this makes nothing to his purpose: for Caesar does not there directly
affirm that it was lawful, but he spoke it rather to bring the Pompeian
faction into hatred, signifying that they did afforde the security of
embassing to such lewd persons, whereas to their fellow Citizens they did
utterly deny it: But here difference must be held betwixt an absolute
monarch which takes pray or spoil upon the seas, and dominions of other
princes, and these which be pirates without all color of justice: therefore
the Pirates answer to Alexander is misliked, Alberic. Gentil. lib. 1. de iur.
bell. c. 4.
when he said boldly, That because he did rob on the seas with one small
pinnesse, therefore he was accounted a pirate: but because Alexander did the
same with many great galleys, therefore he was termed the Governor of a fleet
Cicer. 3. de repub.
: howbeit this saying of the pirate seems to be commended by Cicero Ibid.
: and to S. Augustine August. l. 4. de ciuit. dei.
it seems to have been spoken truly and eloquently, which is very strange,
unless they did account Alexander a robber, whom some doubt not to call so
Luc. 10. Senec. 1. de benefic.
: and Alciat also is deceived, which not only allows the said speech of the
pirate, but even piracie it self Alci. 1. Cons. 1.
, because forsooth pirates are tolerated of some princes, and there were some
nations which did publicly practice and put in ure that course of life. The
Normanes (says P. Emilius) as antiquaries do think, did reckon and repute
piracie amongst laudable things p. Emil. lib. 3. Franc.
: And Alciat reasons further, That they offend less then others which do so
spoil upon the sea, where the law of nations only is of force and no other
law: for (says he) by that law the sea is common. This manner of discoursing
becomes not Alciat: but regard is to be had, whether he that before was a
robber do afterward become a lawful and just captain, which Iustine affirms
of Aristonicus Justin lib 35
: near unto him Plin. lib. 18. c. 6.
, being better minded then Achab to Naboth, to whom he said: Damihi viniam
quae appropinquat domui meae 3. Reg. 21.
: But against such the prophet Esaias pronounces a woe: Vae qui coniungitis
agrum agro, et domum domui Esai. 5. ver. 8.
: But because these things are plain, they need no further discourse.

The twelfth Chapter.
That the rules of War and Law of Nations are not to be observed and kept
with Pirates, Rebels, Robbers, Traitors, Reuoltes, and Usurpers.
WIth Pirates, Rebels, Robbers, Traitors, and Reuoltes, the Law of Arms is not
to be observed and kept: for they by offending have not withdrawn themselves
from public jurisdiction Bald. 3. cons. 96.
: for by offending a man may not be said to be of more price, or of greater
liberty, then he was before Paulus l. 63. ad leg. Falc.
, and for an other reason they may not claim advantage by the Law of Arms,
because that Law springs from the Law of Nations, and such persons may not
enioie the benefit of that Law to which they are enemies: To these men which
have withdrawn themselves from the communion and society of men: and as
Florus says Flor. lib. 3.
, have broken the league of mankind; how can the Law of Nations, which is
nothing else but the communion and league of Nations, extend any favor.
Pirates (as Pliny says) are enemies to all men living: and therefore Cicero
says, that if thou do not bring to Robbers or Pirates the ransom which
thou have promised for thy life, there is neither offense, nor fraudulent
dealing: no though thou have promised with an oath Plin. lib. 2. c. 46. Cicer.
pro leg. manil. et 3. de offic.
. Spartacus that notable rogue did move Crassus to contract a league with
him: But he was with indignation rejected Appi. in Mithrid. et 1. civil.
. Tacfarinas that famous robber of Affrike grew to such height of arrogancy,
that he sent Ambassadors to Tiberius the Emperor: but his army was sharp
against him and said, that Tacfarinas dealt very reprochfully with him,
because he being no better then a robber by highwaies, did notwithstanding so
deal with him, as if he had been a public or just enemy Tacit. Annal. 3.
. War has never been as Heliodorus well observes, compounded or determined
by articles or leagues with such dissolute persons, but either they have
ouercomed, and so suruiued, or else have been overcome, Frontinus of Viriallius
Frontin. lib. 2. c. 5.
: and Appian of Spartacus: of Apuleius who was proscribed, and of Sextus
Pompeius Appia. lib. 1. and 4. bellor. civil.
: which is not so much effected by the leuying of a great army, or the
increase of the same, as these writers and other historians Herodia. l. 1.
seem to think, but by the enjoying of a good and sound title, and by the
maintaining of a public cause: for when Viriallius being before a robber did
employ himself wholly for the defense of the liberty of his country he became
a just captain, and may well be said to have borne lawful arms: for which
cause the Romans did conclude peace and league with him, and did likewise call
him their friend: So Arsaces whilst he sought to win the crown of the
kingdom of Parthia, being his cuntrie from the Macedonians, was when he had
committed many robberies and pillages, highted a lawful king: and Aristonicus
whilst he claimed the kingdom of Asia by right of blood and course of
succession, might well be termed a governor in war and thought to have pursued
that contention which is commonly called war. And so it may be noted that God
himself would that Sampson should not move against the Philistines without
cause, but so did bring to pass that from private occasions he should as it
were by degrees ascend to a public quarrel Iudic. 14.
: but they which ground not their wars upon a public cause are not properly
enemies though they have arms, and do term themselves governors, and though
they encounter such as be lawful governors, and have under their regiment a
complete army of soldiers: he is properly an enemy which has a court or a
commo^weale, a treasury, and power to make league, peace and truce. And
Charles Martelle did say of the Saracens that they could not therefore clean
themselves from the fault of robbers because they went in great troops, and
because they had captains, and tents, and ensigns P. Emil. li. 2.
, sithence they had no just cause of war which is the only warrant of bearing
arms Ceph. consil. 620.
: What shall then be said of these French men which were taken in the Portugal
war of the Spaniards, and were not used as just enemies: the soldiers I mean
of Don Antonio were handled as pirates: yet the very history does convince
that they were not pirates: for they did show forth their kings letters, the
king of France his letters whom they did serve, and not Don Antonio though for
him they did fight Connest. l 9
: but they which have been subject to others, and are recoiled from their
loyalty of lieges becoming rebels, let them beware how they send ambassadors
to him from who^ they have revolted. But it cannot be discerned by the law of
nations which Phillip late king of Spain did to certain Flemings which came
to him as ambassadors, though they were never under his legeance or subjection,
their estates having bin free from time immemorial, as al histories of account
do with clear voice pronounce: And Dionisius did impriso^ the ambassadors of
the Sir acusanes, because that city having driven the tirant into his tower did
set themselves at liberty Plutarch. in Dio.
: but Buchanan seems to err, which compares two just princes, nay such as
himself confesses to be most just Buch. in lib. de re. Scot.
, namely Hiero of Siracuse, and Cosimo Medices Duke of Tuscana, to two great
thieves which did justly divide the pray, and did rule well though they came
unjustly by it: for how was Cosimo a robber, if he did undertake the
government of that city which did willingly offer unto him the government, he
should perhaps have suffered it to be subdued by some foreign Lord: or else
have left the regiment to others who would have hazarded that ship upon rocks
and tempests, whereas that excellent man knew well how to keep the ship in the
haven: but it seems that the law of arms is not be kept to an usurper: and
therefore Constance the Emperor could not justly be reproved if he had
punished these ambassadors, which Iulianus being consorted with him in the
Empire by the French army did send unto him, as he threatened he would, for
both Iulianus and the army were rebels Amm. li. 21
. But this is to be understood only of such rebels and such usurpers as
have been sometimes in subjection, and under the leigeance of some absolute
Monarch: for they which do only break league or friendship, or ancient
intercourse, are not to be excluded from the right and benefit of embassage
Alber. Gentil. l. 2. de legate. c. 7.
: for how often did the Volscians, Latins, Spaniards, and many others revolt
from the Romans, and yet sent ambassadors to them without hurt or fear of
danger Liui. lib. 5. 6. 29. etc. and Appi. lib. 1 de bell. civil.
: they may lawfully claim the right of embassage, because they had and enjoyed
it before their revolt, but otherwise it is of subjects, because they had it
not so, neither is it reason that they should gain any new right, or have any
advantage by their crime or offense.

The thirteenth Chapter.
That by the law and practice of nations, war is not to be maintained against
infidels, only because they are infidels, and that princes in their realms
may inflict punishment for strange worships.
IF religion be of that nature, that no man ought against his will to be
compelled unto it by force of arms, and that be termed a new and unusual
preaching which exacteth faith by blows: then it follows that such war is
not just c. 35. 23. q. 5. c. 1. 3. disti. 45. c. 3. de babt.
. It is a point of irreligiousnes (says Tertullian) to forbid the opinion
conceived of the deity, and that it shall not be lawful for me to worship
whom I would, but I shall be constrained to worship whom I would not Tertul.
Apolog. et ad Scap.
: Faith is to be persuaded, not to be enforced (says Barnard) Barn. cantic.
ser. 66.
: And Hilarie says, that by a new example men are compelled by arms to
believe Erasm. pref. Hill.
. So Lactantius says, that religion must be established by words, not by
swords Lactant. 5. Justin. 20. 21.
: and so Arnobius says to his adversaries: Because ye can do much by force and
weapons, do ye therefore think that ye do exceed us in the knowledge of the
truth Arnob. adu. ge. 4.
? Ye have heard authors, now hear reasons. That which is against the nature of
a thing cannot tend to the effecting or preserving of that thing, but to the
destroying of it: That which stands by his own strength is not to be vpheld
by other supporters. This opinion of not moving arms for religion, Franciscus
a Victoria a very learned man, affirms h) Victor. relect.
to be allowed of all writers none exempted: therefore he says that this
could be no just cause to his countrymen the Spaniardes to maintain war
against the Indians. And Didacus a Couarruuia a Spaniard likewise and a learned
Lawier Couarer. reg. pre.. 10.
, does vouch many Canonistes and Divines which do teach the same. Baldus also
affirms, that it is not lawful to wage battle against infidels living with
us in peace, and not being injurious unto us Bald. lib. 5. de iustir.
: yet Didacus says, that Aquinas is of a contrary opinion Couar. vbi supr.
. And the fathers of the council of Toletum did make a decree touching the
afflicting of heretics by war, which is recorded in the cannon law c. 3. de
her. c. 5. did. 45.
. And Barnard moving Lewis king of France against Asia says: Can any war
seem more just to the then that which is most holy. The Lacedaemonians also
amongst other objections made this a cause of their war amongst the
Athenians, and said that they were prophaners of religion: and the Athenians
did on the contrary part charge the Lacedaemonians with this, that they did
draw them that yielded themselves out of the temples, and killed them Thuc.
lib. 1.
. But surely such pretenses are but colorus of avarice and cruelty, for there
is no religion so barbarous, which moves us to slay men of a contrary
religion Na. Co. li. 1.
. King Ferdinand entitled the Catholic, did cover all his dishonest desires
with the veil of religion, as Guicchiardine notes Guicc. li. 12.
. And Charles the Emperor the nephew of Ferdina^d did not garnish his ambitious
enterprises with any other color Iou. lib. 30.
. But the wars of the French and other people of Europe which did relieve the
Christians vexed of the Turks, and revenging the injuries done to Christ have
been liked and allowed of Couar. reg. pecc.. co.
: but that is an other question of defensive war, which without all doubt is
lawful, if it be maintained by them that may undertake the defense lawfully.
But now the question is whether only by pretense of religion war may be
undertaken, and this has bin denied, and the reason is, Alber. Gentill. lib.
1. de iur. bell. c. 9.
for that the cause of religion is not betwixt man and man, but betwixt man and
God: neither is the right of any man prejudiced for a diverse religion, because
the bond of religion is only to God: and it is a law betwixt God and man. But
here we do not speak of such, which are altogether void of religion, and
live rather the life of beasts then of men. For they like pirates, the common
and daily enemies of all men are to be pursued by war, and to be brought by
arms into compass, and to the order of civil conversation. For they may
justly seem to be injurious to all men which in the bodies of men carry the
appetites of beasts, yea most savage beasts: for that there is some spark of
religion in some kinds of brutish creatures, has been delivered and
believed. These are they which fight with God after the manner of the Giantes,
which is as much to say as to resist nature, for religion is parcel of the law
of nature Calvin. li. 1. institut.
. And (as Cicero says, there is no nation which have not some religion Cicer.
lib. 1. de not. deor.
: for though many nations follow not a good religion, yet there are few void
of all religion. Baldus. 1. cons. 316.
Where Agathias said, that the Almaines were worthy of pity though idolaters.
Therefore such are to be suffered and to be taught, not to be compelled and
exterminated: and many ciuilians have answered in the point, that the Jews
were not to be molested nor enforced to the faith, though they sithence
Christ's doctrine revealed unto them differ nothing from Idolaters. Now let
us consider whether war and sword ought to be assayed against such as
despised the religion received in a City or commonweal: but doubtless they
which have used strange worship have bin in all commo^weales severely punished.
Plato against such awarded a capital punishment Plat. 10. de legi.
: the civil laws have made diverse punishments Just. 1. Apol.
: for this cause Socrates is killed at Athens: Diagoras is proscribed, and some
in other places be punished, slain Joseph. 1. App. Cicer. 1. de nature. deor.
Plut. Nic.
. Anacharsis was slain of his countrymen: the Thracians for his greekish
rites, which he did use being returned out of Greece Herodot. 4.
. And Tiberius was hot against external ceremonies, and against the Egyptian
and Jewish rites. And Augustus did use the accustomed religion, and did not
tolerate any new Sueton. 93. Dio. 53. 54.
. And so Maecenas did counsel Augustus to punish such as brought in new or
foreine religion: because they drew many into conspiracy, and to other
inconveniences, very prejudicial to a Monarchy Dio. lib. 52.
. And some Princes for the same cause do mislike the doctrine of Luther Guicc.
13. 20.
. But other Princes which hearken to Luther are of a contrary mind. Surely
such religion as distroyeth the government of commonweals and Monarchies, is
not to be suffered Aelia. lib 9.
: But if the religion be good and do not hurt Princes, they that withstand it
are like the stubberne Persians which resisted Daniell Dan. 6.
. But some perhaps will say, that diversity of religion hinders the society
of men, as contrariwise the unity thereof does preserve it, which Philo
speaks of his countriemen the Jews Phil. de for.
. And others have said that by the difference of religion and sects, and by
the distance of life and manners hatred and seditions arise, by which evils,
cities often do perish. All diversity of religion dissolueth government as
Cardanus thinks Card. 3. de sap.
. And a modern politician does earnestly avouch the same Lips. in polit.
. Wherefore Procopius says, that Christians by disputing subtillie of their
Faith, and contending amongst themselves, do stir up sedition Procop. 3. Goth.
. And an other historian adds: If at any time controversy do arise of
Faith, parents do not only dissent from their children, but the husband from
the wife in seditious manner Nic. Call. 17. Histor. 7.
. Valentinian and Gratian both famous Princes, do deny unto Valens near unto
them in blood, aid and succor for this diversity of Religion Zonar. Cedr.
Callis. 11. histor. 49.
: and added further, that it was not just nor godly to help an ungodly man,
and to enter into a society with an enemy of God, a professed Arrian. And
upon that reason Justinian the Emperor moves the French against the Goths,
because they also were Arrians Procop. Goth. 3. 4.
. All which come to this sum, that the Princes cause may seem just, who
suffers one Religion, and which maintains it by punishments. Yet some are
of an other mind, that force is not to be used against them which embrace a
contrary Religion: but they temper their opinion with this caution: Nisi quid
detrimenti illinc respub. capiat. Unless the common weal may receive some
damage thereby Alber. Genesis lib. 1. de iur. bell. c. 10.
. And therefore Augustus is reported to have favored the synagogues of the
Jews, because to him they seemed not Bacchanals or conuenticles made for
disturbing peace, but the schools of virtue Phil. de legati.
: for many times unlawful assemblies be under pretense of Religion l. 2. de
extra. or. l. 1. de coll.
, which are never without danger, and have always been forbidden Mant. in
orat. pro Sext. and Asc. pro Cornel.
: But when it is apparent that such meetings are not made of evil intent, the
prohibitiue Law cease Alciat. 5. consil. 107. Launpr. Plin. vltim. epistol.
103. 104. Eusebius. 3. 27. 33. Tertul. apol.
. And there is an Epistle of the Emperor Marcus extant, forbidding Christians
to be troubled, unless they were convicted to have attempted some thing
against the common weal, and if nothing were objected unto them but diversity
of Religion. And Alexander Seuerus did allow the privileges of the Jews, and
did tolerate Christians. And Traian did before command, that the Christians
should enjoy their liberty being instructed by Plynie of their innocence.
Even in S. Peter's Church at Rome the Eastern people and the Aethiopians do
offer sacrifice after their manner, and are maintained at the Popes charge Ioui.
lib. 18.
. The Lutheranes are permitted to have their public exercise in all the
principalities and dominions of the house of Austrich in Germany. But diverse
Religions are not permitted of the Lutherane Princes: though Bellarmin
affirms it, but of the Papists which is denied by him Bellarm. 5. cont. lib.
3. c. 19. et 18.
. One Religion only is not professed in the city of Augusta, of Ratisbona, of
Frankford, and other free Cities of Germany In such sort live the Polonians,
the Heluetians, the Rhetians, and thou either deceiuest us, or else art deceived
Iustus Lipsius Lips. de vna relig.
, which deniest that there is but one Religion in any one principality of
Germany. There is indeed but one suffered of the Lutherane Princes, and this
is true, notwithstanding Bellarmins premised assertion: But of the Princes of
Austria not only the religion of Luther is tolerated, but even the heresy of
the Anabaptists. And whereas Bellarmin says, that three only Emperors did
permit diverse religions: namely Iouinian, who was reproved by Synod: Valens
who was an Arrian: and Iulianus who was an Apostata. Surely there is none of
sound judgment but will agree with him in this, that Princes ought
principally to regard the unity of Religion, as a thing most pleasing unto
God: who has said by his holy Apostle Ephesi. 4. verse. 5. 6. Vnus Domiuns:
vna fides: vnum baptisma: vnus Deus et pater omnium (...).
: If God, Faith, and Baptism in general, and quocunque modo would have
served, Paul who in his heavenly Epistles uses not one word superfluous,
would not have said vnus, vna, vnum: would not have urged it, would not have
exacted it, would not have cried for it. Yet I would not have weapons and arms
to stir up war for Religion only, if rebellion or disloialtie be not mixed
with it: For heresies may be punished, and yet citra bellum, without war. Let
Lipsius therefore uu) Trismeg. de not. deo. Dio lib. 42.
be silent, who says that it is necessary to contend by weapons, whilst
some go about to prefer their religion before other some: or else says he,
it will be no religion, which is cold and calm. To this warlike note and hot
humor, which argues his want of policy, and that he is neither wise as a
serpent, nor simple and mild as a dove. It may be answered that wars for
Religion are only there to be tolerated, where there is no religion at all,
or where subjects pretend religion as a cause of their rebellion, not where
there is diversity of religion. Nay it is no religion which is hurt to the
slaughter of Citizens and subjects, and the desolation of kingdoms or
countries. Are not the Egyptians to be laughed at, which with mutual wars
and wounds did afflict themselves, for a monstrous and absurd religion on
both sides Trismeg. de not. deo. Dio lib. 42.
: For it appears by Diodorus Siculus, that the diversity of Religions was to
this purpose brought into Egypt, that the people might disagree amongst
themselves, and so have no leisure nor opportunity to conspire against their
king Diodor. Sicul. lib. 2.
. The Egyptians (says one Phil. de 10.
) are by nature wont of little sparks to raise great flames: For the
Egyptians as others report of them, are men unconstant, raging, proud,
injurious, desirous of novelties, and willing to change a present state wish
an erroni^us liberty Vopisc. Dio 39. 42.
: And therefore it was well considered by Augustus and Tiberius Emperors, that
no Senator, that is, no noble nor mighty man should govern Egypt, or should
go into Egypt Tacit. annual. 2.
. But that Princes may command the due observation and practice of Religion,
according as God infourmeth their consciences by the rules of his sacred word,
and the instruction of his true teaching spirit, in their Realms, dominions,
and kingdoms, wherein they have absolute power, and may with severe
punishments correct the frowardnes of men addicted to strange worshippes, may
by the united practice of all commonweals be convinced. A king says
Aristotle in ancient time was the Governor in wars, the Ruler in judgments,
the maintenour of Religion Politic. lib. 3. c. 11. et 5.
. This has been observed of the Assirians, Persians, Medes, Jews, Graecians,
Romans, and all other the most eminent Nations of the world Justin. Procop.
Cursius. Varro. D. August. 3. 4. 5. et 6. de ciuit. dei.
. And so it is reported in Scripture of Asa, that he took away the altars of
the strange Gods, and the high places, and brake down the Images, and cut
down the groves, and commanded Judah to seek the Lord God of their fathers,
and took away out of all the cities of Judah the high places, and images;
therefore the kingdom was quiet before him 2. Chronic. 24.
. And Justinian the Emperor speaks imperiously: We command (says he) the
blessed Archbishops of Rome, Constantinople, Alexandria, Theopolis, and
Jerusalem, to receive for ordeining and installing of Bishops, only that which
this present law does allow Nouel. constit. 123.
. Archadius sets down both law and punishment in some cases of religion. If
any Bishop refuse to communicate with Theophilus, Atticus, and Prophyrius, he
shall lose both his Church and his goods: if any that bear office, they shall
forfeit their dignity: he shall lose his service: if any of the common
people, let them be fined and exiled Nicephor. li. 13. c. 30. Sozome. lib. 8.
c. 24.
. I will not insist longer upon a matter plain, but will cut off these lines
to avoid tediousnes.

FINIS.
Faults. Leaf. Corrections. Agree fol. 4. a. disagree ar fol. 6. b. is
prescribe 9. b. proscribe Dominus 13. b. dominus soundly 20. b. fondly and 21.
b. one Aroutius 24. a. Acontius repeated 24. b. reproved ar less 38. b. at
least Cluitius 38. b. Cluilius victoria 41. a. victori Batari 42. b. Bataui
farelet 43. a. forcelet repelit 44 b. repetit Latinum 54. b. Latium indice 54.
b. iudice convey 64. a. courage cibicall 64. b. ciuicall Fulminea 77. b.
Fluminea Clesoninus 77. b. Cleonymus ipsas 81. a. ipsus Viriallius 83. b.
Viriathus discerned 84. a. defended (There want these words) 90. a. if any
soldier.


