THE FOUNDATION of the Faithful. In a Sermon delivered at Paul's Cross the
17. of January. 1610. By SAMVEL GARDENER, Doctor of Divinity.

2. Tim. 2.19. The Foundation of the Lord remains sure, and has this seal;
The Lord knows who are his: And let every one that calls upon the Name of
the Lord, depart from Iniquity.

Imprinted at London by W.W. for T. Manne. 1611.

The Foundation of the Faithful.
2. Tim. 2.19. The foundation of the Lord remains sure, and has this seal;
The Lord knows who are his: And let every one that calls upon the Name of
the Lord, depart from Iniquity.


THE estate of Man's life, chiefly of the Christians, holds comparison
thorowout with the Seafaring condition: So the writer to the Hebrews
insinuates our Faith, Heb. 6.19.
which is the hand that holds up our head, while we are floating over the Sea
of this world, being surnamed by him, The Ancre of the Soul. The World is this
ebbing and flowing Sea, in the successiue surges thereof very much unquiet:
Mankind, while we here live, are the Sailors on this Sea, by sirtes, by
sands, by diverse dreadful dangers. The Key-side or Shore, from whence we
launch into the Maine, is our Birth into this world. The Port and Landing place
to which we drive, is the Land of the living, the life that is to come. The
whole Time spent from our Birth. to our Death, is our Seafaring season. Our
Shipmaister, is our Savior; who by his Word and Spirit, saves the Church,
which is his Ship, from peril of drowning, leading it safely to the Haven of
happiness.

Now, here the Apostle would have us edific our selves is this holy Faith, and
to build upon this, as on a sure foundation; that howsoever we find our
selves thrown (as it were) into the midst of this Sea, and that all the
contrary Waves and Winds bend and band themselves against us; corporally by
crosses, spiritually by our sins, by the feind, and the flesh, inflicted upon
us, that we cannot miscarrie: But that we shall arrive happily at the Haven of
Heaven, as well in respect of the Decree of God eternal, inuariable: as in
regard of Christ, the Master of the cordage and tackle; whom Winds and Waves
are forced to obey, as the Servant his Master.

The sum and issue of these words, is this: That the state of our salvation
is sure, as seated upon the decree of God, a foundation which is sure: For our
security, a double Seal is set: 1. One in respect of God, with this Image
and superscriptio^ upon it: The Lord knows who are his. 2. The other touching
our selves, with this writing in the Ring and Circle of it: Leteuery one that
calls upon the name of Christ, depart, etc.

The Foundation of the Lord remains sure. This Metophor, set upon the
Forehead of the Text, is to have application unto the eternal counsel of God
touching our election, not by any opposite machination liable to frustration.
For it is of the nature of the foundation of an House, whose uppermost
structure, and composition may be shaken; but the foundation stands sure.
Foundations of ordinary sort and condition laid by Men's hands, remain sure a
long season: Most sure therefore must that Foundation be, whose builder and
maker is God. Now such is the foundation of our Election, it is upon the holy
Hills, upon the Hill of Sion, (which is Gods hill,) which cannot be removed,
but stands fast for ever. Ephesians. 2.20.
We are built upon the Foundation of the Prophets and Apostles, Jesus Christ
himself being the chief Cornerstone, Jn whom all the building coupled
together, grows unto an holy Temple unto the Lord.

The School of Rome would teach us otherwise; Namely, That God his
predestination is chaungeable; and that he that is predestined, is
contingently, or casually predestined; that is, by hap-hazard, or
chaunce-medly, as we may so say. A Proposition naturally begetting very strange
conclusions, as, That he that is ordained unto life, may be damned: And that
he that is determined to Damnation, may be saved. Which is nothing else, but
of a sure, to make an unsure Foundation, and to turn it vpside down. But we
have not so learned Christ, but believe as he has taught us by the mouth of
his Prophets ever since the World began, that he whose name is once noted in
Gods Book, and set down in the writings of the house of Jsrael, is written
down, never to be wiped out, and is seated upon an ever enduring Foundation.
This is the reason of this illation of our Savior: Math. 24.24.
If it were possible the very Elect should be deceived. This If, excluding all
means of possibility of preiudicing the settled estate of the Elect. But the
cause of this impossible matter of the seducement of the Elect, Totally and
Finally lays, in the course that God has taken for them, of their
continuance in the faith; for which cause else where he says, Math. 25.34.
That a Kingdom is prepared for us, from the beginning of the World: that we
might ascertaine our selves, that when the time comes, we shall be absolute
owners and possessors of that Kingdom. Hence is it, that he would have us
shake off the fear, that misfashioned Fancy feeds on: Luke. 12.32.
Fear not little Flock, for it is your Fathers pleasure to give you the
Kingdom. Wherefore it is, that we hear of this joy and gladness, that the
boanes which our sins have broken, may rejoice: Rejoice, Luke. 10.20.
because your Names are written in heaven. Wherefore does he tell us, that our
Names are written down by the Finger of Gods hand, in Magna Charta, in the
great Doomesday book of heaven? truly to make us thoroughly persuaded, that
we shall one day come to Heaven. But this, a luculent instance for the nonce,
this solemn and serious asseueration of our Savior; Ioh. 6.37.
All that the Father gives me, (that is, by decree of Predestination in his
mind) shall come to me; (that is, by the steps and feet of Faith,) and him
that comes to me, I cast not away. They come to Christ, who are given by
Predestination by the Father unto Christ; which is the cause they cannot become
castawayes. Also, of his Sheep, (that is to mean of his Elect) our Lord Jesus
speaks thus. Ioh. 10.28.
I give unto them eternal life, and they shall never perish, neither shall any
pluck them out of mine hands. The reason thereof follows: My Father which
gave them me, is greater then all: But he gave them by predestinating them.
For then are all the Elect given unto Christ to be governed and preserved, when
God has chosen us in Christ as in the head, to whom it necessarily belongs
to save the joints of his body. Suitable hereto is this his other saying; Those
that thou gave me, Ioh. 17.12.
have I kept, and none of them is lost, but the child of perdition. Where he
teaches, that the Elect were truly given him of his Father; so that none of
the Apostles, except Judas, was lost, because he was so preordinated to be
lost. Whosoever therefore are truly given to Christ by the Father, they are in
such safe protection under Christ, as they cannot perish; because they are
Elected; that is, John. 13.18.
given to Christ. Elsewhere foretelling us, that one of the College of
Apostles, should betray him, he prefaceth to the point in hand, in this wise: I
speak not of you all: J know whom J have chosen: but it is that the Scripture
might be fulfilled; He that eats bread with me, has lift up his heel
against me: He gives the cause to Gods eternal Election, that none of the
Apostles was to admit such a prodigious sin of prodition; but only Judas, as
proposed to perdition. Thus having heard Christ him self speaking for us, what
need we more witnesses? Romans 8.30.
Yet we please to hear what Saint Paul can say for us. In his golden Chain
twined with his four individual linckes, the person Predestined, is
proclaimed at the Standard; therewithal, Called, Justified, Glorified. And he
is in his expostulatorie Scrutinie, and Inquiry, after him that dare stand out
adversary to this his positive Divinity; Who shall lay any thing to the
charge of Gods Elect: It is God that Justifies, who shall condemn? As if he
should have disputed it thus: They are Elected; therefore can they not be
Condemned. Yea he provoke the proudest Enemy to the field for the trial of
this truth, as Affliction, Tribulation, and all the united forces of
Temptations; telling us, how these when they have done their worst, can never
be of power to raise our Foundation, and to sunder us from Christ. Lastly, he
would have us believe this, as a sure word of prophecy, that neither Angels,
Dominations, or Powers, future, nor present things; altitudes or deapthes, nor
any thing else, from the Center to the Circumference, can undo this Foundation
of our eternal and infallible Election. Destroy this Foundation, and all these
rows of spiritual Stones laid hereupon, must needs come tumbling down. As
this saying of Saint Paul, Romans 5.1.
Being justified by Faith, we have Peace toward God: Which peace of
conscience toward God, we can not have, so long as we hoouer (as the Raven,)
between Heaven and Earth, and are in perplexity about our Election. As this
other his ghostly Aphorism, Faith makes not ashamed, Romans 5.5.
because the love of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the holy Ghost, which
is given us; If fully, and finally, this love may be lost of us, whereby we are
covered with shame and confusion as it were with a Cloak. As this his other
piece of Lecture: Romans 8.16.
The spirit of God witnesses with our spirit, that we are the children of God:
So be it that we yield that the Spirit may be quite extinguished in us. It is
Saint John's assertion, 1. Ioh. 2.19.
and the mark indeed of those of reprobate condition: They went from us, but
they were not of us: for if they had been of us, they should have continued
with us: For it is flat which Saint Paul says, The gifts and calling of God
are without repentance; Romans 11.29.
and so by course of consequence, he cannot repent that he has predestined
us. Thus do our Popelinges fall before the Scriptures, as Dagon before the
Arc; and the foundation of our Election stands sure.

And now we will deal with them by dinte, and force of reason; and thus
dispute for the soliditie of this our Foundation.

1. First, a posteriorj, Gods purpose to save the Elect in this world, is
absolutely constant: Therefore he so Calls, Justifies, Regenerateth them, so
qualifieth them with the Induments and Ornaments of his spirit, so governs
them, and gives them the gift of perseverance, as he never repents himself
of these collated benefits, inasmuch as repentance cannot fall upon him, as
Scripture before taught us. God follows his chosen with an individual,
vnwearisome, and eternal love; So says God in Jeremie: Ierem. 31.3.
J have loved thee with an everlasting love. So says Christ in John: For as
much as he loved his own which were in the world, unto the end he loved them.
John. 13 1.
But he wills and works nothing now, which was not willed and determined by
him from all eternity: wherefore this foundation is of absolute stabilitie.

2. A priorj, we plead thus; Election is only in God, and not in man, in as
much as Election was before the Creation, and so before man: Ephesians. 1.4.
We were chosen (says the Apostle) before the worlds foundation. Again, if
Eection be a part of divine Providence, and Providence is Gods: the Sequence is
natural, that Election must be in God, and no part thereof may cleave to man's
thumbes. And hence also the deduction is as needful, that it is eternal and
immutable, as consisting in God only; in whom all things are according to his
nature, without variableness or shadow of change. Stood the Foundation of our
Election upon no surer ground then Man, it would soon be turned up: For
Euripus changes not oftener then Man. And what may Man do simply by himself
toward his own salvation? He that is a reprobate, can lay to himself a sure
Foundation whereupon he may build his own damnation; in as much as not being
sufficiently supported by the hand of God, (God not being bound unto him
thereunto) he simply can bring forth nothing but fruits unto death, with
wilfulness enough; and so undo himself: But Election cannot so be made
sure of the part of the Elect, as by nature mutable, and as so continually and
grievously sinful: So, as so far as it lays in them, they quite strip
themselves of the graces of God; and if doom should be denounced according to
their deeds, there were no foundation made for them in Heaven. The effects of
Election are in the persons themselves that are elected, as their vocation
passive, and so their Justification and regeneration in this sense; also faith,
and the works of faith, and at last their glorification in like manner.
Wherefore these effects in us that are of the Elect, admit an alteration in
respect of our selves: Whereupon by nature, faith, and regeneration, may be
lost of us; and of righteous, we may become unrighteous, and so fall from
grace, and perish. But in regard of predestination, and divine decree which is
in God, and so immutable: it can not be, that these guiftes of God, and these
effects of Predestination should be quite without effect; and therefore having
dependence on God, our salvation is most safe. Have a view hereof in the
course of the world, led by the hand of heavenly providence. For Saeculum
Speculum; The World is a Looking-glass in this case: For how is it that it is
so well ordered, so as the Heavens keep their stations appointed the^, the
Sun knows his vprising, and the Moon her going down; the alternall
intercourse of the day and the night is not to be disturbed, and all things
execute their offices in their natures, in their several ranckes and classes,
wherein they were first placed? It is because Pouidence that vsshereth the
World, is not in the Creature, no not in the hand of Man or of Angel; but in
the sole power of the vnchaunging God that holds the ball of the World in his
hand; and so is unchangeable. And hence is it that the execution of supreme
providence in like sort, and all the effects thereof, hold on so set and settled
a tenor, and have so good success. And here follows the assurance of
predestination, as founded upon the certain foundation of Gods eternal
counsel: Wherefore well says Saint Augustine, Turiores erimus si totum Deo
demus. It shall be safest for us to hold all in Capite, and to give all to God.
3. Our next reason is of this fashion. The decree of Election, as of
Reprobation, is eternal; The Scriptures make this good: But whatsoever is
eternal is inuariable, for we call that Eternal, which is without either
beginning or ending, and not subject unto changing.

4. We further urge the present cause thus: Election is only in the will of
God, and has no copartner-ship with works foreseen either good or evil, (as
in some sort we will prove toward the end:) Now that which is independent of
it self, and has no other proceeding then from the will of God, can by no
other bymeanes beside God, be dashed or made void. Now in God himself, there
is nothing at odds with his Will; whereby it comes to pass, that the Will
which is in God, which we term the absolute and the secret Will, is evermore
the same.

5. Moreover, we tender this argument unto them; Election is not without
foreknowledge: For God has foreknowne such as shall be saved: but Gods
foreknowledge is unerring, and so sure (as in the sequel of this text we shall
show) and so the state of our Election stands sure.

6. I say further, (let them check what is said, if they can) that so many and
so maine are the means that are prepared and set out by God, for the common
salvation of the Church, as they can not possibly pass the hands of God, but
needs they must be saved.

7. Beside all this, Gods Will is a work, Psalm. 115.3.
as it is in Psalmodie, Our God is in heaven; he has done whatsoever it
pleased him. But it is his flat Will, the Elect should be saved; it must
therefore needs be so.

8. Add hitherto, that he that transposeth his Will, is led thereunto,
either out of the prospect to a better provision, by a second wisdom; or out
of the sense of his insufficiency, for the execution of his primative
intention: Wherefore there is no other shift, but when we can not what we
would, we will what we can. But neither of these may be spoken of God; for
being only wise, a better counsel cannot be conceived, then was first from
all eternity considered of: And being omnipotent, his arms as Sampsons, are
not to be manacled; but whatsoever he proiecteth he perfourmeth.

9. Finally, all things work to the wicked to the worst, through their own
wickedness, yea the good things of God, as his grace, and the graces of his
holy Spirit; 1. Pet. 2.7. Luke 2.3 4. 2. Cor. 2.16. Romans 2.4. Gal. 5.13. 1.
Cor. 11.27.
for Christ is to them A Rock of offense, and a stone to stumble at, appointed
for the ruin and fall of many. The Gospel, is a savor of death, unto death.
The long sufferance of God, that cites them to repentance, through the injury
they offer it, serves to the enlargement of the hardenesse of their hearts;
Their Christian liberty, is to them an occasion to live licentiously.

The Supper of the Lord, their spiritual refection, becomes their poison.
Wherefore, contrariwise, all things sort out for the best to the elect, as Paul
says; yea, their very sins themselves, as rightly Augustine says.

To grant a mutabilitie in God, is to bring in these absurdities with a strong
hand, that Gods will may be changed: his foreknowledge deceived: His
illimited power restrained: His action hindered; which to grant, is to deny
him to be God; for he is a goodly God indeed, whose knowlede may be blemished
with error, his will, with variableness, his power, with weakness, his
action, with frustration.

But what say we all this while to our sins? do not these drive at the very
foundation, and serve to undermine it? truly, there is nothing that put so
forcibly thereunto as they; So that name these, and name al, Exodus 32 33.
according to this denuntiation of judgment, Who so ever have sinned against
me, J will put him out of my Book: But be ye not dismaide: The hand of that
Scripture, sets the Axe only at the root of presumptuous and malicious
sins, continued to the death; Heb. 6.6.
such as is our obdurate rebellion against Christ, wrought in a very
wilfulness and accompanied with a final impenitence. Our daily falls,
enforced through the infirmity of the Faith in us, as being but in Herba, et
non in Spica; In the Grass, and not in the Ear, in Inchoation and not in
Perfection, will not do the deed. I deny not that our sins deserve so
much, and that they draw out the sword of Gods vengeance out of the scabberd
of his patience, to strike us both ways, inwardly, and outwardly, as he dealt
with David: But withal, mindful of his truth and goodness, and for the
obedience sake of his son Christ, his decree of saving us, which is our
Foundation, is sure on our side: for our sins are cancelled; that is, they
are not to death imputed. He endueth us with Faith and Repentance, whereby we
are raised and set upon our feet. The cause hereof is, for that as he has
chosen us unto life, so he has withal ministered the means of Faith, and
Compunction, that bring us unto this life. Wherefore as we have a feeling in
our selves of Faith, and conversion; so of our assured Predestination unto
Glory, let us make no further question: For if our sins, into which by
inevitable necessity of nature we were to fall, and God foresaw the same, were
not able to make stoppage of the course of Gods purpose of predestinating us to
eternal life, in his son Jesus Christ, as a work of his free grace; surely
after our his falls into them, this eternal, gracious, and steadfast election,
can never be voided. By grace, our names had first enrolement in Gods register;
So by grace they there stand still. I say further, because we are separated to
salvation; by Gods grace it is that we are kept from those sins of contumacie
and impenitencie, for which the Reprobate (which were never there written,) are
said to have the wipe-out of the Book of life, when as what they are, by
degrees they are manifested; that is to say, such as never had been enrolled;
David never despaired of his recovery, for his adultery and murder: Nor
Peter, for his treble apostasy, which hereby appears, in that amidest all
those storms of temptations, they held fast the Faith, the Ancre of the Soul,
and called upon the Lord.

Here I would have done with this Foundation, and have buckled my self to the
rest of the Building, but that there are objections of Scriptures against us,
that are needful to be answered.

1. As this from Ezechiel: Ezech. 18.14.
Jf the righteous turn away from his righteousness, and commiteth iniquity:
Jn the sins that he has sinned, in them he shall die. This supposall If, is
true: but where is it simply said without an If, that the Righteous shall make
this revolt from his righteousness. If, is often in Scripture language, as to
say, Not at all: As where it is said, If a man shall keep the Law, he shall
live in his own righteousness: where this If, is as much as, that which is
impossible: Suppositions do not set down any thing; if they do, an other
thing is aimed at, then is there supposed. God is at such deadly fewde with
sin, as who so shall cherrish it in his breast, shall feel his vengeance
follow him at the back: wherefore it behooves us to continue in well doing;
that beginning in the Spirit, we end not in the Flesh. If we do, as we have
sown, we shall reap: We have sown Sin, we shall reap Justice.

2. Romans 11.20.
An other is from that counsel of Saint Paul, Thou stand by faith: be not
high minded, but fear. We answer, there arrogancy, and supine security is
inhibited, and an holy fear and reverence enjoined us. Those that are of the
Foundation, can not be of this high mind and presumption, as to shake off all
fear, and to become altogether careless, for so might the very Elect be
rejected, to whom this Cautat is directed.

3. An other is from this warning of the same Apostle; 1. These. 5.19.
Quench not the Spirit. I answer, that we find not the affirmative part, that
the Spirit is quenched. I yield, that 1. Gods graces may minish in a man: To
which purpose, Ephesians. 4.30.
these dictates, and directions, are delivered us, Quench not the Spirit.
Grieve not the Spirit of God, by which ye are sealed to the day of redemption.

2. That the graces of God may be buried in a man, yea, for a time seem dead,
like a man in a trance; as Eutychus was when he fell from the third loft: Yet
we may say of him, Act. 20.9.
as Paul did of Eutychus. Trouble not your selves, for his life is in him. Whom
we likewise hearten with this text out of Jsaiah, Isai. 65.8.
The wine is found in the cluster, and one says, destroy it not, for a
blessing is in it. As also with this comparison of the same Prophet, Isai. 6.13.
There is substance in the Elm, or in the Oak, when they cast their leaves.
In which plight, stood David in his adultrie: Peter in his apostasy: Solomon
in his Idolatry.

3 That a man after repentance, may have often relapse, yet shall rise again;
as Abraham when he twice lied, as Joseph when he twice profanely sweared, as
David that fell often into adulteries, beside other iniquities. If Man, that
has not a Mite of mercy respected with God, must seauentie times seven
forgive his brother every day, that trespasseth against him: how may we
faddome, and comprehend Gods mercies, and in what bounds may we contain them?

4 That a man may sin presumptuously, which is heinous and horrible; against
which David thus pours forth his spirit like water, before the Lord: Psalm.
19.13.
Keep thy servant from presumptuous sins, least they get the dominion over
me; so shall I be undefiled, and innocent from the great offense.

5 Finally, Psalm. 77.7.
that a man may despair of Gods mercy, as David did, where he playneth it
thus: Js his Mercy clean gone for ever, and is his Promise come utterly to an
end for evermore? And J said, this is my death. Job. 6.2.3.6.
As Job did, where he thus bewrays it: Oh that my grief were well weighed,
and my miseries were laid together in the balance: For it would be now
heavier then the Sand of the Sea; therefore my words are swallowed up: For the
Arrows of the Almighty are in me, the venom there of did drink up my
spirit. And he further complains, that God is turned enemy, and writes
bitter things against him, and sets him up for a Butte to shoot at. As the
incestuous Corinthian almost did; for he was drouping and stooping that way, 2
Cor. 2.7.
but that Paul watched him, and charged the Corinthians concerning him; Comfort
him, least he be swallowed up with overmuch heaviness. As Luther did for three
years together after his conversion, by his own confession. And as some
among us, have done a longer time: Yea, Despair may suck and soake the body,
as much as any Sickness.

But the Spirit can not quite be extinct in the Elect: their Despair shall be
neither Total, nor Final: not Total, because this Despair shall not be from
the whole heart: For Faith in that exigent, shall covet against Despair. Not
Final, because he shall recover himself before the end of his life. In the
mean while, it shall be our parts, to cherish the sparks of the Spirit in our
hearts, and eschew such means, as are the quenchment thereof. But they reason
but absurdly, who out of the endeavor that must be ours of preserving of the
Spirit, would conclude, the danger we are in, of quite quenching it: For the
meaning of the Apostle in that place, is only this; That we be not too
indulgent to the Flesh, in the fight against the Spirit.

3 An other objection is from the sixth to the Hebrews: Heb. 6.4, 5, 6.
It is impossible that they which were once lightened, and have tasted of the
Heavenly guiftes, etc. If they fall away, should be renewed again by
repentance. whereunto we put in this our double answer. 1. First, that there
it is not said, that such at any time fall away. 2. Secondly, that many
Reprobates have this illumination, but without sanctification, yet with some
cheer and change of affections, such as was in Saul, Judas, Simon Magus, and
in those of the Parable, who received the seed of the word with joy, but
suffered it not to root; and that such fall for a full due, it is both
certain, and necessary: But this is nothing to the Elect, who after all their
fallinges, have again their happy risings: Their faith being seconded with a
Corroborating, and strengthening grace of perseverance to the end. And this is
that grace that Paul wished the Ephesians; Ephesians. 3.16.
That they may be strengthened by his spirit in the inner-man. Colos. 1.11.
And to the Colosians, that they may be strengthened with all might, through his
glorious power. The grace which he felt in himself, where he says, J am able
to do all things, Phil. 4.13.
through the help of Christ, that strengthens me. The grace that God gives
all such as fear him, according to that the royal Prophet says, He shall
make them strong, Psalm. 103.5.
and lusty like an Eagle. This grace is ours in a double respect. 1. Of the
promise of God in Jeremie, J will put my fear in their hearts, that they
shall never depart from me. Luke 22.32.
2. Of the Prayer of Christ, J have prayed for thee, that thy says should not
fuile thee. Hitherto makes this sweet speech of Augustine, De corrept. et
gratia. cap. 2.
Ipse cos facit in bono perseuerare, quj facit bonos. He that makes men good,
makes men to continue good; and he allows not that love that may be lost;
wherefore he says, Charitas quae deserj potest, nunquam vera fuit. That
Charity that may be casseered is but counterfaite.

4 An other Objection is from the examples of such as have departed from the
Faith, Ephesians. 1.4, 1. These. 1.4. 1. Pet. 1.1.
as the Ephesians, Thessalonians, and dispearsed Jews, styled in holy
Writings, The elect and chosen, whereas many of them did afterward forsake
their first Love, and gave up their Faith as it were in the plain field.
Heereto we answer, that there are two sorts of Judgments touching man's
estate this way. 1. The one is called Iudicium Certuudinis, the Judgment of
Certainty; by which an undoubted doom may be delivered of any man's Election.
But that is Gods royalty, peculiar to himself, set down in his sacred, and
secret book of counsels; man is not to meddle with it, no further then God
has revealed to one man, an othermans estate. 2. The other is termed Judicium
Charitatis. The Judgment of Charity; whereby we proceed by the Law of
Love, esteeming of such as live in the Church, and outwardly bear love to the
word of truth, to be in the Calender of the Chosen, until we have a better
Schoolemaister then Nature, to inform us the contrary. Now in respect these
Ephesians, Thessalonians, and Jews, did bear these outward marks; the
Apostle makes the best construction of their doings, as Charity would have
him. 2. Again, they may be deemed to be thus denominated, a maiorj part, of
the greatest part, according to the common course of speech, whereby we call it
an Heap of Corn, which stands most upon the Corn, though much confounded
with colder, and with chafe.

5 An other Objection, Revel. 3.11.
is this admonition Saint John gives: Hold that which thou have, that no man
take thy Crown: whereby is meant (as some would have it) The Crown of
heavenly glory: Whereto they infer this Prouiso of the Apostle; 1. Cor. 10.12.
Let him that thinks he stands, take heed least he fall. We answer, that
the Crown there mentioned, is the Crown of the Ministry; which without loss
to our election, may be lost, and can not be rightly taken for the Crown of
heavenly glory. And what if it could, and we should grant so much; there
would be nothing gotten by it? For it is to be conceived, that one of these two
ways, it is to be lost. 1. Either in respect of our selves. 2. Or of God. 1.
In respect of our selves, we easily yield it, that we may soon loose this
Crown from our heads: For we are fickle and feeble, and nothing else but a
compound of corruption.

Now Death, and not the Diadem of Glory, is the debt that is due to Sin. 2.
But in respect of God, who has chosen us; and of Christ, in whom we are
chosen, this Crown can never be taken away from us, in as much as the gifts
and vocation of God, Romans 11.29.
are without reuersion. Wherefore in both these respects, we have warning in
the Scriptures to look to our standing, and to tread sure, least we fall. And
are taught herewithall, that the Elect stand sure in the Sanctuary of the
Lord, they are under the safe protection of Christ, and so can not perish.

6 The last Objection I will deal with, is from such places of Scripture, as
speak of Blotting out of the Book of life: As that piece of Imprecation of
David's against his Enemies: Psalm. 69.29.
Let them be wiped out of the Book of the Living, and not be written among the
Righteous. As that asseueration of the Spirit in the Apocalips: Revel. 3.5.
He that overcomes, I will not put out his name out of the Book of Life.
Exodus 32.32. Romans 9.3.
As those passionate wishes of Moses and Paul, to be put out of the writings
of the house of Israel, for the salvation of the people of God committed to
their charge. All which places conclude nothing less, then that they make show
of at the first sight, being not thoroughly understood. David's enemies had never
any name in Gods book, but only in the courtious opinion of the Church. And
therefore it can not properly be said of them, that they were spunged out: But
in Scripture phrase, they are taken so to be, when their hypocrisy is
discovered, and they are manifested what they are. So Augustine expounds
those words of the Psalm: Let them be wiped out of the Book of the Living;
that is, Scriptjnon esse cognoscantur tam ab ipsis, quam ab alijs; Let it
appear both to themselves and others, that they are not written down. They
seem to be written (says the same Father) Secundum praesentem Iustitiam, et
temporariam fidem, as they carry credit in the World, for their good carriage
of themselves in their outward actions, and for their temporary profession.
Concerning Moses his wish; some thereby would mean the Book of this present
life, as if Moses should desire to dye for his People: As if he should have
said, Either save them, or slay me. But this meaning is too light to suite
with the gravity of this his petition. For many Captains and Valiaunts have
been found, that have been prodigal of their own, for the safeguard of their
Soldiers lives: And it is the commandment the Godly stand charged with, to
give their lives for their Brethren. Wherein Moses had had his matches even
among the Heathens, such as were Philenj that were brethren, Decius, Curtius,
Theseus, and such like, that made no spare of the effusion of their blood, for
the benefit of their Country: Wherefore some give these words to the Book
of the Covenant, as if he should have said, Blot my Name out of thy
Church-booke, and let it no more be in the number of those to whom thou have
made thy Promises of eternal life. Not that Moses desired directly to be
damned for the peoples deliverance, but only to be excommunicate from the
Church, that is here on earth; which is somewhat more then to die.

But some of better judgment then the the former, are of the mind, that Moses
looked higher then so; namely to the Book of eternal life; as if he should
thus say: Rather then thy whole people should perish, let my name no more stand
in thy Predestinatio^-booke, in the number of those whom thou have put apart to
eternal life. And because this Exposition seems to breed, and to bring some
absurdities with it (as that so great a man should make a motion of a thing
impossible; his Predestination in the certificate of his own knowledge being
not to be altered; as also that he should desire that which is unlawful, to
be raced out of the Register of the Righteous: which is to change copy, and to
turn enemy unto God,) they put in this surioynder, that the Prophet ravished
in zeal of affections to the glory of God, and the good of the people, was
somewhat beside himself, and spoke he knew not what.

So likewise they consider of Saint Paul's vow, to be sundred from Christ, for
his Brethren, his Kinsmen according to the flesh: And it is incident as we
know to these passionate affections, as heeding only that, upon which their
mind is bent, not to heed themselves. This is the verdite of very great men,
whose authority we are justly to reverence. But to vnbowell our thoughts in
the case, howsoever we may yield them what they say concerning Moses, inasmuch
as his parley with God, was extemporall, and familiar, and we may note him of
some rashness: That we should mark out Saint Paul for such a man, and make
him of this humor, is more I am persuaded, then that place will suffer. For
Paul wrote it, and not worded it; his hand led the Pen, and the Spirit led
his heart, as his solemn preamble into that matter witnesses, Romans 9.1.
in this form of contestation, I say the truth in Christ, and lie not, my
conscience bearing me witness in the Holy Ghost. This patheticall provocation
and appellation of the Apostle, is argument of persuasion sufficient unto us,
that mature deliberation, and not precipitate affection wrought this
resolution. And in that the Spirit suggested it, it cannot be excepted against.

Again, we distinguish of the nature and manner of his vow, as there is a
separation from the love of Christ: And as there is a privation of the fruits
of his love. That Paul did wish the first to bid Christ adieu, and to be
execrable for his Breathren, it is not, nay ought not to be supposed; For that
flatly crosses the conclusion of the Chapter before, touching his inseparable
society with Christ; and it checketh the principal cause of the very Vow it
self; which was not so much his love to his Brethren, as his love to Christ;
whose glory he thought in the repudiation of the people, should not be little
hazarded, as to whom appertained the Adoption, and the Glory; the Covenant,
and the Law; the Worship of God, and Promises: and of whom came Christ
according to the flesh. For he saw what the World would gather upon it, if God
should root out the Israelitas, and plant the Nations: namely, that either God
stood not to his Promise; or that Jesus was not that Messiah promised. This was
that which pricked Paul in the quickest Vain, and stabbed him at the Heart.
Yet did his inward Bowels bleed in affections to his Brethren, condoleing
their destruction. But Christ and his glory, put them to the uttermost straint
that might be. Wherefore while he is in this Fervor of love, and his
affections are thus flagrant toward Christ, it is not without reason to
think that in compunction to his kin, he could wish to be cut off from the
communion of Christ. But we take it that we are in the right, in expounding
his Wish of the fruits of Christ's love, as the felicity of the faithful in
the life eternal, of which he would be deprived, and determined to damnation,
rather then his eyes should behold the expunction of his people out of the
Covenant of Grace, to the great obloquie and reproach of Gods name, and of his
son Christ Jesus. And this fitteth well the spirit of that love that he
bears toward Christ. And this is the Gloss of Chrysostom, on this text.

Neither doubt we at all, but that the same Spirit was with Moses his tongue,
which was with Paul's Pen; that the one spoke, the other wrote with aduisement
enough, the same cause, the extent of their love to the glory of God, and the
indemnitie of their People, working these affectionate wishes in them.
Wherefore both these objections of examples, receive the same answer: As if
Moses should have said in this manner. O be gracious unto thy People, not only
for their own salvation sake, but for the glory of thy name; or if thine hand
must needs take hold on Judgment, let their blood be upon my head, and let me
go down unto the damned. Neither does this imprecation of his, strike at all
at the Foundation of Gods unchangeable decree of election, the same implying
in it a tacit condition, if it were possible. But he knew it, that it was
absolutely impossible. As Christ when he did deprecate the remooueall of the
Cup, which he knew before could not be removed, Father, if it be possible,
let this Cup pass from me. The short su^me therefore of Moses his suite is
this, Rather blotte me (if it may be) out of thy Book of life, then that thy
People should be destroyed, and thy name blasphemed; all which makes nothing
to the purpose, to prove that those that are penned down in that Book, may
be afterward put out.

And thus much shall suffice for the forepart of this Text.
It follows.
And has this Seal; The Lord knows who are his.
By an other fit Metaphor, he concludes, the certain salvation of the
elect, alluding to the ancient custom of men, setting their Signets and
sealing Rings, to that which they mind to ratify. God signed the promises of
temporal deliueraunces, made unto his people with his gracious seal. A Seal
was set upon Noah, and his Family, that the Deluge should not drown them.
Sodom was not sentenced to combustion, before Loath, and his Family, were
marked out to an happy preservation. In the inflicted punishment upon the
first borne of Egypt, the aspersion of the Blood of the Lamb upon the Lintels
and Dore-postes of the houses of the Jsraelites, was the Lords Broad seal and
Charter, of their immunitie from the common slaughter. Whereas six Angels in
Ezechiel were dispached by God, against Jerusalem, for their destruction:
Ezech. 9.
An other Angel apparelled in white, (with an Incke-horne at his Girdle,) was
Legatus a Latere, sent on this Legatiue errant, to save such, as should be
sealed with the letter Tau, upon their foreheads, as their pasport, and
protection: Much more is our spiritual deliverance assured us, by signs and
seals of it. There is no man elected unto eternal life, but shall be sealed at
the time appointed. And this is that sealing which is so often mentioned in the
Scriptures; as where in the Revelation it is said, Apo. 7.4.8.
that a number without number, was sealed unto the Lord. For like as the Father
has sealed Jesus Christ as he was Man, Psalm. 45.7.
and Mediator with the holy Ghost above his fellows, according to that which
Christ says of himself; Him has, God the Father sealed: Ioh. 6.27.
So also the rest of his Children he has sealed, and does daily seal with
Marks and Characters of their certain Election, to divide them from the
outcastes of this present evil world. 2. Cor. 1.21.
As where he says: who has sealed us, and given us the earnest of the spirit.
And in the latter to the Ephesians thus: Ephesians. 1.13.
After that ye believed, ye were sealed with the holy spirit of promise.
Ephesians. 4.30.
And in the same Epistle thus: Grieus not the holy Spirit of God, by whom ye
are sealed unto the day of Redemption.

These Seals are the Means to serve the end set down by God.
Predestination is not only of the End, but also of the Means that make to
that end. Now all of them as well the End, as the means, are the Effects
thereof. Wherefore rightly says Augustine: Praedestinatio est praeparatio
beneficiorum Dej, quibus certissime liberantur quicunque liberantur:
Predestination is a preparatiue of the graces of God, by which they are most
assuredly saved, who are to be saved.

These Means, in some are more impotent, in some more eminent in some more, in
some less: Some have but a little Oil in their Cruise: In some, their cup
do ouerflowe. Those means are our Vocation, Justification, Sanctification,
Repentance, new Obedience; without which; there is no entrance to the Throne
of Grace: But by these Grooms, we may be brought into the Kings Chamber.

Here the two principal Seals and Means, are set out unto us: as Faith, and
New obedience: the natural Branch that sprouteth from that root, Faith has
the pre-eminence insinuated in this Prescience and foreknowledge of God in
these words: The Lord knows who are his. The other is more open in the words
following.

Let all that call upon the name of the Lord, depart from iniquity. It is
Faith, that in a quick apprehension swalloweth down this Proposition; The
Lord knows who are his. Knows, that is, Loves those that are his; and so
infers this. Assumpt thereupon: and so loves me, that am one of his.

This Attribute of Knowledge, ascribed to God, is of two sorts. 1. Absoluta,
Absolute; so styled of the Schoolmen, inasmuch as all things simply, and
absolutely from all eternity are known unto God. Of this the spirit speaks
thus: Heb. 4.13.
Neither is there any creature which is not manifest in his sight: But all
things are naked and open unto his eyes. And to this appertains this
sentence of Psalmodie, Psalm. 94.11.
The Lord knows the thoughts of men, that they are but vain. 2. The other
is, Specialis, of more special property, as by which he not only knows the
Elect, as he does all other things; but also knows them for his own,
deuideth them from others: allows, and loves them above all others: For this
word, Knows, when it is given to God speaking of the creature, very often in
Scripture Language bears such a meaning; as where David says, The Lord
knows the way of the righteous: Psalm. 1.6.
but the way of the ungodly shall perish. As where Christ says to the prating
professors. Math. 7.23.
I know you not depart from me, ye workers of iniquity. As where Paul says,
God has not cast away his people, Romans 11.2.
which he knew before. So does Thomas take this word in his Scholie upon the
8. Chapter to the Romans, Quos praesciuit scientia approbationis, hos et
praedestinauit: Those whom he foreknew, in his knowledge of approbation; them
also he predestined. And the same School man, is in the mind, that Gods
effectual will of conferring grace, is included in this his knowledge of
approbation. Thus Hugo de Sancto victore, in his notes upon the Epistle to the
Romans: And Ioachim, upon the Revelation, do understand this word.
Augustine, August. do persevere. Sanct. lib. 2. c. 18.
sometimes does not doubt, to take the Knowledge of God, for Gods
Predestination, and to confound them together; grounding his Judgment upon
the Apostles assertion: God has not cast away his People, which he knew
before. And such are by his reckning, Filij in praescientia, Aug. de corrept.
et gra. c. 9.
Sons in Gods foreknowledge, Qui in memoriali patris sui inconcussa
stabilitate conscripti sunt; Who are written down in Gods rowles of
remembrances, not to be raced out. So Cyrill sings us the same song, Cyrill
expos. in Ioh. 7. c. 6.
where he says: Christ knows his Sheep, electing and foreseeing them unto
eternal life, (as the Apostle tells us:) God has not cast away his people,
which he knew before: for as the Lord, such as he reprobateth, is said not to
know; as where he says to the foolish Maids, that had not Oil for their
Lights, I know you not: so such as he predestinateth, and preordinateth unto
life, he is rightly said to know them.

Now this is the true Faith which ought to be in us, to be thoroughly persuaded,
that we are in the rank and classie of Gods children, adopted in Christ
Jesus, and so to be in the fatherly favor of God; and that so our salvation is
sealed up in a Bag.

Without this Faith, we cannot be grafted into Christ. But this Faith suffices
us, though not perfect, so it be true, though but small as a Grain of
Musterd-seed, tender like a newborn Babe. In the Babe there can not be the
action of Faith, which is the knowledge of Christ, and confidence in him; yet
is the Spirit and virtue thereof in it, which in time will show it self. And
this the Scriptures would have us believe, Heb. 11.6.
in all such places as show us, that we are saved by Faith; and that without
Faith, it is impossible that we should please God; yet withal, the perfecter
our Faith is, the greater is the power of it: and therefore we must endeavor
all we may, to increase our Faith. And albeit we receive in this life, not the
Tithe; but the first Fruits of Gods Spirit, Romans 8.23. 2. Cor. 1.22.
and but the earnest thereof: (the first Fruits being but a Sheafe, in
comparison of the whole Cornelande: and the Earnest being as it were but a
Penny, for the payment of Pounds,) yet this Sheafe, this Penny, serves the
turn to incorporate us into Christ. As the eye of an Israelite serving him but
to look up to the Brazen Serpent, auayled to cure the sting of the fiery
Serpent; John. 3.
so the pur-blind eye of our Faith, if it can but turn up the Ball toward
Christ lifted up unto the Cross, it will be enough to cure the deadly wound,
the old Serpent has given us. The Palsy shaking hand of a poor Lazar, may
serve to receive the devotion of a Passenger, as well as the best, though the
other can hold it fastest. Though the Bonie parts in man's body be the
strongest; yet there is as much life in the weak Flesh, as in them. The
weakest Joint of the body (so it be living) is as living as the rest. So this
is the ordinance of Divine providence in the body of the Church, that every
one of the Elect, the members thereof, should have so much Faith measured out
unto them, as might suffice to their salvation. As he that gathered much Manna
had not the more: and as he that gathered less, had not less, but had enough
as well as the other; so it is with Faith, the food of the Soul: he that has
the least, has enough to save his Soul in the day of the Lord, as well as he
that has the greatest measure thereof.

Thus Faith is the Seal of our Predestination unto life, in as much as none are
capable thereof, but the sealed sort: wherefore it is styled, Tit 1.1.
The Faith of the elect. Wherefore Luke speaking of the Gentiles who had been
Paul's auditors, Act. 13.48.
says: As many as were ordained unto life, believed. In this respect, Paul
entituleth Faith, 1. Cor. 2.14.
The earnest of our adoption and inheritance. Men simply natural, perceive
not the things that are of God; and so can not spanne or comprehend the Faith.
To this, Cum alibi, rum in libro de bono perseuera^t.
give all the Fathers consent, that Faith is the effect of Predestination. So
Augustine, auoweth against the Pelagians in sundry places.

Now whereas others are said to believe as the Devils, They believe and
tremble: as the temporizers of these days; it is so abusiuely and improperly
said of them. It is as Augustine says: Alij cogitant, pij credunt, The Godly
believe; others do but think: The Faith is not in them, but a kind of Fancy
only.

This Faith is a harder matter then the School of Rome conceiueth, who recke
no more of it, then of an ordinary gift of God; of a certain light of the
mind, by which one assenteth to the word of God; Canis. op. ca. pa. Rhem. test
in. 2. Cor. 15.5.
(as Canisius has excogitated: then of an actio^ of the understanding, as the
Rhemistes would have it: to be only occupied in generalities, and never to
descend to application in particular, Heb. 6.5. Luke 8.13. Iam. 2.19.
as Andradius dreameth. For such a Faith, the very Reprobates may be owners
of: for their minds may be illuminated in the knowledge of the truth; and
they may be thoroughly persuaded of it. And therefore they have this action of
understanding. And this is the general Faith that takes up things in gross;
which the Deuilles themselves have.

We teach and prove, that Faith consists in a faculty of apprehending and
applying Christ: that to Believe, Apprehend, and to Receive Christ, are all
one. Thus Saint John compoundeth and confounds them, John. 1.12.
where he says; As many as received him, to them he gave power to be the
Sounes of God, even to them that believe in his Name. Thus is Faith an
application of Christ in special to it self: as a poor man when an alms is
given him, he does put forth his hand and draw it in again unto himself, and
makes the alms his own. Gal. 3.27.
This is the reason of the Metaphor of Putting on of Christ, taken up by the
Apostle, where he entreats of the nature of Faith. But Christ is only Put
on by way of application in particular, of his righteousness laid to our
hearts, as the Garment is applied unto the back, when it is put upon it.
Hitherto has reference the manducation and potation of Christ, which is by
Faith. Ioh. 6.35.
Now the meat and drink that we take down to do us good, must be tasted,
minced by the Teeth, conveyed into the Stomach, digested, and after all these,
be particularly applied to their several parts that are to be nourished by
them.

Hence it is that Saint Paul prays for the Ephesians, Ephesians. 3.17.
That Christ may dwell in their hearts by faith: Which can not be without the
apprehension of him. He therefore may properly be said to believe, that can
distinctly and truly say of himself, that he is thoroughly persuaded in his
conscience, that he is reconciled unto God for all his sins, and is accepted
unto eternal life in him. Thus Paul teaches both by practice and precept: as
where having first set down the general Proposition: Gal. 2.16.
A man is not justified by the works of the Law; but by Faith in Christ Jesus:
He immediately infers the Application of it to himfelfe in particular: We
have believed in Jesus Christ, that we might be justified by the Faith of
Christ. And beneath in the 20. verse more specially he makes use thereof, thus
unto himself: I live by faith in the Son of God, who has loved me, and
given himself for me. Ney there does Paul take this as his prerogative, or
peculiar, above others; but only sets out himself for an example unto us,
that we should so instruct and comfort our selves: Wherefore else where he
says, 1. Tim. 1.16.
For this cause, was J received unto mercy, that Jesus Christ should first
show on me, all long suffering, unto the ensample of them, which shall in time
to come believe in him, unto eternal life. And how this is incident to all
believers, in an other place he tells us, where having thus said, concerning
himself. I Judge all things but doung, Psalm. 3.8.
that I might win Christ, and might be found in him, not having mine own
righteousness, which is of the Law, but that which is through the faith of
Christ, even the righteousness which is of God through faith: He teaches us,
that this is direction for us, Verse. 15.
and the inherent condition of Faith; Let as many as be perfect, be thus minded.

Thus Faith liueih not in suspense betwixt Hope and Fear, as the Crow that
flies between Heaven and Earth; but nestleth herself in the Wounds of
Christ, as Doves in the cliftes and holes of Rocks. By this, We stand, says
Saint Paul; nay, 2. Cor. 1.
by this, We live, says the Prophet Abacuc. Abac. 2.
Faith is the Spirit and Soul of the Newman. We have the name that we live:
but indeed we are dead toward God, if we believe not; If Peradventure, are
not words that proceed from the mouth of Faith, but it is the pronuntiation of
Babylon; Ierom. 51.8.
as it is thus written: Bring Balm for her Sore, Jf she may he healed.
Peradventure, is a Plaster to be set on the Sore and side of Simon Magus, whom
Simon Peter summoning to repentance, Act. 8.22.
says: Pray to God, that if it be possible, the thoughts of thine heart may
be forgiven thee. Wherefore make we not our case, like the case of the
Elephant, who lies down, and cannot rise again: Let us not so far bend the
Bow, as to break it: But in the cause of Faith, let us take up Peter's Text:
Master, it is good for us to be here. Let us taste of the Tree of Life, and
our eyes shall be opened. Let us sprinckle our hearts, with the blood of the
Lamb, and the destructive Angel shall not hurt us: Let us say with the
Spouse, Cantic. 3.4.
in the Canticles: J have found him, whom my Soul loves, I will hold him
fast, and will not let him go. The forgiveness of our finns, is an Article of
our Christian faith; so that he that believes it not, is not a Christian.

This Faith is required of us, through our whole life, but cheifely, about the
time of our death; (when our Wealth, and Well willers, our Senses and
Sensualities, and all outward sollaces, and succors forsake us.) For then
Faith enforces us, to go out of our selves, and to run to the mercy of
God, as to our City of refuge; Then is Faith the hand of the Soul, by which
we draw in Christ to our selves, with all his Benefits. Then is Faith the
mouth of the heart, by which we feed on Christ, as on a restoratiue, eating
his Body, and drinking his Blood, unto eternal life. Then is Faith the Foot
of the mind, which enableth us to walk with God, the means whereby we are
familiar with him. Then is Faith the Ear, by which we hear God speaking to
us, out of the word. Then is Faith, the Tongue of the Soul, by which we talk
with God, and invoke his most holy and reverend name. Wherefore Luther was
wont to say, That men become best Christians, when they are at Deaths door.
When David saw nothing but present death before his eyes, 1. Sam. 30.6.
the People determining with themselves to stone him; his Quietus est, that he
immediately took out, was in the Lord his God. And the use that he made to
himself, of the Promises of God, was the argument of his Joy, Psalm. 119.49.50.
and the lifter up of his head, in the time of trouble; where he says:
Remember the promife made to thy Servant, wherein thou have caused me to put
my trust: It is my comfort in my trouble, for thy promise quickened me. As else
where, where he says, Psalm. 73.25.
My Flesh, and my heart fails: But God is the strength of my heart, and my
portion for ever. The Jsraelites, Ioh. 3.14.
when they had been stricken by fiery Serpents in the Wilderness, and their
wounds were deadly; they cast up their eyes to the Brazen Serpent, (as God
would have them,) and they were forthwith healed. So when the fiery Dart of
death, strikes us at the very heart, fix we the eyes of our faith upon
Christ, lifted up upon the Cross, and so by the Pathway, and Region of death,
we shall have the through passage, and entry, unto eternal life.

All this while I deny not, but that this faith in the best of the bunch,
skirmisheth with doubts. He that never doubted of his election, never yet
believed it. As he that is in health, feels many grudginges, and motions unto
sickness; which he should never feel, were he not sound. So the true
believer feels many quaimes, which he should not have had, had he not
believed: For in Man, there is a double estate, as he is compounded of Nature,
and Grace. By the first, Romans 7.5.
(that is Nature,) he and his flesh; (as Man and Wife,) makes but one Boody,
wherefore the one consents, and is accessory to the other. When the flesh
sins, man also sins, that consists of Flesh: yea when the Flesh
perishes, the Man perishes; as a loving couple, they live and die together.
By the second, albeit his Flesh be about him, Romans 7.17. Romans 8.1.
yet he and his Flesh have made a divorce.

This Divorce is made, when a man begins to displease himself, and to hate
the Flesh, and the filthy fruits thereof. Now upon this Divorce, they are no
more one, but twain; and are so divided, as the one has nothing to do with
the other. In this case, although the Elesh brings forth sin, and
perishes: yet the Christian is not in the state of damnation. Therefore
howsoever the Flesh fathereth doubts, recount with thy self this Divorce, and
that thou art now wedded unto Christ; and so disclaim thy sins, as none of
thine, basely begotten, and bastardly brattes. Say I doubt; but I detest my
doubtinges, I am no cause of them: But my Flesh is the occasion, which shall
perish, when as my Soul shall be saved by Jesus Christ. In the mean while, cure
this Disease of thy doubtinges, with these preservatives, I prescribe thee.

1 That it is Gods positive, and express precept, thou should believe in
Christ: 1. Ioh. 3 23.
His Precept runs thus. This is his commandment, that we believe in the
Name of his son Jesus Christ: Thou dare not break the eight Commandment
of the moral Law; Thou shall not steal. And why art thou so bold as to
break this, this being as forcible a binder as the other?

2 That God his promises of salvation in Christ, are indefinite, and general,
excluding none. Let one of them, here stand in the room of many. So God
loved the world, Ioh. 3.
that he gave his only begotten Son; that whosoever believes in him, should
not perish, but have everlasting life. When the Prince seals his general
pardon for all Felons; every man takes the benefit of it, though he be not
set down by his name in it: But God has gone further with thee the^ so; he
has particularly signed thee thy Pardon. 1. First, in the Seal of Baptism.
2. Secondly, by that of the Supper of the Lord, wherefore stand fast in the
faith which thou have made, and doubt no farther of it.

3 That Distrust and Despair, Romans 4.18.
displeases God almost as much as any other sin; for thereby thou art no
longer the Child of Abraham, To hope against hope, as thou ought. Thou
robbest God of his Glory, in as much as thou make his infinite Mercy, an
underling to thy sins. Thou make God a liar, who has plighted this promise
to thee of forgiveness of sins: Nay, thou do justify Satan before God;
for God has said it, sworn it, sealed it with the red precious blood of
Christ: and yet we rather believe the suggestion of Satan, that the Justice
of God is not to be appeased. This Despair is a malady immedicable: for
thereby we do as the wilful diseased man, who when as the Chyrurgian would
heal his soar, he thrusts his Nails again into it, and sets it
backward.

But all this while, how should a man know that he is thus Sealed, and has
this indeleble character of Faith stamped on his Soul? For many a man's Faith
is but feigned, and formed to the times. And such do but beguile themselves,
while they stand in opinion they do believe, and believe not at all.

I answer, that such resemble them, that dream that they are Princes and
great States, and awake stark Beggars. Such as truly believe, do know they
believe, even as he that has a Jewel in his hand, knows that he has it.
For if a man that believes an other man on his word, does know that he
believes him: how much more shall he, whose heart is inspired with true
Faith, by the work of the holy Ghost, to believe the Gospel, know that he
believes it? If a man might not know whether he has this true Faith or not;
how is it that the Apostle persuades us thus: Prove your selves whether ye
be in the Faith: 2. Cor. 13.5.
thereby insinuating, that it is to be discerned, proved, and known, whether
we do believe? So that as he that understands, knows that he
understands: So he that believes, knows that he believes. Wherefore Saint
Paul thus speaks of himself: I know whom I have believed. 2. Tim. 1.12.
A point which Saint John thus concludes, 1 Ioh. 3.24.
saying: 1. Ioh. 3.24.
Hereby we know, that he abides in us: even by that spirit, which he has
given us. Augustine is plentiful in this cause: I will charge you, August.
lib. de Trinit. 13. c. 1.
Quisque vidit fidem esse in cord suo si credat: si non videt came deesse.
Every one perceives that he has faith in his heart, if he believes: If not,
he finds that he is without it. Epist. 112.
Again, where he says: Credens videt propriam suam fidem, per quam respondet
se credere sine dubitatione. The believer feels his own Faith, by which he
believes without doubtinges. Lib. 8. de Tri^it. c. 8.
In an other place, thus: Qui diligit Fratrem suum, magisscit dilectionem per
quam diligit, quam Fratrem quem diligit. He that looueth his Brother, knows
the love, wherewith he loves him; better then he knows his Brother whom he
loves. This, and such like effects of Gods Predestination, are not simply
effects, but such effects thereof, as they also may be said to be Seals of
it. For God to usward, is like to the Sun. The Sun when it shines on us
(and in a manner, looks us on the face,) printeth in such sort, the Image of
his light in our eyes; as we also are made partakers of the same light, and
are enabled to look upon the Sun, and the light thereof. For the beams of
the Sun, striking upon us, have a repercussion and reflexe toward the Sun:
So the Lord, the Son of Righteousness, looks upon us, and knows us to be
his: And then the Elect being made partakers of his Light and Knowledge; he
makes us likewise to know him. Heereto serve these words of our Savior: J
know my sheep. John. 10.14.
Inferring thereupon in the next place, And J am known of mine: So the first,
is the cause of the latter; and the latter, always follows the former: as if
he should have said. While I acknowledge them for mine, I make them to have my
light and knowledge, to acknowledge me their Shephearde. Both these, are put
together by Saint Paul, Gal. 49.
where he says; Seeing ye know God, or rather are known of God. Where he
teaches, that therefore because God knew the Galathians, who first
acknowledged them, for his: he consequently imparted this his own Wisdom to
them, and brought them to that pass, to acknowledge the true God to be their
God.

The like may be said of the Love of God, wherewith he loved us in Christ to
eternal life, before the groundworke of the World was laid. God in loving us,
has left an impression and obsignation of his love in our hearts, by which
we return, and retorte this love, and love him again; and as it were by the
reflection of these Sunbeams, striking into our hearts, are provoked to love
him. For Gods love toward us, being by nature eternal, brings forth at
his full appointed time, a certain love in us, serving to the eternity of his
glory. 1 Ioh. 4.19.
Hence it is that Saint John says: Not that we loved him, but that he first
loved us. As if he should thus say; By setting the Seal of his Love upon our
hearts, he effects thus much, that we in the rereward should love him as a
Father: Wherefore by the soliditie of that love, by which we have a feeling
that we love God, we are made to know how large the dimensions of that love
of God are, by which from all eternity in Christ, he has embraced us. Now
what is this love else, but Predestination? So our Election, by which we are
put apart in Christ from the residue of the World, sets a kind of Image of
God himself upon us: that is, it begets an other Election, by which we
renounce all other Gods, and know no other else but the true God, to be adored
and worshipped; and not only as we gather the cause from the effect, but as
we draw a Picture from the president; and as from the form of the Seal in
the Wax, we easily conceive what is the Image of the Seal it self.

And thus much of this first Seal, which respects God, in these words; The
Lord knows who are his.

The other Seal follows, which concerns our selves, in the sequel, thus.

Let every one that calls upon the Name of the Lord, depart from iniquity.
To Faith, the proper indument of the Elect, a special Seal of Election, Good
works an other Seal thereof, is immediately adjoined. Good works can never be
sundred from Faith, as Scriptures and Fathers teach, and our Church believe.
The Apostle speaking of such, who making great words of Christ, Tit. 1.16.
but deny him in their works, says; They prefesse they know God; but by
works they deny him, and are abominable, and disobedient; and to every good
work reprobate: Where, to deny God, is to deny the Faith. In an other place
he says, 1. Tim. 5.5.
if there be any that provides not for his own, and namely for them of his
household, he has denied the Faith: Now he that denies the Faith, can not
have Faith. Also, Saint John says; He that says, 1. Ioh. 2.4.
I know him, and keeps not his commandments, is a liar: Where he
concludes that to be a lying and a false Faith, which has not joint commerce
with the performaunce of his precepts: but a counterfeit Faith, is no Faith at
all: Therefore they go both hand in hand together; Faith and Good works, and
will not part company. Iam. 2.
Faith without Good works, is dead: It is Saint James his theoreme, and case
divinity. But dead Faith, is no more Faith, then a dead Man, is a Man: The
Fathers with one consent, teach the same. Orig. in Ezech. Hom. 9.
Origin says: Male credit quicunque peccat. He that is a sinner, is but a
simple believer. In epist. ad Romans l. ^. c. 10.
In his Scholie upon the Romans, he proves the same thus: Omnis qui credit
in eum non erubescit: erubescit autem omnis qui peccat: ergo qui adhuc rubore^
peccati incurrit, credere non videtur. Every one that believes in him, is not
ashamed: but every one that sins, is ashamed: therefore, he that falls
into the shame of sin, seems as yet not to believe. Cyprian.
Cyprian sings the same song, where he says: Quomodo dixit se credere in
Christum, qui non facit quod Christus facere praecepit? How does he say that
he believes in Christ, who does not that which Christ has commanded him?
Ambrose is as peremptory in the Point, Amb. lib. 6. Epist. 36.
where he says; Vbi quis caeperit luxuriart, incipit deuiare a vera fide; He
that swaggereth, swarueth from the Faith. Aug. in Ioh. sermon. 61.
Augustine hereunto performs testimony in sundry places; as where he says,
Qui fidem habet sine spe et dilectione, Christum esse credit, non in Christum
credit; Whosoever has Faith, without Hope and Love, believes that Christ is;
but he believes not in Christ. Aug. de fide et operib. c. 23.
Again where he says: Insoperabilis est bona vita a fide quae per dilectionem
operatur: immo uero ipsa est bona vita: Good life is not to be severed from
Faith which works by Love: yea Faith is of it self, good life. Wherefore the
12. Article of the Christian confession of the Church of England is most sound,
which professes in this wise; Good works are the fruits of Justifying faith,
and do necessarily spring and grow from thence: Wherefore Faith being the
badge of the Elect; and Works inseparably being the effects thereof: the
sequel must needs be, that Good works must be also the Liuerie of the
Elect, whereby they may be known. Which stops the mouth of our carnal
Epicures; who upon the foundation of Gods immutable decree of our election,
would lay the structure and composition of a dissolute conversation, while they
reason thus: We may live as we list; because if we be predestined unto
life, we can not be lost. But such are to know, that the End, and the Means,
that make to the end, must needs go together. Faith and Good Works
inseparably accompany the work of our Election. God glorifieth not the Elect,
before he has Called and Justified them: yea, before they Believe, and
declare by their Works that they do believe. Ephesians. 2.10.
Hence is it that the Apostle says; We are created in Christ Jesus unto good
Works, which God has ordained, that we should walk in them. Ephesians. 1.4.
And hereto serve these inferences of Saint Paul, of Love unfeigned, 1. Tim.
1.19.
unto whic h we are chosen: and of a good Conscience, which as an impartible
companion, is of the Faith of the Elect. This endeavor to perform Good works,
is to all the Elect necessary, 2. Pet. 1.10.
as Peter teaches, where he wills us, that we make sure our Election, and
Vocation, by good works; as many Copies have it; not to God, our vocation
being certain unto him before the Worlds creation: but to our selves, and to
our neighbors. This is one of the chiefest uses we make of Good works; that
by them not as causes, but effects of our Election and Faith, we our selves
and our brethren, are assured and secured of our salvation. Where the mouths
of the Pelagians are stopped, who make the foresight of our Faith, and Works
in God, the cause of our Salvation: when as of the quite contrary-side, God
has predestined us to Faith, and Good works; because he has chosen us to
eternal life. 1. Cor. 7.25.
Wherefore Paul speaks cautelously, where he says; Jobtained mercy of the
Lord to be faithful: he says not, Because I was to be faithful. As where he
speaks in the same manner, thus; That we should be unblameable, not because we
were to be such. As again where he says; Ephesians. 1.4.
We are created in Christ Jesus vinto Good works, which God has ordained,
that we should walk in them; not because we did them. As finally, where he
says; Tit. 2.11.
The Grace of God has appeared, that we should live soberly, righteously,
godly: not because we were so to do. It can not be rightly said, that God
first foreseeth that men are to believe, and afterward predestinateth them to
believe: Because whom he foreknew should believe, therefore he foreknew it,
Contra. Tryphon.
because he decreed it. Wherefore Iustine Martyr calls them, The Elect, who
are foreknowne, that they should believe: wherefore such as by Gods grace are
delighted in Good works; in them there is a certain sign and seal, that
they believe in Christ, and so that they are elected in Christ unto eternal
life.

Faith is of the nature of a Tree in operation; which naturally of it self,
brings forth fruits; so that there is no need that the Tree be commanded
to yield her increase: So the faithful man without coaction disposes himself
to be fruitful in Good works, the Law of God being grafted in his heart, so
that his delight is daily in the same: So that of his own accord, he does Good
works, as of him self he cateth, he drinks, sees, hears, and
performs such faculties as are incident to Nature: As he that is thirsty
does but stay until drink come: and as he that is hungry, expects his
meat, and then willingly and naturally he takes them both: So the Faithful
man, hungry and thirsty of Righteousness, takes the advantage of all
occasions, to do the Works thereof. Although Faith alone justifies and
knitteth the Marriage knotte between the Soul and Christ; and is properly the
Wedding garment, and the sign Tau which must Protect us from the power of the
evil Angels; yet Faith is never severed from Charity: Wherefore the Faithful
are resembled to Orchardes, Vines, and Trees, that bring forth Fruit in
season.

The Church by Isaiah is resembled to a Vine, Isai. 5.7.
furnished with a Wine Press and Tower for the purpose: wherefore Christ
says; Ioh. 15.1.
I am the Vine, and my Father is the Husbandman; every Branch that bears not
fruit in me, he takes away: and every one that bears fruit, he purges
it, that it may bring forth more fruit. Wherefore, God is said to have come
down to the Garden of Nuttes, Cant. 6.10.
to see the fruits of the Valley, to see if the Vine budded, and the
Pomegranats flourished. Moreover, we are to Bring forth Fruits in patience:
For God, Luke 8.15.
the Lord of the Vineyard, comes to his Vine with a pruning Knife in his
hand, to top and cut off the luxurious Branches, that we might bring forth
more Fruit, and be in better liking.

Christians are Trees of righteousness, Ezech. 47.4.12
grewing by the Rivers of the Sanctuary: But not such Trees as ours are; for
they take root upward in Heaven in Christ; and their branches grow downward,
and fructify among men. Wherefore theoricall Religion is not enough. It
serves not our turns to bear the name of Christians, if we live not as
Christians. True Piety, challenges a departure from Iniquity. Jacobs smooth
Voice, and Esaus rough Garment, agree not together. We bear Adams disease
about us, rather tasting of the Tree of Knowledge; then of the Tree of Life:
Scientia, Knowledge; weighs heavier in the Ballence, then Conscientia,
Conscience; therefore our Sorrow must be added to that part, to add more
weight unto it. Such Vocalistes, have their Repulse already in the persons of
those prating Professors; whom Christ shook off thus: J know you not, depart
from me ye workers of iniquity: For Light and Darkness will have no
intercourse together: God and Belial will not bargain together. Psalm. 89.
He cannot abide a sinful body, of whom it is written: Righteousness and
Truth is the preparation of his seat. He that will fill a Glasse-bottle with
Honey that stood full of Vinegar before, must first empty it of the Vinegar
before it can be capable of the Honey. The vessels of our Souls are full up to
the brim with the sharp Vinegar of our sins; God would gladly fill them with
the Hony-blessinges of his goodness: Wherefore we must first be purged and
rinced of our former iniquities. Lethalia peccata non sunt Christianorum, sed
Ethnieorum, Deadly sins are not of Christians, but of Heathens. Wherefore our
Circumcision went before our Reconciliation; to signify that the circumcision
of our sins, must go before our pacification with God. We are not under the
Law, but under Grace. What then? Therefore Iniquity must not thus set up a
Monarchy in us: it is Paul's consequent, and it is necessarily inferred. With
our new Profession, we must cast off our old Conversation; as the Eagle
casts her Bill: And we must know that the kingdom of God is not in word, but
in work. David's monition in these words; Ye that love God, see that ye hate
the thing that is evil; Psalm. 97.
answers in effect, the words only varied: to this present direction of the
Apostle, in our text: Let every one that calls upon the name of the Lord,
depart from iniquity. Aulus Fuluins, on a time, espying his Son in Catilines
Camp among the rebellious route, would have put him to the Sword, telling him,
that he begot him not for Catiline, but for his Country: So this is not the
condition of our creation, or the consideratio of our regeneration, that we
should serve under sin, the professed Enemy unto God, but that we should
serve him in righteousness, and true holiness, all the days of our life.
Demades in times past, seeing Philip the King, want only disposed among his
Minions, insulting upon the misfortunes of his Prisoners, whom he had then in
durance; thus gravely and advisedly censured his leuitie: Since Fortune and
good luck, has imposed upon thee, the person of Agamemnon, (that is of a
valiant and victorious Prince,) may thou not be ashamed to play the
Thersites, (that is a Man of unseemly demeanor?) It is a huge disgrace to a
Kings Son any way, to converse with rascal Company: So, we being adopted
the Sons of God, by grace in Christ Jesus, it will be an indeleble turpitude
in us, to have any dealing with sin and iniquity: Wherefore remember we our
calling, and let every one of us that call upon God, bid adiewe to iniquity.

We will conclude all, with a short supputation and survey of the
multiplicitie of especial use, that this Text tendereth us.

1 First, here is lively demonstrance of the uncreated wisdom of God, who in
his eternal counsel, has foreseen, and in singular wisdom, has disposed
of every ones estate, and this foundation, of his ordidation, stands sure,
without possibility of any alteration.

2 Here is also consideration of his power absolute, that he is able,
notwithstanding all resistaunce, to save all such, as are appointed thereunto
by his divine providence.

3 Thirdly, here is Mercy, taking Justice by the Heel, and supplanting it as
Jacob did Esau, in saving such by his gracious election, through the hand of a
Mediator, which were determined to destruction.

4 Fourthly, here is argument of liquide, Joy and comfort, that this
foundation of our salvation is the Lords, it must needs therefore, be
irresistable and most sure.

5 Fifthly, whereas God has preordinated us to life, and has given us the
means in his word to attain the certificat of our particular election, let us
take the counsel S. Peter gives us, 2. Pet. 1.10.
to endeavor to make our election sure unto us. In the world, men look well to
the assurance of such Lands and Possessions as they purchase, that they may
be sure to them, and to their Heirs; how much more stands it us in hand, to
make sure to our Souls, the heavenly inheritance, purchased for us at so dear
a price as the blood of Jesus Christ.

6 Further, hence arises Patience in afflictions, in as much as, Romans 8.29.
Those whom he knew before, he also predestined to be made like to the
Image of his Son; as Saint Paul sets it down: now wherein our conformity
with his Son stands, he elsewhere shows us, where he lays it down
thus: Phil. 3.10.
In the fellowship of his afflictions, and by being made conformable unto his
death. Wherefore they feed upon a fond Fancy, which is a strong fallacy, who
make an estimate of the Graces of God toward them, by the measure and
proportion of their worldly prosperity; that the Lord here affords them.
Saint Paul teaches them otherwise, Romans 9.22.
where he says: God to show his wrath, and to make his power known,
suffers with long patience, the vessels of wrath prepared unto destruction.
The Sheep that are highly kept in the better Pastures, come soonest to the
slaughter, when as such as feed on the Common, live a longer time.

7 Moreover, we are here armed, and prepared to withstand all offense, that
we might otherwise take up in the sense of the contempt, that is cast upon the
Gospel, and in the senseless ignorance of the People, while we ponder this
in our minds, that nothing contingently, or casually comes to pass, but
according to the purpose and foreknowledge of God, the Lord knowing who are
his. In this respect, Gods Ministers are not to discourage them selves, and to
be out of heart, in that their labors have no better success in the hearts
of their hearers, and bring forth such slender fruits, while they fix their
thoughts upon the Decree of God, of saving some, and of rejecting other some;
it belonging also to the said Decree, that some are called sooner, and some
later.

8 Moreover, whereas the Lord knows who are his; and some there be, whom he
is said not to know: we are thereby stricken with no small fear. It is the
consequent and application the Apostle makes from the excision and extirpation
of the Jews (the natural Branches) and the insition of the Gentiles: Romans
11.20.
Through unbelief they are broken off; and thou stand by Faith: be not high
minded, but fear. There is nothing happen to them, but may befall us: for
others examples, are our Looking-glasses. Judas was termed an Incarnate
Devil; and his end was most fearful: but without the greater supportation of
Gods grace, we should not only betray Christ with Judas; but worser then the
Jews, we should a thousand ways crucify him. Consider we with our selves,
whether there be not now in Hell, such who were of better conversation then
we, while we lived here on earth. Isai calls the people of his time, Isai.
1.10.
The people of Sodom, and, the people of Gomorah.

9 Finally, from the clause and conclusion of this sentence, Let every one, who
calls on the Name of the Lord, depart from Iniquity: direction unto
Sanctification aryseth; because, whom God has chosen unto life, he has also
chosen unto newness of life. Ephesians. 1.4.
He has chosen us (says Saint Paul) before the foundation of the world, that
we should be holy, and without blame before him in love: Whereto answers,
that which he has elsewhere in the same Letter; Ephesians. 2.10.
We are created in Christ Jesus, unto good works, which God has ordained
that we should walk in them. We have the same Divinity delivered us in his
writing to the Thessalonians, 2 Thessalonians. 2.13.
God has from the beginning chosen you to salvation, through sanctification of
the Spirit, and the Faith of truth. Romans 8.
The Elect are styled, Vessels of honor: Wherefore such as will be of that
nature, 2. Tim. 2.21.
for that high service, and not be Disshes of disgrace, must so carry
themselves, as they may be numbered among such. But while we soake our selves
in our Sins, and lie wallowing in our Wickedness, we are worse then Treen
Trayes, and Vessels of the vildest use whatsoever. It is so set down, and
established by order, that the Sun should give us his light by day, and the
Moon by night, and this standing wherein they were primitiuely placed, they
still keep. Yea every Creature in her kind, keeps the course, at the first
prefixed them, in the creation of all things. The Grass grows, Trees
fructify, according to the blessing pronounced by the mouth of God upon them,
when they were first in being, the very end and purpose of their being;
thus are all Christians, Trees that are planted by the right hand of God, to
give their fruit in due season, this being the period and end of their
election, their holy conversation. If thou should pass by a ground, wherein
thou should see a beautiful Vine, prudently kept, enclosed with a wall, that
nothing could hurt it, thou would conclude, that the owner thereof was a
careful man, a good Husband indeed: so is every one of us to keep our bodies
and souls in that godly and holy manner, as the very adversary to our
Religion, be he an Infidel, beholding us, may have occasion to reverence our
Religion, and to say, Great is the God of the Christians. In the setting up of
an House, first we lay the Foundation, then the Sides and Walls round about,
and then the Roof the uppermost part thereof. Faith is the Foundation of this
our House: Good works are the Walls and the rest of the Building that is to
be joined to this Foundation.

To the pulling down of an House, the course is quite contrary to that which
was taken when it was first erected; for that which was set up last was the
Roof; and with the Roof, we begin to reaue it and we come to the Foundation
at the last. So the Devil, seeking the ruin of us all, he first assaulteth
our Good works, the uppermost of our Building; our Alms, our Fastes, our
Prayers, our Charity: and then he lays at the Foundation of our Faith, and
says; Down with it, down with it, even to the ground.

Finally, this parcel of Scripture, is the very Period of all the Scripture,
as the purport of all the Works of God, done, and yet in doing, toward us.
They have many ends and purposes beside; the principal whereof, is the Glory
of God: the rest come in at the second hand, and are servants unto this, as
ordinated and sequestered to this service and office of furthering and setting
soorth the excellency of this Glory.

Now among those of the secondarie sort, this easily is the chief, A zeal to
Piety: a diligent endeavor to depart from Iniquity. The whole Scripture is
resolved into Law, and Gospel. History is a midling between both, and an
appurtenaunce unto them. The whole Law is abridged and summed in this sentence,
Declina a malo; et fac bonum: Eschew that is evil; and ensue that is good. The
whole knowledge of the Law, is in the knowledge of our three-folde estate. 1.
Of that we had by Creation 2 Of that we have now by Nature. 3. Of that we
ought to be now: this one end, to Depart from Iniquity, is Finis vltimis,
always at the end of all of them three. We are told what we were by
Creation; that we should strive by Departing from iniquity, to recover our
primitive condition. We are showed what we are now by corruption; that we
might run from the Law, to Christ; and lead a holy conversation. 3. Lastly,
it lessoneth us what we ought to be; namely, Conformable to our first Image,
of Righteousness and holiness, by renouncing all Wickedness. This is the
only Tribute silver he requires at our hands, as Moses thus expressly tells
us in Deuteronomie. Deuteronomy. 10.12.
What does the Lord thy God require of thee; but to fear the Lord thy God, and
to walk in his ways? The same is the consideration of the Law of the Gospel,
signified by Zachary; Luke. 1.75.
That we being delivered out of the hands of our enemies, might serve him
without fear, in righteousness and holiness before him, all the days of our
life: as by Paul in like manner where he says: Tit. 2.
The Grace of God that brings salvation to all men, has appeared, and
teaches us, that we should deny all ungodliness, and worldly lusts; and that
we should live soberly, and righteously, and godly, in this present world,
looking for that blessed hope, and appearing of that glory of that mighty
God, and of our Savior Jesus Christ, who gave himself for us, that he might
redeem us from all iniquity, and purge us to be a peculiar people unto
himself, zealous of Good works. The like respect there is of all the Works of
God, and his Son Christ, already wrought, or to be wrought for us. The scope
at which they drive, is the renuntiation of our Sins.

All the Works of God, whatsoever they be, must be of these three kinds. 1.
Such as concern our Creation, Preservation, Protection. 2. Or such as belong
to our Redemption by Christ. 3. Or such as appertain to our communicate
Redemption and Grace.

1 The Creation of the World was for man's sake, to the end that man might know
God, and by knowing, glorify him. This is plain by this the Apostle says:
Romans 1.20.21.
The invisible things of him, that is, his eternal power, and Godhead, are
seen by the creation of the world, being considered in his works, to the
intent that they should be without excuse: Because that when they knew God,
they glorified him not as God, neither were thankful. Now God can not
otherwise be glorified, but by our co^formitie to the Law, by our departure
from iniquity, and by our duties of piety and integrity. No other end he
proposes to himself in his afflicted punishments, that so they might consider
his anger toward sin, to be shie thereof, and shun it. He has determined
the Devils, and the Reprobates, to damnation, to no other end, then to warn
the Elect not to sin, and if they sin, to save themselves by repentance, and
by perfourmance, of future obedience. The patience of God, is to the same
purpose: His sufferance, Romans 2.4.
is only a summons to our conversion, to which end says the Apostle: Despicest
thou the riches of his bountifulnes, and patience, and long sufferance, not
knowing that the bountifulness of God leads thee to repentance? The common
and ordinary benefits of God, redound unto the wicked. The Clouds drop
down Fatness upon their Cloddes, they have the gracious dew of his blessing,
though none of his inheritance: That his practice might be president, and
Pattern to us, of piety and perfection, as he intimates in the conclusion
thereof, in this sentence of monition, Be ye also perfect, as your heavenly
Father is perfect.

2 All the Works of our Redemption, are of reference unto this, Our departure
from Iniquity. For all the Promises of the Gospel in Christ, are to dispell
Despair, that we should not as absorpt of Desperation, plunge our selves
through our sins, into the pit of Perdition: but contrariwise, under hope
of Grace, should repent us of our Trespasses, and depart from our Iniquities.
Christ, the Argument of the Gospel, conformed himself to the rites of the
Law, could defy every adversary that could accuse him of Sin, was obedient
to his Father to the death; that his example, should be our imitation,
according to this his direction in such causes; I have given you an exsample,
that as I have done, so should ye do. He that says he is in him, must
walk as he has walked. He cured the Sick, raised the Dead, filled the
Hungry with good things, as for other ends, so namely and mainely, for this
one end, that while they recounted how Sin brought these evils into the
World, they should shake off these evils, and forsake their sins; the Caution
given by Christ to the Palsey-man: Now thou art whole, sin no more, least a
greater evil come unto thee. He remitted sins, that we should commit no
more sins, wherefore he says to the adultresse in the Gospel: Jf no man
condemn thee, J do not condemn thee, Go in peace. The same matter of
meditation, arises unto us, out of the circumstances of his passion. He did
bear the Cross, and suffered the shame for us, to deliver us determined to
eternal death; and to leave us an example, that it seem not grievous unto us,
to suffer all manner of evil unjustly for his sake This use Saint Peter gives
us of Christ Passion for us: 1. Pet 4.1.
Forasmuch as Christ hat suffered for us in the flesh; arm your selves
likewise with the same mind, which is, that he the has suffered in the
flesh, has ceased from sin that he hence forward should live, not after the
lusts of men, but after the will of God: That is in a word, as it is else
where delivered, That we should crucify the flesh with the lusts thereof.

He prayed for his Enemies, to teach us to forbear vengeance, and to bear
wrongs with patience.

He dies, not only to save our Souls from death: but also to the end, that
we should die to our sins. The application that Paul makes of that Article
of the Faith. He is buried, Romans 6.
that we also should bury our sins, and roll a great Stone over the Grave
of them, that they never rise again. The inference, Romans 6.4.
the same Apostle makes in the same place: We are buried then with him by
baptism into his death, that like as Christ was raised up from the dead to the
glory of the Father: so we also should walk in newness of life. He
dispatcheth his Apostles into the wide perambulation of the world, with this
legatiue Commisson, to preach the Gospel, and Remission of sins; and to this
special end, that we should make an end of sin, as in the clause of that
commission, is not obscurely intimated, where these words are added; Teaching
them to observe such things, as J have commanded you.

He ascended up to Heaven, not only to appear for us in the presence of God,
but also to raise up our Souls from the nethermost Pit to the uppermost
Heavens, that we might learn in liew of this benefit, to lead an heavenly
life. It is the warning that Paul gives us out of the said Learning: Coloss.
3.1.2.
If ye be then risen with Christ, seek those things that are above, and not
those things that are on the earth. This was Paul's course of conversation;
Our conversation is in Heaven.

Finally, foretelling the final Judgment, he inserteth this special end
hereof, to give to every one according to his works. Wherefore it stands us
in hand as much as our Souls and Bodies are worth, to look to our ways, and
to follow our iniquities no more.

3 Lastly, the works of our communicate Redemption, implye the same condition.
The Apostle shuts them all up in four words.

1. Romans 8.
Predestination. 2. Vocation. 3. Justification. 4. Glorification.

1. The intention of our Election, heedeth this condition, as where Paul
teaches it, saying: Ephesians. 1.4.
He has chosen us in him before the foundation of the world, that we should
be holy and without blame before him in love.

Of our Vocation, we may say the like: For God has not created us to
uncleanness, but unto holiness. We have Faith given us to obey his Call:
First, that thereby we might partake of the righteousness of Christ imputed to
us. 2. Next, that we might observe the Law; and that the righteousness of the
Law might be fulfilled in us. Romans 6.19.
Hence comes in this Interrogation of the Apostle: Do we make the Law of
none effect through Faith? God forbid: yea, we establish the Law.

He Justifies us, in pardoning our sins, that we should be no more factiue
instruments to sin, 1. Cor. 6.
but that we should Give up our members as servants unto righteousness in
holiness: he instilleth his holy Spirit into us, that being made the Members
of Christ, and the Temples of the holy Ghost, we should take heed how
hereafter we pollute and defile our bodies with iniquities. It is the quick
expostulation and question of the blessed Apostle: 1. Cor. 15.
Know ye not that your bodies are the Temples of the holy Ghost? He that
shall pollute the Temple of God, him shall God destroy. All the Religion that
we have in the Church; as Preaching, Sacraments, Prayers, Discipline, drive at
this end; to die to sin, to live to God.

To conclude, our Glorification includes and concludes the same
consideration; Then shall God be all in all, because then there shall be no
more sin to strive against God. Wherefore, bend we, and band we all our
Sinnewes and Sides against the sides of Sin, that we may live in his fear,
and die in his favor; and enjoy that Place, which the Father of old has
prepared, Christ of late has purchased, and to which we are sealed, by the
Spirit of sanctification: To these three Persons, and one God, be praise, and
glory, now and ever, Amen.

FINIS.

