EPISCOPACIE BY Divine Right.

ASSERTED, BY JOS. HALL, B. of Exon.

seal with fleur-de-lis IN DOMINO CONFI (...)



LONDON, Printed by R.B. for Nathanael Butter, at the Pide-Bull by S.
Augustine's Gate. 1640.

TO THE KINGS Most Excellent Majesty, our most Gracious Sovereign Lord,
CHARLES, By the Grace of GOD, of Great Britain, France, and Ireland, King,
Defender of the Faith, etc.
May it please your Majesty.
WHen, about a year ago, I presumed to tender to your Royal hands some few
short Propositions concerning Church Government, I little thought, that either
the public, or my own Dioecesan Occasions would have called on me for so large
and speedy a pursuance of them, as now I am invited unto. Episcopacie since
that time has suffered in the north, even to the height of patience; and I
have met with some affronts within my own Jurisdiction: All evils (especially
those of Schism^) (...) (as the pl^g^^) (...) ^^^^ing, and do much mischief,
both in their act, and the spreading; It was therefore time for me to bend my
best endeavors both to the remedy of what had happened in mine own Dioecesse,
and prevention of what future mischief might ensue. And long I sat down, and
waited for the undertaking of some abler pen; but seeing such a silence in so
needful a subject, as one that might not be too long wanting either to the
vindication of the common cause, or the safety of my own charge, I have thus
boldly rushed forth into the Press.

I cannot be so weakly inconsiderate, as to think that I could put my finger
into this fire, and not be scorched; I do well know, never any man touched upon
this quarrel, who was not branded with the deepest censure; Yet I do willingly
sacrifice my self herein to God and his Truth.

I confess my heart burns within me to see a righteous cause thus martyred
through unjust prejudice, and to see some honest and well-minded Christians
misled into a palpable error under the pretense of zeal and piety, by the
mere names of two or three late Authors, not more learned and godly, than (in
this point) grossly mistaken.

If your Majesty's great Cares of State could part with so much leisure as to
peruse this short, but faithful relation of the first ground, and original of
this unhappie division in the Church, it might please your Majesty to be
informed, that when Petrus Balma, the last Bishop of Geneva was by his mutining
Citizens frighted, and driven out of his place, and that Church was now left
headless: Farell, and Viret, two zealous Preachers there, devised, and set up
a new platform of Church Government never before heard of in the Christian
World; Themselves would supply the Bishop; and certain Burgesses of the City
should supply his assistant Clergy; and both these together would make up the
body of an Ecclesiastical Senate or Consistory. This strange bird thus
hatched by Farell, and Viret, was afterward brooded by two more famous
successors; and all this within the compass of our present age. Now, had this
form (being at first devised only out of need for a present shift) contained
it self within the compass of the banks of the Lemane lake, it might have
been there retained, with either the connivence, or pity of the rest of the
Christian world: but now finding it self to grow in some places, through the
fame of the abettors, into request, and good success; it has taken the
boldness to put it self forth to the notice and approbation of some neighbor
Churches; and some there are (which I bless my self to see) that have taken
such liking to it, that they have affected a voluntary conformity thereunto:
and being weary of that old form of Administration, which has (without
contradiction) continued in the whole Christian Church from the times of the
blessed Apostles of Christ inclusively until this present age, are not only
eager (out of their credulity) to erect this new frame, but dare venditate it
to the world, after fifteen hundred years deep silence, for the very
Ordinance, and Kingdom of Christ; whereas, if any living man can show any one
lay Presbyter, that ever was in the Christian World, till Farell and Viret
first created him, let me forfeit my reputation to shame, and my life to
justice. This is the true ground of this woeful quarrel; wherein I cannot but
heartily pity the misguidance of many well-meaning souls, of your Majesty's
subjects, which are impetuously carried away in the throng, by the mere sway
of names, and tyranny of an ignorant zeal; not being so much as suffered to
know where they are, or on what ground they go: the fervent desire of whose
reclamation, as of the settlement of others, whom the ill condition of the time
might cause to stagger, has put my pen upon this envious, but necessary
task; whereto also my zeal was the more stirred, by an information, which I
received from the late meeting at Edinburgh; In the eight Session whereof it is
reported, that one M. G. Grahame Bishop of Orkney had openly, before the whole
body of the Assembly, renounced his Episcopal Function, and craved pardon for
having accepted it, as if thereby he had committed some heinous offense; this
uncouth act of his was more than enough to inflame any dutiful son of the
Church, and to occasion this my ensuing (most just) expostulation. Only I had
need to crave pardon of your Majesty for the boldness of this interpellation,
that I have dared to move your Majesty to descend so low, as to take view of
this (on my part, so confidently undertaken) duel; Although, if the Combatants
be single, yet the Cause is so common, as that the whole Church of God claims
her interest in it; But your Majesty's long-knowne goodness incourages me to
this presumption; And withal, I could not but have some due regard to that
right, and propriety, which your Majesty may justly challenge in all the
labors of this kind, from whose pen soever, as being under God appointed the
great Patron of all divine truths, the great Guardian and Protector of these
parts of his Church upon earth, whose true, ancient, and Apostolical
government is here questioned, and whose deserved devotions, and faithful
prayers shall be continually powered out to the God of heaven, for your Majesty's
long and happy preservation, amongst which shall be duly paid the daily tribute
of

Your Majesty's most humble, Loyal, and zealously devoted Subject, and
Servant, Ios. Exon.

The Contents.
The First Part.
1 AN expostulatorie entrance into the question. Page. 1 2 The difference of
the condition of foreign Churches and Divines from those of our Northern
neighbors. Page. 6 3 The judgment of the German Reformers concerning the
retention of Episcopacie. Page. 10 4 The attestation of foreign Divines to our
Episcopacie. Page. 14 5 The particularity of the difference of our freedom,
and the benefit of a Monarchical reformation. Page. 17 6 The project and drift
of the treatise following. Page. 27 7 The first ground or Postulate, That
government whose foundation is laid by Christ, and whose fabric is raised by
the Apostles, is of divine institution. Page. 28 8 The second ground, The
practice and recommendation of the Apostles is sufficient warrant for an
Apostolical Institution Page. 30 9 The third ground, That the forms ordained
for the Churches Administration by the Apostles, were for universal and
perpetual use. Page. 32 10 The fourth ground, That the universal practice of
the Church immediately succeeding the Apostolic times, is a sure Commentary
upon the practice of the Apostles, and our best direction. Page. 35 11 The two
famous rules of Tertullian and S. Augustine to this purpose, asserted. Page. 39
12 The fifth ground; That the Primitive Saints and Fathers neither would, nor
durst set up another form of government different from that they received of
the Apostles. Page. 50 13 The sixth ground; That if the next successors would
have innovated the form of government, yet they could not in so short space
have diffused it, through the whole Christian world. Page. 56 14 The seventh
ground; That the ancientest Histories of the Church, and writings of the first
Fathers are rather to be believed in the report of the Primitive state of the
Church, than the latest Authors. Page. 59 15 The eight ground; That those whom
the ancient Church of God, and all the holy Fathers of the Church since, have
condemned for Heretics, are no fit guids for us to follow in that their
judgment of the government for which they were so condemned. Page. 64 16 The
ninth ground; That the accession of honorable Titles and Compatible
privileges makes no difference in the substance of a lawful and holy calling,
Page. 66 17 The tenth ground; That those Scriptures whereon a new and different
form of government is raised, had need to be more evident, and unquestionable,
than those which are alleged for the former that is rejected. Page. 69 18 The
eleventh ground; That if Christ had left this pretended order of government, it
would have ere this time been agreed upon what that form is, and how to be
managed. Page. 71 19 The twelfth ground; That if this which is challenged be
the Kingdom of Christ; then those Churches which want any essential part of
it are mainly defective; and that there is scarce any at all entire. Page. 72
20 The thirteenth ground; That true Christian policy requires not any thing
absurd, or impossible to be done. Page. 74 21 The fourteenth ground; That new
pretenses of truths never before heard of, especially in maine points, carry
just cause of suspicion. Page. 76 22 The fifteenth ground; That to depart from
the judgment and practice of the universal Church of Christ ever since the
Apostles times, and to betake our selves to a new invention, cannot but be
(beside the danger) extremely scandalous. Page. 78
The Second Part.
1 THe Terms and state of the Question settled and agreed upon. Page. 1 2
Church government begun by our Savior in a manifest imparity. Page. 11 3 The
execution of this Apostolical power after our Saviors ascent into Heaven.
Page. 16 4 The derivation of this power and majoritie from the Apostles to the
succeeding Bishops. Page. 19 5 The clear testimonies of Scripture for this
majoitie, especially those out of the Epistles to Timothy and Titus, urged.
Page. 26 6 Some elusions of these Scriptures met with, and answered. Page. 35 7
The testimony of S. John in his Revelation pressed. Page 41 8 The estate and
order of Episcopacie deduced from the Apostles to the Primitive Bishops. Page.
49 9 The testimony and assent of Bucer, and some famous French Divines. Page.
54 10 The superiority and jurisdiction of Bishops proved by the testimony of
the first Fathers, and Apostolical men: and first of Clemens, the partner of
the Apostles. Page. 59 11 The pregnant and full testimonies of the holy Saint
and Martyr, Ignatius, urged. Page. 65 12 The testimony of the ancient Canons,
called the Apostles. Page. 79 13 The state and history of the next age. Page.
84 14 Proofs of the confessed superiority of Bishops from several forceable
arguments out of antiquity. Page. 88 15 Power of Ordination only in Bishops.
Page. 90 16 Power of jurisdiction appropriated to Bishops from the first. Page.
95 17 Exceptions against our Episcopacie answered, and particularly, of the
dissimilitude of our Bishops to the Primitive in their Pomp and perpetuity.
Page. 99 18 The practice of the whole Christian Church in all times and places,
is for this government by Bishops. Page. 110 19 Of the suppression of contrary
Records; and of the sole opposition of the heretic Aerius. Page. 117 20 The
vindication of those Fathers which are pretended to second Aerius his opinion.
Page. 120 21 The practice of the Waldenses and Albigenses in allowance of
Episcopal government. Page. 125 22 The government by Bishops both universal
and unalterable. Page. 129
The Third Part.
1 THe appellation of Lay Elders, and the state of the Question concerning
them. Page. 1 2 No Lay-Elder ever mentioned, or heard of in the times of the
Gospel in all the world till this present age; the texts of Scripture
particularized in pretense of the contrary. Page. 7 3 Lay-eldership a mere
stranger to all antiquity, which acknowledges no Presbyters, but Divines.
Page. 15 4 S. Ambrose's testimony, urged commonly for Lay Elders, answered.
Page. 19 5 The utter disagreement and irresolution of the pretenders to the new
Discipline concerning the particular state of their desired government. Page.
24 6 The imperfections and defects which must needs be yielded to follow upon
the discipline pretended, and the necessary inconveniences that must attend it,
in a kingdom otherwise settled. Page. 30 7 The known newness of this
invention, and the quality of the late authors of it. Page. 36 8 A
recapitulation of the several heads; and a vehement exhortation to all
Readers; and first to our Northern brethren. Page. 42 9 An exhortatorie
conclusion to our brethren at home. Page. 53
EPISCOPACIE BY DIVINE RIGHT.
. 1.
An expostulatorie entrance into the Question.

GOod God! what is this, that I have lived to hear? That a Bishop in a
Christian Assembly should renounce his Episcopal function, and cry mercy for
his now-abandoned calling? Brother and tell you, it had been much better to
have been unborn, than to live to give so heinous a scandal to Gods Church, and
so deep a wound to his holy truth, and Ordinance. If Tweed that runs between
us, were an Ocean, it could not either drown, or wash off, our interest, or
your offense: however you may be applauded for the time, by some ignorant, and
partial abettors, wiser posterity shall blush for you, and censure you too
justly for Chalcedon, Council. Chalced. of 150 Bish. Can. 29. (...).
no other than sacrilege. For me, I am now breathing toward the end of my
race; the goal is already in mine eye; young men may speak out of ambitious
hopes, or passionate transportations; I that am now setting foot over the
threshold of the house of my before our eyes; let us reason the case in a
modest earnestness. I should be ashamed to find less zeal in my self for holy
Episcopacy, than you think you have showed in disclaiming it. Say therefore, I
beseech you, before God and his elect Angels, say what it is, (besides perhaps
the fear of plundering a fair temporal estate by the furious multitude;) say
what it can be, that induced you to this sinful, to this scandalous and
comfortable waters of divine Truth, to the dry and barren deserts of humane
inventions, it cannot be but as shameful as it is dangerous; both in an high
degree. That some poor seduced souls of your ignorant vulgar should condemn
that calling, which they were never suffered to look at, but with prejudicate
eyes; or, that some of your higher-spirited Clergy, out of an Ambition of this
dignity, and anger of the repulse, should snarle at Episcopacie, to spurn
down that once honorable seat, and to make his very Profession, government
(such perhaps, as have enraged your angry vulgar) these had been just matter
of your humble penitence, and worthy of your most submisse deprecation: but to
repent you of a most lawful, honorable, holy, divine vocation, and thereby to
cast mire in the faces of the blessed Apostles, who received it from their God,
and Savior, and by the guidance of his Spirit ordained it, is such an act,

. 2.
The difference of the condition of foreign Churches and Divines, from those
of our Northern neighbors.

BUt first, ere we enter these lists, let me advise you, and your, now-Maister,
the faction; not to deceive your selves vainly where the calling is (as it
should be) severed from these exceptions to the person, did ever any wise man,
or Christian Church condemn that calling for it self? Yea, if the last Bishop
of Geneva had become a Protestant, aad consented in matter of Doctrine to
Calvin, Farret, Viret, have you or any man living just cause to think that the
City would not gladly have retained his government still, and thought
themselves Calvin himself says for himself, and his Copartners. Calvin de
necessit. Eccles. Reformandae.

Talem si nobis hierarchiam exhibeant, in qua sic emincant Ep^scopi ut Christo
subesse non recusent, ut ab illo tanquam unico capite pendeant, and ad ipsum
referantur, etc. tum vero nullo non anathemate dignos fatear, si qui erunt, qui
n^n eam rev renter summaque obedientia observant, Cited also as approved by
Chamier, De membris Eccles. Lib. 4. Cap. 1.




If they would, says he, bring unto us such an Hierarchy, wherein the Bishops
shall so rule, as that they refuse not to submit themselves to CHRIST, that they
depend upon him, as their only head, etc. then surely if there shall be any
that shall not submit themselves to that Hierarchy reverently, and with the
greatest obedience that may be, I confess there is no Anathema of which they
are not worthy. Thus he, in the treatise of the necessity of reforming Calvin's
just Anathema. Interea tamen, Ecclesiae authoritatem vel past^rum and
Superintendentium, quibus Ecclesiae r^gendae provin^^a mandata est, sublatam
n^lumus. Fatemur ergo Episcopos siv^ Pastores r^v^renter au^iendos qua^enus pro
suae functionis ratione verbum Dei docent Confess. Fidei nomine Gall. Eccles.
Yet again, the same Author in his Confession of Faith, written in the name
of all the French Churches, speaking of the depraved estate of the Roman
Church, then in the fieri of Reforming, plainly Interea tamen; Yet in the mean
time, we would not have the Authority of the Church, or of those Pastors, or
Superintendents, to whom the charge of Governing the Church is committed, taken
away; we confess therefore, that these Bishops, or Pastors are reverently to
be heard, so far forth as according to their function, they teach the Word of
God. And yet more plainly. Sane si very Epis^opi essent, aliquid iis in hac
part auth ritatis tribuerem, non qua tum sibi post^lant, sed quantum ad
politiam Ecclesiae rite ord nandam requiritur. Calv. Instit. l. 4. c. 10.
Certainly (says he, speaking even of Popish Bishops, if they were true
Bishops) I would yield them some authority, in this Case, not so much as
themselves desire, but so much as is required to the due ordering of the
Policy, or Government of the Not first of all stripping him of his Episcopal
power, and discharging all his Clergy of their respects and obedience to him,
and reducing him to the rank of the meanest Plebeian Presbyter, as some hot
heads would have done. You hear how judicious and moderate Calvin's opinion was
then; and had he been in your late pretended Assembly at Glasgow, or this of
Edinburgh, what vote he would have given: Had he had the casting voice, your
Coat had

3.


ANd that the French Reformers may not herein be thought to go alone, take
notice I beseech you, what the Germane Divines of the Ausburgh-Confession, have
freely professed to this purpose. Who taking Occasion to speak of Canonical
Ordination, break forth into these words following; Sed Episcopi, etc. But the
Bishops (say they) do either force our Priests to disclaim and condemn this
kind of Doctrine, which we have here Confessed; or by a certain new and
unheard of kind of Cruelty put the poor and Quam nos magnopere conservare
cupiebamus.
which we earnestly desired to conserve, is in some places now dissolved: And
not long after in the same Chapter; Prorsus hic iterum, etc. And now here again
we desire to testify it (to the world) that we will willingly Conserve the
Ecclesiastical shall hear, and read, that we earnestly deprecating the unjust
cruelty of the Bishops, could obtain no equal measure at their hands. Thus
those learned Divines and Protestants of Germany; wherein all the world sees
the Apologist professes for them, that they greatly desired to conserve the
government of Bishops; that they were altogether unwillingly driven from it;
that it was utterly against their heart, that it should have been impaired or
weakened; Camer. in vita Melancth.
which Camerarius reports concerning those two great Lights of Germany,
Melancthon and Luther: That Philip Melancthon not only by the consent, but the
advice of Who professes also so much in the Smalcaldian Articles. Art. 10.
Luther persuaded the Protestants of that time, that if Bishops would grant
free use Melancthon in an Epistle to Luther has thus; Melanct. Epist. Luthero.
You do not believe in how great hatred I am, both with the Noricians, and I
know not whom else for restoring to the Bishops their jurisdiction: and in a
most true censure in his history of the Augustan Confession; Melanct. Camerario
hist. Conf^s. August per Chytraeum.
Hoc autem male habet quosdam immoderatiores, reddi jurisdictionem, restitui
politiam Ecclesiasticam; This, says he, troubles certain immoderate men, that
jurisdiction is re-delivered to the Bishops, Buc. de Regno Christi. He that
desires to see more testimonies of this kind, I refer him to the Survay of
Discipl. chap. 8.
and their Ecclesiastical policy restored. As for Bucer, he is noted, and
confessedly acknowledged for a favourer

See now I beseech you, how willing these first reformers were to maintain and
establish Episcopal government, how desirous to restore it, how troubled, that
they might not continue it. Might they have enjoyed the Gospel, they would
have enjoyed Episcopacie: In whose steps then do you tread whiles you defy it?
Certainly if the Genevian and Germane Prelacie would have but tolerated a
Reformation

. 4.
The attestation of famous Divines abroad to our Episcopacie.

WHat should I need to press you with those Attestations of high respect which
the most eminent Divines Beza Resp. ad Sarav. p. 111. Vid. Surv. Discipl. p.
135.
To begin with Beza (though a truer back-friend to the Hierarchy, than his
cooler Predecessor) yet this he can say for ours; If now the reformed Churches
of England underpropped with the Authority of Bishops and Archbishops do hold
on, as this has happened to that Church in our memory, that she has had men
of that calling, not only most notable Martyrs of God, but also excellent
Fruatur sane ista singulari Dei beneficentia, quae utinam illi sit perpetua;
Let her in Gods name enjoy this singular bounty of God, which I wish she may
hold for ever. As for learned and moderate Zanchius, he has spent his
judgment so freely on our part, that he confesses, A certain great man (and
we guess whom he means) took exceptions at his favor of Episcopacie. Let me
(not without the professions of my dear respects to my ancient and worthy
friend, D. Molinaeus) tell you what he heartily writes to our late-admirable
Bishop of Winchester, P. 3 Molin. Ep. 3 Reverendiss. viro; Praesuli dignissimo;
D. Episc. Winton.
Egone male vellem Ordini vestro, etc. What? that I should have an ill conceit
of your Order? of which I never France, or Germany has yielded; he that
denies this, is either wickedly foolish, or envious to the glory of God, etc.

What should I need to thicken the air with clouds of witnesses? There is
witness enough in the late Synod of Dort; when the Bishop of Landaffe had in a
speech of his, touched upon Episcopal government, and showed, that the want
thereof gave opportunities to those Divisions, which were then on foot in the
Netherlands: Bogermannus the President of that Assembly, stood up, and in a
good allowance of what had been spoken; said; Domine, nos non sumus adeo
foelices; Alas, my Lord, we are not so happy: neither did he speak this in a
fashionable Complement (neither the person, nor the place, nor the hearers were
fit for that) but in a Casaubon, Fregevill, and Saravia, that no Church in the
world comes so near to the Apostolic form, as the Church of England: And are
you vvearie of that Condition which other good and wise men proclaim happy?
Do you dote upon that, which they would be glad to change?

. 5.
The particularity of the difference in our freedom, and the benefit of a
Monarchical Reformation.

house, when there is no appearance of danger? we cut off a limb to prevent
the deadly malignitie of a gangrene, is this any warrant to dismember the
sound? Right thus stands the Case betwixt other Churches and yours: They found
themselves in danger to be wracked, with the tempestuous storms of popish
Tyranny; to be consumed with the flames of Romish persecution; to be struck
dead with the killing Gangrene of superstition; they saw, on Non culpa ^^str^
^b^sse Episco^atum, s^d injuria temporum: Non enim t^m p^^pit os hab^^ss^ Reges
^^str^^ G^^^^ ^n E^cl^sia v^s^rmanda ^^a ^a^ui^ B^ita^nia n^stra. Epi^c Wi^ton.
Mol^^. e^. Ep 3.
would so far favor Rome: Hereupon therefore they were forced to discard
the office as well as the men; But yet the office because of the men; as
Popish, not as Bishops; and to put themselves for the present into such a form
of Government at a venture, N^si eos coegerit dura necessitas, cui nulla lex
est posita. Hadr. Sarav. resp. ad Bez. de grad. Ministr. Factum Ecclesiarum
reformatarum accipio, and excuso, non incuso, nec exprobro Ibid.
as under which they might be sure, without violent interruption, to sow the
seeds of the saving and sincere truth of the Gospel. Though also it is very
considerable, whether the condition they were in, does altogether absolutely
warrant such a proceeding; for was it not so with us, after Reformation was
stepped in, during those fiery Mary? Was it not so with you, when those holy men,
Patrick Hamilton, and George Wischart sowed the first seeds of Reformation
among you in their own blood? with that Spirit, the Holy Ghost endued them, of
patience and constancy, crowned with martyrdom; not of tumult and furious
opposition; to the disquiet of the State, and hazard of the Reformation it
self; or to the adjuring and blaspheming of an holy Order in the his Bishops
preach for it, write for it, and profess themselves ready, after the example of
their predecessors, to bleed for it. Your and our late learned and pious
Sovereign of blessed memory, with the general votes of a lawful Assembly,
reinforced that Order of Episcopacie, which had been (as I take it) but about
seventeene years discontinued. And how can you now think of paralleling your
condition with the foreign? But that you may not think that Fregevill.
Politic Reform page 70. of the Translation into English.
what wise Fregivillaeus (a deep head, and one that was able to cut even
betwixt the league, the Church, and the State) says concerning it. The
Ministers of the reformation, says he which planted it in France, had respect
unto their business, and to the work they took in hand, when they brought in
this equality, which Was, to plant a Church, and to begin after Jerusalem. As
also they meant not to traverse the state of the Clergy, or to submit it to
their orders, whenever the Clergy, or whole State of France should happen to
admit the Reformation: But their purpose tended only to overthrow
superstition; and in the mean time to bear themselves according to their
simple equality: whereupon I infer, that he that would take occasion of this
equality brought into France, to reverse the estate of the Episcopal Clergy
among the reformed, should greatly wrong the cause of those, who there-under
have reformed France, and had never that intent. Thus he. France, to whom the
whole estate of the French Clergy might, upon fair terms be subjected. Do
you not now in all this, which has been said, see a sensible difference
betwixt their Condition and yours? Can you choose but observe the blessing of
Monarchical reformation amongst us, beyond that popular and tumultuary
reformation amongst our neighbors? Ours, a Council; theirs, an uproare: Ours,
beginning from the head; theirs, from the feet: Ours, proceeding in a due
order; theirs, with confusion: Ours, countenancing, and encouraging the
converted Governors of the Church; theirs, extremely overawed with averse
power, or totally over-borne with foul sacrilege: in a word, ours,
comfortably yielding what the France, before these separate forms of
administration were pitched upon, would have said; You, of the Reformed
profession, enjoy your religion freely, and if of the learned Divines of those
times have slighted the offer, and have said, by your leave Sir, we like it
not; we have other projects in hand; we will set up a new government that
will better befit our purposes: certainly I should vvonder at the man, that
should entertain such an impossible imagination of those wise and godly
learned professors, who were by the iniquity of the times in a manner
forceably Beza, That he never meant to prescribe the Ecclesiastical policy of
Geneva to other Churches; for this were high presumption. And will you be
prescribing to your selves, that, which he would not prescribe to you? Will
you create tha^ to be an universal Ordinance of God, which he dare not warrant
for any other than a Local Constitution?

Neither is there a more sensible difference between the Authority and
success of a Monarchical or popular Reformation, than there is between the
forms which are fit and expedient for large Churches living under the sway of a
Monarch, and those which particular Cities, or territories may admit under a
Democraticall England, or as the Church of France, or such like, might be, if
God should call them to Reformation, the state of the Clergy ought to be
preserved; For equality would be hurtful to the State, and in time breed
confusion. Thus he. And indeed (besides those holy and divine considerations,
Optimates, who by successive Elections sway the government, according to their
municipall rules, not without the assistance, and consent of a greater number
of Plebeian Burgesses; and see (perhaps) this form of Administration in those
places succesfull, it were a crime, of strange braine-sick giddiness, to say
nothing of the heinous moral transgression, to cast off the yoke of just and
hereditarie Monarchy, and to affect this and my respects to the Churches
abroad, and my care and pity of many seduced souls at home, have drawn me on
farther in this discourse, than I meant: For who can endure to see simple and
well meaning Christians abused with the false color of Conformity with other
Churches, when there is apparently more distance in the ground of their
differences, than in the places of their situation? Be wise, my dear Brethren,
and suffer not your selves to (fu friar) confess (unless you can in truth
deny it) that you go alone, and that you have reason absolutely to quit all
the hope of the Patrocination of other Churches, which you might seem to
challenge from of Episcopacie, and your penitent submission to a Presbyteriall
government. Wherein I doubt not but I shall convince you of an high and
irreparable injury done by you to God, his Ordinance, and his Church.

6.
The project and substance of the Treatise following.

has no true footing: either in Scripture, or the practice of the Church, in
all ages, from Christ's time, to the present.

That I may clearly evince these two maine points, wherein indeed consists the
life and soul of the whole cause; I shall take leave to lay down certain just,
and necessary Postulata, as the ground-workes of my ensuing proofs: all which,
are so clear and evident, that I would fain suppose neither your self, nor
any ingenuous

. 7.
The first ground or postulate; That government whose

THe first whereof shall be this; That government, whose ground being laid by
our Savior himself, was afterward raised by the hands of his Apostles,
cannot be denied to be of Divine Institution. A Proposition so clear, that it
were an injury to go about to prove it. He cannot be a Christian, who will
not grant, that, as in Christ, the Son of God, the Deity dwelt bodily; so, in
his servants also and agents under him; the Apostles, the Spirit of the same
God dwelt; so as all their actions, were Gods by them. Like as it is the same
message; these (which was one of the privileges of the Apostles) were through
the guidance of Gods Spirit, in the acts of their Function, inerrable. So then,
if the foundation were laid by Christ, and the walls built up by his Apostles,
the Fabric can be no less than divine.

. 8.


SEcondly, It must also be granted, That not only the government, which was
directly commanded, and enacted; but that which was practiced and recommended
by the Apostles to the Church, is justly to be held for an Apostolical
Institution. In eminent and Chrysostom therefore truly said, That our Savior
did not only speak, but work Parables: So may we say here, that the Apostles
did not only enact, but even act laws for his holy Church. Licet autem nullum
extat praeceptum de manuum impositione, etc. Calv. l. 4. Instit. C. 3.8.16.
And this is learned Calvin's determination about imposition of hands: Although,
says he, there is no certain precept concerning Imposition of Hands, yet
because we see it was in perpetual use with the Apostles, their so accurate
observation of it ought to be unto us instead of a command: and therefore Nec
humanum est inventum, etc. It is no humane device, but the Institution of God
himself; For we read, that Paul and Barnabas ordained Presbyters in all the
Churches of Lystra, Antioch, Iconium: And that direction, which the great
Apostle of the Gentiles gave to Timothy, Calvin truly, Mandati nomine, in the
name and nature of a command. And what else, I beseech you, would the rigid
exacters of the over-severe and Judaicall observation of the Lords day, as an
Evangelicall Sabbath, seem to plead for their vvarrant (were they able to make
it good any way) but the guise and practice of the Apostles. Precept certainly
there is none, either given, or pretended; Thus the bitter Tileno-mastix can
say, There was a double Discipline of the Apostles, Docens and Vtens; in the
first they gave precepts to the Church, Paracles. l. 1. c. 4
and her Governors; in the second, their practice prescribes her government;
although (as he adds without book) not without the Churches own consultation,
and consent: which if it be granted, makes the more for us; who, ever
Cartwright himself ((...)) the example of the Apostles, and general practice
of the Churches under their government draws a necessity.

. 9.


THirdly, it is no less evident, that the form which the Apostles set and
ordained for the governing of the Church, was not intended by them for that
present time, or place only; but for continuance, and succession for ever. For
no man, I suppose, can be so weak, Praecepta ipsa disciplinae omnibus in
futurum Ecclesiis dictante Sp. Sancto tradiderunt. Sco. Wy. Paracles. l. 1. c. 4
as to think that the rules of the Apostles were personal, local, temporary;
as some Dials, or Almanacks, that are made for some special Meridians: but as
their office and charge, so their rules were universal to the whole world; as
far, and as long as the world lasts. For what reason is Crete or Ephesus
should be otherwise provided for, than all the world besides? Or what
possibility to think that those first planters of the Gospel should leave all
the rest of Christ's Church, as the Ostrich does her eggs, in the dust, without
any farther care? The extent and duration of any rule will best be measured, as
by the intention of the Author, so by the nature, and use of it; S. Paul's
intention is clearly expressed for a continuance until the appearing 1 Timothy
6.14.
As for the nature of the several directions, they carry perpetuity, and
universality of use in the face of them; there being the same reason of their
observation by all persons concerned, and in all times and places; why should
not every Bishop be as unreproveable as a Cretian, or an Ephesian? Why should
an accusation be received against an Elder upon more slender evidence in one
place, than another? Why should there not be the same courses taken for
Ordination and Censure in all ages and Churches, since the same things must of
necessity be done every where, in all ages and Churches? But why should I
strive for a granted Truth? For it is plain, that the Isle of Crete, and
Ephesus, were but the patterns of other Timothy and Titus of other faithful
Overseers: If therefore it shall appear, that Episcopacie, so stated as we
have expressed, was in these persons and Churches ordered and settled by
Apostolical direction, it must necessarily be yielded to be of Apostolic, and
therefore Divine Institution.

. 10.
The fourth ground, That the universal practice of the Church immediately
succeeding the Apostolic times, is a sure Commentary upon the practice of the
Apostles, and our best direction.

improbable. A truth, which it is a wonder any sober Christian should bogle at;
yet such there are, to our grief, and to the shame of this late giddy age;
even the great guides of their faction; Polit. Eccles. l. 2. cap. 7. Falsum
est, etc.
Our mis-learned countriman Parker, the second Ignis fatuus of our poor
misled brethren, and some Seconds of his, stand peremptorily and highly upon
the Denial: It is false (says he) that the universal practice of the Church
is sufficient to prove any thing to be of Vniversa Ecclesiae praxis, and
consensus patrum, unica Hierarchicorum Helena est. The universal practice of
the Church, and consent of Fathers, (says he) is the only dearling of the
abettors of the Hierarchy. But the practice of the Church immediately after the
Apostles is no evidence. Hear now, I beseech you, my dear brethren, all ye
who would pretend to any Christian ingenuity, and consider, whether other men
of yesterday; surely in very matter of doctrine this could be no other than
deeply suspicious, than foulely odious: If no man before Luther and Calvin had
excepted against those points wherein we differ from Rome, I should have hated
to follow them; how much more must this needs hold in matter of fact? Judge
what a shame it is to hear a Christian Divine carelessly shaking off all
arguments Jrenaeus, Iren. l. 4. contr haeres.
I am sure, was of another mind; Agnitio vera, says he, The true
acknowledgement is the doctrine of the Apostles, and antiquus Ecclesiae status,
and the ancient state of the Church in the whole world by the Succession of
Bishops, to whom the Apostles delivered the Church, which is in every place:
And then whiles we have both these; the doctrine of the Apostles, seconded by
the ancient state of the Church, who can outface us? What means then this
wilful, and peevish stupidity? Nihil pro Apostolico habendum; Ibid. l. 2. c. 7.
Parker, is to be held for Apostolic, but that which is found recorded in the
writings of the Apostles. Nothing? Was all registered by themselves, which we
must believe they did, or enacted? For doctrine necessary for salvation, we are
for him; but surely for evidence of fact, or rituall observation, this is no
better than absurd rigor, than unchristian incredulity: Where is there
express charge for the Lords Day? Where for Paedobaptisme? Hierome, Hieron
Tom. 6. in Agge 1.
Quae absque authoritate, etc. Those things which men either find or feign,
as delivered by Apostolic tradition, without the authority and testimonies of
Scripture, are smitten by the sword of Gods Spirit; But what is this to us, who
find this which we challenge for Apostolical, recorded in the written Word of
God? Or, with what conscience is this alleged against us, which is directly
bent against the heretical doctrines and traditions Marcionites, either
utterly without, or expressly against the Scripture?

. 11.
The two famous Rules of Tertullian and S. Augustine to this purpose asserted.

I May not baulke two pregnant testimonies Anthierarchist and his Northern
(...) is as much and justly troubled, as our cause is advantaged; not so much
because they are the sentences of ancient Fathers (which they have learned to
turn off at pleasure, with scorn enough) as for that they carry in them such
clearenesse, and strength of reason, as will not admit of any probable
contradiction; The former is, Tertull. con^r. Marcion. c. 4.
that of Tertullian, Constabit id esse ab Apostolis traditum, quod apud
Ecclesias Apostolorum fuerit sacrosanctum; That shall clearly appear to be
delivered by the Apostles, which shall have been religiously observed in the
Churches of the Apostles: What evasion is there of so evident a truth? Vbi
supra.
Me seems (says Parker) that Tertullian understands only those Churches,
Quod est, but Quod fuerit; and thus it may be held true: But this is to mock
himself, and those that trust him, and not to answer all the Fathers
testimony. The question must be, what, in Tertullian's time, should be held to
have been Apostolic; and therefore he says, Constabit, not, Constitit; now,
if he shall speak to Parkers sense, he shall say, That which was religiously
kept practice, descending from them to the succeeding ages; so as either they
must trust the Churches then present, for the deduction of such truth, or else
nothing would be proved Apostolic. Neither is there any thing more familiar
with the Fathers, than to term those the Churches of the Apostles, even for
some hundreds of years after their decease, wherein they (after some
residence) Synesius speaks; as it were too easy to instance in a thousand
particularities; yea, that it may appear how Parker shuffles here, against his
own knowledge, there is a flat mention of the Churches after the time of Saint
John (the longest liver of all that holy train) which he calls Ioannis alumnas
Ecclesias, Tert. l. 4. contra Marc. c. 5.
So as this of Parkers is a miserable shift, and

The other is that famous place of Saint Augustine against the Donatists,
agi^ated by every pen; Quod universa, etc. That which is held by the universal
Church, and not ordained by any Council, but has been always retained in
the Church, is most truly believed to be delivered by no other than
Apostolical authority; which Parker sticks not to profess the Achillaean
argument of the Hierarchists; Neither have they any cause to disclaim it; the
authority of the man is great, but the power of his reason more; For that which
obtains universally, must either have some force in it self to command
acceptance, or else must be imposed by some overruling Authority; and what can
that be, but either of the (however the word, for want of distinguishing, is,
from their abuse, grown into an ill name) must have their place, and use; and
in vain should learned Chamier, Fulk, Whitakers, Perkins, Willet, and other
Controversers labor in the rules of discerning true Apostolical Traditions
from false, and counterfeit, if all were such; and if those which are certainly
true, were not worthy of high honor and respect; Reverend Metropolitan against
his Jesuit A.C. Onwards therefore I must observe; That whereas Chamier does
justly defend, Cham. Panstrat. de Traditionibus.
that the Evidence of these kind of Traditions from the universal receipt of
the Church, does not breed a plerophory of assent; he does not herein touch
upon us; since his Opposition is only Parker himself professes to be far
from importing salvation? Is it not enough that I do as verily believe (upon
these humane proofs) what was done by the Apostles for the plantation and
settlement of the Church, as I do believe there was a Rome before Christ's
Incarnation; or that a Julius Caesar was Emperor, or Dictator there; or Tully
an Orator, and Consul; or Cato a wise Senator; or Catiline a Traitor?
Certainly, thus

Two things are answered hereto, by Parker and his Clients: The one, That the
rule of S. Augustine availes us nothing, since that the Original of
Episcopacie is designed Hierome; as from Councels, by S. Ambrose: but what that
decree was, or could be, besides Apostolical, or what those Councels were, he
were wise that could tell; He, and all his abettors, I am sure, cannot.

But of this in the Sequel. The other (after some mis-applied testimonies of
our own Authors, who drive only at matter of faith) that he can make
instance in diverse things, which were both universally, and perpetually
received (no Council decreeing them) and yet far from an Apostolic
Ordination. Sibrandus Lubbertus helps him to his first instance, borrowed from
S. Augustine, a fixed day Easter: And what of that? How holds his argument in
this? For that this or that day should be universally set, and perpetually kept
for that solemn Feast, who that ever heard of the state of the Primitive time
can affirm? Since those famous quarrels and contrary pretenses of their
several derivations of right from the two prime Apostles, are still in every
man's eye; but that an Easter was agreed to be solemnly kept by the Primitive
Eusebius. l. 5. hist. c. 24. Quanquam enim in ipso die differe^tia erat, in hoc
tamen omnes E^^l^siae conspira^ unt, Diem Paschatis observandum aliquem esse.
Ibid. Polit. Eccles.
those very Contentions betwixt Polycarpus and Annicetus do sufficiently
declare; and Parker himself confesses. Thus it was kept, and withal decreed
by no Council, yet not (says he) by any Apostolical institution: How does
that appear? Nihil illi de festis, etc. They,.i. the Apostles, never delivered
ought concerning Feast-dayes, nor yet of Easter: Why but this is the very
question: Parker denies it, and must we take his word for proof, whereas we
have the Apostles direct, (...)? Let us keep the feast. And afterward there is
a plain deduction of it from and through the times succeeding, as is fully and
excellently set forth by our incomparably-learned, the late Bishop of
Winchester, to whose accurate discourse of this subject, B. Andrews Sermon. of
the Resur. Ser. 13.
I may well

His second instance is the Apostles Creed, which our Authors justly place
within the first three hundred years after Christ; used, and received by the
whole Church, and not enacted by any Councels, yet not (in respect of the form
of it) delivered by the Apostles. A doughty argument, and fit for the great
Controller of times, and Antagonist of government; we speak of the matter of
the Creed, Tilenus his friend instances in (...) and (...), found in Ignatius.
But do these men suppose, S. Augustine meant to send us to seek for all common
expressions of language to the Apostles? Let them tell us: Is there any thing
in the substance of that Creed, which we cannot fetch from the Apostles? Are
not all the several clauses (as he cites them from S. Augustine) per divinas
Scripturas sparsae, inde collectae, and in unum redactae; scattered here and
there in the Scriptures, penned by the Apostles, gathered up, and reduced into
this sum? As for the syntaxe of words and sentences, who of us ever said they
were, or needed to be, fathered (quiddam) vox est, praeterea nihil.

His third instance is in the Observation of Lent; for which indeed there is so
great plea of Antiquity, that himself cannot deny it to be Ignatius, a man
contemporary to some of the Apostles; and as overcome by the evidence of all
Histories, grants it to be apparent, that the whole Church constantly ever
observed some kind of Fast before their Easter; no less than Theophilus
Alexandrinus, Polit. Eccles. ubi supra.
Lex abstinendi, the Law of fasting in Lent has been always observed in the
Church; and what need we more? And yet, says Parker, for all that, Lent was
not delivered by Apostolic authority; Et in eo lapsi sunt Patres; therein the
Fathers are mistaken. Magisterially spoken; and we must believe him, rather
than S. Hierome, who plainly tells us, it is secundum Traditionem Apostolorum,
according to the Tradition of the Apostles. The specialties indeed of this fast
admitted of old very great variety; in Socrates has well expressed; Socrat. l.
5. c. 2. (...).
but for a quoddam jejunium, some kind of fast, I see no reason why the man
that can be so liberal, as to grant it always observed by the universal
Church, should be so strait-laced, as to deny it derivable from the Tradition
of the holy Apostles; and when he can as well prove it not Apostolic, as we
can prove it universal, we shall give him

To what purpose do I trace him in the rest? the ancient rites of the
Eucharist, and of Baptism urged out of Baronius; of gestures in prayer, of the
observation of solemn Feasts, and Embers; let one word serve for all; it will
be an harder work for him to prove their universality and perpetuity, than to
disprove their original; let it be made good, that the whole Church of Christ
always received them, we shall not be niggardly in yielding them this honor
of their pedigree deducible from an Apostolical recommendation: In the mean
time every (not ungracious) son of this spiritual Mother will learn to
kiss the Behold I am with you always to the end of the world; and will
resolve to spit in the face of those seducers, who go about to alienate their
affections from her, and to draw them into the causlesse suspicions of her
chaste fidelity to her Lord and Savior. To shut up

. 12.
The fifth ground, That the Primitive Saints and Fathers neither would nor
durst set up another form of government different from that they received from
the Apostles.

Fifthly, we may not entertain so irreverent evil: And what evil can be
worse, than to violate or transgress Apostolical Ordinances?

How highly does the Apostle of the Gentiles praise the Corinthians, (...). 1
Cor. 11.2. (...).
That they kept all his orders, and observed his Traditions; and would he have
less deeply blamed those, that should have wilfully broken them! Vultis veniam
in virga, Will ye that I shall come to you with a rod, says the same Apostle;
All the Christian Moses his back was turned) worship Idols of their own
invention? Surely he must be strongly uncharitable that shall think so,
strangely impudent that dares maintain it, and wickedly credulous that can
believe it.

Quae defectio in Ecclesia quidem ipsa Apostolorum aetati proxima adeo coepit,
ut argumento certo illius universa praxis esse nequeat. Pa^k. Polit. Eccles. l.
2. c. 8.
But the defection began in the Church, presently after the Apostles; yea in
their time; A point eagerly urged by the faction: It is no trusting therefore
to the universal practice of the Successors. Our own Authors are frequently
alleged for the earliness of this Apostasy; Whitakers, Reynolds, Field,
Mornay; what need it, when the Apostle himself tells us, the mystery of
iniquity began then to work: Paul himself by appointing Bishops, was himself
a worker in it. The mystery of iniquity? What is that, but the plots of that
Antichrist? Yea but you ordinarily speak of him, as I thought, but as one: The
Roman vice-god; Now I perceive it is a mistake; there was the Antichrist at
Jerusalem; the Antichrist of Antioch; of Alexandria; shortly in every Church,
one. But let them say Rome to be the Antichrist or not? If they do; let them
show us what it is that makes him so, which all good Bishops do not as mainly
oppose? What hand has the Patri^ rch of Constantinople, or Alexandria, or the
Abassine Bishops in his transcendent supremacy and usurpation? These disclaim
him, these resist him? Did the Episcopacie of these and all other Christian
Churches give any aid to the advancement of that usurpers infallibility, or
universal supremacy? Did, or do the Christian Bishops of all other Churches
give him their shoulder to hoyse him up above all that is called God? If they
help him up, who offers to pull him Rome, yet not for the Grecian, Syrian,
Asian Churches: No, no, it was not any point of the defection, this, but rather
of the perfection of the Church; But here we are choked with the examples of
some Churches, which soon after their plantation, swerved from their former
purity; Of Israel it is said: Rehoboam left the Law of the Lord, 2 Chronicles. 12.1.
and all Israel with him; Of the Galathians; I Galat. 1.6.
and several errors are reckoned up of succeeding Churches and men. It is no
such strange matter therefore, that the Christian Church should in some sort
fail after the decease of the Apostles: How little reason, and great
uncharitableness is there in this Argument? If there were some errors, shall
we suspect all truths? And if some particular Churches failed in some opinions,
shall we therefore mis-doubt the practice of the universal? Parker grants,
that in the times of the Apostles, the Church was in her ((...)) the height of
her health; even then, were there not quarrels, were there not foul
mis-opinions in the Churches of Corinth, Galatia, Thessalonica, Colossae? If
these particular failings did not hinder Keckerman observes not ill) a
remarkable alteration in every state; Neither is the Church privileged from
mutability: but as a man changes his complexion, but still holds his visage;
and as the State changes those which succeeded the Apostolic: And if some men
therein declined toward error or heresy, God forbid the Church should
suffer, as guilty of their lapses: But as for the maine laws of
Church Discipline, if the succeding Governors should have so foulely forgotten
themselves after the decease of the two great Apostles of the Gentiles, and the
Circumcision; yet Saint John lived a fair age after, no

13.
The sixth ground: That if the next successors would have innovated the form
of government, yet they could not in so short space have diffused it through
the whole Christian world.

But sixthly, if the succeeding Church Governors, to their neighbors. How then
can any living man conceive it possible, if there had not been an uniforme
order settled by the Apostles, that all the world should so suddenly meet in one
form of policy, not differing so much as in the circumstances of government?
That which Parker thinks to speak for his advantage ( neque uno impetu
disciplina statim mutata est, Polit. Eccles. l. 2. c. 8.
sed gradatim and paulatim; that the discipline was not Amsterdam varying from
those of Leiden concerning their government; and in the New-English Colonie
those of the Boston-leaders from the Western Plantation? When we see drops of
water spilt upon dry sand, running constantly into one and the same stream, we
may then hope to see men and Churches, not overswayed otherwise with one
universal command, running every where into a perfect uniformity of
government, especially in a matter of such nature and consequence, as
subordination and subjection is. It was the singular and miraculous blessing of
the Gospel in the hands of the first Propagators of it; Psalm. 19.3, 4.
that, There was no speech nor language of a sudden, went out through all the
earth, and their words to the end of the world. The Sun, which rejoices as a
strong man to run a race, could scarce out-goe them; but as for their
followers, the very next to them, they must be content to hold their own, a
much slower pace, and by leisure to reach their journeyes end; If therefore it
shall be made to appear, that presently after the decease of the Apostles, one
uniforme order of Episcopal

. 14.
The seventh ground: That the ancientest histories of the Church, and Writings
of the first Fathers are rather to be believed in the report of the Primitive
state, than the latest Authors.

Parker, the late oracle of the schism, has dared to do it in terms; who
speaking of the testimony of the Primitive times; Park. Polit. Eccles. l. 2. c.
^.
Haecne Ecclesia illa est, quae certum testimonium in causa disciplinaria
praestitura nobis est? Is this, says he, (in the high scorn and pride of his
heart) the Church that shall give us so sure a testimony in the cause of
Discipline? and every where disparaging the validity of the ancient histories,
preferres the present; Is Eusebius mentioned, who records the succession of
Primitive Bishops from their first head? Ibid. l. 2. c. 5.
At Eusebio defuit, etc. But, says he, Eusebius being carried away with the
sway of that age, wanted that golden reed, which is given to the Historians of
our times, Apoc. 11.2. to measure the distance of times, the difference of
manners, the inclinations of Churches, and the Ibid. c. 8.
for, says he, Non volent^s, sed nescientes, non per apostasiam, aut
contemptum, sed per infirmitatem and ignorantiam lapsi sunt Patres, qui in
disciplina aberrarunt. The Fathers, who erred in this matter of discipline, did
not offend out of will, but out of want of knowledge; suggestion to believe
that all ancient histories are false, all the holy and learned Fathers of the
Church ignorant, and erroneous; and that none ever saw, or spoke the truth, not
of doctrine only, but not of fact, until now that these men sprung up, follow
them, and rely upon their absolute and unerring authority; but if you have a
mind to make use of your senses, and reason, and not to suffer your selves
Quid autem? Patres qui adversus nos, etc. Polit. Eccles^l. 2. c. 19.
Parker, which by the favorers of Episcopacie are produced against us, were,
for the most part, Bishops; so as, while they speak for Episcopacie, they
plead for themselves? Ecquis igitur eos credendos dicet? Will any man therefore
say they are to be believed? Or will any man forbid us to appeal from them?
Blessed God! that any who bears the title of a Christian, should have the
forehead thus to argue: Appeal? To whom I pray? To the succeeding Doctors and
Fathers? No, they were in the same predicament; to the rest of the whole
Church? They were governed by these leaders; whither therefore can they imagine
to appeal, but to themselves? and what proves this then, but their own case?
And if the Fathers may not be suffered to be our witnesses,

But the Fathers were Bishops; the case was their own; true, they were
Bishops; and it is our glory and comfort, that we have had such predecessors:
In vain should we affect to be more holy and more happy than they; Let them,
if they can, produce such presidents of their parity. But, the case was theirs.
Had then according to their unanimous apprehension of the true meaning of the
Scriptures, and according to the certain knowledge of the Apostolic
Ordinances, derived to them by the undoubted successions of their known
predecessors; Heaven may as soon fall, as these evidences may fail us: See
then, I beseech you brethren, the question is, whether a man may see any object
better in the distance of one

. 15.
The 8th. ground: That those whom the ancient Church of God, and all the holy
Fathers of the Church have condemned for heretical, are no fit guides for us
to follow in that judgment of the government for which they were so condemned.

EIghthly, I must challenge it for an unquestionable Cyprian did in that case
of Rebaptizing) the Church takes up his truth, as her common stock, balkes his
error, not without a commiserating censure. Now if any man shall think fit to
pitch upon the noted mis-opinions of the holiest authors, for imitation or
maintenance, what can we esteem of him, but as the fly, who, passing by the
sound parts of the skin, falls upon a raw and ulcered sore: And if the best
Saints may injustifying the wicked, Esa. 5.23.
and taking away the righteousness of the righteous from them. Is not he like
to make a good journey, that chooses a blind, or lame guide for his way? When
the Spouse of Christ enquires after the place of his feeding, Cant. 1.7, 8.
and where he makes his flock to rest at noone, he answers her; If thou know
not, O thou fairest among women, go thy ways forth by the footsteps of the
flock, and feed thy kids besides the shepherds tents; what is his flock, but
Christian souls, and his shepherds, but the holy and faithful Pastors? The
footsteps then of this flock, and the tents of these Shepherds are the best
direction for any Christian soul for the search of a Savior, and of all his
necessary truths. To deviate from these, what is it but to turn aside by the
flocks of the Companions? If then it shall be made to appear, that one only
branded Heretic in so many hundred years has opposed the received judgment
and practice of the Church concerning Episcopal government, I

. 16.
The ninth ground. That the accession of honorable titles, and compatible
privileges, makes no

NInthly, It must be yielded, that the accession of honorable titles, or (not
incompatible) privileges, makes no difference in the substance of a lawful
and holy calling: These things, being merely external, and adventitious, can
no more alter the nature of the calling, than change of suits, the body.
Neither is it otherwise with the calling, than with the person whose it is; The
man is the same whether poor or rich; The good Patriarch was the same in
Potiphar's dungeon, and on Pharaoh's bench; Our Savior was the same in
Joseph's workhouse, and in the hill of Tabor; Saint Paul was the same while he
sat in the house with Aquila making of Tents, that he was reigning in the
Pulpit, or disputing in the School of Tyrannus. As a wise man is no whit
differently affected with the changes of these his outward conditions, but
looks upon them with the same face, and manages them with the same temper; so
the judicious beholder indifferently esteems them in another; as being some
garments be course, yet they may serve to defend from cold; others, besides
warmth, give grace and comeliness to the body; there may be good use of both;
and perhaps one and the same vesture may serve for both purposes. It is an old
and sure rule in Philosophy, That degrees do not diversifie the kinds of
things; The same fire that flashes in the Tow, glowes in the Juniper; if one
gold be finer than another, both are gold; if some pearls be fairer

. 17.
The tenth ground: That those Scriptures whereon a new and different form of
government is raised, had need to be more evident and unquestionable, than
those which are alleged for the former, rejected.

it is fit there should be a legal ejection, and that ejection must be upon
better evidence of right; If therefore the Church of God have been quietly
possessed of this government by Bishops, for above these sixteen hundred
years, it is good reason the ejectors should show better proof than the
ancient possessours, ere they be outed from their Tenures: And what better
proof can there be than more clear Scripture? Shortly then, if it shall

. 18.
The eleventh ground: That if Christ had left this pretended order of
government, it would have ere this time been agreed upon, what that form is,
and how to be managed.

must be managed: If then it shall be made to appear, that the pretenders to
the desired Discipline cannot yet, all this while, agree upon their verdict,
for that kingdom of Christ, which they challenge; it will be manifest to every
ingenuous Reader, that their platformes of this their imagined kingdom, are
but the Chimericall devices, and whimsies of men's brains, and worthy to be
entertained accordingly.

. 19.
The twelfth ground: That if this which is challenged, be the kingdom of
Christ, then those Churches which want any essential part of it, are mainly
defective, and scarce any at all entire.

TWelfthly, It must be yielded, that if this, entirely set up, but is still
mainly defective. If therefore it shall appear, that even in most of those
Churches which do most eagerly contend for the Discipline, there neither are,
nor ever were all those several Offices, which are upon the list of this
spiritual Administration, it will irrefragably follow, that either those
Churches do not hold these offices necessary, which having power in their
hand, they have

. 20.
The thirteenth ground: That true Christian policy requires not any thing
absurd or impossible to be done.

THirteenthly, I have reason to require it granted, That true Christian policy
necessity of the times would allow; this is no president for the same persons
(if they were now living) and at their full liberty and power; neither can the
Churches of those Cantons or Cities, which challenge a kind of freedom in a
Democraticall State, be meet examples for those which are already established
under a settled Monarchy: If therefore it shall appear, that many foul and
unavoidable

. 21.
The fourteenth ground: That new truths never before heard of, especially in
maine points, carry just cause of suspicion.

FOurteenthly, It must be granted, that, Tertullians rule, quod primum verum,
That the first is true, then the latest is seldom so, where it agrees not with
the first. After the teeming of so many ages, it is rarely Liberum esse praeter
and contra sanctorum Patrum and Doctorum sententiam, in religionis doctrina
innovare. Alphons. Var. Toletan. de Stratagem. Jesuit.
that a New and Posthumous verity is any other than spurious. It was the
position (it seems) of Poza the braine-sick Professor of Divinity, set up by
the Jesuits at Madrill; That it is free for any man besides and against the
judgment of the holy Fathers and Doctors, to make innovations in the doctrine
of religion; And for his warrant of contemning all ancient Fathers and Councels
in respect of his own Opinions, borrowes the words in Ecclesiasticus; Council.
Constantinop. Act. 5. Ecclesiast 25. (...).
cited by the Council of Constantinople; Beatus qui praedicat verbum
inauditum, Blessed is he that preaches the word never before heard of;
impiously, and ignorantly marring the text, mistaking the sense, belying in
auditum; he turns them both into one adjective (inauditum) and makes the
sentence as monstrous, as his own stupidity. Pope Hormisda in his Epistle to
the Priests and Deacons of Syria, turns it right, Qui praedicat verbum in
aurem obedientis; He that preaches a word to the obedient; far be it from
any Ier. 6.16.
and will walk therein accordingly; and in so doing, finds rest to his soul; he
that preaches this word, is no less happy, than he that obediently hears
it; neither shall a man find true rest to his soul, in a new and untrodden
by-way. If therefore it shall be made to appear, that this government by
lay-Presbyters, is that which the ancient, and succeeding Church of God never
acknowledged, until this present age, I shall not need to persuade any wise
and ingenuous Christian (if otherwise he have not lost the free liberty of his
choice) that he has just cause to suspect it for a misgrounded novelty. For
such it is.

. 22.
The fifteenth ground: That to depart from the judgment and practice of the
universal Church of Christ ever since the Apostles times, and to betake our
selves to a new invention, cannot but be (besides the danger) vehemently
scandalous, etc.

LAstly, it must upon all this necessarily follow; that to depart from the
judgment and practice of the universal Church of Christ ever since the
Apostles times, and abandon that ancient form wherein we were and are legally
and peaceably infeoffed, to betake our selves to a new one, never, till this
age, heard of in the whole Christian world, it cannot but be extremely
scandalous, and savor too much of Schism. How ill does it become the mouth of
a Christian Divine, which Parker has let fall to this purpose; Quod duo (...)
posuerit. Park. Polit. Eccles. l. 2. c. 5.
Who dares to challenge learned Casaubon for proposing two means of deciding
the modern controversies, Scriptures, and Antiquity; what more easy Salomons
charge, Remove not the old landmarks. Prove. ^
If therefore it shall be made to appear, that Episcopacie, as it presupposes
an imparity of order and superiority of government has been a sound stake
pitched in the hedge of Gods Church, ever since the Apostles times; and that
Parity and lay-Presbytery are but as new-sprung of lay-Presbyters has never
been so much as mentioned, much less received in the Church, until this
present age; I shall need no farther argument to persuade all peaceable and
well-minded Christians to adhere to that ancient form of Administration, which
with so great authority is derived unto us, from the first Founders of the
Gospel; and to leave the late supply of a lay-Presbyterie to those Churches,
who would,

The Second Part.
. 1.
The terms and state of the Question, settled and agreed upon.

THese are the grounds; which, if they prove (as they cannot but do) firm and
unmovable, we can make no fear of the superstructure: Let us therefore now
address our selves to the particular points here confidenly undertaken by us,
and made good all those several issues of defense, which our holy cause is
most willingly cast upon.

But before we descend to the scanning of the matter; reason and order require,
that according to the old and sure rules of Logicians, the terms be cleared and
agreed upon; otherwise we shall perhaps fight with shadows, and beat the air.

It has pleased the providence of GOD, so to order it, that as the Word it
self, the Church; so the names of the Offices belonging to it, in their
several comprehensions, should be full of Senses, and variety of use and
acception; and that in such manner, that each of them 1 Cor. 14. Act 1.20 2 Ep.
John and 1 Peter 5.1. 1 Timothy 4.6.
an Evangelist, an Apostle; an Apostle, a Bishop; an Apostle, a Presbyter; a
Presbyter, an Apostle, as Romans 6.7. a Presbyter, a Bishop: and lastly, an
Evangelist and Bishop, a Deacon or Minister; for all these met in Timothy,
alone, who, being Bishop of Ephesus, is with one breath charged to do the work
of an Evangelist, and to fulfill his (...), or Ministry: It could not be
otherwise likely, but from this community of names there would follow some
confusion of apprehensions; for since names were intended for distinction of
things, where names are the same, how can viz. To plant the Church, and to
ordain the Governors of it; of a Bishop, an other, to wit, To manage the
Government which was the propagation of the Gospel, and the sounding of Gods
Church; and soon after, the very terms were contra-distinguished, both by the
substance of their charge, and by the property of their Titles; insomuch as
blessed Ignatius, that holy Martyr, who lived many years within the times of
the Apostles, in every of his Epistles (as we shall see in the sequel) makes
express mention of three distinct orders of Government, Bishops, Presbyters,
Deacons.

Now we take Episcopacie, as it is thus punctually differenced, in an eminence
from the two inferior orders of Presbyter and Deacon; so as to define it,
Episcopacie is no other than an holy order of Church Governors, appointed for
the Administration of the Church. Or, more fully thus; Episcopacie is an
eminent order of sacred function, appointed by the Holy Ghost, in the
Evangelicall The one are furiously and impetuously fierce, crying down
Episcopacy for an unlawful, and Antichristian state, not to be suffered in a
truly Evangelicall Church, having no words in their mouths, but the same
which the cruel Edomites used concerning Jerusalem, Down with it, down with
it, even to the ground: And such are the frantic Separatists, and
Semi-separatists of our time, and Nation, Calvin or Beza were alive, to see,
they would spit at, and wonder whence such an offspring should come. Men that
defend and teach there is no higher Ecclesiastical government in the world,
than that of a Parish: that a Parochial Minister (though but of the blindest
village in a Country) is utterly independent, and absolute, or French
discipline, Honoratiss. Do. Glanico Cancellario Scotiae respon. ad sex
quaestiones.
for which we find Beza's directions (although both your act of a
brenunciation, and some speeches, let fall in the assembly of Glasco, and of
the plea of Covenanters (fetching Episcopacy within the compass of things
abjured) might seem to intimate some danger of inclination this way) our
charity bids us hope the best, which is, that you hate the frenzeys of these
our wild Contrymen abroad, for whom no answer is indeed fit, but opposites
at once convinced. But before we offer to deal blows on either side, it is fit
we should know how far we are friends and upon what points this quarrel stands.

It is yielded by the wiser fautors of Discipline, that there is a certain
Polity necessary for the retention of the Churches peace; That this Polity
requires that there must be several Congregations or flocks of Christians, and
that every propound the Cases, gather the voices, pronounce the Sentences and
judgments; but in the mean while, he (having but lent his tongue for the time
to the use of the Assembly) when the business is ended, returns to his own
place without any personal inequality. A lively image whereof we have in our
lower house of Convocation; the Clerks whereof are chosen by the Clergy of the
several Diocesses: They all having equal power of voices, assemble together,
choose their Prolocutor; He calls Jurisdiction. Calvin in this case shall speak
for all, who writing of the state of the Clergy in the Primitive times, has
thus, Calv. Instit. l. 4. c. 4.
Quibus ergo docendi munus etc. Those therefore which had the charge of
teaching injoined unto them, they named Presbyters: These Presbyters out of
their number in every city chose one to whom they especially gave the title of
Bishop; lest from equality (as it commonly falls out) discords Beza in his
Treatise of the degrees of the ministry; Moulin, Chamier, others. So as we
easily see how our Bishop differs from Calvin's, namely in a settled imparity,
and a perpetuity of jurisdiction. Give me therefore such a Pastor, as shall be
ordained a perpetual Moderator in Church affairs, in a fixed imparity,
exercising Spiritual Jurisdiction, out of his own peculiarly demandated
Authority, this is the Bishop whom we contend for, and whom they oppose; I do
well see therefore how we may make a shorter cut of this controversy, than
has formerly been made by others, whose large discourses (upon the importune
Angariation of others) has been learnedly spent upon the names and titles of a
Bishop, Apostolical and divine Institution: to which Task we now address our
selves, (...). etc.

. 2.
Church government begun by our Savior in a manifest imparity.

noted still by an article of Eminence ((...)) The twelve, others were
laborers in the work, these were master builders, as St. Paul to his
Corinthes; others might heal by their touch, these by their very shadow: Others
had the holy Ghost, these gave it: Philip was an Evangelist, he preached, he
wrought miracles, he converted and baptized the Samaritans, yet till Peter and
John came down and prayed, and laid their hands on them, Act. 8.14.15.
they recived not the holy Judas, Hier. de script. Eccles.
it must, by the direction of the Spirit of God, be made up by an election out
of the 70. Had it not been an higher preferment to have been an Apostle,
wherefore was that scrutiny and choice? What do I urge this point? He never
read Scripture that can doubt of it: wherefore did the chosen vessel stand so
highly upon 1 Cor 12.28.
Secondly Prophets, Thirdly Teachers, then those that do miracles, after that
the gifts of healing, helps in governing, diversity of Tongues; but perhaps you
will not be so illiberall, as to deny the Apostles a precedence of honor in
the Church: how can you, and be a Christian? But you stick at their
Jurisdiction: Here was nothing but equality; true, an equality among
themselves, pari consortu praediti, et honoris et potestatis, as Cyprian truly:
but a superiority of power in them all, and in each of Matthew. 19.2^.
ye that have followed me in the Regeneration, when the Son of man shall sit in
the throne of his glory, ye shall also sit upon twelve Thrones, judging the
twelve Tribes of Isarel; ((...)) in the Regeneration. That is, as Cameron very
well interprets it, Camer. in locum.
in the Renovation of the Church: for under the state of the Gospel, the Church
was as new born, and made Paul, All things are become new; alluding to the
Prophet Isaiah, who to this sense, Behold (says he) I create new heavens and a
new earth, Esa 65.17.
and the former shall not be remembered nor come into mind. And Beza himself,
though he make a difference in the pointing, and thereby in the Construction,
yet grants, that according to his second sense, the preaching of the Gospel by
Christ and his messengers, is meant by this regeneration Quia tum veluti de
integro conditus est mundus, because then the world was, as it were, made anew:
So as then was the time, when the Son of man began to be exalted to the
Throne of his glory, both in earth and in Heaven: And then should the Twelve
that had forsaken all for him, enjoy all in him: Then should they sit on twelve
Thrones, and judge the Number. 1.16.
They had their twelve Princes of the Tribes of their Fathers, heads of the
thousands of Israel. Nu. 11.16.17.
They had their seventy Elders to bear the burden of the people.

The Son of God affects to imitate his former Polity, and therefore chooses his
twelve Apostles, and 70 Disciples o tgather and sway his Evangelicall Church:
The twelve Tribes then are the Church: The twelve Apostles must be their Judges
and governors: Their siitting shows author^tie: Their sitting on Thrones,
eminence of power: their sitting on twelve Thrones, equality of their Rule:
their sitting to judge, power and exercise of Jurisdiction: their sitting to
judge the twelve Tribes of Israel, the universalitie of their power and
jurisdiction: And what Judgment could this be but Ecclesiastical and
Spiritual (for civil rule they challenged not) and what Thrones but
Apostolical, Aerius himself: Epiphan. haere. 75.
And if the Apostles seat was his Throne, and the Bishops succeeded the
Apostles in those seats, who can deny them this power of Spiritual judicature
and jurisdiction? To the same purpose is that of S. Augustine, Aug. de Civit.
dei 1. 20.
who upon the words of S. John, I saw seats, and some sitting on them, and
judgment was given, has thus Non hoc putandum We may not think this spoken of
the last judgment, but the seats of the Prelates or presidents by whom the
Church is governed, and the governors themselves are to be understood, and the
judgment that is given cannot be any better way taken, than for that which is
said, Whatsoever ye bind on earth, shall be bound in heaven.

. 3.
The execution of this Apostolical power after our Saviors ascent into Heaven.

THe power is clear, will you see the Execution of it? Look upon St. Paul, the
Posthumous, and Supernumerary, but no less glorious 2 Thessalonians 36.
charging and commanding, another while 1 Cor. 5.4.5.6.7.
controlling and censuring: One while 1 Cor. 11.2. 1 Cor. 16 1.
giving Laws and Ordinances, another while urging for their observance: One
while 1 Timothy 1.6. 1 Timothy 2.9. 1 Timothy 6 13. 2 Cor. 13.2. 2 Cor. 4.21. 1 Timothy
1.20.
ordaining Church Governors, another while adjuring them to do their duties:
one while threatening punishment, another while inflicting it: power in Gods
Church: And if any person whosoever (though an Evangelist or Prophet) should
have dared to make himself equal to an Apostle, he had been hissed out, yea
rather thunderstruck by deep Censure, for an Arrogant and saucy usurper. Now
if our blessed Savior thought it fit to found his Church in an evident
imparity, what reason should we have to imagine he did not intend so to
continue but equal to the Presbyters they ordained. No they still and ever (as
knowing they were qualified for that purpose, by the more special graces of
the holy Ghost) kept their holy state, and maintained the honor of their
places. What was the fault of Diotrephes, but that, being a Church-governour,
he proudly stood out against St. John, not acknowledging the Transcendant
power of his Apostolical Jurisdiction, whom the provoked Apostle threats to
correct Diotrephes in our dish, do little consider that they buffet none but
themselves, who symbolize with him in opposing Episcopal, that is, as all
antiquity was wont to construe it, Apostolical government.

But you are ready to say, This was during their own time, they were persons
extraordinary, and their calling and superiority died with them: Par^c^ ^l. 1.
c. 4.
Thus our Tileno-mastix in terms. The only question is, Whether of the ordinary
were Christians, Presbyters, Bishops, Apostles. So it was, they were Apostles
immediately called, miraculouslie gifted; infalliblie guided, universallie
charged. Thus, they had not, they could not have, any successors; they were
(withal) Church governors appointed by Christ to order and settle the affairs
of his Spiritual Kingdom; And therein (besides the preaching of the Gospel,
and baptizing, common to them,

4.
The derivation of this power and majority from the Apostles to the succeeding
Bishops.

NOw therefore, that we have seen what ground our Savior laid for a
superiority in them: Let us see how they by his divine inspiration erected it
in others, who should follow them; that was Apostolical, this was Episcopal:
It is true, as Cal^in says, that at the first, all to whom the Dispensation of
the Gospel was committed, were called Presbyters, whether they were Apostles,
Evangelists, Prophets, Pastors and Doctors, as before the Apostles were
commonly called by the name of Disciples, in every Chapter, yet in degree still
above the 70; and we do still say, one while Bishops Jerome truly, All maine
matters were done in the beginning by the common Council, and consent of the
Presbyters; their consent; but still the power was in the Apostles, who in the
nearer Churches (since they in person ordered Ecclesiastical affairs) ordained
only Presbyters; in the remoter, Bishops. This for the Consummation of it, was
an act of time; Neither was the same course held at once, in every Church
(whiles it was in Fieri) some, which were nearer, being supplied by the
Apostles presence, needed not so present an Episcopacy, Others that were small,
needed not yet their full number of Offices, that they must needs be divided
into many Congregations, and those Congregations must necessarily have many
Presbyters, and those many Presbyters, in the absence of the Apostles, began to
emulate each other, and to make parties for their own advantage; then (as St.
Jerome truly notes) began the manifest and constant distinction betwixt the
Office of Bishops and Presbyters to be both known and observed. For now, the
Apostles, by the direction Supervisors, and Governors. So as the Ministers
((...)) Phil. 3.7. they (...), (for as the Offices, so the names of Bishop and
days, and under their own hands, although sometimes the names, after the
former use, were confounded.

All the question then shortly, is, whether the Apostles of Christ ordained
Episcopacie, thus stated, and thus fixedly-qualified with Imparitie and
Jurisdiction. For if we take a Bishop for a parochial Pastor, and a Presbyter
for a Lay-elder (as too many misconstrue the terms) viz for that which we call
now Priesthood; the other is a merely new and uncouth devise, neither came ever
within the Ken of antiquity. As for the further subdivision of this quarrel,
whether Episcopacy must be accounted a distinct Order, Iuris humani; And I
cannot but wonder at the toughness of those other opposites, which stand so
highly upon this difference, to have it merely but a degree; In the mean while
never considering that those among the Pontificiall Divines (which in this
point are the greatest Patrons of this their fancy) go all upon the ground of
the Mass, according to which they regulate and conform their opinions
therein; First making all Ecclesiastical power to have reference to the body
of Christ; Bellarm. de sacram. Ord n. l. 1. c. 9.
(as Bellarmine fully) then every Andrews, Winton. Epist. ad Molin. 1.
ci es it out of the School, qua potestas there can be no reason to deny
Episcopacy to be a distinct order, since the greatest detractors from it, have
granted the power of Ordination of Priests and Deacons, and of Imposition of
hands for Confirmation, to Bishops only: They are Chamiers own words, Camer.
de Oe cumen. Pontif. l. 10. c. 5.
Accipere Episcopum novam potestatem, and Jurisdictionem non iverim inficias; I
cannot deny that a Bishop (as such) receives a new power and jurisdiction:
Moreover in the Church of England, every Bishop receives a new Ordination (by
way of Eminence, commonly called his Consecration) which cannot be a void-Act,
I trow, and must needs give Paul in his Epistles to Timothy and Titus; Surely
in my understanding the Apostle speaks so home to the point, that if he were
now to give direction to an English Bishop, how to demean himself in his
place, he could not speak more fully to the execution of this sacred Office:
For I demand what it is that is stood upon, but these two particulars, the
especial power of Ordination, and power of the ruling and censuring of
Presbyters; and if these two be not clear in the charge of the Apostle to those
two Bishops, one of Crete, the other of Ephesus; I shall yield the cause, and
confess to want my senses.

. 5.
The clear Testimonies of Scripture, especially those out of the Epistles to
Timothy and Titus, urged.

NOw, because this is the main point that is stood upon, and some wayward
opposites are ready to except at all proofs Timothy is charged, 1 Timothy 1.3.
to charge the preachers of Ephesus, that they teach no other Doctrine than was
prescribed; That they do not give heed to Fables and Genealogies. If Timothy
were an equal Presbyter with the rest, those Teachers were as good as he; what
then had he to do to charge Teachers? Or what would those Teachers care for his
charge? How equally apt would they be to charge him to keep within his own
compass, and to meddle with his own matters? It is only for Superiors to
charge, and inferiors to obey. Secondly, this charge S. Paul commits to Timothy
to oversee and control the unmeet and unseasonable doctrines of the Ephesian
false teachers, 1 Timothy 1.12.
according to the prophecies which went before of him; and that in opposing
himself to their erroneous opinions, he might war a good warfare: This
controlment cannot be incident into an equality; In this charge therefore both
given and executed (however it pleased our Tileno-mastix in a scurrilous manner
to jeer us upon the like profecto erit pessimus Dominus Episcopus Paulus) that
S. Paul was an ill Lord Bishop) I may truly say that both St. Paul and Timothy
his disciple, does as truly Lord it here, in their Episcopal power, as those
Bishops which they have abdicated.

1 Timothy 3.8.9.10.
Thirdly, Timothy must prove and examine the Deacons, whether they be
blameless, or not; Whether they be so qualifyed as is by him prescribed: and
if they be found such, must allow them to use the office of a Deacon, and upon
the good and holy use of it, promote them to an higher degree; How should this
be done without a fixed Superiority of power? Or what other than this does an
English Bishop?

1 Timothy 3.15.
Fourthly, Timothy is encharged with these Paul, that if he should tarry long,
he might know how to behave himself in the house of God, which is the Church of
the living God; That is, how to carry himself, not in the Pulpit only, but in
Church government; in admitting the Officers of the Ephesian Church; This could
not be meant of the duties of a mere Presbyter; for what has such an one to
do with the charges and Offices of his Equals? par in parem etc. Besides that
house of God, which is the Church (wherein his behaving is so required) is not
some one private Congregation; such an one were not fit for that style of the
Pillar and ground of Truth, but that famous Diocesan Church of Ephesus (yea of
Asia rather (wherein there was the use of the variety of all those offices
prescribed) Neither may we think that Timothy was before (after so much
attendance of the blessed Apostle in his journeys) ignorant of what might
concern him as an ordinary Minister; it was therefore a more public and
general charge, which was now imposed upon him; he therefore that knew how to
behave himself in a particular Congregation, must now know what carriage is fit

Fifthly, Timothy must put the brethren, that is, 1 Timothy 4 6.
the Presbyters, in remembrance of the fore^old dangers of the last times, and
must oppose the false doctrine there specified, with this charge, Command and
teach. He must teach then himself, he must command others to teach them, Had he
been only a simple Presbyter, he might command and go without; Now he must
command: If our Lords Bishops do so much,

Sixthly, 1 Timothy 5.1.
Timothy is encharged with censures and prescribed how he must manage them
toward old and young; Rebuke not an Elder (roughly) etc. He is also to give
charge con^erning the choice, carriage, and maintenance of these widows, which
must be provided for by the Church, he has power to admit some, and to refuse
others, and to take order the Church be not charged unduely, which a single
Presbyter alone, is not allowed to do, even where their own Presbytery is on
foot.

Seventhly, Timothy must care and see that the Elders, 1 Timothy 5.17.
or Presbyters who are painful in their callings, be respectfully used, and
liberally maintained, what is this to an ordinary Presbyter, that has no power
of disposing any maintenance? If every Presbyter had, and no body over

Eighthly, 1 Timothy 5.19.
Timothy was charged not to receive an accusation against an Elder, or
Presbyter, but before two or three witnesses: So then Timothy, by his place,
might receive accusations against Presbyters; How could he do so if he were but
their equal? Our Northern paraclesis can tell us parium neutrum alteri
subordinatur, and paria non sunt (...); Scot. (...) l. 1. c. 4.
that fellows cannot be subordinate; witnesses must be called before Epiphan.
haere 75.
That of Epiphanius is upon good ground therefore; The Divine speech of the
Apostle, teaches who is a Bishop, and who a Presbyter, in saying to Timothy,
Rebuke not an Elder, etc. How could a Bishop rebuke a Presbyter, if he had no
power over a Presbyter. Thus he. Camer. in 1 Timothy 4.
that Cameron himself cannot but confess, Nullus est dubitandi locus etc.
There can be no doubt, says he, but that Timothy was elected (by the College
of Elders) to govern the College of the Elders, and that not w thout some
authority, but such as had meet limits; Thus must, thus might Timothy do even
to Presbyters: what could a Bishop of England do more? And thus Cameron. Though
I cannot approve of his election by the College; that conceit is his own, but
the authority is yielded.

1 Timothy 5.21.
Ninthly, Timothy is charged before God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, and the
elect Angels, to observe all these things, without preferring one Presbyter
before an other, and doing nothing by partiality; plainly therefore Timothy was
in such place and authority as was capable of giving

1 Timothy 5.22.
Tenthly, Timothy is charged to lay hands suddenly on no man; he had therefore
power of the imposition of hands. On whom should he lay his hands for
Ordination, but on Presbyters and Deacons? therefore he above Presbyters; The
less, says the Apostle to the Hebrews, is blessed of the better. H^br. 7.7.
He laid hands then? Yes, but Timothy and not to more? The Presbytery some
construe to have laid hands on the ordained; but, the Presbytery so
constituted, as we shall hereafter declare; but a mere Presbyter or many
Presbyters (as of his or their own power) never. An Apostle did so to Timothy
himself; and Timothy, as being a Bishop, might do it, but who, or where ever
any less than he? Neither does the Apostle say, lend not thine hand to be laid
on with others; but appropriates it as his own act; whereas then our
Antitilenus tells us the question is not, whether this charge were given to
Timothy, but, whether Timothy alone; me thinks he might easily have answered
himself; Does St Paul in this act join any with him? were there not Elders
good store at Ephesus before? Could they have ordained without him, what need
was there of this charge to be laid on Timothy? Be there then what Elders
soever, their hands without a Timothy will not serve; his without theirs,
might: To his own, if, at any time, he joined theirs; what else do all Bishops
of England? Timothy: We come next to Titus and his charge from St. Paul, Titus
1.^
to set in order the things that were left yet undone in the large Isle of
Crete, or as is now called, Candia, A populous Island, and stored with no less
than an hundred Cities, whence it had the name of (...); and to ordain Elders,
or Presbyters in every of those Cities, as he had been appointed by the
Apostle; Lo, the whole Diocese of Crete is committed to his oversight, Not some
one parish in it; And what must he do? Two things are injoined him; To ordain
Ministers, and to correct disorders ((...)) To correct (as Beza turns it not
amiss) or, as Erasmus, pergas corrigere, with an intimation of his former
service that way; where, that the extent of the work may be noted, Eccles. 1.15.
(...) (as Hebrew) comprehends, both things amiss, and things wanting; So as
the business of Titus was (as of a good Bishop) both to rectify and reform
those things, which were offensive; and by new orders made to supply those
matters which were yet defective: As for the Ordination, it was not of some one
Presbyter that wanted, to make up the number, but it was universal throughout
that whole Island; (...), per civitates; or as we, in

. 6.
Some elusions of these Scriptures met with, and answered.

THe elusion of some (not mean Opponents) Titus, as by way of Society and
partnership with the Presbytery; so as that he should join with them in these
duties of correction, and Ordination, is so palpable and quite against the
hair, that I cannot think the authors of it can believe themselves. Had the
Apostle so meant, he could as easily have expressed it, and have directed his
charge to more; Titus alone is singled out; now if it were in the power of
every does any Bishop of England challenge more, as Essential to his place,
than power of Ordination, and power of correction of disorders?

Titus 1.11.
Secondly, It is also the charge given to Titus ((...)) to stop the mouths of
those false teachers, who broach doctrines they ought not, for filthy lucres
sake; and to pass sharp censures upon them; what can do this but Episcopal
authority?

Tit. 3 10,
Thirdly, Again, it is the charge upon Titus, after the first and second
admonition, reject. So then it is to Titus, it belongs to proceed against
erroneous teachers, to judge of heresy; to give formal admonitions to the
heretic; to cast him out of the Church, upon his Obstinacy; Can any man
suppose it to be for a mere Presbyter to make such a judicial process against
heretics, or to eject them out of the Church; would not they have returned it
upon him, with scorn Timothy and Titus; and that with so clear Evidence, that
for my part, I do not more fully believe there were such men, than they had
such power, and these warrants to execute it.

It is a poor shift of some, That Timothy and Titus were Evangelists; and
therefore persons extraordinary, and not in this behalf capable of succession;
For, what ever they were in their personal qualifications, yet here they stood
for Bishops; and received, as Church-governors, Titus there is no color; For
Timothy; it is true; St. Paul charges him to do the work of an Evangelist;
What of that? That might imply as well that he was not indeed in that
particular office, which yet Saint Paul would have him supply howsoever, Scot.
(...) l. 1. c. 5.
and Paul did, and yet not an Apostle. He that jeeres this answer, might know,
that the implication of the word is as large for both; who knows not the
promiscuous use of these terms? As well may they say he was a Doctor, because
he is bidden to teach, and yet these Offices are challenged for distinct; Or a
Deacon, because he is charged with a (...), What is it to do the work of an
Evangelist, but to preach the Evangelium pacis, the Gospel of peace? which he
might, he must do, as a Bishop: and what propriety is there of these injoined
works to an Evangelist, as he was an Evangelist? What, can they show it was
his office, to ordain, or to censure? nay rather, how should those works which
are constant and

But says our Tileno-mastix, Four years after Paul had given this charge of
Episcopacie to Timothy, there was an equality of Presbyters at Ephesus; they
were all convented, and no news of Timothy, as their Bishop: poorly; when the
Sun shines, what use is there of the Stars? when Saint Paul was present, Act.
20.
his greater light extinguishes the less; what need any mention of Timothy? Or
why may not I take upon me to affirm a more likely, that Saint Paul, who had
associated Timothy with him, in six several Epistles, would also call him as
his Assessor, in this his last Exhortation to his Presbyters. Neither can we
be flouted out of that Construction of the late learned Bishops, Barlow and
Buckeride, of, In quo vos spiritus sanctus constituit Episcopos, that these
Elders were indeed Bishops, such, as whereof Timothy was one; such, as whereof
Saint Peter acknowledges himself a Compresbyter; for, if it be alleged, as it
is, That this is against our own Principles, who allow but one Bishop in one
City, and these were many; let me put the Objector in mind, that though these
Bishops were called together by Saint Paul, from Miletum to Ephesus yet they
were not all said to be Elders of Ephesus; but from thence, monition went
speediliest out to all places to call them: and so we hear saint Paul say, Ye
all, amongst whom I have gone preaching the Kingdom of God: which plainly
argues, they were not confined to the compass of one City or Territory, but
Over seers of several and far-dispersed charges. As Saint Paul therefore to his
Timothy, so Saint Luke here uses the terms promiscuousl^, one being as yet in
common use for both, though the offices were sensibly distinguished.

And now, what shall we say to this? Tell me, ye that look upon these Papers
with censorious eyes; tell me, is all this, think you, no other than a formal
presidence of an assembly, Zanchy resembles it (ut Rector in Academia) as a
Rector in one of their Academies: or rather, as Saint Jerome (whom you
challenge for your Patron in this point, has it) tanquam imperator in
exercitu, ^^^^on. Epist. (...) Evang^^^.
as a General in an Army, who has power both to Marshall all the hugg still
your own palpable error, not without our pity, though without the power of
redress; but if you care for truth, and desire in the presence of God to
embrace it for truths own sake, without respect of persons, ask your own
hearts, whether these charges and services, laid by the elect Vessel upon his
Timothy and Titus, be any other than really Episcopal, and such as manifestly
carry in them, both Superiority

. 7.
The testimony of St. John in his Revelation pressed.

NEither can all the shifts in the world elude that pregnant Vision and charge
of the John (in whose longer lasting time the government of the Church, was
fully settled in this threefold imparity, of the Orders and degrees (who having
had the special supervision of the whole Asian Church, was by the Spirit of
God commanded to direct his 7 Epistles to the Bishops of those seven famous
Churches, by the name of so many Angels: To the Angel of the Church of Ephesus;
To the Angel of the Church in Smyrna, etc. For what can be more plain, than
that in every of these Chur hes (as for instance that of Ephesus) there were
many Presbyters, yet but one Angel; If that one were not in place above the
rest, and higher by the head than they, how comes he to be noted in the throng?
Why was not the direction to all the Angels of the Church Ephesus? Divina voce
laudatur sub Angeli nomine p^aepositus Ecclesiae. Aug. Epi. 162.
All were Angels, in respect of their Ministry, one was the Angel in respect
of his fixed superiorit^. There were thousands of Stars in this firmament of
the Asian Churches, there were but seven of the first magnitude, who can
endure such an invasion? that one is mentioned, many are meant; as if they had
said; Non populum aggr^dit. sed principem cla^^ utique Episcopum. M^rl^rat.
To one, that is to more; To one Angel, that is to more Angels than one. To
what purpose is it to insist upon any propr^ety of Iehu with a message, and
expressly said, To thee, O Captain, he should have turned it off to the rest,
and have said, To me, that is, Not to me alone, but to all my felllows with me:
But to put this matter out of doubt, it is particularly known who some of those
Angels were; Holy Polycarpus was known to be the Angel of the Church of
Smyrna, whom Ignatius the blessed Martyr mentions, as, by his Episcopacy,
greater than his Clergy. Timothy had been, not long before, Bishop of Ephesus,
yea of the Asians, now Onesimus was; whose Metropolis Ephesus was; Wherein
Ignatius acknowledges Leo's time, Iura Graec. p. 88. 90.
it had 36. Bishoprics under it; And so was Sardis, having under it 24. And
shall we think, that these great Dioceses, were as some obscure Parishes,
wherein were no variety of eminent persons? so as the Angel that is noted here
must needs be of a large Jurisdiction and great Authority.

But if any man shall imagine, these things Ephesus were patient and laborious,
Revel. 2.2
that none of them fainted, that they all lost their first love; that all hated
the work of the Nicholaitans; who can say that all those of the Church of
Smyrna were either poor or rich; That none in the Church of Pergamus denied
the fath.

Besides, here is a manifest distinction betwixt the Pastor or Bishop, and
those of his charge; and they are described by the severalties of their
estates. As when he had acknowledged the Graces of Polycarpus the Angel of
Smyrna, Revel. 2.10.
and Behold some of you the devil shall cast into prison; and ye shall be
tried, and endure Tribulation ten days: and then addressing to him, Be thou
faithful to the death, etc. And in his fourth Epistle, Revel. 2.24.
distinguishing the Angel or Bishop of Thyatyra from the rest of his charge;
But unto you says says he, and the rest of Thyatyra, as many as have not this
doctrine, and the depth Brightman, who makes not only these Angels, the types
of those Churches, but those Churches of Asia, the Types and Histories of all
the Christian Churches, which should be to the end of the world. Thus the Bells
say what some Hearers think.

So clear is this truth, that the Opposites have been forced to yield Priority
here intimated; but a Priority of Order only, not of power; a Priority of
Presidencie for the time, Beza yields him, (...), as he acknowledges Justine
Martyr to call him, President of the Presbytery ( imo ne perpetuum. q. istud
(...), munus esse necessario opportuisse) but perhaps not perpetual; wherein I
bless my self, to see how prejudice can blind the eyes of the wise and
learned: for what Author in the whole world ever mentioned such a fashion of
ambulatory Government in the Church? And do not our Histories testify, that
Polycarpus the Angel of Smyrna, dyed Bishop there, that Onesimus (by Ignatius
his testimony) so continued Bishop of Ephesus, James at Jerusalem, and of these
errors, taxed by the holy Ghost, were but for the time, of a shifting
Presidencie, why should any one of the momentany guides of the Churches be
charged so home, with all the abuses of their Jurisdiction? How easy had it
been for him to shift the fault, as he did the chair; for how could it
concern him more then the next men? surely, this conceit is more worthy of
pity, than Confutation. No indifferent Reader can look upon that Scripture,
and not confess it a strained Construction. Here then were certainly both
Continuance, and Jurisdiction. Wherein Parker braves our learned Docter Field,
as relying merely upon the proofs of humane authority: Ephesus had taken the
Examination of the counterfeit Apostles, and found them liars? which, if a mere
Presbyter had undertaken to do, to be sure, he had been shaken off with
Pergamus, that however himself, in his own person, held constant to the Faith,
yet that there were those under his charge, who held the doctrine of Balaam,
the beastly errors of the Nicolaitans; lhey were of his Clergy that taught
these wicked Doctrines; And for this the Bishop is texed and menaced: how
should this be, if he had not had a coe cive power to restrain and punish them.

And more plainly; the Angel of the Church of Thyatyra, notwithstanding all
his good parts, graces, services, is sharply taxed: What is his fault? Revel.
2.26.
That thou suffer the woman Iezabel (who calls herself a prophetess) to
Asian Churches. Shortly then upon these clear passages of Saint Paul and Saint
John, meeting with the grounds laid by our our sacred Ordes, given to us alone,
for the Consecration and distribution of the holy Eucharist; a point not more
highly than justly stood upon, by all Orthodox Divines, yea Christians; What
warrant can we challenge for this right, but our Saviors practice? And with
all that speech of his to his Disciples, Luke 22.20.
Do this in remembrance of me; Now if this, Hoc facite shall be taken (as it is
by some) as not spoken of the Consecration or benediction but of the receipt;
what warrant had the Apostles and all their

He therefore that would upon pretense of want of Scriptures, quarrel at the
divine Institution of Bishops (having so evident and unavoydable Testimonies)
might with much better color cavil at those blessed Ordinances of God, which
the whole Church has thought her self bound upon sufficient reason to receive
and reverence.

8.
The estate and order of Episcopacy deduced from the Apostles to the Primitive
Bishops.

DId not the holy Scriptures yield unto these firm grounds, whereon to build
our Episcopacy, in vain should we plead the Tradition, and practice of the
Church, ever since; for Christ and his Apostles give us the text, well may the
Apostolical and universal Church yield us the Commentary; And that let me
boldly say, is so clear for us, that if our Opposites dare stand to this
trial, the day is ours; their gultinesse therefore would fain decline this
bar.

Tertull. de prescrip. c. 24, 25.
Parker taking advantage from a word of Tertullian, Nihil interest quando quid
sit, quod ab Apostolis non fuit; It matters not when any thing Qi d igitur,
Nihil interest. etc. l. 2. c. 8.
it is enough that it is Adulterine, for that it is not named by the Apostles.
And contrarily, it matters no whit at what time the reformed dis ipline was
impaired, whether in the very first Church, or no; or whether in the time
immediately succeeding: Classes or Synods; Are all these adulterine? For us, we
are not concerned in this Censure; Our Episcopacy is both named, and
recommended, and prescribed by the Apostles. As for his discipline, seeing it
never came within the mention either of an Apostle, or of any Christian, for
above fifteen hundred years since our Savior left the world; what can that be,
but grossly adulterine? But to make up all: Parker should Tertullian; Quod ab
Apostolis non damnatur, imo defenditur, hoc erit judicium proprietatis; That
which is not condemned by the Apostles, yea defended rather, may well be judged
for their own; and then he would have found how strong this plea of Tertullian
is against himself. For where, ever, can he show Episcopacy condemned by the
Apostle; yea how clearly do we show it, not allowed only,

Had there been any sensible gapp of time betwixt the days of the Apostles,
and the Ordination of Bishops in the Christian Church, we might have had some
reason to suspect this Institution to have been merely humane; but now, since
it shall appear that this work of erecting Episcopacy passed both under the
eyes and hands of those sacred Ambassadors of Christ, who lived to see their
Episcopal successors planted in the several regions of the world, what reason
can any man pretend, that Ambrose, Paul saw James at Jerusalem because he was
made Bishop of that place by the Apostles: and to the same effect St. Austin,
contra Cresi^n. 1. 2. St. Jerome, the only Author amongst the ancients, who is
wont with any color to be alleged against the right of Episcopacy; yet
himself confesses that Bishops began Alexandria, from Mark the Evangelist, who
died six years before St. Peter or St. Paul; Thirty five years before St.
James the Apostle; Forty five years before Simon Cleophas (who succeeded St.
James in the Bishopric of Jerusalem) being the kinsman of our Savior, (...)
l. 3. c. 11.
as Eusebius Brother to Joseph, as Egesippus. The same author can tell us, that
in the very times of the Apostles, Ignatius was Bishop of Antioch, indeed of
Syria: Sicut Smyrnaeorum ecclesia habens Policarpum ab Joanne conlocatum Tert.
de praesc.
Policarpus of Smyrna; Timothy of Ephesus; Titus of Crete, or Candia, That
Papias St. John's Auditor soon after was made Bishop of Hierapolis; Quadratus a
disciple of the Apostles, Bishop of Athens after Publius his martyred
predecessor.

And can we think these men were made Bishops Bilson has cleared this point
beyond all Eusebius, Egesippus, Socrates, Ierom, Perpet. goverm. of the Chapter chapter
13.
Epiphanius, others, as exact a pedigree of all the holy Bishops of the
Primitive Church, succeeding each other in the four Apostolical Sees until
the time of the Nicene Council, as our Godwin or Mason can give us of our
Bishops of England; or a Speed or Stow of our English Kings. There you shall
find from James the Lords brother, who, (as Ierom himself expressly) sat as
Bishop in the Church of Jerusalem, to Macarius, who sat in the Nicene
Council, 40. Bishops punctually named. From St. Peter who governed the Church
of Antioch, and was succeeded by Evodius, (and he by Ignatius) twenty seven. In
the Sea of Rome, thirty seven. In the Sea of Alexandria, from Mark the
Evangelist, twenty three; A Eusebius, Eusebius. l. 3. c. 37.
it is not possible, by name, to rehearse them all that were Pastors, employed
in the

. 9
The testimony and assent of Bucer, and some famous French Divines.

BY the perpetual observation of the Bucer) we see, it seemed good to the holy
Ghost, that among the Presbyters to whom the charge of the Church is specially
committed, one should have the singular Charge of the Churches, and in that
Charge and Care, governed others; for which cause the name of Bishops was
attributed to these chief Governors of the Church; Thus he in full accord
with us.

Chamier when he had first granted, that statim post Apostolorum excessum;
immediately after the decease of the Apostles began the difference between a
Bishop and Presbyter; Cham. de membris Eccles. mil^ t. l. 4. c. 1.
straight, as correcting himself, adds; Quid? Res ipsa caepit tempore
Apostolorum, vel potius ab ipsis profecta est; The thing it self began in the
very time of the Apostles, yea proceeded from them; Thus he; although withal
he affirms this difference not to have been Essential, but Accidental; A
distinction in this respect unproperly, perhaps applied by him; but otherwise.
Nulla est Esse^tialis distinctio inter Episcopos and Presbyteros respectu
ministeri^: idem enim utrisque est: Apostoli tamen erant primarii a Christo
ministri instituti; qu bus and non aliis Ecclesiae suae fundationem and regimen
commisit. Spalat. de Rep. Eccl. 1. 2. c. 3.
Spalatensis justly, both yelds, and makes, in a right and sure sense; For
certainly, in the proper works of their ministerial function, in preaching and
administering the Word and Sacraments, they differ not; or only differ, Moulin,
in one of his Epistles to the renowned Bishop of Winchester, Molin Epi. ad
Winton Ep. 3.
Statim post, etc. Soon after the Apostles time, says he, or rather in their
own time, as the Ecclesiastical story witnesses, Et hanc regiminis formam
omnes ubique Ecclesiae receperunt, and this form of government all Churches
every where receive.

I do willingly take the word of these two famous professors of the French
Church; The one says Constitutum est, It was constituted in the time of the
Apostles; the other, that it proceeded from the Apostles themselves. If it were
constituted in their time, and proceeded from them, and were in this name
received of all Churches, then certainly it must be yielded to be of
Apostolical, that is, divine Institution: Chamier's own allegations; Thus
much truth is not grudged us by these ingenuous Divines; All the question is,
of the nature and extent of this Superiority. This difference there was; but,
as that great Pancratiast, and others with him, contend; though many
prerogatives were yielded to the Bishop in his place, especially in the nobler
Cities; yet this place, Cham. ubi supra.
was but Primatus ordinis; a Primacy of order only, nulla erat hic dominatio,
aut jurisdictio, sed sancta charitas; Chamier had no reason to oppose things
which agree so well; and as well in a Bishop as in a civil Magistrate: for, as
for rule, if we affect any but fatherly, and moderate, and such as must
necessarily be required for the Conservation of peace, and good order in the
Church of God, we do not deprecate a Censure: We know how to bear humble minds
in eminence of places, how to command without imperiousness; and to comply with
out exposing our places to contempt: so as those are but spightfull Frumps, and
malicious

. 10.
The superiority and Jurisdiction of Bishops, proved by the testimony of the
first Fathers, and Apostolical men; and first of Clemens.

Peter and St. Paul, I mean Clemens, whom St. Paul mentions honorably in his
Epistle to the Philippians, Philip. 4.3.
by the title of one of his fellow laborers, whose names are in the book of
life; One, who laid St. Peter in his grave, as Theodoret tells us; and followed
that blessed Apostle both in his See and in his Martyrdom: yea one, whom
Clemens Alexandrinus enstyles no less than an Apostle of so great reputation
in the Church, that as Jerome tells us, he was by some reputed the penman of
the holy Epistle to the Hebrews; and that learned Father finds the face of his
style alike, if not the same: you look now, that I should produce some blown
ware out of the pack of his Recognitions, Corinthians upon the occasion of
those quarrels, which were, it seems, on foot in St. Paul's time, and still
continued, Emulation and side-takings amongst, stations. For which purpose,
having laid before them the history of Aarons rod budding, and thereby, the
miraculous confirmation of his election, he adds, And our Apostles knowing by
our Lord Jesus Christ, the contention that would arise ((...)) about the name
of Episcopacy, and they, Clem. Epist. ad Corinthios. (...), etc.
for this very same cause having received perfect knowledge, appointed the
foresaid (degrees) and gave thereupon, those Presbyters, who having dispatched
their journey (by death) have obtained a perfect and fruitful dissolution; For
now, they need not fear least any man shall out them from the place wherein
they now are: For, we see that some ye have removed and displaced from their
unblameably-managed office: ye are contentious, my brethren, and are
quarrelsome, about those things, which do not concern salvation: search
diligently the Scriptures, etc. Thus Clement. Corinth, or of Scotland? Judge
you how well it agrees; but in the mean time, you see these distinctions of
degrees; you see the quarrels arising about the very title; You see that the
Bishops ordained by the Apostles succeeded in their service, you see they
continued, or ought to continue in their places, during their life; you see it
a sin to out them, except there be just cause in their misdemeanour.

The testimony is so clear, that I well foresee, has too much warrant in the
innate simplicity of it, and too much testimony from the ancient Fathers of the
Church, for any adversary to contradict: Though it could come but lately to our
hands, yet we know long since that it had the attestation of Justin Martyr, of
Irenaeus, who calls it (...), of Clemens Alexandrinus, of Origin, of Cyrill, of
Jerusalem, of Photius, who terms it (...), Jerome, who terms it valde utilem,
a very profitable Epistle, and tells us that it was of old publicly read, as
authentical, in Churches, and that in the Character of it, it much resembles
that to the Hebrews; This noble monument (that you may not doubt how it came so
late to our hands) was by Cyrill the late worthy Patriarch of Constantinople,
sent out of his Library of Alexandria, whence he removed to our gracious
Sovereign of Great Britain, for a precious Present; Tecla her self,
transcribed, and placed at the end of the old, and new Testament, fairly by
her written in the same Character: A Present worth too much Gold; And if any
man do yet misdoubt, his eyes may inform him by the view of it, in so well,
his Majesty's Library, where it is kept, and (out of a desire of more public
good) was lately set forth by the learned searcher of Antiquities, Mr. Patrick
Young, the worthy Keeper of his Majesty's Library.

But if any man shall hope to elude this Testimony; by taking advantage of the
only mention of Presbyters and Deacons in the foregoing passages, let him know,
this was only according to the occasion of the writing of that Epistle;
Clement, Bishop of Rome (whether the first (as some of the ancient) or, the
third, (as others) after Saint Peter (a difference not hard to be reconciled)
and therefore how little danger there is of his favoring a parity in that
sacred Administration.

. 11.
The pregnant and full testimonies of the holy Saint and Martyr Ignatius urged.

AFter him, what better and more convincing Ignatius, the famous Martyr of
Christ, whose memory is justly precious to the whole Church of God, to this
very present age, that Miracle of Martyrs, who called his fetters, Christ's
chains of Spiritual pearls; who (when he was to be thrown to the wild beasts
for the profession of Christ) could boast, (...), etc. Hier. Catalog. Script.
Eccles.
that he should set to the world, as the Sun, that he might rise to God; and
when he heard the Lions I am, said he, Christ's Wheat; Oh let me be ground with
the teeth of wild beasts, that may be found pure bread for my God; make much
of these wild beasts, that they may become my Sepulcher, that nothing my be
left of my body, etc. I had rather dye for Christ, then reign over the whole
world. This blessded Saint in all those confessedly-genuine Epistles, which he
wrote, Seven in number, still so beats upon this point, (as if religion
depended upon it) Reverence and Obedience to their Bishops. This man lived in
the days of the Apostles, conversed with them, and in likelihood saw Christ
in the flesh, being martyred in the Eleventh year of Trajan, according to
Baronius, and therefore thoroughly acquainted with the state of Gods Church in
the Apostles time, and his own; and ad Trallianos; Be subject to your Bishop,
Ignat. Epist. ad Trall. (...).
as to the Lord, for he watches for your souls; And straight, Necessary it
is, that whatsoever ye do, ye should do nothing without your Bishop; But be
ye subject also to your Priests, as to the Apostles of Christ. See what a
distance here is; whereas other of the Fathers compare yet higher. The Bishop,
says he, Ibid. (...), etc.
bears the resemblance of God the Father of all things; The Priests are as the
bench of his Apostles, etc.

And lest any man should construe these words to sound only of a generality of
reverent respects, without yielding of any power of command; Soon after, he
speaks home, for what other, says he, is a Bishop, then he that is superior
Page 9. (...), etc.
and as far as a man's power may reach, made an Imitator of the Christ of God;
And what is the Presbytery or Priesthood, but an holy company, the the
Counselors and Assessors of the Bishop, and what the Deacons, but the
Imitators of the Angelical powers, which give him pure and unblameable
attendance.

What say ye now to this, ye Patrons of Paritie in Church Government? How do
ye think Deacons, no less then between a Prince and his attendants; And
this, delivered according to the received judgment and practice of the
Primitive Church; The testimony is too pregnant to be eluded; And yet welfare
a friend in a corner: Nico: Vedelius; because he sees the witness so clear,
that he cannot be shifted off, charge him with corruption, and subordination,
pretending that sure these words are foysted Coke, and Parker, and Antitilenus;
being netled with their unavoydable evidences, durst cry down for bastardy;
whom I leave to be thoroughly Schooled by Chamier, Rivitus, Crit Secr. Vedel.
Apol. and exercit.
Videlius; By whom out of all antiquity, they are sufficiently vindicated to
the shame Videlius plays his part; that those passages which he finds in these
(confessedly Authentic Epistles, most convictive for our purpose; He would
feign challenge to be corrupted; And why so? Surely, says he, these words of
Principality and power ascribed to Bishops, do not savor of that golden age
of the Apostles, wherein Ignatius lived, when Episcopacy was not Imperium and
potestas, a rule and power, but a service rather; And why not both? As if
excellency of dignity, could not consist with humility of Officiousness; What
else does our Savior imply in his charge, he that is greatest amongst you, let
him be your servant: their glory, like 1 Cor. 2.3, 4. 1 Thessalonians. 1.5.
St. Paul matcheth (...), and (...). weakness and power; and even whiles he
was Tent-making could speak of his ((...)) and (...): And why should this
phrase be here seized upon suspicion, rather then in other passages of holy
Ignatius, where it is plainly attributed to Bishops? as in that to Smyrna, as
we shall see in the sequel: And why might not he digest this Phrase, which he
so commonly met with in antiquity? (...). Chrysostom. in Act. c. 1. Citat. in
Append. Notarum Criticarum Nic. Vedel.
Amonst the rest, it is remarkable, that the very same sentence that he cites
for his defense out of Chrysostom, cuts his throat: then their praefecture
(speaking of the Apostle's Bishop) was not an honor, but a provident care for
those whom they ruled over. Lo here was a praefecture first, and then here are
(...), which implies (...), a rule not alluding to the abuses of his own time
(as Vedelius, poorly) but to the Apostles, in whom honor did well agree with
care; was there ever man that denied Apostle-ship to be an honor? much less,
holy Chrysostom: The Fathers meaning plainly is, that the Apostles did not
stand so much upon Ignatius, his passage, is as undoubted as his Epistle, and
the Bishops power is not (...), only which Vedelius could yield, but (...).
And what need Vedelius to stand upon this term, when Chamier himself so fully
yields it. Cham. de Occumen. Pontif. l. 13. c. 19. ex Nazianzen. (...).
Revera Episcopatus est (...), and singuli Episcopi in suis The Martyr for a
close shuts up with a Farewell in the Lord Jesus, and be subject to your
Bishop, etc. In the second Epistle to the Magnesians (for I love to follow the
trace of that blessed Saint) I exhort you, Ignat. ad Magnes. (...), etc. page
54.
says he, that your care and study be to do all things in a godly Concord;
your Bishop being president in the place of God, your Priests in the place of
the Senate of the Apostles, etc. And not long after; As the Lord, says he, did
nothing without his Father, who said I can do nothing of my self, (...).
so neither may any of you do ought without your Bishop. Whether it be Priest,
or Deacon, or Laick; Neither let any thing seem meet for you to do without
his judgment, for whatsoever is so done, is wicked,

What will our refractaries say to this, who affect to make head against their
Bishops, yea not only suffer him to do nothing without them, but suffer him to
do nothing at all, yea suffer him not to be: Oh God! if thy blessed Martyr
Ignatius now lived, and saw these insolences, how would he think himself
fallen amongst more fierce beasts, than those which were prepared for him! Ignat
ad Philadelph. p. 91. (...), etc.


In his third Epistle to the Phyladelphians; So Caesar: Let the soldiers obey
their chief governors; Let the Deacons and the rest of the Clergy, with all
the people, soldiers, governors, and Caesar himself obey their Bishop: Let
the Bishop obey Christ, as Christ obeyed his Father, and thus shall Unity be
conserved in all things: Thus he. Now comes in Nic: Videlius, and seconding
Scultetus, cries out of manifest interpolation; I wish I had leisure in this
place, to follow him home, he is out of my way, yet I must step aside to him a
little; And Ignatius? Caesar was then no Christian. In vain should the true
Ignatius have charged Caesar to obey the Bishop. weakly objected, for as
Maestraeus answers him well: The Martyr tells us what should be done, not what
was. It is true that the greatest Monarchs of the world, even those, whose
vassals we confess our selves in temporal respects, Ignatius admonishes
Christians, not heathen of their duty. Weak still! His amonition is
universal, though directed to Philadelphians, and those men which were now
Ethnicks, might prove Christians. The rules must not vary with the persons;
But, it would have been scandalous, especially in those times, to exhort an
Heathen Emperor, to submit himself to a Christian; still alike; what scandal
more in this, than in the rest of the doctrine of the Gospel, which in the
mouths of all faithful Preachers, requires Princes to yield their necks to
the yoke of Christ? Why more then; Go tell that Fox? Non licet, of the Baptist
to Herod? why more than the bold speeches of the Martyred Saints to their
heathen persecutors? Why more than of that Christian Bishop to Julian; of
Chrysostomus to Eudoxia why more than the high language of Valentinian and
Trajan to Valens, and hundreds other of this kind? Socrat. lib. ^. cap. 16.
Theod. lib. 5. cap. 31. and 3^.
But (which is grossest of all) he makes the end of all, the Conservation of
unity in the Church; Ignatius had written only for a day; as if these men must
needs live and die Heathens; The Cavills must be more probable that must cast a
Martyr, or rob us of his holy instruction.

Yet again therefore hear what our St. Ignatius says in the same Epistle; Page
102. Edit. Vede. (...), etc.
It is hard says he, to reject the preaching of the Apostles; The Priests are
good, and so are the Deacons, or Ministers of the word; but the chief Priest,
is better, (...).
who is trusted with the Holy of Holies, who only is entrusted with the secrets
of God; Here Vedelius startles, and not he only, but Chamier too, contends the
Chief Priest, not to be meant of the Bishop, but of Christ; but the place
easily quits it self: Ignatius, plainly compares

Our Martyr goes on: In his Epistle to those of Smyrna he is, Ignat ad Smyr.
(...), etc. Page 16 11
if it be possible, more punctual; Follow your Bishop, says he, as Christ did
his Father; and the College of Priests, as his Apostles; reverence your
Deacons as ministering according to the command of God. Let no man, without the
Bishop, do any of those things which appertains to the Church; Let that
Eucharist be held right and unquestionable, which is done by the Bishop, or by
such an one, as he shall allow. Where the Bishop shall appear, there let the
multitude assemble, as where Christ is, there all the heavenly host stands by
him etc. It is not lawful without the Bishop to baptize, nor to offer etc. And
Page 48. (...), and^
the Deacons to the Priests or Presbyters, the Presbyters to the Bishop, the
Bishop to Christ, as he to his Father. Could he speak plainer? Lo, says
Vedelius, and our Scotus (...), this savours not of the age of Ignatius, in
whose time no such distinction, as of the Clergy and Laity was on foot: Weakly
suggested! Had they but read our Clement, Clem. ad Corinth.
in his fore-recited Epistle to the Corinthians, they had soon eaten this word
(...), says he, to the Priests, their proper place is assigned. The Laickes
have their services (...), A Layman is bound to lay Ordinances: But I may not
so far (...).
In his Epistle to Polycarpus, he requires, that no man should so much as marry
without the Bishops consent; and soon after, Page 208. (...), etc.
Let all things, says he, be done to the honor of God: give regard to your
Bishop as God to you. (...) etc.
My soul for theirs who obey their Bishop, Presbyters and Deacons.

In his Epistle to the Ephesians, magnifying their Bishop Onesimus, he charges
them to give all respects to him, and adds, Ye ought to look upon your Bishop,
as upon God himself, since he waits upon the Lord, and serves him. And toward
the end, Following the holy Ghost for your guide, obeying your Bishop, and the
company of Presbyters, with an entire heart, etc.

What shall we think of all this? was not St. Ignatius see'd to speak on the
Bishops side; Or how would these words have sounded in the late Assemblies of
Glasco and Edinborough? Are we more holy than he? Is the truth the same it was,
or is the alteration on our part? All these have been large and full
Testimonies of the acknowledged ad Trallianos, and mark well what he says:
where having reckoned up the three (so often mentioned Orders) of Bishops,
Presbyters and Deacons, he adds; Without these, Page 5. (...), etc.
there is no elect Church, without these, no holy Congregation, no assembly of
Saints; And I persuade my self that you also are of the same mind; Lo here,
words which no Vedelius can carp at as interpolated, imposing such a necessity
of the being of these three several Orders in Gods Church, that it cannot be
right without them. I see and pity his shuffling, Append. Nota^rum Crit.
but would be glad to see a satisfactory answer from any hands: Epist. ad P:
Molin.


In the mean time, I wish, with learned Bishop Andrews, those Churches where
they are missing, that happiness, which now to our grief, and I hope theirs,
they are forced to want. I have dwelt long with blessed Ignatius, where could I
be better? That one Author is in stead of many; why should I not boldly say, if
besides the divine Scriptures, there were no other Ignatius to have been so
holy a Bishop, so faithful a Martyr, so true a Saint, can stick at a Truth so
often, so confidently, so zealously, recommended by him to the world; For me
let my soul go with his, let his faith be mine, and let me rather trust one
Ignatius, than ten thousand Cartwrights, Parkers, Ameses, or any other Ignatius
a likely man to build up the kingdom of Antichrist? were not these shoulders
fit for the supportation of that man of sin? Away with these absurd and wicked
fancies: and if this charge of his were holy and Apostolical, wherein he
requires us to honor our Bishops, as the Lord himself, whom they serve and
represent; what doom do you suppose would he have passed upon those, who (as
such) abhor them, and eject them as Devils. I cannot without horror think
of either the act or the issue

12.
The testimony of the Ancient Canons, called the Apostles.

YEt perhaps if Ignatius went alone, he might herein incur some suspicion;
now all antiquity is with him, never any ancient Author said otherwise: We will
begin with those Canons which are instyled ((...)) and Presbyters proclaimed in
every Chapter) there are those which do imply a power and Jurisdiction, as Can:
15. Can. 15.
If any Presbyter or Deacon, (...).
or any of the number of Clerks, leaving his division (or Parish) shall go to
another, (...).
and without the leave or allowance of his own Bishop abide in another Parish
(or charge) we forbid him further to Minister, especially if when his own
Bishop calls him back, he refuses to return, continuing still Can: 32. If any
Presbyter contemning his own Bishop, shall hold Conventicles apart, and shall
erect an other Altar, when he has no just exception against his Bishop, in
matter of Religion or Justice, Let him be deposed ((...)) as a man that Tyran.
And Can: 33. If any Presbyter or Deacon shall, by his own Bishop be put from
his place, it is not lawful that he be received by any other, but only of him
that formerly discharged him, except perhaps, the Bishop that put him out be
deceased. And because it was so early perceived, that even amongst the Bishops
themselves, an equality might breed confusion; It is enacted in the 35 Canon,
That the Bishops of all nations should know him that was ((...)) the prime
amongst them, and esteem him as their head, and do nothing without him. Shortly
Can: 39: it is ordained, That the Bishop should take the charge and care of all
the affairs belonging to the Church, and dispense them as in the presence and
view of God Almighty; and in the Canon, Let the Presbyters and Deacons do
nothing besides the liking, and allowance of their Bishop: for the people of
God are committed to him, and an account must be required of him for their
souls.

Hear this now, ye that pretend there is so much difference betwixt the state
of our Bishops, and the Primitive; What do we challenge more than the
Apostolic Canons enjoin, what do they prescribe less than we and if this be
no rule no Jurisdiction, we claim none.

Certainly, no wit of man can devise any Evasion here, but by exception at the
credit of the Evidence; Loud clamours are raised of their Counterfaysance;
Rather than fail, Pope Gelasius himself is brought in to disprove these Canons,
as Apocryphal; And they that do most eagarly cry the Pope down, for the
Antichrist, (Vafer Afer) as Fregevill justly calls him, drove his own Plough;
for nothing could more cut him in the affectation of his Supremacy, than those
Canons, which therefore it is no marvel if he disparage. The truth is, whereas
there are 85 of those Canons, in more than one Edition, 50 of them are most
ancient and legitimate, the other 35 later and Superious. With this distinction
Binius answers the censure of his Pope; The 50 first, says he, are received as
authentical, by the ancient Popes, Councels, Fathers, as containing Orthodox
doctrine; The other later are condemned by Gelasius. Indeed such age and worth
plead for the first rank, Isidor. praefat. ad Collect. Canonn.
that as Isidorus truly; The holy Fathers confirmed their acts by Synodall
authority, and placed them amongst Canonical Constitutions. If any man desire
full information concerning the antiquity, and authentiquenesse of these
Canons, I remit him to Fregivillaeus, Fregivil. palma Christiana.
where he shall find how many of these Canons were transferred into, and
approved, and cited by the Councels of Nice, Gangra and Antioch, not without
the Constantinople, Ephesus, Chalcedon, Orleans, Cabilon; There he shall find
them cited (for such) with approbation of Eusebius, Socrates, Theodoret,
Sozomen; There he shall find that Aurelius, Bishop of Carthage made use of
these Canons as the Test whereby to examine the Roman Popes decrees; that by
these the African Fathers repelled the Popes Tyrannical Usurpation; but Calvin
himself, and Chamier, Calvin. Valde antiqui testes moris Ecclesiae. Instit. l.
4. c. 4.
and every ingenuous Writer, confess them to be of very great, and (therefore
very reverend) Antiquity.

. 13
The state and History of the next age.

AS touching the state of this truth in the age next succeeding, how easy were
it to accumulate histories to make it good? Citat a D. Bilsen. perpet. regim.
Eccl. c^p. 13.
as that Methodius, in Marianus Scotus, who tells us, That the Apostle Peter
directed Eucharius one of the 70, with Valerius and Maternus, to preach the
Gospel in Germany and France; And that Eucharius planting a Church in Treners,
held the Bishopric of that City 23 years, Traverie^ Eccles. culmina, etc.
and then left the Episcopacy of that Church to Valerius, who after 15 years
sitting there, left it to Maternus, he to Auspicius, etc.

Agesip. apud Eusebius. 4. c. 22.
And that of Egesippus, in Eusebius, who traveling Rome under Amicetus,
conferred with Primus Bishop of Corinth, and diverse other Bishops as he went,
and found them in every succession, and in every City constantly observing the
truth etc. And the Church of Corinth held on in the right way unto the time of
Primus Bishop there. With these whom can I more fitly match than holy Irenaeus,
the famous Bishop of Lions, near bordering upon this age, whose testimony may
be a clear Commentary upon the former passages, Habemus enumerare eos, qui ab
Apostolis etc. we can, Iren. l. 3. advers. haeres. c. 3.
says he, reckon up those, who by the Apostles were made Bishops in the
Churches, and their successors, even unto our times etc. The blessed viz. Peter
and Paul, founding and furnishing the Church (of Rome) delivered the Episcopacy
of the Government of that Church to Linus; Of this Linus, Paul makes mention in
those Epistles he wrote to Timothy; Anacletus succeeded him: In the third place
Clemens, after him took that Bishopric, who both saw the Apostles themselves,
and had Conference with them etc. After this Clement, succeeded Evaristus;
after Evaristus, Alexander, and after Sixtus was made the sixth Bishop from the
Apostles; and after him Telesphorus, who most gloriously suffered Martyrdom;
after him Higinus, then Pius, and after him Amicetus; and after that Soter had
succeeded Amicetus, now in the twelfth place from the Apostles, Eleutherius
possesses the Bishopric; And soon after he adds (a passage which I cannot
pretermit) And Polycarpus, says he, was not only taught by the Apostles, and
conversed with many of them who saw our Lord Christ, but also was by the
Apostles made Bishop in Asia, in that Church which is at Smyrna, whom we our
selves saw in our younger age, for he lasted long, and being very old, he most
nobly and gloriously suffering Martyrdom, passed out of this life! Lo here was
but one ages difference. Polycapus saw, and conversed with the Apostles,
Irenaeus saw Polycarpus; by their hands was he ordained Bishop, constantly
lived and dyed a Martyr in that holy function. Tertullian was not much below
Irenaeus in age, not at all below him in the clearness of his suffrage, Edant
origines Ecclesiarum suarum, evolant ordinem Episcoporum suorum ita par
successiones ab initio decurrentem, ut primus ille Episcopus aliquem ex
Apostolis aut Apostolicis viris habuerit authorem and antecessorem, etc.
Tertull. de praescription. advers. haer.
Edant origines etc. Let them, says he, set forth the Originals of their
Churches, Let them reckon upon the Order of their Bishops, so running Smyrna h^
ving Polycarpus placed there by St. John; the Church of Rome shows Clement
ordained by St. Peter, and so the rest of the Churches show, what sprouts they
have of the Apostolic seed. Even those which were first placed in their
Episcopacie by the Apostles. What can be spoken more fully for the Apostolic
institution of Episcopacy? This is more than enough to show the state of the
first ages of the Church, under and after the Apostles; And therein the
superiority and Jurisdiction of

. 14.
The confessed Superiority of Bishops, from several arguments out of Antiquity.

ANd here in the first place it is well worthy to weigh much with us, that all
antiquity Irenaeus, Vide Bills. loco citato.
Tertullian, Cyprian, Basil, Theodoret, Hierome, Ambrose, Augustine, Sidonius,
and others, are so familiarly quoted by all Writers, that I shall not need to
urge them. In the next, those titles of superiority and Jurisdiction, which are
given by all antiquity to Bishops above Presbyters, Ambros in Ephesians 4 idea
Optatus l 1. contra Parme^. Hieron. in Ep. 60.17. Hierarch Ecles. c. 5. (...).
Epiphan. in haeres. 75. Conc. Carthag. c. 68. Conc. Sardic. c. 10. Sidon.
Apoll. l 9 Ep. 4.
may well settle our assurance in it. They are (...), rulers in Ignatius;
Principes sacerdotum in Ambrose; Dionysius; An order generative of other
Fathers, as Epiphanius. They have an ((...)) given them by the Council of
Carthage, Excelsiorem gradum by Jerome, (...), by the Council of
Constantinople; eminence of oversight by the Council of Sardica: Incomparably
eminent Apostleship by Sidonius Apollinaris; Excellent dignity and authority by
the Council of Constantinople in Trullo. (...), Council. Antioch. c. 25. It
were easy to be tedious in this kind: If now the Bishops of this Island
challenge no more than is given to those Church Governors of the Primitive
times, certainly either they must be condemned, or not justified. Winton.
Epist. ad Molin.
For (as our learned Bishop of Winchester) of old, the Presbyters were (as it
were) of the family of the Bishop, and lived upon those distributions, which
were laid down as at the feet of the Apostles first; so, now at theirs, until
the division of several Parishes infoeffed Downham instances, Arrius is said
to have been Alexander's Presbyter; Petrus and Iraenaeus, Timotheus and
Macarius to have been Athanasius his Presbyters; by the same token that
Timotheus (a grave and reverend personage) as the history reports (wittily and
justly took off a foul aspersion from his innocent and honored Diocesan) The
Deputies of Silvester in the Council of Nice, were his Presbyters: Thus
Crispio is named Epiphanius his Archdeacon; Heraclides to have been
Chrysostom's Deacon; It were easy to fill up pages out of Eusebius alone with
such instances.

. 15.


BUt in the fourth place the several acts that were appropriated to the
Bishops alone, by the universal consent of all times, do more than
sufficiently evince their acknowledged superiority; wherein even those
Testimonies, which are wont to be alleged against us, do Hierome himself can
say, Excepta ordinatione; and Chrysostom (who is cited for (...)) can yet add
(...). Only in laying on of hands Bishops go beyond them. Homil. 11 in 1 Timothy 3


Neither is this any slight difference, or despicable privilege; but such as
implies a manifest Superiority (as Ambrose justly infers) and a clear
distinction of Order: Hands were imposed in the Church of old, for more than
one purpose. In absolution for the penitent's reconciliation to God and the
Church: In Confirmation for the increase of Grace upon the baptized: In
Ordination for the blessing, Conc. Carthag. 4. c. 3. Benedicente eum Episcopo,
and manum super caput ejus imponente.
and hallowing of the Ordained. The first of these, as incident and annexed to
the holy Order of Timothy and Titus (by the consent of all Antiquity) Bishops
of their several Dioceses, and not to any Ordinary Paul gives that charge of
imposition of hands: That Presbyter had been a monster among Christians, that
would have dared to usurp it; and the Church of those first ages observed it
so Curiously, that besides those strict Laws, which they made for the
prevention of any such insolence, restraining even one kind of Chorepiscopi
Rural Bishops from this power (for there was another sort, which were in the
nature and quality of suffraganes furnished with Episcopal right) they have
left unto us memorable records of their severe proceedings against such
presumptions; I may not forget two or three remarkable histories to this
purpose.

(...).
Colluthus, a Presbyter of Alexandria took upon him ordain Presbyters; for this
he was convented in the general Council, before Hosius and other Bishops, and
with deserved checks remanded to keep within his own Tether, and a Nullity
pronounced of those his misordained: Ischiras who pretended to be one of those,
his mis-made Presbyters, was (in his Administration of the blessed Sacrament,
(whiles he had the holy Cup in his hand) violently Athanasius) by Macarius. He
complains there of a sacrilegious assault; about an hundred Bishops are
assembled in Egypt; Ischiras himself is convented, his Ordination examined,
and he found to be no Presbyter, because only ordained by a Presbyter; he is
sent away without remedy, with a devestitute from his pretended Orders, and
together with all his fellows, turned down to the Laick form. Quo pacto igitur
Presbyter Ischiras aut quo tandem authore constitutus Athanas. apolog 2. Perpet
govet^^^. c 13.
The equity of the sact is so clear (says this Apologist for Athanasius) that
no man ever thought it could be doubted of: An history (as our learned Bishop
well observes) so much the more considerable, for that it carries in it the
universal consent of the whole Primitive Church, Alexandria. Much of the same
kind is that commonly noted story of the Council of Civil: A Bishop who had
sore eyes, Council. Hispalen. 2 c. ^5.
being to ordain Priests and Deacons, laid his hands on them; but caused his
Chaplain, a Presbyter that stood by, to supply his eyes, by reading the words
of their Ordination and Benediction; Tales merito etc. Those men are worthy to
be discarded, because they were wrongfully made: What need I press the history
of Musaeus, and Eutichianus, whose Ordinations were also in this manner
rescinded, and nullified by the Council of Sardica; Or that of the great
Council of Constantinople concerning Maximus, or, out of Sozomon, the
proceedings against Elpidius, Eustathius, Basilius, Eleusius, for their
mis-ordination of Presbyters; this peculiar act was a thing so universally both
granted to, and practiced by Bishops, that in vain shall we search through all
antiquity, for an instance of any regular performance Paul's to Timothy; 1 Timothy
4 14. Calvin Instit. lib. 4. cap. 3.
Neglect not the gift that is in the etc. by the imposition of hands of the
Presbytery: when Calvin himself interprets the place, not of the men, but of
the office; following herein Jerome and Anselme, Haimo, Lyra, and others;
referring it to the gift, not to the hands: whose reason also is more strong
than his authority: For if Timothy were ordained by Paul in another place
says, that his hands (and no other) were imposed on Timothy: And if more hands
were required to this service, it had been as easy for the Apostles to have
encharged it upon the Presbytery, as upon Timothy. Little did Calvin think of
the double Presbytery of Tileno-mastix, Paracl. c. 5
when he gave this interpretation of St. Paul's (...): But if either the
Apostles then, or the Bishops since, have had other hands laid upon the
ordained, together with theirs, as the rule and practice of the Church of
England is, yet fain would I see where ever it can be read, that Presbyte^s,
without a Bishop, in a regular course imposed hands for Ordination.

. 16.
Power of Jurisdiction appropriated to the Bishops from the first.

THus for Ordination the case is plain; I speak it confidently, it is more
plain (if Timothy or Titus (Bishops) to receive accusations against
Presbyters, or to reject them; not for one Presbyter against another; It is the
charge laid upon Presbyters by more than one ancient Council, or single
Father, to do nothing at all without the consent ((...)) of the Bishop. We have
heard it from holy Ignatius, and from the Apostolic Canons; we may hear it
(when we please) from the holy Martyr St. Cyprian, Conc. Carthag. C^nc Gangr.
Conc. Antioch.
from the 2 Council of Carthage, from the Council of Gangra, from the Council
of Antioch: yea let me say, Those ancient restrictions were such, as if they
should be now urged upon our inferior Clergy, they would be cried down for in
tollerably Tyrannical; It was in the Bishops power to raise the Reverendae,
much less might they Downham, Defense. 2 part Chapter 5.
who is very large in this subject. As for matter of censure, wherein the proof
of Jurisidiction mainly consists, how particularly was this ever managed by
Episcopal power; and that not only in case of Excommunication of Laics (which
has wont of old to be therefore called Mucro Episcopi (for as for that giddy
conceit of the whole Churches interposition and act, Vivald. C^^. d^labr.
in these Sentences which our Tileno-mastix stands upon, it is long since cried
down, not by Calvin only, but even by our late Separatists, amongst whom this
case has been thoroughly Sifted) but even of Correction, Excommunication, Conc.
Agath. c 1. de contumac. Clericis. Conc. Agath. c. 2. de Episcopis qui pro
minimis causis excommunicant Conc. Sardi^ c. 16. de clericorum.
excommunicatione. Conc Ephesians 6.5 Conc. Chalc. c. 23. Conc. Antioch. c 4. Cypr.
l. Ep. 9.
Deacons and Presbyters; Correction, so the Council of Agatha;
Excommunication, so the Council of Sardica, the Council of Ephesus, the
Council of Chalcedon; Deposition, so the Council of Antioch; So Arrius was
deposed by Bishop Alexander; Eutyches, by his Diocesan: So the holy Martyr
Cyprian in that famous Epistle to R gatianus, tells him, That he being
potestatim honoris, the power of his honor, and either to depose, or
excommunicate him: And yet who dares say that our blessed Martyr was proudly
Tyrannical, and not holily zealous in observation of lawful discipline? And
lastly (for it were easy to be tedious in particularities) the ancient Canon
of Apostles (32) to this purpose is recited and ratified by two Councels,
Council. Antioch. 1. c. 9.
the one of Antioch, the other of Chalcedon; and there applauded by the
acclamation of a just rule, and the rule of the Fathers. And now, say reader,
what is Superiority and Jurisdiction over all Subordinates, if this be not? If
any Bishop of this Island have challenged and usurped more England should at
any time be required to publish any Canon for the determining the Latitude of
Episcopal power, and the due exercise thereof: they could hardly devise to
express it in more full terms, than Antioch has done. Council. Antioch. sub
Iulio c. 9. Unusquisque Episcopus habeat suae paroechiae potestatem, etc.
Let every Bishop, says it, have authority of his own See, both to govern it
according to the fear of God, which is before his eyes, and to have a provident
care of the whole Country which is under his City; as also to ordain
Presbyters and Deacons, and to govern all things with Judgment. Upon all this
which has been said, I wonder how the Opposers of Episcopacy can read these so
plain proofs of the Judgment and practice of the ancient Church of God, and
not be ashamed of their palpable innovation.

Hitherto we have clearly deduced the superiority of Bishops above the other
Clergy, and the power of their Jurisdiction from Christ and

. 17.
Exceptions against our Episcopacy answered; and particularly of the
dissimilitude of

BUt two main exceptions are taken at our Episcopacy, wherein it is pretended,
there is an utter dissimilitude betwixt the anciently acknowledged superiority
and ours: The one is perpetuity, the other, Lordlinesse; In both which regards,
Parker, (according to his loud langua^e) says, there is as much likeness
betwixt the English Episcopacy and the ancient, as betwixt light and darkness.
For both these briefly. That there is and must needs be a superiority of some
Pastors above others, Beza Bez in Apoc 2.1
but this presidence, says he, is not perpetual, but only for the time and
vicissitudinary; Vid^ Bez. and Saraviam in resp. ad triplicatum Episcopatum,
and De gradibus Minist. c. 23.
There can be no Church without a Ministry: Those Ministers are divided into
Presbyteries: Those Presbyters must have an head, that head is to overruled the
body, for his turn; And this says he, is that Regency, which was in the
Primitive times, and is now ^efut. of Mr. D^^^ ham.
the governor of his brethren; the action ended, and his course finished,
returns to his old form, with a sumus ergo pares. And was this the inequality
of the Church Governors in the Primitive times? Was this the form of the
Regiment and Presidency of the Primitive Bishops? Blessed God! Where was this
monster of opinion formed? Who ever read or heard of such a course of
Administration, from the beginning of Gods Church upon earth, until this
present age? And yet these men, the better to guilde their upstart fancies to
the eyes of the vulgar, dare James, Ignatius Polycarpus, and all those noted
Successors, in their several charges, live and die Bishops there? Do not all
the Subscriptions of Councels, all histories that ever were in the Church,
testify so much? was there ever any Writer (but any one) that has given
intimation (but bare intimation) of any such shifting of Church Governors (for
that mistaken Ambrose is justly hissed out of all Countenance.) Did ever the
man fall into any kind of mention, that once practiced it? And shall grave
Divines give themselves liberty to dream of such strange Chimaericall devices,
and then (merely to get glory to themselves, and strength to their own fancie^)
so boldly obtrude them upon Gods Church for good Law, and as highly tending to
Gods glory? If we do not find among the ancient so direct contradictions to
this conceit, we must impute it to this, that they did not suppose so
impossible a fancy could have fallen into any wise heads: C^^r. l. 4. Epist 2.
Yet that of blessed Cyprian is clear enough: where a Bishop is once lawfully
ordained, whosoever would now (moreover) be made a Bishop (in that See) it is
necessary Vid supra Epist. Clementis ad Corinthios.
etc. And soon after, Forasmuch as after the first Bishop (viz.) during his
life, there cannot be a second; whosoever after that one (who ought to be
alone) is made, he is not a second, but none at all; Thus he. But what need I
urge this, when the very word of Ordination strikes it dead: For what
Ordination to in the Council of Salisbury (called Ep.tus puor.) practiced also
in the Popish times here in England, Binius, Anno 1274. Episcopatus puerorum.
upon St. Clements night and on St. Nicholas; wherein boys and youths dressed
up after the manner of Episcopal habits, took upon them to act the Bishops
sacred actions, and after the pastime ended, disroabed themselves, and returned
to their wonted trade; Both these I confidently say, are the mere mockeries of
Episcopacie; Quis furor, O Cives! As for the title first, alas, how poor a
quarrel it is? Certainly, if there were that true piety, and

But not to scan the Original (...), and Dominus, which every man knows how
common it was of old to Fathers, Masters, Husbands, Governors, Prophets; that
no man may wonder, Genesis 24.18.
Sara called Abraham Lord: Rebecca calls Abraham's servant so; Drink my Lord:
Nay what if it be made to appear that even those Titles which are now stumbled
at, were the usual style of the ancient Bishops? So Eusebius to the Bishop of
Trevers: (...).
To my Paulinus; and Paulinus in his Epistle to him, to my Lord Eusebius. So
the Bishops of Egypt to the Bishops assembled in the Council of Tire, (...).
To our most honorable Lords. The Synod held at Jerusalem to the people of
Egypt, (...).
Libya, etc. calls Athanasius their Pastor and Lord: And Julius Bishop of Rome,
the great Abbettor of Athanasius, is by the holy Bishops styled (...) most
blessed Lord: Nazianzen, My Lords the Bishops: And George the Bishop of
Laodicea, writing to certain Bishops, (...)
calls them most honorable Lords; and in the same Epistle putting both
together; Most reverend and most honorable brethren: Vide B Downham defense 3 b
cap. 6
And Bishop Downham (to whom I refer my reader for this point) has instanced
abundantly: yet I may not omit those more aged titles (which he has omitted)
even of blessed Ignatius himself, Ignat. Epist. ad Magnisianos Epist. ad
Smyrnenses.
who calls the Bishop of the Magnesians (...); and Polycarpus the Bishop of
Smyrna (...) God-worthy Bishops; which I suppose, comprehends the highest
degree of Grace. Much like to those which the late worthy Patriarch of
Constantinople gave in his Epistle to our late Archbishop of Canterbury. Vid.
Epist. in sine histor. Turci^ae: Append. etc.
Cartwright; Chap. to Mr. Cartwr. Calvin Epist. Farello de Basileens^ quodam.
Practice of Prelates D. 2. Cited in the survay of Disc. p. 372.
and how much below that other, Non minus Farello, quam Paulo, meaning the
blessed Apostle of the Gentiles: And again that in the practice of Prelates,
Calvin, Beza, Viretus, Knox, Cartwright, are the only Worthies of the world,
that have maintained Discipline: For us; If then it has pleased gracious
Princes, for expression of the honor which they gave to God, in the honor
given by them, to our holy function, to grace us with eminent titles and
rights, can any Christian man be so foolishly spightfull, as to think, because
we are Lords-Bishops, that we challenge to be Lords of our Clergy: as he said
well, because they themselves are usually styled Masters, are they therefore
the Masters of their Church? I would these maligners should know that with high
titles, we can bear as humble minds (to say no more) as those that pick that
quarrel; and are so little transported with these puffes of style, that we
account it (according to our Saviors prescription) our greatest glory to be
servants to the souls of the meanest drudges in the family of our God.

But if the name offend, the thing offends much more: We have the Lands, Rents,
Royalty, possessions of Lordships, Rights of Barony: What? Have we not yet been
prey enough to this malignant and sacrilegious envy? Are we not yet despoyled
to purpose? Is that little pittance which hungry sacrilege, and cruel rapine
have left behind them, still a beam in these evil eyes? We are Barons by our
places, but, as one said truly, Bare-ones indeed, Barons Elemosynarij; Ex
^u^is consulto quodam D. Henric. Spelman Collect. Synod in Anno ^ 34.
Cast your eyes you greedy Church-robbers, upon what we had, and then tell me
if you can grudge us a feather of that soul which you have stolen and devoured.
To speak of one which I have reason to know; There is a Bishopric in the world
which had 27 rich Manors within the Diocese (besides other foreign) and 14
fair houses and Parkes about them; which bath now but 7 of the meanest Manors
left, in full Lease, and one only house, without so much as a stick of wood for
the heirth, or an handful of Hay for the stable, and yet none of the ancient
burdens subtracted. Paul's Disciples, if we had not learned to want, and to
abound.

Little do these men think what charges do necessarily attend our places) what
hospitality is expected from us, what Competencie of ringantur. In the mean
time, what a difference is there between times. Our poor well meaning ignorant
forefathers, thought their Clergy could never have enough; Statutes of
Mortmain needed to hold their hands; their knowing, rich, zealous offspring,
think their better deserving-Clergie can have never too little. We see and
heartily pity the incompetent provision of our foreign brethren, whose parts
are as eminent as their maintenance poor. And this is that pass of perfection
which these mis-zelotes would bring our Clergy unto, and are angry because we
are not enough beggars. They would have their Pastors true Ministers, that

Sarav. de gradi^. minist.
I remember what learned Saravia over heard some of his Antwerpian masters say,
when speech was concerning the augmentation of his stipend; Prove. 29.21.
He that delicately brings up his Servant, shall have him become his Son at
the last. Blessed be God that we are not under such mercy; though it is the
regret of some that we are not. That double honor which St. Paul moyens is too
vast for a Bishop, which some Lay Presbyter may put over without envy; yea some
noble Elder (for such the time now yields) shall be cried up for spending upon
one Supper a Bishops yearly revenue. As it is, we bless God and our good
Kings, for what we have left; But I wis it is not so much, as that any man
should at the sight of it, need to feed upon his own heart, in stead of our
Trencher: But if any of our profession being blessed with plenty of means,
shall run forth into lavish excess; pampering his Appetite with Apician
delicates, or ruffling in proud and costly attyres, and furnitures, beyond the

Forasmuch therefore as these imaginary dissimilitudes

. 18.
The practice of the whole Christian Church, in all times and places, is for
this government of Bishops.

HOwever it pleases our Anti-praesulists to Quod semper et ubique: Always and
every where; was the old and sure rule of Vincentius Lirinensis; and who thinks
this can fail him, as well worthy to err. It were a long task to instance in
all times, and to particularize in all Churches: Let this be the trial, Turn
over all histories, search the records of all times and places, if ever it can
be shown that any Orthodox Church in the whole Christian world, since the times
of Christ and his Apostles, was governed otherwise than by a Bishop, superior
to his Clergy (unless perhaps during the time of some persecution, or short
inter-regnum) let me forfeit my part of the cause. Our opposites dare not stand
Rome? And has not Bishop Downham diligently noted his (...) in Boniface; his
(...) in Hildebrand, his (...) in the latter times? Sur^ly had these men
bestowed that time in perusing Bishop Downhams discourse concerning Antichrist,
Diatrib. de Antichrist, (...). ^^on Less^^^.
which they have spent in confuting his worthy Sermon, they had needed no
other either reformation or disproof. For can any indifferent man be so
extremely mad, as to think all the Christian world (these men only by good luck
excepted) is, or ever was turned Antichrist? or that that Antichrist has set
his foot every where, in all assemblies of Christians? and that he still keeps
his footing in all Gods Church upon earth? To say nothing else concerning the
notorious falsity hereof, what a derogation were cheerfully pouring out their
blood for Christ, Loco supra citato.
would in their very offices bolster up the pride of Antichrist? Or if they
would, yet can we think that the Apostles themselves, who saw and erected this
superiority (as Chamier himself confesses) would be accessory to this
advancement of Antichrist? Certainly he had need of a strong and as wicked a
Credulity of a weak and as wild a wit, that can believe all this. So the
(Semper) is plainly ours, and so is (ubique) too; All times are not more for
us, than all places. Take a view of the whole Christian world: The state of
Europe is so well known, that it needs no report; Look abroad, ye shall find
that for the Greek Church, Christianography of the Greek Chapter
the Patriarchate of Constantinople, which in the Emperor Leo's time, had 81
Metropolitans, and about 38 Arch-bishopricks under his Jurisdiction, has under
him still 74 Metropolitans; who have diverse Bishops under them; As
Thessalonica, Corinth four; Athens six, etc. For the Russian Church, which
since the Mahumetan tyranny has subjected it self a Patriarch of their own,
near home, of Mosco, he has under him two Metropolitans, four Archbishops,
six Bishops.

For the Patriarchate of Jerusalem, to which have belonged the three
Palestines, and two other Provinces; Tirius reckons also five Metropolitans,
and ten Bishops.

For the Patriarchate of Antioch, which has been accounted one of the most
numerous for Christians, it had, as the same author reckons, fifteen Provinces
allotted to it, and in them, Metropolitans, Archbishops, and Bishops, no

For the Armenian Christians, they acknowledge obedience to the government of
two Patriarks of their own; the one of Armenia, the greater, who kept his
residence of old at Sebastia; the other of Armenia the less, whose residence
was formerly at Mytilene, the Mother City of that Province, now near Tarsus in
Cilicia: Mr. Sands reports their Bishops to be 300, but Baronius, 1000.

For the Jacobite Christians, they have a Patriarch of their own, whose
Patriarchall Church is near to the City of Merdin in Mesopotamia; and he has
under his government many Churches dispersed in the Cities of Mesopotamia,
Babylonia, Syria.

For the Maronites, whose main habitation is in Mount Lebanus, containing in
circuit 700 miles; they have a Patriarch of their own, who has eight or nine
Bishops under his Jurisdiction.

For the mis-named Nestorian Christians, they are subject to their Patriarch of
Musal, or Seleucia, besides others which they have had; Under one whereof is
said to have been 22 Bishoprics,

For the Indian Christians, named from St. Thomas, they have their Archbishop
lately subjected to the Patriarch of Musall.

For the African Christians, we find that in one Province alone, under one
Metropolitan, they have had 164 Bishops; They are under the government of the
Patriarch of Alexandria, to whose Jurisdiction belong both the Christians of
Egypt, and those about the Bay Arabia; Upon whose late solemn Consecration,
how many Bishops attended, and what solemnity were used, were too long to
rehearse.

For the Abassine Christians, they are subject to their Abuna, a Patriarch of
their own; Some report of an 127 Archbishops: And Alvares, that in one Church
of the holy Trinity, upon a solemn occasion, he saw two hundred of their Mitred
Clergy together. Thus have I for the readers satisfaction, contracted into a
short view, some passages of laborious Christianography of Mr. Paget, gathered
by him out of many Authors, whereby it well appears how the Christian Church is
governed abroad, and (which is very remarkable) well near all of these (in a
manner) utterly divided from the Rome, and professedly opposite to most of her
errors, and chiefly to her ambitious and tyrannous usurpation; but all gladly
ever submitting themselves to that Episcopal government, which some few very
ill-advised, but very well self-conceited new-commers, here in a corner of our
Europe, have for their own ends presumed to contradict.

. 19.
Of the Suppression of contrary records: and the sole opposition of the
heretic Aerius.

CLearly then, all times, all places, all histories Parker, and Anti-tilenus,
that perhaps there were some, but they were suppressed; suppressed? now
gramercy for that: By whom I hope, by the Hierarchy? what, when there was no
opposition? No color of offense? suppressed? what, not only their edition in
this age of Presses but their very mention? Can they persuade been any, or of
their allowance of the discipline called for; not so much as the least
intimation of any City or region, that was, or wished to be otherwire governed
then by a Diocesan Bishop? As well may they tell us, there are people at this
day on, and beyond the mountains of the moon, who do still, and ever have
governed themselves by their platform, though who, and what they are, could
not, cannot possibly be discovered.

Onwards then: It can be no great comfort Arius; branded, even for this very
point, which they now maintain; And how could this be, if the conceit had been
formerly current? Or, why he singled from the rest, if there had been others
known to have been of the same mind? Epiphanius, Austen, Philaster; And who
can choose but blush to hear those; who would go for Orthodox Christians, now
at the latter end of the day (after so many ages of exsibilation) to take upon
them the defense of a noted heretic, against all the holy Fathers of the
Church, yea, against the whole Church of God, whose judgment those Fathers
expressly declared. Hear then of your Patriarch, all ye opposers of Episcopacy;
and then judge how you like him: All agree in the story; Epiphanius is the
fullest. (...) Epiph. haeres. 75.
Aerius says he was a man frantick-headed, proud-minded; an Arrian altogether;
He would fain have been a Bishop; and when his schoole-fellow Eustathius came
Eustathius humor'd him by all means, he was still the more peevish; at last, he
brake forth into Opposition; and (says that Father) his speech favored rather
of madness then of sober humanity. For he said, what is a Bishop better then a
Presbyter? The one differs not at all from the other; There is but one order,
one honor, one dignity of both; Epiph. loco citato.
so does the Presbyter. These are the opinions, among others, for which Aerius
was hooted, not out of the Church only, but out of the Cities, towns and
villages; which I grieve to see taken up in this doting, and last age of the
world by those, who should be both godly and wise. He whom Epiphanius in the
voice of Gods Church styles magnum mundo malum, a great mischief to the world,
is now applauded by those, who pretend to holiness,

. 20.
The vindication of those Fathers that are pretended to second Aerius.

BUt what noise is this I hear from our Antepiscopists, Aerius, surely, if
there had been any such, the world would have rung of it, ere now. The
thenpresent Church would sooner have noted it, than those that lag after them,
so many hundred paces of years. But to make this good, more than once is laid
in our dish by Parker, Paracles. l. 1. c. 7
and the censure of Tilenus, the quotation of Medina, which our Reverend and
learned Bishop of Durham, Dr. Morton in his Apology cites, Apol. p 2. c. 12.
Non Dubito, etc. I doubt not says, Medina to affirm that St. Jerome,
Sedulius, Primasius, Theodoret, held with the Aerian heretics that the Order
of Bishops and Presbyters is Jure divino the very same. It is well that he
omitted Augustine, Ambrose, Chrysostom, Oecumenius. Well, what of this, the
learned Bishop cites Medina, but does he approve him? he scorns the motion:
Medina cites those Fathers, as for this opinion; The more shameless he: Is it
ever the truer, because a sworn champion of the tyranny of Rome, and a
professed enemy to the reformed Religion, impudently avers it? It is enough for
me to leave him to the castigation of Bellarmine: and though I might spend
paper Aerianisme yet for that it is but incidently in our way, Intolerabilis
est Medirae impudentia. Spalat de Rep. Eccles. l. 2. c. 3.
I shall rather remit my Reader to the learned and satisfactory discourse of
the Archbishop of Spalato, who has prevented that labor. All the rest are
easily freed; St. Jerome and St. Ambrose in the opinion of some seem to take in
water: For the former as he was naturally a waspish and hot good man, so now
being vexed with some cross proceedings (as he thought) of John Bishop of
Jerusalem, heflew out into some expressions indeed, but yet such as in other
places he does either salve or contradict; The passages are scanned thoroughly
by many authors. It is true then, that he says, Bishops are greater than
Presbyters rather consuetudine Hier. ad Evagrum.
than Dominicae dispositionis veritate; but even in that, withal he grants
Episcopacy, to be an Apostolical Institution; Eadem Epistola ad finem.
for he interprets himself, that this Custom was derived and continued from
the Apostles, and that the Dominica dispositio of which he spoke, was to be
taken of a personal appointment from Christ our Savior; Hier in 1 ad T^tum.
Wherefore what can be more plain than that his toto orb decretum relates to
Paul mentions in his Epistle to the Corinths, One says I am of Paul, another I
am of Apollo; I am of Cephas; which was in the heart of the Apostolic times:
And relating those words of the Bishop of Jerusalems letters, [There is no
difference betwixt a Bishop and a Presbyter] he passes a satis imperite upon
it; professing to his Marcella, against the Novelty of Montanus; With us our
Bishops hold the place of the Apostles, and that the drepression of their
Bishops below their place was utterly perfidious; And commenting upon that
passage of the Psalm, Hier. in Ps. 44.
In stead of Fathers thou shall Quid facit Episcopus excepta ordinatione, quod
Presbiter non facit? What does a Bishop besides Ordination, which a Presbyter
does not? That very exception exempts him from Aerianisme; and those other

As for St. Ambrose, they could not have pitched upon a better man; a renowned
Archbishop and Metropolitan, and of so holily-high a grain, as that he would
not abate one inch of Archiepiscopall port and power; no not to an Emperor;
Yet this is the man that shall plead against the superiority of Bishops. And
what will he say? Of a Bishop and a Presbyter says he, there is one order or
Ordination; for either of them is a Priest, but the Bishop is the first; so
that every Bishop is a Presbyter, but not every Presbyter a Bishop, for among
the Presbyters, the Bishop is the first. But first of all, by Parkers own
confession, it is not St. Ambrose Whitakers, spalato, Cocus, Rivetus, and
others, but even some of the great Pontifician authors, as we shall see upon
another occasion more fully: Secondly Ambrose himselstells another tale,
Ambros. de dignitate sacerd. c. 3. c. 5.
in his genuine writings; There is one thing, says he, that God requires of a
Bishop, another of a Presbyter, another of a Deacon. And again, As Bishops do
ordain Presbyters, and consecrate Deacons, Primus sacerdos, that is, says he,
Princeps Sacerdotum.

. 21.
The practice of the Waldenses and Albigenses in allowance of Episcopal
government.

SHortly then, all times, all histories, all Authors, Arrians, Novatians,
Donatists, yet still held themselves to the government of their Bishops; It was
their question, whether this or that man should be their Bishop, it was never
questioned whether they should have any Bishops at all. Yea in these latter
times the very Waldenses Albigenses when in some things they justly flew off
from the Romish superstition, yet still would have a Bishop of their own; It
was one of the Articles that was objected against them, the Supremacy of the
Pope, Artic Vvald. Ann^. 1170 and 1216,
usurping above all Churches, is by them denied; Neither that any degree is to
be received in the Church, but only Priests, Deacons, and Bishops; And Aeneas
Silvius in his Bohemian history reporting the Tenets of the Waldenses has
thus, Fox p. 209. de dogmat. Waldens
Romanum pontificem, etc. That the Bishop of Rome is but equal to other
Bishops, that among Priests there is no difference; that not dignity but merit
of life makes one Presbyter better then another. Those of Merindol and
Cabrieres (a people which about two hundred years ago came out of the Country
of Piemont, Provence) being there planted, and hearing of the Gospel p^eached
in Germany, and Switzerland, sent in the year 1530. George Maurellus, and
Petrus Latomus to confer with the learned men of those parts; they met with
Oecolampadius, Bucer, Capito; Maurellus escaping home alone, told his
Compatriots how much they had erred, and how their old Ministers, whom they
Albigenses, did set up to themselves a Bishop of their own one Bartolomaeus
remaining about the coasts of Croatia and Dalmatia; Epist Legati Papae Card.
Portinens. vide Fox. Acts etc.
of whom the Cardinal Portinensis (the Popes Legate) writes thus to the
Archbishop of Roan about the year 1146. Etenim de Carcasona or^undus, etc. For
one Bartolomaeus the Bishop of the Heretics, borne in Carcasona, taking upon
him the Deputation of that Antipope, yielded unto him a wicked and abominable
reverence, and gave him a place of residence in the Town of Porlos, and removed
himself to the parts of Tholose. This Bartolomaeus in the tenor of his
letters, which run every where in the first style of his salutation,
Bartolomaeus, the servant of the servants of God to. N. the salutations of the
holy faith. This man, amongst all his other enormities, makes Bishops, and
takes upon him perfidiously, to govern and order the Churches. Thus that
Cardinal. And those Angragnians, who are commonly said for some hundred of
years to have cast off all relation to the Church of Rome, yet in as the
people. These Chrisians were far from that peevish humor, wherewith diverse
miszealots are now-a-dayes transported. What speak I of these? The very late
Christians who within the Ken of memory, H^drian. Sarav. Praelat. ad tractat.
de gradibus minister.
came into this Kingdom for Protection had the noble Johannes a Lasco for
their Bishop. Thus it was with all Christian men and assemblies all the world
over, till (within the age of some (who might be yet living) the waters of the
Cantons, Lemanus began to be troubled: And now, when the gross errors of
Doctrine came to be both discovered by one side, and impetuously defended by
the other, and the impugners cruelly persecuted to bonds and death, those who
could not enjoy the freedom of the true Religion, under their Popish Bishops,
thought themselves driven to set up Church-governors and Pastors of their own:
And these

. 22.
The government by Bishops, both universal and unalterable.

WE have seen the grounds of Church Government Churches, yet the substance of
the government is, and must be ever the same. That ordinary power which the
Apostles had, they traduced to their successors, as bequeathed by our Savior,
in his last fare well to them unto the end of the world. For we may not think,
as one said well, that the Apostles carried their Commission with them up to
heaven. They knew it was given them for a perpetuity of Go teach all Nations,
and baptize, added, Behold I am with you to the end of the world; He could not
mean it of their persons which staid not long upon earth after him; he meant it
of their Evangelical successors; So was he with them; as he was with his
domestics their Predecessors, not in the immediatnesse and extraordinary way
of calling; not in the admirable measure and kinds of their (...), or gifts,
not in the infalliblenesse of the infliction of censures, and, in short, the
power of the Keys, which we justly say, were not tied to St. Peter's girdle, but
were communicated to all his fellows, and to all his and their successors for
ever. By virtue whereof, all true Pastors can open and shut heaven gates above,
much more the Church doors hereupon earth: And all these as are of such
necessity, that without them the Church could not at all Peter (says St.
Ambrose) Veniat ad Antistites, Augustine; Let them come to the Bishops, by whom
the keys are ministered in the Church. As Beza said truly of the promise of the
holy Ghost, Beza de Graeci. minist. c. 5.
that it was given for the good of the whole Church, yet not unto the whole
Church; but peculiarly unto the Apostles (to give to others at least) so must
it be said of this power And so indeed by Calvin's own determination, Calv.
Instit. 1. 4. c. 3.
none but Pastors might lay hands on the ordained, Hoc postremo h^bendum est
non universam multitudinem manus i^posuisse su^s ministris, sed, folos pastores.
and none but they were capable to weild the great censures of the Church:
Shortly then, was this power left by the Apostles, or was it not left? If it
were left, (as we could else have no Church) was it left with all, or with
some? with all it cannot; the multitude cannot be thought fit for these
affairs; If with some, then whether with one in a City or territory, Timothy
in Ephesus; One Titus in Creet; One Angel in Thyatira; One other in
Philadelphia; Laodicea, and the rest: And why are those single persons
challengeable for the neglect? And if this power and this charge, were by the
very hands of the Apostles, entayled upon these eminent persons, which should
by due ordination therein succeed them, and from them lineally Jure Apostolico,
in the first institution, yet hold it may be changed in the sequel. For me I
have learned to yield this honor to these inspired men, that I dare not but
think these their ordinances, which they intended to succession; immutable.
Some kinds of Ceremonious prescriptions fell from them, which were meant to be
only local, and temporary; those we have no reason to think our selves
obliged to, but those which they left for the administration of Gods Church,
it shall be high presumption in any to alter: because the Apostles did but meet
together diverse times, on the first day of the Paul ordered that day for the
laying aside their Collections; And that is only called the Lords day by the
Apostle; How strongly are the vehement opposites of Episcopacy, wont to
maintain that day, in succession to the Jewish Sabbath; and that in all points
unalterable, by any humane authority? Surely had they but the tenth part of
that plea from the Apostles, for this their Judaicall-Evangelicall Sabbath,
which we have for our form of their government of the Church, which (say you)
was by an equality from: which, if (as we plead) they afterward ascended to
this imparity (which we now contend for) why is it not as safe say you, for us
to take up that their first form, as this latter. Admitting all this, our
answer is the readier; we like well to make those holy men of God our choosers:
They thought fit to alter to this: and therefore we think fit to hold to it:
They tried both, not detrect to continue it. Otherwise, why may I not urge the
same argument in the instanced Sabbath, The Apostles had duly kept the seventh
day according to the Law; they after fell to the observation of the first day.
What, shall any man now infer, why not the Jewish Seventh, which was first
kept rather than the Evangelicall first, which was last Whitgift) there may be
some appendances and formalities of government, alterable by the wisdom and
discretion of the Church; yet for the main substance, it is now utterly
indispensable, and must so continue to the worlds end. Indispensable by any
voluntary act (what inevitable necessity may do in such a case, we now dispute
Nisi coegerit dura necessitas cui nulla sex esst posita Hadr. Sarav. resp. ad
Bez. de gradi^. etc.
Where then that may be justly pleaded, we shall not be wanting both in our
pity, and in our Prayers.


1.
The appellation of Lay Elders, and the state of the question concerning them.

THE question concerning the lay-Presbyter is not easily stated; the thing
Presbyter, we know, in the Greek, as also Zachen, in the Hebrew (whence the use
of it is borrowed) is a word importing age; and signifies a man elder in
years: Now, for that years should and do commonly bring knowledge and
experience, and carry gravity and authority: therefore it is traduced from that
natural sense, and used to signify a man of some eminence in place, and
government: so we have in the Old Testament, Elders of the house, Genesis 50.7.
Elders of the Congregation, Levit. 4.15. Elders of the City, Deuteronomy. 19.12.
Elders of the land, Genesis 50.7. Elders of the people, Mat. 21.23. and these,
sometimes marched with Deuteronomy. 21.2, Princes and Elders, Ezra 10.8. Priests and
Elders, Lam. 1 10. And all these were titles of civil authority: But when we
come to the days of the Gospel, under the New Testament; now we find the
Elders of the Church, Acts 20.17. Acts 11.30. and 14.23. A name which
comprehended all those sacred persons who were employed in the promulgation of
the Gospel (as Calvin well observes Presbyters which are now in question,
which, says Travers (if you will speak properly) are only them that rule, he
were wise that could tell: merely civil they would not be, for they take upon
them Ecclesiastical charges: Merely sacred and sprituall they are not, for
they are neither Bishops, Priests, nor Deacons; Merely Laik they would not be,
Bez. Resp. ad S rav. negat ^sse Laicos.
Clergimen they deny to be. Those of old that served at the Altar, seniores
populi, we would not grudge them this title but if seniores, or Presbyteri
Ecclesiae; they have no more right to that; than we Bishops have to Crowns and
Scepters; least any doubt should seem ungrounded, Beza, who will not yield
these Elders Laics; to grace them the more, ubi supra.
ascribes to them some kind of spiritual cure; Abrah. Henri. these. Genev. The
adminitration of the Word is given to the Elders, but to another end, etc
U^judicius Ecclesiaticis praecuntibus pastoribus praesunt.
they feed the flock by governing; they are (...), and preach after a sort in
the reproof of sin in their Consistory; and yet he is feign to
contra-distinguish them from teaching Elders; and their style forsooth is
(...), governments: But, tell me, I beseech you dear brethren, you that are so
apt to affect, and receive a foreign discipline; tell me in good earnest; can
you think this to be the feeding of the flock of Christ, Paul requires of the
Elders at Ephesus? Acts 20.
can you think these men to be such as the Apostle there speaks of, In quo
Dominus vos constituit Episcopos; enchargingthem with the flock over which
Christ has made them Bishops? Was ever any lay Elder styled by that name? Does
not Calvin himself confess at the Presbyters both there mentioned, and Titus
1.5. are no other Doctors and Teachers; because in both places Germany, who
retain nothing of that divine order, but lands and name. Yea, my brethren, why
are ye willing to be deceived? who ever spoke or heard of a Lay-Presbyter in
all the Church of God, till this age? Take the term as it is: We are forced
upon this epithete for distinction sake; not out of any scornful intent of
discouraging Gods people: we know that in a general acception they are all the
Lords inheritance; but because there is a necessary difference to be put
betwixt them, whom God has separated Ignatius, as in other places, so
especially in his Epistle to them of Smyrna (which we have already cited) is
clear, (...) etc. Let the Clement B. of Rome; as we have formerly alledgd. A
lay man is bound to Laick precepts. And yet before him a^ so, I for my part am
confident that St. Peter, whom this man succeed, both in his Chair and
Martyrdom, meant no other when he charged his fellow Bishops that they should
feed their flock, (...), not domineering over their Clergy: 1 Pet. 5.3.
for the word is plural; not as if it were Clero, but Clericis: and in the
verse before it is, (...), the very act of Episcopacie; those that would have
it taken otherwise, are feign to add a word of their own to the text; reading
it, Gods heritage; where as the Original is merely (...), perfecyly to this
sense. Neither is there any Ataxie to be feared in Eutaxie rather: and such as
without which nothing could ensue, but confusion. If these men then be
spiritual and sacred persons, why do they not challenge it? If Laicke, why are
they ashamed of it? If betwixt both, let them give themselves that title which
Bernard gives himself upon the occasion of his forced forbearance of his
Canonical Ego tanquam Chimaera quaedam mei seculi. Here then ye seduced
Brethren, that go all upon trust for the strong belief of a Lay-Presbytery;
your credulity has palpably abused you; it is true, this advantage you have,
that the first authors of this late device were men of great note in their
times, but men still; and herein they showed it too well: that for their own
ends, they not only invented such a government, as was never heard of in any
Christian Church, throughout the whole world, before them but also found out
some pretense of Scriptures, never before to understood, whereupon to father
their so new, and (now) plausible erection.

. 2.
No Lay-Elder ever mentioned or heard of in the world, till this present age:
The texts of Scripture particularized, to the contary.

ANd that you may not think this to be some bold unwarranted suggestion
present age, I shall yield the cause, and live and die theirs. We find in
common experience, that we apprehend things according to our own
prepossession: Iaundised eyes seem to see all objects yellow; blood-shoten,
red: it is no marvel if those who have mancipated their minds to the
judgments of some, whom they over-admire, and have lent their eyes out of
their owns heads, wheresoever they find mention of an Elder in the New
Testament, Erasmus, who persuaded himself, he saw a strange Dragon in the
air, because his friend confidently pointed to it, and seemed to wonder at his
not seeing it but those who with unpartiall and unprejudiced hearts shall
address themselves to the Book of God, and with a careful sincerity, compare
the Scriptures, shall find, that wheresoever the word Elder, or Presbyter is,
in an Evangelicall sense, were it not too long to take them into particular
examination, I should gladly scan them all; some we will; let us begin with the
last; 2 Ioh. 1. 3. Ioh. 1.
The elder unto the well-beloved Gaius: And, The Elder to the elect Lady: 3
Ioh. 1.
What Elder is this? Is it not the holy and dear Apostle St. John? The Elders
which are among you I exhort, who am also an Elder etc. Feed the flock of God
which is among you, (says Saint Peter. 1 Pet 5.1.
) Peter, such were they whom he exhorts their title is one, their work is one:
I suppose no lay-Elder will take upon him this charge of feeding the flock of
Christ, with Saint Peter; and if Beza would feign, out of favor to their new
erection, strain the word so far as to feeding by government, yet it is so
quite against the hair, that Calvin himself and Chamier, and Moulin, (and who
not) do every where contra-distinguish Calvin is clear ours, The flock of
Christ, says he cannot be fed but with pure doctrine, quae sola spirituale est
pabulum. Js any man sick among you? says St. James, James 5.3^.
Let him call for the Elders of the Church, and let them pray over him,
anointing him with oil in the name of the Lord, and the prayer of faith shall
save the sick. Are these Lay Elders, think we, whom the Apostle requires to be
called for: who must comfort the sick, cure him by their prayers, anoint him
with their miraculous oil, for recovery? Let me ask then, were there no
spiritual Pastors, no Ministers among them? And if there were such, was it
likely, or fit, they should stand by, whiles laymen did their spiritual
services? Besides, were they lay-hands S. Mark, we shall find them sacred
persons; such lips, and such hands must cure the sick; so then the Elders of S.
John, S. Peter, S. James are certainly Pastors, and Ministers; And what other
are S. Paul's? For this cause (says he to Titus) I left thee in Crete, that
thou should set in order the things that are wanting, and ordain Elders in
every City. What Elders Jf any be blamlesse, the husband of one wife, having
faithful children, etc. For a Bishop must be blameless, as the steward of
God; Lo S. Paul's Elder here, is no other than a Bishop, even then, as the
Fathers observe, every Bishop was a Presbyter. And though not every Presbyter a
Bishop, yet every Presbyter a sacred and spiritual person; such a one as is
capable of holy Ordination: thus might we easily pass through all these texts,
wherein there is any mention of Presbyters; One only place there is, that
might to a fore-inclined mind seem to give some color, (and God knows, but
a color) of a lay-Presbytery, Let the Elders that rule well, 1 Timothy 5.17.
says St. Paul to A place, which has been so thoroughly sifted by all, who
have meddled with this ill-raised controversy, as that no humane wit can devise
to add one scruple of a notion, toward a farther discussion of it. I dare
confidently say, there is scarce any one sentence of Scripture, which has
undergone a more busy and curious agitation, The issue is this, that never any
expositor for the space of that we need no other argument against them; For,
where was it ever heard of, or how can it be, that mere Laics should be
(...)? Bishops and Pastors have had that style, as in Scripture, so in
following antiquity, that passage of Clemens Alexandrinus, cited by Eusebius,
concerning Saint John, that he at Ephesus committed the charge of his young man
to an old Bishop, whom he calls (...), besides that of Justin Martyr, already
cited, and Prebstre, (as the more think) let us have Lay-priests, if
Lay-presbyters: And what better Commentary can we have of Saint Paul's (...),
than himself gives of himself, in his exhortation to the Elders or Pastors at
Ephesus, who interprets it, by careful attending to themselves, and their
flocks; which even was it ever required that they should be maintained by the
Church?

And what can those (...) be, but those Priests which diligently and painfully
toil in Gods harvest; in the Word and Doctrine? all the Elders therefore there
intended, are exercised in the Word and Doctrine, but there are some that do
(...), labor more abundantly than the rest; these must be respected these holy
affairs of God, have an hard answer to make one day, before the Tribunal of
Almighty God, for this their presumptuous usurpation.

Now then, since this one litigious, and unproving text, is the only place in
the whole New Testament, that can bear any pretense for the lay-Presbytery,
(for, as for their Dic Ecclesiae, and their (...), they are so improbable, and
have been so often and thoroughly charmed, that they are not worth either urging,
or

. 3.
Lay-Eldership a mere stranger to antiquity: which acknowledges no
Presbyters, but Divines.

ANd as the Scriptures of God never meant to give countenance to a
lay-Presbytery, Clemens makes a contradistinction of Laics, and Presbyters:
Clem. Ep^st. ad Corinth. supra. Ignat. Ep. ad Magn. Do nothing without your
Bishop, ^eith^r Presbyter, nor Deacon, nor Laick.
And Ignatius the holy Martyr, yet more punctually, goes in these degrees;
(...). This difference is so familiar with that Saint, as that we scarce miss
it in any of his Epistles, in so much as Vedelius himself finding in the
Epistle of this Martyr to the Ephesians, Ignat. Epist. ad Ephesians.
(...), translates it, memorabile sacerdotum vestrorum collegium, a College of
Presbyters: such the Bishops of those first times had (as we have still the
Deane and Chapter, to consult withal, upon any occasion) but those Presbyters
were no other than professed Divines: Neither were ever otherwise construed. If
we look a little lower, who can but turn over any two leaves of the Can.
Apost. c. 3.4.5.
under pretense of Religion, which in c 6, 7.
They forbid a Bishop, Presbyter, or Deacon to meddle with any secular cares or
imploiments; A Laick person had no reason to be so restrained; shortly (for we
might here easily weary our Reader) the ninth of their Canons is punctual,
which plainly reckons up the Bishop, Can. ^
Presbyter, Deacon, as (...), of the Priestly list; and in the foureteenth, if
any Presbyter or Deacon, (...); or whosoever else of the Clergy.

Dionysius the mis-named. Areopagite has (...) and, (...), for Bishops and
Presbyters: and the holy Martyr Cyprian, Cum Episcopo Presbyteri Sacerdotali
honor conjuncti, the Presbyters joined l. 3. ep. 1. Cypr. l. 3. Ep. 1.
What shall I need to urge, how often in the ancient Councels they are styled
by the name of (...), Priests; and how by those venerable Synods they have the
offices and employments of only Priests; and Clergimen put upon them; our two
learned Bishops, D. Bilson, and D. Downam, have so cleared this point, that my
labor herein would be but superfluous; I refer my reader to their
unquestionable instances; One thing Aerius himself, the only ancient enemy of
Episcopacie; what is a Bishop (says he) other then a Presbyter? etc. there is
but one order, one honor of both: Does the Bishop impose hands? so does the
Presbyter. Does the Bishop administer Baptism? so does the Presbyter. The
Bishop dispenses Gods service; so does the Presbyter, etc. Thus he. Lo; there
is but one professed enemy to Bishops, in all the history of the Church, and he
in the very act of his opposition to Episcopacie, marres the fashion of the
Lay-presbytery: He could not in terminis directly oppose it indeed; How should
he oppose that which never was? But he attributes

. 4.
Ambrose's testimony urged for Lay Elders fully answered.

YEt, let me eat my word betimes, while it Milaine St. Ambrose, a man noted, as
for singular sanctimonie, so for the height of his spirit, and zeal of
mantaining the right of his function; and what will he say? Amb. in 1. Tim. 5.1.
Vnde and synagoga, and postea etiam Ecclesia seniores habuit, etc. Whereupon
(says he) both the synagogue and afterward, the Church also, had certain
Elders, to rouse up himself a little, and with some more than ordinary
attention to listen to this evidence, on which alone (for any likely pretense
of antiquity) so a great cause wholly depends: And first, let him hear, that
this is no Ambrose, but a counterfeit; even by the confession of the greatest
favorers of the Lay-presbyterie; Park. Polit. Eccl.
who), that they would thus easily turn off the chief, (if not the only)
countenance of their cause, it is to me a wonder: but they well Possevine
thinks he finds Pelagianisme in this Commentary upon the Epistles: Bellar.
Tom. 4. de Amiss. great. c. 5. and l. 4. de Iustif. c. 8.
both, Whitakers and Bellarmine disclaim it for Ambrose's; the later pitches
it upon an heretic; even the same which was the author of the book of the
Questions of the Old and New testament; Hilarie the Deacon, and the former,
does little other; whiles he cites and seems to allow the Censors Lovaine to
this purpose. Maldon. in Mat. 19.
Maldonate casts it upon Remigius Lugdunensis, who lived Anno 870. far from
any authentic antiquity; and confidently says; no man that ever read
Ambrose's Writings, can think these to be his. It is then first no great
matter what this witness says; but yet let us hear him; Vnde synagoga,
(says he) Whereupon the Synagogue, and after, the Church also, had Elders:
And whereupon was this spoken, I beseech you? Let my reader but take the fore
going words with him, and see if he can forbear to smile at the conceit. The
words run thus; upon occasion of Saint Paul's charge, Rebuke not an elder, but
entreat him, as etc. For the honor of age, the elder in years is by meekness
to be provoked to a good work, etc. Nam apud omnes ubique gentes honorabilis
est senectus: For, says he, amongst all nations every where old age it is
honorable: And so inferres, whereupon, both the Synagogue, and afterward the
Church, had certain elder or S. Paul's words import too, for it follows, the
elder women as mothers, and I suppose no man will think S. Paul meant to ordain
Eldresses in the Church; Thus in the supposed Ambrose, all runs upon this
strane; fort here is Honorificentia aetatis, the honorificence of age; majores
natu, honorabilis senectus; no intimation of any office in the Church. But you
will say, here is mention of the Elders that the Synagogue had: True, but not
as Judges, but only as aged persons; whose experience might get them skill,
and gravity procure them reverence; and such the Church had too; and made use
of their counsel; and therefore it quorum sine consilio, without whose
counsel, nothing was done in the Church; he says not, without whose
authority. these then, for ought this place implies, were not incorporated in
any Consistory, but, for their prudence, advised with, upon occasion; and what
is this to a fixed bench of Lay-presbyters? Or, if there were such a settled
College of Presbyters, in ancient use (as Ignatius implies) yet where are the
Lay? They were certain Ambrose dreamed of any other, let him be consulted in
his noble, humble, and yet stout Epistile, Am. l. 2. Epist 1^ 3.
to the Emperor Valentinian; where that worthy pattern of Prelates, well
shows, how ill it could be brooked, that persons merely laick or secular,
should have any hand in judging and ordering of matters spiritual, Yea, for
this very pretended Ambrose, how far he was from thinking of a
Lay-presbytery; let himself speak, who in the very same Chapter, upon those
words (Let the Elders that rule well he counted worthy of double honor)
construes those boni dispensatores, ac fideles; and because you may think this
may well enough fit Laick Presbyters; he adds, Evangelizantes regnum Dei, those
that preach the Kingdom of God, And again: Adversus Presbyterum, etc. Against
a Presbyter receive not an accusation, etc. Because, says he, (Ordinis hujus
sublimis est honor) the honor of this order is high, for they are the Vicars
of Christ; and therefore an accusation of this person is not easily to be
admitted; for Ambrose's Presbyters, are no other in his sens^, than Gods
Priests, and Christ's Vicars: If our Lay-presbyters then have a mind to be, or
to be called Priests, and Vicars, their Ambrose, is for them; else he is not
worthy of his fee for what he has said.

If all antiquity have yielded any other witness, worth the producing, how
gladly should we hear him out, and return him a satisfactory answer; but the
truth is, never any man thought of such a project; and therefore, if any
author have let fall some favorable word, that might seem to bolster it, it
must be against his will: neither did any living mam (before some Burgesses of
Geneva in our age took it upon

. 5.
The uter disagrement, and irresolution of the pretenders to the new
discipline, concerning the particurlar state of the desired government.

ALl this considered, I cannot but wonder, and grieve, to hear a man of such
worth as Beza was, so transported, as to say, that this Presbyter, of their
device, is the Tribunal of Christ: a Tribunal erected above fifteen hundred
years after his departure from us: an invisible Tribunal to all the rest of
Gods Church besides; a Tribunal not known, nor resolved of by those that call
it so. Surely our blessed Savior was never ashamed to own his ordinance;
neither was he ever so reserved, as not to show his own Crown and Scepter to
all his good subjects: he never cared for an outward glorious magnificence, An^
o 1572. a perfect platform is tendered, not so perfect yet, but two years
after it is altered, nine years after that, Anno 1583. a new draught, fit for
the English Meridian, is published; yet, that not so exact, but that Travers
must have a new essay to it, 29. Eliz. And after all this, a world of doubts
yet arise, which were in 1588. debated at Coventry, Cambridge, elsewhere. And
yet still, when all is done, the fraternity is as far to seek in very many
points for resolution, as at the first day: yea, at this very hour, feign
would I know whether they can ring this peale without jarres; It is not long
ago, I am sure, that they found every parcel of their government Cartwright
is for a Presbytery in every Parish, wheresoever a Pastor is, and his late
clients make every village a Church absolute, and independent; the Genevian
fashion is otherwise; neither does Danaeus think it to be Christ's institution,
to have every Parish thus furnished and governed: Our late humorists give power
of excommunication, and other censures to every Parish-Presbytery: The Belgic
Churches allow it not to every particular (says T. C.) are jointly to execute,
with their Pastor, the election and abdication of all their Ecclesiastical
officers; Not so, Io. Calv. l. 4. Inst. c. 3.
says I.C. Soli pastores, only the Pastors must do it; And good reason;
what a monster of opinions it is, that laymen should lay on hands to the
ordination of Ministers; I wonder these men fear not Vzzah's death, or
Vzziah's leprosy: There are that doubt whether there should be Doctors in
Scotland) you do not hold your Consistories perfect without them: There are
that hold them so necessary a member of this body of Christ's ordinance, that it
is utterly maimed and unperfect without them. And indeed, what to make of their
Doctors, neither themselves know, nor any for them, To make them a distinct
office from Pastors, as it is an uncouth conceit, and quite besides the Text,
(which tells doctrine, and not feed the soul? This is, as if every child should
have two nurses, one to give it the bib, another the breast; one to hold the
dish, and the other to put in the spoone. Now, if Doctors must be, whether in
every Parish one; whether admitted to sit, and vote in the Presbytery, and to
have their hand in censures or not; or whether they be Laymen, or of the
Clergy, whether as Academicall Readers, or as rural Iunius his judgment was,
Si adsint, non recuso; si absint, non desidero: not to be refused where they
are, and not to be missed where they are not; however, I see not why the good
women should not put in for a share, and chide with the Elders, to be shut out:
These which I have abstracted from our judicious surveyer, and an hundred other
doubts concerning the extent, and managing of the new Consistory, are enough to

. 6.
The imperfections and defects which must needs be yielded to follow upon the
discipline pretended; and the necessary inconveniences that must attend it in a
kingdom otherwise settled.

THIS uncertainty of opinion cannot

Neither is the imperfection more palpable, and fatal, where these ordinances
are missing; then is the absurdity, and inconvenience of entertaining them
where they are wished to be: for howsoever, where some new State is to be
erected (especially in a popular form) or a new City to be contrived, with
power of making their own Laws; there might perhaps be some possibility of
complying, in way of pol^cie, with some of the rules of this pretended England
is, where there are thousands of small village-parish^s, (I speak according to
the plots of our own la^est reformers) for every Parish to furnish an
^ccl^siasticall Consi^ tory, consisting of one, or more Pastors, a Doctor,
Elders, Deacons; perhaps there are not so many houses, as offices are required;
And whom shall they then be Judges of? And some of these so far remote from
neighbors, that they cannot participate of theirs, either teaching, or
censure: And if this were faisible, what stuff would there be? Perhaps a young
indiscreet giddy Pastor, and for a Doctor, who, and where, and what? John a
Nokes, and John a Styles, the Elders, Smug the Smith, a Deacon; and whom, or
what should Cartwright to say, that in such cases, God powers out his gifts
upon men, called to these functions, and makes them all new men? Here are no
miracles to be expected, no enth^siasmes; an honest ^ hatcher will know how to
hand his straw no whit better, after his election, than he did before: and was
as deeply politic before, as now, and equally wise and devout, though perhaps
he may take upon him some more state and gravity, than he formerly did; and
what a mad world would it be, that the Ecclesiastical Laws of such a company
should be like those of the Medes and Persians, irrevocable; that there should
be no appeal from them: for, as Buchanan speak.

Now were it possible that an Hockley in the or (as Cartwright pleases to
instance) an Hitchin, or Newington could yield us choice of such a worthy
Senate, yet whence shall the maintenance arise? Surely, as the host said upon
occasion of a guest with too many titles; we have not meat for so many; it is
well, if a poor and painful incumbent can but live. But whence (as the
Disciples said) should we have bread for all these? And what do you think of
this lawless Polycoyranie? That every Parish-Minister and his Eldership,
should be a Bishop and his Consistory; yea a Pope and his Conclave of Cardinals
within his own Parish, not subject to controlement, not liable to a superior
Censure? What do you think of the power of Laymen to bind and loose? What
of the equal power of votes in spiritual causes with their grave and Epist.
before Helvet, Confess.
that it is the project of Beza, and the present practice of Scotland, that
Noblemen, or great Senators should be Elders, Geneva Deacons too; and then
how well will it become the house, that great Lords should yield their
Chaplains to be the better men? Danaeus de Eccles. Disc c. 10.
For as honest Daneus, (who knew the fashion well) Long est dissimile, and
inferius, etc. The place of the Elders is utterly unlike, and below the order
of Pastors; neither (me thinks) should it work any contenting peace to their
great spirits, to hear that upon their Consistoriall Bench, their
Peasantly-Tenant is as good as the best of them; Artic. Genev. 7
and that if they look awry to be so matched (which T. C. suggests) they
disdain not men, but Christ: These are but a handful of those strange
incongruities,

. 7.
The known newness of this invention, and the quality of of the late authors
or it.

But that which is above all other exceptions most undeniable, and not least
convictive, and, which I beseech the reader Christ, to lay most seriously to
heart, is the most manifestly-spick-and-spannewnesse of this devised
Discipline, for all wise and staid Christians, have learned to suspect, if not
to hate noveltie, in those things which are pretended to be the matters of God.
In matter of Evidence they are old Records that will carry is. As the ancient
of days is immutable, and eternal, so his truths are like him, not changeable
by time, not decayable by age: who was Calvin disclaimes it, Calv. Epist. ad
Sadoletu^ Gar^m. Ego autem, Sa^ olete, etc.
who, in his Epistle to Cardinal Sadolet, has thus; I, for my part, profess
to be one of them, whom you do so hostilely in veigh against; for although I
was called thither ( i. to Geneva) after the Religion was settled, Tametsi enim
constituta sam religione, ac correcta Ecclesiae forma illuc vocatus fui: quia
tamen quae a Farello ac Vireto gesti erant, non modo suffragio meo comprobavi,
sed etiam, quantum in me suit, conservare studue^ ac confirmare, separatam ab
illis causam habere nequoo, etc
and the form of the Church corrected; yet, because those things which were
done by Farell and Viret, I did not only by my suffrage allow, but, what in me
lay, labored to conserve and ratify, I cannot hold my cause any whit
different from theirs. Thus he. So as he professes only to be the
Nurse-father of that issue, which was Farell indeed was called Flagellum
sacrificulorum, the scourge of Mass Priests, and what he did for the
reformation of Religion, I am as apt to acknowledge and applaud as the
forwardest; But, that he preached somewhere in the very streets, Sp^nhem. Geneva
Restituta.
and even (Quam vis renitente magistratu) in Saint Peter's Church, was not to be
bragged of by F^emente interim an m^gina^. te plebe, Ibid.
And in his violent carriage in the animating of the people to the outing of
their Bishop Pet Balms; (though perhaps faulty enough) and the introducing of
this new form of government: Natus Vapine^, noto Delphinatus oppido. Idem:
I wish he had lived and died in his Vapincum. His Coadjutor in this work was
(I perceive) one Antho. Frumentius, vehement young man, who was set up by the
people to preach upon a Fishstall; and no doubt equally heartned his auditors
to this tumultuous way of proceeding; but then, when Viret came once into the
file, here was, at the least, fervor enough. The spirit of that man is well
seen in his Dialogue of White Devils; these were the founders of that
Discipline; men of eminence Calvin, who came into Geneva, first as a Lecturer,
or Preacher, and then became their Pastor,: insomuch as Zanchy reports, when
Calvin preached at S. Peter's, and Viret at S. Gervases, concurrent Sermons, a
Frenchman asked, why he did not come sometimes, and hear Viret, Zanch. Epist.
ad Misc. Citat in Surv. Disc.
answered, Si veniret Sanctus Paulus, qui eadem hora concionaretur, qua and
Calvinus, ego, relicto Paulo, audirem Calvinum: If Paul should come and preach
in the same hour with Calvin, I would leave Paul, and hear Calvin; which was
spoken like a good blasphemous zelote: But it is not to be wondered at in men
of such spirits. Calvin. Farello
I told you before what Calvin himself writes to Farell; There was one at
Basil who professed to attribute non minus Farello quam Paulo, Not less to
Farell, than to Saint Paul. O God, whither does mad zeal hurry men? It
appears then, that Farell and Viret roughhew'd this statue, which Calvin after
polished; we now know, Consulem, ac Deim, and I doubt not but some do yet
live, who might know the man. For me, although I have Germany and Geneva,
undertook for this newborn infant at our English Font; under whose Ministry
my younger years were spent: Trouble of the English Church at Frankfort. in
marg. The zeal of A. G.
The author of that bitter Dialogue betwixt Miles Monopodius, and Bernard,
Blinkard, one of the hottest and busiest stickers in these quarrels at
Frankfort. So young Peter Ramus (though a man censured for affecting
innovations in Logic and Philosophy) is (if we may credit his old friend
Carpentarius) said to dislike it, and to frump it by the name of Talmud
Subaudicum.

I cannot be ignorant of the common plea of the pretenders, that so far is
this form from novelty, as that it was the most ancient, and first model of
Churchr-government under the Apostles. Thus they say, and they alone say it;
All they have to say, more, in color of reason, for it, is, That the twelve
Apostles themselves were all equal: What then? If their pretended form were
bred From thence; where has it lien hid all this while till now? That, they

But with all give me leave to put you in mind, that this is a stale plea for
more unholy opinions than one. The Anabaptists, when they are urged with the
Churches ancient practice of baptizing of infants, straight pretend, that this
ill guise was brought in by Popery, and is aparcell of the mystery of iniquity;
Prolaeus. Fesciculo, etc.
the New-Arrians of our times, hellish heretics, when they are pressed with
the distinction of three persons, in the Deity, and one infinite Essence,
straight H. N. Ibid.
a worse devil, if possible, than they, in his Evangelium Regni, sings the
very same note, Evang. Regni.
for his damnable plot of doctrine, and government; sadly complaining of
Antichrist and that the light of life has lien hid under the mask of Popery,
until this day of love; and now he coms to erect his Seniores sanctae
intelligentiae, Elders of

Beware therefore, I advise you, how you take up this challenge, but upon
better grounds; disgrace not Gods Truth with the odious name of
Antichristianisme; honor not Antichrist with the claim and title of an holy
Truth; Confess the device new, and make your best of it; But if any man will
pretend this governmet has been in the world before, though no footsteps
remain of it in any history or record, he may as well tell me, there has
been of old a passage from the Teneriffe to the Moon, though never any but a
Gonzaga discovered it.

. 8.


NOw then I beseech, and adjure you, my dear brethren, by that love you
profess to bear to the Truth of God, by that tender respect you bear to the
peace of his Sion, by your zeal to the Gospel of Christ, the very same, which
upon the foundation of Christ's Institution, was erected by his inspired
Apostles, and ever since continued unto this day, without interruption, without
alteration; If you find that not in this part of the Western Church alone,
into which the Church of Rome had diffused her errors, but in all the
Christian world; far and wide, in Churches of as large extent as the Roman
ever was, and Mark, Bishop of Alexandria, Timothy, Bishop of Ephesus, and Titus
of C^ete, were altogether in substance the same with ours, in the same altitude
of fixed superiority, in the same latitude of spiritual jurisdiction; if you
find the Laicke Presbytery, an utter stranger to the Scriptures of God; a
thing altogether unheard of in the ancient times, yea, in all the following
ages of the Church; If you find that Invention full of indeterminable
uncertainties; If you find and judge of it accordingly. Upon my soul, except
the holy Scripture, Apostolical acts, the practice of the ancient Church of
God, the judgment of all sacred Synods, of all the holy Fathers, and Doctors
of the Church, all grounds of faith, reason, policy, may fail us; we are
safe, and our cause victorious.

Why then, O why will you suffer your selves to be thus impetuously carried
away, with the for an holy and memorable Prelacie, and though it did more
lately fall upon the division of Dioeceses; D. Henr. Spelman ex Hectore Boetio.
Anno 840.
so as every Bishop did in every place (as opportunity offered) executo
Episcopal offices (which kind of Administration continued in your Church till
the times of Malcolme the third) yet this government over the whole Clergy,
was no less acknowledged than their sanctimony; after the settling of those
your Episcopal Sees, it is worth your note, and our Hector Boethius writes;
Sacer Pontificatus Sancti Andreae tanta reverentia, etc. The Bishopric of St.
Andrews, was with so great reverence, and innocence of life, from the first
institution of it, in a long line of Episcopal succession continued to the
very time, wherein we wrote this; That six and thirty, and more, of the Bishops
of that See were accounted for Saints: Good Lord! How are either the times
altered, or we? There may be differences of carriage; Deus omen, etc.

In the name of God, what is it, what can it be that is thus stood upon? Is it
the very name of Episcopacie, which (like that of Tarquin in Rome) is condemned
to a perpetual disuse? What has the innocent word offended? Your own Church,
after the Reformation, could well be contented to admit of Superintendents; and
what difference is here (as Zanchius well) but that good Greek is turned into
ill Latin; (...), Superintendens
Their viz. The Superintendent of Orkney; his Dioecesse shall be the Isles of
Orkney, Catnesse, and Strathnever; his Residence in the town of Kirkwall. The
Superintendent of Rosse; his Dioecesse shall comprehend Rosse, Sutherland,
Murray, and the North Isles, called the Sky, and Jews, with their adjacents;
his residence shall be the Canonry of Rosse. Argile, his Dioecesse shall be
Argile, Kintire, Lorne, the South Isles, Argile, and Boot, with their
adjacents; his residence is at Argile. The like of the Superintendent of
Aberdene; the Superintendent of Breckin; the Superintendent of Fiffe; the
Superintendent of Edinburgh; the Superintendent of Iedburgh; the Superintendent
of Glasgow; the Superintendent of Dumfreys; all of them bounded with their
several jurisdictions; which who desires to know particularly, may have
recourse to the learned Discourse of D Lindsey, then Bishop of Brechen,
concerning the proceedings of the Synod of Perth; Where he shall also find the
particularities of the function and power of these Superintendents: Amongst the
rest, these; That they have power to plant and erect of these Superintendents,
and the present Bishops? How comes it then about, that the wind is thus
changed? That those Church Governors, which your own reformers with full
consent allowed, and set down an Order for their Election in your
Constitutions before the Book of Psalms in Meeter; should now be cashiered?
There, and then, M. Knox himself, whose name you profess to honor, by the M.
John Spotteswood then admitted Superintendent of Lothian, in these words; O
Lord, send upon this our Brother (unto whom we do in thy name commit the
chief charge of the Churches of the division of Lothian) such a portion of thy
holy Spirit, as that, etc. And, in the name of the Church, blesses his new
Superintendent, thus; God our first reformers, as there is distance betwixt a
Superintendent, and no Bishop? But what? is it the stroke the Bishops have in
government, and their seat in Parliament, which is so great an eyesore? Let me
put you in mind, that your greatest patrons of your desired Discipline have
strongly motioned an Ecclesiastical Commission for the over-looking and
overruling your Consistories; and even when they would have Bishops excluded
both out of those Comitiall Moved also to the Lords of the Counsel in Q Eliz.
time by the humble Mot.
and out of the Church, yet have moved (such was Beza's device long since for
Scotland) That in the place of Bishops there might be present in the
Parliament House, some wise and grave Ministers of special gifts and learning,
sorted out of all the land, to yield their Counsel according to Gods heavenly
Law, even as the Civil Judges are ready to give their advice according to the
temporal Law; and for matters of greater difficulty. What a world is Beza's
Counsel, we see, is yet alive, but it comes not home to the purpose; Welfare
that bold Supplicator to Q. Elizabeth, which moved, that four and twenty
Doctors of Divinity, to be called by such names as should please her Highness,
might be admitted into the Parliament House, and have their voices there,
instead of the Bishops. O impotent envy of poor Love creepes where it cannot
go; How much are we beholden to these kind friends, who are so desirous to
ease us of these unproper secularities? Even ours at home can nibble at these
(as they think) ill-placed honors, and services; yours go (alas) too roundly
to work; striking at the root of their Episcopacie, not pruning off some
superfluous twigs of privilege, and rather them deserved confusion But for
you, alas, Brethren, what hopes can I conceive, that these pre-judged papers
can have any access to your eyes, much less to your hearts; my very Title is
bar too much: But if any of you will have so much patience, as to admit these
lines to your perusal, I shall beseech him for Gods sake, and for his own, to
be so far indifferent also, as not upon, groundless suggestion, to abandon
Gods Truth and Ordinance; and out of mere Aaron: Shortly, after these poor
well-meant (howsoever, I doubt, ineffectuall) endeavors, my prayers shall not
be wanting for your comfortable peace, loyal obedience, perfect happiness. Oh
that the God of heaven would open your eyes, that you may see the truth; and
compare what you have

. 9.
An exhortary conclusion to our brethren at home.

ANd for you, my dearly beloved Brethren, at home; For Christ's sake, for the
Churches sake, for your souls sake, be Rome, and her superstitions; what
admirable Preachers; what incomparable Writers; foreign Churches, and to the
unparallelable glory of this Church, and Nation. I could fill this page with
such a Catalogue of them, who are now in their heaven, that come for the
present to my thoughts; (besides those Worthies yet living, both here, and in
Ireland, who would be unwilling from my pen tO blush at their own just
praises) as might justly shame and silence any gaine-sayer. After that a
malicious Libeller has spit out all his poison against Episcopacie, and raked
together, out of all histories, please God, out of the same rod of Aaron still
to raise such blossoms, and fruit, as shall win him glory to all eternity: Go
you on to honor these your reverend Pastors; to hate all factious withdrawings
from that government, which comes the nearest of any Church upon earth to the
Apostolical. And (that I may draw to Conclusion) for the farther Confirmation
of your good Opinion of the Bishops of your Great Britain, hear what Iacobus
Lectius, Jacob. Lectius. Prascriptionum Theologicarum l. 2. Nota. 2.
the learned Civilian of Geneva in his Theological Prescriptions, dedicated to
the Consuls, and Senate of Geneva, says of them, De Episcoporum autem vestorum
vocatione, etc. As for the calling of your Bishops (says he) speaking to his
Popish adversaries) others have accurately written thereof, and we shortly say,
that they have a show of an Ordinary Ministry, but not the thing it self, and
that those only are to be held for true and legitimate, which Paul describes
Timothy and Titus, Cujusmodi olim in magno illo Britanniarum regno extitisse,
atque etiamnum superesse, subindeque eligi Episcopos non diffitemur; Such kind
of Bishops as we do not deny, but yield, to have been of old, and to be still
at this day, successively elected in the great Kingdom of Britain: Thus he:
when Geneva it self pleades for us, why should we be our own adversaries? Let
me therefore confidently shut up all, with that resolute word of that blessed
Martyr, and Saint, Ignatius: (...). Let all things be done to the honor of
God; Give respect to your Bishop, Amen.

FINIS.

