Contemplations UPON THE HISTORY of the old TESTAMENT. THE SEVENTH VOLVME. In
two Books.

By IOS. HALL D. D.

LONDON, Printed by J. H^^land for Nath. Butter. 1623.

Contemplations UPON THE OLD TESTAMENT.

The 18th. Book.

Wherein are, Rehoboam. Jeroboam. The seduced Prophet. Ieroboams Wife. Asa.
Elijah with the Sareptan. Elijah with the Baalites. Elijah running before Ahab,
flying from Iezebel.


TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, JAMES, LORD HAY; Baron of Saley, Viscount Doncaster,
Earl of Carlisle, one of the Lords of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy
COUNCIL.
Right Honorable:
I Cannot but thus gratulate to you your happy return from your many, and
noble employments; which have made you, some years, a stranger at home; and so
renowned abroad, that all the better parts of Europe know and honor your name,
no less, than if you had been borne theirs; Neither is any of them so savage,
as not to say, when they hear mention of your worth, that Virtue is a thousand
Escuchions.

If now your short breathingtime may allow your Lordship the freedom of quiet
and holy thoughts, cast your eyes upon Israel and Judah, upon the Kings and
Prophets of both, in such beneficial variety as profane history shall
promise in vain. Your Lordship shall see Rehoboam following Solomon in nothing
but his seat, and his fall, as much more wilful than his father, as less
wise; all head, no heart; losing those ten Tribes with a churlish breath, whom
he would (and might not) recover with blood. Jeroboam as crafty, as wicked;
plotting a revolt, creating a Religion to his state, marring Israelites to make
subjects, branded in his name, smitten in his hand, in his loins. You shall
see a faithful messenger of God, after miraculous proof of his courage,
fidelity, power, good nature, paying dear for a little circumstance of
credulous disobedience; The lion is sent to call for his blood, as the price of
his forbidden harbor; You shall see the blind Prophet descrying the disguise
of a Queen, the judgment of the King, the remouall of a Prince, too good for
Ieroboams heir. You shall see the right stock of Royal succession flourishing
in Asa, whiles that true heir of David (though not without some blemishes of
infirmity) inherits a perfect heart; purges his kingdom of Sodomy, of
Idolatry, not balking sin, even where he honored nature. You shall see the
wonder of Prophets, Elijah, opening and shutting heaven, as his private chest;
catored-for by the Ravens, nor less miraculously catoring for the Sareptan,
contesting with Ahab, confronting the Baalites, speaking both fire and water
(from heaven) in one evening; meekely lacquaying his Sovereign, weakly flying
from Iezabel, fed supernaturally by Angels, hid in the rock of Horeb,
confirmed by those dreadful apparitions, that had confounded some other;
casting his mantle upon his homely successor, and by the touch of that garment,
turning him from a plough-man, to a Prophet. But what do I withhold your
Lordship in the bare heads of this ensuing discourse? In all these, your
piercing eyes shall easily see beyond mine, and make my thoughts but a station
for a further discovery. Your Lordships observation has studied men, more than
books; here it shall study God, more than men; That of books has made you
full, that of men, judicious, this of God shall make you holy, and happy;
Hitherto shall ever tend the wishes and endeavors of

Your Lordships humbly devoted in all faithful observance, IOS. HALL.

Contemplations.
REHOBOAM.
WHo would not but have looked that seven hundred wives, and three hundred
concubines, should have furnished Salomons Palace with choice of heirs, and
have peopled Israel with royal issue? and now behold, Solomon has by all
these but one Son; and him by an Ammonitesse: Many a poor man has an
house-full of children by one wife; whiles this great King has but one son
by many house-fulls of wives; Fertility is not from the means, but from the
author; It was for Solomon that David sung of old; Lo, children are an heritage
of the Lord; and the fruit of the womb is his reward; How often does God deny
this heritage of heirs, where he gives the largest heritage of lands; and
gives most of these living possessions, where he gives least of the dead? that
his blessings may be acknowledged free unto both; entayled upon neither.

As the greatest persons cannot give themselves children, so the wisest cannot
give their children wisdom; Was it not of Rehoboam that Solomon said; I hated
all my labor which I had taken under the Sun; because I should leave it unto
the man that shall be after me; and who knows whether he shall be a wise
man, or a fool; Yet shall he rule over all my labor, wherein I have labored,
and showed my self wise under the Sun? All Israel found that Salomons wit
was not propagated; Many a fool has had a wiser son, than this wisest
father; Amongst many sons it is no news to find some one defective; Solomon
has but one son, and he no miracle of wisdom; God gives purposely so
eminent an instance, to teach men to look up to heaven, both for heirs, and
graces.

Solomon was both the King of Israel, and the father of Rehoboam, when he was
scarce out of his childhood; Rehoboam enters into the kingdom at a ripe age;
yet Solomon was the man, and Rehoboam the child; Age is no just measure of
wisdom; There are beardlesse sages, and gray headed children; Not the ancient
are wise, but the wise is ancient: Israel wanted not many thousands that were
wiser than Rehoboam: Yet because they knew him to be the son of Solomon, no
man makes question of his government; In the case of succession into Kingdoms
we may not look into the qualities of the person, but into the right. So
secure is Solomon of the peoples fidelity to David's seed, that he follows not
his fathers example in setting his son by him, in his own throne; here was
no danger of a riuality to enforce it; no eminency in the son to merit it; It
suffices him to know that no bond can be surer than the natural allegiance
of subjects; I do not find that the following Kings stood upon the
confirmation of their people; but as those that knew the way to their throne,
ascended those steps without aid; As yet the sovereignty of David's house was
green, and unsettled; Israel therefore does not now come to attend Rehoboam,
but Rehoboam goes up to meet Israel. They come not to his Jerusalem, but he
goes to their Shechem: To Shechem were all Israel come to make him King; If
loyalty drew them together, why not rather to Jerusalem? there the majesty of
his fathers Temple, the magnificence of his palace, the very stones in those
walls, (besides the strength of his guard) had pleaded strongly for their
subjection; Shechem had been many ways fatal, was every way incommodious: It
is an infinite help or disadvantage that arises from circumstances; The very
place puts Israel in mind of a rebellion; There Abimelech had raised up his
treacherous usurpation over, and against his brethren; There Goal against
Abimelech; There was Joseph sold by his brethren: As if the very soil had
been stained with perfidiousnesse. The time is no less ill chosen; Rehoboam
had ill counsel ere he bewrayed it; For had he speedily called up Israel,
before Jeroboam could have been sent for out of Egypt, he had found the way
clear; A little delay may leese a great deal of opportunity; what shall we
say of both, but that misery is led in by infatuation.

Had not Israel been somewhat predisposed to a mutiny, they had never sent
into Egypt for such a spokesman as Jeroboam; a fugitive, a traitor to Solomon;
long had that crafty conspirator lurked in a foreign court; The alliances of
Princes are not ever necessary bonds of friendship: The brother in law of
Solomon harbors this snake in his bosom, and gives that heat, which is repaid
with a sting to the posterity of so near an allye: And now Salomons death
calls him back to his native soil: That Israel would entertain a rebel, it
was an ill sign; worse yet that they would countenance him; worst of all that
they would employ him: Nothing does more bewray evil intentions, than the
choice of vicious Agents: Those that mean well will not hazard either the
success, or credit of their actions upon offensive instruments; None but the
sluttish will wipe their faces with foul clothes. Upright hearts would have
said, as David did to God, so to his anointed; Do not I hate them that hate
thee? Yea I hate them with a perfect hatred. Ieroboams head had been a fit
present to have tendered unto their new King; and now in stead thereof they
tender themselves to Jeroboam, as the head of their faction.

Had not Rehoboam wanted spirits, he had first (after Salomons example) done
justice to his fathers traitor, and then have treated of mercy toward his
subjects; The people soon found the weakness of their new Sovereign, else
they durst not have spoken to him by so obnoxious a tongue; Thy father made our
yoke grievous, make thou it lighter and we will serve thee; Doubtless the
crafty head of Jeroboam was in this suit, which his mouth uttered in the name
of Israel; Nothing could have been more subtle; It seemed a promise, it was a
threat; that which seemed a supplication was a complaint: humility was but a
veil for coffeehouse; One hand held a paper, the other a sword: Had they
said, Free us from Tributes, the capitulation had been gross, and strongly
savoring of sedition; now they say Ease us, they profess his power to impose,
and their willingness to yield; only craving favor in the weight of the
imposition; If Rehoboam yield, he blemisheth his father; If he deny, he
indangers his kingdom; His wilfulness shall seem worthily to abandon his
scepter, if he stick at so reasonable a suit; Surely Israel came with a
purpose to cavil; Jeroboam had secretly troubled these waters, that he might
fish more gainefully; One malcontent is enough to embroile a whole kingdom.

How harshly must it needs sound in the ears of Rehoboam, that the first word
he hears from his people, is a querulous challenge of his fathers government;
Thy father made our yoke grievous; For ought I see the suggestion was not more
spightfull than unjust: where was the weight of this yoke, the toil of these
services? Here were none of the turmoyles of war; no traynings, marchings,
encampings, entrenching, watchings, minings, sieges, fortifications; none of
that tedious world of work that attends hostility; Solomon had not his name
for naught; All was calm during that long reign: And if they had paid dear
for their peace, they had no cause to complain of an hard match; The warlike
times of Saul and David had exhausted their blood, together with their
substance; what ingratitude was this to cry out of ease? Yea but that peace
brought forth costly and laborious buildings: Gods house, and the Kings, the
walls of Jerusalem, Hazor, Megiddo, and Gezer, the cities of store, the cities
of defense, could not rise without many a shoulder: True, but not of any
Israelites; The remainders of Amorites, Hittites, Perizzites, Hiuites, and
Iebusites, were put to all the drudgery of these great works; the taskes of
Israel were easy, and ingenuous; free from seruility, free from painfulnesse.
But the charge was theirs, whose-soeuer was the labor: The diet of so endless
a retinue, the attendance of his Seraglio, the purueyance for his forty
thousand stables, the cost of his sacrifices, must needs weigh heavy;
Certainly, if it had layne on none but his own; But wherefore went Salomons
Navy every three years to Ophir? to what use served the six hundred threescore
and six Talents of Gold, that came in one year to his Exchequer? wherefore
served the large tributes of foreign nations? How did he make silver to be in
Jerusalem as stones, if the exactions were so pressiue? The multitude is ever
prone to pick quarrels with their Governors; and whom they feared alive, to
censure dead; The benefits of so quiet and happy a reign are past over in
silence; the grieuances are recounted with clamor; Who can hope that merit or
greatness can shield him from obloquie, when Solomon is traduced to his own
loins?

The proposition of Israel puts Rehoboam to a deliberation; Depart ye for
three days, then come again to me: I hear no other word of his that argued
wisdom; Not to give sudden resolutions in cases of importance was a point that
might well beseem the son of Solomon; I wonder that he who had so much wit
as to call for leisure in his answer, should show so little wit in the
improuing of that leisure, in the return of that answer; Who cannot but hope
well to see the gray heads of Salomons secret Counsel called to Rehoboams
Cabinet? As Counselors, as ancient, as Salomons, they cannot choose but see
the best, the safest course for their new Sovereign: They had learned of their
old master, that a soft answer appeaseth wrath; wisely therefore do they
advise him, If thou will be a servant to this people this day, and speak good
words to them, they will be thy servants for ever; It was an easy condition;
with one mouthfull of breath to purchase an everlasting homage: with one gentle
motion of his tongue, to bind all his peoples hearts to his allegiance for
ever. Yet (as if the motion had been unfit) a new Counsel Table is called:
well might this people say; What will not Rehoboam grudge us, if he think much
to give good words for a Kingdom. There is not more wisdom in taking variety
of advice, where the matter is doubtful, than folly, when it is plain: The
young heads are consulted; This very change argues weakness; Some reason might
be pleaded for passing from the younger Counsel to the aged; none, for the
contrary; Age brings experience; and, it is a shame, if with the ancient be not
wisdom; Youth is commonly rash, heady, insolent, ungoverned, wedded to will,
led by humor, a rebel to reason, a subject to passion, fitter to execute than
to advise: Green wood is ever shrinking and warping, whereas the well-seasoned
holds a constant firmness: Many a life, many a soul, many a flourishing
state has been ruined by undisciplined Monitors: Such were these of Rehoboam;
whose great stomach tells them that this conditionating of subjects, was no
other than an affront to their new master, and suggests to them, how unfit it
is for Majesty to brook so saucie a treaty; how requisite and Princely, to
crush this presumption in the egg; As scorning therefore to be braued by the
base Vulgar, they put words of greatness, and terror into their new Prince, My
little finger shall be thicker than my fathers loins; My father made your
yoke heavy, I will add to your yoke; My father has chastised you with
whips, I will chastise you with Scorpions. The very words have stings; Now must
Israel needs think; How cruel will this man's hands be, when he thus draws
blood with his tongue? Men are not wont to speak out their worst; who can
endure the hopes of him that promises tyranny? There can be no good use of an
indefinite profession of rigor and severity; Fear is an unsafe guardian of any
state, much less of an unsettled. Which was yet worse, not the sins of Israel
were threatened, nor their purses, but their persons; neither had they desired a
remission of justice, but of exactions; and now, they hear of nothing but
burdens, and scourges, and Scorpions.

Here was a Prince and people well met; I do not find them sensible of ought,
save their own profit; They do not say; Religion was corrupted in the
shutting up of thy fathers days; Idolatry found the free favor of Priests,
and Temples, and Sacrifices; Begin thy reign with God; purge the Church,
demolish those piles of abomination; abandon those Idol-mongers, restore
devotion to her purity; They are all for their penny, for their ease; He on the
other side, is all for his will, for an imperious Sovereignty; without any
regard either of their reformation or satisfaction; They were worthy of load
that cared for nothing but their backs; and he worthy of such subjects, who
professed to affect their misery and torment.

Who would not but have looked any whither for the cause of this evil, rather
than to heaven? yet, the holy God challenges it to himself; The cause was from
the Lord, that he might perform his saying by Abijah the Shilonite to
Jeroboam; As sin is a punishment of sin, it is a part of Justice; The holy one
of Israel does not abhor to use even the grossest sins to his own just
purposes; whiles our wills are free to our own choice, his decrees are as
necessary, as just; Israel had forsaken the Lord, and worshipped Ashtaroth, the
goddess of the Zidonians, and Chemosh, and Milchom: God owes them, and Solomon
a whipping; The frowardness of Rehoboam shall pay it them; I see Ieroboams
plot, the peoples insolence, the young men's mis-aduice, the Princes
unseasonable austeritie, meeting together (through the wise providence of the
Almighty) unwittingly to accomplish his most just decree; All these might have
done otherwise for any force that was offered to their will; all would no more
do otherwise, than if there had been no predetermination in heaven; that God
may be magnified in his wisdom, and justice, whiles man wittingly perishes
in his folly.

That three days expectation had warmed these smoking Israelites, and made
them ready for a combustion; upon so peremptory a resolution of rigor, the
flame bursts out, which all the waters of the well of Bethlehem could never
quench; The furious multitude flies out into a desperate revolt; What portion
have we in David, neither have we inheritance in the son of Iesse; To your
Tents o Israel; now, see to thine own house David.

How durst these seditious mouths mention David in defiance? One would have
thought that very name had been able to have tempered their fury, and to have
contained them within the limits of obedience; It was the father of Rehoboam,
and the son of David that had led Israel into Idolatry; Solomon has drawn
contempt upon his father, and upon his son: If Israel have cast off their
God, is it marvel that they shake off his anointed? Irreligion is the way to
disobedience; There can be no true subjection but out of conscience; They
cannot make conscience of civil duties, who make none of divine.

In vain shall Rehoboam hope to prevail by his Officer, when himself is
rejected: The persons of Princes carry in them characters of Majesty; when
their presence works not, how should their message? If Adoram solicit the
people too late with good words, they answer him with stones. Nothing is more
intractable and violent, than an enraged multitude; It was time for Rehoboam to
betake himself to his charet; he saw those stones were thrown at him, in his
Adoram: As the messenger suffers for his master; so the master suffers in his
messenger; Had Rehoboam been in Adorams clothes, this death had been his:
Only flight can deliver him from those that might have been subjects:
Jerusalem must be his refuge against the conspiracy of Shechem.

Blessed be God for lawful government; Even a mutinous body cannot want an
head: If the rebellious Israelites have cast off their true Sovereign, they
must choose a false; Jeroboam the son of Nebat must be the man; He had need
be skillful, and sit sure, that shall back the horse which has cast his
rider; Israel could not have any where met with more craft, and courage, than
they found in this leader.

Rehoboam returns to Jerusalem lighter by a crown than he went forth; Judah
and Benjamin stick still fast to their loyalty: the example of a general
rebellion cannot make them unfaithful to the house of David; God will ever
reserve a remnant free from the common contagion; Those tribes, to approve
their valor, no less than their fidelity, will fight against their brethren,
for their Prince; and will hazard their lives to reduce the crown to the son
of Solomon; An hundred and fourscore thousand of them are up in arms, ready
to force Israel to their denied subjection: No noise sounded on both parts but
military; no man thought of any thing but blood; when suddenly God sends his
Prophet to forbid the battle; Shemaiah comes with a message of cessation; Ye
shall not go up, nor fight against your brethren, the children of Israel,
return every man to his house, for this thing is from me, says the Lord; The
word of one silly Prophet dismisses these mighty armies; He that would not lay
down the threats of his rigor, upon the advice of all his ancient Counselors,
will lay down his sword, upon the word of a Seer; Shall we envy, or shame to
see how much the Prophets of the old Testament could do; how little those of
the new? If our commission be no less from the same God, the difference of
success cannot go away unrevenged.

There was yet some grace in Rehoboam, that he would not spurn against that,
which God challenged as his own work: Some godless ruffian would have said;
whosoever is the Author, I will be revenged on the instruments; Rehoboam has
learned this lesson of his Grandfather; I held my peace because thou Lord have
done it; If he might strive with the multitude, he knew it was no striving with
his Maker; quietly therefore does he lay down his arms, not daring after
that prohibition to seek the recovery of his kingdom by blood.

Where Gods purposes are hid from us, we must take the fairest ways of all
lawful remedies; but where God has revealed his determinations, we must sit
down in an humble submission; our struggling may aggrauate, cannot redress our
miseries.

Jeroboam.
AS there was no public and universal conflict betwixt the Ten Tribes, and
the two, so no peace; Either King found reason to fortify the borders of his
own territories; Shechem was worthy to be dear to Jeroboam; a city as of
old seasoned with many treasons, so now auspicious to his new usurpation. The
civil defection was soon followed by the spiritual; As there are near
respects betwixt God, and his anointed, so there is great affinity betwixt
treason and Idolatry: there is a connection betwixt, Fear God, and Honor the
King; and no less betwixt the neglects of both: In vain shall a man look for
faith in a mis-religious heart.

Next to Achitophel, I do not find that Israel yielded a craftier head than
Ieroboams; so has he plotted this conspiracy, that (what ever fall) there is
no place for a challenge; not his own intrusion, but Isreal's Election has
raised him to their throne; neither is his cunning less in holding a stolen
scepter; Thus he thinks in himself; If Israel have made me their king, it is
but in a pang of coffeehouse; these violent thoughts will not last always:
Sudden fits have commonly sudden recoueries; their return to their loyalty
shall forfeit my head together with my Crown; They cannot return to God, and
hold off from their lawful Sovereign; They cannot return to Jerusalem, and
keep off from God; from their loyalty; Thrice a year will their devotion call
them up thither; besides the exigence of their frequent vows; How can they be
mine, whiles that glorious Temple is in their eye; whiles the magnificence of
the royal Palace of David and Solomon, shall admonish them of their native
allegiance; whiles (besides the solicitation of their brethren) the Priests and
Levites shall preach to them the necessity of their due obedience, and the
abomination of their sacrifices in their wilful disobedience; whiles they
shall (by their presence) put themselves upon the mercy, or justice of their
lawful, and forsaken Prince; Either therefore I must divert them from
Jerusalem, or else I cannot live and reign. It is no diuerting them by a
direct restraint; such prohibition would both endanger their utter distaste,
and whet their desire to more eagerness: I may change religion, I may not
inhibit it; so the people have a God, it suffices them; they shall have so
much formality as may content them; their zeal is not so sharp, but they can
be well pleased with ease; I will proffer them both a more compendious, and
more plausible worship; Jerusalem shall be supplied within mine own borders;
naturally men love to see the objects of their devotion; I will therefore feed
their eyes with two golden representations of their God, nearer home; and what
can be more proper than those, which Aaron devised of old to humor Israel?

Upon this pestilent ground, Jeroboam sets up two calves in Dan, and Bethel,
and persuades the people; It is too much for you to go up to Jerusalem, behold
thy Gods o Israel, which brought thee out of the land of Egypt. Oh the
mischief that comes of wicked infidelity; It was Gods Prophet that had rent
Ieroboams garment into twelve pieces, and had given ten of them to him; in
token of his sharing the ten Tribes; who with the same breath also told him
that the cause of this distraction was their Idolatry, Yet now will he
institute an Idolatrous service for the holding together of them, whom their
Idolatry had rent from their true Sovereign to him: He says not; God has
promised me this Kingdom, God has conferd it; God shall find means to
maintain his own act; I will obey him, let him dispose of me; The God of
Israel is wise and powerful enough, to fetch about his own designs; but, (as
if the devices of men were stronger than Gods providence, and ordination) he
will be working out his own ends by profane policies: Jeroboam being borne
an Israelite, and bred in the Court of a Solomon, could not but know the
express charge of God against the making of Images, against the erecting of
any rival altars, to that of Jerusalem, yet now that he sees both these may
avail much to the advancing of his ambitious proiects, he sets up those
Images, those Altars; Wicked men care not to make bold with God in cases of
their own commodity; If the laws of their Maker lie in the way of their
profit, or promotion, they either spurn them out, or tread upon them at
pleasure: Aspiring minds will know no God but honor. Israel soiourned in
Egypt and brought home a golden calfe; Jeroboam soiournes there, and brought
home two; It is hard to dwell in Egypt untainted; not to savor of the sins of
the place we live in, is no less strange, than for wholesome liquor tund up in
a musty vessel, not to smell of the caske; The best body may be infected in a
contagious air; Let him beware of Egypt that would be free from Idolatry.

No sooner are Ieroboams calves up, than Israel is down on their knees: their
worship follows immediately upon the erection; How easily is the unstable
vulgar carried into whateuer religion of authority? The weathercock will look
which way soever the wind blows; It is no marvel if his subjects be brutish,
who has made a calfe his God.

Every accessory to sin is filthy, but the first authors of sin are
abominable; How is Jeroboam branded in every of these sacred leaves? how do
all ages ring of his fact, with the accent of dishonor, and indignation;
Jeroboam the son of Nebat, that made Israel to sin? It was a shame for
Israel that it could be made to sin by a Jeroboam; but, o cursed name of
Jeroboam that would draw Israel to sin; The followers and abettors of evil are
worthy of torment, but no hell is too deep for the leaders of public
wickedness.

Religion is clothed with many requisite circumstances; As a new King would
have a new God; so that new God must have new Temples, Altars, Services,
Priests, Solemnities; All these has Jeroboam instituted; all these has he
cast in the same mould with his golden calves: False devotion does not more
cross, than imitate the true: Satan is no less a counterfeit than an enemy of
God; He knows it more easy to adulterate religion, than to abolish it.

That which God ordained for the auoydance of Idolatry, is made the occasion of
it; a limitation of his holy services to Jerusalem; How mischieuously do
wicked men pervert the wholesome institutions of God to their sin, to their
bane?

Jeroboam could not be ignorant how fearfully this very act was revenged upon
Israel, in the wilderness; yet he dares renew it in Dan and Bethel: No
example of judgment can affright wilful offenders.

It is not the metal that makes his Gods, but the worship; the sacrifices:
What sacrifice could there be without Priests? No religion could ever want
sacred masters of Divine Ceremonies; Gods Clergy was select, and honorable;
branches of the holy stem of Aaron; Jeroboam rakes up his Priests out of the
channel of the multitude; all Tribes, all persons were good enough for his
spurious devotion; Leaden Priests are well fitted to golden Deities. Religion
receives either much honor, or blemish, by the quality of those that serve at
her Altars; We are not worthy to profess our selves servants of the true God,
if we do not hold his service worthy of the best.

Ieroboams Calves must have sacrifices, must have solemn festiuities; though
in a day, and month of his own devising: In vain shall we pretend to
worship a God, if we grudge him the just days, and rites of his worship.

It is strange that he who thought the dregs of the vulgar good enough for
that Priesthood, would grace those Gods, by acting their Priest himself; and
yet behold where the new King of Israel stands before his new Altar, with a
Scepter in one hand, and a Censer in the other, ready to sacrifice to his new
Gods; when the man of God comes from Judah, with a message of judgment; Oh
desperate condition of Israel, that was so far gone with impiety, that it
yielded not one faithful monitor to Jeroboam; The time was, that the erecting
of but a new altar (for memory, for monument) on the other side Jordan, bred a
challenge to the Tribes of Reuben, Gad, and Manasses; and had cost much
Israelitish blood, if the quarrelled Tribes had not given a seasonable and
pious satisfaction; and now, lo how the stronger stomach of degenerated Israel
can digest new Altars, new Temples, new Gods; What a difference there is
betwixt a Church and Kingdom newly breathing from affliction, and settled upon
the lees of a mis-used peace?

But oh the patience, and mercy of our Long-suffering God; that will not strike
a very Jeroboam vnwarned: Judgment houers over the heads of sinners, ere it
light; If Israel afford not a bold reprouer of Jeroboam, Judah shall; When the
king of Israel is in all the height both of his State, and superstition,
honoring his solemn day with his richest devotion, steps forth a Prophet of
God, and interrupts that glorious service, with a loud inclamation of
judgment. Doubtless the man wanted not wit to know what displeasure, what
danger must needs follow so unwelcome a message: yet dares he (upon the
commission of God) do this affront to an Idolatrous King, in the midst of all
his awefull magnificence. The Prophets of God go upon many a thankelesse
errand; He is no messenger for God that either knows, or fears the faces of
men.

It was the Altar, not the person of Jeroboam, which the Prophet thus
threatens; Yet not the stones are stricken, but the founder; in both their
apprehensions: So dear are the devices of our own brain to us, as if they
were incorporated into our selves; There is no opposition whereof we are so
sensible, as that of religion.

That the royal Altar should be thus polluted by dead men's bones, and the
blood of the Priests, was not more unpleasing, than that all this should be
done by a child of the house of David; for Jeroboam well saw that the throne
and the altar must stand, or fall together; that a son of David could not
have such power over the Altar, without an utter subversion of the government,
of the succession; therefore is he thus galled with this comminatory
prediction; The rebellious people who had said, What portion have we in David,
hear now, that David will perforce have a portion in them: and might well see,
what beasts they had made themselves, in worshipping the image of a beast; and
sacrificing to such a God, as could not preserve his own Altar from violation,
and ruin.

All this while I do not see this zealous Prophet laying his hand to the
demolition of this Idolatrous Altar; or threatening a knife to the Author of
this deprauation of religion; Only his tongue smites both; not with foul, but
sharp words; of menace, not of reproach; It was for Josias a King, to shed the
blood of those sacrificers, to deface those Altars: Prophets are for the
tongue, Princes for the hand; Prophets must only denounce judgment; Princes
execute.

Future things are present to the Eternal; It was some two hundred and sixty
years, ere this prophecy should be fulfilled; yet the man of God speaks of
it as now in acting; What are some Centuries of years to the Ancient of days?
How slow, and yet how sure is the pace of Gods revenge? It is not in the power
of time to frustrate Gods determinations; There is no less justice, nor
severity in a delaied punishment.

What a perfect Record there is of all names in the roll of Heaven; before they
be, after they are past? what ever seeming contingency there is in their
imposition, yet they fall under the certainty of a decree; and are better
known in heaven, ere they be, than on earth whiles they are. He that knows
what names we shall have, before we or the world have a being, does not often
reveal this piece of his knowledge to his creature; here he does; naming the
man that should be two hundred years after; for more assurance of the event;
that Israel may say, this man speaks from a God who knows what shall be:
There cannot be a more sure evidence of a true Godhead, than the foreknowledge
of those things, whose causes have yet no hope of being; But because the proof
of this prediction was not more certain, than remote; a present demonstration
shall convince the future; The altar shall rend in pieces, the ashes shall be
scattered; How amazedly must the seduced Israelites needs look upon this
miracle; and why do they not think with themselves; whiles these stones rend,
why are our hearts whole? Of what an ouer-ruling power is the God whom we have
forsaken, that can thus tear the Altars of his corriualls? How shall we stand
before his vengeance, when the very stones break at the word of his Prophet?
Perhaps, some beholders were thus affected; but Jeroboam, whom it most
concerned, in stead of bowing his knees for humiliation, stretches forth his
hand for revenge, and cries, Lay hold on him: Resolute wickedness is impatient
of a reproof, and in stead of yielding to the voice of God, rebelleth: Just
and discreet reprehension does not more reform some sinners than exasperare
others.

How easy is it for God to cool the courage of proud Jeroboam? the hand which
his rage stretches out, dries up, and cannot be pulled back again: and now
stands the King of Israel like some anticke statue, in a posture of impotent
endeavor; so disabled to the hurt of the Prophet, that he cannot command that
piece of himself; What are the great Potentates of the world, in the powerful
hand of the Almighty? Tyrans cannot be so harmefull as they are malicious.

The strongest heart may be brought down with affliction; Now the stout
stomach of Jeroboam is fallen to an humble deprecation; Entreat now the face of
the Lord thy God, and pray for me, that my hand may be restored me again. It
must needs be a great straight that could drive a proud heart to beg mercy,
where he bent his persecution; so does Jeroboam; holding it no scorn to be
beholden to an enemy; In extremities, the worst men can be content to sue for
favor, where they have spent their malice.

It well becomes the Prophets of God to be merciful; I do not see this Seer
to stand upon terms of exprobration, and ouerlie contestations with Jeroboam,
to say, Thine intentions to me were cruel; Had thine hand prevailed, I should
have sued to thee in vain; Continue ever a spectacle of the fearful justice
of thy Maker, whom thou have provoked by thine Idolatry, whom thou would have
smitten in my persecution; but he meekely sues for Ieroboams release; and
(that God might abundantly magnify both his power and mercy) is heard and
answered with success: We do no whit savor of heaven, if we have not
learned to do good for evil.

When both wind and Sun, the blasts of judgment, and the beams of favor
met together to work upon Jeroboam, who would not look that he should have
cast off this cumbrous, and mis-beseeming cloak of his Idolatry; and have said,
Lord thou have stricken me in justice, thou have healed me in mercy; I will
provoke thee no more; This hand which thou have restored shall be consecrated
to thee in pulling down these bold abominations; Yet now, behold he goes on
in his old courses, and, as if God had neither done him good nor evil, lives,
and dies idolatrous; No stone is more hard or insensate than a sinful heart;
The changes of Judgment and mercy do but obdure it, in stead of melting.

The Seduced Prophet.
IEroboams hand is amended, his soul is not; that continues still dry, and
inflexible; Yet whiles he is unthankful to the Author of his recovery, he is
thankful to the instrument; he kindly inuites the Prophet, whom he had
threatened, and will remunerate him whom he endeavored to punish: The worst men
may be sensible of bodily favors; Civil respects may well stand with
gracelessenesse: Many a one would be liberal of their purses, if they might
be allowed to be niggardly of their obedience.

As God, so his Prophet cares not for these waste courtesies, where he sees
maine duties neglected; More piety would have done well, with less
complement; The man of God returns a blunt and peremptory denial to so
bounteous an offer; If thou will give me half thine house, I will not go in
with thee, neither will I eat bread or drink water in this place. Kindness is
more safely done to an Idolater, than taken from him; that which is done to him
obliges him, that which is taken from him obliges us; his obligation to us
may be an occasion of his good, our obligation to him may occasion our hurt;
the surest way is to keep aloof from the infectiously wicked.

The Prophet is not uncivil, to reject the favor of a Prince without some
reason; He yields no reason of his refusal but the command of his God; God
has charged him, Eat no bread, nor drink no water, nor turn again by the
same way that thou came; It is not for a Prophet to plead humane, or carnal
grounds for the actions of his function: He may not move but upon a divine
warrant; would this Scer have looked with the eyes of flesh and blood, he might
have found many arguments of his yeeldance. He is a King that inuites me; his
reward, by enriching me, may benefit many; and who knows how much my further
conversation may prevail to reform him? how can he be but well prepared for
good counsel by my miraculous cure? how gainfully should my receipt of a
temporal courtesy be exchanged with a spiritual to him? All Israel will
follow him either into Idolatry, or reformation; which way can be devised of
doing so great service to God and the Church, as by reclaiming him; what can
yield so great likelihood of his reclamation, as the opportunity of my further
entirenesse with him? But the Prophet dares not argue cases, where he had a
command; what ever become of Jeroboam, and Israel, God must be obeyed; Neither
profit, nor hopes may carry us cross to the word of our Maker. How safe had
this Seer been, if he had kept him ever upon this sure ward; which he no
sooner leaves, than he miscarries.

So deeply does God detest Idolatry, that he forbids his Prophet to eat the
bread, to drink the water of a people infected with this sin; yea to tread
in those very steps which their feet have touched. If this inhibition were
personal, yet the grounds of it are common. No pestilence should be more
shunned than the conversation of the mis-religious, or openly scandalous; It is
no thank to us if their familiarity do not enfeoffe us of their wickedness.

I know not what to think of an old Prophet that dwells in Bethel, within the
air of Ieroboams Idol, within the noise of his sacrifices; that lives where
the man of God dares not eat; that permitted his sons to be present at that
Idolatrous service; If he were a Prophet of God, what did he now in Bethel?
why did he wink at the sin of Jeroboam? what needed a Seer to come out of
Judah, for the reproof of that sin, which was acted under his nose? why did
he lie? why did his family partake with Idolaters? If he were not a Prophet of
God; how had he true visions, how had he true messages from God; why did he
second the menacing word of that Prophet, whom he seduced? why did he desire
that his own bones might be honored with his Sepulcher? Doubtless he was a
Prophet of God, but corrupt, restie, vicious; Prophecy does not always
presuppose sanctification; many a one has had visions from God, who shall
never enjoy the vision of God. A very Balaam in his ecstasies, has so clear a
revelation of the Messiah to come, as scarce ever any of the holiest Prophets;
yea, his very Ass has both her mouth miraculously opened, and her eyes; to
see and notify that Angel, which was hid from her Master; Yea, Satan himself
sometimes receives notice from God of his future actions; which else that evil
Spirit could neither foretell, nor foresee. These kinds of graces are both
rare, and common; rare, in that they are seldom given to any; common, in that
they are indifferently given to the evil, and to the good; A little holiness
is worth much illumination.

Whether out of envy, to hear that said by the Seer of Judah, which he either
knew not or smothered; to hear that done by another, which he could not have
effected, and could not choose but admire; or whether out of desire to make
trial of the fidelity of so powerful a Messenger, the old Prophet hastens to
overtake, to recall that man of God. who had so defied his Bethel; whom he
finds sitting faint and weary under an Oak, in the way; taking the benefit of
that shade which he hated to receive from those contagious groves that he had
left behind him; His habit easily bewrayed him, to a man of his own trade:
neither does his tongue spare to profess himself. The old Prophet of Bethel
inuites him to a return, to a repast: and is answered with the same words,
wherewith Ieroboams offer was repelled; The man of God varies not a syllable
from his message: It concerns us to take good heed of our charge, when we go
on Gods errand. A denial does but inuit the importunate; what he cannot do
by entreaty, the old man tries to do by persuasion; I am a Prophet also as
thou art, and an Angel spoke to me, by the word of the Lord, saying; Bring him
back with thee into thine house, that he may eat bread, and drink water;
There is no Tentation so dangerous, as that which comes shrouded under a veil
of holiness, and pretends authority from God himself; Jeroboam threatens,
the Prophet stands undaunted; Jeroboam fawnes, and promises; the Prophet holds
constant; now comes a gray headed Seer, and pleads a counter-message from God,
the Prophet yields, and transgresses. Satan may affright us as a fiend, but he
seduces us as an Angel of light.

Who would have looked for a Lier under hoarie hairs, and an holy mantle? who
would not have trusted that gravity, when there was no color of any gain in
the untruth? Nothing is so apt to deceive as the fairest semblances, as the
sweetest words. We cannot err if we believe not the speech for the person,
but the person for the speech; Well might this man of God think, An aged man,
a Prophet, an old Prophet, will not (sure) belly God unto a Prophet; No man will
forge a lie, but for an advantage; What can this man gain by this match, but
the entertainment of an unprofitable guest; Perhaps though God would not allow
me to feast with Jeroboam, yet, pitying my faintness, he may allow me to eat
with a Prophet; Perhaps now that I have approved my fidelity in refusing the
bread of Bethel, God thinks good to send me a gracious release of that strict
charge; Why should I think that Gods revelations are not as free to others, as
to me? and if this Prophet have received a countermand from an Angel of God,
how shall I not disobey God, if I do not follow him?

Upon this ground he returns with his deceitful host, and when the meat was
now in his mouth, receives the true message of death, from the same lips that
brought him the false message of his inuitation; Thus says the Lord, for as
much as thou have disobeyed the mouth of the Lord, and have not kept the
commandment of the Lord thy God, but came back and have eaten bread, and
drunk water in the place forbidden thee, thy carcass shall not come to the
Sepulcher of thy fathers. Oh woeful Prophet, when he looks on his host he
sees his executioner, whiles he is feeding of his body, he hears of his
carcass; at the table, he hears of his denied Sepulcher; and all this, for
eating and drinking where he was forbidden by God, though bidden as from God;
The violation of the least charge of a God is mortal; No pretenses can warrant
the transgression of a divine command: A word from God is pleaded on both
sides; The one was received immediately from God, the other related mediatly by
man; One the Prophet was sure of, the other was questionable; A sure word of
God may not be left for an uncertain; An express charge of the Almighty
admits not of any check: His will is but one, as himself is; and therefore
is out of the danger of contradiction.

Me thinks I see the man of God change countenance at this sharp sauce of his
pleasing morsels; his face before hand is died with the palenesse of death; me
thinks I hear him urging many unkind expostulations with his injurious host;
who yet dismisses him better provided for the ease of his journey, than he
found him. Perhaps, this officiousness was out of desire to make some amends
for his late seducement. It is a poor recompense when he has betrayed the
life, and wronged the soul, to cast some courtesies upon the body.

This old Bethelite that had taken pains to come and fetch the man of God into
sin, will not now go back with him to accompany his departure; Doubtless
he was afraid to be inwrapped in the judgment, which he saw hanged over
that obnoxious head; Thus the mischievous guides of wickedness leave a man, when
they have led him to his bane; as familiar Devils forsake their witches, when
they have brought them once into fetters.

The man of God returns alone, careful (no doubt) and pensive for his
offense, when a lion out of the wood meets him, assaults him, kills him; Oh the
just and severe judgments of the Almighty, who has brought this fierce beast
out of his wild ranges, into the high way, to be the executioner of his
offending servant: Doubtless this Prophet was a man of great holiness, of
singular fidelity, else he durst not have been Gods Herald to carry a message
of defiance to Jeroboam, King of Israel, in the midst of all his royal
magnificence; yet now, for varying from but a circumstance of Gods command
(though upon the suggestion of a divine warrant) he is given for a prey to the
Lion: Our interest in God is so far from excusing our sin, that it aggrauates
it; Of all others the sin of a Prophet shall not pass unrevenged.

The very wild beasts are led by a providence; Their wise and powerful Creator
knows how to serve himself of them: The Lions guard one Prophet, kill another,
according to the commission received from their Maker; What sinner can hope to
escape unpunished, when every creature of God is ready to be an auenger of
evil? The beasts of the field were made to serve us, we to serve our Creator;
When we forsake our homage to him that made us, it is no marvel if the beasts
forget their duty to us, and deal with us not as Masters, but as rebels; When
an holy man buys so dearly such a slight frailty, of a credulous mistaking,
what shall become of our heinous and presumptuous sins?

I cannot think but this Prophet died in the favor of God, tho by the teeth
of the Lion; His life was forfeited for example, his soul was safe; Yea his
very carcass was left though torn, yet fair after those deadly graspes; as
if God had said; I will only take thy breath from thee, as the penalty of thy
disobedience, a Lion shall do that which an apoplexy, or fever might do; I
owe thee no further revenge than may be satisfied with thy blood.

Violent events do not always argue the anger of God; Even death it self is,
to his servants, a fatherly castigation.

But oh the unsearchable ways of the Almighty! The man of God sins, and dies
speedily; the lying Prophet that seduced him suruiues; Yea wicked Jeroboam
enioyes his Idolatry, and treads upon the grave of his reprouer: There is
neither favor in the delay of stripes, nor displeasure in the haste; Rather
whom God loves, he chastises, as sharply, so speedily; whiles the rest prosper
to condemnation: Even the rod of a loving father may draw blood; How much
happier is it for us that we die now to live for ever; than that we live a
while, to die ever?

Had this Lion set upon the Prophet for hunger, why did he not devour as well
as kill him? Why did he not rather kill the beast than the man? since we know
the nature of the Lion such, that he is not wont to assail man, save in the
extreme want of other prey. Certainly the same power that employed those
fangs, restrained them; that the world might see, it was not appetite that
provoked the beast to this violence, but the ouer-ruling command of God; Even
so, o Lord, thy powerful hand is over that roaring Lion, that goes about
continually, seeking whom he may devour: thine hand withholds him, that
though he may shed the blood of thine elect, yet he cannot hurt their souls;
and whiles he does those things which thou permittest, and orderest to thy just
ends, yet he cannot do lesser things, which he desires, and thou permittest
not.

The fierce beast stands by the carcass, as, to auow his own act, and to tell
who sent him; so to preserve that body, which he has slain; Oh wonderful
work of God, the Executioner is turned Guardian; and (as the Officer of the
highest) commands all other creatures to stand aloof from his charge: and
commands the fearful Ass, that brought this burden thither, not to stir
thence, but stand ready pressed, to recarrie it to the Sepulcher: And now, when
he has sufficiently witnessed to all passengers, that this act was not done
upon his own hunger, but upon the quarrel of his Maker, he delivers up his
charge to that old Prophet; who was no less guilty of this blood than
himself.

This old Seducer has so much Truth, as both to give a right Commentary upon
Gods intention, in this act, for the terror of the disobedient, and to give
his voice to the certainty of that future judgment, which his late guest had
threatened to Israel: (sometimes it pleased the wisdom of God to express and
justify himself even by the tongues of faulty Instruments.) Withal, he has
so much faith and courage, as to fetch that carcass from the Lion; so much
piety and compassion, as to weep for the man of God, to interre him in his
own Sepulcher; so much love, as to wish himself joined in death, to that
body, which he had hastened unto death; It is hard to find a man absolutely
wicked; Some grace will bewray it self in the most forsaken breasts.

It is a cruel courtesy to kill a man, and then to help him to his grave; to
betray a man with our breath, and then to bedew him with our tears; The
Prophet had needed no such friend, if he had not met with such an enemy; The
mercies of the wicked are cruel.

Jeroboams Wife.
IT is no measuring Gods favor by the line of outward welfare; Jeroboam the
idolatrous usurper of Israel prospers better, than the true heirs of David; He
lives to see three successions in the Throne of Judah; Thus the Iuy lives, when
the Oak is dead. Yet could not that mis-gotten crown of his keep his head
always from aching; He has his crosses too: God whips sometimes more than
his own; His enemies smart from him, as well as his children; his children in
love, his enemies in judgment; Not simply the rod argues love, but the temper
of the hand, that weelds it, and the back that feels it: First Ieroboams hand
was stricken, now his Son; Abijah the eldest, the best son of Jeroboam, is
smitten with sickness; As children are but the pieces of their Parents in
another skin, so Parents are no less stricken in their children, than in
their natural lims, Jeroboam does not more feel his arm, than his son; Not
wicked men only, but beasts may have natural affections; It is no thank to
any creature, to love his own.

Nature wrought in Jeroboam, no grace; He is enough troubled with his sons
disgrace, no whit bettered; I would have heard him say; God follows me with
his afflictions; it is for mine impiety; what other measure can I expect from
his Justice? Whiles mine Idols stand, how can I look that my house should
prosper? I will turn from my wickedness, O God turn thou from thy wrath;
These thoughts were too good for that obdured heart; His son is sick, he is
sorrowful; but (as an amazed man seeks to go forth at the wrong door) his
distraction sends him to a false help: He thinks not of God, he thinks of his
Prophet: He thinks of the Prophet that had foretold him he should be a King;
he thinks not of the God of that Prophet who made him a King; It is the
property of a carnal heart to confine both his Obligations, and his hopes to
the means, neglecting the Author of good. Vain is the respect that is given
to the servant, where the Master is contemned.

Extremity draws Ieroboams thoughts to the Prophet; whom else he had not
cared to remember. The King of Israel had Divines enough of his own; Else, he
must needs have thought them miserable Gods that were not worth a Prophet; And
besides, there was an old Prophet (if he yet suruiued) dwelling within the
smoke of his Palace; whose visions had been too well approved; why would
Jeroboam send so far to an Ahijah?

Certainly, his heart despised those base Priests of his high places; neither
could trust either to the gods, or the Clergy of his own making; His
conscience rests upon the fidelity of that man, whose doctrine he had
forsaken; How did this Idolater strive against his own heart, whiles he
inwardly despised those, whom he professed to honor; and inwardly honored
them, whom he professed to despise? Wicked breasts are false to themselves;
neither trusting to their own choice, nor making choice of that, which they
may dare to trust. They will set a good face upon their secretly-vnpleasing
sins, and had rather be selfe-condemned, than wise and penitent: As for that
old Seer, it is like Jeroboam knew his skill, but doubted of his fincerity;
that man was too much his neighbor to be good; Ahijahs truth had been tried
in a case of his own; He whose word was found just in the prediction of his
kingdom, was well worthy of credit in the news of his son; Experience is a
great encouragement of our trust; It is a good matter to be faithful; this
loadstone of our fidelity shall draw to us even hearts of iron, and hold them
to our reliance: As contrarily deceit does both argue, and make a bankrupt; who
can trust where he is disappointed? O God, so often, so ever, have we found thee
true in all thy promises, in all thy performances, that if we do not seek
thee, if we do not trust thee in the sequel, we are worthy of our loss,
worthy of thy desertions.

Yet I do not see that Jeroboam sends to the Prophet for his aid, but for his
intelligence, Curiosity is guilty of this message, and not devotion; he calls
not for the prayers, not for the benediction of that holy man, but for mere
information of the event. He well saw what the prayers of a Prophet could do;
That which cured his hand, might it not have cured his son? Yet he that said
to a man of God, Entreat the face of the Lord thy God, that he may restore my
hand; says not now, in his message to Ahijah, Entreat thy God to restore my
Son: Sin makes such a strangeness betwixt God and man, that the guilty
heart either thinks not of suing to God, or fears it; What a poor contentment
it was to foreknow that evil which he could not avoid, and whose notice could
but hasten his misery? Yet, thus fond is our restless curiosity, that it
seeks ease in the drawing on of torment; He is worthy of sorrow that will not
stay till it comes to him, but goes to fetch it.

Whom does Jeroboam send on this message, but his wife, and how, but disguised?
Why her, and why thus? Neither durst he trust this errand with another, nor
with her in her own form: It was a seceet that Jeroboam sends to a Prophet of
God; none might know it but his own bosom, and she that lay in it; if this
had been noised in Israel, the example had been dangerous; Who would not have
said, The King is glad to leave his counterfeit deities, and seek to the true;
Why should we adhere to them whom he forsakes? As the message must not be
known to the people; so she that bears it must not be known to the
Prophet, her name, her habit must be changed; she must put off her robes, and
put on a russet coat; she must put off the Queen, and put on the peasant; in
stead of her Scepter, she must take up a basket, and go a masked pilgrimage to
Shiloh; Oh the fondnes of vain men that think to iuggle with the Almighty,
and to hide their counsels from that all-seeing ere! If this change of habit
were necessary at Bethel, yet what needs it at Shiloh; though she would hide
her face from her subjects, yet why would she not pull off her muffler, and
show her self to the Prophet? Certainly, what policy began, guiltiness must
continue; Well might she think, there can be no good answer expected of the
wife of Jeroboam; my presence will do no less, than solicit a reproof; No
Prophet can speak well to the consort of a founder of Idolatry, I may perhaps
hear good as another, though as my self I can look for nothing, but tidings
of evil; Wicked hearts know they deserve ill at Gods hands, and therefore they
do all they can to avoid the eyes of his displeased justice, and if they
cannot do it by colors of dissimulation, they will do it by imploration of
shelter; they shall say to the rocks, Fall on us, and cover us.

But oh the gross folly mixed with the craft of wickedness! could Jeroboam
think that the Prophet could know the event of his sons disease, and did he
think that he could not know the disguise of his Wife? the one was present,
the other future; this face was but wrapped up in a clout, that event was wrapped
up in the counsel of God; Yet this politic head presumes that the greater
shall be revealed, where the lesser shall be hid; There was never wicked man
that was not infatuate, and in nothing more than in those things wherein he
hoped most to transcend the reach of others.

Ahijah shunning the iniquity of the times, was retired to a solitary corner of
Shiloh; no place could be too private for an honest Prophet, in so extreme
deprauednesse; Yet even there does the King of Israel take notice of his
reclusion, and sends his Wife to that poor cell, laden with presents; presents
that dissembled their bearer: had she offered jewels, or gold, her greatness
had been suspected; now she brings loaves, and cracknels, and honey, her hand
answers her back; She gives as she seems, not as she is: Something she must
give, even when she acts the poorest client.

The Prophets of God were not wont to have empty visitations; they who hated
bribes, yet refused not tokens of gratitude; Yea the God of heaven who neither
needs our goods, nor is capable of our gratifications, yet would have no man to
come to him, gift-lesse; Woe to those sacrilegious hands, that in stead of
bringing to the Prophets carry from them.

Jeroboam was a bad man, yet, as he had a towardly son, so he had an obedient
wife; else she had not wanted excuses to turn off both the journey, and the
disguise; against the disguise she had pleaded the vnbeseemingnesse for her
person and state; against the journey, the perils of so long and solitary a
walk; perhaps a Lion might be in the way; the Lion that tore the Prophet in
pieces; perhaps robbers; or if not they, perhaps her chastity might be in
danger; an unguarded solitarines in the weaker sex might be a provocation to
some forced uncleanness: she casts off all these shifting proiections of
fear; according to the will of her husband, she changes her raiment, she sets
upon the journey, and ouercomes it: What needed this disguise to an old Prophet
whose dim eyes were set with age? All clothes, all faces were alike to a
blind Seer; The visions of Ahijah were inward, neither was his bodily sight
more duskie, than the eyes of his mind were clear, and piercing; It was not
the common light of men whereby he saw, but divine illumination; things absent,
things future were no less obuious to those spiritual beams, than present
things are to us; Ere the quick eyes of that great Lady can discern him, he
has espied her; and so soon as he hears the sound of her feet, she hears
from him the sound of her name, Come in thou Wife of Jeroboam; How God laughes
in heaven at the frivolous fetches of crafty politicians, and when they think
themselves most sure, shames them with a detection, with a defeat? What an
idleness it is for foolish Hypocrites to hope they can dance in a net unseen
of heaven?

Never before was this Queen troubled to hear of her self; now she is; her
very name struck her with astonishment; and prepares her for the assured horror
of following judgments, I am sent to thee with heavy tidings; Go tell
Jeroboam; Thus says the Lord God of Israel. Could this Lady less wonder at
the mercy of this style of God, than tremble at the sequel of his justice? Lo
Israel had forsaken God, yet God still ownes Israel. Israel had gone a whoring,
yet God has not divorced her; Oh the infinite goodness of our long-suffering
God, whom our foulest sins cannot rob of his compassions.

By how much dearer Israel was to God, so much more odious is Jeroboam that
has marred Israel, Terrible is that vengeance which God thunders against him
by his Prophet; whose passionate message vpbraids him with his promotions,
charge him with his sins, and lastly denounces his judgments; No mouth
was fitter to cast this royalty in the teeth of Jeroboam, than that, by which
it was first foretold, fore-promised; Every circumstance of the advancement
aggrauates the sin, I exalted thee; Thou could not rise to honor alone. I
exalted thee from among the people; not from the Peers; thy rank was but
common, before this rise; I exalted thee from among the people, to be a Prince;
subordinate height was not enough for thee, no seat would serve thee but a
throne; Yea, to be a Prince of my people Israel; No Nation was for thee, but my
chosen one; none but my royal inheritance; Neither did I raise thee into a
vacant throne; a forlorn and forsaken principality might be thanklesse; but I
rent the kingdom away from another, for thy sake, yea from what other but the
grand child of David? out of his hands did I wrest the Scepter, to give it
into thine: Oh what high favors does God sometimes cast away upon unworthy
subjects? How do his abused bounties double both their sin, and judgment?

The sins of this Prince were no less eminent than his obligations,
therefore his judgments shall be no less eminent than his sins: How
bitterly does God express that, which shall be more bitter in the execution;
Behold, I will bring evil upon the house of Jeroboam, and will cut off from
Jeroboam, him that pisseth against the wall; and him that is shut up, and left
in Israel, and will take away the remnant of the house of Jeroboam, as a man
takes away dung, till it be all gone; Him that dies of Jeroboam in the city
shall the dogs eat, and him that dies in the field, shall the fowls of the
air eat; Oh heavy load that this disguised Princess must carry to her
Husband; but because these evils, though grievous, yet might be remote,
therefore for a present hansell of vengeance, she is dismissed with the sad
tidings of the death of her son; When thy feet enter into the city, the
child shall die; It is heavy news for a mother that she must leese her
son, but worse yet that she may not see him; In these cases of our final
departures, our presence gives some mitigation to our grief: might she but
have closed the eyes, and have received the last breath of her dying son, the
loss had been more tolerable; I know not how our personal farewell eases our
heart, even whiles it increases our passion; but now she shall no more see, nor
beseene of her Abijah; She shall no sooner be in the city, than he shall be out
of the world: Yet more, to perfect her sorrow, she hears that in him alone
there is found some good; the rest of her issue, are graceless; she must
leese the good, and hold the graceless; he shall die to afflict her, they
shall live to afflict her.

Yet what a mixture is here of severity and favor in one act? favor to the
son, severity to the father; Severity to the father, that he must leese such
a son; favor to the son that he shall be taken from such a father; Jeroboam
is wicked, and therefore he shall not enjoy an Abijah; Abijah has some good
things, therefore he shall be removed from the danger of the deprauation of
Jeroboam: Sometimes God strikes in favor, but more often forbeares out of
severity: The best are fittest for heaven; the earth is fittest for the worst;
this is the region of sin, and misery, that of immortality; It is no argument
of dis-fauour to be taken early from a well led life; as not of approbation to
age in sin.

As the soul of Abijah is favored in the remouall; so is his body with a
burial; he shall have alone both tears and tomb; all the rest of his
brethren shall have no grave but dogs and fowls; no sorrow but for their life;
Tho the carcass be insensible of any position, yet honest Sepulture is a
blessing; It is fit the body should be duly respected on earth, whose soul is
glorious in heaven.

Asa.
THe two houses of Judah, and Israel grow up now together in an ambitious
riuality; this splitted plant branches out so severally, as if it had forgotten
that ever it was joined in the root; The throne of David often changes the
possessors; and more complains of their iniquity, than their remove; Abijam
inherits the sins of his father Rehoboam, no less than his Crown; and so
spends his three years, as if he had been no whit of kin to his
grandfathers virtues. It is no news that Grace is not traduced, whiles vice
is: Therefore is his reign short because it was wicked; It was a sad case when
both the Kings of Judah and Israel (though enemies) yet conspired in sin;
Rehoboam (like his father Solomon) began graciously, but fell to Idolatry; as
he followed his father, so his son, so his people followed him. Oh, what a
face of a Church was here, when Israel worshipped Ieroboams calves, when Judah
built them high places, and Images, and groves on every high hill, and under
every green tree; On both hands God is forsaken, his Temple neglected, his
worship adulterate; and this, not for some short brunt, but during the
succession of two Kings; For, after the first three years Rehoboam changed his
fathers religion (as his sheilds) from gold to brass; the rest of his
seventeen years were led in impiety; His Son Abijam trod in the same mirie
steps; and Judah with them both; If there were any (doubtless there were some)
faithful hearts, yet remaining in both kingdoms, during these heavy times,
what a corasiue it must needs have been to them, to see so deplored, and
miserable a deprauation?

There was no visible Church upon earth, but here; and this what a one? Oh
God, how low do thou sometimes suffer thine own flock to be driven? What
woeful wanes, and eclipses have thou ordaind for this heavenly body? Yet at
last, an Asa shall arise from the loins, from the grave of Abijam,; he shall
revive David and reform Judah: The gloomy times of corruption shall not last
always; The light of truth and peace shall at length break out, and bless
the sad hearts of the righteous.

It is a wonder how Asa should be good; of the seed of Abijam, of the soil of
Maachah; both wicked, both Idolatrous; God would have us see that grace is from
heaven, neither needs the helps of these earthly conueyances: Should not the
children of good parents sometimes be evil, and the children of evil parents,
good, virtue would seem natural, and the giver would leese his thanks: Thus
we have seen a fair flower spring out of dung; and a well-fruited tree rise
out of a sour stock; Education has no less power to corrupt, than nature;
It is therefore the just praise of Asa that being trained up under an
Idolatrous Maachah, he maintained his piety; As contrarily, it is a shame for
those that have been bred up in the precepts and examples of virtue and
godliness, to fall off to lewdness, or superstition; There are four
principal monuments of Asaes virtue, as so many rich stones in his Diadem: He
took away Sodomie, Idols, out of Judah; Who cannot wonder more that he found
them there, than that he removed them? What a strange incongruitie is this;
Sodom in Jerusalem? Idols in Judah? Surely debauched profession proves
desperate; Admit the Idols, ye cannot doubt of the Sodomy; If they have changed
the glory of the incorruptible God, into an Image, made like to corruptible
man, and to birds, and foure-footed beasts, and creeping things, it is no
marvel, if God give them up to uncleanness through the lusts of their own
hearts, to dishonor their own bodies, between themselves; If they changed
the truth of God into a lie, and worshipped and served the creature more than
the Creator, who is blessed for ever, no marvel, if God give them to vile
affections, to change the natural use into that which is against nature;
burning in lust one toward another, men with men working that which is
unseemly.

Contrarily, admit the Sodomy, ye cannot doubt of the Idols; unnatural
beastliness in manners, is justly punished with a sottish dotage in religion;
bodily pollution with spiritual; How should the soul care to be chaste, that
keeps a stews in the body? Asa begins with the banishment of both; scouring
Judah of this double uncleanness: In vain should he have hoped to restore
God to his Kingdom, whiles these abominations inhabited it; It is justly the
maine care of worthy, and religious Princes, to clear their Coasts of the
foulest sins; Oh the impartial zeal of Asa; There were Idols that
challenged a prerogative of favor; the Idols that his father had made; all
these he defaces; the name of a father cannot protect an Idol: The duty to
his Parent cannot win him to a liking, to a forbearance of his misdeuotion;
Yea, so much the more does the heart of Asa rise against these puppets, for
that they were the sin, the shame of his father: Did there want (think we)
some Courtier of his Fathers retinue, to say; Sir, favor the memory of him
that begot you; you cannot demolish these statues, without the dishonor of
their Erector; Hide your dislike at the least; It will be your glory to lay
your finger upon this blot of your fathers reputation; If you list not to allow
his act, yet wink at it; The godly zeal of Asa turns the deaf ear to these
monitors; and lets them see, that he does not more honor a father, than hate an
Idol; No dearness of person should take off the edge of our detestation of
the sin. Nature is worthy of forgetfulness, and contempt, in opposition to
the God of Nature; Upon the same ground, Abijam, so for Idols he removed his
Grandmother Maachah; she would not be removed from her obscene Idols, she is
therefore removed from the station of her honor; That Princess had aged, both
in her regency, and superstition; Under her rod was Asa brought up; and
schooled in the rudiments of her Idolatry; whom she could not infect, she hoped
to ouer-awe; so, as if Asa will not follow her gods, yet she presumes that she
may retain her own; Doubtless, no means were neglected for her reclamation;
none would prevail; Religious Asa gathers up himself; and begins to remember
that he is a King, though a son; that she, though a mother, yet is a
subject; that her eminence could not but countenance Idolatry; that her
greatness suppressed religion; which he should in vain hope to reform,
whiles her superstition swayed; forgetting therefore the challenges of nature,
the awe of infancy, the custom of reverence, he strips her of that command,
which he saw prejudicial to his Maker; All respects of flesh and blood must be
trampled on, for God; Could that long-setled Idolatry want abettors?
Questionless, some or other would say; This was the religion of your father
Abijam, this of your grandfather Rehoboam, this of the latter days of your
wise and great grandfather Solomon, this of your grandmother Maachah, this of
your great grandmother Naamah; why should it not be yours? Why should you
suspect either the wisdom, or piety, or salvation of so many Predecessors?
Good Asa had learned to contemn prescription against a direct law; He had the
grace to know it was no measuring truth by so modern antiquity; his eyes
scorning to look so low, raise up themselves to the vncorrupt times of
Solomon, to David, to Samuel, to the Judges, to Joshua, to Moses, to the
Patriarks, to Noah, to the religious founders of the first world, to the first
father of mankind; to Paradise, to heaven: In comparison of these, Maachahs
God cannot ouerlooke yesterday; the ancientest error is but a nouice, to Truth;
And if never any example could be pleaded for purity of religion; it is enough
that the precept is express: He knew what God said in Sinai, and wrote in the
Tables; Thou shall not make to thy self any graven image, nor any similitude;
Thou shall not bow down to them, nor worship them; If all the world had been
an Idolater, ever since that word was given; he knew how little that precedent
could avail for disobedience: Practice must be corrected by law, and not the
law yield to practice; Maachah therefore goes down from her seat; her Idols
from their grove; she to retiredness, they to the fire, and from thence to
the water; Woeful deities that could both burn, and drown.

Neither did the zeal of Asa more magnify it self in these privative acts of
weeding out the corruptions of Religion, the positive acts of an holy
plantation; In the falling of those Idolatrous shrines, the Temple of God
flourishes; That does he furnish with those sacred treasures, which were
dedicated by himself, by his Progenitors; Like the true son of David, he
would not serve God, cost-free; Rehoboam turned Salomons gold into brass; Asa
turns Rehoboams brass into gold: Some of these vessels (it seems) Abijam
(Asaes father) had dedicated to God; but after his vow, inquired; yea withheld
them; Asa, like a good son, pays his fathers debts, and his own. It is a good
sign of a wellmeant devotion, when we can abide it chargeable; as contrarily,
in the affairs of God a niggardly hand argues a cold, and hollow heart.

All these were noble and excellent acts, the extirpation of Sodomy, the
demolition of Idols, the remouall of Maachah, the bountious contribution to the
Temple; but that which gives true life unto all these, is a sound root; Asaes
heart was perfect with the Lord all his days; No less laudable works than
these have proceeded from Hypocrisy; which whiles they have carried away
applause from men, have lost their thanks with God; All Asaes gold was but
dross to his pure intentions.

But oh what great, and many infirmities may consist with uprightness? What
allayes of imperfection will there be found in the most refined soul? Four no
small faults are found in truehearted Asa; Asa took away; There were some
mis-deuoted to the worship of the true God; these he lets stand; There was
gross Idolatry in the former; there was a weak will worship in the latter;
whiles he opposes impiety, he winkes at mistakings; yet even the variety of
altars was forbidden by an express charge from God, who had confined his
service to the Temple: With one breath does God report both these; The
high places were not removed, yet nevertheless Asaes heart was persit. God
will not see weaknesses, where he sees truth; How pleasing a thing is
sincerity, that in favor thereof the mercy of our just God digests many an
error: Oh God, let our hearts go upright, though our feet slide, the fall
cannot (through thy grace) be deadly; how ever it may shame or pain us.

Besides, Baasha, this religious King of Judah fetches in Benhadad the King of
Syria into Gods inheritance, upon too dear a rate; the breach of his league,
the expilation of the Temple. All the wealth wherewith Asa had endowed the
house of the Lord, was little enough to hire an Edomite, to betray his
fidelity, and to invade Israel: Leagues may be made with Infidels; not at such
a price, upon such terms; There can be no warrant for a wilful subornation
of perfidiousnesse: In these cases of outward things, the mercy of God
dispenses with our true necessities, not with the affected: O Asa, where was
thy piety, whiles thou robbest God, to corrupt an Infidel for the slaughter
of Israelites? O Princes, where is your piety, whiles ye hire Turks to the
slaughter of Christians? to the spoil of Gods Church?

Yet (which was worse) Asa does not only employ the Syrian, cost his
Grandfather David dear: And when Hanani Gods Seer, the Herald of heaven, came
to denounce war against him for these sins, Asa, in stead of penitence,
breaks into choler: Fury sparkles in those eyes, which should have gushed out
with water; Those lips that should have called for mercy, command revenge; How
ill do these two agree, The heart of David, the tongue of Jeroboam? That holy
Grandfather of his would not have done so; when Gods messenger reproved him for
sin, he condemned it, and himself for it; I see his tears, I do not hear
his threats: It ill becomes a faithful heart to rage, where it should sorrow;
and in stead of submission, to persecute: Sometimes no difference appears
betwixt a son of David, and the son of Nebat; Any man may do ill, but to
defend it, to outface it, is for rebels; yet even upright Asa imprisons the
Prophet, and crusheth his gainsayers. It were pity that the best man should
be judged by every of his actions, and not by all; The course of our life must
either allow or condemn us, not these sudden eruptions.

As the life, Asa wanted not infirmities; Long and prosperous had his reign
been; now after forty years health and happiness, he that imprisoned the
Prophet, is imprisoned in his bed; There is more pain in those fetters which
God put upon Asa, than those, which Asa puts upon Hanani; And now, behold, he
that in his war seeks to Benhadad, not to God, in his sickness seeks not
to God, but to Physicians: We cannot easily put upon God a greater wrong, than
the alienation of our trust; Earthly means are for use, not for confidence; We
may, we must employ them; we may not rely upon them; Well may God challenge
our trust, as his peculiar; which if we cast upon any creature, we deifie it;
Whence have herbs, and drugs, and Physicians, their being, and efficacy, but
from that divine hand? No marvel then if Asaes gout struck to his heart, and
his feet carried him to his grave, since his heart was miscarried carried for
the cure of his feet, to an injurious mis-confidence in the means, with
neglect of his Maker.

ELIjAH with the SAREPTAN.
WHo should be matched with Moses, in the hill of Tabor, but Elijah? Surely
next after Moses, there was never any Prophet of the old Testament more
glorious than he: None more glorious, none more obscure; The other Prophets
are not mentioned without the name of their parent, for the mutual honor both
of the father, and the son; Elijah (as if he had been a son of the earth)
comes forth with the bare mention of the place of his birth; Meandness of
descent is no block in Gods way to the most honorable vocations; It matters
not whose son he be whom God will grace with his service: In the greatest
honors that humane nature is capable of, God forgets our parents: As when we
shall be raised up to a glorious life, there shall be no respect had to the
loins whence we came; so it is proportionally in these spiritual aduancements.

These times were fit for an Elijah; an Elijah was fit for them; The eminentest
Prophet is reserved for the corruptest age; Israel had never such a King as
Ahab, for impiety; never so miraculous a Prophet, as Elijah; This Elijah is
addressed to this Ahab; The God of Spirits knows how to proportion men to the
occasions; and to raise up to himself such witnesses, as may be most able to
convince the world: A mild Moses was for the low estate of afflicted Israel;
mild of spirit, but mighty in wonders; mild of spirit, because he had to do
with a persecuted, and yet a techy and perverse people; mighty in wonders,
because he had to do with a Pharaoh: A grave and holy Samuel was for the quiet
consistence of Israel; A fierie-spirited Elijah was for the desperatest
declination of Israel: And if in the late times of the depraved condition of
his Church, God have raised up some spirits that have been more warm, and
stirring, than those of common mould, we cannot censure the choice, when we see
the service.

The first word that we hear from Elijah, is an oath, and a threat to Ahab,
to Israel: As the Lord God of Israel lives, before whom I stand, there shall
not be dew, nor rain these years, but according to my word: He comes in like
a Tempest, who went out in a whirlwind; Doubtless he had spoken fair, and
peaceable inuitations to Israel (though we hear them not) This was but the
storm which followed his repulse, their obstinacy; After many solicitations,
and warnings, Israel is stricken by the same tongue that had prayed for it;
Elijah dares avouch these judgments to their head; to Ahab: I do not so much
wonder at the boldness of Elijah, as at his power; Yea, who so sees his power,
can no whit wonder at his boldness: How could he be but bold to the face of a
man, who was thus powerful with God? As if God had lent him the keys of
heaven to shut it up, and open it at pleasure; he can say, There shall be
neither dew, nor rain, these years, but according to my word; Oh God, how
far it has pleased thee to communicate thy self to a weak man? What Angel
could ever say thus? Thy hand, o Lord, is not shortened; Why art thou not thus
marvelous in the ministers of thy Gospel? Is it for that their miracles were
ours? Is it for that thou would have us live by faith, not by sense? Is it
for that our task is more spiritual, and therefore more abstracted from
bodily helps? we cannot command the sun with Joshua, nor the thunder with
Samuel, nor the rain with Elijah; It shall content us if we can fix the Sun
of righteousness in the soul, if we can thunder out the judgments of God
against sin, if we can water the earthen hearts of men with the former, and
latter rain of heavenly doctrine.

Elijahs mantle cannot make him forget his flesh; whiles he knows himself a
Prophet, he remembers to be a man; he does not therefore arrogate this power,
as his own, but publishes it as his masters; This restraint must be according
to his word; and that word was from an higher mouth, than his: He spoke from
him by whom he swear; whose word was as sure as his life; and therefore he
durst say, As the Lord lives, there shall be no rain: Man only can denounce
what God will execute; which when it is once revealed, can no more fail, than
the Almighty himself.

He that had this interest and power in heaven, what needed he flee from an
earthly pursuit? Could his prayers restrain the clouds, and not hold the hands
of flesh and blood? Yet behold Elijah must flee from Ahab, and hide him by the
brook Cherith; The wisdom of God does not think fit so to make a beaten path
of miracles, as that he will not walk beside it; He will have our own
endeavors concur to our preservation; Elijah wanted neither courage of heart,
nor strength of hand, and yet he must trust to his feet for safety; How much
more lawful is it for our impotency to flee from persecution? Even that God
sends him to hide his head, who could as easily have protected, as nourished
him: He that wilfully stands still to latch dangers, tempts God in stead of
trusting him.

The Prophet must be gone; not without order taken for his purueyance; Oh the
strange Cators for Elijah; I have commanded the Ravens to feed thee there; I
know not whether had been more miraculous, to preserve him without meat, or to
provide meat by such mouths: The Raven, a devouring and ravenous foul, that
uses to snatch away meat from others, brings it to him: He that could have fed
Elijah by Angels, will feed him by Ravens; There was then in Israel an
hospital Obadiah, that kept a secret table in two several caves, for an
hundred Prophets of God; There were seven thousand faithful Israelites (in
spite of the Devil) who had never bowed knee to Baal; Doubtless, any of
these would have had a trencher ready for Elijah, and have thought himself
happy to have defrauded his own maw, for so noble a Prophet; God rather chooses
to make use of the most unlikely fowls of the air, than their bounty; that
he might give both to his Prophet, and us a pregnant proof of his absolute
command over all his creatures, and win our trust in all extremities. Who can
make question of the provisions of God, when he sees the very Ravens shall
forget their own hunger, and puruey for Elijah? Oh God, thou that prouidest
meat for the fowls of the air, wilt make the fowls of the air provide meat
for man, rather than his dependence on thee shall be disappointed; Oh let not
our faith be wanting to thee, thy care can never be wanting to us.

Elijah might have lived for the time with bread, and water; neither had his
fare been worse than his fellows in the caves of Obadijah; but the
munificence of God will have his meals better furnished; the Ravens shall
bring him both bread, and flesh twice in the day; It is not for a persecuted
Prophet to long after delicates; God gives order for competency, not for
wantonness; Not out of the dainty compositions in Iezebels kitchen, nor out
of the pleasant Wines in her celler, would God provide for Elijah; but the
Ravens shall bring him plain, and homely victuals, and the river shall afford
him drink; If we have wherewith to sustain nature (though not to pamper it)
we owe thanks to the giver; Those of Gods family may not be curious, not
disdainful: Ill does it become a servant of the highest, to be a slave to his
palate. Doubtless, one bit from the mouth of the Raven was more pleasing to
Elijah, than a whole Table-full of Ahab: Nothing is more comfortable to Gods
children then to see the sensible demonstrations of the divine care, and
providence.

The brook Cherith cannot last always; that stream shall not for Elijahs
sake be exempted from the universal exsiccation; Yea the Prophet himself
feels the smart of this drought, which he had denounced; It is no unusual
thing with God to suffer his own dear children to be inwrapped in the common
calamities of offenders: He makes difference in the use, and issue of their
stripes, not in the infliction; The corn is cut down with the weeds, but to a
better purpose.

When the brook fails God has a Zarephath for Elijah; In stead of the
Ravens, a Widow shall there feed him; yea her self by him: Who can enough
wonder at the pitch of this selectiue providence of the Almighty; Zarephath
was a town of Sidon, and and therefore without the pale of the Church;
Poverty was the best of this Widow, she was a Pagan by birth, heathnishly
superstitious by institution; Many Widows were in Israel in the days of
Elijah when the heaven was shut up three years, and six months, when great
famine was throughout all the land, but unto none of them was Elias sent, save
unto this Sarepta, a City of Sidon, unto a woman that was a widow; He that
first fed the Prophet by the mouth of unclean fowls, will now feed him by the
hand of an heathenish Hostess: His only command sanctifies those creatures
which by a general charge were legally impure.

There were other birds besides Ravens, other widows besides this Sareptan;
none but the Ravens, none but the Sareptan shall nourish Elijah. Gods choice is
not led in the string of humane reason; his holy will is the guide, and the
ground of all his elections. It is not in him that wills, nor in him that runs,
but in God that shows mercy.

The Prophet follows the call of his God; the same hand that brought him to
the gate of Sarepta, led also this poor widow out of her doors; she shall
then go to seek her sticks, when she shall be found of Elijah; she thought of
her hearth, she thought not of a Prophet; when the man of God calls to her,
Fetch me a little water (I pray thee) in a vessel, that I may drink. It was
no easy suit in so droughtie a season; and yet, at the first sight, the
Prophet dares second it with a greater; Bring me a morsel of bread in thine
hand; That long drought had made every drop, every crum precious; yet the
Prophet is emboldened by the charge of God to call for both water and bread; He
had found the Ravens so officious, that he cannot make doubt of the Sareptan:
She sticks not at the water; she would not stick at the bread, if necessity
had not pressed her; As the Lord thy God lives, I have not a cake, but an
handful of meal in a barrel, and a little oil in a cruse; and behold I am
gathering two sticks, that I may go in and dress it for me and my son, that
we may eat it and dye.

If she knew not the man, how did she know his God? and if she knew not the God
of Elijah, how did she swear by him? Certainly though she were without the
bounds of Israel, yet she was within the borders; so much she had gained by
her neighborhood; to know an Israelite, a Prophet by his habit; to know the
only living God was the God of the Prophet, the God of Israel; and if this had
not been, it is no marvel if the widow knew Elijah, since the Ravens knew
him. It was high time for the Prophet to visit the Sareptan; pooresoule, she
was now making her last meal; after one mean morsel she was yielding her
self over to death. How oportunely has God provided succors to our
distresses? It is his glory to help at a pinch; to begin where we have given
over: that our relief might be so much the more welcome, by how much it is
less looked for.

But oh, what a trial is this of the faith of a weak Proselyte, if she were
so much; Fear not, go do as thou have said; but make me thereof a little
cake first; and bring it to me, and after make for thee, and thy son; For,
thus says the God of Israel; The barrel of meal shall not waste, nor the
cruse of oil fail till the day that God send rain upon the earth; She must
go spend upon a stranger part of that little she has, in hope of more which
she has not, which she may have; she must part with her present food, which
she saw, in trust of future which she could not see; she must rob her sense in
the exercise of her belief; and shorten her life in being, upon the hope of a
protraction of it, in promise; she must believe God will miraculously increase
what she has yielded to consume; she must first feed the stranger with her
last victuals, and then after her self, and her son; Some sharp dame would
have shaken up the Prophet, and have sent him away with an angry repulse: Bold
Israelite, there is no reason in this request, were thou a friend, or a
brother, with what face could thou require to pull my last bit out of my
mouth? Had I superfluity of provision, thou might hope for this effect of
my charity; now, that I have but one morsel for my self, and my son, this
is an injurious importunity; what can induce thee to think thy life (an
unknown traveler) should be more dear to me, than my sons, than my own?
How uncivil is this motion that I should first make provision for thee, in
this dying extremity? It had been too much to have begged my last scraps;
Thou tellest me the meal shall not waste, nor the oil fail; how shall I
believe thee? Let me see that done, before thou eatest; In vain should I
challenge thee when the remainder of my poor store is consumed; If thou can
so easily multiply victuals, how is it that thou want? Do that beforehand,
which thou promisest shall be afterward performed, there will be no need of my
little. But this good Sareptan was wrought by God not to mistrust a Prophet; she
will do what he bids, and hope for what he promises; she will live by faith
rather than by sense; and give away the present, in the confidence of a future
remuneration; first, she bakes Elijahs cake, than her own; not grudging to
see her last morsels go down another throat, whiles her self was famishing.
How hard precepts does God lay where he intends bounty; Had not God meant her
preservation, he had suffered her to eat her last cake alone, without any
interpellation: now the mercy of the Almighty purposing as well this
miraculous favor to her, as to his Prophet, requires of her this task, which
flesh and blood would have thought unreasonable. So we are wont to put hard
questions to those scholars, whom we would promote to higher forms. So in all
atchieuements the difficulty of the enterprise makes way for the glory of the
actor.

Happy was it for this widow, that she did not shut her hand to the man of God;
that she was no niggard of her last handful; Never corn or olive did so
increase in growing, as here in consuming; This barrel, this cruse of hers had
no bottom; the barrel of meal wasted not, the cruse of oil failed not;
Behold, not getting, not saving, is the way to abundance, but giving. The mercy
of God crowns our benificence with the blessing of store; who can fear want
by a merciful liberality, when he sees the Sareptan had famished, if she had
not given, and by giving, abounded? With what thankful devotion must this
woman every day needs look upon her barrel, and cruse, wherein she saw the
mercy of God renewed to her continually? Doubtless her soul was no less fed
by faith, than her body with this supernatural provision. How welcome a guest
must Elijah needs be to this widow, that gave her life and her sons to her,
for his board? yea, that in that woeful famine gave her and her son their board
for his house-roome.

The dearth thus overcome, the mother looks hopefully upon her only son,
promising her self much joy in his life and prosperity; when an inexpected
sickness surprizeth him, and does that which the famine but threatened; When
can we hold our selves secure from evils? no sooner is one of these Sergeants
compounded withal, than we are arrested by another.

How ready we are to mistake the grounds of our afflictions; and to cast them
upon false causes; The passionate mother cannot find whither to impute the
death of her son, but to the presence of Elijah; to whom she comes
distracted with perplexity, not without an unkind challenge of him from whom
she had received both that life she had lost, and that she had; What have I to
do with thee, O thou man of God, Art thou come to me to call my sin to
remembrance, and to slay my son?

As if her son could not have died if Elijah had not been her guest; when as
her son had died, but for him; why should she think that the Prophet had
saved him from the famine, to kill him with sickness? As if God had not been
free in his actions; and must needs strike by the same hands, by which he
preserved; She had the grace to know that her affliction was for her sin; yet
was so unwise, to imagine the arerages of her iniquities had not been called
for, if Elijah had not been the remembrancer; He, who had appeased God
toward her, is suspected to have incensed him; This wrongful mis-construction
was enough to move any patience; Elijah was of an hot spirit; yet his holiness
kept him from fury; This challenge rather increased the zeal of his prayer,
than stirred his choler to the offendent: He takes the dead child out of his
mothers bosom, and lays him upon his own bed, and cries unto the Lord; Oh
Lord my God, have thou brought evil also upon the Widow with whom I soiourne,
by slaying her son? In stead of chiding the Sareptan, out of the feruency of
his soul, he humbly expostulates with his God: His only remedy is in his
prayer; that which shut heaven for rain, must open it for life. Every word
inforceth; First he pleads his interest in God; Oh Lord my God; then the
quality of the patient; a Widow, and therefore, both most distressed with the
loss, and most peculiar to the charge of the Almighty. Then, his interest, as
in God, so in this patient; with whom I soiourne; as if the stroke were given
to himself, through her sides; and lastly, the quality of the punishment, By
slaying her son, the only comfort of her life; and in all these, implying the
scandal, that must needs arise from this event, where ever it should be
noised, to the name of his God, to his own; when it should be said; Lo how
Elijahs entertainment is rewarded; Surely the Prophet is either impotent, or
unthankful.

Neither does his tongue move thus only; Thrice does he stretch himself upon
the dead body; as if he could wish to infuse of his own life into the child;
and so often calls to his God for the restitution of that soul: What can
Elijah ask to be denied? The Lord heard the voice of his Prophet, the soul of
the child came into him again, and he revived: What miracle is impossible to
faithful prayers? There cannot be more difference betwixt Elijahs devotion,
and ours, than betwixt supernatural and ordinary acts; If he therefore
obtained miraculous favors by his prayers, do we doubt of those which are
within the sphere of nature, and use? What could we want, if we did not slack
to plye heaven with our prayers?

Certainly Elijah had not been premonished of this sudden sickness, and death
of the child; He who knew the remote affairs of the world, might not know what
God would do within his own roof; The greatest Prophet must content himself
with so much of Gods counsel, as he will please to reveal; and he will
sometimes reveal the greater secrets, and conceal the less, to make good
both his own liberty, and man's humiliation. So much more unexpected as the
stroke was, so much more welcome is the cure; How joyfully does the man of God
take the revived child into his arms, and present him to his mother? How does
his heart leap within him, at this proof of Gods favor to him, mercy to the
widow, power to the child?

What life and joy did now show it self in the face of that amazed mother,
when she saw again the eyes of her son fixed upon hers; when she felt his
flesh warm, his motions vital? Now she can say to Elijah; By this I know
that thou art a man of God, and that the word of the Lord in thy mouth is
truth; Did she not till now know this? Had she not said before, What have I
to do with thee, o thou man of God? Were not her cruse, and her barrel
sufficient proofs of his divine commission? Doubtless what her meal and oil
had assured her of, the death of her son made her to doubt; and now the
reviving did reascertaine. Even the strongest faith sometimes staggereth, and
needs new acts of heavenly supportation; the end of miracles is confirmation
of truth; It seems had this widows son continued dead, her belief had
been buried in his grave: notwithstanding her meal and her oil, her soul
had languished: The mercy of God is feign to provide new helps for our
infirmities, and graciously condescends to our own terms, that he may work
out our faith, and salvation.

ELIjAH with the BAALITES.
THree yeeares and an half, did Israel lie gasping under a parching drought,
and miserable famine: No creature was so odious to them, as Elijah, to whom
they ascribed all their misery; Me thinks I hear how they railed on, and
cursed the Prophet; How much envy must the servants of God undergo for their
master? Nothing but the tongue was Elijahs, the hand was Gods; the Prophet did
but say what God would do: I do not see them fall out with their sins, that
had deserved the judgment, but with the messenger that denounced it; Baal had
no fewer servants than if there had been both rain, and plenty: Elijah safely
spends this storm under the lee of Sarepta; Some three years has he lien
close in that obscure corner, and lived upon the barrel, and cruse which he
had multiplied: At last, God calls him forth, Go show thy self to Ahab, and
I will send rain upon the earth; No rain must fall till Elijah were seen of
Ahab; He carried away the clouds with him, he must bring them again: The King,
the people of Israel, shall be witnesses that God will make good the word, the
oath of his Prophet; Should the rain have fallen in Elijahs absence, who could
have known it was by his procurement? God holds the credit of his messengers
precious, and neglects nothing that may grace them in the eyes of the world;
Not the necessity of seven thousand religious Israelites could crack the word
of one Elijah; There is nothing wherein God is more tender, than in approving
the veracity of himself in his ministers.

Lewd Ahab has an holy Steward; As his name was, so was he, a servant of God,
whiles his Master was a slave to Baal. He that referued seven thousand in the
kingdom of Israel, has reserved an Obadiah in the Court of Israel: and, by
him, has reserved them: Neither is it likely there had been so many free
hearts in the country, if Religion had not been secretly backed in the Court;
It is a great happiness when God gives favor, and honor to the Virtuous.
Elijah did not lie more close in Sarepta, than Obadiah did in the Court; He
could not have done so much service to the Church, if he had not been as
secret, as good; Policy and religion do as well together, as they do ill
asunder: The Dove without the Serpent is easily caught; the Serpent without the
Dove stings deadly; Religion without policy is too simple to be safe: Policy,
without religion, is too subtle to be good; Their match makes themselves
secure, and many happy.

Oh degenerated estate of Israel; any thing was now lawful there, saving
piety; It is well if Gods Prophets can find an hole to hide their heads in;
They must needs be hard driven when fifty of them are feign to crowd together
into one cave; There they had both shade and repast: Good Obadiah hazards his
own life to preserve theirs; and spends himself in that extreme dearth, upon
their necessary diet; Bread and water was more now, than other whiles, wine,
and delicates; Whether shall we wonder more at the mercy of God in reserving an
hundred Prophets, or in thus sustaining them being reserved; When did God ever
leave his Israel unfurnished of some Prophets? When did he leave his Prophets
unprovided of some Obadiah? How worthy art thou, o Lord, to be trusted with
thine own charge? Whiles there are men upon earth, or birds in the air, or
Angels in heaven, thy messengers cannot want provision.

Goodness carries away trust, where it cannot have imitation. Ahab diuides
with Obadiah the surucy of the whole land; They two set their own eyes on
work, for the search of water, of pasture, to preserve the horses, and mules
alive: Oh the poor and vain cares of Ahab; He casts to kill the Prophet, to
save the cattle; he never seeks to save his own soul, to destroy Idolatry; he
takes thought for grass, none for mercy: Carnal hearts are ever either
groueling on the earth, or deluing into it; no more regarding God, or their
souls, than if they either were not, or were worthless.

Elijah hears of the progress, and offers himself to the view of them both;
Here was wisdom in this courage; First, he presents himself to Obadiah, ere
he will be seen of Ahab; that Ahab might upon the report of so discreet an
informer, digest the expectation of his meeting; Then he takes the opportunity
of Ahabs presence, when he might be sure Iezebel was away.

Obadiah meets the Prophet, knows him, and (as if he had seen God in him)
falls on his face to him, whom he knew his master persecuted: Though a great
Peer, he had learned to honor a Prophet. No respect was too much for the
president of that sacred college; To the poor boarder of the Sareptan, here
was no less, than a prostration, and My Lord Elijah; from the great High
Steward of Israel; Those that are truly gracious cannot be niggardly of their
obseruances to the messengers of God.

Elijah receives the reverence, returns a charge; Go tell thy Lord, Behold
Elijah is here: Obadiah finds this lode too heavy; neither is he more stricken
with the boldness, than with the unkindness of this command; boldness in
respect of Elijah; unkindness in respect of himself: For, thus he thinks; If
Elijah do come to Ahab, he dies; If he do not come, I die; If it be known
that I met him, and brought him not, it is death; If I say that he will come
voluntarily, and God shall alter his intentions, it is death: How unhappy a man
am I, that must be either Elijahs executioner, or my own: Were Ahabs
displeasure but smoking, I might hope to quench it, but now that the flame of
it has broken forth to the notice, to the search of all the kingdoms, and
nations round about, it may consume me, I cannot extinguish it; This message
were for an enemy of Elijah; for a client of Baal; As for me, I have well
approved my true devotion to God, my love to his Prophets: What have I done,
that I should be singled out either to kill Elijah, or to be killed for him?
Many an hard plunge must that man needs be driven to, who would hold his
conscience together with the service, and favor of a Tyrant: It is an happy
thing to serve a just master; there is no danger, no strain in such obedience.

But, when the Prophet binds his resolution with an oath, and cleares the
heart of Obadiah from all fears, from all suspicions, the good man dares be
the messenger of that, which he saw was decreed in heaven: Doubtless Ahab
startled to hear of Elijah coming to meet him; as one that did not more hate,
than fear the Prophet. Well might he think; thus long, thus far have I
sought Elijah, Elijah would not come to seek me, but under a sure guard, and
with some strange commission; His course mantle has the advantage of my robe
and Scepter; If I can command a piece of the earth, I see he can command
heaven: The edge of his revenge is taken off with a doubtful expectation of
the issue: and now when Elijah offers himself to the eyes of Ahab; He who
durst not strike, yet durst challenge the Prophet, Art thou he that troubles
Israel? Ieroboams hand was still in Ahabs thoughts; he holds it not so safe to
smite, as to expostulate: He, that was the head of Israel, speaks out that
which was in the heart of all his people, that Elijah was the cause of all
their sorrow: Alas what has the righteous Prophet done? He taxed their sin,
he foretold the judgment; he deserved it not, he inflicted it not; yet he
smarts, and they are guilty: As if some fond people should accuse the herald or
the Trumpet as the cause of their war; or as if some ignorant peasant, when
he sees his fowls bathing in his pond, should cry out of them, as the causes of
foul weather.

Oh the heroical Spirit of Elijah! he stands alone a mids all the train of
Ahab, and dares not only repel this charge, but retort it; I have not troubled
Israel, but thou and thy fathers house, in that ye have forsaken the
commandments of the Lord, and thou have followed Baalim. No earthly glory can
daunt him who has the clear and heartning visions of God; This holy Seer
discernes the true cause of our sufferings, to be our sins; Foolish men are
plagued for their offenses; and it is no small part of their plague that they
see it not; The only common disturber of men, families, cities, kingdoms,
worlds, is sin; There is no such traitor to any state, as the wilfully wicked;
The quietest and most plausible offender is secretly seditious, and stirs
quarrels in heaven.

The true messengers of God carry authority even where they are maligned; Elijah
does at once reprove the King, and require of him the improuement of his power,
in gathering all Israel to Carmel, in fetching thither all the Prophets of
Baal. Baal was rich in Israel, whiles God was poor; Whiles God has but one
hundred Prophets, hid closely in Obadiahs caves, Baal has eight hundred and
fifty; four hundred and fifty dispersed over the villages and towns of
Israel, four hundred at the Court; Gods Prophets are glad of bread and water,
whiles the four hundred Trencher-Prophets of Iezebel feed on her dainties:
They lurk in caves whiles these Lord it in the pleasantest groves. Outward
prosperity is a false note of truth: All these with all Israel, does Elijah
require Ahab to summon unto Carmel. It is in the power of Kings to command the
assembly of the Prophets; the Prophet sues to the Prince for the indiction of
this Synod: They are injurious to Sovereignty who arrogate this power to none
but spiritual hands. How is it that Ahab is as ready to perform this charge,
as Elijah to move it? I dare answer for his heart, that it was not drawn with
love: Was it out of the sense of one judgment, and fear of another? he
smarted with the dearth and drought, and well thinks Elijah would not be so
round with him, for nothing: Was it out of an expectation of some miraculous
exploit which the Prophet would do in the sight of all Israel? Or, was it out
of the ouer-ruling power of the Almighty; The heart of kings is in the hand of
God, and he turns it which way soever he pleases.

Israel is met together, Elijah rates them, not so much for their superstition,
as for their vnsetlednes, and irresolution: One Israelite serves God, another
Baal; yea the same Israelite perhaps serves both God and Baal. How long halt ye
between two opinions? If the Lord be God, follow him; but if Baal, then follow
him; Nothing is more odious to God than a profane neutrality in maine
oppositions of religion; To go upright in a wrong way, is a less eyesore to
God, than to halt betwixt right and wrong; The Spirit wishes that the
Laodicean were either hot or cold; either temper would be better borne, than
neither, than both; In reconcilable differences nothing is more safe than
indifferency both of practice, and opinion; but in cases of so necessary
hostility, as betwixt God, and Baal, he that is on neither side is the
deadliest enemy to both; Less hateful are they to God that serve him not at
all, than they that serve him with a rival.

Whether out of guiltiness, or fear, or uncertainty, Israel is silent; yet
whiles their mouth was shut, their ears were open: It was a fair motion of
Elijah; I am only remaining a Prophet of the Lord, Baals Prophets are four
hundred and fifty; Let them choose one bullock, let me choose another; Their
devotion shall be combined, mine single; The God that consumes the sacrifice
by fire from heaven, let him be God; Israel cannot but approve it; the
Prophets of Baal cannot refuse it; they had the appearance of the advantage, in
their number, in the favor of King, and people. Oh strange disputation, wherein
the argument which must be used is fire; the place whence it must be fetched,
heaven; the mood and figure, devotion; the conclusion, death to the ouercomne.

Had not Elijah, by divine instinct, been assured of the event, he durst not
have put religion upon such an hazard; That God commanded him this trial, who
meant confusion to the authors of Idolatry, victory to the truth; His power
shall be approved both by fire and by water; first by fire, then by water;
There was no less terror in the fire, than mercy in the rain; It was fit they
should be first humbled by his terrors, that they might be made capable of his
mercy; and by both, might be won to repentance. Thus still the fears of the
law make way for the influences of grace, neither do those sweet and heavenly
dewes descend upon the soul, till way be mad^ for them by the terrible flashes
of the law.

Justly does Elijah urge this trial: Gods sacrifices were used to none but
heavenly fires; whereas the base and earthly religion of the heathen contented
it self with gross and natural flames.

The Prophets of Baal durst not (though with faint and guilty hearts) but
embrace the condition; they dress their bullock, and lay it ready upon the
wood; and send out their cries to Baal from morning until midday; O Baal
hear us; What a yelling was here, of four hundred and fifty throats, tearing
the skies for an answer? What leaping was here upon the altar, as if they
would have climbed up to fetch that fire, which would not come down alone?
Mount Carmel might give an Echo to their voice, heaven gave none; In vain do
they roar out, and weary themselves in imploring a dumb and deaf deity;
Grave and austere Elijah holds it not too ligh tto flout their zealous
devotion; he laughes at their tears, and plays upon their earnest; Cry
aloud, for he is a God, either he is talking, or he is pursuing, or he is
traveling, or he is sleeping, and must be awaked.

Scorns and taunts are the best answers for serious Idolatry; Holiness will
bear us out in disdainful scoffs, and bitterness against wilful
superstition; No less in the indignation at these insulting frumps, than zeal
of their own safety, and reputation, do these Idolatrous Prophets now rend
their throats with inclamations, and that they may assure the beholders they
were not in lest, they cut, and flash themselves, with knives, and lancers, and
solicit the fire with their blood; How much painfulnesse there is in
mis-religion? I do not find that the true God ever required or accepted the
selfe-tortures of his servants; He loves true inward mortification of our
corruptions, he loves the subduing of our spiritual insurrections, by due
exercises of severe restraint; he takes no pleasure in our blood, in our
carcasses: They mistake God that think to please him by destroying that
nature, which he has made; and measure truth by rigor of outward extremities;
Elijah drew no blood of himself, the Priests of Baal did; How feign would the
Devil (whom these Idolaters adored) have answered the suit of his suppliants?
What would that ambitious spirit have given, that as he was cast down from
heaven like lightning, so now he might have fallen down in that form upon his
altar?

God forbids it: All the powers of darkness can no more show one flash of fire
in the air, than avoid the unquenchable fire in hell: How easy were it for
the power of the Almighty to cut short all the tyrannical usurpations of that
wicked one, if his wisdom and justice did not find the permission thereof
useful to his holy purposes.

These Idolaters now toward evening, grew so much more vehement, as they were
more hopeless; and at last when neither their shrikes, nor their wounds, nor
their mad motions could prevail, they sit down hoarse and weary; tormenting
themselves afresh with their despaires, and with the fears of better success
of their adversary; When Elijah calls the people to him; (the witnesses of his
sincere proceedings) and taking the opportunity both of the time, (the just
hour of the evening sacrifice) and of the place, a ruined Altar of God, now by
him repaired, conuinces Israel with his miracle, and more ^uts these Baalites
with envy, than they had cut themselves with their lancers.

Oh holy Prophet, why did thou not save this labor? what needed these
unseasonable reparations? Was there not an altar, was there not a sacrifice
ready prepared to thine hand? that which the Prophets of Baal had addressed,
stood still waiting for that fire from thee, which the founders threatened in
vain: the stones were not more impure, either for their touch, or their
intentions; yet such was thy detestation of Idolatry, that thou abhorredst to
meddle with ought, which their wickedness had defiled: Even that altar whose
ruins thou did thus repair, was mis-erected; though to the name of the true
God; yet did thou find it better to make up the breaches of that altar, which
was mis-consecrated to the service of thy God, tha^ to make use of that pile,
which was idolatrously devoted to a false god; It cannot be but safe to keep
aloof from participation with Idolaters, even in those things which not only
in nature, but in use are unclean

Elijah lays twelve stones in his repaired altar, according to the number of
the Tribes of the Sons of Jacob: Alas, ten of these were perverted to Baal: The
Prophet regards not their present Apostacy; he regards the ancient covenant,
that was made with their Father Israel; he regards their first station, to
which he would reduce them: he knew that the unworthiness of Israel could
not make God forgetful: he would by this monument put Israel in mind of
their own degeneration, and forgetfulness. He employes those many hands for
the making a large trench round about the altar; and causes it to be filled
with those precious remainders of water, which the People would have grudged to
their own mouths; neither would easily have parted with, but (as those that
pour down a paile full into a dry pumpe) in the hope of fetching more. The
altar, the trench is full; A barrel full is poured out for each of the Tribes,
that every Tribe might be afterward replenished. Ahab and Israel are no less
full of expectation; and now, when Gods appointed hour of the evening
sacrifice was come, Elijah comes confidently to his altar, and looking up into
heaven, says, Lord God of Abraham, Isaac, and Israel, Let it be known this
day, that thou art God in Israel, and that I am thy Servant, and that I have
done all these things at thy word: Hear me, O Lord hear me, that this people
may know that thou art the Lord God, and that thou have turned their hearts
back again.

The Baalites prayers were not more tedious, than Elijahs was short; and yet
more pithie than short; charging God with the care of his covenant, of his
truth, of his glory. It was Elijah that spoke loud; Oh strong cries of faith,
that pierce the heavens, and irresistably make their way to the throne of
grace; Israel shall well see that Elijahs God whom they have forsaken, is
neither talking, nor pursuing, nor traveling, nor sleeping: Instantly, the
fire of the Lord falls from heaven and consumes the burnt sacrifice, the wood,
the stones, the dust, and lickes up the water that was in the trench; With what
terror must Ahab and Israel needs see this fire rolling down out of the sky,
and alighting with such fury so near their heads; heads no less fit for this
flame, than the sacrifice of Elijah; Well might they have thought, How easily
might this fire have dilated it self, and have consumed our bodies, as well as
the wood and stone, and have lick't up our blood, as well as that water? I know
not whether they had the grace to acknowledge the mercy of God, they could do
no less than confess his power, The Lord is God, The Lord is God.

The iron was now hot with this heavenly fire, Elijah stays not till it cool
again, but strikes immediately: Take the Prophets of Baal, let not one of them
escape. This wager was for life; Had they prevailed in procuring this fire, and
Elijah failed of effect; his head had been forfeited to them: now, in the
contrary success, theirs are lost to him. Let no man complain that those holy
hands were bloody; This sacrifice was no less pleasing to God, than that
other. Both the man and the act were extraordinary, and led by a peculiar
instinct; Neither does the Prophet this without the assent of the supreme
Magistrate; who was now so affected with this miraculous work, that he could
not in the heat of that conviction, but allow the justice of such sentence.
Far be it from us to accuse Gods commands or executions of cruelty; It was
the ancient and peremptory charge of God, that the authors of Idolatry and
seduction should dye the death; no eye, no hand might spare them: The Prophet
does but move the performance of that Law, which Israel could not without
sin have omitted. It is a merciful and thanke-worthy severity to rid the
world of the Ringleaders of wickedness.

ELIjAH running before AHAB, Flying from IEZEBEL.
I Hear no news of the four hundred Prophets of the Groves; They lie close
under the wing of Iezebel under their pleasing shades; neither will be
suffered to undergo the danger of this trial; the carkeises of their fellows
help to fill up the halfedry channel of K^shon; Justice is no sooner done
than Ahab hears news of mercy from Elijah; Get thee up, eat and drink, for
there is a sound of abundance of rain: Their meeting was not more harsh, than
their parting was friendly; It seems Ahab had spent all that day fasting in an
eager attendance of those conflicting Prophets; It must needs be late, ere the
execution could be done, Elijahs part began not till the evening; So far must
the King of Israel be from taking thought for the massacre of those four
hundred and fifty Baalites, that now, he may go eat his bread with joy, and
drink his wine with a cheerful heart: for God accepts this work, and
testifies it in the noise of much rain; Every drop of that Idolatrous blood
was answered with a shower of rain, with a stream of water, and plenty poured
down in every shower; A sensible blessing follows the impartial strokes of
severe justice: Nothing is more cruel than an unjust pity.

No ears but Elijahs could as yet perceive a sound of rain; the clouds were
not yet gathered, the vapors were not yet risen, yet Elijah hears that which
shall be: Those that are of Gods Council can discern either favors or
judgments afar off; the slack apprehensions of carnal hearts make them
hard to believe that, as future, which the quick and refined senses of the
faithful perceive as present.

Ahab goes up to his repast; Elijah goes up to his prayers: That day had been
painful to him, the vehemence of his spirit draws him to a neglect of his
body; The holy man climbes up to the top of Carmel, that now he may talk with
his God alone: neither is he sooner ascended, than he casts himself down
upon the earth: He bows his knees to God, and bows his face down to his
knees; by this humble posture acknowledging his awful respects to that Majesty
which he implored; We cannot prostrate our bodies, or souls, too low to that
infinitely-glorious Deity, who is the Creator of both.

His thoughts were more high than his body was low; what he said we know not,
we know that what he said opened the heavens, that for three years and an
half had been shut up; God had said before, I will send rain upon the earth;
yet Elijah must pray for what God did promise; The promises of the Almighty do
not discharge our prayers, but suppose them; he will do what he undertakes,
but we must sue for that which we would have him do: Our petitions are
included in the decrees, in the engagements of God.

The Prophet had newly seen and caused the fire to descend immediately out of
heaven, he does not look the water should do so; he knew that the rain must
come from the clouds, and that the clouds must arise from vapors, and those
vapors from the Sea, thence does he expect them: But as not willing that the
thoughts of his fixed devotion should be distracted, he does not go himself,
only sends his servant to bring him the news of his success: At the first
sight nothing appears: Seven times must he walk to that prospect; and not till
his last view can discern ought: All that while is the Prophet in his prayers,
neither is any whit daunted with that delay: Hope holds up the head of our holy
desires, and perseverance crowns it: If we receive not an answer to our suits
at the sixth motion, we may not be out of countenance, but must try the
seventh: At last, a little cloud arises out of the Sea, of an hand breadth; So
many, so fervent prayers cannot but pull water out of heaven as well as fire:
Those sighs reflect upon the earth, and from the earth reflect upon heaven,
from heaven rebound upon the Sea, and raise vapors up thence to heaven again;
If we find that our prayers are heard for the substance, we may not cavil at
the quantity; Even an hand-broad cloud contents Elijah, and fills his heart
full of joy and thankfulness; He knew well this meteor was not at the
biggest, it was newly borne of the womb of the waters, and in some minutes of
age must grow to a large stature; stay but a while, and heaven is covered with
it; From how small beginnings have great matters arisen? It is no otherwise in
all the gracious proceedings of God with the soul; scarce sensible are those
first works of his spirit in the heart, which grow up at last to the wonder of
men, and applause of Angels.

Well did Elijah know that God, who is perfection it self, would not defile
his hand with an inchoate and scanted favor: as one therefore that foresaw
the face of heaven ouer-spred with this cloudy spot, he sends to Ahab to hasten
his charet, that the rain stop him not; It is long since Ahab feared this let;
never was the news of a danger more welcome: Doubtless the King of Israel
whiles he was at his diet, looked long for Elijahs promised showers; where is
the rain whose sound the Prophet heard? how is it that his ears were so much
quicker, than our eyes? We saw his fire to our terror, how gladly would we see
his waters? When now the servant of Elijah brings him news from heaven, that
the clouds were setting forward, and (if he hastened not) would be before him:
The wind arises, the clouds gather, the sky thickens; Ahab betakes him to his
charet; Elijah girds up his loins, and runs before him: Surely the Prophet
could not want the offer of more ease in his passage; but he will be for the
time Ahabs lacquey, that the King and all Israel may see his humility no less
than his power, and may confess that the glory of those miracles has not made
him insolent. He knew that his very sight was monitorie; neither could Ahabs
mind be beside the miraculous works of God, whiles his eye was upon Elijah;
neither could the Kings heart be otherwise than well affected toward the
Prophet, whiles he saw that himself, and all Israel, had received a new Life
by his procurement. But what news was here for Iezebel? Certainly Ahab minced
nothing of the report of all those astonishing accidents: If but to salve up
his own honor, in the death of those Baalites, he made the best of Elijahs
merits; he told of his challenge, conflict, victory, of the fire that fell
down from heaven, of the conviction of Israel, of the unavoidable execution of
the Prophets, of the prediction and fall of those happy showers, and lastly of
Elijabs officious attendance. Who would not have expected that Iezebel should
have said; It is no striving, no dallying with the Almighty; No reasonable
creature can doubt, after so prodigious a decision; God has won us from
heaven, he must possess us: Justly are our seducers perished: None but the God
that can command fire and water shall be ours; There is no Prophet but his: But
she contrarily, in stead of relenting, rages; and sends a message of death,
to Elijah, So let the Gods do to me, and more also, if I make not thy life, as
the life of one of them by to morrow about this time: Neither scourges, nor
favors can work any thing with the obstinately wicked; All evil hearts are not
equally dis-affectd to good; Ahab and Iezebel were both bad enough, yet Ahab
yields to that work of God, which Iezebel stubbornly opposes; Ahab melts with
that water, with that fire, wherewith Iezebel is hardened: Ahab was bashfully,
Iezebel audaciously impious. The weaker sex is ever commonly stronger in
passion; and more vehemently carried with the sway of their desires, whether to
good or evil: She swears, and stamps at that whereat she should have
trembled. She swears by those gods of hers, which were not able to save their
Prophets, that she will kill the Prophet of God, who had scorned her gods, and
slain her Prophets.

It is well that Iezebel could not keep counsel: Her threat preserved him,
whom she had meant to kill: The wisdom and power of God could have found
euasions for his Prophet, in her greatest secrecy; but now, he needs no other
means of rescue, but her own lips: She is no less vain, than the gods she
swears by: In spite of her fury, and her oath, and her gods, Elijah shall
live: At once shall she find her self frustrate, and forsworn: She is now
ready to bite her tongue, to eat her heart for anger, at the disappointment of
her cruel Vow. It were no living for godly men, if the hands of Tyrants were
allowed to be as bloody as their hearts. Men and Devils are under the
restraint of the Almighty; neither are their designs more lavish, than their
executions short.

Holy Elijah flees for his life; we hear not of the command of God, but we
would willingly presuppose it; So divine a Prophet should do nothing without
God; His heels were no new refuge; As no where safe within the ten Tribes, he
flees to Beersheba, in the territories of Judah; as not there safe, from the
machinations of Iezebel, he flees alone (one days journey) into the
wilderness; there he sits him down under a Juniper tree, and (as weary of
life, no less than of his way) wishes to rise no more. It is enough now, O
Lord, take away my life, for I am not better than my Fathers: Oh strange and
uncouth mutation! What is this we hear? Elijah fainting and giving up? that
heroical spirit dejected, and prostrate? He that durst say to Ahabs face, It
is thou, and thy fathers house that troubles Israel; he that could raise the
dead, open and shut the heavens, fetch down both fire, and water, with his
prayers; he that durst chide and contest with all Israel, that durst kill the
four hundred and fifty Baalites, with the sword; does he shrink at the frowns
and threats of a woman? does he wish to be rid of his life, because he feared
to lose it? Who can expect an undaunted constancy from flesh and blood, when
Elijah fails? The strongest and holiest Saint upon earth is subject to some
qualmes of fear, and infirmity: To be always and unchangeably good, is proper
only to the glorious Spirits in heaven: Thus the wise and holy God will have
his power perfited in our weakness; It is in vain for us, whiles we carry
this flesh about us, to hope for so exact health, as not to be cast down
sometimes with fits of spiritual distemper. It is no new thing for holy men to
wish for death; Who can either marvel at, or blame the desire of advantage?
For the weary traveler to long for rest, the prisoner for liberty, the
banished for home, it is so natural, that the contrary disposition were
monstrous: The benefit of the change is a just motive to our appetition; but to
call for death, out of a satiety of Life, out of an impatience of suffering, is
a weakness unbeseeming a Saint: It is not enough, O Elijah; God has more
work yet for thee: thy God has more honored thee, than thy fathers, and thou
shall live to honor him.

Toil and sorrow have lulled the Prophet asleep, under his Juniper tree; that
wholesome shade was well chosen, for his repose: whiles death was called for,
the cozen of death comes unbidden: The Angel of God waits on him in that hard
lodging; no wilderness is too solitary for the attendance of those blessed
spirits; As he is guarded, so is he awaked by that messenger of God; and
stirred up from his rest, to his repast; whiles he slept, his breakfast is
made ready for him, by those spiritual hands; There was a cake baken on the
coals, and a cruse of water at his head: Oh the neuer-ceasing care and
providence of the Almighty, not to be barred by any place, by any condition;
when means are wanting to us, when we are wanting to our selves, when to God,
even then does he follow us with his mercy, and cast favors upon us, beyond,
against expectation: What variety of purueiance does he make for his servant?
One while the ravens, then the Sareptan, now the Angel shall be his Cator;
none of them without a miracle. Those other provided for him waking, this
sleeping; O God, the eye of thy providence is not dimmer, the hand of thy power
is not shorter; only teach thou us to serve thee, to trust thee.

Needs must the Prophet eat, and drink, and sleep with much comfort, whiles
he saw that he had such a guardian, attendant, purueiour; and now the second
time is he raised, by that happy touch, to his meal, and his way: Arise and
eat, because the journey is too great for thee. What needed he to travel
further, since that divine power could as well protect him in the wilderness,
as in Horeb? What needed he to eat, since he that meant to sustain him forty
days with one meal, might as well have sustained him without it? God is a
most free Agent, neither will be tied to the terms of humane regularities: It
is enough that he knows, and approues the reasons of his own choice, and
commands: Once in forty days and nights shall Elijah eat, to teach us what God
can do with little means: and but once, to teach us what he can do without
means: Once shall the Prophet eat, Man lives by bread; and but once, Man lives
not by bread only, but by every word that proceeds out of the mouth of God;
Moses, Elijah, our Savior fasted each of them forty days, and forty nights:
the three great fasters met gloriously in Tabor: I find not where God ever
honored any man for feasting; It is abstinence, not fullness, that makes a man
capable of heavenly visions, of divine glory.

The journey was not of it self so long; the Prophet took those ways, those
hours which his heart gave him: In the very same mount where Moses first saw
God, shall Elijah see him: one and the same cave (as is very probable) was the
receptacle to both; It could not be but a great confirmation to Elijah, to
renew the sight of those sensible monuments of Gods favor, and protection, to
his faithful predecessor. Moses came to see God in the bush of Horeb; God came
to find Elijah in the cave of Horeb: What do thou here, Elijah? The place
was directed by a providence, not by a command: He is hid sure enough from
Iezebel; he cannot be hid from the all-seeing eye of God. Whither shall I go
from thy Spirit? or Whither shall I fly from thy presence? If I ascend up into
Heaven, thou art there; if I make my bed in Hell, behold thou art there; If I
take the wings of the morning and dwell in the uttermost parts of the Sea, even
there shall thine hand find me, and thy right hand shall hold me: Twice has
God propounded the same question to Elijah: Once in the heart, once in the
mouth of the cave: Twice does the Prophet answer, in the same words: Had the
first answer satisfied, the question had not been re-demanded. Now, that
sullen answer which Elijah gave in the darkness of the cave is challenged into
the Light, not without an awful preface. The Lord first passes by him with
the terrible demonstrations of his power. A great and strong wind rent the
mountains, and brake the rocks in pieces; That tearing blast was from God,
God was not in it: So was he in it as in his other extraordinary works; not
so in it, as by it to impart himself to Elijah: it was the vshier, not the
carriage of God; After the wind came an Earthquake, more fearful than it: That
did but move the air, this the earth; that beat upon some prominences of
earth, this shook it from the Center; After the earthquake came a fire more
fearful than either. The other affected the ear, the feeling; but this lets
in horror into the Soul, by the eye, the quickest, and most apprehensiue of
the senses. Elijah shall see Gods mighty power in the earth, air, fire, before
he hear him in the soft voice; All these are but boystrous harbingers of a
meek, and still word; In that God was; Behold, in that gentle and mild breath
there was omnipotency; there was but powerfulness in those fierce
representations; There is not always the greatest efficacy where is the
greatest noise: God loves to make way for himself by terror, but he conuaies
himself to us, in sweetness: It is happy for us if after the gusts and
flashes of the Law, we have heard the soft voice of Evangelical mercy.

In this very mount, with the same horror had God delivered his Law to Moses
and Israel: It is no marvel if Elijah wrap his face in his mantle: His
obedience draws him forth to the mouth of the cave, his fear still hides his
head: Had there not been much courage in the Prophets faith, he had not stood
out these affrightfull forerunners of the divine presence, though with his
face covered: The very Angels do no less, before that all-glorious Majesty
than veil themselves with their wings: Far be it from us once to think of
that infinite, and omnipotent Deity, without an humble awfulnesse.

Fear changes not the tenor of Elijahs answer: He has not left one word
behind him in the cave: I have been very jealous for the Lord God of hosts,
because the children of Israel have forsaken thy Covenant, thrown down thine
Altars, and slain thy Prophets with the sword, and I, even I only, am left,
and they seek my life to take it away. I hear not a direct answer from the
Prophet to the demand of God; then he had said, I run away from the threats of
Iezebel, and here I hide my head from her malicious pursuit; His guiltiness
would not let him speak out all: He had rather say, I have been jealous for
the Lord God of Hosts, than, I was fearful of Iezebel: We are all willing to
make the best of our own case: but what he wants of his own accusation, he
spends upon the complaint of Israel. Neither does he more bemone himself,
than exclaim against them, as Apostates from Gods Covenant, Violaters of his
Altars, murderers of his Prophets: It must needs be a desperate condition of
Israel, that drives Elijah to indite them before the throne of God: That tongue
of his was used to plead for them, to sue for their pardon, it could not be but
a forceable wickedness, that makes it their accuser. Those Idolatrous Israelites
were well forward to reformation: The fire and rain from heaven at the prayers
of Elijah had won them to a scorn of Baal; only the violence of Iezebel
turned the stream, and now they are re-setled in impiety, and persecute him
for an enemy, whom they almost adored for a benefactor; otherwise, Elijah had
not complained of what they had been: Who would think it? Iezebel can do
more than Elijah; No miracle is so preualent with the vulgar, as the sway of
authority, whether to good, or evil.

Thou art deceived, O Elijah; Thou art not left alone; neither is all Israel
tainted; God has children and Prophets in Israel, though thou see them not;
Those clear eyes of the Seer discern not the secret store of God, they looked
not into Obadiahs caves, they looked not into the closets of the religious
Israelites; he that sees the heart, can say, I have left me seven thousand in
Israel, all the knees which have not bowed to Baal, and every mouth which has
not kissed him: According to the fashion of the wealthy, God pleases himself
in hidden treasures; it is enough that his own eyes behold his riches: Never
did he, never will he leave himself unfurnished with holy clients, in the midst
of the foulest deprauations of his Church: The sight of his faithful ones has
sometimes been lost, never the being: Do your worst, O ye Gates of Hell, God
will have his own; He that could have more, will have some: that foundation is
sure, God knows who are his.

It was a true cordial for Elijahs solitariness, that he had seven thousand
invisible abettors; neither is it a small comfort to our weakness, to have
companions in good: for the wickedness of Israel God has another receipt; the
oil of royal, and prophetical unction; Elijah must anoint Hazael king of
Syria, Iehu King of Israel; Elisha for his successor; All these shall revenge
the quarrels of God, and him; one shall begin, the other shall prosecute, the
third shall perfect the vengeance upon Israel.

A Prophet shall avenge the wrongs done to a Prophet: Elisha is found, not in
his study, but, in the field; not with a book in his hand, but a plough; His
father Shaphat was a rich farmer in Abel-Meholah, himself was a good husband;
traind up, not in the schools of the Prophets, but, in the thrifty trade of
tillage: and behold, this was the man, whom God will pick out of all Israel
for a Prophet; God sees not as man sees: Neither does he choose men because
they are fit, but therefore fits them, because he has chosen them; his call
is above all earthly institution.

I hear not of ought that Elijah said: Only he casts his cloak upon Elisha
in the passage; That mantle, that act was vocal: Together with this sign,
Gods instinct teaches the amazed son of Shaphat that he was designed to an
higher work, to break up the fallow grounds of Israel, by his prophetical
function; He finds a strange virtue in that robe; and (as if his heart were
changed with that habit) forgets his teme, and runs after Elijah; and sues for
the leave of a farewell to his Parents, ere he had any but a dumb command to
follow; The secret call of God offers an inward force to the heart, and
insensibly draws us beyond the power of our resistance: Grace is no enemy to
good nature; well may the respects to our earthly parents stand with our duties
to our Father in heaven. I do not see Elisha wring his hands and deplore his
condition, that he shall leave the world, and follow a Prophet, but for the joy
of that change, he makes a feast: those oxen, those vtensils of husbandry
whereon his former labors had been bestowed, shall now be gladly devoted to
the celebration of that happy day, wherein he is honored with so blessed an
employment; If with desire, if with cheerefulnes we do not enter into the works
of our heavenly Master, they are not like to prosper in our hands: He is not
worthy of this spiritual station, who holds not the service of God his
highest, his richest preferment.

Contemplations UPON THE OLD TESTAMENT.

The 19th. Book.

Wherein are Ahab and Benhadad. Ahab and Naboth. Ahab and Michaiah, or, the
death of Ahab. Ahaziah sick, Elijah revenged. The Rapture of Elijah. Elisha
Healing the waters, Cursing the Children, Releeuing the three kings. Elisha
with the Shunamite. Naaman and Elisha. Elisha raising the iron, blinding the
Syrians. The Famine of Samaria relieved.


TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, EDWARD, Lord DENNY, Baron of WALtham, my bountiful,
and dearly honored PATRON.
Right Honorable,
NOne can challenge so much right in these Meditations, as your Lordship, under
whose happy shade they received their first conception: Under this Juniper of
yours, have I (not driven by force, but drawn by pleasure) slept thus long,
sweetly, safely; and have received these Angelical touches: How justly may
your Lordship claim the fruits of your own favors? Your careful studies in
this book of God, are fit to be exemplary; which have so enriched you, that
your teacher shall gain. In this reach of divine thoughts, you shall see
Benhadads insolence taken down by Ahabs victory, an humble (though Id^^atrous)
Israelite carrying it from an insulting Pagan: You shall see in Ahab the
impotent passions of greatness, in Naboth, bleeding honesty; in Iezebel bloody
hypocrisy, cruel craft; plotting from hell, pretending from heaven: You shall
see the woeful success of an unjust mercy; Ahab forfaiting what he gave,
killed by him, whom he should have killed; You shall see resolute Michaiah
opposing the mercenary Synod of Prophets, a beaten victor, an imprisoned
freeman; You shall see Ahaziah falling through his grate; Elijah climbing up
his mount, mounting up to his glory; fetching fire from heaven, fetched by a
fiery charet to heaven. Elisha the heir of his mantle, of his spirit, no less
marvelous in his beneficences, in his reuenges. What do I foretell all? Me
thinks I feel my self now too like an Italian host, thus to meet your
Lordship on the way, and to promise beforehand your fare, and intertainment:
Let it please your Lordship rather to see and allow your cheer; Indeed the
feast is Gods, and not mine, wherein store strives with delicacie; If my
cookery hurt it not, it is enough: Through your hands, I commend it to the
world, as I do your Lordship, and my honorable good Lady to the gracious
protection of the Almighty; justly vowing my self

Your Lordships in all faithful observance for ever to command, IOS: HALL.

AHAB, and BENHADAD.
THere is nothing more dangerous for any state, than to call in foreign
powers, for the suppression of an homebred enemy; the remedy has often in this
case, proved worse than the disease. Asa King of Judah implores the aid of
Benhadad, the Syrian, against Baasha King of Israel. That stranger has good
color to set his foot in some out-skirttownes of Israel; and now these serve
him but for the handsell of more; Such sweetness does that Edomite find in
the soil of Israel, that his ambition will not take up with less than all;
He that entered as a Friend, will proceed as a Conqueror; and now aims at no
less than Samaria it self, the heart, the head of the ten Tribes: There was
no cause to hope for better success of so perfidious a League with an
Infidel: Who can look for other than war when he sees Ahab and Iezebel in
the throne, Israel in the groves and temples of Baalim? The ambition of
Benhadad was not so much guilty of this war, as the Idolatry of that wicked
nation; How can they expect peace from earth, who do wilfully fight against
heaven? Rather will the God of Hosts arm the brute, the senseless creatures
against an Israel, than he will suffer their defiance unrevenged. Ahab and
Benhadad are well matched; an idolatrous Israelite, with a paganish Idumaean;
well may God plague each with other, who means vengeance to them both. Ahab
finds himself hard pressed with the siege; and therefore is glad to enter
into treaties of peace; Benhadad knows his own strength; and offers insolent
conditions, Thy silver and thy gold is mine, thy wives also and thy children,
even the goodliest are mine. It is a fearful thing to be in the mercy of an
enemy; In case of hostility might will carue for it self: Ahab now after the
division of Judah, was but half a King; Benhadad had two and thirty Kings to
attend him; What equality was in this opposition? Wisely does Ahab therefore,
as a reed in a tem^^st, stoop to this violent charge of so potent an enemy: My
Lord, O King, according to thy saying, I am thine, and all that I have: It is
not for the ouer-powred to capitulate; Weakness may not argue, but yield.
Tyranny is but drawn on by submission; and where it finds fear, and
deiection, insulteth. Benhadad not content with the sovereignty of Ahabs goods,
calls for the possession; Ahab had offered the Dominion, with reservation of
his subordinate interest: he will be a tributary, so he may be an owner:
Benhadad imperiously besides the command, calls for the propriety; and suffers
not the King of Israel to enjoy those things at all, which he would in^oy but
under the favor of that predominancie. Ouer-strained subjection turns
desperate; if conditions be imposed worse than death, there needs no long
disputation of the remedy; The Elders of Israel (whose share was proportionably
in this danger) harten Ahab to a denial: which yet comes out so fearfully, as
that it appears rather exto^ted by the peremptory indignation of the people,
than proceeding out of any generosity of his Spirit: Neither does he say, I
will not, but, I may not. The proud Syrian (who would have taken it in foul
scorn to be denied, though he had sent for all the heads of Israel) snuffes
up the wind like a wild Ass in the Wilderness, and brags, and threats, and
swears; The gods do so to me, and more also, if the dust of Samaria shall
suffice for handfulls for all the people that follow me: Not the men, not the
goods, only of Samaria shall be carried away captive, but the very earth
whereon it stands; and this, with how much ease? No Soldier shall need to be
charged with more than an handful, to make a valley where the mother City of
Israel once stood: Oh vain boaster! in whom I know not whether pride or folly
be more eminent: Victory is to be achieved, not to be sworn; future events
are no matter of an oath; Thy gods (if they had been) might have been called
as witnesses of thy intentions, not of that success, whereof thou would be
the Author without them: Thy gods can do nothing to thee, nothing for thee,
nothing for themselves; all thine Aramites shall not carry away one corn of
sand out of Israel, except it be upon the soles of their feet, in their
shameful flight; It is well, if they can carry back those skins, that they
brought thither: Let not him that girdeth on his harness boast himself as he
that puts it off: There is no cause to fear that man that trusts in
himself: Man may cast the dice of war, but the disposition of them is of the
Lord.

Ahab was lewd, but Benhadad was insolent; If therefore Ahab shall be scourged
with the rod of Benhadads fear; Benhadad shall be smitten with the sword of
Ahabs revenge; Of all things God will not endure a presumptuous, and
selfe-confident vaunter; after Elijahs flight and complaint, yet a Prophet is
addressed to Ahab; Thus says the Lord, Host thou seen all this great
multitude? behold I will deliver it into thine hand, this day, and thou shall
know that I am the Lord: Who can wonder enough at this unweariable mercy of
God? After the fire and rain fetched miraculously from Heaven, Ahab had
promised much, performed nothing, yet again will God bless and solicit him
with victory; One of those Prophets whom he persecuted to death, shall comfort
his deiection with the news of deliverance and triumph: Had this great work
been wrought without premonition; either chance, or Baal, or the golden calves
had carried away the thanks: Before hand therefore shall Ahab know both the
Author and the means of his victory; God for the Author, the two hundred
thirty two young men of the Princes for the means; What are these for the
Vant-gard, and seven thousand Israelites for the maine battle, against the
troops of three and thirty Kings, and as many centuries of Syrians, as Israel
had single soldiers? An equality of number had taken away the wonder of the
event; bu^ now, the God of hosts will be confessed in this issue, not the
valor of men; How indifferent it is with thee, O Lord, to save by many, or by
few; to destroy many, or few? A world is no more to thee than a man; How easy
is it for thee to enable us to be more than Conquerours over Principalities and
Powers: to subdue spiritual wickednesses to flesh and blood? Through thee we
can do great things, yea we can do all things through thee that strengthnest
us; Let not us want faith, we are sure there can be no want in thy power or
mercy.

There was nothing in Benhadads pauilions but drink, and surfeit, and iollity;
as if wine should make way for blood; Security is the certain usher of
destruction: We never have so much cause to fear as when we fear nothing.
This handful of Israel dares look out (upon the Prophets assurance) to the
vast host of Benhadad: It is enough for that proud Pagan to sit still, and
command amongst his cups: To defile their fingers with the blood of so few,
seemed no mastery; that act would be inglorious on the part of the Victors:
More easily might they bring in three heads of dead enemies than one alive:
Imperiously enough therefore does this boaster out of his chair of state, and
ease, command, Whether they be come out for peace, take them alive; or whether
they be come out for war, take them alive; There needs no more, but, Take
them; this field is won with a word; Oh the vain and ignorant presumptions
of wretched men that will be reckoning without, against their Maker.

Every Israelite kills his man; the Syrians flee, and cannot run away from
death: Benhadad and his Kings are more beholden to their horses than to their
gods, or themselves for life and safety; else they had been either taken, or
slain, by those whom they commanded to be taken.

How easy is it for him that made the heart, to fill it with terror, and
consternation, even where no fear is? Those whom God has destined to
slaughter, he will smite; neither needs he any other enemy or executioner,
than what he finds in their own bosom: We are not the masters of our own
courage, or fears; both are put into us by that ouerruling power that created
us: Stay now, O stay, thou great King of Syria, and take with thee those
forgotten handfuls of the dust of Israel; Thy gods will do so to thee, and
more also, if thy followers return without their vowed burden; Learn now of
the despised King of Israel, from henceforth not to sound the triumph before
the battle, not to boast thy self in the girding on of thine harness, as in
the putting off.

I hear not of either the public thanksgiving, or amendment of Ahab. Neither
danger nor victory can change him from himself: Benhadad and he, though
enemies, agree in unrepentance; the one is no more moved with mercy, than the
other with judgment: Neither is God any changeling in his proceedings toward
both; his judgment shall still follow the Syrian, his mercy Israel: Mercy both
in fore-warning, and re-deliuering Ahab; Judgment in overthrowing Benhadad.
The Prophet of God comes again, and both foretells the intended re-encounter of
the Syrian, and aduises the care, and preparation of Israel: Go, strengthen
thy self, and mark, and see what thou do; for, at the return of the
year, the King of Syria will come up against thee: God purposes the
deliverance of Israel, yet may not they neglect their fortifications; The
merciful intentions of God toward them may not make them careless; The
industry and courage of the Israelites fall within the decree of their victory;
Security is the bane of good success; It is no contemning of a foiled enemy;
the shame of a former disgrace and miscarriage, whets his valor, and sharpens
it to revenge: No power is so dreadful, as that which is recollected from an
overthrow.

The hostility against the Israel of God may sleep, but will hardly die. If the
Aramites sit still, it is but till they be fully ready for an assault; Time
will show that their cessation was only for their advantage; neither is it
otherwise with our spiritual adversaries, sometimes their onsets are
intermitted; they tempt not always, they always hate us: their forbearance is
not out of favor, but attendance of opportunity; happy are we, if out of a
suspicion of their silence, we can as busily prepare for their resistance, as
they do for our impugnation.

As it is a shame to be beaten, so yet the shame is less, by how much the
victor is greater; to mitigate the grief, and indignation of Benhadads foil,
his parasites ascribe it to gods, not to men; an humane power could no more
have vanquished him than a divine power could by him be resisted; Their gods
are gods of the hills; Ignorant Syrians, that name gods, and confine them;
varying their deities according to situations; They saw that Samaria (whence
they were repelled) stood upon the hill of Shemer: They saw the temple of
Jerusalem stood upon mount Sion; they knew it usual with the Israelites to
sacrifice in their high places, and perhaps they had heard of Eliahs altar,
upon mount Carmel; and now they sottishly measure the effects of the power, by
the place of the worship; as if he that was omnipotent on the hill, were
impotent in the Valley; What doltish conceits does blind Paganism frame to it
self of a Godhead? As they have many gods, so finite; every region, every
hill, every dale, every stream has their several gods, and each so knows
his own bounds, that he dares not offer to incroach upon the other; or, if he
do, abuyes it with loss: Who would think that so gross blockishnesse should
find harbor in a reasonable soul? A man does not alter with his station; He
that wrestled strongly upon the hill, loses not his force in the plain; all
places find him alike active, alike valorous; yet these barbarous Aramites
shame not to imagine that of God, which they would blush to affirm of their
own champions. Superstition infatuates the heart out of measure; neither is
there any fancy so absurd or monstrous, which credulous infidelity is not
ready to intertaine with applause.

In how high scorn does God take it to be thus basely vnder-valued by rude
heathen? This very mis-opinion concerning the God of Israel shall cost the
Syrians a shameful, and perfect destruction; They may call a Counsel of
war, and lay their heads together, and change their Kings into Captains, and
their hills into valleys, but they shall find more graves in the plains, than
in the mountains; This very mes-prison of God shall make Ahab (though he were
more lewd) victorious; An hundred thousand Syrians shall fall in one day, by
those few hands of Israel; And a dead wall in Aphek (to whose shelter they
fled) shall revenge God upon the rest that remained; The stones in the wall
shall rather turn executioners, than a blasphemous Aramite shall escape
unrevenged. So much does the jealous God hate to be robbed of his glory, even
by ignorant Pagans, whose tongue might seem no slander. That proud head of
Benhadad, that spoke such big words of the dust of Israel, and swore by his
gods, that he would kill and conquer, is now glad to hide it self in a blind
hole of Aphek; and now in stead of questioning the power of the God of Israel,
is glad to hear of the mercy of the Kings of Israel; Behold, now, we have
heard that the Kings of the house of Israel are merciful Kings; Let us, I pray
thee, put sackcloth on our loins, and ropes on our heads, and go out to the
King of Israel, peradventure he will save thy life.

There can be no more powerful attractiue of humble submission, than the
intimation and conceit of mercy; We do at once fear, and hate the inexorable;
This is it, O Lord, that allures us to thy throne of grace, the knowledge of
the grace of that throne; with thee is mercy and plenteous redemption; thine
hand is open before our mouths, before our hearts; If we did not see thee
smile upon suitors, we durst not press to thy footstool; Behold now we know
that the King of heaven, the God of Israel, is a merciful God; Let us put
sackcloth upon our loins, and strew ashes upon our heads, and go meet the
Lord God of Israel, that he may save our souls.

How well does this habit become insolent, and blasphemous Benhadad and his
followers? a rope, and sackcloth? A rope for a crown, sackcloth for a robe;
Neither is there less change in the tongue, Thy servant Benhadad says, I pray
thee let me live; Even now the King of Israel said to Benhadad, My Lord, o
King, I am thine; Tell my Lord the King, all that thou did send for to thy
servant, I will do: Now, Benhadad sends to the King of Israel, Thy servant
Benhadad says, I pray thee let me live: He that was erewhile a Lord and King,
is now a servant; and he that was a servant to the King of Syria, is now his
Lord: he that would blow away all Israel in dust, is now glad to beg for his
own life at the door of a despised enemy; No courage is so haughty, which
the God of hoasts cannot easily bring under; What are men or Devils in those
almighty hands?

The greater the deiection was, the stronger was the motive of commiseration;
That halter pleaded for life; and that plea for but a life, stirred the bowels,
for favor; How readily did Ahab see in Benhadads sudden misery the image of
the instability of all humane things? and relents at the view of so deep and
passionate a submission. Had not Benhadad said, Thy servant, Ahab had never
said, My brother; seldom ever was there loss in humility; How much less can
we fear disparagement, in the annihilating of our selves, before that infinite
Majesty?

The drowning man snatches at every twig; It is no marvel if the messengers of
Benhadad catch hastily at that style of grace, and hold it fast, Thy brother
Benhadad; Favors are wont to draw on each other; Kindnesses breed on
themselves; neither need we any other persuasion to beneficence, than from our
own acts. Ahab calls for the King of Syria; sets him in his own charet; treats
with him of an easy (yet firm) league, gives him both his life, and his
Kingdom. Neither is the crown of Syria sooner lost, than recovered; Only he
that came a free Prince, returns tributarie: Only his train is clip't too
short for his wings; an hundred twenty seven thousand Syrians are abated of
his Guard, homeward. Blasphemy has escaped too well, Ahab has at once peace
with Benhadad, war with God; God proclaims it by his Herald, one of the
sons of the Prophets; not yet in his own form, but disguised, both in
fashion and complaint; It was a strange suit of a Prophet, Smite me I pray
thee; Many a Prophet was smitten, and would not; never any but this wished to
be smitten; The rest of his fellows were glad to say, Save me; this only
says, Smite me; His honest neighbor, out of love and reverence, forbeares to
strike; There are too many (thinks he) that smite the Prophets, though I
refrain; What wrong have thou done that I should repay with blows? Had thou
sued for a favor, I could not have denied thee; now thou suest for thine hurt,
the denial is a favor; Thus he thought; but Charity cannot excuse
disobedience; Had the man of God called for blows, (upon his own head) the
refusal had been just and thanke-worthy; but now that he says, In the word
of the Lord, Smite me, this kindness is deadly: Because thou have not obeyed
the voice of the Lord, behold, as soon as thou art departed from me a Lion
shall slay thee; It is not for us to examine the charges of the Almighty; Be
they never so harsh, or improbable, (if they be once known for his) there is
no way but obedience, or death. Not to smite a Prophet, when God commands, is
no less sin, than to smite a Prophet, when God forbids; It is the divine
precept or prohibition, that either makes or aggrauates an evil; And if the
Israelite be thus revenged, that smote not a Prophet, what shall become of
Ahab that smote not Benhadad? Every man is not thus indulgent; an easy request
will gain blows to a Prophet from the next hand; yea, and a wound in smiting.
I know not whether it were an harder task for the Prophet to require a wound,
than for a well-meaning Israelite to give it; Both must be done; The Prophet
has what he would, what he must will, a sight of his own blood; and now
disguised herewith, and with ashes upon his face, he waylayes the King of
Israel, and sadly complains of himself in a real parable, for dismissing a
Syrian prisoner delivered to his hands, upon no less charge than his life; and
soon receives sentence of death, from his own mouth; Well was that wound
bestowed that struck Ahabs soul through the flesh of the Prophet; The disguise
is removed; The King sees not a Soldier, but a Seer; and now finds that he
has unawares passed sentence upon himself. There needs no other doom than
from the lips of the offender: Thus says the Lord, Because thou have let go
out of thy hand, a man whom I appointed to utter destruction, therefore thy
life shall go for his life, and thy people for his people: Had not Ahab known
the will of God concerning Benhadad, that had been mercy to an enemy, which was
now cruelty to himself, to Israel: His cares had heard of the blasphemies of
that wicked tongue: His eyes had seen God go before him, in the example of
that revenge, No Prince can strike so deep into his state, as in not striking;
In private favor there may be public unmercifulness.

AHAB, and NABOTH.
NAboth had a fair vineyard; It had been better for him to have had none; His
vineyard yielded him the bitter Grapes of death. Many a one has bin sold to
death by his lands and goods; wealth has been a snare, as to the soul, so to
the life; Why do we call those goods, which are many times the bane of the
owner? Naboths vineyard lay near to the Court of Iezebel; it had been better
for him, it had been planted in the wilderness; Doubtless, this vicinitie
made it more commodious to the possessor; but more envious and unsafe: It was
now the perpetual object of an evil eye, and stirred those desires, which
could neither be well denied, nor satisfied: Eminency is still joined with
peril, obscurity with peace: There can be no worse annoyance to any
inheritance, than the greatness of an evil neighborhood: Naboths vines stood
too near the smoke of Iezebels chimneys: too much within the prospect of
Ahabs window; Now lately had the King of Israel been twice victorious over the
Syrians; no sooner is he returned home than he is overcome with evil desires;
The foil he gave was not worse than that he took: There is more true glory
in the conquest of our lusts, than in all bloody Trophies; In vain shall Ahab
boast of subduing a foreign enemy, whiles he is subdued by a domesticke enemy
within his own breast; Opportunity and Conuenience is guilty of many a
theft: Had not this ground lien so fair, Ahab had not been tempted: His eye
lets in this evil guest into the soul, which now dares come forth at the
mouth; Give me thy vineyard, that I may have it for a garden of herbs, because
it is near to my house, and I will give thee a better vineyard for it, or if
it seem good to thee, I will give thee the worth of it in money; Yet had Ahab
so much civility, and justice, that he would not wring Naboths patrimony out
of his hand by force, but requires it upon a fair composition, whether of
price, or of exchange: His government was vicious, not tyrannical; Propriety
of goods was inuiolably maintained by him; No less was Naboth allowed to
claim a right in his vineyard, than Ahab in his palace; This we owe to
lawful Sovereignty to call ought our own; and well worthy is this privilege
to be repaid with all humble and loyal respects. The motion of Ahab (had it
been to any other than an Israelite) had been as just, equal, reasonable, as
the repulse had been rude, churlish, inhumane. It is fit that Princes should
receive due satisfaction in the just demands, not only of their necessities,
but conuenience, and pleasure; well may they challenge this retribution to the
benefit of our common peace and protection; If there be any sweetness in our
vineyards, any strength in our fields, we may thank their scepters; Justly may
they expect from us the commodity, the delight of their habitation; and if we
gladly yield not to their full elbow-roome, both of site, and provision, we can
be no other than ungrateful; Yet dares not Naboth give any other answer to so
plausible a motion, than, The Lord forbid it me, that I should give thee the
inheritance of my Fathers: The honest Israelite saw violence in this
ingenuitie; There are no stronger commands, than the requests of the great; It
is well that Ahab will not wrest away this patrimony, it is not well that he
desired it; The land was not so much stood upon, as the law; One earth might be
as good as another; and money equivalent to either; The Lord had forbidden to
alien their inheritance: Naboth did not fear loss, but sin; What Naboth
might not lawfully do, Ahab might not lawfully require; It pleased God to be
very punctual, and cautelous, both in the distinction, and preservation of the
entireness of these Jewish inheritances; Nothing but extreme necessity might
warrant a fale of land, and that, but for a time; if not sooner, yet at the
Iubile, it must reuert to the first owner: It was not without a comfortable
signification, that whosoever had once his part in the land of Promise, could
never lose it; Certainly Ahab could not but know this divine restriction, yet
doubts not to say, Give me thy vineyard; The unconscionable will know no other
law but their profit, their pleasure; A lawless greatness hates all
limitations, and abides not to hear men should need any other warrant but will.

Naboth dares not be thus tractable; How gladly would he be quit of his
inheritance, if God would acquit him from the sin? Not out of wilfulness,
but obedience, does this faithful Israelite hold off from this demand of his
Sovereign; not daring to please an earthly King with offending the heavenly:
When Princes command lawful things, God commands by them; when unlawful, they
command against God; passive obedience we must give, active we may not; we
follow then as subordinate, not as opposite to the highest.

Who cannot but see and pity the straits of honest Naboth; Ahab requires what
God forbids; he must fall out either with his God, or his King: Conscience
carries him against policy; and he resolves not to sin, that he might be
gracious. For a world he may not give his vineyard: Those who are themselves
godless, think the holy care of others but idly scrupulous: The King of
Israel could not choose but see that only Gods prohibition lay in the way of
his designs, not the stomach of a froward subject; yet he goes away into his
house heavy and displeased; and casts himself down upon his bed, and turns
away his face, and refuses his meat; He has taken a surfeit of Naboths grapes
which marres his appetite, and threats his life: How ill can great hearts
endure to be crossed, though upon the most reasonable and just grounds? Ahabs
place called him to the guardianship of Gods Law; and now his heart is ready to
break that this parcel of that Law may not be broken: No marvel if he made
not dainty to transgress a local statute of God, who did so shamefully
violate the eternal Law of both Tables.

I know not whether the spleen, or the gall of Ahab be more affected; Whether
more of anger, or grief, I cannot say; but sick he is, and keeps his bed,
and balkes his meat, as if he should die of no other death, than the salads
that he would have had: O the impotent passions, and insatiable desires of
Covetousness! Ahab is Lord and King of all the territories of Israel; Naboth
is the owner of one poor Vineyard; Ahab cannot enjoy Israel, if Naboth enjoy
his Vineyard; Besides Samaria, Ahab was the great Lord Paramount of Damascus
and all Syria, the victor of him that was attended with two and thirty Kings;
Naboth was a plain townsman of Iezreel, the good husband of a little Vineyard;
Whether is the wealthier? I do not hear Naboth wish for any thing of Ahabs, I
hear Ahab wishing (not without indignation of a repulse) for somewhat of
Naboths: Riches and poverty is more in the heart, than in the hand; He is
wealthy that is contented; he is poor that wants more: Oh rich Naboth, that
carest not for all the large possessions of Ahab, so thou may be the Lord of
thine own Vineyard; Oh miserable Ahab, that carest not for thine own
possessions whiles thou may not be the Lord of Naboths Vineyard.

He that caused the disease, sends him a Physician; Satan knew of old how to
make use of such helpers; Iezebel comes to Ahabs bedside; and casts cold water
in his face, and puts into him spirits of her own extracting; Do thou now
govern the Kingdom of Israel? Arise, eat bread, and let thine heart be merry;
I will give thee the Vineyard of Naboth. Ahab wanted neither wit, nor
wickedness; Yet is he in both, a very nouice to this Zidonian dame. There
needs no other Devil, than Iezebel, whether to project evil, or to work it:
She chides the pusillanimity of her dejected husband, and persuades him his
rule cannot be free, unless it belicentious; that there should be no bounds
for sovereignty, but will; Already has she contrived to have by fraud and
force, what was denied to entreaty; Nothing needs but the name, but the seal
of Ahab; let her alone with the rest; How present are the wits of the weaker
sex for the devising of wickedness: She frames a letter in Ahabs name, to the
Senators of Iezreel, wherein she requires them to proclaim a fast, to suborne
two false witnesses against Naboth, to charge him with blasphemy against God
and the King, to stone him to death; A ready payment for a rich Vineyard: Whose
indignation rises not to hear Iezebel name a fast? The great contemners of
the most important Laws of God, yet can be content to make use of some divine,
both statutes, and customs, for their own advantage: She knew the Israelites
had so much remainder of grace, as to hold blasphemy worthy of death; She knew
their manner was to expiate those crying sins with pulike humiliation; She
knew that two witnesses at least must cast the offender; all these she vrges
to her own purpose. There is no mischief so deuillish, as that which is
cloked with piety: Simulation of holiness doubleth a villainy; This murder had
not been half so foul, if it had not been thus masked with a religious
observation; Besides devotion, what a fair pretense of legality is here?
Blasphemy against God and his anointed may not pass unrevenged; The offender
is conuented before the sad and severe bench of Magistracy; the justice of
Israel allows not to condemn an absent, an unheard malefactor; Witnesses come
forth, and agree in the intentation of the crime; the Judges rend their
garments, and strike their breasts, as grieved, not more for the sin than the
punishment; their very countenance must say, Naboth should not die, if his
offense did not force our justice; and now, he is no good subject, no true
Israelite, that has not a stone for Naboth.

Iezebel knew well to whom she wrote; Had not those letters fallen upon the
times of a woeful degeneration of Israel, they had received no less strong
denials from the Elders, than Ahab had from Naboth; God forbid that the Senate
of Iezreel should forge a perjury, belie truth, condemn innocence, broke
corruption: Command just things, we are ready to dye in the zeal of our
obedience, we dare not embrue our hands in the blood of an innocent.

But she knew whom she had engaged; whom she had marred by making conscious.
It were strange if they who can countenance evil with greatness, should want
factors for the vniustest designs. Miserable is that people whose Rulers (in
stead of punishing) plot, and encourage wickedness; when a distillation of
evil falls from the head, upon the lungs of any State, there must needs follow
a deadly consumption.

Yet, perhaps there wanted not some color of pretense for this proceeding;
They could not but hear, that some words had passed betwixt the King and
Naboth; Happily it was suggested, that Naboth had secretly ouer-lashed into
saucie and contemptuous terms to his Sovereign, such as neither might be well
borne, nor yet (by reason of their priuacy) legally convinced; the bench of
Iezreel should but supply a form to the just matter, and desert of
condemnation; What was it for them to give their hand to this obscure midwifery
of Justice? It is enough that their King is an accuser and witness of that
wrong, which only their sentence can formally revenge. All this cannot wash
their hands from the guilt of blood; If justice be blind, in respect of
partiality, she may not be blind in respect of the grounds of execution; Had
Naboth been a blasphemer, or a traitor, yet these men were no better than
murderers; What difference is there betwixt the stroke of Magistracy, and of
manslaughter, but due conviction?

Wickedness never spoke out of a throne, and complained of the defect of
instruments; Naboth was (it seems) strictly conscionable, his fellow Citizens
loose, and lawless; they are glad to have gotten such an opportunity of his
dispatch: No clause of Ahabs letter is not observed; A fast is warned, the
City is assembled, Naboth is conuented, accused, confronted, sentenced,
stoned. His vineyard is escheated to the Crown; Ahab takes speedy and quiet
possession: How still does God sit in heaven, and look upon the complots of
treachery, and villainies, as if they did not concern him: The success so
answers their desires, as if both heaven and earth were their friends. It is
the plague, which seems the felicity of sinners, to speed well in their lewd
enterprises; No reckoning is brought in the midst of the meal, the end pays
for all; Whiles Ahab is rejoicing in his new garden-plot, and promising
himself contentment in this commodious enlargement, in comes Elijah, sent from
God with an errand of vengeance. Me thinks, I see how the Kings countenance
changed; with what aghast eyes, and pale cheeks, he looked upon that unwelcome
Prophet; Little pleasure took he in his prospect, whiles it was clogged with
such a guest: yet his tongue begins first; Have thou found me, O mine enemy?
Great is the power of conscience: upon the last meeting (for ought we know)
Ahab and Elijah parted friends: The Prophet had lacquaied his coach, and took
a peaceable leave at this Towns end; now Ahabs heart told him (neither needed
any other messenger) that God, and his Prophet were fallen out with him; His
continuing Idolatry, now seconded with blood, bids him look for nothing but
frowns from heaven: A guilty heart can never be at peace; Had not Ahab known
how ill he had deserved of God, he had never saluted his Prophet by the name of
an enemy: He had never been troubled to be found by Elijah, if his own
breast had not found him out for an enemy to God; Much good may thy vineyard
do thee, O thou King of Israel, many fair flowers, and sauoury herbs may thy
new Garden yield thee; please thy self with thy Iezebel, in the triumph over
the carcass of a scrupulous subject; let me rather die with Naboth, than
rejoice with thee: His turn is over, thine is to come; The stones that
overwhelmed innocent Naboth, were nothing to those that smite thee; Host thou
killed, and also taken possession? Thus says the Lord, In the place where dogs
licked the blood of Naboth, shall dogs lick thy blood, even thine. What
meanest thou, O Elijah, to charge this murder upon Ahab? He kept his Chamber;
Iezebel wrote, the Elders condemned, the people stoned; yet thou say, Have
thou killed? Well did Ahab know, that Iezebel could not give this vineyard with
dry hands; yet was he content to wink at what she would do; He but sits still
whiles Iezebel works; Only his Signet is suffered to walk for the sealing of
this unknown purchase; Those that are trusted with authority, may offend no
less in conniuencie, or neglect, than others in act, in participation: Not
only command, consent, countenance, but very permission feoffes public
persons in those sins, which they might, and will not prevent. God loves to
punish by retaliation; Naboth and Ahab shall both bleed; Naboth by the stones
of the Iezreelites; Ahab by the shafts of the Aramites; The dogs shall taste of
the blood of both; What Ahab has done in cruelty, he shall suffer in justice;
The cause and the end make the difference happy on Naboths side, on Ahabs
woeful; Naboth bleeds as a Martyr; Ahab as a murderer: What ever is Ahabs
condition, Naboth changes a vineyard on earth, for a Kingdom in heaven. Never
any wicked man gained by the persecution of an innocent; Never any innocent man
was a loser by suffering from the wicked.

Neither was this judgment personal, but hereditarie; I will take away thy
posterity; and will make thine house like the house of Jeroboam: Him that
dies of Ahab in the City, the Dogs shalleat; and him that dies in the field,
shall the Fowls of the air eat; Ahab shall not need to take thought for the
traducing of this ill gotten inheritance; God has taken order for his heirs;
whom his sin has made no less the heirs of his curse, than of his body;
Their fathers cruelty to Naboth has made them, together with their mother
Iezebel, dogs-meat. The revenge of God does at last make amends for the delay;
Whether now is Naboths vineyard paid for?

The man that had sold himself to work wickedness, yet rues the bargain. I
do not hear Ahab (as bad as he was) revile or threaten the Prophet, but he
rends his clothes, and wears, and lies in sackcloth, and fasts, and walks
softly: Who that had seen Ahab would not have deemed him a true penitent? All
this was the visor of sorrow, not the face; or if the face, not the heart; or
if the sorrow of the heart, yet not the repentance: A sorrow for the judgment,
not a repentance for the sin: The very devils howl to be tormented; Grief is
not ever a sign of grace; Ahab rends his clothes, he did not rend his heart;
he puts on sackcloth, not amendment; he lies in sackcloth, but he lies in his
Idolatry; he walks softly, he walks not sincerely; Worldly sorrow causes
death; Happy is that grief for which the soul is the holier.

Yet, what is this I see? This very shadow of penitence carries away mercy; It
is no small mercy to defer an evil; Even Ahabs humiliation shall prorogue the
judgment; such as the penitence was, such shall be the reward; a temporary
reward of a temporary penitence: As Ahab might be thus sorrowful, and never
the better; so, he may be thus favored, and never the happier; Oh God, how
graciously art thou ready to reward a sound, and holy repentance, who art thus
indulgent to a carnal and servile deiection!

AHAB and MICAIAH: OR, The Death of AHAB.
WHo would have looked to have heard any more of the wars of the Syrians,
with Israel, after so great a slaughter, after so firm a league; a league not
of peace only, but of Brotherhood; The haltars, the sackcloth of Benhadads
followers were worn out, as of use, so of memory, and now they are changed for
Iron and steel. It is but three years that this peace lasts; and now that
war begins which shall make an end of Ahab: The King of Israel rues his
unjust mercy; according to the word of the Prophet, that gift of a life, was
but an exchange; Because Ahab gave Benhadad his life; Benhadad shall take
Ahabs; He must forfeit in himself what he has given to another. There can be
no better fruit of too much kindness to Infidels: It was one Article of the
league betwixt Ahab, and his brother Benhadad, that there should be a speedy
restitution of all the Israelitish Cities; The rest are yielded, only Ramoth
Gilead is held back, unthankfully, injuriously: He that begged but his life
receives his Kingdom, and now rests not content with his own bounds: Justly
does Ahab challenge his own, justly does he move a war to recover his own
from a perfidious tributary; the lawfulness of actions may not be judged by
the events, but by the grounds; the wise and holy arbiter of the world knows
why many times the better cause has the worse success: Many a just business
is crossed for a punishment to the agent.

Yet Israel and Judah were now peeced in friendship; Iehosaphat the good King of
Judah had made affinity with Ahab the Idolatrous King of Israel: and, besides a
personal visitation, ioynes his forces with his new Kinsman, against an old
confederate; Judah had called in Syria against Israel; and now Israel calls in
Judah against Syria: Thus rather should it be: It is fit that the more pure
Church should join with the more corrupt, against a common Paganish enemy.

Iehosaphat has matched with Ahab; not with a divorce of his devotion. He
will fight, not without God; Inquire I pray thee at the Word of the Lord, to
day: Had he done thus sooner; I fear Athaliah had never called him father;
This motion was news in Israel: It was wont to be said, Inquire of Baal; The
good King of Judah will bring Religion into fashion in the Court of Israel;
Ahab had inquired of his Counselors, What needed he be so devout, as to
inquire of his Prophets? Only Iehosaphats presence made him thus godly; It is
an happy thing to converse with the virtuous; their counsel and example cannot
but leave some tincture behind them of a good profession, if not of piety:
Those that are truly religious dare not but take God with them in all their
affairs; with him they can be as valiant, as timorous without him.

Ahab had Clergy enough, such as it was; Four hundred Prophets of the groves
were reserved from appearing to Elijahs challenge; these are now consulted by
Ahab; they live to betray the life of him who saved theirs. These care not so
much to inquire what God would say, as what Ahab would have them say; they saw
which way the Kings heart was bent, that way they bent their tongues: Go up,
for the Lord shall deliver it into the hands of the King: False Prophets care
only to please; a plausible falsehood passes with them above an harsh truth.
Had they seen Ahab fearful, they had said, Peace, Peace; now they see him
resolute, war and victory; It is a fearful presage of ruin when the Prophets
conspire in assentation.

Their number consent, confidence has easily won credit with Ahab; We do all
willingly believe what we wish: Iehosaphat is not so soon satisfied; These
Prophets were (it is like) obtruded to him (a stranger) for the true Prophets
of the true God: The judicious King sees cause to suspect them, and now
perceiving at what altars they served, hates to rest in their testimony; Is
there not here a Prophet of the Lord, besides, that we might inquire of him?
One single Prophet speaking from the Oracles of God, is more worth than four
hundred Baalites; Truth may not ever be measured by the poll. It is not number,
but weight that must carry it in a Council of Prophets: A solid Verity in one
mouth is worthy to preponderate light falsehood in a thousand.

Even King Ahab (as bad as he was) kept tale of his Prophets; and could give
account of one that was missing; There is yet one man ( Michaiah the son of
Imlah) by whom we may inquire of the Lord, but I hate him, for he does not
prophecy good concerning me, but evil. It is very probable that Micaiah was
that disguised Prophet, who brought to Ahab the fearful message of
displeasure, and death for dismissing Benhadad, for which he was ever since
fast in prison, deep in disgrace: Oh corrupt heart of self condemned Ahab: If
Micaiah spoke true to thee, how was it evil? If others said false, how was it
good? and if Micaiah spoke from the Lord, why do thou hate him? This has
wont to be the ancient lot of Truth, censure and hatred; Censure of the
message, hatred of the bearer. To carnal ears the message is evil, if
unpleasing; and if plausible, good: If it be sweet, it cannot be poison: if
bitter, it cannot be wholesome: The distemper of the receiver is guilty of this
mis-conceit: In it self every truth as it is good, so amiable; every falsehood
loathsome, as evil: A sick palate cries out of the taste of those liquors,
which are well allowed of the healthful. It is a sign of a good state of the
soul, when every verdure can receive his proper judgment.

Wise and good Iehoshaphat disswades Ahab from so hard an opinion, and sees
cause so much more to urge the consultation of Michaiah, by how much he finds
him more unpleasing: The King of Israel, to satisfy the importunity of so
great, and dear an allie, sends an Officer for Michaiah; He knew well (belike)
where to find him; within those four walls, where unjust cruelty had disposed
of that innocent Seer; Out of the obscurity of the prison, is the poor
Prophet fetched into the light of so glorious a Confession of two Kings; who
thought this Convocation of Prophets not unworthy of their greatest
representation of State and Majesty; There he finds Zedekiah, the leader of
that false crew, not speaking only, but acting his prediction: Signs were no
less used by the Prophets, than words; this arch-flatterer has made him
horns of iron; the horn is forceable, the iron irresistible; by an
irresistible force shall Ahab push the Syrians; as if there were more
certainty in this man's hands than in his tongue; If this son of Chenaanah
had not had a forehead of brass for impudency, and an heart of Lead for
flexiblenesse to humors, and times, he had never devised these horns of
iron; wherewith his King was goared unto blood: Howsoever, it is enough for him
that he is believed, that he is seconded; All the great Inquest of these
Prophets gave up their verdict by this foreman; not one of four hundred
dissented: Unanimity of opinion in the greatest Ecclesiastical assemblies is
not ever an argument of truth; There may be as common, and as firm agreement
in error.

The messenger that came from Micaiah, like a carnal friend, sets him in a way
of favor; tells him what the rest said, how they pleased; how unsafe it would
be for him to vary, how beneficial to assent: Those that adore earthly
greatness, think every man should dote upon their Idols; and hold no terms
too high for their ambitious purchases. Faithful Micaiah scorns the motion;
he knows the price of the world, and contemnes it, As the Lord lives, what
the Lord says unto me, that will I speak; Neither fears, nor favors can
tempt the holily resolute; They can trample upon dangers, or honors, with a
careless foot; and whether they be smiled, or frowned on by the great, dare
not either alter, or conceal their errand.

The question is moved to Micaiah; He at first so yields, that he contradicts;
yields in words, contradicts in pronunciation; The syllables are for them, the
sound against them: Ironies deny strongest in affirming; and now being pressed
home, he tells them that God had showed him those sheep of Israel should ere
long, by this means, want their Shepherd; The very resemblance, to a good
Prince, had been affectiue; The sheep is an helpless creature, not able
either to guard or guide it self; all the safety, all the direction of it, is
from the keeper; without whom, every curre chases and werries it, every tracke
seduceth it; Such shall Israel soon be, if Ahab be ruled by his Prophets; The
King of Israel does not believe, but quarrel; not at himself, who had
deserved evil, but at the Prophet, who fore-signified it, and is more careful
that the King of Judah should mark how true he had foretold concerning the
Prophet, than how true the Prophet had foretold concerning him.

Bold Micaiah, (as no whit discouraged with the unjust checks of greatness)
doubles his prediction, and by a second vision particularizeth the means of
this dangerous error; Whiles the two Kings sat maiestically in their thrones,
he tells them of a more glorious Throne, than theirs, whereon he saw the King of
Gods sitting; Whiles they were compassed with some hundreds of Prophets, and
thousands of Subjects, and Soldiers, he tells them of all the host of heaven,
attending that other Throne; Whiles they were deliberating of a war, he tells
them of the God of heaven justly decreeing the judgment of a deadly deception
to Ahab; This decree of the highest is not more plainly revealed, than
expressed parabolically: The wise and holy God is represented, after the manner
of men, consulting of that ruin, which he intended to the wicked King of
Israel; That increated, and infinite wisdom, needs not the advice of any
finite, and created powers, to direct him, needs not the assent, and aid of any
spirit for his execution; much less of an evil one; yet here an evil spirit
is brought in (by way of vision mixed with parable) profering the service of his
lie, accepted, employed, successful; These figures are not void of truth; The
action and event is reduced to a decree; the decree is shadowed out by the
resemblance of humane proceedings; All evil motions, and counsels are
originally from that malignant Spirit; That evil spirit could have no power
over men, but by the permission, by the decree of the Almighty; That
Almighty, as he is no Author of sin, so he ordinates all evil to good; It is
good that is just; it is just that one sin should be punished by another:
Satan is herein no other than the executioner of that God, who is as far from
infusing evil, as from not revenging it; Now Ahab sees the ground of that
applauded consent of his rabble of Prophets; one evil spirit has no less
deceived them, than they their master; he is one, therefore he agrees with
himself; he is evil, therefore both he, and they agree in deceit.

Oh the noble and undaunted spirit of Michaiah; neither the Thrones of the
Kings, nor the number of the Prophets could abate one word of his true (though
displeasing) message; The King of Israel shall hear, that he is misled by
liers, they by a devil; Surely Iehoshaphat cannot but wonder at so unequal a
contention; to see one silly Prophet affronting four hundred; with whom lest
confidence should carry it, behold Zedekiah more bold, more zealous; If
Michaiah have given him (with his fellows) the lie, he gives Michaiah the
fist: Before these two great Guardians of peace, and justice, swaggering
Zedekiah smites Michaiah on the face; and with the blow expostulates; Which way
went the Spirit of the Lord from me, to speak unto thee? For a Prophet to
smite a Prophet, in the face of two Kings, was intolerably insolent; the act
was much unbeseeming the person, more the presence; Prophets may reprove, they
may not strike; It was enough for Ahab to punish with the hand; no weapon was
for Zedekiah, but his tongue; neither could this rude presumption have been
well taken, if malice had not made magistracy insensible of this usurpation:
Ahab was well content to see that hated mouth beaten by any hand: It is no new
condition of Gods faithful messengers to smart for saying true. Falsehood does
not more bewray it self in any thing, than in blows; Truth suffers, whiles
error persecutes: None are more ready to boast of the Spirit of God, than those
that have the least; As in vessels, the full are silent.

Innocent Michaiah, neither defends, nor complains; It would have well
beseemed the religious King of Judah, to have spoken in the cause of the dumb,
to have checked insolent Zedekiah; He is content to give way to this tide of
peremptory, and general opposition; The helpless Prophet stands alone, yet
lays about him with his tongue, Behold, thou shall see in that day, when thou
shall go into an inner chamber, to hide thy self; Now the proud Baalite
showed himself too much; ere long he shall be glad to lurk unseen; his
horns of iron cannot bear off this danger. The son of Ahab cannot choose,
but in the zeal of revenging his fathers deadly seducement, call for that
false head of Zedekiah; In vain shall that impostor seek to hide himself
from justice; But, in the mean while, he goes away with honor; Michaiah with
censure. Take Micaiah, and carry him back to Amon, the Governor of the City,
and to Ioash the Kings son; and say, Thus says the King, Put this fellow in
prison, and feed him with bread of affliction, and with water of affliction,
until I come in peace.

An hard doom of Truth; The Iayle for his lodging; course bread and water for
his food, shall but reserve Micaiah for a further revenge. The return of Ahab
shall be the bane of the Prophet; Was not this he that advised Benhadad, not to
boast in putting on his Armor, as in the vngirding it; and does he now promise
himself peace and victory, before he buckle it on? No warning will dissuade
the wilful; So assured does Ahab make himself of success, that he threats
ere he go, what he will do when he returns in peace: How justly does God
deride the mis-reckonings of proud and foolish men; If Ahab had had no other
sins, his very confidence shall defeat him; yet the Prophet cannot be
overcome in his resolution; he knows his grounds cannot deceive him; and dare
therefore cast the credit of his function upon this issue; If thou return at
all in peace, the Lord has not spoken by me; And he said, Hearken, O people,
every one of you; Let him never be called a Prophet, that dare not trust his
God; This was no adventure therefore of reputation, or life; since he knew
whom he believed, the event was no less sure, than if it had been past; He is
no God that is not constant to himself; Has he spoken, and shall he not
perform? What hold have we for our souls, but his eternal word? The being
of God is not more sure, than his promises, than his sentences of judgment;
Well may we appeal the testimony of the world in both; If there be not plagues
for the wicked, If there be not rewards for the righteous, God has not spoken
by us.

Not Ahab only, but good Iehoshaphat is carried with the multitude; Their
forces are joined against Ramoth; The King of Israel does not so trust his
Prophets, that he dares trust himself in his own clothes; Thus shall he
elude Michaiahs threat; Iwis the judgment of God, the Syrian shafts cannot
find him out in this unsuspected disguise; How fondly do vain men imagine to
shift off the just reuenges of the Almighty?

The King of Syria gives charge to his Captains to fight against none, but the
King of Israel; Thus does the unthankful Infidel repay the mercy of his late
victor; Ill was that Snake saved, that requites the favor of his life, with a
sting; Thus still the greatest are the fairest mark to envious eyes. By how
much more eminent any man is in the Israel of God, so many more, and more
dangerous enemies must he expect; Both earth and hell conspire in their
opposition to the worthiest. Those who are advanced above others, have so much
more need of the guard, both of their own vigilance, and others prayers.
Iehoshaphat had like to have paid dear for his love; He is pursued, for him,
in whose amity he offended; His cries deliver him; his cries, not to his
pursuers, but to his God; whose mercy takes not advantage of our infirmity,
but rescues us from those evils, which we wilfully provoke: It is Ahab against
whom, not the Syrians only, but God himself intends this quarrel; The enemy
is taken off from Iehoshaphat: Oh the just and mighty hand of that divine
providence, which directs all our actions to his own ends; which takes order
where every shaft shall light; and guides the arrow of the strong Archer, into
the joints of Ahabs harness; It was shot at a venture, falls by a destiny; and
there falls, where it may carry death to an hidden debtor: In all actions, both
voluntary and casual, thy will, O God, shall be done by us, with what ever
intentions. Little did the Syrian know whom he had stricken, no more than the
arrow wherewith he stroke; An invisible hand disposed of both, to the
punishment of Ahab, to the vindication of Michaiab: How worthily, O God, art
thou to be adored in thy justice, and wisdom, to be feared in thy
judgments. Too late does Ahab now think of the fair warnings of Michaiah,
which he unwisely contemned; of the painful flatteries of Zedekiah, which he
stubbornly believed; That guilty blood of his runs down out of his wound,
into the midst of his charet, and paies Naboth his arerages: O Ahab, what art
thou the better for thine Iuory house, whiles thou have a black soul? What
comfort have thou now, in those flattering Prophets, which tickled thine ears,
and secured thee of victories? What joy is it to thee now, that thou wast
great? Who had not rather be Michaiah in the Iayle, than Ahab in the Charet?
Wicked men have the advantage of the way, godly men of the end; The Charet is
washed in the poole of Samaria, the dogs come to claim their due; they lick
up the blood of the great King of Israel; The tongues of those brute creatures
shall make good the tongue of Gods Prophet; Michaiah is justified, Naboth is
revenged, the Baalites confounded, Ahab judged; Righteous art thou O God in all
thy ways, and holy in all thy works.

AHAZIAH sick, and ELIJAH revenged.
AHaziah succeeds his father Ahab, both in his throne, and in his sin: Who
could look for better issue of those loins, of those examples? God follows
him with a double judgment; of the revolt of Moab; and of his own sickness:
All the reign of Ahab, had Moab been a quiet Tributarie; and furnished Israel
with rich flocks, and fleeces; now their subjection dies with that warlike
King, and will not be inherited; This rebellion took advantage, as from the
weaker spirits, so from the sickly body of Ahaziah; whose disease was not
natural, but casual; Walking in his Palace of Samaria, some grate in the
floor of his Chamber, breaks under him, and gives way to that fall, whereby
he is bruised, and languisheth; The same hand that guided Ahabs shaft, crackes
Ahaziahs lattesse; How infinite variety of plagues has the just God for
obstinate sinners? whether in the field or in the chamber, he knows to find
them out; How fearelesly did Ahaziah walk on his wonted pauement? The Lord
has laid a trap for him, whereinto, whiles he thinks least, he falls
irrecouerably; No place is safe for the man that is at variance with God.

The body of Ahaziah was not more sick, than his soul was graceless: None
but chance was his enemy, none but the God of Ekron must be his friend; He
looks not up to the Omnipotent hand of divine justice for the disease, or of
mercy for the remedy; An Idoli is his refuge, whether for cure, or
intelligence; We hear not till now of Baal-zebub; this new God of flies is
(perhaps) of his making, who now is a suter to his own erection; All these
heathen deities were but a Devil, with change of appellations; the influence
of that evil spirit deluded those miserable clients; else, there was no fly
so impotent as that outside of the God of Ekron; Who would think that any
Israelite could so far dote upon a stock or a Fiend? Time gathered much credit
to this Idol; in so much as the Jews afterward styled Beel-zebub, the Prince
of all the regions of darkness: Ahaziah is the first that brings his Oracle in
request, and paies him the tribute of his devotion; He sends messengers, and
says, Go enquire of Baal-zebub the god of Ekron, whether I shall recover of
this disease; The message was either idle, or wicked; idle, if he sent it to a
stock; if to a devil, both idle and wicked. What can the most intelligent
spirits know of future things, but what they see either in their causes, or in
the light of participation; What a madness was it in Abaziah to seek to the
posterne, whiles the foregate stood open? Could those evil spirits truly
foretell events no way pre-existent, yet they might not, without sin, be
consulted; the evil of their nature debarres all the benefit of their
information; If not as Intelligencers, much less may they be sought to, as
gods: who cannot blush to hear and see, that even the very Evangelical Israel
should yield Pilgrims to the shrines of darkness? How many, after this clear
light of the Gospel, in their losses, in their sicknesses, send to these
infernal Oracles, and damn themselves wilfully, in a vain curiosity; The
message of the Jealous God intercepts them, with a just disdain, as here by
Elijah, Is it not because there is not a God in Israel, that ye go to enquire
of Baal-zebub the god of Ekron? What can be a greater disparagement to the true
God than to be neglected, than to stand aside, and see us make love to an
hellish rival? were there no God in Israel, in heaven, what could we do
other? what worse? This affront of what ever Ahaziah cannot escape without a
revenge: Therefore thus says the Lord; Thou shall not come down from that
bed, on which thou art gone up, but shall surely die. It is an high indignity
to the true God, not to be sought to, in our necessities; but so to be
cashiered from our devotions, as to have a false god thrust in his room, is
such a scorn, as it is well if it can escape with one death: Let now the
famous god of Ekron take off that brand of feared mortality, which the living
God has set upon Ahaziah: Let Baal-zebub make good some better news to his
distressed suppliant: Rather the King of Israel is himself (without his
repentance) hasting to Beel-zebub. This errand is soon done; The messengers
are returned, ere they go: Not a little were they amazed to hear their secret
message from another mouth; neither could choose but think; He that can tell
what Ahaziah said, what he thought, can foretell how he shall speed; We have met
with a greater God than we went to seek; what need we inquire for another
answer; With this conceit, with this report, they return to their sick Lord,
and astonish him with so short, so sad a relation; No marvel if the King
inquired curiously of the habit, and fashion of the man, that could know this,
that durst say this; They describe him a man whether of an hairy skin, or of
rough, course, careless attire; thus dressed, thus girded; Ahaziah readily
apprehends it to be Elijah, the old friend of his father Ahab, of his mother
Iezebel: More than once had he seen him (an unwelcome guest) in the Court of
Israel; The times had been such, that the Prophet could not at once speak
true, and please; Nothing but reproves and menaces founded from the mouth of
Elijah; Michaiah and he were still as welcome to the eyes of that guilty
Prince, as the Syrian arrow was into his flesh; Too well therefore had Ahaziah
noted that querulous Seer, and now is not a little troubled to see himself (in
succession) haunted with that bold, and ill-boding spirit.

Behold the true son of Iezebel; the anguish of his disease, the expectation
of death cannot take off the edge of his persecution of Elijah; It is against
his will that his deathbed is not bloody: Had Ahaziah meant any other than a
cruel violence to Elijah, he had sent a peaceable messenger, to call him to
the Court, he had not sent a Captain, with a band of Soldiers, to fetch him;
the instruments which he uses, carry revenge in their face: If he had not
thought Elijah more than a man, what needed a band of fifty to apprehend one?
and if he did think him such, why would he send to apprehend him by fifty?
Surely Ahaziah knew of old how miraculous a Prophet Elijah was; what power that
man had over all their base Deities; what command of the Elements, of the
heavens; and yet he sends to attache him; It is a strange thing to see how
wilfully godless men strive against the stream of their own hearts; hating
that which they know good, fighting against that which they know divine; What a
gross disagreement is in the message of this Israelitish Captain? Thou man of
God, the King bath said, Come down; If he were a man of God, how has he
offended? and if he have justly offended the anointed of God, how is he a man
of God? And if he be a man of God, and have not offended, why should he come
down to punishment? Here is a kind confession, with a false heart, with
bloody hands: The world is full of these windy courtesies, real cruelties:
Deadly malice lurkes under fair complements, and whiles it flatters, kills.
The Prophet hides not himself from the pursuit of Ahaziah; rather he sits
where he may be most conspicuous, on the top of an hill; this band knows well
where to find him; and climbes up, in the sight of Elijah, for his arrest; The
steepness of the ascent (when they drew near to the highest reach) yielded a
conuenience both of respiration and parle; thence does the Captain imperiously
call down the Prophet. Who would not tremble at the dreadful answer of
Elijah, If I be a man of God, then let fire come down from heaven and consume
thee, and thy fifty; What shall we say? That a Prophet is reuengefull, that
Soldiers suffer whiles a Prophet strikes; that a Princes command is answered
with imprecation, words with fire, that an unarmed Seer should kill one and
fifty at a blow? There are few tracks of Elijah that are ordinary, and fit for
common feet; His actions are more for wonder, than for precedent: Not in his
own defense would the Prophet have been the death of so many, if God had not
by a peculiar instinct made him an instrument of this just vengeance; The
divine justice finds it mere to do this for the terror of Israel, that he
might teach them, what it was to contemn, to persecute a Prophet; that they
might learn to fear him whom they had forsaken, and confess that heaven was
sensible of their insolences, and impieties; If not as visibly, yet as
certainly does God punish the violations of his ordinances, the affronts
offered to his messengers still and ever: Not ever with the same speed;
sometimes, the punishment ouertakes the act; sometimes dogs it afar off, and
seizes upon the offender, when his crime is forgotten. Here, no sooner is the
word out of Elijahs mouth, than the fire is out of heaven: Oh the wonderful
power of a Prophet! There sits Elijah in his course mantle, on the top of the
hill, and commands the heavens, and they obey him, Let fire fall down from
heaven; He needs no more but say what he would have done; The fire falls down,
as before, upon the sacrifice in Carmel, so now upon the Soldiers of Ahaziah;
What is man in the hands of his Maker? One flash of lightning has consumed
these one and fifty; And if all the hosts of Israel, yea of the world, had
been in their rooms, there had needed no other force; What madness is it for
him whose breath is in his nosthrils, to contend with the Almighty? The time
was, when two zealous Disciples would feign have imitated this fiery revenge of
Elijah, and were repelled with a check; The very place puts them in mind of
the judgment: Not far from Samaria was this done by Elijah, and wished to be
done by the Disciples: So churlish a reiection of a Savior seemed no less
heinous, than the endeavor of apprehending a Prophet; Lord, will thou that we
command fire to come down from heaven, and consume them, as Elias did. The
world yielded but one Elias; That which was zeal in him, might he fury in
another; the least variation of circumstance may make an example dangerous;
presently therefore do they hear, Ye know not of what spirit ye are; It is
the calling that varies the spirit; Elijah was Gods minister for the execution
of so severe a judgment, they were but the Servants of their own impotent
anger; there was fire in their breasts, which God never kindled; far was it
from the Savior of men, to second their earthly fire, with his heavenly; He
came indeed to send fire upon earth; but to warm, not to burn; and if to
burn, not the persons of men, but their corruptions; How much more safe is it
for us to follow the meek Prophet of the New Testament, than that fervent
Prophet of the Old: Let the matter of our prayers be the sweet dewes of mercy,
not the fires of vengeance.

Would not any man have thought Ahaziah sufficiently warned by so terrible a
judgment: Could he choose but say, It is no meddling with a man that can speak
lightning and death; What he has said concerning me, is too well approved by
what he has done to my messengers; Gods hand is with him, mine shall not be
against him; Yet now, behold, the rage of Ahaziah is so much the more kindled
by this fire from heaven; and a more resolute Captain, with a second band, is
sent to fetch Elijah to death; This man is in haste; and commands not only his
descent, but his speed; Come down quickly: The charge implies a threat; Elijah
must look for force, if he yield not; There needs no other weapon for
defense, for offense, than the same tongue, the same breath; God has fire
enough for all the troops of Ahaziah: Immediately, does a sudden flame break
out of heaven, and consume this forward Leader, and his bold followers: It is a
just presage and desert of ruin, not to be warned: Worthily are they made
examples, that will not take them.

What Marble, or Flint is harder than a wicked heart? As if Ahaziah would
despightfully spit in the face of heaven, and wrestle a fall with the
Almighty, he will needs yet again set a third Captain, upon so desperate an
employment; How hot a service must this Commander needs think himself put
upon? Who can but pity his straits? There is death before him, death behind
him: If he go not, the Kings wrath is the messenger of death; if he go, the
Prophets tongue is the executioner of death; Many an hard task will follow the
service of a Prince wedded to his passion, divorced from God; Unwillingly,
doubtless, and fearfully does this Captain climb up the hill, to scale that
impregnable Fort; but now, when he comes near to the assault, the battery
that he lays to it, is his prayers; his surest fight is upon his knees; He
went up, and came, and fell upon his knees, before Elijah, and besought him,
and said unto him, O man of God, I pray thee, let my life, and the life of
these fifty thy servants, be precious in thy sight; he confesses the
judgment that befell his Predecessors; the monuments of their destruction were
in his eye, and the terror of it, in his heart; of an enemy therefore he is
become a suppliant, and sues not so much for the Prophets yeeldance, as for his
own life; This was the way to offer violence to the Prophet of God, to the God
of that Prophet, even humble supplications; We must deprecate that evil,
which we would avoid; if we would force blessings, we must entreat them;
There is nothing to be gotten from God by strong hand, any thing by suit. The
life of the Captain is preserved; Elijah is by the Angel commanded to go
down with him, speedily, fearelesly. The Prophet casts not with himself: What
safety can there be in this journey? I shall put my self into the hands of
rude Soldiers, and by them, into the hands of an enraged King; if he did not
eagerly thirst after my blood, he had never sought it, with so much loss; But,
so soon as he had a charge from the Angel, he walks down resolutely, and
(as it were) dares the dangers of so great an hostility: He knew that the
same God, who had fought for him, upon the hill, would not leave him in the
Valley; he knew that the Angel which bade him go, was guard enough against a
world of enemies. Faith knows not how to fear; and can as easily contemn the
suggestion of perils, as infidelity can raise them.

The Prophet looks boldly upon the Court; which doubtless was not a little
disaffected to him; and comes confidently into the bedchamber of Ahaziah; and
sticks not to speak over the same words to his head, which he had sent him
not long since by his first messengers; Not one syllable will the Prophet abate
of his errand; It is not for an Herald of heaven to be out of countenance; or
to mince ought of the most killing messages of his God.

Whether the inexpected confidence both of the man, and of the speech amazed
the sick King of Israel, or whether the fear of some present judgment
(wherewith he might suspect Elijah to come armed upon any act of violence that
should be offered) ouer-awed him; or whether now at the last, upon the sight
and hearing of this man of God, the Kings heart began to relent, and check it
self for that sin, for which he was justly reproved; I know not; but sure I
am, the Prophet goes away untouched; neither the furious purposes of Ahaziah,
nor the exasperations of a Iezebel can hurt that Prophet, whom God has
intended to a fiery Chariot; The hearts of Kings are not their own: Subjects
are not so much in their hands, as they are in their Makers: How easily can God
tame the fierceness of any creature, and in the midst of their most heady
careere, stop them on the sudden, and fetched them upon the knees of their
humble submission: It is good trusting God with the events of his own
commands; who can at pleasure either auert evils, or improve them to good.

According to the word of the Prophet, Ahaziah dies; not two whole years does
he sit in the throne of Israel; which he now must yield (in the want of
children) to his brother. Wickedness shortens his reign; he had too much of
Ahab, and Iezebel, to expect the blessing, either of length, or prosperity of
government: As always in the other, so oft-times in this world does God
testify his anger to wicked men; Some live long, that they may aggrauate their
judgment; others die soon, that they may hasten it.

THE RAPTVRE of ELIjAH.
LOng and happily has Elijah fought the wars of his God; and now after his
noble, and glorious victories, God will send him a Chariot of Triumph: Not
suddenly would God snatch away his Prophet without warning, without
expectation; but acquaints him before hand with the determination of his glory.
How full of heavenly joy was the soul of Elijah, whiles he foreknew, and looked
for this instant happiness; With what contempt did he cast his eyes upon that
earth which he was now presently to leave, with what rauishments of inward
pleasure did he look upon that heaven which he was to enjoy? For a meet
farewell to the earth, Elijah will go visit the schools of the Prophets,
before his departure: These were in his way; Of any part of the earth they were
nearest unto heaven; In an holy progress therefore he walks his last round,
from Gilgal, (near Jordan) to Bethel, from Bethel to Jericho, from Jericho to
Jordan again; In all these sacred Colleges of Divines, he meant to leave the
legacy of his love, counsel, confirmation, blessing. How happy a thing it is,
whiles we are upon earth to improve our time and gifts to the best behoof of
Gods Church? And after the assurance of our own blessedness, to help others
to the same heaven? But, O God, who can but wonder at the course of thy wise
and powerful administrations? Even in the midst of the degeneration, and
Idolatries of Israel have thou reserved to thy self whole societies of holy
Prophets; and out of those sinful and revolted Tribes, have raised the two
great miracles of Prophets, Elijah, and Elisha, in an immediate succession:
Judah it self under a religious Iehoshaphat, yielded not so eminent, and
clearly illuminated spirits: The mercy of our provident God will neither be
confined, nor excluded; neither confined to the places of public profession,
nor excluded from the depraved Congregations of his own people; where he has
loved, he cannot easily be estranged: Rather, where sin abounds, his grace
abounds much more; and raises so much stronger helps, as he sees the
dangers greater.

Happy was Elisha in the attendance of so gracious a master, and more happy
that he knows it: Feign would Elijah shake him off at Gilgal; if not there, at
Bethel; if not yet there, at Jericho. A private message (on which Elijah must
go alone) is pretended, from the Lord; Whether shall we say the Prophet did
this for the trial of the constant affection of his careful and diligent
servant, or, that it was concealed from Elijah that his departure was revealed
to Elisha: Perhaps he that knew of his own reception into heaven, did not know
what witnesses would be allowed to that miraculous act: and now his humble
modesty affected a silent and vn-noted passage; Even Elisha knew something
that was hid from his master, now upon the threshold of heaven: No mere
creature was ever made of the whole counsel of the Highest: Some things have
bin disclosed to babes and nouices, that have been closed up to the most wise
and judicious: In natural speculations the greater wit, and deeper judgment
still caries it; but in the revelations of God, the favor of his choice swaies
all; not the power of our apprehension: The master may both command and entreat
his servants stay, in vain; Elisha must be pardoned this holy and zealous
disobedience, As the Lord lives, and as thy soul lives, I will not leave
thee; His master may be withdrawn from him, he will not be withdrawn from
his master. He knew that the blessing was at the parting; and if he had
diligently attended all his life, and now slacked in the last act, he had lost
the reward of his service. The evening praises the day; and the chief grace of
the theater is in the last Scene; Be faithful to the death, and I will give
thee a Crown of life.

That Elijah should be translated, and what day he should be translated, God
would have no secret; The sons of the Prophets at Bethel, at Jericho, both
know it, and ask Elisha if he knew it not; Know thou that the Lord will
take away thy master from thy head this day? and he answered, Yea, I know it,
hold ye your peace. How familiarly do these Prophets inter-know one another?
How kindly do they communicate their visions? Seldom ever was any knowledge
given to keep, but to impart; The grace of this rich Jewel is lost in
concealment. The remouall of an Elijah is so important a business, that it is
not fit to be done without noise; Many shall have their share in his loss; he
must be missed on the sudden; it was meet therefore that the world should know
his rapture should be divine and glorious. I do not find where the day of any
natural death is notified to so many; by how much more wonder there was in
this Assumption, by so much more shall it be fore-reuealed. It is enough for
ordinary occurrents to be known in their event: supernatural things have need
of premonition, that men's hearts may be both prepared for their receipt, and
confirmed in their certainty. Thrice was Elisha entreated, thrice has he
denied, to stay behind his now-departing master; on whom both his eyes and his
thoughts are so fixed, that he cannot give allowance so much as to the
interpellation of a question of his fellow-Prophets: Together therefore are
this wonderful pair comne to the last stage of their separation, the banks
of Jordan. Those that were not admitted to be attendants of the journey, yet
will not be debarred from being spectators of so marvelous an issue; Fifty
men of the sons of the Prophets went and stood to view a far off; I marvel
there were no more; How could any son of the Prophets stay within his
Colledge-walls that day; when he knew what was meant to Elijah? Perhaps,
though they knew that to be the Prophets last day; yet they might think his
disparition should be sudden, and insensible; besides, they found how much he
affected secrecy in this intended departure: yet the fifty Prophets of Jericho
will make proof of their eyes, and with much intention assay who shall have
the last sight of Elijah; Miracles are not purposed to silence and obscurity;
God will not work wonders without witnesses; since he does them on purpose to
win glory to his name, his end were frustrate without their notice. Even so, O
Savior, when thou had raised thy self from the dead, thou would be seen
of more than five hundred brethren at once; and when thou would raise up thy
glorified body from earth into heaven, thou did not ascend from some close
valley, but from the mount of Olives; not in the night, not alone, but in the
clear day, in the view of many eyes; which were so fixed upon that point of
thine heaven, that they could scarce be removed by the check of Angels.

Jordan must be crossed by Elijah in his way to heaven: There must be a meet
parallel betwixt the two great Prophets, that shall meet Christ upon Tabor;
Moses and Elias; Both received visions on Horeb, to both God appeared there in
fire, and other forms of terror; both were sent to Kings; one to Pharaoh, the
other to Ahab; Both prepared miraculous Tables, the one of Quails and Manna in
the Desert, the other of Meal and Oil in Sarepta; Both opened heaven, the one
for that nourishing dew, the other for those refreshing showers; Both revenged
Idolatries with the sword, the one upon the worshippers of the golden Calfe,
the other upon the four hundred Baalites; Both quenched the drought of Israel,
the one out of the Rock, the other out of the Cloud; Both divided the waters,
the one of the Red sea, the other of Jordan: Both of them are forewarned of
their departure; Both must be fetched away beyond Jordan; The body of Elijah is
translated, the body of Moses is hid: What Moses does by his Rod, Elijah does
by his Mantle; with that he smites the waters, and they (as fearing the divine
power which wrought with the Prophet) run away from him; and stand on heaps,
leaving their dry channel for the passage of those awful feet: It is not long
since he mulcted them with a general exsiccation; now he only bids them stand
aside, and give way to his last walk; that he might with dry feet mount up into
the celestial chariot.

The waters do not now first obey him; they know that mantle of old; which
has often given laws to their falling, rising, standing: they are past over;
and now when Elijah finds himself treading on his last earth, he profers a
munificent boon to his faithful servant, Ask what I shall do for thee
before I am taken from thee; I do not hear him say, Ask of me when I am
gone, In my glorified condition, I shall be more able to bestead thee; but ask
before I go. We have a communion with the Saints departed, not a commerce;
when they are enabled to do more for us, they are less apt to be solicited by
us; It is safe suing where we are sure that we are heard. Had not Elijah
received a peculiar instinct for this profer, he had not been thus liberal:
It were presumption to be bountiful on another cost, without leave of the
owner; The mercy of our good God allows his favorites not only to receive,
but to give; not only to receive for themselves, but to convey blessings to
others; What can that man want that is befriended of the faithful?

Elisha needs not go far to seek for a suit; It was in his heart, in his
mouth; Let a double portion of thy spirit be upon me. Every Prophet must be a
son to Elijah; but Elisha would be his heir, and craves the happy right of
his primogeniture, the double share to his brethren: It was not wealth, nor
safety, nor ease, nor honor that Elisha cares for, the world lies open before
him, he may take his choice; the rest he contemns, nothing will serve him
but a large measure of his masters spirit; No carnal thought was guilty of
this sacred ambition; Affectation of eminence was too base a conceit to fall
into that man of God; He saw that the times needed strong conuictions, he saw
that he could not otherwise weild the succession to such a master, therefore he
sues for a double portion of spirit; the spirit of prophecy to foreknow, the
spirit of power to work; We cannot be too covetous, too ambitious of
spiritual gifts, such especially as may enable us to win most advantage to God
in our vocations. Our wishes are the true touchstone of our estate; such as we
wish to be, we are; worldly hearts affect earthly things, spiritual, divine;
we cannot better know what we are in deed, than by what we would be.

Elijah acknowledges the difficulty, and promises the grant of so great a
request: suspended yet upon the condition of Elishaes eyesight. If thou see
me when I am taken from thee, it shall be so unto thee; but if not, it shall
not be; What are the eyes to the furniture of the soul? What power is there
in those visiue beams to draw down a double portion of Elijahs Spirit? God
does not always look at efficacy and merit in the conditions of our actions,
but at the freedom of his own appointments; The eye was only to be employed
as the servant of the heart; that the desires might be so much more intended
with the sight; Vehemence is the way to speed both in earth, and in heaven; If
but the eyelids of Elisha fall, if his thoughts slacken, his hopes are dashed;
There must be fixednesse and vigilancie, in those that desire double graces.

Elijah was going on, and talking, when the Chariot of heaven came to fetch
him; Surely, had not that conference been needful and divine, it had given way
to meditation; and Elijah had been taken up rather from his knees, than from
his feet; There can be no better posture, or state, for the messenger of our
dissolution to find us in, than in a diligent prosecution of our calling, The
busy attendance of our holy vocation is no less pleasing to God, than an
immediate devotion; Happy is the servant whom the master (when he comes) shall
find so doing.

Oh the singular glory of Elijah! What mortal creature ever had this honor to
be visibly fetched by the Angels of God to his heaven? Every soul of the elect
is attended and carried to blessedness by those invisible messengers, but,
what flesh and blood was ever graced with such a conuoy? There are three bodily
Inhabitants of Heaven; Henoch, Elijah, our Savior Christ. The first before the
Law; the second under the Law; the third under the Gospel; All three in a
several form of translation; Our blessed Savior raised himself to and above
the heavens, by his own immediate power; he ascended as the son, they as
servants; he as God, they as creatures; Elijah ascended by the visible
ministry of Angels; Henoch insensibly; Wherefore, O God, have thou done thus,
but to give us a taste of what shall be? to let us see that heaven was never
shut to the faithful; to give us assurance of the future glorification of this
mortal and corruptible part?

Even thus, O Savior, when thou shall descend from heaven with a shout, with
the voice of an Archangel, and with the trump of God, we that are alive and
remain shall be caught up together with the raised bodies of thy Saints, into
the clouds, to meet thee in the air, to dwell with thee in glory.

Many forms have those celestial Spirits taken to themselves in their
apparitions to men; but of all other, most often has the Almighty made his
messengers a flame of fire; never more properly thau here; How had the Spirit
of God kindled the hot fires of zeal in the breast of Elijah? How had this
Prophet thrice commanded fire from heaven to earth? How fitly now at last do
these Seraphicall fires carry him from earth to heaven?

What do we see in this rapture of Elijah, but violence and terror,
whirlewind and fire? two of those fearful representations which the Prophet
had in the rock of Horeb; Never any man entered into glory with ease; Even the
most favorable change has some equiualency to a natural dissolution. Although
doubtless to Elijah this fire had lightsomnesse and resplendence, not terror;
this whirlwind had speed, not violence; Thus have thou, O Savior, bidden us
when the Elements shall be dissolved, and the heavens shall be flaming about
our ears, to lift up our heads with joy, because our redemption draws nigh.
Come death, come fire, come whirlwind, they are worthy to be welcome that shall
carry us to immortality.

This arreption was sudden, yet Elisha sees both the Charet, and the horses,
and the ascent; and cries to his now changed master, between heaven and earth,
My father, my father, the charet of Israel, and the horsemen thereof. Shaphat
of Abel-meholah, has yielded this title to Elijah; the natural father of
Elisha, to the spiritual; neither of them may be neglected, but, after the
yoke of oxen killed at the farewell, we hear of no more greetings, no more
bewailings of his bodily parent; and now that Elijah is taken from him, he
cries out, like a distressed Orphane, My father, my father; and when he has
lost the sight of him, he rends his clothes in pieces, according to the fashion
of the most passionate mourners; That Elisha sees his master halfe-way in
heaven, cannot take away the sorrow of his loss; The departure of a faithful
Prophet of God is worthy of our lamentation; Neither is it private affection
that must sway our grief, but respects to the public; Elisha says not only,
My father, but the charet and horsemen of Israel. That we have forgone a
father, should not so much trouble us, as that Israel has lost his guard.
Certainly, the view of this heavenly charet and horses that came for Elijah,
puts Elisha in mind of that charet and horsemen, which Elijah was to Israel.
These were Gods charet, Elijah was theirs: Gods charet and theirs are upon the
same wheels mounted into heaven; No forces are so strong as the spiritual;
the prayers of an Elijah are more powerful than all the Armies of flesh; The
first thing that this Seer discernes, after the separation of his master, is,
the nakedness of Israel in his loss. If we muster Soldiers, and leese
zealous Prophets, it is but a woeful exchange.

Elijahs Mantle falls from him in the rising; there was no use of that, whither
he was going, there was, whence he was taken: Elisha justly takes up this dear
monument of his glorified master; A good supply for his rent garments; This was
it which (in presage of his future right) Elijah invested him withal, upon the
first sight, when he was ploughing with the twelve yoke of oxen; now it falls
from heaven to his possession; I do not fee him adore so precious a relic, I
see him take it up, and cast it about him; Pensive and masterlesse does he now
come back to the banks of Jordan, whose stream he must pass in his return
to the Schools of the Prophets. Ere while he saw what way that river gave to
the mantle of Elijah; he knew that power was not in the cloth, but in the
Spirit of him that wore it; to try therefore whether he were no less the
heir of that spirit, than of that garment, he took the mantle of Elijah and
smote the waters, and said, Where is the Lord God of Elijah? Elisha does not
expostulate, and challenge, but pray; As if he said, Lord God it was thy
promise to me by my departed master, that if I should see him in his last
passage, a double portion of his Spirit should be upon me: I followed him with
my eyes in that fire, and whirlewind; now therefore, O God, make good thy
gracious word to thy servant; show some token upon me for good; make this the
first proof of the miraculous power wherewith thou shall indue me; Let Jordan
give the same way to me, that it gave to my master. Immediately the stream (as
acknowledging the same Mantle, though in another hand) diuides it self, and
yields passage to the successor of Elijah.

The fifty sons of the Prophets having been a far off witnesses of these
admirable events, do well see that Elijah (though translated in body) has
yet left his Spirit behind him; they meet Elisha, and bow themselves to the
ground before him; It was not the outside of Elijah which they had wont to
stoop unto, with so much veneration, it was his Spirit; which since they now
find in another subject, they intertaine with equal reverence; No envy, no
emulation raises up their stomachs against Elijahs servant, but where they
see eminent graces, they are willingly prostrate. Those that are truly
gracious, do no less rejoice in the riches of others gifts, than humbly
undervalue their own; These men were trained up in the schools of the
Prophets, Elisha at the plough and cart, yet now they stand not upon terms of
their worth, and his meannesse, but meekely fall down before him whom God will
honor; It is not to be regarded who the man is, but whom God would make him;
The more unlikely the means is, the more is the glory of the workman: It is
the praise of an holy ingenuitie to magnify the graces of God where ever it
finds them.

These young Prophets are no less full of zeal, than reverence; zeal to
Elijah, reverence to Elisha; They see Elijah carried up into the air; they
knew this was not the first time of his supernatural remouall; Imagining it
therefore possible that the Spirit of God had cast him upon some remote
mountain, or valley, they profer he labor of their servants to seek him; In
some things, even professed Seers are blind: Could they think God would send
such a charet and horses for a less voyage tha^ heaven?

Elisha (knowing his master beyond all the sphere of mortality) forbids the^:
Good will makes them vnma^nerly; their importunity vrges him till he is
ashamed; not his approbation, but their vehemence carries at last a condescent;
Else he might perhaps have seemed enuiously unwilling to fetch back so admired
a master; and loath to forgo that mantle. Some things may be yielded for the
redeeming of our own vexatio^, and auoida^ce of others mis-constuctio^, which
out of true judgment we see no cause to affect.

The messengers tired with three days search, turn back as wise as they
went; some men are best satisfied, when they have wearied themselves in their
own ways; nothing will teach them wit, but disappointments. Their painful
error leads them to a right conceit of Elijahs happier transportation; Those
that would find Elijah, let them aspire to the heavenly Paradise; Let them
follow the high steps of his sincere faithfulness, strong patience, undaunted
courage, fervent zeal; shortly, let them walk in the ways of his holy and
constant obedience; at last, God shall send the fiery charet of death to fetch
them up to that heaven of heavens, where they shall triumph in everlasting
joys.

ELISHA Healing the Waters. Cursing the Children. Releeuing the Kings.

IT is good making use of a Prophet whiles we have him. Elisha stayed
some-while at Jericho; the Citizens resort to him with a common suit; Their
structure was not more pleasant, than their waters unwholesome, and their
soil, by those corrupt waters; They sue to Elisha for the remedy. Why had they
not all this while, made their moan to Elijah? was it that they were more awed
with his greater austerity? Or was it that they met not with so fit an
opportunity of his commoration amongst them? It was told them what power Elisha
had exercised upon the waters of Jordan, and now they ply him for theirs;
Examples of beneficence easily move us to a request, and expectation of favors.

What ailed the waters of Jericho? Surely, originally they were not ill
affected; No men could be so foolish as to build a city, where neither earth,
nor water could be useful; Mere prospect could not carry men to the neglect
of health, and profit. Hiel the Bethelite would never have reedified it with
the danger of a curse, so lately as in the days of Ahab, if it had bin of old
notorious for so foul an annoyance: Not therefore the ancient malediction of
Joshua, not the neighborhood of that noisome lake of Sodom, was guilty of this
disease of the soil, and waters, but the late sins of the inhabitants. He
turns the rivers into a wilderness, and water-springs into a dry ground; a
fruitful land into barrenness, for the wickedness of them that dwell
therein; How often have we seen the same field both full and famishing? How often
the same waters both safe, and by some irruption, or new tincture, hurtful?
Howsoever natural causes may concur, heaven and earth, and air, and waters
follow the temper of our souls, of our lives; and are therefore indisposed
because we are so: Jericho began now to make it self capable of a better
state, since it was now become a receptacle of Prophets; Elisha is willing to
gratify his hosts; it is reason that any place should fare the better for the
presence of Divines: The medicine is more strange than the disease. Bring me a
new Cruse and put salt therein: Why a Cruse? why new? why Salt in that new
Cruse? How should Salt make water potable? Or, if there were any such virtue in
it, what could a Cruse full do to a whole current? Or, if that measure were
sufficient, what was the age of the Cruse to the force of the Salt? Yet Elisha
calls for Salt in a new Cruse. God (who wrought this by his Prophet) is a free
agent; as he will not bind his power to means; so will he by his power bind
unlikely means to perform his will.

Natural proprieties have no place in miraculous works: No less easy is it
for God to work by contrary, than subordinate powers.

The Prophet does not cast the Salt into the channel, but into the spring of
the waters: If the fountain be redressed, the streams cannot be faulty; as
contrarily, the purity and soundnes of the stream auailes nothing to the
redress of the fountain: Reformation must begin at the wellhead of the
abuse; The order of being is a good guide to the method of amending: Virtue
does not run backward; Had Elisha cast the Salt into the brooks and ditches,
the remedy must have striuen against the stream, to reach up to the spring;
now it is but one labor to cure the fountain; Our heart is a well of bitter
and venomous water, our actions are the streams; In vain shall we cleanse our
hands, whiles our hearts are evil.

The Cruse and the Salt must be their own; The act must be his; the power,
Gods; He cast the Salt into the spring, and said, Thus says the Lord, I have
healed these waters; there shall not be from thence any more death, or
barrenness. Far was it from Elisha to challenge ought to himself; Before,
when he should divide the waters of Jordan, he did not say, Where is the power
of Elisha, but, Where is the Lord God of Elijah? and now, when he should cure
the waters of Jericho, he says not, Thus says Elisha, but thus says the
Lord, I have healed these waters. How careful is the man of God that no part
of Gods glory should stick to his own fingers. Jericho shall know to whom they
owe the blessing, that they may duly return the thanks; Elisha professes he
can do no more of himself than that Salt, than that Cruse; only God shall
work by him, by it: and what ever that almighty hand undertakes, cannot fail,
yea is already done; neither does he say, I will heal, but I have healed; Even
so, O God, if thou cast into the fountain of our hearts, but one Cruse-full of
the Salt of thy Spirit, we are whole, no thought can pass between the receipt
and the remedy.

As the general visitor of the Schools of the Prophets, Elisha passes from
Jericho to that other college at Bethel. Bethel was a place of strange
composition; there was at once the golden Calfe of Jeroboam; and the School of
God: True religion and idolatry found a free harbor within those walls; I do
not marvel that Gods Prophets would plant there; there was the most need of
their presence, where they found the spring head of corruption; Physicians are
of most use where diseases abound: As he was going up by the way, there came
forth little children out of the city, and mocked him, and said to him, Go
up thou bald-head; Go up thou bald-head. Even the very boys of Bethel have
learned to scoff at a Prophet; The spite of their idolatrous parents is
easily propagated; Children are such as their institution; Infancy is led
altogether by imitation, it has neither words, nor actions, but infused by
others; If it have good or ill language, it is but borrowed; and the shame or
thank is due to those that lent it.

What was it that these ill-taught children vpbraided to the Prophet, but a
slight natural defect, not worthy the name of a blemish, the want of a little
hair; at the best, a comely excrement, no part of the body; Had there been
deformity in that smoothness of the head, which some great wits have honored
with praises, a faultlesse and remediless eyesore had been no fit matter for
a taunt: How small occasions will be taken to disgrace a Prophet? If they could
have said ought worse, Elisha had not heard of this; God had crowned that head
with honor, which the Bethelitish children loaded with scorn: Who would have
thought the rude terms of waggish boys worthy of any thing but neglect?
Elisha looks at them with severe brows, and (like the heir of him that called
down fire upon the two Captains and their fifties) curses them in the name of
the Lord; Two she-Beares out of the wood hasten to be his executioners, and
tear two and forty of them in pieces. O fearful example of divine Justice!
This was not the revenge of an angry Prophet, it was the punishment of a
righteous Judge: God and his Seer looked through these children, at the Parents,
at all Israel; he would punish the parents mis-nurturing their children (to the
contemptuous usage of a Prophet) with the death of those children, which they
had mis-taught: He would teach Israel what it was to mis-use a Prophet: And if
he would not endure these contumelies unrevenged in the mouths of children,
what vengeance was enough for aged persecutors?

Doubtless some of the children escaped to tell the news of their fellows;
what lamentation do we think there was in the streets of Bethel? how did the
distressed mothers wring their hands for this woeful orbation? And now when
they came forth to fetch the remnants of their own flesh, what a sad spectacle
it was to find the fields strawed with those mangled carkeises? It is an
unprofitable sorrow that follows a judgment; Had these Parents been as
careful to train up their children in good discipline, and to correct their
disorders, as they are now passionate in bemoaning their loss, this slaughter
had never been; In vain do we look for good of those children, whose
education we have neglected; In vain do we grieve for those miscarriages
which our care might have prevented.

Elisha knew the success, yet does he not balke the City of Bethel; Do we
not wonder that the furious impatience of those parents, whom the curse of
Elisha robbed of their children, did not break forth to some malicious
practice against the Prophet? Would we not think the Prophet might misdoubt
some hard measure from those exasperated Citizens? There lay his way; he
follows God, without fear of men; as well knowing that either they durst not,
or they could not act violence. They knew there were Bears in the wood, and
fires in heaven; and if their malice would have ventured above their courage,
they could have no more power over Elisha in the streets, than those hungry
beasts had in the way. Whither dare not a Prophet go when God calls him? Having
visited the schools of the Prophets, Elisha retires to mount Carmel, and after
some holy solitariness, returns to the City of Samaria; He can never be a
profitable Seer, that is either always, or never alone; Carmel shall fit him
for Samaria; contemplation for action; That mother City of Israel must needs
afford him most work: Yet is the throne of Ahaziah succeeded by a brother
less ill than himself, than the parents of both: Ahabs impiety has not a
perfect heir of Iehoram: That son of his hates his Baal, though he keeps
his calves. Even into the most wicked families it pleases God to cast his
powerful restraints, that all are not equally vicious: It is no news to see
lewd men make scruple of some sins; The world were not to live in, if all
sins were affected by all. It is no thank to Ahab and Iezebel that their
son is no Baalite: As no good is traduced from parents, so not all evil;
there is an Almighty hand that stops the foul current of nature, at his
pleasure: No Idolater can say, that his child shall not be a convert.

The affinity betwixt the houses of Israel and Judah, holds good in succession;
Iehoram inherits the friendship, the aid of Iehoshaphat: whose counsel (as is
most likely) had cured him of that Baalisme. It was a just war whereto he
solicites the good King of Judah: The King of Moah (who had been an ancient
Tributarie from the days of David) falls now from his homage, and refuses to
pay his hundred thousand Lambs, and hundred thousand Rams with fleeces, to
the King of Israel; The backs of Israel can ill miss the wool of Moah; they
will put on iron to recover their cloth. Iehosaphat had been once well chid,
well frighted, for joining with Ahab against Aram; yet does he not stick now
again to come into the field with Iehoram against Moab; The case is more
favorable, less dangerous; Baal is cast down; The Images of the false gods
are gone, though the false Images of the true God stand still; Besides, this
rebellious Moab had joined with the Syrians formerly against Judah; so as
Iehoshaphat is interessed in the revenge.

After resolution of the end, wisely do these Kings deliberate of the way. It
is agreed to pass through Edom; that Kingdom was annexed to the Crown of
Judah; well might Iehoshaphat make bold with his own: It was (it seems) a
march far about in the measure of the way, but nearest to their purpose: the
assault would be thus more easy, if the passage were more tedious; The three
Kings of Israel, Judah, Edom, together with their Armies, are upon foot. They
are no sooner comne into the parching wilds of Edom, than they are ready to
die for thirst; If the channels were far off, yet the waters were further;
the scorching beams of the Sun have dried them up; and have left those
rivers more fit for walk, than entertainment; What are the greatest Monarchs
of the world, if they want but water to their mouths? What can their Crowns,
and Plumes, and rich Arms avail them when they are abridged but of that which
is the drink of beasts? With dry tongues and lips, do they now confer of
their common misery; Ieboram deplores the calamity, into which they were
fallen; but Iehoshaphat asks for a Prophet; Every man can bewail a mischief;
every man cannot find the way out of it: still yet I hear good Iehoshaphat
speak too late; He should have inquired for a Prophet, ere he had gone forth;
so had he avoided these straits; Not to consult at all with God, is Iehorams
sin; to consult late, is Iehoshaphats; the former is atheous carelessness,
the latter, forgetful ouer-sight; The best man may slacken good duties, the
worst contemnes them.

Not without some specialty from God does Elisha follow the camp: Else, that
had been no Element for a Prophet; Little did the good King of Judah think
that God was so near him; Purposely, was this holy Seer sent for the succor
of Iehoshaphat, and his faithful followers, when they were so far from
dreaming of their delivery, that they knew not of a danger: It would be wide
with the best men, if the eye of divine providence were not open upon them,
when the eye of their care is shut toward it; How well did Elisha in the
wars? The strongest squadron of Israel was within that breast; All their
armours of proof had not so much safety, and protection, as his Mantle;
Though the King of Israel would take no notice of the Prophet, yet one of his
Courtiers did, Here is Elisha the son of Shaphat, which powered water on the
hands of Elijah; This follower of Iehoram knows Elisha by his own name, by
his fathers, by his masters; The Court of Israel was profane, and Idolatrous
enough, yet, even there Gods Prophet had both knowledge, and honor; His very
service to Elijah was enough to win him reverence; It is better to be an
attendant of some man, than to be attended by many: That he had powered water on
Elijahs hands, was insinuation enough, that he could powere out water for those
three Kings: The three Kings walk down (by the motion of Iehoshaphat) to the
man of God; It was news to see three Kings going down to the servant of him,
who ran before the charet of Ahab: Religion and necessity have both of them
much power of humiliation, I know not whether more; Either zeal or need will
make a Prophet honored.

How sharply dares the man of God to chide his Sovereign, the King of Israel?
The liberty of the Prophets was no less singular, than their calling; He that
would borrow their tongue, must show their Commission; As God reproved Kings
for their sakes, so did not they stick to reprove Kings for his sake: Thus
much freedom they must leave to their successors, that we may not spare the
vices of them, whose persons we must spare.

Justly is Iehoram turned off to the Prophets of his father, and the Prophets
of his mother; It is but right, and equal, that those which we have made the
comfort and stay of our peace, should be the refuge of our extremity; If our
prosperity have made the world our God, how worthily shall our deathbed be
choked with this exprobration? Neither would the case bear an Apology, nor
the time an expostulation; Iehoram cannot excuse, he can complain; he finds
that now three Kings, three Kingdoms are at the mercy of one Prophet; it was
time for him to speak fair; nothing sounds from him but lamentations, and
entreaties; Nay, for the Lord has called these three Kings together to deliver
them into the hand of Moab; Iehoram has so much grace as to confess the
impotencie of those, he had trusted; and the power of that God whom he had
neglected; Every sinner cannot see, and acknowledge the hand of God in his
sufferings; Already has the distressed Prince gained something by this misery;
None complains so much as he, none feels so much as he; All the rest suffer
for him, and therefore he suffers in them all.

The man of God, who well sees the in-sufficiency of Iehorams humiliation,
lays on yet more load; As the Lord lives before whom I stand, Surely, were it
not that I regard the presence of Iehoshaphat, the King of Judah, I would not
look toward thee, nor see thee; Behold the double Spirit of Elijah; the master
was not more bold with the father, than the servant was with the son: Elisha
was a subject, and a Prophet; He must say that as a Prophet, which he might
not as a subject; As a Prophet he would not have looked at him, whom as a
subject he would have bowed to: It is one thing when God speaks by him,
another, when he speaks of himself; That it might well appear his dislike of
sin stood with his honor of Sovereignty, Iehoshaphat goes away with that
respect, which Iehoram missed, No less does God and his Prophet regard
religious sincerity, than they abhor Idolatry, and profaneness: What shall
not be done for a Iehoshaphat? For his sake shall those two other Princes, and
their vast Armies live, and prevail; Edom and Israel, whether single or
conjoined, had perished by the drought of the desert, by the sword of Moah; One
Iehoshaphat gives them both, life, and victory: It is in the power of one good
man to oblige a world; we receive true (though insensible) favors from the
presence of the righteous; Next to being good, it is happy to converse with
them that are so: if we be not bettered by their example, we are blessed by
their protection.

Who wonders not to hear a Prophet call for a Minstrell, in the midst of that
mournful distress of Israel, and Judah? Who would not have expected his
charge of tears and prayers, rather than of Music? How unseasonable are
songs to an heavy heart? It was not for their ears, it was for his own
bosom, that Elisha called for Music: that his spirits after their zealous
agitation, might be sweetly composed, and put into a meet temper, for receiving
the calm visions of God: Perhaps it was some holy Leuite, that followed the
Camp of Iehoshaphat, whose minstrelsie was required, for so sacred a purpose:
None but a quiet breast is capable of divine Revelations; Nothing is more
powerful to settle a troubled heart than a melodious harmony; The Spirit of
prophecy was not the more invited, the Prophets Spirit was the better
disposed, by pleasing sounds: The same God that will reveal his will to the
Prophet, suggests this demand; Bring me a Minstrell; How many say thus when
they would put God from them? Profane mirth, wanton music debauches the
soul; and makes no less room for the unclean Spirit, than spiritual
melody does for the Divine.

No Prophet had ever the Spirit at command; The hand of the Minstrell can do
nothing without the hand of the Lord; Whiles the Music sounds in the ear,
God speaks to the heart of Elisha; Thus says the Lord, Make this valley full
of ditches; Ye shall not see wind, neither shall ye see rain, yet that valley
shall be full of water, etc. To see wind, and rain in the height of that
drought, would have seemed as wonderful, as pleasing; but, to see abundance of
water, without wind or rain, was yet more miraculous; I know not how the sight
of the means abates our admiration of the effect; Where no causes can be found
out, we are forced to confess omnipotency; Elijah relieved Israel with water,
but it was out of the clouds, and those clouds rose from the sea; but whence
Elisha shall fetch it, is not more marvelous, than secret.

All that evening, all that night must the faith of Israel and Judah be
exercised with expectation; At the hour of the morning sacrifice no sooner did
the blood of that Oblation gush forth, than the streams of waters gushed forth
into their new channels, and filled the Country with a refreshing moisture;
Elijah fetched down his fire, at the hour of the evening sacrifice; Elisha
fetched up his water, at the hour of the morning sacrifice; God gives respect
to his own hours, for the encouragement of our observation; If his wisdom
has set us any peculiar times, we cannot keep them without a blessing; The
devotions of all true Jews (all the world over) were in that hour combined;
How seasonably does the wisdom of God pick out that instant, wherein he might
at once answer both Elishaes prophecy, and his peoples prayers.

The Prophet has assured the Kings, not of water only, but of victory; Moab
hears of enemies, and is addressed to war; Their own error shall cut their
throats; they rise soon enough to beguile themselves; the beams of the rising
Sun glistering upon those vaporous, and unexpected waters, carried in the
eyes of some Moabites a semblance of blood; a few eyes were enough to fill all
ears with a false noise; the deceived sense mis-carries the imagination; This
is blood, the Kings are surely slain, and they have smitten one another; now
therefore, Moab to the spoil: Civil broils give just advantage to a common
enemy; Therefore must the Camps be spoiled, because the Kings have smitten each
other. Those that shall be deceived, are given over to credulity; The
Moabites do not examine either the conceit, or the report; but fly in,
confusedly, upon the Camp of Israel; whom they find, too late, to have no
enemies but themselves; As if death would not have hastened enough to them,
they come to fetch it, they come to challenge it; It seizes upon them
unavoidably; they are smitten, their Cities razed, their Lands marred, their
Wells stopped, their trees felled; as if God meant to waste them but once.

No onsets are so furious as the last assaults of the desperate; The King of
Moab now hopeless of recovery, would be glad to shut up with a pleasing
revenge; with seven hundred resolute followers, he rushes into the battle,
toward the King of Edom; as if he would bid death welcome, might he but carry
with him that despighted neighbor; and now, mad with the repulse, he returns:
and whether as angry with his destiny, or as barbarously affecting, to win his
cruel gods with so dear a sacrifice, he offers them with his own hand the
blood of his eldest son in the sight of Israel, and sends him up in smoke to
those hellish Deities. O prodigious act, whether of rage, or of devotion! What
an hand has Satan over his miserable vassals? What marvel is it to see men
sacrifice their souls, in an unfelt oblation, to these plausible tempters,
when their own flesh and blood has not been spared? There is no Tyran to the
Prince of darkness.

ELISHA with the Shunamite.
THE holy Prophets under the old Testament, did not abhor the marriage bed;
they did not think themselves too pure for an institution of their Maker; The
distressed widow of one of the sons of the Prophets comes to Elisha to
bemoane her condition; Her husband is dead; and dead in debt; Death has no
sooner seized on him, than her two sons (the remaining comfort of her life) are
to be seized on, by his creditors, for bondmen: How thick did the miseries of
this poor afflicted woman light upon her; Her husband is lost, her estate
clogged with debts, her children ready to be taken for slaves: Her husband was
a religious, and worthy man; he paid his debts to Nature, he could not to his
Creditors; they are cruel, and rake in the scarceclosed wound of her sorrow;
passing an arrest, worse than death, upon her sons: Widow-hood, poverty,
servitude have conspired to make her perfitly miserable. Virtue and goodness
can pay no debts; The holiest man may be deep in arerages; and break the
bank: Not through lavishness, and riot of expense; (Religion teaches us to
moderate our hands; to spend within the proportion of our estate) but through
either iniquity of times, or evil casualties; Ahab and Iezebel were lately in
the throne, who can marvel that a Prophet was in debt? It was well that any
good man might have his breath free, though his estate were not: wilfully to
ouer-lash our ability cannot stand with wisdom, and good government; but no
providence can guard us from crosses; Holiness is no more defense against
debt, than against death; Grace can keep us from unthriftiness, not from
want. Whither does the Prophets widow come to bewail her case, but to Elisha;
Every one would not be sensible of her affliction, or if they would pity,
yet could not relieve her; Elisha could do both; Into his ear does she
unload her griefs. It is no small point of wisdom to know where to plant our
Lamentation; otherwise, in stead of comfort, we may meet with scorn and
insultation.

None can so feelingly compassionate the hard terms of a Prophet as an Elisha;
He finds that she is not querulously impatient, expressing her sorrow without
murmuring, and coffeehouse; making a loving, and honorable mention of that
husband, who had left her distressed; readily therefore does he incline to her
succor: What shall I do for thee? Tell me, What have thou in thine house?
Elisha, when he hears of her debt, asks of her substance; Had her house been
furnished with any valuable commodity, the Prophet implies the necessity of
selling it for satisfaction; Our own abundance can ill stand with our
engagement to others; It is great injustice for us to be full of others
purses: It is not our own which we owe to another; What is it other than a
plausible stealth to feed our riot with the want of the owner? He that could
multiply her substance, could know it; God and his Prophet loves to hear our
necessities out of our own mouths (Thine handmaid has not any thing in the
house save a pot of oil.) It is neither news nor shame for a Prophet to be
poor; Grief and want perhaps hastened his end; both of them are left for the
dowry of his careful widow; She had not complained, if there had been any
possibility of remedy, at home; bashfulnesse had stopped her mouth thus long,
and should have done yet longer, if the exigence of her childrens servitude had
not opened it; No want is so worthy of relief, as that which is loathest to
come forth. Then he said, Go borrow thee vessels abroad of all thy neighbors,
even empty vessels, borrow not a few; and when thou art come in, thou shall
shut the door upon thee, and upon thy sons, and shall power out into all
those vessels, and thou shall set aside that which is full.

She that owed much, and had nothing, yet must borrow more, that she may pay
all: Poverty had not so discredited her with her neighbors, that they should
doubt to lend her those vessels empty, which they had grudged full: Her want
was too well known; it could not but seem strange to the neighbors, to see
this poor widow so busily pestring her house with empty tubs; which they knew
she had nothing to fill; they knew well enough she had neither field, nor
vineyard, nor orchard, and therefore must needs marvel at such unprofitable
diligence; If their curiosity would be inquiring after her intentions, she is
commanded secrecy. The doors must be shut upon her self, and her sons;
whiles the oil is increasing; No eye shall see the miracle in working, enough
shall see it once wrought; This act was no less a proof of her faith, than an
improuement of her estate, it was an exercise of her devotion, as well as of
her diligence; it was fit her doors should be shut, whiles her heart and lips
were opened in an holy invocation; Out of one small Jar was powered out so much
oil, as by a miraculous multiplication filled all that empty caske: Scarce
had that pot any bottom: At least the bottom that it had, was to be measured
by the brims of all those vessels; this was so deep, as they were high; Could
they have held more, this pot had not been empty: Even so the bounty of our
God gives grace, and glory, according to the capacity of the receiver; when he
cease to infuse, it is for want of room in the heart that takes it in; Could
we hold more, O God, thou would give more; If there be any defect, it is in
our vessels, not in thy beneficence; How did the heart of this poor widow run
over, as with wonder, so, with joy and thankfulness, to see such a river of
oil rise out of so small a spring; to see all her vessels swimming full with
so beneficial a liquor; Justly is she affected with this sight, she is not
transported from her duty; I do not see her run forth into the street, and
proclaim her store, nor calling in her neighbors, whether to admire or
bargain; I see her running to the Prophets door, and gratefully acknowledging
the favor, and humbly depending on his directions, as not daring to dispose of
that, which was so wondrously given her, without the advice of him, by whose
powerful means she had received it; Her own reason might have sufficiently
suggested what to do; she dares not trust it, but consults with the Oracle of
God; If we would walk surely, we must do nothing without a word; Every action,
every motion must have a warrant; We can no more err with this guide, than not
err without him.

The Prophet sets her in a right way; Go sell the oil, and pay thy debt, and
live, thou, and thy children, on the rest; The first care is of her debts, the
next, of her maintenance; It should be gross injustice to raise means for her
self, and her charge, ere she have discharged the arerages of her husband;
None of the oil was hers, till her creditors were satisfied; all was hers that
remained; It is but stealth to enjoy a borrowed substance; Whiles she had
nothing, it was no sin to owe; but when once her vessels were full, she could
not have been guilt less, if she had not paid, before she stored. God and his
Prophets were bountiful; after the debts paid, they provide not only against
the thraldom of her charge, but against the want. It is the just care of a
religious heart to defend the widow and children of a Prophet from distress
and penury.

Behold the true servant, and successor of Elijah; What he did to the
Sareptan widow, this did to the widow of a Prophet; That increase of oil was
by degrees, this at once; both equally miraculous, this, so much more
charitable, as it less concerned himself.

He that gives kindnesses, does by turns receive them, Elisha has relieved a
poor woman, is relieved by a rich. The Shunamite, a religious and wealthy
matron, inuites him to her house, and now after the first entertainment,
finding his occasions to call him to a frequent passage, that way, moves her
husband to set up, and furnish a lodging for the man of God; It was his
holiness that made her desirous of such a guest; Well might she hope that such
an Inmate would pay a blessing for his house-rent; Oh happy Shunamite that
might make her self the Hostess of Elisha! As no less dutiful than godly,
she imparts her desire to her husband; whom her suit has drawn to a
partnership in this holy hospitality; Blessed of God is that man, whose bed
yields him an help to heaven. The good Shunamite desires not to harbor Elisha
in one of her wonted lodgings, she solicites her husband to build him a chamber
on the wall apart: she knew the tumult of a large family unfit for the quiet
meditations of a Prophet; retiredness is most meet for the thoughts of a Seer;
Neither would she bring the Prophet to bare walls, but sets ready for him, a
bed, a table, a stool, and a candlestick, and what ever necessary vtensils
for his entertainment: The Prophet does not affect delicacy, she takes care to
provide for his conuenience; Those that are truly pious, and devout, think
their houses, and their hands cannot be too open to the messengers of God; and
are most glad to exchange their earthly commodities for the others spiritual.
Superfluity should not fall within the care of a Prophet; necessity must; he
that could provide oil for the widow, could have provided all needful helps
for himself; What room had there been for the charity and beneficence of
others, if the Prophet should have always maintained himself out of power?

The holy man is so far sociable as not to neglect the friendly offer of so
kind a benefactor: Gladly does he take up his new lodging; and, as well
pleased with so quiet a repose, and careful attendance, he sends his servant
Gebezi, with the message of his thanks, with a treaty of retribution; Behold,
thou have been careful for us, with all this care; What is to be done for
thee? Would thou be spoken for to the King, or to the Captain of the Host?
An ingenuous disposition cannot receive favors without thoughts of return: A
wise debtor is desirous to retribute in such kind, as may be most acceptable
to his obligers: without this discretion, we may offer such requirals, as may
seem goodly to us, to our friend, worthless: Every one can choose best for
himself; Elisha therefore (who had never been wanting in spiritual duties to
so hospital a friend) gives the Shunamite the election of her suit, for
temporal recompense also; No man can be a looser by his favor to a Prophet;
It is a good hearing that an Elisha is in such grace at the Court, that he can
promise himself access to the King, in a friends suit: It was not ever thus;
the time was, when his master heard, Have thou found me, O mine enemy: Now the
late miracle which Elisha wrought in gratifying the three Kings, with water,
and victory, has endeared him to the King of Israel; and now, Who but Elisha?
Even that rough mantle finds respects amongst those silks and tissues: As bad
as Iehoram was, yet he honored the man of God; He that could not prevail
with an Idolatrous King, in a spiritual reformation, yet can carry a civil
suit; Neither does the Prophet, in a sullen coffeehouse, fly off from the
Court, because he found his labors unprofitable, but still holds good terms
with that Prince, whom he cannot reclaim, and will make use notwithstanding of
his countenance in matters, whether of courtesy, or justice; We may not cast
off our due respects even to faulty authority; but must still submit and
persist, where we are repelled: Not to his own advancement does Elisha desire
to improve the Kings favor, but to the behoof, to the relief of others; If
the Shunamite have business at the Court, she shall need no other Solicitor;
There cannot be a better office, nor more beseeming a Prophet, than to speak
in the cause of the dumb, to befriend the oppressed, to win greatness unto
the protection of innocence.

The good matrone needs no shelter of the great; I dwell among mine own
people; as if she said; The courtesy is not small in it self, but not useful
to me; I live here quietly in a contented obscurity, out of the reach either
of the glories, or cares of a Court; free from wrongs, free from enuies: Not so
high as to provoke an evil eye, not so low as to be trodden on; I have neither
fears, nor ambitions; my neighbors are my friends; my friends are my
protectors; and (if I should be so unhappy, as to be the subject of maine
injuries) would not stick to be mine Advocates; This favor is for those that
either affect greatness, or groan under oppressions; I do neither, for I
live among my own people. O Shunamite, thou shall not escape envy! Who can
hear of thine happy condition, and not say, Why am not I thus? If the world
afford any perfect contentment, it is in a middle-estate, equally distant from
penury, from excess; it is in a calm freedom, a secure tranquillity, a
sweet fruition of our selves, of ours; But what hold is there of these earthly
things? How long is the Shunamite thus blessed with peace? slay but a while,
you shall see her come on her knees to the King of Israel, pitifully
complaining that she was stripped of house, and land; and now Gehezi is feign
to do that good office for her, which was not accepted from his master, Those
that stand fastest upon earth have but slipperie footing; no man can say that
he shall not need friends.

Modesty sealed up the lips of the good Shunamite; she was ashamed to confess
her longing; Gehezi easily guessed that her barrenness could not but be her
affliction; she was childlesse, her husband old; Elisha gratifies her with the
news of a son: About this season according to the time of life, thou shall
embrace a son; How liberal is God, by his Prophet, in giving beyond her
requests; not seldom, does his bounty ouer-reach our thoughts, and meet us
with those benefits, which we thought too good for us to ask. Greatness and
inexpectation makes the blessing seem incredible, Nay, my Lord, thou man of
God, do not lie to thine handmaid: We are never sure enough of what we
desire; We are not more hard to believe, than loath to distrust beneficial
events: She well knew the Prophets holiness could not stand with wilful
falsehood; perhaps, she might think it spoken by way of trial, not of serious
affirmation; as unwilling therefore that it should not be, and willing to hear
that pleasing word seconded, she says, Do not lie to thine handmaid.
Promises are made good, not by iteration, but by the effect; The Shunamite
conceiues, and bears a son, at the set season: How glad a mother she was,
those know best, that have mourned under the discomfort of a sad sterilitie.
The child grows up, and is now able to find out his father in the field,
amongst his Reapers: His father now grew young again with the pleasure of this
sight; and more ioyed in this spring of his hopes, than in all the crops of his
harvest; But what stabilitie is there in these earthly delights? The hot beams
of the Sun beat upon that head which too much care had made tender, and
delicate; The child complains to his father, of his pain; Oh that grace
could teach us, what nature teaches Infants, in all our troubles to bemoane our
selves to our heavenly father! He sends him to his mother; upon her lap, about
noone, the child dies; as if he would return his soul into that bosom,
from which it was derived, to his; The good Shunamite has lost her son, her
faith she has not lost; Passion has not robbed her of her wisdom; As not
distracted with an accident so sudden, so sorrowful; she lays her dead
child upon the Prophets bed, she locks the door; she hides her grief, lest
that consternation might hinder her design; she hastens to her husband, and
(as not daring to be other than officious in so distresse-full an occasion)
acquaints him with her journey, (though not with the cause) requires of him
both attendance, and conueyance; she posts to mount Carmel; she cannot so
soon find out the man of God, as he has found her; He sees her a far
off; and like a thankful guest, sends his servant hastily to meet her, to
inquire of the health of her self, her husband, her child; Her errand was not
to Gehezi, it was to Elisha; no messenger shall interrupt her; no ear shall
receive her complaint but the Prophets; Down she falls passionately at his
feet, and, forgetting the fashion of her bashful strangeness, lays hold of
them, whether in an humble veneration of his person, or in a fervent desire of
satisfaction. Gehezi, who well knew how uncouth, how unfit this gesture of
salutation was, for his master, offers to remove her, and admonishes her of
her distance; The merciful Prophet easily apprehends that no ordinary occasion
could so transport a grave, and well-gouerned matrone; as therefore pitying
her unknown passion, he bids, Let her alone, for her soul is vexed within
her, and the Lord has hid it from me, and has not told me. If extremity of
grief have made her unmannerly, wise and holy Elisha knows how to pardon it;
He dares not add sorrow to the afflicted; he can better bear an
unseemliness in her greeting, than cruelty in her molestation; Great was the
familiarity that the Prophet had with his God; and as friends are wont
mutually to impart their counsels to each other, so had the Lord done to him;
Elisha was not idle on mount Carmel; What was it that he saw not from thence?
Not heaven only, but the world was before him, yet the Shunamites loss is
concealed from him; neither does he shame to confess it; Ofttimes those that
know greater matters may yet be ignorant of the less: It is no disparagement
to any finite creature not to know something. By her mouth will God tell the
Prophet, what by vision he had not; Then she said, Did I desire a son of my
Lord? Did I not say, do not deceive me? Deep sorrow is sparing of words; The
expostulation could not be more short, more quick, more pithy; Had I begged a
son, perhaps my importunity might have been yielded to, in anger; Too much
desire is justly punished with loss. It is no marvel if what we wring from
God, prosper not; This favor to me was of thine own motion; Thy suit, O
Elisha, made me a mother: Could thou intend to torment me with a blessing?
How much more easy had the want of a son been, than the mis-carriage?
Barrenness than orbation? Was there no other end of my having a son, than
that I might lose him? O man of God, let me not complain of a cruel
kindness; thy prayers gave me a son, let thy prayers restore him; let not my
dutiful respects to thee be repaid with an aggrauation of misery; give not
thine handmaid cause to wish that I were but so unhappy as thou foundest me;
Oh woeful fruitfulness, if I must now say, that I had a son.

I know not whether the mother, or the Prophet were more afflicted, the Prophet
for the mothers sake, or the mother for her own; Not a word of reply do we
hear from the mouth of Elisha: his breath is only spent in the remedy; He
sends his servant with all speed, to lay his staff upon the face of the
child; charging him to avoid all the delays of the way: Had not the Prophet
supposed that staff of his able to beat away death, why did he send it? and if
upon that supposition he sent it, how was it that it failed of effect? was this
act done out of humane conceit, not out of instinct from God? Or, did the want
of the mothers faith hinder the success of that cure? She, not regarding the
staff, or the man, holds fast to Elisha; No hopes of his message can loose her
fingers: As the Lord lives, and as they soul lives, I will not leave thee;
She imagined that the servant, the staff might be severed from Elisha, she
knew that where ever the Prophet was, there was power; It is good relying upon
those helps that cannot fail us.

Merit and importunity have drawn Elisha from Carmel to Shunem: He finds his
lodging taken up by that pale carkeise; he shuts his door, and falls to his
prayers; this staff of his (what ever became of the other) was long enough (he
knew) to reach up to heaven; to knock at those gates, yea to wrench them open;
He applies his body to those cold and senseless limbs; By the fervor of his
soul he reduces that soul, by the heat of his body he educeth warmth out of
that corpse; The child neeseth seven times; as if his spirit had been but hid
for the time, not departted, it falls to work afresh; the eyes look up, the
lips and hands move; The mother is called in to receive a new life, in her
twice-giuen son: she comes in, full of joy, full of wonder, and bows her
self to the ground, and falls down before those feet, which she had so boldly
laid hold of in Carmel. Oh strong faith of the Shunamite, that could not be
discouraged with the seizure, and continuance of death; raising up her heart
still to an expectation of that life, which to the eyes of nature had been
impossible, irrcuocable; Oh infinite goodness of the Almighty, that would not
suffer such faith to be frustrate, that would rather reuerse the laws of
nature, in returning a guest from heaven, and raising a corpse from death, than
the confidence of a believing heart should be disappointed.

How true an heir is Elisha of his master, not in his graces only, but in his
actions? Both of them divided the waters of Jordan, the one as his last act,
the other as his first; Elijahs curse was the death of the Captains, and their
troops; Elishaes curse was the death of the children; Elijah rebuked Ahab to
his face, Elisha Iehoram; Elijah supplied the drought of Israel by rain from
heaven; Elisha supplied the drought of the three Kings by waters gushing out of
the earth; Elijah increased the oil of the Sareptan, Elisha increased the oil
of the Prophets widow; Elijah raised from death the Sareptans son; Elisha the
Shunamites; Both of them had one mantle, one spirit; both of them climbed up
one Carmel, one heaven.

ELISHA with NAAMAN.
OF the full showers of grace which fell upon Israel and Judah, yet some drops
did light upon their neighbors: If Israel be the worse for her neerenesse to
Syria, Syria is the better for the vicinitie of Israel. Amongst the worst of
Gods enemies some are singled out for mercy. Naaman was a great Warrior, an
honorable Courtier, yet a Leper; no disease incident to the body is so nasty,
so loathsome, as leprosy. Greatness can secure no man from the most odious
and wearisome condition; How little pleasure did this Syrian Peer take, to be
stooped to by others, whiles he hated to see himself; Even those that honored
him, avoided him; neither was he other than abhorred of those that flattred
him; yea his hand could not move to his mouth, without his own detestation;
the basest slave of Syria would not change skins with him, if he might have his
honor to boot; Thus has the wise God thought meet to sauce the valor,
dignity, renown, victories, of the famous General of the Syrians; Seldom
ever was any man served with simple favors; These compositions make both our
crosses tolerable, and our blessings wholesome.

The body of Naaman was not more tainted with his leprie, than his soul was
tainted with Rimmon; and, besides his Idolatry, he was a professed enemy to
Israel, and successful in his enmity: How far does God fetch about his
purposes? The leprosy, the hostility of Naaman shall be the occasions of his
salvation; That leprosy shall make his soul sound; That hostility shall
adopt him a son of God: In some prosperous in-rodes, that the Syrians under
Naamans conduct, have made into the land of Israel, a little maid is taken
captive; she shall attend on Naamans wife; and shall suggest to her mistress
the miraculous cures of Elisha. A small chink may serve to let in much light;
Her report finds credit in the Court, and begets both a letter from the King,
and a journey of his Peer; whiles the Syrians thought of nothing but their
booty, they bring happiness to the house of Naaman; The captivity of a poor
Hebrew girl is a means to make the greatest Lord of Syria, a subject to God;
It is good to acquaint our children with the works of God, with the praises of
his Prophets. Little do we know how they may improve this knowledge, and
whither they may carry it; perhaps the remotest Nations may light their candle
at their coal: Even the weakest intimations may not be neglected; A child, a
servant, a stranger may say that, which we may bless God to have heard: How
well did it become the mouth of an Israelite to extol a Prophet; to wish the
cure of her master, though an Aramite; to advise that journey, unto the man of
God, by whom both body and soul might be cured; True Religion teaches us
pious and charitable respects to our Governors, though Aliens from the
Commonwealth of God.

No man that I hear blames the credulity of Naaman; upon no other ground-doth
the King of Syria send this chief Peer, with his letters to the King of
Israel; from his hands requiring the Cure; The Syrian supposed, that what ever
a subject could do, a Sovereign might command; that such a Prophet could
neither be out of the knowledge, nor out of the obedience of his Prince; never
did he dream of any exemption, but imagining Iehoram to be no less a King of
Prophets, than of people, and Elisha no less a subject, than a Seer, he
writes, Now when this letter is comne to thee, behold, I have herewith sent
Naaman my servant to thee, that thou may recover him of his leprosy. Great
is the power of Princes; every man's hand is theirs, whether for skill, or for
strength; Besides the eminency of their own gifts, all the subordinate
excellencies of their subjects, are no less at their service, than if they
were inherent in their persons; Great men are wanting to their own
perfections, if they do not both know, and exercise the graces of their
inferiors.

The King of Israel cannot read the letter without amazement of heart, without
rending of garments, and says, Am I God, to kill and to make alive, that this
man sends to me, to recover a man of his leprosy? Wherefore consider, and see,
I pray you, how he sekeeth a quarrel against me? If God have vouchsafed to
call Kings, Gods; it well becomes Kings to call themselves, men; and to
confess the distance wherein they stand to their Maker; Man may kill, man
cannot kill and make alive; yea, of himself, he can do neither; with God, a
Worm, or a fly may kill a man; without God, no Potentate can do it; much less
can any created power both kill, and revive; since to restore life is more than
to bereave it, more than to continue it, more than to give it; And if leprosy
be a death, what humane power can either inflict, or cure it? It is a trouble
to a well-affected heart to receive impossible commands; To require that of an
inferior which is proper to the highest, is a derogation from that supreme
power whose property it is: Had Iehoram been truly religious, the injury
done to his Maker in this motion, (as he took it) had more afflicted him, than
the danger of his own quarrel. Belike, Elisha was not in the thoughts of the
King of Israel; He might have heard that this Prophet had made alive, one, whom
he killed not: Himself with the two other Kings had been eyewitnesses of
what Elisha could do: yet, now, the Calves of Dan and Bethel have so taken up
his heart, that there is no room for the memory of Elisha; whom he sued to
in his extremity, now his prosperity has forgotten; Carnal hearts (when
need drives them) can think of God, and his Prophet; when their turn is
served, can as utterly neglect them, as if they were not.

Yet cannot good Elisha repay neglect, and forgetfulness; He listens what is
done at the Court, and finding the distress of his Sovereign, profers that
service, which should have been required; Wherefore have thou rent thy
clothes; Let him come now to me, and he shall know that there is a Prophet in
Israel. It was no small fright, from which Elisha delivers his King: Iehoram
was in awe of the Syrians, ever since their late victory, wherein his Father
Ahab was slain, Israel and Judah discomfited: nothing was more dreadful to
him, than the frowns of these Aramites; the quarrel which he suspected to be
hatched by them, is cleared by Elisha: their Leper shall be healed; both they,
and Israel, shall know they have neglected a God, whose Prophet can do
wonders; Many eyes, doubtless, are fastened upon the issue of this message. But
what state is this that Elisha takes upon him; he does not say, I will come to
him; but, Let him come now to me; The three kings came down once to his tent,
it is no marvel, if he prevent not the journey of a Syrian Courtier; It well
beseemes him that will be a suitor for favor, to be obsequious; We may not
stand upon terms of our labor, or dignity, where we expect a benefit; Naaman
comes richly attended with his troops of servants, and horses, and waits in
his Charet at the door of a Prophet; I do not hear Elisha call him in; for
though he were great, yet he was leprous; neither do I see Elisha come forth
to him, and receive him with such outward courtesies, as might be fit for an
honorable stranger; for in those rich clothes the Prophet saw an Aramite; and,
perhaps some tincture of the lateshed blood of Israel; Rather, that he might
make a perfect trial of the humility of that man, whom he means to gratify,
and honor, after some short attendance at his door, he sends his servant with
a message to that Peer, who could not but think the meanest of his retinue, a
better man than Gehezies master. What could the Prophet have done other to the
lacquay of Naamans man? He that would be a meet subject of mercy, must be
thoroughly abased in his own conceit; and must be willingly pliable to all
the conditions of his humiliation; Yet, had the message carried in it either
respect to the person, or probability of effect, it coudl not have been
unwelcome; but now, it sounded of nothing, but sullenness, and unlikelihood;
Go, and wash in Jordan seven times, and thy flesh shall come again to thee,
and thou shall be clean; What wise man could take this, for any other than a
mere scorn, and mockery? Go, wash? Alas, What can water do? It can cleanse
from filthiness, not from leprosy; And why in Jordan? What differs that from
other streams? and why just seven times? What virtue is either in that
channel, or in that number? Naaman can no more put off nature, than leprosy;
In what a chafe did he fling away from the Prophets door; and says, Am I
comne thus far to fetch a flout from an Israelite? Is this the issue both of
my journey, and the Letters of my King? Could this Prophet find no man to play
upon, but Naaman? Had he meant seriously, why did he think himself too good
to come forth unto me? Why did he not touch me with his hand, and bless me
with his prayers, and cure me with his blessing? Is my misery fit for his
derision? If water could do it, what needed I to come so far for this
remedy? Have I not often done thus in vain? Have we not better streams at
home, than any Israel can afford? Are not Abana and Pharphar, rivers of
Damascus, better than all the waters of Israel? Folly and pride strive for
place in a natural heart, and it is hard to say whether is more predominant.
Folly in measuring the power of Gods ordinances by the rule of humane
discourse, and ordinary event; pride, in a scornful valuation of the
institutions of God, in comparison of our own devices. Abana and Pharphar, two
for one; Rivers, not Waters; of Damascus, a stately City, and incomparable;
Are they not? Who dares deny it? Better, not as good; than the waters, not the
rivers; all the waters, Jordan, and all the rest; of Israel, a beggarly Region
to Damascus. No where shall we find a truer pattern of the disposition of
nature; how she is altogether led by sense, and reason; how she fondly judges
of all objects by the appearance, how she acquaints her self only with the
common rode of Gods proceedings; how she sticks to her own principles, how she
mis-construes the intentions of God, how she ouer-conceits her own, how she
disdaines the mean conditions of others, how she vpbraids her opposites with
the proud comparison of her own privileges.

Nature is never but like her self; No marvel if carnal minds despise the
foolishness of preaching, the simplicity of Sacraments, the homeliness of
ceremonies, the seeming inefficacie of censures: These men look upon Jordan
with Syrian eyes; One drop of whose water set apart by divine ordination, has
more virtue, than all the streams of Abana, and Pharphar.

It is a good matter for a man to be attended with wise and faithful
followers; Many a one has had better counsel from his heels, than from his
elbowes: Naamans servants were his best friends: they came to him, and spoke to
him, and said, My Father, If the Prophet had bid thee do some great thing,
would thou not have done it? How much rather then, when he says to thee,
Wash, and be clean. These men were servants not of the humor, but of the
profit of their master; Some servile Spirits would have cared only to sooth
up, not to benefit their Governor; and would have encouraged his rage, by
their own; Sir, will you take this at the hand of a base fellow? Was ever man
thus flouted? Will you let him carry it away thus? Is any harmless anger
sufficient revenge for such an insolence? Give us leave at least to pull him
out by the cares, and force him to do that by violence, which he would not
do out of good manners. Let our fingers teach this saucy Prophet what it is to
offer an affront to a Prince of Syria: But these men loved more their masters
health, than his passion; and had rather therefore to advise, than flatter; to
draw him to good, than follow him to evil; Since it was a Prophet from whom he
received this prescription, they persuade him not to despise it; intimating
there could be no fault in the sleightnesse of the receipt, so long as there
was no defect of power in the commander; that the virtue of the cure should be
in his obedience, not in the nature of the remedy: They persuade, and
prevail. Next to the Prophet, Naaman may thank his servants that he is not a
Leper; He goes down (upon their entreaty) and dips seven times in Jordan, his
flesh rises, his leprosy vanishes; Not the unjust fury and techinesse of
the patient shall cross the cure: lest whiles God is severe, the Prophet
should be discredited. Long enough might Naaman have washed there in vain, if
Elisha had not sent him; Many a Leper has bathed in that stream, and has
come forth no less impure; It is the word, the ordinance of the Almighty
which puts efficacy into those means, which of themselves are both impotent,
and improbable; What can our Font do to the washing away of sin? If Gods
institution shall put virtue into our Jordan, it shall scour off the
spiritual leprosies of our hearts; and shall more cure the soul, than cleanse
the face.

How joyful is Naaman to see this change of his skin, this renouation of his
flesh; of his life: Never did his heart find such warmth of in ward gladness,
as in this stream.

Upon the sight of his recovery, he does not post home to the Court, or to
his family, to call for witnesses, for partners of his joy; but thankfully
returns to the Prophet, by whose means he received this mercy; He comes back
with more contentment, than he departed with rage; Now will the man of God be
seen of that recovered Syrian, whom he would not see leprous: His presence
shall be yielded to the gratulation, which was not yielded to the suit;
Purposely did Elisha forbear before, that he might share no part of the praise
of this work, with his Maker; that God might be so much more magnified, as the
means were more weak, and despicable. The miracle has his due work; First,
does Naaman acknowledge the God that wrought it; then, the Prophet, by whom he
wrought it: Behold, now I know there is no God in all the earth, but in Israel.
Oh happy Syrian that was at once cured of his leprosy, and his mes-prison of
God; Naaman was too wise, to think that either the water had cured him, or the
man; he saw a divine power working in both; such as he vainly sought from his
Heathen Deities; with the heart therefore he believes, with the mouth he
confesses.

Whiles he is thus thankful to the author of his cure, he is not unmindful
of the instrument, Now therefore, I pray thee, take a blessing of thy servant;
Naaman came richly furnished with ten talents of silver, six thousand pieces of
gold, ten changes of raiment; All these and many more would the Syrian Peer
have gladly given to be delivered from so noisome a disease; No marvel if he
importunately offer some part of them to the Prophet, now that he is delivered;
some testimony of thankfulness did well, where all earthly recompense was too
short; The hands of this man were no less full of thanks, than his mouth; Dry
and barren professions of our obligations, where is power to requite, are unfit
for noble and ingenuous spirits.

Naaman is not more frank in offering his gratuitie, than Elisha vehement in
refusing it, As the Lord lives, before whom I stand, I will receive none. Not
that he thought the Syrian gold impure; Not that he thought it unlawful to
take up a gift, where he has laid down a benefit; But the Prophet will remit
of Naamans purse, that he may win of his soul; The man of God would have his
new convert see cause to be more enamoured of true piety; which teaches her
Clients to contemn those worldly riches and glories which base worldlings
adore: and would have him think, that these miraculous powers are so far
transcending the valuation of all earthly pelf, that those glittering
treasures are worthy of nothing but contempt, in respect thereof; Hence it is,
that he who refused not the Shunamites table, and stool, and candlestick,
will not take Naamans present: There is much use of godly discretion in
directing us when to open, when to shut our hands.

He that will not be allowed to give, desires yet to take: Shall there not, I
pray thee, be given to thy servant two mules load of earth? for thy servant
will henceforth offer neither burnt offering, nor sacrifice to other Gods, but
unto the Lord. Israelitish mold lay open to his carriage, without leave of
Elisha; but Naaman regards not to take it, unless it may be given him, and
given him by the Prophets hand; Well did this Syrian find that the man of God
had given a supernatural virtue to the water of Israel; and therefore supposed
he might give the like to his earth; Neither would any earth serve him but
Elishaes; else the mold of Israel had been more properly craved of the King,
than the Prophet of Israel.

Doubtless it was devotion that moved this suit; The Syrian saw God had a
propriety in Israel, and imagines that he will be best pleased with his own;
On the sudden was Naaman half a Proselyte, still here was a weak knowledge
with strong intentions; He will sacrifice to the Lord; but where? in Syria,
not in Jerusalem: Not the mold, but the Altar is that God respects; which he
has allowed no where but in his chosen Sion; This honest Syrian will be
removing God home to his Country; he should have resolved to remove his home,
to God; And though he vows to offer no sacrifice to any other god, yet he
craves leave to offer an outward courtesy to Rimmon; though not for the Idols
sake, yet for his masters: In this thing the Lord pardon thy servant, that when
my master goes into the house of Rimmon, to worship there, and he leans on
my hand, and I bow my self in the house of Rimmon, the Lord pardon thy servant
in this thing Naaman goes away resolute to profess himself an Israelite for
Religion; all the Syrian Court shall know that he sacrifices upon Israelitish
earth, to the God of Israel; they shall hear him protest to have neither
heart, nor knee for Rimmon; If he must go into the house of that Idol, it
shall be as a servant, not as a suppliant; his duty to his master shall carry
him, not his devotion to his masters god; If his master go to worship there,
not he; neither does he say, When I bow my self to the Image of Rimmon; but,
in the house: he shall bow, to be leaned upon, not to adore; yet had not
Naaman thought this a fault, he had not craved a pardon; his heart told him
that a perfect convert should not have abid the roof, the sight, the air of
Rimmon; that his observance of an earthly master should not draw him to the
semblance of an act of outward observance, to the rival of his master in
heaven; that a sincere detestation of Idolatry could not stand with so
unseasonable a courtesy.

Far therefore is Naaman from being a pattern, save of weakness: since he
is yet more than half a Syrian; since he willingly accuses himself, and in
stead of defending, deprecates his offense; It is not for us to expect a full
stature in the cradle of conversion. As nature, so grace rises by many degrees,
to perfection; Leprosy was in Naaman cured at once, not corruption.

The Prophet, as glad to see him but thus forward, dismisses him with a civil
valediction; Had an Israelite made this suit, he had been answered, with a
check; thus much from a Syrian was worthy of a kind farewell; They are parted.

Gehezi cannot thus take his leave; His heart is maled up in the rich chests of
Naaman, and now he goes to fetch it: The Prophet and his man had not looked
with the same eyes upon the Syrian treasure; the one with the eye of contempt,
the other with the eye of admiration, and covetous desire. The disposition of
the master may not be measured by the mind, by the act of his servant; Holy
Elisha may be attended by a false Gehezi; No examples, no counsels will
prevail with some hearts; who would not have thought that the follower of
Elisha could be no other than a Saint? yet, after the view of all those
miracles, this man is a mirror of worldliness: He thinks his master either
too simple, or too kind, to refuse so just a present from a Syrian; himself
will be more wise, more frugall; Desire hastens his pace, he does not go, but
run after his booty: Naaman sees him, and, as true nobleness is ever
courteous, alights from his Charet, to meet him; The great Lord of Syria comes
forth of his coach to salute a Prophets servant; not fearing that he can humble
himself overmuch to one of Elishaes family; He greets Gehezi with the same
word wherewith he was lately dimitted by his master; Is it peace? So sudden a
messenger might seem to argue some change; He so one receives from the
breathless bearer news of his masters health; and request; All is well; My
master has sent me, saying, Behold, even now there be come to me from mount
Ephraim, two young men of the sons of the Prophets; Give me, I pray thee, a
talent of silver, and two changes of garments. Had Gehezi craved a reward in
his own name, calling for the fee of the Prophets servant; as the gain so the
offense had been the less, now, reaching at a greater sum, he belies his
master, robs Naaman, burdens his own soul. What a sound tale has the craft
of Gehezi devised? Of the number, the place, the quality, the age of his
masters guests? That he might set a fair color upon that pretended request;
so proportioning the value of his demand, as might both enrich himself, and
yet well stand with the moderation of his master: Love of money can never keep
good quarter with honesty, with innocence; Covetousness never lodged in the
heart alone; if it find not, it will breed wickedness: What a mint of fraud
there is in a worldly breast? How readily can it coin subtle falsehoods for an
advantage?

How thankfully liberal was this Noble Syrian; Gehezi could not be more eager
in taking, than he was in giving; As glad of so happy an occasion of leaving
any piece of his treasure behind him, he forces two Talents upon the servant
of Elisha; and binds them in two bags, and lays them upon two of his own
servants; his own train shall yield Porters to Gehezi: Cheerfulness is the
just praise of our beneficence: Bountiful minds are as zealous in ouer-paying
good turns, as the niggardly are in scanting retributions.

What proiects do we think Gehezi had all the way? How did he please himself
with the waking dreams of purchases, of traffic, of iollitie? and now, when
they are comne to the tower, he gladly disburdens, and dismisses his two Syrian
attendants, and hides their load, and wipes his mouth, and stands boldly before
that master, whom he had so foulely abused; Oh Gebezi! where did thou think
God was this while? Could thou thus long power water upon the hands of
Elisha, and be either ignorant, or regardlesse of that undeceivable eye of
providence, which was ever fixed upon thy hands, thy tongue, thy heart? Could
thou thus hope to blind the eyes of a Seer? Hear then thy indictment, thy
sentence, from him, whom thou thoughtest to have mocked with thy concealment;
Whence comst thou, Gehezi? Thy servant went no whither. He that had begun a
lie to Naaman, ends it to his master; who so lets his tongue once loose to a
wilful untruth, soon grows impudent in multiplying falsehoods. Of what metal
is the forehead of that man, that dares lie to a Prophet? What is this but to
outface the senses? Went not mine heart with thee, when the man turned again
from his charet to meet thee? Did thou not till now know, O Gehezi, that
Prophets have spiritual eyes, which are not confined to bodily prospects?

Did thou not know that their hearts were often, where they were not? Did
thou not know that thy secretest ways were ouer-looked by invisible witnesses?
Hear then, and be convinced; Hither thou wentest, thus thou said, thus thou
did, thus thou sped'st: What answer was now here but confusion? Miserable
Gehezi, how did thou stand pale and trembling before the dreadful Tribunal
of thy severe master, looking for the woeful sentence of some grievous
judgment for so heinous an offense? Is this a time to receive money, and to
receive garments, and (which thou had already purchased in thy conceit)
Oliueyards, and vineyards, and sheep, and oxen, and men-seruants, and
maid-seruants? Did my mouth refuse, that thy hands might take? Was I so
careful to win honor to my God, and credit to my profession, by denying these
Syrian presents, that thou might dash both, in receiving the^? Was there no
way to enrich thy self, but by belying thy master? by disparaging this holy
function in the eyes of a new convert? Since thou would needs therefore take
part of Naamans treasure, take part with him in his leprosy, The leprosy of
Naaman shall cleave unto thee, and unto thy seed for ever. Oh heavy Talents of
Gehezi! Oh the horror of this one unchangeable suit, which shall never be but
loathsomely white, noisomely unclean! How much better had been a light purse,
and an homely coat, with a sound body, a clear soul? Too late does that
wretched man now find, that he has loaded himself with a curse, that he
has clad himself with shame; His sin shall be red ever in his face, in his
seed; All passengers, all posterities shall now say; Behold the characters of
Gehezies covetousness, fraud, sacrilege! The act ouertakes the word; He went
out of his presence, a leper as white as snow; It is a woeful exchange that
Gehezi has made with Naaman; Naaman came a leper, returned a Disciple; Gehezi
came a Disciple, returned a leper; Naaman left behind both his disease, and
his money; Gehezi takes up both his money and his disease: Now shall Gehezi
never look upon himself, but he shall think of Naaman, whose skin is
transferred upon him with those talents; and shall wear out the rest of his
days in shame, and pain, and sorrow: His tears may wash off the guilt of his
sin, shall not (like another Jordan) wash off his leprosy; that shall ever
remain as an hereditarie monument of divine severity. This son of the
Prophets shall more loud and lively preach the Justice of God by his face, than
others by their tongue; Happy was it for him, if whiles his skin was
snow-white with leprosy, his humbled soul were washed white as snow with the
water of true repentance.

ELISHA raising the Iron, blinding the Syrians.
THere was no loss of Gehezi; when he was gone, the Prophets increased; an ill
man in the Church, is but like some shrubbie tree in a Garden, whose shade
keeps better plants from growing: A blanke does better in a room, than an ill
filling: The view of Gods just judgments does rather draw clients unto him,
than alienate them; The Kings of Israel had succeeded in Idolatry, and hate of
sincere Religion, yet the Prophets multiply; Persecution enlarges the bounds
of the Church; These very tempestuous showers bring up flowers and herbs in
abundance: There would have been neither so many, nor so zealous Prophets in
the languishments of peace: Besides, What marvel is it, if the immediate
succession of two such noble leaders, as Elijah, and Elisha, established, and
augmented religion; and bred multitudes of Prophets? Rather, who cannot
marvel, upon the knowledge of all their miracles, that all Israel did not
prophecy? It is a good hearing that the Prophets want elbow-roome; out of
their store, not out of the envy of neighbors, or incompetencie of provision;
Where vision fails, the people perish; they are blessed, where it abounds.

When they found themselves straightened, they did not presume to carue for
themselves, but they craved the leave, the counsel of Elisha; Let us go, we
pray thee, unto Jordan, and take thence every man a beam, and let us make us a
place where we may dwell: And he said, Go ye: It well becomes the sons of
the Prophets, to enterprise nothing, without the allowance of their Superiors:
Here was a building toward, none of the curiousest; I do not see them making
means for the procurement of some cunning artificers, nor for the conquisition
of some costly marbles, and cedars; but every man shall hew, and square, and
frame his own beam. No nice terms were stood upon by these sons of the
Prophets; Their thoughts were fixed upon the perfection of a spiritual
building: As an homely roof may serve them, so their own hands shall raise
it; The fingers of these contemplative men did not scorn the axe, and mallet,
and chesell: It was better being there, than in Obadiahs cave; and they that
dwell now contentedly under rude sticks, will not refuse the squared stones,
and polished contignations of better times. They shall be ill teachers of
others, that have not learned both to want, and to abound.

The master of this sacred Society, Elisha, is not stately, not austere; he
gives not only passage to this motion of his Collegiates, but assistance: It
was fit the sons of the Prophets should have conuenience of dwelling, though
not pomp, not costlinesse. They fall to their work; No man goes slackly about
the building of his own house: One of them, more regarding the tree than the
tool, lets fall the head of his axe into the river: Poor men are sensible of
small losses; He makes his moan to Elisha; Alas master, for it was borrowed;
Had the axe been his own, the trouble had been the less to forgo it;
therefore does the miscarriage afflict him, because it was of a borrowed axe:
Honest minds are more careful of what they have by loan than by propriety:
In lending there is a trust, which a good heart cannot disappoint without
vexation: Alas poor nouices of the Prophet, they would be building, and were
not worth their axes; if they would give their labor, they must borrow their
instruments.

Their wealth was spiritual; Outward poverty may well stand with inward
riches; He is rich, not that has the world, but that can contemn it.

Elisha loves and cherishes this just simplicity; rather will he work a
miracle, than a borrowed axe shall not be restored; It might easily be
imagined, he that could raise up the iron out of the bottom of the water,
could tell where it fell in; yet even that powerful hand calls for direction;
In this one point, the son of the Prophet knows more than Elisha; The notice
of all particularities is neither fit for a creature, nor communicable; A mean
man may best know his own case; this Nouice better knows where his axe fell,
than his master; his master knows better how to get it out, than he. There is
no reason to be given of supernatural actions: The Prophet borrowes an axe to
cut an helue for the lost axe; Why did he not make use of that handle which had
cast the head? Did he hold it unworthy of respect, for that it had abandoned
the metal wherewith it was trusted? Or did he make choice of a new stick,
that the miracle might be the more clear, and unquestionable? Divine power
goes a contrary way to Art; We first would have procured the head of the axe,
and then would have fitted it with an helue; Elisha fits the head to the helue;
and causes the wood, which was light, and knew not how to sink, to fetch up
the Iron, which was heavy, and naturally incapable of supernatation. Whether
the metal were stripped of the natural weight, by the same power which gave
it being; or whether retaining the wonted poise, it was raised up by some
spiritual operation, I inquire not; Only, I see it swim, like Cork, upon the
stream of Jordan, and move toward the hand that lost it: What creature is not
willing to put off the properties of nature, at the command of the God of
Nature; Oh God, how easy is it for thee, when this hard and heavy heart of
mine is sunk down into the mud of the world, to fetch it up again by thy
mighty word, and cause it to float upon the streams of life, and to see the
face of heaven again?

Yet still do the sides of Israel complain of the thorns of Aram; The
children of Ahab rue their fathers unjust mercy; From an enemy, it is no making
question whether of strength, or wile: The King of Syria consults with his
servants, where to encampe for his greatest advantage; their opinion is not
more required, than their secrecy; Elisha is a thousand Scouts; he sends word
to the King of Israel of the proiects, of the remoues of his enemy: More than
once has Iehoram saved both his life, and his host, by these close
admonitions. It is well that in something yet a Prophet may be obeyed; What
strange State-seruice was this, which Elisha did, besides the spiritual? The
King, the people of Israel owe themselves, and their safety to a despised
Prophet: The man of God knew, and felt them Idolaters; yet how careful, and
vigilant is he, for their rescue; If they were bad, yet they were his own; If
they were bad, yet not all; God had his number amongst their worst. If they
were bad, yet the Syrians were worse; The Israelites mis-worshipped the true
God; the Syrians worshipped a false; That (if it were possible) he might win
them, he will preserve them; and if they will needs be wanting to God, yet
Elisha will not be wanting to them; their impiety shall not make him
undutiful.

There cannot be a iuster cause of displeasure, than the disclosing of those
secret counsels, which are laid up in our ear, in our breast. The King of
Syria, not without reason, stomachs this supposed treachery. What Prince can
bear that an adverse power should have a party, a Pensionarie in his own
Court? How famous was Elisha, even in foreign Regions? Besides Naaman, others
of the Syrian Nobility take notice of the miraculous faculties of this Prophet
of Israel; He is accused for this secret intelligence: No words can escape him,
though spoken in the bedchamber; O Syrian, whosoever thou were, thou said not
enough; If thy master do but whisper in thine ear, if he smother his words
within his own lips; if he do but speak within his own bosom, Elisha knows
it from an infallible information; What counsel is it, O God, that can be hid
from thee? What counsel is it, that thou will hide from thy Seer? Even this
very word that accuses the Prophet is known to the accused; He hears this
tale, whiles it is in telling; he hears the plot for his apprehension: How ill
do the proiects of wicked men hang together? They that confess Elisha knows
their secretest words, do yet confer to take him. There are Spies upon him,
whose espials have moved their anger, and admiration; He is descried to be in
Dothan, a small Town of Manasses; A whole Army is sent thither to surprise
him; The opportunity of the night is chosen for the exploit; There shall be
no want either in the number, or valor, or secrecy of these conspired troops:
and now when they have fully girt in the village with a strong and exquisite
siege, they make themselves sure of Elisha; and please themselves to think, how
they have incaged the miserable Prophet, how they should take him at unawares
in his bed, in the midst of a secure dream; how they should carry him
fettered to their King; what thanks they should have for so welcome a prisoner.

The successor of Gehezi rises early in the morning, and sees all the City
encompassed with a fearful host of foot, horse, charets: His eye could meet
with nothing but woods of pikes, and walls of harness, and luster of metals;
and now he runs in affrighted to his master; Alas, my master, what shall we
do? He had day enough to see they were enemies that environed them; to see
himself helpless, and desperate; and has only so much life left in him, as
to lament himself to the partner of his misery: He cannot flee from his new
master, if he would; he runs to him, with a woeful clamor, Alas, my master,
what shall we do?

Oh the undaunted courage of faith! Elisha sees all this, and sits in his
chamber so secure, as if these had only been the guard of Israel, for his
safe protection. It is an hard precept that he gives his servant, Fear not; As
well might he have bid him not to see, when he saw, as not to fear when he
saw so dreadful a spectacle; The operations of the senses are not less
certain, than those of the affections, where the objects are no less proper:
But the task is easy, if the next word may find belief, [For there are more
with us, than with them;] Multitude and other outward probabilities do both
lead the confidence of natural hearts, and fix it: It is for none but a
David, to say, I will not be afraid of ten thousands of people, that have set
themselves against me round about: Flesh and blood rises, and falls,
according to the proportion of the strength, or weakness of apparent means.

Elishaes man looked about him; yet his master prays, Lord open his eyes that
they may see; Naturally we see not, whiles we do see; Every thing is so seen,
as it is; Bodily eyes discern bodily objects, only spiritual can see the
things of God; Some men want both eyes, and light; Elishaes servant had eyes,
wanted illumination; No sooner were his eyes open, than he saw the mountain
full of horses, and charets of fire round about Elisha. They were there before,
(neither does Elisha pray that those troops may be gathered, but that they may
be seen) not till now were they descried. Invisible Armies guard the servants
of God, whiles they seem most forsaken of earthly aid, most exposed to
certain dangers; If the eyes of our Faith be as open as those of our sense, to
see Angels as well as Syrians, we cannot be appalled with the most unequal
terms of hostility; Those blessed Spirits are ready either to rescue our
bodies, or to carry up our souls to blessedness; whether ever shall be
enjoined of their Maker: there is just comfort in both, in either.

Both those charets that came to fetch Elijah, and those that came to defend
Elisha, were fiery: God is not less lovely to his own, in the midst of his
judgments, than he is terrible to his enemies, in the demonstrations of his
mercies. Thus guarded, it is no marvel if Elisha dare walk forth into the
midst of the Syrians. Not one of those heavenly Presidiaries struck a stroke
for the Prophet; neither does he require their blows; only he turns his
prayer to his God, and says, Smite this people, I pray thee, with blindness;
With no other than deadly intentions did these Aramites come down to Elisha,
yet does not he say, Smite them with the sword, but, Smite them with
blindness; All the evil he wishes to them, is their repentance; There was no
way to see their error, but by blindness; He that prayed for the opening of
his servants eyes, to see his safe-gard; prays for the blinding of the eyes of
his enemies, that they might not see to do hurt.

As the eyes of Elishaes servant were so shut that they saw not the Angels,
when they saw the Syrians; so the eyes of the Syrians shall be likewise shut,
that when they see the man, they shall not see the Prophet: To all other
objects their eyes are clear, only to Elisha they shall be blind; blind, not
through darkness, but through mis-knowledge; they shall see, and mistake both
the person and the place: He that made the senses, can either hold, or delude
them at pleasure; how easily can he offer to the sight other representations,
than those which arise from the visible matter, and make the heart to believe
them?

Justly now might Elisha say, This is not the way, neither is this the City,
wherein Elisha shall be descried: He was in Dothan, but not as Elisha; he shall
not be found but in Samaria; neither can they have any guide to him, but
himself. No sooner are they come into the streets of Samaria, than their eyes
have leave to know both the place, and the Prophet: The first sight they have
of themselves, is in the trap of Israel, in the jaws of death; those stately
palaces, which they now wonder at unwillingly, carry no resemblance to them,
but of their graves; Every Israelite seems an executioner; every house a
Iaile; every beam a gibbet; and now, they look upon Elisha transformed from
their guide, to their common murderer, with horror and palenesse: It is most
just with God to entangle the plotters of wickedness, in their own snare.

How glad is a mortal enemy to snatch at all advantages of revenge? Never did
the King of Israel see a more pleasing sight, than so many Syrian throats at
his mercy; and, as loath to lose so fair a day, (as if his fingers itched to
be dip't in blood) he says, My father, shall I smite, shall I smite them? The
repetition argued desire, the compellation, reverence: Not without allowance of
a Prophet, would the King of Israel lay his hand upon an enemy, so miraculously
trained home; His heart was still foul with Idolatry, yet would he not taint
his hand with forbidden blood; Hypocrisy will be still scrupulous in
something; and in some awful restraints is a perfect counterfeit of conscience.

The charitable Prophet soon gives an angry prohibition of slaughter; Thou
shall not smite them; Would thou smite those whom thou have taken captive,
with thy sword, and with thy bow? As if he said, These are Gods captives, not
thine; and if they were thine own, their blood could not be shed without
cruelty; though in the hot chases of war, executions may be justifiable; yet
in the coolness of deliberation, it can be no other than inhumane, to take
those lives which have been yielded to mercy; But here, thy bow and thy sword
are guiltless of the success; only a strange providence of the Almighty
has cast them into thy hands, whom neither thy force, nor thy fraud could have
compassed; If it be victory thou aymest at, overcome them with kindness; Set
bread and water before them, that they may eat and drink; Oh noble revenge of
Elisha, to feast his persecutors! To provide a Table for those, who had
provided a grave for him; These Syrians came to Dothan full of bloody purposes
to Elisha; he sends them from Samaria full of good cheer, and iollitie; Thus,
thus should a Prophet punish his pursuers; No vengeance but this is heroical,
and fit for Christian imitation; If thine enemy hunger, give him bread to eat;
if he thirst, give him water to drink: For thou shall heap coals of fire
upon his head; and the Lord shall reward thee; Be not overcome with evil, but
overcome evil with good.

The King of Israel has done that by his feast, which he could not have done
by his sword; The bands of Syria will no more come by way of ambush, or
incursion, into the bounds of Israel: Never did a charitable act go away,
without the retribution of a blessing; In doing some good to our enemies, we
do most good to our selves: God cannot but love in us this imitation of his
mercy, who bids his Sun shine, and his rain fall where he is most provoked;
and that love is never fruitless.

THE FAMINE OF Samaria relieved.
NOt many good turns are written in Marble: soon have these Syrians forgotten
the merciful beneficence of Israel: After the forbearance of some hostile
inrode, all the forces of Syria are mustered against Iehoram: That very Samaria
which had relieved the distressed Aramites, is by the Aramites besieged, and is
affamished by those, whom it had fed. The famine within the walls was more
terrible than the sword without; Their worst enemy was shut within; and could
not be dislodged of their own bowels: Whither has the Idolatry of Israel
brought them? Before, they had been scourged with war, with drought, with
dearth; as with single cords; they remain incorrigible, and now God twists two
of these bloody lashes together, and galls them even to death: There needs no
other executioners than their own mawes. Those things which in their nature
were not edible, (at least, to an Israelite) were now both dear, and dainty;
The Ass was (besides the vntoothsomnesse) an impure creature; that which the
law of Ceremonies had made unclean, the law of necessity had made delicate,
and precious; the bones of so carrion an head could not be picked for less
than four hundred pieces of Silver; neither was this scarcity of victuals
only, but of all other necessaries for humane use; that the belly might not
complain alone, the whole man was equally pinched.

The King of Israel is neither exempted from the judgment, nor yet yields
under it; He walks upon the walls of his Samaria, to ouersee the Watches set,
the Engines ready, the Guards changed, together with the posture of the enemy;
when a woman cries to him out of the City, Help my Lord O King; Next to God,
what refuge have we in all our necessities, but his Anointed? Earthly
Sovereignty can aid us in the case of the injustice of men, but what can it
do against the judgments of God? If the Lord do not help thee, whence shall
I help thee? out of the barn floor; or out of the winepresse? Even the
greatest powers must stoop to afflictions in themselves, how should they be
able to prevent them in others? To sue for aid where is an utter impotence of
redress, is but to vpbraid the weakness, and aggrauate the misery of those
whom we implore; Iehoram mistakes the suit; The suppliant calls to him for a
woeful piece of Justice; Two mothers have agreed to eat their sons; The one
has yielded hers to be boiled, and eaten; the other, after she has taken her
part of so prodigious a banquet, with-drawes her child, and hides him from the
knife; Hunger and envy make the Plaintiff importunate; and now she craves the
benefit of royal justice; She that made the first motion, withholds her part
of the bargain; and flies from that promise, whose trust had made this mother
childlesse. Oh the direful effects of famine, that turns off all respects of
nature, and gives no place to horror; causing the tender mother to lay her
hands, yea her teeth upon the fruit of her own body; and to receive that into
her stomach, which she has brought forth of her womb; What should Iehoram
do? The match was monstrous; The challenge was just, yet unnatural; This
complainant had purchased one half of the living child, by the one half of
hers, dead; The mother of the furuiuing Infant is pressed by covenant, by
hunger; restrained by nature; To force a mother to deliver up her child to
voluntary slaughter, had been cruel; To force a Debtor to pay a confessed
arerage, seemed but equal: If the remaining child be not dressed for food,
this mother of the devoured child is both robbed, and affamished; If he be,
innocent blood is shed by authority.

It is no marvel if the question astonished the Judge; not so much for the
difficulty of the demand, as the horror of the occasion; To what lamentable
distress did Iehoram find his people driven? Not without cause did the King
of Israel rend his garments, and show his sackcloth; well might he see his
people branded with that ancient curse which God had denounced against the
rebellious; The Lord shall bring a Nation against thee, of a fierce
countenance, which shall not regard the person of the old, nor show favor to
the young; And he shall besiege thee in all thy gates; And thou shall eat the
fruit of thine own body, the flesh of thy sons, and of thy daughters; The
tender and delicate woman, her eyes shall be evil toward her young one that
comes out from between her feet, and toward the children which she shall
bear, for she shall eat them for want of all things secretly in the siege and
straitness. He mournes for the plague, he mournes not for the cause of this
plague, his sin, and theirs; I find his sorrow, I find not his repentance:
The worst man may grieve for his smart, only the good heart grieves for his
offense: In stead of being penitent, Iehoram is furious, and turns his rage
from his sins, against the Prophet; God do so to me, and more also, if the
head of Elisha, the son of Shaphat, shall stand on him this day: Alas, what
has the righteous done? Perhaps Elisha (that we may imagine some colors of
this displeasure) forethreatned this judgment; but they deserved it, perhaps
he might have auerted it by his prayers; their unrepentance disabled him;
Perhaps he persuaded Iehoram to hold out the siege; though through much
hardness, he foresaw the deliverance; In all this how has Elisha forfeited
his head? All Israel did not afford an head so guiltless as this that was
destined to slaughter: This is the fashion of the world; the lewd blames the
innocent, and will revenge their own sins upon others uprightness.

In the midst of all this sad estate of Samaria, and these storms of Iehoram,
the Prophet sits quietly in his own house, amongst his holy Consorts;
bewailing no doubt both the sins, and misery of their people; and
prophetically conferring of the issue; when suddenly God reueales to him the
bloody intent, and message of Iehoram, and he at once reueales it to his
fellows. See ye how this son of a murderer has sent to take away mine
head. Oh the inimitable liberty of a Prophet! The same God that showed him his
danger, suggested his words; He may be bold, where we must be awful; Still
is Naboths blood laid in Iehorams dish; The foul fact of Ahab blemisheth his
posterity; and now when the son threats violence to the innocent, murder is
objected to him as hereditary.

He that foresaw his own peril, prouides for his safety; [Shut the door and
hold him fast at the door.] No man is bound to tender his throat to an unjust
stroke; This bloody commission was prevented by a prophetical foresight: The
same eye that saw the executioner coming to smite him, saw also the King
hasting after him, to stay the blow; The Prophet had been no other than
guilty of his own blood, if he had not reserved himself a while, for the
rescue of authority: Oh the inconstancy of carnal hearts! It was not long
since Iehoram could say to Elisha, My father, shall I smite them? now he is
ready to smite him as an enemy, whom he honored as a father; Yet again,
his lips had no sooner given sentence of death against the Prophet, than his
feet stir to recall it; It should seem that Elisha, upon the challenges and
expostulations of Iehorams messenger, had sent a perswasiue message to the King
of Israel, yet a while to wait patiently upon God for his deliverance; The
discontented Prince flies off in an impotent anger, Behold, this evil is of
the Lord, what should I wait for the Lord any longer? Oh the desperate
resolutions of impatient minds! They have stinted God both for his time and
his measure; if he exceed either, they either turn their backs upon him, or
fly in his face: The position was true, the inference deadly: All that evil
was of the Lord; they deserved it, he sent it: What then? It should have been
therefore argued, He that sent it, can remove it: I will wait upon his mercy,
under whose justice I suffer: Impatience and distrust shall but aggrauate my
judgment; It is the Lord, let him do what he will; But now to despair
because God is just, to defy mercy because it lingers, to reject God for
correction, it is a presumptuous madness, an impious pettishnesse.

Yet in spite of all these prouocations both of King, and people, Elisha has
good news for Iehoram; Thus says the Lord, To morrow about this time shall a
measure of fine flower be sold for a Shekell; and two measures of Barley for a
Shekell in the gate of Samaria: Miserable Israel now sees an end of this hard
trial; One days patience shall free them both of siege, and famine. Gods
deliverances may ouer-stay our expectation, not the due period of his own
counsels. Oh infinite mercy, when man says, No longer, God says, To morrow;
As if he would condescend, where he might judge; and would please them who
deserved nothing but punishment. The word seemed not more comfortable, than
incredible; A Lord, on whose hand the King leaned, answered the man of God, and
said, Behold, if the Lord would make windows in heaven, might this thing be?
Prophesies, before they be fulfilled, are riddles; no spirit can areed them,
but that by which they are delivered. It is a foolish and injurious infidelity
to question a possibility, where we know the message is Gods: How easy is it
for that omnipotent hand to effect those things, which surpass all the reach
of humane conceit? Had God intended a miraculous multiplication, was it not as
easy for him to increase the corn or meal of Samaria, as the widows oil?
was it not as easy for him to give plenty of victuals without opening the
windows of heaven, as to give plenty of water without wind, or rain? The
Almighty hates to be distrusted; This Peer of Israel shall rue his unbelief;
Behold, thou shall see it with thine eyes, but shall not eat thereof; The sight
shall be yielded for conviction, the fruition shall be denied for punishment;
Well is that man worthy to want the benefit which he would not believe; Who can
pity to see Infidelity excluded from the blessings of earth, from the glory
of heaven?

How strange a choice does God make of the Intelligencers of so happy a change:
Four Lepers sit at the entering of the Gate; they see nothing but death before
them, famine within the walls, the enemy, without: The election is woeful; at
last they resolve upon the lesser evil; Famine is worse than the Syrian; In
the famine there is certainty of perishing; amongst the Syrians, hazard;
Perhaps the enemy may have some pity, hunger has none; and, were the death
equally certain, it were more easy to die by the sword, than by famine; upon
this deliberation they come down into the Syrian camp, to find either speed
of mercy, or dispatch. Their hunger would not give them respite till morning;
By twilight are they fallen upon the uttermost tents: Behold, there was no
man; They marvel at the silence, and solitude; they look, and listen; the
noise of their own feet affrighted them; their guilty hearts supplied the
Syrians, and expected fearfully those which were as fearfully fled: How
easily can the Almighty confound the power of the strong, the policy of the
wise? God puts a Pannick terror into the hearts of the proud Syrians; he makes
them hear a noise of charets, and a noise of horses, even the noise of a great
host; They say one to another, Lo the King of Israel has hired against us
the Kings of the Hittites, and the Kings of the Egyptians, to come upon us;
they arise therefore in a confused rout, and leaving all their substance
behind them, flee for their lives. Not long before, Elishaes servant saw
charets and horses, but heard none; Now, these Syrians hear charets and
horses, but see none; That sight comforted his heart; this sound dismayed
theirs; The Israelites heard no noise within the walls, the Lepers heard no
noise without the gates; Only the Syrians heard this noise in their camp:
What a scorn does God put upon these presumptuous Aramites? He will not
vouchsafe to use any substantial stratagem against them; nothing but an empty
sound shall scatter them, and send them home empty of substance, laded with
shame, halfedead with fear; the very horses that might have hastened their
flight, are left tied in their Tents; their very garments are a burden; all is
left behind, save their very bodies, and those breathless for speed.

Doubtless these Syrians knew well to what miserable exigents the enclosed
Israelites were brought, by their siege; and now made full account to sack,
and ransacke their Samaria; already had they divided, and swallowed the prey;
when suddenly God puts them into a ridiculous confusion; and sends them to
seek safety in their heels; no booty is now in price with them but their
life; and happy is he that can run fastest.

Thus the Almighty laughes at the designs of insolent men, and shuts up their
counsels in shame.

The fear of the four Lepers began now to give way to security; they fill
their bellies, and hide their treasures, and pass from one Tent to another, in
a fastidious choice of the best commodities; they who ere-while would have held
it happiness enough to have been blessed with a crust, now wantonly roue for
dainties; and from necessity leap into excess.

How far self-love carries us in all our actions; even to the neglect of the
public? Not till their own bellies, and hands, and eyes were filled, did
these Lepers think of imparting this news to Israel: at last, when themselves
are glutted, they begin to remember the hunger of their brethren; and now they
find room for remorse; We do not well, this day is a day of good tidings,
and we hold our peace; Nature teaches us that it is an injury to ingrosse
blessings: and so to mind the private, as if we had no relation to a
community; we are worthy to be shut out of the Citie-gates for Lepers, if the
respects to the public good do not ouer-sway with us in all our desires, in
all our demeanure; and well may we with these covetous Lepers fear a mischief
upon our selves, if we shall wilfully conceal blessings from others.

The conscience of this wrong and danger sends back the Lepers into the City;
they call to the Porters; and soon transmit the news to the Kings household;
The King of Israel complains not to have his sleep broken with such
intelligence; He arises in the night, and not contemning good news, though
brought by Lepers, consults with his servants of the business.

We cannot be too jealous of the intentions of an enemy; Iehoram wisely
suspects this flight of the Syrians to be but simulatorie, and politic; only
to draw Israel out of their City, for the spoil of both; There may be more
peril in the back of an enemy, than in the face; the cruellest slaughters
have been in retiring: Easily therefore is the King persuaded to adventure
some few for-lorne Scouts for further assurance; The word of Elisha is out of
his head, out of his heart; else there had bin no place for this doubt:
Timorous hearts never think themselves sure; those that have no says, had
need of much sense.

Those few horses that remain, are sent forth for discovery; they find
nothing but Monuments of frightfulness, pledges of security: Now Israel dares
issue forth to the prey; There (as if the Syrians had comne thither to enrich
them) they find granaries, wardrobes, treasures, and what ever may serve
either for use, or ostentation: Every Israelite goes away filled, laden,
wearied with the wealthy spoil.

As scarcity breeds dearth, so plenty cheapnesse: To day a measure of fine
flower is lower rated, than yesterday of dung.

The distrustful Peer of Israel sees this abundance, according to the word of
the Prophet, but enioyes it not: he sees this plenty can come in at the gate,
though the windows of heaven be not open; The gate is his charge; The
affamished Israelites press in upon him, and bear him down in the throng;
Extreme hunger has no respect to greatness: Not their rudeness, but his own
unbelief has trampled him under feet. He that abased the power of God by his
distrust, is abased worthily to the heels of the multitude; Faith exalts a man
above his own sphere; Infidelity depresses him into the Dust, into Hell: He
that believes not is condemned already.

FINIS.

