In s'Graven Haghe Ten huyse van Henricus Hondius, anno 1637.

map of Breda drawn by Henricus Hondius BARONNIE VAN BREDA

inset map of the barony of Breda

A BRIEF DESCRIPTION OF BREDA, and the Barronie thereof, represented in this
mapp above.
THis City is a Land Town, situated in a most pleasant place upon two
Rivers, the one called the Marck, the other the A, from whence the name thereof
is derived. For the A spreading it self at the broadest in it, is called Breed
A, that is, Broad A. This Riveret running into it, does strengthen the Town
exceedingly, by feeding and filling the moate with water, and within the Town
does discharge it self into the Marck. It is girt about with a thick, high,
and a lofty wall, having rows of Oaks, Elmes and other trees growing upon it.
The circuit of it is 4000 Geometrical paces at 5 foot, which make some three
English miles in compass, having twelve hundred Houses in it, a goodly Markett
place, and a fair Church, with a Lofly steeple 362 foot high. The Castle lies
upon the Marck with a goodly moate about it severed from the Town, a stately
Orchard, and a Garden for pleasure like a paradise, with a curious Maze, a fine
prospect, Fountains, and other rarities in it.

Moreover, it is strongly fortifyed with 13 Royal Bulwarks, five large
Hornworks, a broad and a deep moate in some places 200 foot over, diverse
Ravelings Halfe-moones and a Counskarfe, which J will delineate by Figure and
Letter.

The Figure
1. Js the Castle Bulwark, Hom-worke and Raveling upon which Count Harrie
Governor of Frizeland runn his Approach. 2. Js Spite-Mansfeilds Bulwark. 3.
The Bosch-Port-Bulwarck with the Horne-work and Raveling. 4. Maurice Bulwark.
5. Martins Bulwark with the Horne-worke. 6. Nassaws Bulwark. 7.
Ginnekens-Port-Bulwarke and Horne-worke upon which his Highness quarter
Approached. 8. Notes Bulwark. 9. The Water-miles. 10. Hollands Bulwark. 11.
Barnevelts Bulwark. 12. Anwerps-Port-Bulwark, and Horne-worke upon which Count
William ran his Approaches. 13. Lamberts Bulwark. 14. The new Bulwark. 15.
Heragiers Bulwark, all these having Ravelings on the otherside of the moate
and Counterskarfe.
The Description of the seige, without and the several quarters
A. His Highness quarter consisting of English, French Wallons and Duchess. B.
Count Williams quarter at the Hage. C. Count Harries quarter Lord Gouvernour of
Fryzeland at Tetering. D. Coronell Varicks quarter near Terheyde. E.
Lieutenant Coronell Boshuysens quarter. F. The Wallons quarter on the other
side of the Marck. G. Count Solmes his quarter. H. The Lord of Brederodes
quarter. I. Coronell Ferens his quarter. K. The Damme, where the Marck was
stopped by his Highness quarter. L. The two first small Redoubts to keep in
the Enemy upon Ginnekens way into Breda. N. The first Battery, where the
French and the English began their Approaches, the one on the right, and the
other on the left hand. N. The French Approach. O. The English Approach. P. A
great Battery of 12 half Canon. Q. A second Battery of 8 Pieces. R. A third
Battery called the French Battery of 4 Pieces. S. The Mast, or Pine-wood
through which the line of Circumvalation rann. T. The Fort Papenmutch. V. The
Riveret A, between Papen-mutch the crown work, and the stone bridge. W.
Count Williams Approach from the Hagh. X. Count Williams first Battery made
against Antwerpes Poort and Bulwark. Y. Count Harries Approach and Battery
upon the Horneworke and Raveling before the Castle. Z. The House of pleasure
taken in by Count Harrie. aa. This Arrable Lands. bb. Low meddow grounds
overflowed. cc. The Pan-house and way toward Getruydenberke. dd. The high way
toward Turnehout. ee. The high way toward Hooghstrate. ff. Js Rysbergen,
where the Cardinal Jnfante quartered. gg. Heusenhout, or the way by which the
Enemy marched through our gards when they departed. hh. The House of Knaverie
moated. ii. The States lodging. kk. The black dyke.

