THE DOCTRINAL OF PRINces made by the noble orator Isocrates, and translated
out of Greek in to English by sir Thomas Eliot knight. 1534

Sir Thomas Eliot knight to the reader.
This little book (which in mine opinion) is to be compared in counsel and
short sentence with any book, holy scripture excepted, I have translated out
of greek, not presumyng to contend with them, which have done the same in
latin: but to the intent only that I would assaie, if our Englisshe tunge
might receive the quick and propre sentences pronounced by the greeks. And
in this experience I have found (if I be not much deceived) that the form of
speaking, used of the Greeks, called in greek, and also in latin, Phrasis,
much nere approaches to that, which at this day we use: than the order of
the latin tunge: I mean in the sentences, and not in the words: which I
doubt not shall be affirmed by them, who sufficiently instructed in all the
said three tunges, shall with a good judgment read this work. And where I
have put at the beginning this words, vessel, plate, or for that which is in
greek, brass or gold wrought, it is perceived of every wise man, for what
intent I did it. Finally the chief cause of this my little exercise was: to the
intent that they, which do not understand greek nor latin, should not lack
the commoditee and pleasure, which may be taken in readyng thereof. wherefore
if I shall perceive you to take this mine enterprise thankefully, I shall that
little portion of life, which remains (God sendyng me quietness of mind)
bestow in preparing for you such books, in the readyng whereof, ye shall find
both honest pass time and also profitable counsel and lernyng.

Fare ye well.
The oracion of Isocrates to Nicocles the king.
They that b^ wont Nicocles, to bring to you, that be kings, garments,
vessel, or plate, or other like iewelles, whereof they be nedie, and ye be
rich, and have plenty: they plainly seem unto me, not to present you, but to
make open market, sellyng those things much more craftily, than they that
confess them self to retaile. For my part I suppose that to be the best
gefte and most profitable, also most convenient as well for me to give, as for
the to receive, if I might prescribe unto the, by what studies desiryng, and
from what works absteinyng; thou may best order thy roialme and city. For
to private persons be sufficient Instructions, specially that they live not
delicately, but daiely do labor for things concerning their living. And
moreover they have laws, whereby they are governed: They have also libertee of
speech, wherewith it is lefull for friends to blame each other, and enemies to
reproach each other of their offenses.

Thereto diverse ancient poets have left sondrie works, instructyng men how to
live well, so that by all those means it seems, that diverse men have amended
their living.

But to great princes no such thing happens, for they, who of all other ought
to be best taught or instructed, after they be ones stablished in their
authoritee: they still persevere most ignorant and without lernyng. For as
much as many men dare not approach them, and they that keep them company
speak alwaie to please them.

Moreover, being made lords of much substance and great authoritee, and not
vsyng well such occsions as happen, they have caused many to doubt, which
life is best to be chosen, either of them that live privately and meanly, or
of them that be in princely dignitee. for when they behold their honor,
richesse, and authoritee, they suppose, that all princes be equal to gods, but
when they consider the fear and perils, and reuoluyng in their remembrances
do find some slain by them, that lest ought to have done it, other doing
some displeasure to their most familiar companions, to diverse happens both the
one and the other: than contrary wise they think it better and more
commodious, to live in any other manner, how so ever it be, than in so many
dangers, to be king of all Asie. The cause of this disorder and trouble, is
for as much as they repute a kyngedome as mete for every man to have, as any
other mean office, where of al things perteining to man, a kingdom is the
greattest, and requires most providence, touching every act, whereby a man
may best govern according to the manners of people, and to observe such
things as be good, and exchue those that be noifull: it is expedient to take
counsel, and examine such acts as be in daily experience. Generally, all
studies, which ought to be observed most diligently, and wherein a man ought to
be exercised, I will assaie to declare. but whether this my gift ones
finished, shall accord to the purpose that I go about: it is hard to know at
the beginning. for many things, which have been written as well in verse as
in prose, as long as they were in the minds of the writars, men had of them
great expectacion: but after they were ones finished and openly published, men
had of them opinion much less than they hoped. How be it this mine enterprise
is to be commended, wherein I seek for that, which other men have committed,
and do prescribe rules to them that be governors.

For they that teach private persons, do profit them whom they teach only:
But if any man instructs in virtue them that have rule over the multitude, he
thereby profits the one and the other as well them that be in auctoritee, as
those that be under their governance, for as much as to the first he makes
their aucthoritee the more stable and sure, and to the other he causes the
rule or governance to be the more easier.

First therefore it must be considered, what is the office of them that do
govern, for if we order well the head, and that which is the principal of the
whole matter, having our respect thereunto, the better shall we treat of the
residue.

I suppose all men will grant, that it pertains to princes, their countceie
by any aduesitee, being troubled, to set it in quietness: And if it be
welthie, so to preserve it. And to make also great of that, that is little, sens
therefore all other things, which daiely happen, ought to be done and
experienced, and verily it is apparent to all men, that it behooves them, that
are and shall be of power to do the premises, and also those, which shall
thereof consult, not to be ignorant: but to consider how they may use them more
prudently than other in their ministracion.

For it is very certain that such shall princes have their roialmes and
governance, as they them selfs have prepared their own minds and opinions.

And therefore no wrasteler or champion ought so much to travail his body in
exercise, as kings ought their minds in study: for all the prices that ever
were given in commune games or Iustes, are in no part to be compared to that
price, wherefore ye that be kings, daiely do labor: which things considered,
it is expedient to take good head, that as much as thou excellest other men in
honor, so much more thou may excede them in virtues. And think not care
and diligence in all other things profitable, and in making us better to be of
none importance: Ne condemn not man's infelicitee, that concerning beasts we
have found crafts to make them tame, and to be of more value, and little do
auaunce our selfs to the atteinyng of virtue. but rather as lernyng and
industry may be in any thing beneficial unto our souls, so order thy wit
and opinion. Be also most familiar with them, which being about the, be
wisest: and get other such as thou may come by most like unto them.

Think not that it shall become thee, to lack the knowlage of any famous
poets and other great learned men: but be thou of the one the herer, of the
other the disciple or scholar.

Prepare thy self so, that in virtue thou may be judge of them, which
therein be thine inferiors, and a contendar with them that be thy superiors,
by such manner of exercise thou shalt soon atteine to be such one, as we
determined that he ought to be, that rules a right, and governs well his
countreie or city.

Thou shall be counseled best by thy self, in thinkyng it inconvenient, that
the better be ruled by the worse, or that fools before wise men should be
preferred.

The more vehemently thou abhorrest other men's madness or folly, the better
shalt thou practice thy wit: for thereat must they begin, that purpose to do
any of those things, which be convenient and necessary. And therewith love
well their people and countraie, for no man shall rule well either, horse or
hounds, nor men, or any thing else, if he delight not and take pleasure in those
things, which be under his governance.

Take care of the multitude, and esteem above all things, to rule graciousely
over them, whom thou gouernest, remembering that as well where few persons
governs, as also in other commonweals, they longest do continue, that for
the multitude do take most care and study.

Thou shalt truly rule well thy people, Iuiuries to be avoided.
if thou neither do suffer any man to do wrong, nor despisest any that
sufffreth wrong. And take good head, that good men be rewarded with honor
and auctoritee, and that other by any injury be not indamaged. These be the
principles and chief introduction in to the right and commendable governance
of a public weal.

Repel or change such laws and ordinances as be not well constitute,
Hurtefull tradicions to be avoided.
specially be thou the auctour of those that be good, or at the least the
follower of them that were well made by other.

Seek for such laws, What the laws should be.
that on al parts be good, and do profit to all universally, and in them
selfs be of one accord and consent: moreover, those that among the people
make fewest contencions. And such controversies as be, determine them
shortly. Al these things ought to be in laws, that be well and substancially
ordained.

Provide for thy people such occupacion, as whereby may grow great advantage
and lucre, and that contencion and suit, may bring to them detrimente, to the
intent that they may eschew the tone, to the other they may be well disposed
and ready.

In controversies give always such sentence as is not repugnant, and prononce
thy judgments without favor to any man, and without discordance, so that
they be ever all one and like in semblable causes.

It becomes and is also expedient to princes in matter of justice, to have the
mind immovable, like to the laws that be well provided.

Order thy City or countreie, To govern a city.
like thy house left by thy father, in stuff gaie and roially decked, in
occupacion busy and diligent, that thou may have both honor and abundance
of richesse.

Al be it declare thy magnificence not in such sumptuous expenses, that shortly
do vanishe, but only in the things before expressed: that is to say, in the
adournyng or garnishyng of thy possessions, and in beneficence and liberalitee
toward thy friends, for that, which is so employed, shall remain with the
still, and thou shall leave to thy children more commoditee thereby, than they
should have of superfluous expenses.

In the honor due unto god observe diligently that which is left unto thee
by thy progenitors. and suppose verily, that sacrifice to be most acceptable
and service most thankful to god, if thou endeavor thy self to excel all
other men in virtue and justice. For undoubtedly thereby shall thou opteine more
reasonable peticions, than if thou dydst give unto him great treasure or
offrynges.

Reward thy familiar counsailours with principal dignitees, and to them whom
thou know beneuolent and trusty, give perpetual and stable promorions.

Think that the best and most sure guard of thy person be friends virtuous
and honest, A princes sure guard
loving and beneuolent subjects, and thine own will stable and circnmspecte:
for by those things authoritee is opteined and lengest preserved.

Have good awaite on the householdes, and expenses of thy subjects, A princes
right over his subjects.
thinkyng that they dispendyng unprofitably, do consume thine own propre
treasure, and that which they get by their good husbandry augmenteth thy
substance and honor: Lonsideryng that all the goods of them that be
subjects, be at the commandment of the prince that rules well and
honorably.

Let men perceive the to have alwaie truth in such reverence, that to thy
words, they may sooner give credence than to other men's oaths.

Make thy countreie safe and sure abidyng to all them that be strangers, and in
their contractes just and indifferent.

Of such as do repair unto thee, set more by them, that for some merit do
look to have some thing of thee, than of those that do bring presents to
thee, for honoryng men for their merits thou shalt much more be of other
commended.

Take away fear fro thy subjects, and be not terrible to them that have not
offended, but like as thou would have them disposed toward the, so be thou
toward them.

Do thou nothing in fury, sens other men know what time and occasion is
meetest for the.

Be thou seen to have such wisdom and grauitee, that nothing that is done
can be hid from thee, not withstanding be thou easy and merciful, in
punisshyng offenses under their merits.

Show thy self princely, not in sturdinesse, or punisshyng cruelly, but in
surmountyng all other in wisdom, that they may suppose that thou can
counsel them better for their weal than they can them selfs.

Be also warlike and valiant in feats of arms and provision for wars, but
yet notwithstanding embrace thou peace, and do nothing iniustly.

Deal thou with inferior countreies in all entercourses and mutual
contractes, according as thou would that they that be to thy countreie
superiors, should do unto the.

Strive not for every thing, but for that only which, if thou opteinest may
be to thy profit.

Blame not them that be vanquished to their commoditee, but account the^ to be
fools that do vanquishe other to their own detriment.

Suppose not them to be men of great wisdom, that do take greatter things
in hand than they can order: but those, which in mean things do bring
well to pass that that they purposed.

Follow not them that do opteine greattest auctoritee, but them that best use
things that be present.

Finally do not think thy self happy, if thou rulest over all men terribly
and in great danger, but if being such as thou ought to be, and doing as
the time present requires, thou desire moderate things, and thereof thou
lackest nothing, than art thou happy.

Get thee friends, not all them that do seek friendship of the: but such as
be most agreeable unto thy nature, neither those, with whom thou shalt live
plesantly, but with whom thou may govern thy country most surely.

Make diligent espiall and prouse of thy most familiar servants, remembryng
that such as be not with the so conversant, do suppose that thou art like in
conditions to them, whom thou use familiarly.

Matters, wherewith thou thy self will not medel, commit to such persons,
as what so ever they do, the blame shall be imputed thiefely unto the.

Think not them to be loial or faithful, that do preise all thing that thou
do, but them that do blame the thing, wherein thou errest.

Give to wise men libertee to speak to thee freely: that in things, whereof
thou doubtest, thou may have them, with whom thou may try out the
certaintee.

Discern crafty flatterers, Crafti^ flattere^
from the^ that do serve the with true heart and benevolence, lest the evil
men receive more profit by thee, than they that be honest and virtuous.

Here diligently what men speak mutually one of an other, and assaie to know as
well what manner of persens those be that have spoken, as also they, of whom
they reported.

Accordyngly as thou correctest offenders, False de^actours.
semblably, and with the same punishment correct false detractours and
accusers of innocents.

Have no less dominion or rule over thy self, than over other.

Think it most incident unto a king and most royal, never to be subject to
pleasant affections, but to rule more over thine appetites than over thy people
and subjects.

Admit no recreation without good aduisement, but delight in such exercise,
whereby thou may receive some commoditee, and that other may perceive, that
thou art thereby the better.

Glory not in such things, which are possible to be done by them that be
unthrifts, but rejoice in virtue, wherein evil men can not participate with
thee.

Suppose not honor to be that, ^ery ho^ur.
which is published abroad with fear, but very honor to be, where men by
them selfs wonder more at thy wisdom than at thy fortune.

If it chance the to take any pleasure in any thing that is not honest or
virtuous, do it very secretly, but going about things of great weight and
importance, show thy self abroad unto al men.

Require not that all other men should live in good order, and princes to be in
their living remiss and negligent, but order thy temperance in living, to be
an example to other, considering that the manners of all the whole city or
contraie, do ensue and resemble their princes conditions.

It shall be to the a token, that thou haste well governed, if thou perceive
them that be under thy governance to be by thy diligence welthie and more
temperate in living.

Set more by leauyng to thy children honest fame or renoume, Honest fame.
than great possessions or richesse. for these be transitory, the other
immortal. Also goods may be gotten by fame, but good fame can be bought with
no money.

Also goods happen to men that be of evil disposition, but so does not good
estimacion, but comes only to them that endeavor them self with virtue to
get it.

Be delicate in thine apparaile and garments that serve for thy body, in all
other parts of thy living be continent as it besemeth all princes of honor,
to the intent that they that behold the, for thine honorable presence may deem
the worthy to be a governor and thy familiars and servants for thy noble
courage may have of the a like good opinion.

Consider diligently both thine own words and thy deeds, to the intent thou
may fall in very few errors.

Of all things it is best to happen on the right point of all things that
are to be done, but for as much as that is very hard to be known, better is
to leave somewhat, than to excede.

For that, wherein somewhat does lack is nerer to temperance, than that wherein
is to much abundance.

Endeavor the to be both courtaise and of a reverend grauitee: Courtesy and
grauite^
for the one besemeth a prince, the other is expedient and more agreeable to
every company: all be it to use both, it is of all other things the most
difficile. for thou shalt find for the more part them that use a reverent
grauitee to be unpleasant, them that be courtoyse, to be of base courage and
simple. Therefore the one and the other is to be used, but than exchue that
thing, which in any of them is ill or seems inconvenient.

If thou would perfectly know that, Experyence and philosophy.
which belongs to kings to perceive, give the to experience and study of
philosophy, for philosophy shall declare unto thee the means or ways how to
bring to pass thine affairs: experience in semblable business shall make
the able to do or sustain them.

Behold diligently, that which as well princes as private persons do daily,
and what of their acts does succeed in conclusion.

Surely if thou remember well things that are passed, thou shall the better
consulte of things coming.

Think where private persons have died with good will, to the intent that
after their death they might be commended, that it were great shame to
princes, not to travail in such study or business, whereby in their lives
they mate be worthily praised.

Desire to leave when thou die, rather monumentes or images of thy ver tues
than of thy personage.

Endeavor the specially to keep alwai thy self and thy country in surety.

If necessitee constreigne thee to ieoparde thy person, chose rather to die
with honor, than to live in reproach.

In all thine acts remember that thou art a prince: and therefore do nothing
unworthy to so high a dignitee.

Set not so little by thy nature, that thou suffer thy self all wholly to
perish, but in as muthe as thy body is mortal, and thy soul immortal, assaie
to leave to thy soul an immortal remembrance.

Use thee to speak of honest affairs and studies, that by such custom thou
may think on like things as thou spekest of.

Things that in counsailyng seem to be best, those execute thou in thy proper
acts.

At whose good renown thou have most envy, his deeds do thou follow.

Look what thou counsailest thy children or servants to do, think it
convenient that thy self do the same.

Either use that which I have advised the to do, or inquire for better than
that is.

Suppose not them to be wise men, that sharply can talk of small things and
trifles, but those that can substancially reason in matters of weighty
importance.

Nor think not them wise, that promise to other men welthe and good fortune,
they them self being in great necessitee, but rather those that speaking of
them selfs moderately, can with other men and in their affairs use them self
well and discretely and being not troubled with any change of their living,
know how to bear honestly and temperately as well aduersitee as also
prosperitee.

And marvel thou not, that I have now rehearsed many things that thou knew
before, nor that forgatte I not, but knew well enough, that being such a
multitude as well of princes as of private persons, some of them have spoken
the same that I did, and many have heard it, and diverse have seen other men
done it, and some there be that by them selfs have experienced it. Not
withstanding in matter concerning Instruction, novelty is not to be sought for,
for therein ought not to be founden either singular opinion, or thing
impossible, or contrary to men's conjecture: but suppose that to be in heryng
most gracious or pleasant, which being sown in the minds of other, may
assemble most matter to the purpose, and the same declare best and most
aptely. For this know I well, that the counsels and wise sentences of poets
and other good authors, are thought of all men to be very profitable: yet will
not they very gladly give ear unto them, but be therewith in the same case, as
they be with those that do give them good counsel, for they praise them all,
but they care not how seldom they come in their compani, desiryng to be
rather with offenders, than with them that of sin be the rebukars. Example
we may take of the poemes or works of Hesiodus, Theognes, and phorillides.
For every man affirms the^ to be excellent counsels concerning man's life,
but all though they say so, yet had they lever use that, whereto their own
madness indureth them, than follow that whereto the others precepts does
advise them. Moreover if one should gader out of the said authors that which
men call centences, wherein they perchance have been studiouse: in semblable wise
toward them should they be disposed, for they should with more pleasure here a
liyng fable or a fa^tafie, than the said precepts made by much connyng and
diligence. But what needs it to tarry long upon every matter? Generally if we
will consider the natures of men, we shall perceive, that many of them delight
neither in meats that been most wholesome, nor in studies that been most honest,
nor in deeds that be most convenient: nor yet in doctrine that is most
commodious, but embracing pleasant appetites, which be repugnant to prolite,
would seem to be painful and laboriouse, although they do nothing expedient,
or necessary.

How may any man content any such persons, either by prechyng or teaching or
tellyng of any thing that is profitable: that for the words that be spoken,
do envy and have indignacion at them that speak truly, and do take them for
plain men or simple, in whom lacks wisdom? so much they abhor truth
in all things, that they know not what is theirs or do belong to their
office, but consultyng or reasonyng of that which does perteine unto them,
they be sad and unpleasant, when they talk of other men's affairs they be
merry and ioyouse. Moreover they had leauer suffer some grefe in their bodies,
than in reuoluyng what should be most necessary, travail any thing in their
minds. And if a man take good head he shall find in their mutual assembles
and companies, that either they reprove other men, or else that they of other be
in some thing reproved. And when they be by themselfes, they be ever wisshing
and never consultyng. I have not spoken this again all men but only again
them that be guilty in that, which I have rehearsed. Finally this is apparent
and certain, who so ever will make or write any thing pleasant and thankful
to the multitude, he may not seek for words or matters most profitable, but
for them that contain most fables and leasynges. For in bearyng such things
they rejoice: but when they perceive to be labors and contencions in their
affairs, than be they pensife. Wherefore Homere and they that found first
tragedies, may be well meruailed at, who in their works used both the said
fourmes in writynge, for Homere expressed in his works the contencions and
batailes of them, which for their virtues, were named half gods, the other
brought those fables into actual apparaunce.

In so much as we not only may here them, but also may presently behold
them, by such example is it declared to them that be studiouse to please
their herers, that they must abstain from exhortyng and counsailyng them, and
that they apply them to write and speak that only, wherein they perceive the
mnl titnde to have most delectacion.

This before written have I declared, thinkyng that it besemeth not the that
art not one of the people, to be of like opinion with the multtitude, or to
judge things to be honest, or men to be pleasant, according to thy sensual
appetite, but to try and esteem them by their good and profitable acts.

Moreover for as much as they that labor in the study of Ppilosophy,
concerning the exercise of the minds, be of sondrie opinions, some saying that
men become wiser by much disputyng and reasonyng, other affirm that it
happens by exercise in polityke governance, or civil causes, diverse suppose it
to come of other doctrines: but finally they all do confess, that he which
is well brought up, may by every of the said studies gather matter sufficient
to give good counsel.

Therefore he that will leave the doubtful opinions, and will apply to that
which is certain, he must examine the reasons thereof, and sperially they
that be counsailours ought to have consideration of the occasion, time and
oportunitee, if they can not bring that to pass, than to reiecte and put
away as well them which speak in all matters generally, as also those that
perceive nothing that is expedient or necessary, for it is aparant, and
certain, that he which can not be to him self profitable, he shall in other
men's business do nothing wisely.

Make much of them that be wise, and do perceive more than other men, and have
good regard toward them: remembryng that a good counsailour, A good
counsailour.
is of all other treasure the most royal and profitable, and think verily
that they which can most aid and profit to thy wit or reason, shall make
thy kyngedome most ample and honorable.

Wherefore for my part as much as I ran, I have exhorted the, and honored the
with such presents as be in my power to give the. And desire thou not, that
other men should bring unto the (as I said at the beginning, their accustomed
presents, which ye should bie much derer of the giuers, than of the sellers:
but couaite thou such presents, which if thou do use well and diligenly
omittyng no time, thou not only shall not consume them, but thou shalt also
increase them, and make them of more estimacion and value.

Finis.
Addicion, to fill up vacant pages.
Full truly writes Solomon, The heart of the king is in the hand of god, and
which wai so ever he wills he shall incline it: but the very laud of a good
king is, if he again incline his heart to god, the king of all kings,
alwaie bendyng to his will, without whose favorable aid, man's endeavor can
nothing do: and so frames all his acts, as knowlageyng and myndyng, that
what so ever he does, he does it before his eyes, who is no less judge
over kings then over common people. Nothing is truly prosperous, nothing can
be called welthy, that the author of all felicitee will not vouchesafe to make
fortunate. Most luckely, most happily it is done, what so ever is done
according to his will, who says: By me kings do reign, and the law makers
decerne just things: by me princes rule, and mighty men judge just things.
This said the eternal wisdom, which is the son of God. What prescribes
Sapience to kings? Mercy (says she) and Truth do keep the king: and his
Throne is made strong with clemency. He shows Mercy in succouryng the
oppressed: Truth in iudgeyng truly. Clemency in temperyng the seueritee of
the laws with lenitee.

The special duty, and whereunto kings were wont to be sworn, when they
began their reign, was this, to help widows, to succor the fatherless,
and to deliver and defend all that are oppressed from injury. Truth has
two companions, Sapience and Constance. Sapience gives light unto the eyes:
whereby is perceived, what is right, and what not, what is profitable for the
weal publyke, and what is contrary to it. Constancy causes, that the mind,
ouercomyng all couetouse desires, neither with ire, nor with love, nor with
hatred, is moved from honesty. Clemency tempereth with lenitee necessary
Seueritee. Clemenrie is not forthwith to go in hand with war, when cause
of war is given, but to leave no reasonable mean unassayed, to see whether
the matter may be determined without war. And otherwhile it is better to
dissemble the injury, than to revenge it by force of arms. It is Clemency,
if by no means it may be eschewed, so to make war, that as littell human
bloudde be spilte as can be, and that the wars be ended as shortly as may
be. For this wisdom, that brings all good things with it, Solomon prayed
for, that she should alwaie be assistent to his Throne, as a most faithful
and trusty counsailour.

Finis.
JMPRINTED AT London in Fleet street, in the house of Thomas Berthelet.

Cumpriuilegio ad imprimendum solum.


