GREAT BRITAINS SORROW For the Death of her late deceased all beloved
Sovereign Lord King JAMES, Who dyed at his Manor of Theobalds, on Sunday,
March 27. 1625. AND THE PEOPLES JOY In the welcome proclaiming of his undoubted
Son, and our Liege Lord CHARLES King of Great Britain, France, and Ireland,
etc.
woodcut of the body of King James laid out and a gathered crowd

HEre are two Figures of great Grief and Joy:
Each striving one the other to destroy:
And as the one possesses us with Grief,
The other gives us Comfort and Relief.
This unexpected and unwelcome Blow
Caused brinish Tears our mourning Eyes oreflow;
Yet we have the Almighties favor found,
Who gave the Cure before he gave the Wound.
This Good deceast example of Good Kings,
Whose fair Renown throughout the whole world rings,
The Iemme and Jewel of Great Britains Throne,
Our Wise, Beloved, Prudent Solomon,
The Scourge of Antichrist, whose Tongue and Pen
Has been inspired by God, admired by Men:
When Blessed Peace was banished every where,
He gave her Royal entertainment here:
Full two and twenty years (that Heavenly Dove)
He did embrace her in the Arms of Love.
Peace (all his life) with Plenty staid with him
Whilst neighbour-Realms in bloody wars did swim.
His Learning and his Charity was rare,
Unmatched, as his Works do well declare.
For Royal Majesty and Courtesy,
For pious Zeal, and Liberality,
He was the Paragon, and Pattern too,
To guide all Princes how to speak and do.
And having lost him, which way can we see
How this great Damage may repaired be:
O God, with thankfulness we make confession,
Thou have restored our Joys, in his Succession;
Rest gracious James, in Everlasting Rest,
Whilst in thy blessed Offspring we are blessed.
Great Charles, our hope in thee, expels our fears,
Reuiues our Joy, our drooping spirits cheares:
Thy Fathers Sunset almost struck us dead,
And by thy Rising we are comforted.
O what a war of Grief and Joy, within
Each Subjects breast the conquest sought to win:
At last our Joy the victory did gain,
For joy of Thee, Great Britains Charlemagne.
When as the Peers of this lamenting Land
Proclaimed thy Reign, thy Title, and Command,
Then did the Air with Acclamations ring,
God save Charles, Britains, France, and Irelands King.
This was the sound of comfort, and the voice
That made each sad and fearful heart rejoice.
In Thee, we are made happy we confess,
If we have grace to see our happiness.
As thou art Heir unto Great James his Crown,
So art thou to his virtues and Renown,
In thee his goodness really is borne,
His Crown and Qualities do thee adorn,
So that this change is nothing but in Name,
The Estate and the Perfection is the same.
Long may thou imitate his actions still,
T'aduance the Good, and to suppress the Ill,
That tracing in the footsteps of thy Sire,
Thy name and fame all Nations may admire,
Whilst Thou, the Glory of thy Diadem,
May be thy peoples Joy, and joy in Them.
May no Conspira^ies thy peace molest,
May Antichristian Plots be all suppressed:
May God and good men ever more befriend thee,
And days of old Methashelah attend thee.
Amen.

