God save
I In memorable brass let there be writ
A An everlasting story of a King:
M Marvel of men! wonder of chiefest wit!
E Eternal glory does to England bring.
S So let his style be framed, and he be said,
E Englands true King, successor of a Maid.
K Know foreign powers: Englands true loyalty,
I Is bent in service to her Sovereign King:
N Nor shall the fierce allar'ms, nor frown of enemy
G Give alteration, or daunted courage bring.
O O no, she shall, first in a scarlet flood,
F Fight to the lips, with loss of dearest blood.
E Even as the day which first proclaimed his name,
N Never as yet did seem to make an end:
G Glorious with bon-fires pyl'd on stateliest frame,
L Looked like the morning, the Sun, the night: which
A A quiet reign, and happy to our King; (did pretend
N Near ceasing Joys and his aeternizing.
D Do therefore England, marching in stately trains,
E Englands true Leige-lord, welcome bid (King James.)
God save King James.
THE COPY OF the K. Majesty's letter to the L. Mayor of the City of London,
and to the Aldermen and Commons of the same.
Trusty and well-beloved, We greet you heartily well. Being informed of your
great forwardness in that just and Honorable action of proclaiming us your
Sovereign Lord and King, immediately after the decease of our late dearest
sister the Queen, wherein you have given a singular good proof of your
ancient fidelity (a reputation hereditarie to that our City of London, being
the Chamber of our Jmperiall Crown, and ever free from all shadows of
tumultuous and unlawful courses:) We could not omit with all the speed we
might possible, to give you hereby a taste of our thankful mind for the
same: And withal, assurance that you cannot crave any thing of us fit for the
maintenance of you all in general, and every one of you in particular, but it
shall be most willingly performed by us, whose special care shall ever be to
provide for the continuance and increase of your present happiness: Desiring you
in the mean time to go constantly forward in doing all and whatsoever things
you shall find necessary or expedient for the good government of our said
City in execution of Justice, as you have been in use to do in our said
dearest Sisters time, till our pleasure be further known unto you.

Thus not doubting but you will do as ye may be fully assured of our gracious
favor toward you in the highest degree, we bid you heartily farewell.

Halirudhouse the 28. of March. 1603. James R.

To our trusty and well-beloved Robert Lee L. Mayor of our City of London, and
to our well-beloved the Aldermen and Commons of the same.

