A SERMON PREACHED BEFORE HIS MAJESTY AT THE COURT AT GREENEWICH the 2. of
IVLY. 1632.

BY GEO: IAY Mr. OF ARTS AND LATE STVDENT OF CHRIST-CHVRCH in OXON.

Imprinted at London by Augustine Mathewes. 1632.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, THE COUNTESS OF DENBEIGH, LADY OF HER MAJESTY'S
Bedchamber, and Mistrisse of her Robes.
RIGHT HONORABLE,
SOme that have conceived better of this then I can at the hearing (though it
received little advantage by my delivery) thought it worthy to be published, to
which when I was persuaded, I did not much study to whom I should dedicate it.
For to whom should I present my service in this kind, but to her, who of all
others has given so many notable examples of religion, and so much cherisht
the professors of it, and my self amongst the rest. Religion and learning in
these latter days never found a greater Patroness. You have been the good
Angel that when the waters were troubled have helped the distressed into the
poole. John 5.2.
The grapes in Babell sent upon a time to the Vine leaves in Iudaea desiring
their shadow, least they were parcht with the heat: Talmud Cholm. 62.1
Our succorlesse clusters need not send so far for protection, did your
branches spread (under which the beasts of the field, Dan. 4.12.
and the fowls of heaven had their habitations) as heretofore when the great
Duke (my gracious Master for a moment) your illustrious brother lived. During
the intended expedition to Rochell.
were your power as great as then, or as your disposition is good, my hopes
would live though his excellency and my noble Lord of Anglesey, (whom I shall
ever name with honor and sorrow) are dead. And I make no question but that J
should only find an exchange, not a loss, and at last a happy success of
those many gracious references, from his sacred Majesty (whom God preserve)
for which I shall ever think my self bound to thank your Honor and your
noble kinseman Master Porter.

How can I conceive otherwise since your Honor lately without request freely,
and voluntarily offered me preferment of your own, until you could procure
me better. I presume you desire not to have this published, Math. 9.30.
yet our Savior that charged the two blind men that they should tell no man,
Luke 17.18.
did not mislike the turning back of the thankful stranger: should I
conceal it, I should not do right to your sweet and noble disposition, and
leave in in some (it may be) a suspicion of my unthankefulnesse: For which
pious expression of your favor unto me, as also your many precedent (besides
the reward which such works of charity carry with the^) your Ladyship shall
ever have my prayers and thanks, and as the humble acknowledgement of my
obligation to your Honor, so any future service when you shall please to
descend so low as to command it from

Your Honors humble beads-man to dispose of GEO: IAY.

A SERMON PREACHED AT THE COURT.
REVEL. 2.10. Be thou faithful unto Death, and I will give thee a Crown of
life.


GOd is the best Paymaster, he that labors in his Vineyard shall be sure of
his hire though he comes at the last hour, Math. 20.9. They that doubled their
talents in the Gospel received not verbal but real rewards, Math. 25.20. And
a cup of cold water given in his name shall not be unpaid for, Math. 10.42. And
the faith of the thief upon the Cross at the last gasp shall be recompensed
with a place in Paradise, Luke 23.43. If Abraham will walk before God, and be
perfect, he will make a covenant with him, and bless him exceedingly, Genesis
17.1.2. Gods reward and man's service are Relatiues: Posito vno, ponitur and
alterum, Say the one, and you cannot deny the other. If our obedience preceede,
his blessings will follow, if one be in the premises, the other will be in the
conclusion; if we come before his presence with praise, and thankesgiving, and
show our selves glad in him with Psalms, he will be merciful unto us, and
bless us, and show us the light of his countenance, and be merciful unto us;
Fac hoc, and viues, Do this and thou art sure of life everlasting, Luke 10.28.
Sure to eat of the Tree of life, as in the seventh verse of this chapter, sure
not to be hurt of the second death, as in the eleaventh verse, and according to
my Text, Esto fidelis, and Corona vitae will follow, it is God that says it.
Be thou faithful, etc.

Which words you are to understand as spoken by Christ Jesus the head to every
faithful member of his Church, to whom he proposes a duty to be performed,
Faithfulness unto death, and a reward to be received, a crown of life.

So as the division is easy, a duty, and a promise. In the duty I observe
two things. First the substance, or matter of it, Faithfulness, we must be
faithful. Secondly the Determination, Extent or Measure of it, until Death.

In the Promise, I also observe two things. First the reward it self, a
Crown, I will give thee a Crown. Secondly the specification, or quality of
the Reward, an immortal Crown, I will give thee a Crown of life.

Be thou faithful, etc.
I begin with the first part, our service: And good reason our service should
go before the Reward to our service. Therefore first we are to be faithful.
Be thou faithful unto Death, etc.

And I will proceed according to the order of nature, and consider first the
substance of faithfulness, and then the continuance. And then I shall tell you
by this word faithfulness, we are not to understand that habit of the soul,
whereby we apprehend, and lay hold upon the mercy and favor of God in our
regeneration, and first conversion, which the scripture calls faith, and whereby
we believe, and yield assent unto all the articles of our Christian doctrine,
which is the root and fountain of all Christian duties. But we are to
conceive it of that faithfulness which springs as an effect or fruit from
that root, and includes a just discharge of those duties which God requires at
our hands: As also an universal obedience to all his Commandments. You know
that we are all Stewards unto the great Lord of heaven, and sent into the
earth to traffic and negotiate with those talents which he has committed to
every one of us in our several places. Now says Saint Paul in the 1. Cor. 4.
that it is required in a Steward, that he be found faithful, that is justly,
and honestly to husband, and dispense those things that are entrusted to his
charge, according to the will and pleasure of his Lord and Master.

Now the maine rule that must direct us in the guiding and governing of all our
purposes, behaviors, and actions must be the glory of God; He has created
all things for his own sake says Solomon, Prove. 16. that is, for his own
glory. This is the tribute that he requires of every man, this must arise unto
him out of every action; We are not our own says the Apostle, we are bought
with a price, 1. Cor. 6.20.
therefore glorify God in your bodies and in your souls. The whole man must
be faithful in giving God his glory; the thoughts that we think they must
be religiously, and faithfully conceived to the honor of God. I will give
thanks unto God secretly amongst the faithful, says the Psalmist, Psalm.
111.1. And yet not only in our thoughts secretly, but in our words openly, in
the congregation, as it follows in the end of the same verse.

And as we must be faithful in glorifying him in our thoughts and words, so
likewise in our deeds; the light whereof must so shine before men, that they
seeing our good works may glorify God our Father which is in Heaven.

And note what a strict course the Lord has taken for the gathering up of this
tribute of his glory out of every thing. He will call us to a reckoning for our
secretest cogitations: Inquisition shall be made into our very thoughts. If
you speak but a word that does not some way or other tend to his glory, it is an
idle word, and we must account for idle words in the day of judgment; if then
we do a deed that aims not at this end, shall we think not to be
questioned for it? We must all appear before the judgment seat of the Lord,
to give an account of those things that we have done in the body. Therefore our
body and our soul, our thoughts, words and deeds, must all be ordered, and
husbanded so faithfully and justly, that God may have his due, his Honor, and
his Glory by it. And if we have been faithful in a little, he will make us
Rulers over much, Math. 25.23. And by way of commendation tell us, It is well
done good and faithful servants, and then bid us enter into our Masters joy,
where we shall have a Crown of life, if we have discharged our duty as much
as in us lies, and been obedient and faithful unto Death. And that is my
second part, the continuance, extent or measure of our thankfulness, (...) which
has a twofold meaning, and may yield us matter of instruction both ways. For
first, (...) is unto death, and then it signifies such a service, and such
faithfulness, as will not shrink at any affliction, or prosecution
whatsoever, but goes on courageously, and resolutely if need be to the laying
down of our life, and continues faithful even unto death. Secondly, (...)
signifies until death, and then it betookens such a service, and such an
obedience as continues all our life long, never fails of the discharge of 'its
duty as long as we have a day to live, but continues, and goes on from day to
day, from year to year, as long as we have any being, even until death.

First then our duty must be strong, substantial, well wrought, and close
woven, and such as will not shrink, neither with the water of affliction, nor
with the fire of persecution, nor be shaken with the wind of temptation, but
endure all extremities, even death it self. We must be faithful unto death:
And then it must hang upon the same thread that our life does, and both must
run on together, and as long as the one lasts so long must the other, and
our service must be faithful until death.

First then of the couragiousnesse of our service that it must not shrink at
any thing, no not at death it self. Omne majus continet in se minus, that
every lesser thing is contained in the greater, is a ground, and principle in
nature, which every man knows. If then our service must be faithful unto
death which is extremum malorum, the greatest of evils, then it must be
faithful unto persecution, imprisonment, loss of goods, disgraces and
reproaches, which are but lesser evils, even petty, and slight afflictions as
the Apostle calls them. My son says Solomon when thou entrest into the
house of the Lord, prepare thy Soul for temptations: and our Savior in the
10. of Matthew says, if any man will follow me, and be my Disciple, let him
take up his Cross, and follow me, let him deny himself, not make dainty of
any thing he has, no not of his life. He that will save his life shall lose
it, and he that desires to have a Crown of life, must be faithful unto
death.

The way to Heaven is not paved with the pleasures of this world, nor strow'd
with the flowers of humane delights, but through many tribulations we must
enter into the kingdom of Heaven, says Saint Paul in the 14. Acts 22. And our
Savior which is our head, he has led the way and trod the path before us, and
first wore the crown of Thorns, before he put on his Crown of glory, he
first served his Father faithfully unto death, and then was rewarded with a
Crown of life. No sooner do we enter our selves into the service of God, and
put on us the livery of him that is the Father of lights, but presently the
whole kingdom of darkness is up in arms against us, the Prince whereof
leads the battle, and he wars against us with all the temptations that his
malice can suggest. And not content with his own strength, he stirs up the
world against us, ^^^ur Savior tells his Disciples, because you are not of the
world, therefore the world will hate you; and this hatred it will show by
defaming our Credit, spoiling us of our goods, persecuting of our bodies, yea
and sometimes by taking away our lives too. Nay further, this subtle
adversary of ours like a politic Statist, will not only war against us
with open hostility, but he will stir up enemies within our own gates, and
kindle a fire in our own house, and raise up this traitorous and rebellious
flesh of ours, which we nourish in our own bosoms like a false brother to
seduce, and entrap us; this flesh perplexeth us with fears, enveigles us with
hopes, allures us with baits, distracts us with cares, and torments us with
pains, and uses a thousand sleights, and fetches to make us betray our
Christian profession, and revolt from that God to whom in our baptism we swore
our allegiance to be his constant soldiers, to fight under his banner, and to
do him faithful service in spite of the world, the flesh, and the Devil, or
all extremities that can betide us, whether they are the miseries of nature,
the frowns of fortune, yea or the loss of life, even unto death it self.
This is the vow, this is the profession, and this is the promise that we have
made in baptism: And we have it sealed and confirmed with the sign of the
Cross, the sacred signiture, and character whereof stands imprinted in our
foreheads to testify to the world, that we have made such a vow to heaven, and
to encourage us to confront any enemy being armed with an In hoc signo vinces,
and to convince us of cowardice if we shrink or draw back. Our life is a
Warfare, and what should a coward do in the wars that cannot endure the
aching of a finger, is he fit to be the soldier of that Captain that entered
not into life, but by the gates of death? Our Country is in heaven, and the
world is but our pilgrimage, and therefore they are much deceived, says Saint
Augustine, Qui quaerunt vitam in regione mortis, that seek for life and
pleasure in this region of misery, and death. A heathen man could say, Non est
delicata res vincere. Seneca.
here is no Paradise, noe heaven on earth, but in the safety of a good
conscience. Our time of reigning and triumphing is reserved for us in heaven,
this is a time of duty and service, and such service as must be courageous,
and not shrink at any thing, but continue constant, and faithful unto death.
And here let us descend every man into his own heart, and try, and examine our
selves how we stand affected to the performance of this duty, whether we could
be content to be Gods faithful servants, and stick close to him though it
were to the loss of goods, or our reputation, or our friends, or our life it
self, and be faithful unto death; And I doubt not, but that we have
presumption enough to flatter our selves so far, as to believe, and profess,
and perhaps to brag, and vaunt that we are ready to follow our Captain
Christ Jesus whither soever he goes, though it were to the shedding of our
bloods, the spending of our lives even unto death. I make no question but that
we believe this of our selves, and we would make the world believe so too.
But what says Saint James? show me thy faith by thy works, let the world see
our profession by our actions, and let our vaunts be made good by a real, and
actual performance. Whereas if a man may be bold to judge of the tree by the
fruit, and to guess at the faithfulness of the heart by the action of the
outward man, and by those things which are daily presented to our eyes, I
think we should have much to do to persuade any advised, and considerate
man, that our faithfulness is such as would endure all extremities. And that
we would faithfully follow our Captain if ^^ed were unto death. Why the very
censure of lewd, and reprobate persons is enough to flout us out of our
Christian profession, and we would feign do God that faithful service which
our own conscience tells us we owe him, but that we are afraid we shall fall
into disgrace with the world, and that men will account us over precise, and
too religious. This is but a slight pain, and far enough from the heart (a man
would think) and yet even this as slight as it is, kills the faithfulness of
many stout Christians by their own report, and makes them revolt from their
captain and turn renegadoes, I will not say turn Turk, but which is worse,
carry a Turks heart under a Christians livery. Neither has this been the
cowardlinesse of the cursed multitude only, but even of professed leaders and
eminent commanders, even the Scribes and Pharisees, we may see it in the
twelfth of John. There their consciences were so plainly convinced by the
power of Christ's doctrine, and miracles that their hearts could not choose but
tell them that he was the Messiah; yet says the Text, they could not believe
in him, nor make profession of him for their reputation sake; because they
loved the praise of men more then the praise of God, verse 42.43. Nay, a far
less matter then this scarres us from our faithfulness. Let our Savior come
for faithfulness, and call us to his service, not into the field to venture our
lives, but into the Church where is no danger of life or limme (except we are
afraid perhaps of breaking our knees, but we will take order against that well
enough, and therefore we will be sure not to bow them) Let him I say but call
for our faithfulness and service at Church, and we have our sports to follow,
our proiects to contriue, our visits to make, our Mistresses to court, and they
their dresses and faces to order, and compose for all the day after; any thing
shall serve turn to divert us from his service, and to deny him that
faithfulness which we are bound to perform unto him, what ever came of it,
though it were to the loosing of our lives, for the duty that is here enjoined
is faithfulness unto death; Be thou faithful unto death. I have done with
(...), unto death. I come now unto (...) until death. And then it puts us in
mind of the constancy of our duty, that it must last and continue as long as
our life does; the Spirit of God has joined them both together, let none of us
be so hardy as to venture and sunder them, but let them run on both together in
Gods name, and as far as our life goes, so far let our faithfulness even
until death comes. In the affairs of this life it is a shame for a man to
begin an enterprise and not to go through with it, every man points at him
with his finger, derides, and geeres him; this man began to build, and was not
able to finish it.

In the works of our Christian profession, the shame is greater, the danger
infinite, and therefore Saint Paul befooles his Galathians when they fell from
their faithfulness which once they professed, he tells them they were
bewitched, or else such a thing could never have befallen them. Gal. 3.1.
O ye foolish Galathians who has bewitched you, are ye so foolish as having
begun in the Spirit to end in the flesh? If a Man begin a piece of work,
and leave it off in the middle, he has taken a good deal of pains to no
other purpose, but to leave a Monument of his folly, and vanity to the world.
He that has received the common graces of God, and many good gifts of his
Spirit, which have enabled him to do much good and faithful service, and then
takes the grace of God and turns it into wantonness, and smothers and
quenches the Spirit, comes near unto dangerous symptoms of a more dangerous
state. When a man is in a fair way to heaven, and has some time walked on
religiouslly and faithfully, till he has come within some sense of his
reward, and within some view of his Crown by common enlightnings: then to
turn out of the way; and Apostate into the broad way, what is it else but to
tread in a path that without repentance will lead to destruction. And
therefore it is said in the 6. Chap. of the Epistle to the Hebrews, that it is
impossible that they which were once enlightened and have tasted of the heavenly
gift, and were made partakers of the Holy Ghost if they fall away, should be
renewed again by repentance, seeing they crucify to themselves the Son of
God afresh, and put him to an open shame. Here I could give you many examples
of revolters and backsliders, and show you to what a height of impiety they
have grown when once they have forsaken God and that goodness they have begun
to profess, which for brevitie sake I will omit and conclude this point with
the exhortation of the Apostle in the 3. to the Hebr. ver. 12.13. Take heed
brethren least at any time there be in any of you an evil heart, and
unfaithful to depart away from the living God, but exhort one an other daily
whilst it is yet called to day least any of you be hardened through the
deceitfulness of sin, for we are made partakers of Christ, if we hold the
beginning of our confidence steadfast unto the end, and my Text says, If we
continue faithful until death, the God of life and death will give us a
Crown of life. And that's my second general part.

The Promise.
I will give thee a Crown of Life.
Ego dabo tibi Coronam vitae.
And here every word yields matter of observation. I will begin with the first
word Ego, and that is either taken eminenter by way of eminency. And then it is
I the God of heaven and earth that deck my self with light as with a garment,
that make the clouds my chariots and ride upon the wings of the wind. I will
give this Crown.

Great persons give great gifts: Alexander gave a talent to a beggar, not
considering what was fit for the other to receive, but for him to give. Here
God sprinkles Crowns now and then one, a few in an age all the world over, but
in the next life he makes them all Kings, as it were showring and rayning
Crowns from his glorious head, upon his glorified members.

Secondly here is Ego exclusive, I, by way of exclusion. And then it is I, and
none but I, that give these Crowns.

This preferment, these Crowns come neither from the East, nor from the West,
nor from the South, but from God alone.

It Is not S. Peter's keys that can open the door of that kingdom, nor unlocke
the treasury where these Crowns are laid up, he keeps the key himself.

And if you will give me leave to slide from Spiritual to temporal Crowns,
then I shall tell you that God is the disposer of them also. By me Kings
reign. Prou. 8.15.
As was said of him by a wiser man then any of those that ever usurped that
power.

And it is but a ridiculous intrusion extra jurisdictionem jus dicere. To execute
the power of a Judge where a man has no jurisdiction; Or to give that which he
has not in his own power to bestow, which is none of his. This is like the
folly of the mad Athenian that took all the ships in the haven to be his own,
and so gave them away where he pleased, as if he had been the true and right
Master of them: Or like the devil that took the Son of God into an
exceeding high mountain, and showed him all the kingdoms of the world and the
glory of them, proffering all unto him if he would fall down and worship him.
When all those kingdoms, and Crowns were his Lords inheritance, and the
donation of them his prerogative. And they hold them but by a false tenure that
receive them from any other Donor. God is Judge himself, he puts down
one, and sets up an other himself, the word is not idle, he does it
himself says the Psalmist. And for this crown it is not to be bought as
Iulianus the Emperor bought the Roman Empire, nor to be sold as the Papal
disposer of kingdoms does bargain for it. But God himself bestows it. He
needs no Vicar upon earth for that purpose. His hands are long enough to set
the Crown upon that head that must wear it: the words are plain in my text,
Ego Dabo. Dabo, and that's the next word which plainly shows the manner how
these Crowns are conveyed unto us, we have them not by a bargain, or sale,
but by a deed of gift. This Crown is no purchase but a donation.

We may talk, or we may dream, of meriting, or earning this Crown, but we
should be but poorly rewarded, if God should deal with us according to the
proportion of our works. Our works at the best are stained with the
imperfections and blemishes of our corrupted nature; so that the most that we
could hope for, was pardon for their defect. And for a Delinquent that should
sue for his pardon to claim to sit in the throne with his Sovereign, were a
presumption so intolerable, that if we should be guilty of it, heaven and
earth would cry out shame upon us, and condemn us for idiots.

There Is not a word in this part of my text, but will serve for an exception
against that absurd claim by merit. Take Ego an offended God, and what is he
bound to do in justice? take Dabo, and what more free and non merited then
gift? we must strike out that word if we mean to make any claim by merit.
Take Tibi, and what is man but a guilty malefactor. There is such a gulf of
sin, betwixt Ego and Tibi that nothing can pass between them by way of
Justice, but punishment and vengeance.

Or take man at the best, and he is but an offender reconciled to grace and
favor, and received to mercy, so that every word cuts the throat of merit. Or
take the word Coronam, and and who that has the disposing of it, will set it
upon the head of a Captain? Or put the other word to it, and make it Coronam
vitae, and what an impudent demand were it for him to claim the Crown of
life, who all the world knows has deserved the shakles of death. They are
bold attempters that dare adventure to break down all those bars; there is
not a word here but is a fense good enough to keep out all that would take
possession of this Crown by way of merit. For it is Ego dabo tibi. Tibi.

Tibi by way of Argument I have handled already, but yet I will not let it go
until I have observed it to our comfort. Luther says well, that there is a
great deal of divinity in pronouns; give me leave to go a little further, and
to tell you that there is a great deal of comfort in pronouns too. Not only
strong divinity to ground an argument, but strong consolation to comfort a
weak spirit. Tibi is a word of singularity, and will contract Gods general
promises to every man in particular, if the fault be not his own. God
Almighties promises are like a well made picture; though there be an hundred
in the room in diverse places and postures, yet the picture seems to look
upon every one of them in particular, and we cannot avoid the aspect of it
except we turn our eyes aside.

Tibi, does particularize and brings down this Crown upon every man's head.
And indeed a particular word does well for Corona. For it is a single head that
must be ingirt with a Crown. Regnum non patitur consortem, A Crown cannot be
set upon the heads of two men at once, much less upon a many headded
multitude. This Crown will fit but a single head, it is Ego dabo tibi Coronam.

Corona. A Crown is the highest honor and happiness upon earth, it is a
Circle that takes in all that the earth can afford. And therefore if we will
take a resemblance of the Saints glory from any thing in this world earth
cannot yield a higher, then to call it a Crown. He that wears the Crown
swayes and commands all within the orb of his power. But the greatest
Scepter-swayer that this world affords, is oftentimes overswayed and borne
down by his own passions and infirmities. But when this Crown shall be set
upon our heads, there is not the meanest vassayle but shall feel more content,
in having dominion, and power, and free command over himself, then the
greatest Monarch ever found, in being able to move a whole Empire of subjects
with the breath of his mouth. A Crown is circular, when once you are in it,
you may run round without end which caries it above the sphere of mortality,
and makes it truly a Crown of life, and that is my last word.

Corona vitae.
I know not whether a man may safely say that this passage of ours from earth
to earth, from the womb to the tomb be a life or no. I think that which one
said of men at sea, that he knew not whether they might be reckoned amongst the
living or the dead, may be as well said of all that are a shore; for he that
now breaths with the greatest strength and freedom, may presently breath out
his last spiramus, expiramus; our breath, like the dove of Noah's arc, goes
out, and comes in, goes out and never returns again. Saint Paul says, we
die daily. And our Savior Christ that knew better how to term this natural
being of ours then we our selves, says they are but dead men that carry
others to Church. The dead bury the dead, Luke 9. verse 60. He therefore that
will think to find true contentment in a Crown, must seek it where no death
is to be found, here is nothing but sinning, therefore nothing but dying, in
heaven nothing but obedience, and therefore nothing but life. There is Corona
vitae, a Crown that shall last for ever, and that is the term for which we
hold it. It Is not given to us and our heirs for ever, but to us and our own
persons for ever. And this does distinguish it from all other gifts in the
world. Men think to make their deeds, and grants immortal and to continue for
ever, they are conveied to them, and their heir^s for ever. But the Prophet
says in the 37. Psalm, that another takes possession of them and he sought
them, and they were no where to be found. Whereas this Ego in my text gives to
this Tibi, this gracious master to his faithful servant an immortal gift, a
Crown of life which shall make him live for ever.

And now if we join all the words together, Ego daho tibi Coronam vitae. We
shall find that he has given us a gift in proportion, in weight, and measure
so far beyond our service, Romans 8.18.
that we have reason to confess with Saint Paul, that our sufferings and
faithfulness is not worthy of the glory that shall be revealed unto us, the
Crown of life that shall be bestowed upon us. And therefore we had need make a
stand and cry out with the Prophet David. O Lord what is man that thou art so
mindful of him, Psalm. 144.3.
or the son of man that thou so regardest him. Had it not been enough O Lord
to make us little inferior to the Angels, but thou must give us a kingdom, and
crown us with honor and glory, and such a kingdom, and such honor, and such
glory, as shall have no end. Though the Kings of the earth are crowned, and the
Scripture call the^ Gods; Yet they are but mortal Gods, and wear but
corruptible crowns; and the time shall come that will lay these Gods, and
these crowns low enough in the dust, and these Gods and these crowns shall
be turned into dust into nothing. But let this be their comfort; as God has
loved them with an everlasting love, so he will crown them hereafter with an
everlasting Crown; A Crown of such mettle that the rust of time shall never
eat into, not the continuance of eternity one for diminish the glory of it, it
shall be an incorruptible crown. Death it self shall have no power over it,
it shall been Crown of life. The Crown shall be fitted to the head, and the
head to the Crown, an incorruptible Crown upon an importall head. As our
bodies and souls shall live for ever, So our Crown shall be a crown of
life. Be thou faithful, etc.

Now the God that gave us our being, enable us to the performance of this
duty, and incline our hearts to serve him continually without interruption,
faithfully without dissimulation. Let our devotion be sincere, and then O Lord
continue it until death. And after that according to thy promise (and thou O
God art just in thy promises) crown us with glory, and life to serve thee in
thy kingdom for evermore. Now to God the Father, etc. Amen.

FINIS.

