A POEM DECLARING THE REAL PRESENCE OF CHRIST IN THE BLESSED SACRAMENT OF THE
AVLTAR.
IN Paschal feast, the end of ancient rite:
An entrance was to never fading grace.
Tipes to the truth, dim glimpses to the light:
Performing deed presaging signs did chase.
Christ's final meal, was fountain of our good:
For mortal meat, he gave immortal food.
That which he gave he was, o peereles gift:
Both God and man he was, and both he gave.
He in his hands him self did truly lift:
Far of they see, whom in them selves they have.
Twelve did he feed, twelve did the feeder eat:
He made, he dressed, he gave, he was their meat.
They saw, they heard, they felt him sitting near:
Unseen, unfelt, unheard, they him received.
No diverse things, though diverse it appear,
Though senses fail, yet faith is not deceived.
And if the wonder of the work be new:
Believe the work, because the word is true.
Here true belief of force inuiteth love:
So sweet a truth love never yet inioyde.
What thought can think, what will does best approve:
Is here attainde, where no desire is void.
The grace, the joy, the treasure here is such:
No wit can wish, nor will embrace so much.
Self love here cannot crave, more then it finds:
Ambition to no higher worth aspire.
The eagrest famine, of most hongrie minds:
May fill, yea far exceed their own desire.
In sum here is al, and that in some expressed:
Of much the most, of every good the best.
Here to delight the wits, true wisdom is:
To woo the will, of every good the choice.
For memory, a mirrhor showing bliss:
Here Is all that can both sense and soul rejoice,
And if to al, all this it does not bring:
The fault is in the men, not in the thing.
Though blind men see no light, the Sun does shine:
Sweet cates, are sweet, though sowered tastes deny it.
Pearls, precious are, though trodden on by swine:
Each truth is true, though al men do not try it.
The best, still to the bad does work the worst:
Things bred to bliss, does make them more accursed.
The Angels eyes, whom veiles cannot deceive:
Might best disclose, what best they do discern.
Men must with sound, and silent faith receive:
More then they can, by sense or reason learn.
Gods power our proof, his works our wits exceed:
The doers might is reason for his deed.
A body is endued with ghostly rights:
And natures work from natures law is free.
In heavenly Sun lies hid eternal lights:
Lights clear, and near, yet them no eye can see
Dead forms a never dying life does shrowde:
A boundles sea lies in a little cloud.
The God of hosts in slender hosts does dwell:
Yea God, and man, withal to either due.
That God that rules the heavens, and rifled hell:
That man whose death did us to life renew.
That God and man it is that Angels bliss:
In form of bread and wine our nourture is.
Whole may his body be, in smallest bread:
Whole in the whole, yea whole in every crumme.
With which be one, or be ten thousand fed:
Al to each one, to al but one does come
And though each one as much as al receive:
Not one too much, nor al too little have.
One soul in man is al in every part,
One face at once in many glasses shines.
One fearful noise does make a thousand start:
One eye at once of countles things defines
If proof of one in many, nature frame,
Why may not God much more perform the same.
God present is at once in every place:
Yet God in every place is always one.
So may there be by gifts of ghostly grace:
One man in many rooms, yet filling none.
Since Angels may effects of bodies show
God Angels gifts on bodies may bestow.
What God as author made, he alter may,
No chandge so hard, as making al of naught;
If Adam framed were of slimie claie;
Bread may to Christ's most sacred flesh be brought
He still does this, that made with mighty hand,
Of water wine, a snake of Moses wand.
Printed at Doway, by Laurence Kellam, at the sign of the holy Lamb, 1606.


