IONSONVS VIRBIVS: OR, THE MEMORY OF BEN: JOHNSON REVIVED BY THE FRIENDS OF
THE MUSES.

NOLI ALTVM SAPERE printer's device of Elizabeth Purslowe

LONDON, Printed by E. P. for Henry Seile, and are to be sold at his shop, at
the Tigers Head in Fleetstreet, over against Saint Dunstans Church. 1638.

THE PRINTER TO THE READER.
It Is now about six months since the most learned and judicious Poet, B.
JOHNSON, became a subject for these Elegies. The time interjected between his
death and the publishing of these, shows that so great an Argument ought to be
considered, before handled; not that the Gentlemen's affections were less
ready to grieve, but their judgments to write. At length the loose Papers
were consigned to the hands of a Gentleman, who truly honored Him (for he knew
why he did so) To his care you are beholding that they are now made yours. And
he was willing to let you know the value of what you have lost, that you might
the better recommend what you have left of Him, to your posterity.

Farewell.
An Eglogue on the Death of BEN- JOHNSON, between Melybaeus and Hylas.
MELYBEVS. HYlas, the clear day boasts a glorious Sun,
Our Troop is ready, and our time is come:
That Fox who has so long our Lambs destroi'd,
And daily in his prosperous rapine joy'd,
Is eathed not far from hence, old Aegons son,
Rough Corilas, and lusty Corydon,
In part the sport, in part revenge desire,
And both thy Tarrier and thy Aid require.
Haste, for by this, but that for thee we staid,
The Prey-devourer had our prey bin made.

Hyl. Oh! Melibaeus now I list not hunt,
Nor have that vigor as before I wont;
My presence will afford them no relief,
That Beast I strive to chase is only grief.

Mel. What mean thy folded Arms, thy downe-cast eyes,
Tears which so fast descend, and sighs which rise?
What mean thy words which so distracted fall,
As all Thy Loyes had now one funeral?
Cause for such grief, can out retirements yield?
That follows Courts, but stoopes not to the field.
Has thy stern step-dame to thy sire revealed
Some youthful act, which thou could wish concealed?
Part of thy Heard has some close thief conveyed
From open pastures to a darker shade?
Part of thy flock has some fierce Torrent drowned?
Thy harvest failed? or Amarillis frowned?

Hyl. Nor Love, nor Anger, Accident nor Thief,
Has raised the waves of my unbounded grief:
To cure this cause, I would provoke the ire
Of my fierce Step-dame or severer Sire,
Give all my Herds, Fields, Flocks, and all the grace,
That ever shone in Amarillis Face.
Alas, that Bard, that glorious Bard is dead,
Who when I whilome Cities visited,
Has made them seem, but hours which were full days,
Whilst he vouchsaft me his harmonious lays:
And when He lived, I thought the country th en
A torture, and no Mansion, but a Den.

Mel. JOHNSON you mean, unless I much do err,
I know the Person by the Character.

Hyl. You guess aright, it is too truly so,
From no less spring could all these Rivers flow.

Mel. Ah Hylas! then thy grief I cannot call
A passion, when the ground is rational.
I now excuse thy tears and sighs, though those
To deluges, and these to tempests rose:
Her great instructor gone, I know the Age
No less laments then does the widdow'd stage,
And only Vice and Folly, now are glad,
Our Gods are troubled, and our Prince is sad:
He chiefly who bestows light, health and art,
Feels this sharp grief pierce his immortal heart,
He his neglected Lire away has thrown,
And wept a larger nobler Helicon,
To find his Herbs, which to his wish prevail,
For the less loved should his own favorite fail:
So moan'd himself when Daphne he adored,
That arts relieving al, should fail their Lord:

Hyl. But say, from whence in thee this knowledge springs,
Of what his favor was with Gods and Kings.

Mel. Dorus, who long had known books, men, and towns,
At last the honor of our Woods and Downs,
Had often heard his Songs, was often fired
With their enchanting power, ere he retired,
And ere himself to our still groves he brought,
To meditate on what his Muse had taught:
Here all his joy was to revolve alone,
All that her Music to his soul had shown,
Or in all meetings to divert the stream
Of our discourse; and make his Friend his Theme,
And praising works which that rare Loome has weaved,
Impart that pleasure which he had received,
So in sweet notes (which did all tunes excel,
But what he praised) I often have heard him tell
Of His rare Pen, what was the use and price,
The Bays of Virtue and the scourge of Vice:
How the rich ignorant he valued least,
Nor for the trappings would esteem the beast:
But did our youth to noble actions raise,
Hoping the meed of his immortal praise:
How bright and soon His Muses morning shone,
Her Noone how lasting, and her Evening none:
How speech exceeds not dumbness, nor verse prose,
More then His verse the low rough rimes of those,
(For such his seen, they seemed,) who highest reared,
Possessed Parnassus ere his power appeared:
Nor shall another Pen his fame dissolve,
Till we this doubtful Problem can resolve,
Which in his works we most transcendent see,
Wit, Judgment, Learning, Art, or Industry,
Which Till is Never, so all jointly flow,
And each does to an equal Torrent grow:
His Learning such, no Author old nor new,
Escapt his reading that deserved his view,
And such his Judgment, so exact his Test,
Of what was best in Books, as what books best,
That had he joined those notes his Labors took,
From each most praised and praise-deserving Book,
And could the world of that choice Treasure boast,
It need not care though all the rest were lost:
And such his Wit, He writ past what he quotes,
And his Productions far exceed his Notes:
So in his works where ought inferred grows,
The noblest of the Plants engrafted shows,
That his adopted Children equal not,
The generous Issue his own Brain begot:
So great his Art, that much which he did write,
Gave the wise wonder, and the Crowd delight,
Each sort as well as sex admired his Wit,
The He Is and She Is, the Boxes, and the Pit;
And who less liked within, did rather choose
To tax their Judgments then suspect his Muse,
How no spectator his chaste stage could call
The cause of any crime of his, but all
With thoughts and wills purged and amended rise,
From the Ethicke Lectures of his Comedies,
Where the Spectators act, and the shamed age
Blusheth to meet her follies on the stage;
Where each man finds some Light he never sought,
And leaves behind some vanity he brought,
Whose Politics no less the minds direct,
Then these the manners, nor with less effect,
When his Majesticke Tragedies relate
All the disorders of a Tottering state,
All the distempers which on Kingdoms fall,
When ease, and wealth, and vice are general,
And yet the minds against all fear assure,
And telling the disease, prescribe the Cure:
Where, as he tells what subtle ways, what friends,
(Seeking their wicked and their wished for ends)
Ambitious and luxurious Persons prove,
Whom vast desires, or mighty wants does move,
The general Frame, to say and undermine,
In proud Sejanus, and bold Cateline;
So in his vigilant Prince and Consuls parts,
He shows the wiser and the nobler Arts,
By which a state may be unhurt, upheld,
And all those works destroyed, which hell would build.
Who (not like those who with small praise had writ,
Had they not called in Judgment to their Wit)
Used not a tutoring hand his to direct,
But was sole Workman and sole Architect:
And sure by what my Friend did daily tell,
If he but acted his own part as well
As he writ those of others, he may boast,
The happy fields hold not a happier ghost.

Hyl. Strangers will think this strange, yet he (dear Youth,
Where most he past belief, fell short of Truth:
Say on, what more he said, this gives relief,
And though it raise my cause, it bates my grief,
Since Fates decreed him now no longer lived,
I joy to hear him by thy Friend revived.

Mel. More he would say, and better, (but I spoil
His smoother words with my unpolisht style)
And having told what pitch his worth attained,
He then would tell us what Reward it gained;
How in an ignorant, and learned age he swaid,
(Of which the first he found, the second made)
How He, when he could know it, reapt his Fame,
And long outlived the envy of his Name:
To him how daily flockt, what reverence gave,
All that had wit, or would be thought to have,
Or hope to gain, and in so large a store,
That to his Ashes they can pay no more,
Except those few who censuring, thought not so,
But aimed at glory from so great a foe:
How the wise too, did with mere wits agree,
As Pembroke, Portland, and grave Aubigny;
Nor thought the rigidst Senator a shame,
To contribute to so deserved a fame:
How great Eliza, the Retreat of those,
Who weak and injured her protection chose,
Her Subjects joy, the strength of her Allies,
The fear and wonder of her Enemies,
With her judicious favors did infuse
Courage and strength into his younger Muse:
How learned JAMES, whose praise no end shall find,
(But still enjoy a Fame pure like his Mind)
Who favored quiet, and the Arts of Peace,
(Which in his Halcion days found large increase)
Friend to the humblest if deserving Swain,
Who was himself a part of Phoebus Train,
Declared great JOHNSON worthiest to receive
The Garland which the Muses hands did weave,
And though his Bounty did sustain his days,
Gave a more welcome Pension in his praise:
How mighty Charles amidst that Weighty care,
In which three Kingdoms as their Blessing share,
Whom as it tends with ever watchful eyes,
That neither Power may force, nor Art surprise.
So bounded by no shore, graspes all the Maine,
And far as Neptune claims, extends his reign.
Found still some Time to hear and to admire,
The happy sounds of his Harmonious Lire,
And often has left his bright exalted Throne,
And to his Muses feet combined His own: In his Maskes.

As did his Queen, whose Person so disclosed
A brighter Nymph then any Part imposed,
When she did join, by an Harmonious choice,
Her graceful Motions to his Powerful voice:
How above all the rest was Phoebus fired
With love of Arts, which he himself inspired,
Nor oftener by his Light our Sense was cheered,
Then he in Person to his sight appeared,
Nor did he write a line but to supply,
With sacred Flame the Radiant God was by.

Hyl. Though none I ever heard this last rehearse,
I saw as much when I did see his verse.

Mel. Since He, when living could such Honors have,
What now will Piety pay to his grave?
Shall of the rich (whose lives were low and vile,
And scarce deserved a Grave, much less a Pile)
The monuments possess an ample Room,
And such a Wonder lie without a Tomb?
Raise thou him one in Verse, and There relate
His Worth, thy grief, and our deplored state,
His great Perfections our great loss recite,
And let them merely weep who cannot write,

Hyl. I like thy saying, but oppose thy choice,
So great a Task as this requires a Voice
Which must be heard, and listened to, by all,
And Fames own Trumpet but appears too small,
Then for my slender Reed to sound his Name,
Would more my Folly then his praise proclaim,
And when you wish my weakness sing his Worth,
You charge a Mouse to bring a Mountain forth:
I am by Nature formed, by Woes made Dull,
My Head is emptier then my Heart is full;
Grief does my Brain impair, as Tears supply,
Which makes my face so moist, my Pen so dry:
Nor should this Work proceed from Woods and Downs,
But from the Academies, Courts, and Towns;
Let Digby, Carew, Killigrew, and Maine,
Godolphin, Waller, that inspired Train,
Or whose rare Pen beside deserves the grace,
Or of an equal, or a neighboring Place,
Answer thy wish, for none so fit appears
To raise his Tomb, as who are left his Heirs:
Yet for this Cause no labor need be spent,
Writing his Works, he built his Monument.

Mel. If to obey in this, thy Pen be loath,
It will not seem thy weakness, but thy sloth:
Our Towns pressed by our Foes invading Might,
Our ancient Druids and young Virgins fight,
Employing feeble Limbs to the best use;
So JOHNSON dead, no Pen should plead excuse:
For Elegies, howl all who cannot sing,
For Tombs bring Turfe, who cannot Marble bring,
Let all their forces mix, join Verse to Rhyme,
To save his Fame from that Invader, Time;
Whose Power, though his alone may well restrain,
Yet to so wished an end, no Care is vain;
And Time, like what our Brooks act in our sight,
Often sinkes the neightie, and upholds the Light:
Besides, to this, thy pains I strive to move
Less to express his glory then thy Love:
Not long before his Death, our woods he meant
To visit, and descend from Thames to Trent,
Meet with thy Elegy his Pastoral,
And rise as much as he vouchsaft to fall:
Suppose it chance no other Pen do join
In this Attempt, and the whole work be thine.
When the fierce fire the rash-Boy kindled, reigned,
The whole world suffered; Earth alone complained:
Suppose that many more intend the same,
More taught by Art, and better known to Fame,
To that great Deluge which so far destroid,
The Earth her Springs, as Heaven his Showrs emploid;
So may who highest Marks of Honor wears,
Admit mean Partners in this Flood of Tears:
So often the Humblest join with Loftiest Things,
Nor only Princes weep the fate of Kings.

Hyl. I yield, I yield, Thy words my thoughts have fired,
And I am less persuaded then inspired;
Speech shall give Sorrow vent, and that Relief,
The Woods shall echo all the Cities grief:
I often have verse on meaner Subjects made,
Should I give Presents and leave Debts unpaid?
Want of Invention here is no excuse,
My matter I shall find, and not produce,
And (as it fares in Crowds) I only doubt,
So much would pass, that Nothing will get out,
Else in this Work which now my Thoughts intend
I shall find nothing hard, but how to end:
I then but ask fit Time to smooth my Lays,
(And imitate in this the Pen I praise)
Which by the Subjects Power embalmed, may last,
Whilst the Sun Light, the Earth does shadows cast,
And feathered by those Wings fly among men,
Far as the Fame of Poetry and BEN.

FALKLAND.

TO THE MEMORY OF BENJAMIN JOHNSON.
IF Romulus did promise in the fight
To love the Stator, if he held from flight
His men, a Temple, and performed his vow:
Why should not we, learned JOHNSON, thee allow
An Altar at the least? since by Thy aid,
Learning, that would have left us, has bin stayed.
The Actions were different: that thing
Required some mark to keep't from perishing;
But letters must be quite defaced before
Thy memory, whose care did them restore
BVCKHVRST.
TO THE MEMORY OF him who can never be forgotten, Master BENJAMIN JOHNSON.
HAd this bin for some meaner Poets Hearse,
I might have then observed the laws of verse:
But here they fail, nor can I hope to express
In Numbers, what the world grants Numberless;
Such are the Truths, we ought to speak of Thee,
Thou great refiner of our Poesy,
Who turn'st to gold that which before was lead;
Then with that pure Elixar raised the dead.
Nine Sisters who (for all the Poets lies)
Had bin deemed Mortal, did not JOHNSON rise
And with celestial Sparks (not stolen) revive
Those who could erst keep winged Fame alive:
It Was he that found (placed) in the seat of wit,
Dull grinning Ignorance, and banished it;
He on the prostituted Stage appears
To make men hear, not by their eyes, but ears;
Who painted Virtues, that each one might know,
And point the man, that did such Treasure owe:
So that who could in JOHNSONS lines be high
Needed not Honors, or a Ribbon buy:
But vice he only showed us in a glass,
Which by reflection of those rays that pass,
Retains the figure lively, set before,
And that withdrawn, reflects at us no more;
So, he observed the like Decorum, when
He whipped the vices, and yet spared the men;
When heretofore, the vices only note,
And sign from virtue as his party-coate,
When Devils were the last Men on the Stage,
And prayed for plenty, and the present Age;
Nor was our English language, only bound
To thank him, for he Latin Horace found
(Who so inspired Rome, with his Lyricke song)
Translated in the Macaronicke tongue,
Clothed in such rags, as one might safely vow,
That his Maecenas, would not own him now;
On him he took this pity, as to cloth
In words, and such expression, as for both,
There Is none but judges the exchange will come
To twenty more, then when he sold at Rome.
Since then, he made our Language pure and good,
And teach us speak, but what we understood,
We owe this praise to him, that should we join
To pay him, he were paid but with the coin
Himself has minted, which we know by this
That no words pass for current now, but his;
And though He in a blinder age could change
Faults to perfections, yet 'twas far more strange
To see (how ever times, and fashions frame)
His wit and language still remain the same
In all men's mouths; Grave Preachers did it use
As golden Pills, by which they might infuse
Their Heavenly Physic; Ministers of State
Their grave dispatches in his language wrate;
Ladies made cur'tsies in them, Courtiers, legs,
Physicians Bills, perhaps some Pedant begs
He may not use it, for he hears it is such,
As in few words, a man may utter much
Could I have spoken in his language too,
I had not said so much, as now I do,
To whose clear memory, I this tribute send
Who Dead's my wonder, Living was my Friend.
JOHN BEAUMONT, Baronet.
TO THE MEMORY OF M. BENJAMIN JOHNSON.
TO press into the throng, where Wits thus strive
To make thy Laurels fading Tombs survive,
Argues thy worth, their love, my bold desire,
Somewhat to sing, though but to fill the Quire:
But (Truth to speak) what Muse can silent be,
Or little say, that has for Subject, Thee,
Whose Poems such, that as the Sphere of fire,
They warm insensibly, and Force inspire,
Knowledge, and wit infuse, mute tongues unlose,
And ways not track't to write, and speak disclose.
But when thou put'st thy Tragique Buskin on,
Or Comique Socke of mirthfull Action,
Actors, as if inspired from thy hand,
Speak, beyond what they think, less, understand.
And thirsty Hearers wonder-strucken say,
Thy words make that a Truth, was meant a Play.
Folly, and braine-sicke Humors of the time,
Distempered Passion, audacious Crime,
Thy Pen so on the stage does personate,
That ere men scarce begin to know, they hate
The Vice presented, and there lessons learn,
Virtue, from vicious Habits to discern.
Often have I seen Thee in a sprightly strain,
To lash a Vice, and yet no one complain,
Thou threw'st the Ink of Malice from Thy Pen,
Whose aim was evil manners, not ill men.
Let then frail parts repose, where solemn care
Of pious Friends, thee Pyramids prepare;
And take thou (BEN) from Verse a second breath,
Which shall create Thee new, and conquer Death.
Sr. THO. HAWKINS.
Upon BEN. JOHNSON.
I See that Wreath which does the wearer arm
Against the quick strokes of Thunder is no charm
To keep off deaths pale dart: For (JOHNSON) then
Thou had been numbered still with living men:
Times Sithe had feared thy Laurel to invade,
Nor thee this Subject of our sorrow made.
Amongst those many Votaries that come
To offer up their Garlands at thy Tomb,
Whilst some more lofty Pens in their bright Verse,
(Like glorious Tapers flaming on thy Hearse)
Shall light the dull and thanklesse World to see,
How great a maime it suffers, (wanting thee;)
Let not thy learned shadow scorn, that I
Pay meaner Rites unto thy Memory:
And since I naught can add but in desire,
Restore some sparks which leapt from thine own fire.
What ends soever other Quils invite,
I can protest, it was no itch to write,
Nor any vain ambition to be read,
But merely love and justice to the dead,
Which raised my famelesse Muse; and caused her bring
These drops, as tribute thrown into that Spring,
To whose most rich and fruitful head we owe
The purest streams of language which can flow.
For it is but truth; Thou taughtst the ruder Age,
To speak by Grammar; and reformd'st the Stage:
Thy Comic ock induced such purged sense,
A Lucrece might have heard without offense.
Amongst those soaring Wits that did dilate
Our English, and advance it to the rate
And value it now holds, thy self was one
Helped lift it up to such proportion,
That thus refined and roab'd it shall not spare
With the full Greek or Latin to compare.
For what Tongue ever durst, but Ours, translate
Great Tullies Eloquence, or Homers State?
Both which in their unblemisht luster shine,
From Chapmans Pen, and from thy CATILINE.
All I would ask for thee, in recompense
Of thy successful toil, and times expense
Is only this poor boon: That those who can
Perhaps read French, or talk Italian,
Or do the lofty Spaniard affect,
(To show their skill in foreign dialect)
Prove not themselves so unnat'rally wise
They therefore should their Mother Tongue despise:
(As if her Poets both for style and wit,
Not equaled, or not passed their best that writ)
Until by studying JOHNSON they have known
The height, and strength, and plenty of their own.
Thus in what low earth, or neglected room,
So ere thou sleepst, thy BOOK shall be thy Tomb,
Thou will go down a happy Coarse, bestrew'd
With thine own Flowers and feel thy self renewed,
Whilst thy immortal, never withering Bays
Shall yearly flourish in thy Readers praise.
And when more spreading Titles are forgot,
Or, spite of all their Lead and Seare-cloth, rot;
Thou wrapped and shrin'd in thine own sheets wilt lie
A Relic famed by all Posterity.
HEN. KING.
MIght but this slender offering of mine,
Crowd midst the sacred burden of thy shrine,
The near acquaintance with thy greater name
Might style me Wit, and privilege my Fame,
But I Have no such ambition, nor dare sue
For the least Legacy of Wit, as due,
I come not to offend duty, and transgress
Affection, nor with bold presumption press,
Midst those close mourners, whose nigh kin in verse,
Has made the nere attendance of Thy hearse,
I come in duty, not in pride, to show
Not what I have in store, but what I owe.
Nor shall My folly wrong Thy Fame, for we
Prize by the want of Wit, the loss of Thee.
As when the wearied Sun has stolen to rest,
And darkness made the worlds unwelcome guest,
We grovelling captives of the night, yet may
With fire and candle beget light, not day:
Now He whose name in Poetry controules,
Goes to converse with more refined Souls,
Like country Gazers in amaze we sit,
Admirers of this great Eclipse in Wit,
Reason and Wit We have to show us Men,
But no hereditary beam of Ben,
Our knocked inventions may beget a spark,
Which faints at th'least resistance of the dark,
Thine like the Fires high element was pure,
And like the same made not to burn, but cure,
When thy enraged Muse did chide o'th stage,
'Twas to reform, not to abuse the Age,
But thou art requited ill, to have thy hearse,
Stained by prophaner Parricides in verse;
Who make mortality, a guilt, and scould,
Merely because Thou Would offer to be old,
'Twas too unkind a slighting of Thy name,
To think a ballad could confute Thy Fame,
Let Us but peruse their Libels, and they will be,
But arguments they understood not thee,
Nor Is It disgrace, that in Thee through age spent,
'Twas thought a crime not to be excellent:
For Me, I Will in such reverence hold thy Fame,
I Will but by Invocation use Thy Name,
Be thou propitious, Poetry shall know,
No Deity but Thee to whom I Will owe.
HEN. COVENTRY.
AN ELEGY UPON BENJAMIN JOHNSON.
THough once high Statius over dead Lucans hearse,
Would seem to fear his own Hexameters,
And thought a greater Honor then that fear,
He could not bring to Lucans sepulcher;
Let not our Poets fear to write of thee,
Great JOHNSON King of English Poetry
In any English Verse, let none who e're,
Bring so much emulation as to fear:
But pay without comparing thoughts at all,
Their tribute verses to thy funeral;
Nor think what ere they write on such a name,
Can be amiss; If high, it fits Thy Fame:
If low, it rights Thee more, and makes men see,
That English Poetry is dead with Thee,
Which in Thy Genius did so strongly live,
Nor will I here particularly strive,
To praise each well composed piece of thine;
Or show what judgment, Art and Wit did join
To make them up, but only (in the way
That Famianus honored Virgill) say,
The Muse her self was linked so near to thee,
Who ere saw one, must needs the other see,
And if in thy expressions ought seemed scant,
Not thou, but Poetry it self did want,
AN ELEGY ON BEN. JOHNSON.
I Dare not, learned Shade, bedew thy Hearse
With tears, unless that impudence in Verse
Would cease to be a sin; and what were crime
In Prose, would be no injury in Rhyme.
My thoughts are so below, I fear to act
A sin, like their black envy, who detract;
As often as I would character in speech
That worth, which silent wonder scarce can reach.
Yet, I that but pretend to learning, owe
So much to thy great fame, I ought to show
My weakness in thy praise; to thus approve,
Although it be less wit, is greater love:
It Is all our phancie aims at; and our tongues
At best, will guilty prove of friendly wrongs.
For, who would image out thy worth, great BEN,
Should first be, what he praises; and his Pen
Thy active brains should feed, which we cannot have,
Unless we could redeem Thee from the Grave.
The only way that is left now, is to look
Into thy Papers, to read over thy Book;
And then remove thy phancies, there does lie
Some judgment, where we cannot make, t'apply
Our reading: some, perhaps, may call this wit,
And think, we do not steal, but only fit
Thee to thy self, of all thy Marble wears,
Nothing is truly ours, except the tears.
O could we weep like Thee! we might convay
New breath, and raise men from their Beds of Clay
Unto a life of fame; he is not dead,
Who by thy Muses has been buried.
Thrice happy those brave Heroes, whom I meet
Wrapped in thy writings, as their winding sheet:
For, when the tribute unto Nature due,
Was paid, they did receive new life from you;
Which shall not be undated, since thy breath
Is able to immortal, after death.
Thus rescued from the dust, they did never see
True life, until they were entombed by Thee.
You that pretend to Courtship, here admire
Those pure and active flames, Love did inspire:
And though he could have took his Mistress ears,
Beyond feigned sighs, false oaths, and forced tears;
His heat was still so modest, it might warm,
But do the Cloystred Votarie no harm.
The face he sometimes praises, but the mind,
A fairer Saint, is in his Verse inshrin'd.
He that would worthily set down his praise,
Should study Lines as lofty as his Plays.
The Roman Worthies did not seem to fight
With braver spirit, then we see him write:
His Pen their valor equals; and that Age
Receives a greater glory from our Stage.
Bold Catiline, at once Romes hate and fear,
Far higher in his story does appear:
The flames those active Furies did inspire,
Ambition and Revenge, his better fire
Kindles afresh; thus lighted, they shall burn,
Till Rome to its first nothing do return.
Brave fall, had but the cause been likewise good!
Had he so, for his Country, lost his blood!
Some like not Tully in his own; yet while
All do admire him in thy English style,
I censure not; I rather think, that we
May well his equal, thine we never shall see.
DUDLY DIGGS.
To THE IMMORTALITY of my Learned Friend, M. JOHNSON.
I Parled once with Death, and thought to yield,
When thou advised'st me to keep the field,
Yet if I fell, thou would upon my Hearse,
Breath the reviving spirit of thy Verse.
I live, and to thy grateful Muse would pay,
A Parallel of thanks, but that this day
Of thy fair Rights, through the innumerous light,
That flows from thy Adorers, seems as bright,
As when the Sun darts through his golden Hair,
His Beams Diameter into the Air.
In vain I then strive to increase thy glory,
These Lights that go before make dark my story.
Only I Will say, Heaven gave unto Thy Pen
A Sacred power, Immortallizing men,
And thou dispensing Life immortally,
Do now but sabbatize from work, not dye.
GEORGE FORTESCVE.
An ELEGY UPON THE Death of BEN. JOHNSON, the most Excellent of English Poets:
WHat does officious Fancy here prepare?
Be It rather this rich Kingdoms charge and care
To find a Virgin quarrie whence no hand,
E're wrought a Tomb on vulgar Dust to stand,
And thence bring for this work Materials fit,
Great JOHNSON needs no Architect of Wit;
Who forced from Art, received from Nature more
Then does survive Him, or e're lived before.
And Poets, with what veil so'ere you hide,
Your aim, 'twill not be thought your grief, but pride
Which that your Cypress never growth might want,
Did it near his eternal Laurel plant.
Heaven at the death of Princes, by the birth
Of some new star, seems to instruct the Earth,
How it resents our humane Fate. Then why
Did thou Wits most triumphant Monarch dye
Without thy Comet? Did the Sky despair
To teeme a Fire, bright as thy glories were?
Or is it by its Age, unfruitful grown,
And can produce no light, but what is known,
A common Mourner, when a Princes fall
Invites a Star to attend the Funeral?
But those prodigious Sights only create,
Talk for the Vulgar, Heaven before thy Fate.
That thou thy self might thy own Dirges hear,
Made the sad stage close mourner for a year;
The stage, (which as by an instinct divine,
Instructed, seeing it is own Fate in Thine,
And knowing how it owed it is life to Thee)
Prepared it self thy Sepulcher to be,
And had continued so, but that Thy Wit,
Which as the Soul, first animated it,
Still hovers here below, and nere shall dye,
Till Time be buried in eternity.
But You! whose Comicke labors on the stage,
Against the envy of a froward age
Hold combat! How will now your Vessels sail,
The Seas so broken and the winds so frail,
Such Rocks, such shallowes threatening every where,
And Johnson dead, whose Art your course might steare?
Look up! where Seneca, and Sophocles,
Quick Plautus, and sharp Aristophanes,
Enlighten yon bright Orb! Does not your eye,
Among them, one far larger fire, descry,
At which their lights grow pale? it is Johnson, there
He shines your Star who was your Pilot here.
W. ABINGTON.
Upon BEN: JOHNSON, the most excellent of Comic POETS.
MIrror of Poets! Mirror of our Age!
Which her whole Face beholding on thy stage,
Pleased and displeased with her own faults endures,
A remedy, like those whom Music cures,
Thou not alone those various inclinations,
Which Nature gives to Ages, Sexes, Nations,
Have traced with thy All-resembling Pen,
But all that custom has imposed on Men,
Or ill-got Habits, which distort them so,
That scarce the Brother can the Brother know,
Is represented to the wondering Eyes,
Of all that see or read thy Comedies.
Who ever in those Glasses looks may find,
The spots return d, or graces of his mind;
And by the help of so divine an Art,
At leisure view, and dress his nobler part.
Narcissus cozened by that flattering Well,
Which nothing could but of his beauty tell,
Had here discovering the deformed estate
Of his fond mind, preserved himself with hate,
But Virtue too, as well as Vice is clad,
In flesh and blood so well, that Plato had
Beheld what his high Fancy once embraced,
Virtue with colors, speech and motion grac^d.
The sundry Postures of Thy copious Muse,
Who would express a thousand tongues must use,
Whose Fates no less peculiar then thy Art,
For as thou could all characters impart,
So none can render thine, who still escapes,
Like Prote us in variety of shapes,
Who was nor this nor that, but all we find,
And all we can imagine in mankind.
E. WALLER.
Upon the POET of His time, B. J: His honored F. and F.
ANd is thy Glass run out? is that Oil spent,
Which light to such tough sinewy labors lent?
Well BEN I now perceive that all the Nine,
Though they their utmost forces should combine,
Cannot prevail against Nights three Daughters, but
One still will spinne, One Wind, the other Cut,
Yet in despite of Spindle, Clue, and Knife,
Thou in thy strenuous lines have got a life,
Which like thy Bay shall flourish every Age,
While Socke or Buskin move upon the stage.
Sic Vaticinatur IA. HOWELL Ar.
AN OFFERTORY AT THE TOMB OF THE FAMOVS POET BEN: JOHNSON.
IF Souls departed lately hence do know
How we perform the duties that we owe
Their Relics? will it not grieve thy spirit
To see our dull devotion? thy merit
Profaned by disproportiond Rites? thy Hearse
Rudely defiled with Our unpolished Verse?
Necessitie's our best excuse; it is in
Our understanding, not our will we sin;
Against which it is now in vain to labor, we
Did nothing know, but what was taught by Thee,
The routed Soldiers when their Captains fall
Forget all order, that men cannot call
It properly a Battle that they fight;
Nor we ( Thou being dead) be said to write.
It Is noise we utter, nothing can be sung
By those distinctly that have lost their Tongue;
And therefore whatsoere the Subject be,
All Verses now become thy ELEGY:
For, when a livelesse Poem shall be read,
The afflicted Reader sighs, BEN: IONSON'S dead.
This is thy Glory, that no Pen can raise
A lasting Trophee in thy honored praise;
Since Fate (it seems) would have it so expressed,
Each Muse should end with Thine, who was the best:
And but her flights were stronger and so high,
That Times rude hand cannot reach her glory,
An ignorance had spread this Age as great
As that which made thy learned MUSE so sweat,
And toil to dissipate; until (at length)
Purged by thy Art, it gained a lasting strength;
And now secured by thy all-powerfull Writ,
Can fear no more a like relapse of Wit:
Though (to Our grief) we ever must despair,
That any Age can raise Thee up an Heir.
JOHN VERNON. e societ: In: Temp.
THe Muses fairest light in no dark time,
The Wonder of a learned Age; the Line
Which none can pass; the most proportioned Wit,
To Nature, the best Judge of what was fit;
The deepest, plainest, highest, cleerest PEN;
The Voice most echoed by consenting Men,
The Soul which answered best to all well said
By others, and which most requital made,
Tuned to the highest Key of ancient ROME,
Returning all her Music with his own,
In whom with Nature, Study claimed a part,
And yet who to himself owed all his Art:
Here lies BEN: JOHNSON, every Age will look
With sorrow here, with wonder on his BOOK.
Who first reformed our Stage with justest Laws,
And was the first best Judge in your own Cause?
Who (when his Actors trembled for Applause)
Could (with a noble Confidence) prefer
His own, by right, to a whole Theater;
From Principles which he knew could not err.
Who to his FABLE did his Persons fit,
With all the Properties of Art and Wit,
And above all (that could be Acted) writ.
Who public Follies did to covert drive,
Which he again could cunningly retrive,
Leaving them no ground to rest on, and thrive.
Here IONSON lies, whom had I named before
In that one word alone, I had paid more
Then can be now, when plenty makes me poor.
I. Cl.
To the Memory of BEN. JOHNSON.
AS when the Vestall hearth went out, no fire
Less holy then the flame that did expire
Could kindle it again: So at thy fall
Our Wit, great BEN, is too Apocryphal
To celebrate the loss, since it is too much
To write thy Epitaph, and not be such.
What thou were, like th'hard Oracles of old,
Without an ecstasy cannot be told.
We must be ravished first, Thou must infuse
Thy self into us both the Theme and Muse.
Else, (though we all conspired to make thy Hearse
Our Works) so that 'thad been but one great Verse,
Though the Priest had translated for that time
The Liturgy, and buried thee in Rhyme,
So that in Meeter we had heard it said,
Poetique dust is to Poetique laid:
And though that dust being Shakspears thou might have
Not his room, but the Poet for thy grave;
So that, as thou did Prince of Numbers dye
And live, so now thou might in Numbers lie,
'Twere frail solemnity; Verses on Thee
And not like thine, would but kind Libels be;
And we, (not speaking thy whole Worth) should raise
Worse blots, then they that envied thy praise.
Indeed, thou need'st us not, since above all
Invention, thou were thine own Funeral.
Hereafter, when Time has fed on thy Tomb,
The inscription worn out, and the Marble dumb;
So that 'twould pose a Critic to restore
Half words, and words expired so long before.
When thy maym'd Statue has a sentenced face,
And looks that are the horror of the place,
That 'twill be learning, and Antiquity,
And ask a SELDOM to say, this was Thee,
Thou Wilt have a whole Name still, nor needst thou fear
That will be ruined, or lose nose, or hair.
Let others write so thin, that they cannot be
Authors till rotten, no Posterity
Can add to thy Works; they had their whole growth then
When first borne, and came aged from thy Pen.
Whilst living thou enjoy'dst the fame and sense
Of all that time gives but the reverence.
When thou art of Homers years, no man will say
Thy Poems are less worthy, but more gray:
It Is Bastard-Poetry, and oth' false blood
Which cannot without succession be good.
Things that will always last, do thus agree
With things eternal; th'at once perfect be.
Scorn then their censures, who gav't out, thy Wit
As long upon a Comoedie did sit
As Elephants bring forth; and that thy blotts
And mendings took more time then Fortune plotts:
That such thy drought was, and so great thy thirst,
That all thy Plays were drawn at the Mermaid first:
That the Kings yearly Butt wrote, and his Wine
Has more right then thou to thy CATILINE.
Let such men keep a diet, let their wit
Be rackt, and while they write, suffer a fit:
When they have felt tortures which out-paine the gout,
Such, as with less, the State draws treason out;
Though they should the length of consumptions lie
Sick of their verse, and of their Poem die,
^Twould not be thy worst Scoene, but would at last
Confirm their boastings, and show made in have.
He that writes well, writes quick, since the rule's true,
Nothing is slowly done, that is always new.
So when thy FOX had ten times acted been,
Each day was first, but that 'twas cheaper seen.
And so thy ALCHYMIST played ore and ore,
Was new oth' Stage when 'twas not at the door.
We, like the Actors did repeat, the Pit
The first time saw, the next conceived thy Wit:
Which was cast in those forms, such rules, such Arts,
That but to some not half thy Acts were parts:
Since of some silken judgments we may say,
They filled a Box two hours, but saw no Play.
So that the unlearned lost their money, and
Scholars saved only, that could understand.
Thy Scoene was free from Monsters, no hard Plot
Called down a God t'untie th'unlikely knot.
The Stage was still a Stage, two entrances
Were not two parts oth' World, disjoined by Seas.
Thine were land-Tragedies, no Prince was found
To swim a whole Scoene out, then oth' Stage drowned;
Pitched fields, as Red-Bull wars, still felt thy doom,
Thou laidst no sieges to the Musique-Roome;
Nor would allow to thy best Comoedies
Humors that should above the People rise:
Yet was thy language and thy style so high,
Thy Socke toth' ancle, Buskin reached toth' thigh;
And both so chaste, so 'bove Dramatick clean,
That we both safely saw, and lived thy Scene.
No foul loose line did prostitute thy wit,
Thou wrot'st thy Comoedies, did not commit.
We did the vice arraignd not tempting hear,
And were made Judges, not bad parts byth ear.
For thou even sin did in such words array,
That some who came bad parts, went out good play.
Which ended not with the Epilogue, the Age
Still acted, which grew innocent from the Stage.
It Is true thou had some sharpness, but thy salt
Served but with pleasure to reform the fault.
Men were laughed into virtue, and none more
Hated Face acted then were such before.
So did thy sting not blood, but humors draw,
So much does Satyr more correct then Law;
Which was not nature in thee, as some call
Thy teeth, who say thy wit lay in thy Gall.
That thou did quarrel first, and then, in spite,
Did against a person of such vices write:
That 'twas revenge, not truth, that on the Stage
Carlo was not presented, but thy Rage:
And that when thou in company were met,
Thy meat took notes, and thy discourse was net.
We know thy free- vein had this innocence,
To spare the party, and to brand the offense.
And the just indignation thou were in
Did not expose Shift, but his tricks and ginne.
Thou might have used the old Comic freedom, these
Might have seen themselves played, like Socrates.
Like Cleon, Mammon might the Knight have been,
If, as Greek Authors, thou had turned Greek spleen;
And had not chosen rather to translate
Their learning into English, not their rate:
Indeed this last, if thou had been bereft
Of thy humanity, might be called Theft.
The other was not; whatsoere was strange
Or borrowed in thee did grow thine by the change.
Who without Latin helps had been as rare
As Beaumont, Fletcher, or as Shakespeare were:
And like them, from thy native Stock could say,
Poets and Kings are not borne every day.
In the memory of the most Worthy BENJAMIN JOHNSON.
FAther of Poets, though thine own great day
Struck from thy self, scorns that a weaker ray
Should twine in luster with it: yet my flame,
Kindled from thine, flies upwards toward thy Name.
For in the acclamation of the less
There Is Piety, though from it no access.
And though my ruder thoughts make me of those,
Who hide and cover what they should disclose:
Yet, where the lustre's such, he makes it seen
Better to some, that draws the veil between.
And what can more be hoped, since that divine
Free filling spirit took its flight with thine?
Men may have fury, but no raptures now;
Like Witches, charm, yet not know whence, nor how.
And through distemper, grown not strong but fierce;
In stead of writings, only rave in verse:
Which when by thy Laws judged, 'twill be confes'd,
'Twas not to be inspired, but be possessed.
Where shall we find a Muse like thine, that can
So well present and show man unto man,
That each one finds his twin, and thinks thy Art
Extends not to the gestures, but the heart?
Where one so showing life to life, that we
Think thou taughtst Custom, and not Custom thee?
Manners, that were Themes to thy Scenes still flow
In the same stream, and are their comments now:
These times thus living over thy Modells, we
Think them not so much wit, as prophecy:
And though we know the character, may swear
A Sybill's finger has bin busy there.
Things common thou speakst proper, which though known
For public, stamped by thee grow thence thine own:
Thy thoughts so ordered, so expres'd, that we
Conclude that thou did not discourse, but see
Language so mastered, that thy numerous feet,
Laden with genuine words, do always meet
Each in his art; nothing unfit does fall,
Showing the Poet, like the wiseman, All:
Thine equal skill thus wresting nothing, made
Thy pen seem not so much to write as trade.
That life, that Venus of all things, which we
Conceive or show, proportioned decency,
Is not found scattred in thee here and there,
But, like the soul, is wholly every where.
No strange perplexed maze does pass for plot,
Thou always do unty, not cut the knot.
Thy Lab'rinths doors are opened by one thread
Thattyes, and runs through all that is don or said.
No power comes down with learned hat and rod,
Wit only, and contrivance is thy god.
It Is easy to guild gold: there is small skill spent
Where even the first rude mass is ornament:
Thy Muse took harder metalls, purged and boild,
Labored and tried, heated, and beat and toyld,
Sifted the dross, filled roughnes, then gave dress,
Vexing rude subjects into comeliness.
Be it thy glory then, that we may say,
Thou run'st where the foot was hindered by the way.
Nor do thou pour out, but dispense thy vein,
Skilled when to spare, and when to entertain:
Not like our wits, who into one piece do
Throw all that they can say, and their friends too,
Pumping themselves, for one Terms noise so dry,
As if they made their wills in Poetry.
And such spruce compositions press the stage,
When men transcribe themselves, and not the age.
Both sorts of Plays are thus like pictures shown,
Thine of the common life, theirs of their own.
Thy modells yet are not so framed, as we
May call them libells, and not imag'rie:
No name on any Basis: it is thy skill
To strike the vice, but spare the person still:
As he, who when he saw the Serpent wreathed
About his sleeping son, and as he breathed,
Drink in his soul, did so the shoot contrive,
To kill the beast, but keep the child alive.
So do thou aim thy darts, which, even when
They kill the poisons, do but wake the men.
Thy thunders thus but purge, and we endure
Thy launcings better then another cure;
And justly too: for the age grows more unsound
From the fools balsam, then the wisemans wound.
No rotten talk brokes for a laugh; no page
Commenced man by the instructions of thy stage;
No bargaining line there; no provoc'tive verse;
Nothing but what Lucretia might rehearse;
No need to make good countenance ill, and use
The plea of strict life for a looser Muse:
No Woman ruled thy quill: we can descry
No verse borne under any Cynthia's eye:
Thy Star was judgment only, and right sense,
Thy self being to thy self an influence.
Stout beauty is thy grace: Stern pleasures do
Present delights, but mingle horrors too:
Thy Muse does thus like Joves fierce girl appear,
With a fair hand, but grasping of a Spear.
Where are they now that cry, thy Lamp did drink
More oil then the Author wine, while he did think?
We do embrace their slander: thou have writ
Not for dispatch but fame; no market wit:
'Twas not thy care, that it might pass and sell,
But that it might endure, and be done well:
Nor would thou venture it unto the ear,
Until the file would not make smooth, but wear:
Thy verse came seasoned hence, and would not give;
Borne not to feed the Author, but to live:
Whence among the choycer Judges rise a strife,
To make thee read as Classick in thy life.
Those that do hence applause, and suffrage beg,
'Cause they can Poems form upon one leg,
Write not to time, but to the Poets day:
There Is difference between fame, and sudden pay.
These men sing Kingdoms falls, as if that fate
Used the same force to a Village, and a State:
These serve Thyestes bloody supper in,
As if it had only a sallad bin:
Their Catilines are but Fencers, whose fights rise
Not to the fame of battle, but of prize.
But thou still put'st true passions on; do write
With the same courage that tried Captains fight;
Giv'st the right blush and color unto things;
Low without creeping, high without loss of wings;
Smooth, yet not weak, and by a thorough-care,
Big without swelling, without painting fair:
They wretches, while they cannot stand to fit,
Are not wits, but materials of wit.
What though thy searching wit did rake the dust
Of time, and purge old mettalls of their rust?
Is it no labor, no art, think they, to
Snatch Shipwracks from the deep, as Dyvers do?
And rescue Jewels from the covetous sand,
Making the Seas hid wealth adorn the Land?
What though thy culling Muse did rob the store
Of Greek, and Latin gardens to bring ore
Plants to thy native soil? Their virtues were
Improved far more, by being planted here.
If thy Still to their essence does refine
So many drugges, is not the water thine?
Thefts thus become just works: they and their grace
Are wholly thine: thus does the stamp and face
Make that the Kings, that is ravished from the mine:
In others then it is oar, in thee it is coin.
Blessed life of Authors, unto whom we owe
Those that we have, and those that we want too:
The art all so good, that reading makes thee worse,
And to have writ so well's thine only curse.
Secure then of thy merit, thou did hate
That servile base dependence upon fate:
Success thou never thoughtst virtue, nor that fit,
Which chance, and the ages fashion did make hit;
Excluding those from life in after-time,
Who into Po'try first brought luck and rhyme:
Who thought the peoples breath good air: sty'ld name
What was but noise; and getting Briefes for fame
Gathered the many's suffrages, and thence
Made commendation a benevolence:
Thy thoughts were their own Laurel, and did win
That best applause of being crowned within.
And though the exacting age, when deeper years
Had interwoven snow among thy hairs,
Would not permit thou should grow old, cause they
Nere by thy writings knew thee young; we may
Say justly, they are ungrateful, when they more
Condemned thee, cause thou were so good before:
Thine Art was thine Arts blurre, and they will confess
Thy strong perfumes made them not smell thy less.
But, though to err with thee be no small skill,
And we adore the last draughts of thy Quill:
Though those thy thoughts, which the now queasie age,
Does count but clods, and refuse of the stage,
Will come up Porcelaine-wit some hundreds hence,
When there will be more manners, and more sense;
'Twas judgment yet to yield, and we afford
Thy silence as much fame, as once thy word:
Who like an aged oak, the leaves being gone,
VVast food before, art now religion;
Thought still more rich, though not so richly stored,
Viewed and enjoyed before, but now adored.
Great soul of numbers, whom we want and boast;
Like curing gold, most valued now the art lost;
When we shall feed on refuse offalls, when
We shall from corn to akornes turn again;
Then shall we see that these two names are one,
JOHNSON and Poetry, which now are gone.
VV. CARTWAIGHT.
An Elegy upon BEN: JOHNSON.
NOw thou art dead, and thy great wit and name
Is got beyond the reach of Chance or Fame,
Which none can lessen, nor we bring enough
To raise it higher, through our want of stuff;
I find no room for praise, but Elegy,
And there but name the day that thou did dye.
That men may know thou did so, for they will
Hardly believe disease or age could kill
A body so informed, with such a soul,
As, like thy verse, might Fate it self control.
But thou art gone, and we like greedy Heirs,
That snatch the fruit of their dead Fathers cares,
Begin t'enquire what means thou left'st behind
For us pretended Heirs unto thy mind.
And my-selfe not the latest 'gan to look
And found the Inventory in thy Book;
A stock for writers to set up withal:
That out of thy full Comedies, their small
And slender wits by vexing much thy writ
And their own brains, may draw good saving wit.
And when they shall upon some credit pitch,
May be thought well to live, although not rich.
Then for your Songsters, Masquers, what a deal
We have? enough to make a Commonweal:
Of dancing Courtiers, as if Poetry
Were made to set out their activity.
Learning great store for us to feed upon,
But little fame; that with thy self is gone,
And like a desperate debt, bequeathed, not paid
Before thy death has us the poorer made.
Whilst we with mighty labor it pursue.
And after all our toil, not find it due.
IO: RUTTER.
To the Memory of immortal BEN.
TO write is easy; but to write of thee
Truth: will be thought to forfeit modesty.
So far beyond conceit, thy strengths appear;
That almost all will doubt, what all must hear.
For, when the World shall know, that Pindar's height,
Plautus his wit, and Seneca's grave weight,
Horace his matchless Nerves, and that high phrase
Wherewith great Lucan does his Readers maze,
Shall with such radiant illustration glide,
(As if each line to life were property'd)
Through all thy Works; And like a Torrent move,
Rolling the Muses to the Court of Jove,
Wits general Tribe, will soon entitle thee
Heir to Apollo's ever verdant Tree.
And 'twill by all concluded be, the Stage
Is widowed now; was bedridden by thy age.
As Well as Empire, wit his Zenith has,
Nor can the rage of time, or tyrants wrath
Encloud so bright a flame: But it will shine
In spite of envy, till it grow divine.
As when Augustus reigned, and war did cease,
Romes bravest wits were ushered in by peace:
So in our Halcyon days, we have had now
Wits, to which, all that after come, must bow.
And should the Stage compose her self a Crown
Of all those wits, which hitherto she has known:
Though there be many that about her brow
Like sparkling stones, might a quick luster throw:
Yet, Shakespeare, Beaumont, Johnson, these three shall
Make up the Jem in the point Vertical.
And now since JOHNSON'S gone, we well may say,
The Stage has seen her glory and decay.
Whose judgment was it refined it? Or who
Gave Laws, by which hereafter all must go.
But solid JOHNSON? from whose full strong quill,
Each line did like a Diamond drop distill,
Though hard, yet clear. Thalia that had skipt
Before, but like a Maygame girl, now stripped
Of all her Mimick Jigges, became a sight
With mirth, to flow each pleased spectators light.
And in such graceful measures, did discover
Her beauties now; that every eye turned Lover.
Who is it shall make with great Sejanus fall,
Not the Stage crack, but the Universe and all?
Wild Catilines stern fire, who now shall show?
Or quenched with milk, stilled down by Cicero?
Where shall old Authors in such words be shown,
As vex their Ghosts, that they are not their own?
Admit his Muse was slow. It Is Judgments Fate
To move, like greatest Princes, still in state.
Those Planets placed in the higher Sphoeres,
End not their motion but in many years;
Whereas light Venus and the giddy Moon,
In one or some few days their courses run.
Slow are substantial bodies: But to things
That ayery are; has Nature added wings.
Each trivial Poet that can chant a Rhyme,
May chatter out his own wits Funeral chime:
And those slight nothings that so soon are made,
Like Mushromes, may together live and fade.
The Boy may make a Squib: But every line
Must be considered, where men spring a mine.
And to write things that Time can never stain,
Will require sweat, and rubbing of the brain.
Such were those things he left. For some may be
Eccentrick, yet with Axioms maine agree.
This I Will presume to say. When Time has made
Slaughter of Kings that in the World have swayed:
A greener Bays shall Crown BEN. JOHNSONS Name,
Then shall be wreathed about their Regal Fame.
For Numbers reach to Infinite. But He
Of whom I write this, has prevented me,
And boldly said so much in his own praise,
No other pen need any Trophie raise.
OW. FELLTHAM.
On BEN: IONSON. TO MEMORY.
I Do not blame their pains who did not doubt
By labor of the Circle to find out
The Quadrature; nor can I think it strange
That others should prove constancy in change.
He studied not in vain, who hoped to give
A Body to the Echo, make it live,
Be seen, and felt; nor he whose Art would borrow
Belief for shaping yesterday, to morrow:
But here I yield; Invention, Study, Cost,
Time, and the Art of Art it self is lost.
When any frail ambition undertakes
For Honor, profit, praise, or all their sakes,
To speak unto the world in perfect sense,
Pure Judgment IONSON, it is an excellence
Suited his Pen alone, which yet to do,
Requires himself, and 'twere a Labor too
Crowning the best of POETS, say all sorts
Of bravest Acts must die, without reports,
Count learned knowledge barren, fame abhord,
Let Memory be nothing but a word:
Grant IONSON the only Genius of the Times,
Fix him a constellation in all Rhimes,
All height, all secrecies of wit invoke
The virtue of his Name, to ease the yoke
Of barbarism; yet this lends only praise
To such as write, but adds not to his Bays:
For he will grow more fresh in every Story,
Out of the perfumed Spring of his own Glory.
GEORGE DONE.
A Funeral sacrifice, to the sacred memory of his thrice honored Father BEN.
JOHNSON.
I Cannot grave, nor carve; else would I give
Thee Satues, Sculptures, and thy name should live
In Tombs, and brass, until the stones, or rust
Of thine own Monument, mix with thy dust:
But Nature has afforded me a slight
And easy Muse, yet one that takes her flight
Above the vulgar pitch. BEN she was thine,
Made by adoption free and genuine.
By virtue of thy Charter, which from Heaven,
By Jove himself, before thy birth was given.
The Sisters Nine this secret did declare,
Who of Joves counsel, and His daughters are.
These from Parnassus hill came running down,
And though an Infant did with Laurels crown.
Thrice they him kissed, and took him in their arms,
And dancing round, incircled him with charms.
Pallas her Virgin breast did thrice distill
Into his lips, and him with Nectar fill.
When he grew up to years, his mind was all
On Verses: Verses, that the Rocks might call
To follow him, and Hell it self command,
And wrest Joves threefold thunder from his hand.
The Satires often times hemmed him in a ring,
And gave him pipes and reeds to hear him sing:
Whose vocal notes, tuned to Apolloes Lyre,
The Sirens, and the Muses did admire.
The Nymphs to him their gemmes and coral sent;
And did with Swannes, and Nightingales present
Gifts far beneath his worth. The golden Ore,
That lies on Tagus or Pactolus shore,
Might not compare with him, nor that pure sand
The Indians find upon Hydaspes Strand.
His fruitful raptures shall grow up to seed.
And as the Ocean does the Rivers feed,
So shall his wits rich veins, the World supply
With unexhausted wealth, and never be dry.
For whether He, like a fine thread does file
His terser Poems in a Comic style,
Or treates of tragic furies, and him list,
To draw his lines out with a stronger twist:
Minervas, nor Arachnes loome can show
Such curious tracts; nor does the Spring bestow
Such glories on the Field, or Flora's Bowers,
As His works smile with Figures, and with Flowrs.
Never did so much strength, or such a spell
Of art, and eloquence of papers dwell.
For whilst that he in colors, full and true,
Men's natures, fancies, and their humors drew
In method, order, matter, sense and grace,
Fitting each person to his time and place;
Knowing to move, to slack, or to make haste,
Binding the middle with the first and last:
He framed all minds, and did all passions stir,
And with a bridle guide the Theater.
To say now He is dead, or to maintain
A Paradox he lives, were labor vain:
Earth must to earth. But His fair soul does wear
Bright Ariadnes Crown. Or is placed near,
Where Orpheus Harp turns round with Laedas Swan:
Astrologers, demonstrate where you can,
Where His Star shines, and what part of the Sky,
Holds His compendious Divinity,
There He is fixed, I know it, cause from thence,
My self have lately received influence.
The Reader smiles; but let no man deride
The Emblem of my love, not of my pride.
SHACKERLEY MARMION, In Artibus Magister.
On the best of English Poets, BEN: IONSON, Deceased.
SO seems a Star to shoot; when from our sight
Falls the deceit, not from its loss of light;
We want use of a Soul, who merely know
What to our passion, or our sense we owe:
By such a hollow glass, our cozened eye
Concludes alike, All dead, whom it sees die.
Nature is knowledge here, but un-refin'd,
Both differing, as the Body from the Mind:
Laurel and Cypress else, had grown together,
And withered without Memory to either;
Thus undistinguished, might in every part
The Sons of Earth vie with the Sons of Art.
Forbid it, (holy Reverence) to his NAME,
Whose Glory has filled up the Book of Fame!
Where in fair Capitals, free, uncontrould,
JOHNSON, a work of Honor lives inroul'd:
Creates that Book a Work; adds this far more,
It Is finished what unperfect was before.
The Muses, first in Greece begot, in Rome
Brought forth, our best of Poets has called home,
Nursed, taught, and planted here; that Thames now sings
The Delphian Altars, and the sacred Springs.
By Influence of this Sovereign, like the Spheres,
Moved each by other, the most low (in years)
Contented in their harmony; though some
Malignantly aspected, overcome
With popular opinion, aimed at Name
More then desert: yet in despite of shame
Even they though foiled by his contempt of wrongs,
Made music to the harshnes of their songs.
Drawn to the life of every line and limb,
He (in his truth of Art, and that in him)
Lives yet, and will, whiles letters can be read
The loss is ours; now hope of life is dead.
Great men, and worthy of Report, must fall
Into their earth, and sleeping there sleep all:
Since He, whose Pen in every strain did use
To drop a Verse, and every Verse a Muse,
Is vowed to heaven; as having with fair glory,
Sung thanks of Honor, or some nobler Story.
The Court, the University, the heat
Of Theaters, with what can else beget
Belief, and admiration, clearly prove
Our POET fit in merit, as in love:
Yet if He do not at his full appear,
Survey him in his WORKS, and know him there.
JOHN FORD.
Upon the Death of Mr. BEN. JOHNSON.
It Is not secure to be too learned, or good,
These are hard names, and now scarce understood:
Dull flagging souls with lower parts, may have
The vain oftents of pride upon their Grave,
Cut with some fair Inscription, and true cry,
That both the Man and Epitaph there lie!
Whilst those that soar above the Vulgar pitch,
And are not in their bags, but studies rich,
Must fall without a line, and only be
A Theme of wonder, not of Poetry.
He that dares praise the eminent, he must
Either be such, or but revile their dust!
And so must we (Great Genius of brave verse!)
With our injurious zeal profane thy Hearse.
It is a task above our skill, if we
Presume to mourn our own dead Elegy;
Wherein, like Banckrupts in the stock of Fame,
To patch our credit up, we use thy Name;
Or cunningly to make our dross to pass,
Do set a jewel in a foil of brass:
No, it is the glory of thy well-known Name,
To be eternis'd, not in verse but Fame.
JOHNSON! that is weight enough to crown thy stone:
And make the Marble piles to sweat and groan
Under the heavy load! A Name shall stand
Fixed to thy Tomb, 'till times destroying hand
Crumble our dust together, and this All
Sink to its Grave, at the great Funeral.
If some less learned age neglect thy pen,
Eclipse thy flames, and loose the Name of BEN,
In spite of ignorance thou must survive
In thy fair progeny; That shall revive
Thy scattered ashes in the skirts of death,
And to thy fainting Name give a new breath;
That twenty ages after, men shall say
(If the Worlds story reach so long a day,)
Pindar and Plautus with their double Quire
Have well translated BEN the English Lyre.
What sweets were in the Greek or Latin known,
A natural Metaphor has made thine own:
Their lofty language in thy Phrase so dressed,
And neat conceits in our own tongue expressed,
That Ages hence, Critics shall question make
Whether the Greeks and Romans English spoke.
And though thy Phancies were too high for those
That but aspire to COCKEPIT-flight, or prose,
Though the fine Plush and Velvets of the age
Did often for sixepence damn thee from the Stage,
And with their Mast and Achorne-stomacks, ran
To t'h nastie sweepings of thy Servingman,
Before thy Cates, and swore thy stronger food,
'Cause not by them digested, was not good;
These Moles thy scorn and pity did but raise,
They were as fit to judge as we to praise.
Were all the choice of wit and language shown
In one brave Epitaph upon thy Stone,
Had learned Done, Beaumont, and Randolph, all
Survived thy Fate, and sung thy Funeral,
Their Notes had been too low: Take this from me --
None but thy self could write a verse for thee.
R. BRIDEOAKE, A. M. N. C. Oxon.
On Mr. BEN. JOHNSON.
POet of Princes, Prince of Poets (we
If to Apollo well may pray, to thee.)
Give Glo-wormes leave to peep, who till thy Night
Could not be seen, we darkened were with Light.
For Stars t'appeare after the fall of the Sun,
Is at the least modest presumption.
I Have seen a great Lamp lighted by the small
Spark of a Flint, found in a Field or Wall.
Our thinner verse faintly may shadow forth
A dull reflection of thy glorious worth;
And (like a Statue homely fashioned) raise
Some Trophies to thy Mem'rie, though not Praise.
Those shallow Sirs, who want sharp sight to look
On the Majestique splendor of thy Book.
That rather choose to hear an Archy's prate,
Then the full sense of a learned Laureate,
May when they see thy Name thus plainly writ,
Admire the solemn measures of thy wit,
And like thy Works beyond a gaudy Show
Of Boards and Canvas, wrought by INIGO.
Plough-men who puzzled are with Figures, come
By Tallies to the reckning of a Sum.
And Milk-sop Heirs, which from their Mothers Lap
Scarce travaild, know far Countries by a Map.
Shakespeare may make grief merry, Beaumonts style
Ravish and melt anger into a smile;
In winter nights, or after meals they be,
I must confess very good company:
But thou exact'st our best hours industry;
We may read them; we ought to study thee:
Thy Scoenes are precepts, every verse does give
Counsel, and teach us not to laugh, but live.
You that with towering thoughts presume so high,
(Sweld with a vain ambitious Timpanie)
To dream on scepters, whose brave mischief calls
The blood of Kings to their last Funerals:
Learn from Sejanus his high fall, to prove
To thy dread Sovereign a sacred love,
Let him suggest a reverend fear to thee,
And may his Tragedy, Thy Lecture be.
Learn the compendious Age of slippery Power
That Is built on blood; and may one little hour
Teach thy bold rashness that it is not safe
To build a Kingdom on a Caesar's grave.
Thy Plays were whipped and libel'd, only 'cause
They Are good, and savor of our Kingdoms Laws;
HISTRIO-MASTIX (lightning like) does wound
Those things alone that solid are and sound.
Thus guilty Men hate justice; so a glass
Is sometimes broke for showing a foul Face.
There Is none that wish Thee Rods instead of Bays,
But such, whose very hate adds to thy Praise.
Let Scriblers (that write Post, and versifie
With no more leisure then we cast a Die)
Spur on their Pegasus, and proudly cry,
This Verse I made in the twinkling of an eye.
Thou could have done so, had thou thought it fit;
But 'twas the wisdom of thy Muse to sit
And weigh each syllable; suffering naught to pass
But what could be no better then it was.
Those that keep pompous State nere go in have;
Thou went before them all, though not so fast.
While their poor Cobweb-stuffe finds as quick Fate
As Birth, and sells like Almanacks out of date;
The marble Glory of thy labored Rhyme
Shall live beyond the Calendar of Time.
Who will their Meteors 'bove thy Sun advance?
Thine are the Works of judgment, theirs of chance.
How this whole Kingdome's in thy debt! we have
From others Perewigs and Paints, to save
Our ruined Sculls and Faces; but to Thee
We owe our Tongues, and Fancies remedy.
Thy Poems make us Poets; we may lack
(Reading thy BOOK) stolen sentences and Sack.
He that can but one speech of thine rehearse,
Whether he will or no, must make a Verse.
Thus Trees give fruit, the kernels of that Fruit,
Do bring forth Trees, which in more branches shoot.
Our canting ENGLISH (of it self alone)
(I had almost said a Confusion)
Is now all harmony; what we did say
Before was tuning only, this is Play.
Strangers, who cannot reach thy sense, will throng
To hear us speak the Accents of thy Tongue
As unto Birds that sing; if it be so good
When heard alone, what is it when understood!
Thou shall be read as Classick Authors; and
As Greek and Latin taught in every Land.
The cringing Mounsieur shall thy Language vent,
When he would melt his Wench with Complement.
Using thy Phrases he may have his wish
Of a coy Nun, without an angry Pish.
And yet in all thy POEMS there is shown
Such Chastity, that every Line's a Zone.
Rome will confess that thou makst Caesar talk
In greater state and pomp then he could walk.
Catilines tongue is the true edge of swords,
We now not only hear, but feel his words.
Who Tully in thy Idiome understands
Will swear that his Orations are commands.
But that which could with richer Language dress
The highest sense, cannot thy Worth express.
Had I thy own Invention (which affords
" Words above Action, matter above words)
To crown thy Merits, I should only be
Sumptuously poor, low in Hyperbole.
RICHARD WEST.
OUr Bays (me thinks) are withered, and they look
As if (though thunder-free) with envy, struck;
While the triumphant Cipresse boast to be
Designed, as fitter for thy company.
Where shall we now find one dares boldly write,
Free from base flattery yet as void of spite?
That grovels not in's Satyrs, but soars high,
Strikes at the mounting vices, can descry
With his quick Eagles Pen those glorious crimes,
That either dazzle, or affright the Times?
Thy strength of Judgment often did thwart the tide
Of The foaming multitude, when to their side
Thronged plush, and silken censures, whilst it chose,
(As that which could distinguish Men from clothes,
Faction from judgment) still to keep thy Ba^es
From the suspicion of a vulgar praise.
But why wrong I thy memory whilst I strive,
In such a Verse as mine to keep't alive?
Well we may toil, and show our wits the rack;
Torture our needy fancies, yet still lack
Worthy Expressions Thy great loss to moan,
Being none can fully praise thee but thy own.
R. MEADE.
UPON THE DEATH OF BENJAMIN JOHNSON.
LEt thine own Sylla (BEN) arise, and try
To teach my thoughts an angry Ecstasy;
That I may fright Contempt, and with just darts
Of fury stick thy Palsy in their Hearts:
But why do I rescue thy Name from those
That only cast away their ears in Prose:
Or, if some better Brain arrive so high,
To venture Rhimes, it is but Court-Balladry,
Singing thy death in such an uncouth Tone,
As it had been an Execution.
What are his fauls (O Envy!) that you speak
English at Court, the learned Stage acts Greek?
That Latin He reduced, and could command
That which your Shakespeare scarce could understand?
That He exposed you Zelots, to make known
Your Profanation; and not his own?
That One of such a fervent Nose, should be
Posed by a Puppet in DIVINITY?
Fame write 'em on his Tomb, and let him have
Their Accusations for an Epitaph:
Nor think it strange if such thy Scoenes defy,
That erect Scaffolds against Authority.
Who now will plot to cozen Vice, and tell
The Trick and Policy of doing well?
Others may please the Stage, His sacred Fire
Wise men did rather worship then admire:
His lines did relish mirth, but so severe;
That as they tickled, they did wound the Ear.
Well then, such Virtue cannot die, though Stones
Loaded with Epitaphs do press his Bones:
He lives to me; spite of this Martyrdom:
BEN, is the self same POET in the Tomb.
You that can Aldermen new Wits create,
Know, IOHNSONS Sceleton is Laureate.
H. RAMSAY.
En
Ionsonus noster
Lyricorum Drammaticorumque
Coriphaeus
Qui
Pallide auspice
Lauruma Grecia ipsaque Roma
rapuit.
Et
Fausto omnine
In Britannian transtulit
nostram
Nunc
In vidia major
Fato, non Aemulus
cessit
Anno Dom. MCIXXVII. Id Nonar.
FR: WORTLEY, Baronet.
In obitum BEN: IONSONI Poetarum facile Principis.
IN quae proijcior discrimina? quale trementem
Traxit in officium piet as temeraria Musam?
Me miserum; incusso pertentor frigore, and umbra
Territus ingenti videor pars Funeris ipse
Quod celebro; famae concepta mole fatisco,
Exiquumque strues restringuit praegravis ignem.
Non tamen absistam, nam si spes tolibus ausis
Excidat, extabo laudum JOHNSONE tuarum
Vberior testis: totidem quos secula norunt,
Solus tu dignus, cuius praeconia spiret,
Deliquium Musarum, and victi facta Poetae.
Quis nescit, Roman tuos, in utraque triumphos
Militia, Laurique decus mox sceptra secutum:
Virgilius quoque Caesar erat, nec far priorem
Noverat: Augustum fato dilatus in aevum,
Vt Regemvatem jactares regia, Teque
Suspiceres gemino praelustrem Roma Monarcha.
En penitus toto divisos orb Brittannos,
Munera jactantes eadem, similique beatos
Fortuna; haec quoque secla suum videre Maronem,
Caesarei vixit qui laetus imagine sceptri,
Emplevitque suum Romana carmine nomen.
Vtque viam cernas, langosque ad summa paratus;
En series eadem, vatumque simillimus ordo.
Quis neget incultum Lucreti carmen, and Enni
Deformes numeros, Musae incrementa Latinae?
Haud aliter nostri praemissa in principis ortum
Ludicra Chauceri, classisque incompta sequentum;
Nascenti aptaparum divina haec machina regno,
In nostrum servanda fuit, tantaeque decebat
Praelusisse Deos aevi certamina famae;
Nec geminos vates, nec Te Shaksspeare silebo,
Aut quicquid sacri nostros conjecit in annos
Consilium Fati: per seros ite nepotes
Illustres animae, demissaque nomina semper
Candidior fama excipiat; sed parcite Divi,
Si majora vocant, si pagina sanctior urget.
Est vobis decor, et nativae gratia Musae,
Quae trahit atque tenet, quae me modo laeta remittit,
Excitum modo in alta rapit, versatque legentem.
Sed quam te memorem vatum Deus: O novagentis
Gloria and ignoto turgescens Musa cothurno!
Quam solidat vires, quam pingui robore surgens
Invaditque hauritque animam: haud temerarius ille
Qui mos est reliquis, probat obvia, magnaque fundit
Felici tantum genio; sed destinat ictum,
Sed vafer et sapiens cunctator praevia sternit,
Furtivoque gradu subvectus in ardua, tandem
Dimittit pleno correptos fulmine sensus.
Huc, precor, accedat quisquis primo igne calentem
Ad numeros sua Musa vocat, nondumque subacti
Ingenij novitate tumens in carmina fertur
Non normae legisve memor; quis far soluti
Naufragium ingenij poterit, mentisque ruinam?
Quanto pulchrior hic medijs qui regnat in undis,
Turbine correptus nullo: cui spiritus ingens
Non artem vincit: medio sed verus in oestro,
Princeps insano pugnantem numine musam
Edomat, and cudit suspenso metra furore.
In rabiem Catilina tuam conversus and arts
Qualia molitur; quali bacchatur hiatu?
En mugitum oris, conjurataeque Camaenae,
Divinas furias and non imitable fulmen!
O verum Ciceronis opus, linguaeque disertae,
Elogium spirans: O vox aeterna Catonis,
Caesaream reserans fraudem, retrahensque sequaces
Patricios in caedem, and funera certa reorum:
Quis fando expediat primae solennia pompae,
Et circumfusi studium plaususque Theatri?
Non tu divini Cicero dux inclyte facti,
Romave majores vidit servata triumphos.
Celsior incedis nostro, Sejane, cothurno
Quam te Romani, quam te tua fata ferebant:
Hinc magis insigni casu, celebrique ruina
Volveris, and gravius terrent exempla Theatri.
At tu stas nunquam ruituro in culmine vates,
Despiciens auras, and fallax numen Amici,
Tutus honor tuo, genitaeque volumine famae.
A capreis verbosa and grandis epistola frustra
Venerat, offenso major fruerere Tonante,
Si sic crevisses, si sic, Sejane, stetisses.
O fortunatum, qui te, JONSONE, sequutus
Contexit sua fila, suique est Nominis Author.
T. TERRENT.
VATVM PRINCIPI, BEN. JONSONO Sacrum.
Poetarum Maxim!
Sive Tu mortem, sive Ecstasin passus,
Jaces verendum et plus quam Hominis funus.
Sic post receptam sacri furoris Gloriam,
^^m exhaustum jam Numen Decoxit emerita Vates
Jugique fluxu non reditura se prodegit Anima,
Jacuit Sibyllae cadaver,
Vel trepidis adhuc cultoribus consulendum.
Nulli se longius indulsit DEVS, nulli aegrius valedixit;
Pares testatus flammas,
Dum Exul, ac dum Incola.
Annorumque jam ingruente Vespere,
Pectus Tuum, tanquam Poeseos Horizonta,
Non sine Rubore suo reliquit:
Vatibus nonnullis ingentia prodere; nec scire datur:
Magnum alijs Mysterium, majus sibi,
Ferarum ritu vaticinantium
Inclusum jactant Numen quod nesciunt,
Et instinctu sapiunt non Intellecto.
Quibus dum ingenium facit Audacia, prodest Ignorare:
Tibi Primo contigit furore frui proprio,
Et Numen regeri Tuum.
Dum pari lucta Afflatibus Iudicium commisisti,
Bis Entheatus:
Aliasque Musis Mutas addidisti, Arts et Scientias,
Tui plenus Poeta.
Qui furorem Insaniae eximens
Docuisti, et sobrie Aonios Latices hauriri,
Primus Omnium.
Qui Effroenem Caloris luxuriem frugi Consilio castigaveris,
Vt tandem Ingenium sine venia placiturum
Possideret Britannia,
Miraretur Orbis,
Nihilque inveniret scriptis Tuis donandum, praeter famam.
Quod Prologi igitur
Velut Magnatum Propylaea Domini Titulos proferunt,
Perpetuumque celebratur Argumentum, Ipse Author,
Non Arrogantis hoc est, sed Iudicantis,
Aut Vaticinantis.
Virtutis enim illud et vatis est, sibi placere,
Proinde non Invidia tantum nostra, sed Laud Tua
Magnum Te prodire jusserunt fata.
Qui Integrum Nobis Poetam solus exhibuisti,
Vnusque omnes exprimens.
Cum frondes Alij Laureas Decerpunt, Tu totum Nemus vindicas,
Nec Adulator Laudas, nec invidus perstringis:
Vtrumque exosus.
^el Sacrificio Tuo Mella, vel Medicinae Acetum immiscere.
Nec Intenso nimis spiritu Avenam Dirupisti:
Nec exili nimis Tubam emaculasti;
Servatis vtrinque Legibus, Lex ipsi factus.
^na obsequij religione Imperium nactus es:
Rerum servus, non Temporum.
Ita omnium Musarum Amasius,
Omnibus perpetuum certamen astas.
Sit Homeri gloria
Vrbes de se certantes habere, de te disputant Musae,
Qui seu cothurno niteris, inter Poetas Tonans Pater,
Sive soccum Pede comples rotundo,
Et Epigrammata Dictas Agenda,
Facetiasque Manibus exprimendas,
Adoranda posteris Ducis vestigia, et nobis unus es Theatrum Metari.
Non Arenae spectacula scena exhibuit Tua,
Nec Poemata, sed Poesin ipsam parturijt,
Populoque Mentes, et Leges ministravit,
Quibus Te damnare possent, si Tu poteras peccare.
Sic et Oculos spectanti praestas, et spectacula;
Scenamque condis quae Legi magis gestiat quam spectari,
Non Histrioni suum delitura ingenium,
Queis nullus Alij Apollo, sed Mercurius Numen,
Quibus Afflatus praestant vinum et Amasia,
Truduntque in Scenam vitia, Morbo Poetae.
Quibus Musa Pagis primisque Plaustris apta,
Praemoriturum vati carmen,
Non edunt, sed abortiunt;
Cui ipsum etiam praelum conditorium est,
Novaque Lucinae fraud in Tenebras emittuntur Authors,
Dum Poemata sic ut Diaria,
Suo tantum Anno et Regioni effingunt,
Sic quoque Plauti Moderni sales,
Ipsi tantum Plauto (...):
Et vernaculae nimium Aristophanis facetiae
Non extra suum Theatrum Plausus invenerunt:
Tu interim
Saculi spiras quoque post futuri Genium.
Idemque Tuum et Orbis Theatrum est,
Dum Immensum, cumque Lectore crescens Carmen;
Et perenne uno fundis Poema verbo,
Tuas Tibi gratulamur foelices Moras!
Quanquam quid moras reprehendimus, quas nostri fecit reverentia?
Aeternum scribi debuit quicquid aeternum legi.
Poteras Tu solus
Stylo sceptris Majore Orbem moderari.
Romae Britannos subjugavit Gladius,
Romam Britannis Calamus tuus,
Quam sic vinci gestientem,
Cothurno Angliaco sublimiorem quam suis Collibus cernimus,
Demum quod majus est, aetatem Nobis nostram subijcis;
Oraculique Vicarius,
Quod jussit DEVS, Fides praestat Sacerdos,
Homines seipsos Noscere instituens.
Lingua Nostra
Tibi collactanea Tecum crevit,
Vocesque patrias, et Tuas simul formasti.
Nec Indigenam amplius, sed JONSONI jactamus facundiam,
Vt inde semper Tibi contingat Tua Lingua Celebrari;
Qui et Romam
Disertiores docuisti voces
Mancipiali Denuo Iocomate superbientem,
Graeciamque etiam
Orbis Magistram excoluisti,
Nunc alia quam Attica Minerva Eloquentem.
Te solo Dives poteras Aliorum Ingenia contemnere,
Et vel sine Illis evasisses Ingenij compendium:
Sed ut ille Pictor,
Mundo daturus par Ideae Exemplar,
Quas hinc et inde Pulchritudines
Sparserat Natura,
Collegit Artifex:
Formaeque rivulos palantes in unum cogens Oceanum,
Inde exire jussit alteram sine naevo Venerem.
Ita Tibi parem Machinam molito,
In hoc etiam ut Pictura erat Poesis;
Alij inde Authors materies Ingenio Tuo accedunt,
Tu illis Ars, et Lima adderis.
Et si Poetae audient Illi, Tu Ipsa Poesis;
Authorum non alius Calamus, sed Author.
Scriptores Diu sollicitos Teipso tandem docens,
Quem debet Genium habere victurus Liber.
Qui praecesserunt, quotquot erant viarum tantum Judices fuerunt,
Tu solum Columna.
Quae prodest alijs virtus, obstat Domino.
Et qui caeteros emendatius transcripseras,
Ipse transcribi nescis.
Par Prioribus congressus, Futuris Impar,
Scenae perpetuus Dictator.
ROB. WARING.
Epitaphium in BEN: IONSON.
ADsta hospes: pretium morae est, sub isto
Quid sit, discere, conditum Sepulchro.
Socci deliciae; decus Cothurni;
Scenae pompa; cor and caput Theatri;
Linguarum sacer helluo; perennis
Defluxus venerum; scatebra salsi
Currens lene joci, sed innocentis;
Artis perspicuum jubar; coruscum
Sydus; judicij pumex, profundus
Doctrinae puteus, tamen serenus;
Scriptorum genius; Poeticus Dux,
Quantum O sub rigido latet lapillo!
WILLIAM BEW. N. Coll. Oxon. soc.
In Obitum BEN. IONSON.
NEc sic excidimus: pars tantum vilior audit
Imperium Libitina tuum, coelestior urget
Aethereos tractus, mediasque supervolat Auras,
Et velut effusum spissa inter nubila lumen
Ingenij strictura micat, foelicior ille,
Quisquis ab hoc victuram actavit Lampada Phoebo.
In famulante faces accendimus, idque severae,
Quod damus alterius vitae, concedimus Vmbrae.
Sic Caput Ismarij, caesa cervice, Poetae,
Nescio quid rapido vocale immurmurat Hebro,
Memnonis adverso sic stridit Chordula Phoebo,
Datque modos magicos, tenuesque reciprocat Auras:
Seu Tu Grandiloqui torques vaga froena Theatri,
En Tibi vox geminis applaudit publica Palmis;
Seu juvat in Numeros, palantes cogere voces
Maeonia JONSONE cheli, Te pronus amantum
Prosequitur Coetus, studioso imitamine vatum.
BENIAMINI insignis quondam quintuplice ditis
Suffitu Mensae, densaque paropside, sed Tu
Millena plus part alios excedis, et Auctis
Accumulas dapibus, propria de dote, Placentam.
SAM. EVANS, L L. Bacc. No. Coll. Oxon. Soc.
OVed Martes Epico tonat Cothurno,
Sive aptat Elegis leves Amores,
Seu sales Epigrammatum jocosos
Promit, seu numerosiora plectro
Jungit verba, sibi secundat orsa
Cyrrhaeus, nec Hyantiae sorores
Vlli dexterius favent Poetae,
Hoc cum Maeonide sibi et Marone,
Et cum Callimacho, et simul Tibullo
Commune est, alijsque cum trecentis:
Sed quod Anglia quotquot eruditos
Foecundo ediderit sinu Poetas
Acceptos referat sibi, sua omnes
Hos industria finxerit, labosque
IONSONI, Hoc proprium est suumque totum,
Qui Poemata fecit et Poetas.
R. BRIDEOAKE. A. M. N. C. Oxon.
(...),
(...),
(...),
(...).
(...)
(...).
(...),
(...).
(...),
(...).
(...).
(...).
(...),
(...).
(...),
(...).
(...)
(...).
Ian. 23. 1637.
Jmprimatur,

THO: WYKES, R. P. Episc. Land: Capell: Domest.

FINIS.

