POETASTER Or The Arraignment: As it has been sundry times privately acted in
the Black Friars, by the children of her Majesty's Chapel.

Composed, by Ben. Johnson.

Et mihi de nullo fama rubore placet.

LONDON Printed for M. L. and are to be sold in Saint Dunstans Church-yarde.
1602.

THE PERSONS THAT ACT.
1. Augustus Caesar. 2. Mecaenas. 3. Mar. Ovid. 4. Cor. Gallus. 5. Propertius.
6. Fu. Aristius. 7. Pub. Ovid. 8. Virgill. 9. Horace. 10. Tucca. 11. Lupus. 12.
Crispinus. 13. Hermogenes. 14. De. Fannius. 15. Albius. 16. Minos. 17. Histrio.
18. Pyrgus. 19. Lictor. 20. Iulia. 21. Cytheris. 22. Plautia. 23. Chloe. 24.
Maids.
Ad Lectorem.
Ludimus innocuis verbis, hoc iuro potentis
Per Genium Famae, Castalidumque gregem:
Perque tuas aures, magni mihi numinis instar,
Lector, inhumana liber ab Inuidia,
LIVOR
LIght, I salute thee; but with wounded nerves:
Wishing thy golden splendour, pitchy darkness.
What Is here? Th'arraignment? I: This, this is it,
That our sunk eyes have wak't for, all this while:
Here will be subject for my Snakes and me.
Cling to my neck and wrists my loving Worms;
And cast you round, in soft, and amorous foulds,
Till I do bid, vncurle: Then, break your knots;
Shoot out your selves at length, as your forced stings
Would hide them selves within his malic't sides,
To whom I shall apply you. Stay: the shine
Of this assembly here offends my sight,
I Will darken that first, and outface their grace.
Wonder not if I stare: These fifteen weeks
(So long as since the Plot was but an Embrion)
Have I, with burning lights, mixed vigilant thoughts,
In expectation of this hated Play:
To which (at last) I am arrived as Prologue.
Nor would I, you should look for other looks,
Gesture, or complement from me, then what
The infected bulk of Envy can afford:
For I am risse here with a covetous Hope,
To blast your pleasures, and destroy your sports,
With wrestings, Comments, applications,
Spie-like suggestions, privy whisperings,
And thousand such promooting sleights as these.
Mark, how I will begin: The Scene is, ha?
Rome? Rome? and Rome? Crack eystrings, and your balls
Drop into earth; let me be ever blind.
I am prevented; All my hopes are crossed,
Checked, and abated; fie, a freezing sweat
Flows forth at all my Pores, my Entrails burn:
What should I do? Rome: Rome? O my vexed soul,
How might I force this to the present state?
Are there no Players here? no Poet-Apes,
That come with Basiliskes eyes, whose forked tongues
Are steept in venom, as their hearts in gall?
Either of these would help me; they could wrest,
Pervert, and poison all they hear, or see,
With senseless glosses, and allusions.
Now if you be good Devils, fly me not.
You know what dear, and ample faculties
I have endowed you with: I Will lend you more.
Here, take my Snakes among you; come, and eat,
And while the squeez diuice flows in your black jaws,
Help me to damn the Author: Spit it forth
Upon his lines, and show your rustie teeth
At every word, or accent: or else choose
Out of my longest vipers, to stick down
In your deep throats; and let the heads come forth
At your rank mouths; that he may see you armd
With triple malice, to hiss, sting, and tear
His work, and him: to forge, and then declame,
Traduce, corrupt, apply, inform, suggest;
O, these are gifts wherein your souls are blessed.
What? do you hide your selves? will none appear?
None answer? What, does this calm troop affright you?
Nay then I do despair: Down, sink again.
This travail is all lost with my dead hopes.
If in such bosoms, Spite have left to dwell,
Envy is not on earth, nor scarce in hell,
PROLOGVS.
STAY Monster: ere thou sink, thus on thy head
Set we our boulder foot; with which we tread
Thy malice into earth: So Spite should die;
Despised and scornd by noble industry.
If any muse why I salute the Stage,
An armed Prologue; know 't is a dangerous age:
Wherein, who writes, had need present his Scenes
Forty fold proof against the coniuring means
Of base Detractors, and illiterate Apes,
That fill up rooms in fair and formal shapes.
Against these, have we put on this forced defense:
Whereof the Allegory and hid sense
Is, that a well erected Confidence
Can fright their pride, and laugh their folly hence.
Here now, put case our Author should once more
Swear that his Play were good; he does implore,
You would not argue him of Arrogance;
How ere that common Spawne of Ignorance,
Our Fry of Writers, may beslime his fame,
And give his action that adulterate name.
Such full blown vanity he more does loath
Then base deiection; There Is a mean twixt both:
Which with a constant firmness he pursues,
As one that knows the strength of his own Muse.
And this he hopes all free souls will allow:
Others that take it with a rugged browe,
Their moodes he rather pities, then enuies:
His mind it is above their injuries.
ACTVS PRIMVS.
SCENA PRIMA.
Ovid, Luscus. Ovid. THEN, when this body falls in funeral fire, My name shall
live, and my best part aspire. It shall go so.


Lus. Young master, Master Ovid, do you hear? Gods a me! away with your songs
and sonets; and on with your gown and Cappe, quickly: here, here, your Father
will be a man of this room presently. Come, nay, nay, nay, nay, be brief.
These verses too, a poison on 'hem, I cannot abide 'hem, they make me ready to
cast, by the banks of Helicon. Nay look, what a rascally untoward thing this
Poetry is; I could tear 'hem now.


Ovid. Give me, how neere's my Father?


Lus. Heart a'man: get a law book in your hand, I will not answer you else.
Why so: now there is some formalitie in you; By Jove, and three or four of the
Gods more, I am right of mine old masters humor for that; this villainous
Poetry will undo you, by the Welkin.


Ovid. What, have thou buskins on, Luscus, that thou swear'st so tragically and
high?


Lus. No: but I have boots on sir, and so has your father too by this time:
for he called for 'hem, ere I came from the lodging.


Ovid. Why? was he no readier?


Lus. O no; and there was the mad skeldring Captain, with the velvet arms,
ready to lay hold on him as he comes down: he that presses every man he
meets, with an oath, to lend him money, and cries; Thou must do it old boy, as
thou art a man, a man of worship.


Ovid. Who? Pantilius Tucca?


Lu. I, he: and I met little master Lupus the Tribune, going thither too.


Ovid. Nay, and he be under their arrest, I may (with safety enough) read
over my Elegy, before he come.


Lus. Gods a me! What'll you do? why, young master, you are not Castalian mad,
lunatike, frantike, desperate? ha?


Ovid. What ailest thou, Luscus?


Lus. God be with you sir, I Will leave you to your Poetical fancies and furies.
I Will not be guilty, I.


Exit. Ovid. Be not, good ignorance: I Am glad thou art gone: For thus alone, our
Ear shall better judge The hasty errors of our morning Muse.


ENVY, why twitst thou me, Ovid. Lib. 1. Amo. Ele. 15.
my Time's spent ill?
And call'st my verse, fruits of an idle quill?
Or that (unlike the line from whence I sprung)
Wars dustie honors I pursue not young?
Or that I study not the taedious laws;
And prostitute my voice in every cause?
Thy scope is mortal; mine eternal Fame,
Which through the world shall ever chaunt my name.
Homer will live, whilst Tenedos stands, and I Would,
Or to the sea, fleet Simois does slide:
And so shall Hesiod too, while vines do bear,
Or crooked sickles crop the ripened ear.
Callimachus, though in Invention low,
Shall still be sung, since he in Art does flow.
No loss shall come to Sophocles proud vain,
With Sun and Moon Aratus shall remain.
Whilst Slaves be false, Fathers hard, and Bauds be whorish,
Whilst Harlots flatter, shall Menander flourish.
Ennius, though rude, and Accius high-reard strain,
A fresh applause in every age shall gain.
Of Varro's name, what ear shall not be told?
Of Iasons Argo? and the Fleece of gold?
Then, shall Lucretius lofty numbers die,
When Earth, and Seas in fire and flames shall frye.
Titirus, Tillage, Aeney shall be read,
Whilst Rome of all the conquered world is head.
Till Cupids fires be out, and his bow broken,
Thy verses (neat Tibullus) shall be spoken.
Our Gallus shall be known from East to West:
So shall Lycoris, whom he now loves best.
The suffering Plough-share or the Flint may wears
But heavenly Poesy no death can fear.
Kings shall give place to it, and kingly shows,
The banks ore which gold-bearing Tagus flows.
Kneel hindes to trash: me let bright Phoebus swell,
With cups full flowing from the Muses Well.
The frost-drad Myrtle shall impale my head,
And of sad lovers I Will be often read.
"Envy, the living, not the dead, does bite.
"For after death all men receive their right.
Then when this body falls in funera'l fire,
My name shall live, and my best part aspire.
SCENA SECVNDA.
Ovid senior, Ovid Junior, Luscus, Tucca, Lupus, Pyrgus. Ovid sen. YOUR name
shall live indeed sir; your say true: but how infamously, how scorned and
contemned in the eyes and ears of the best and grauest Romans, that you think
not on: you never so much as dream of that. Are these the fruits of all my
Travail and Expenses? is this the Scope and Aim of thy studies? are these the
hopeful courses, wherewith I have so long flattered my expectation from thee?
Verses? Poetry? Ovid, whom I thought to see the Pleader, become Ovid the
Play-maker?


Ovid Iun. No Sir.


Ovid sen. Yes Sir. I hear of a Tragedy of yours coming forth for the
common Players there, called Medea. By my household gods, if I come to the
acting of it, I Will add one tragic part, more then is yet expected, to it:
believe me when I promise it. What? shall I have my son a Stager now? an Enghle
for Players? a Gull? a Rooke? a Shot-clog? to make suppers, and be laughed at?
Publius, I will set thee on the funeral pile first.


Ovid Iun. Sir, I beseech you to have patience.


Lus. Nay, this it is to have your ears damm'd up to good counsel. I did augure
all this to him before hand, without poring into an oxes paunch for the matter,
and yet he would not be scrupulous.


Tucc. How now, good man slave? what, Roll Powle? all riuals, Rascal? why my
Knight of worship, do hear? Are these thy best proiectes? is this thy
desseignes and thy discipline, to suffer knaves to be competitors with
Commanders and Gentmen? are we paralels, rascal? are we paralels?


Ovid sen. Sirrah, go get my horses ready. You Will still be prating.


Tucca. Do, you perpetual Stinkard, do: go, talk to Tapsters and Ostlers
you slave: they are in your element, go: here be the Emperors captains, you
Raggamussin Rascal; and not your Comrades.


Lup. Indeed, Sir Marcus Ovid, these Players are an idle Generation, and do
much harm in a State, corrupt young gentry very much, I know it: I have not
been a Tribune thus long and observed nothing: besides, they will rob us, us,
that are Magistrates, of our respect, bring us upon their Stages, and make us
ridiculous to the Plebeians; they will play you, or me, the wisest men they can
come by still; me: only to bring us in contempt with the vulgar, and make us
cheap.


Tucca. Thou Art in the right, my venerable Cropshin, they will indeed: the
tongue of the Oracle never twangd truer. Your Courtier cannot kiss his
mistress Slippers, in quiet, for 'hem, nor your white innocent Gallant pawn
his reuelling suit, to make his Punque a supper. An honest decayed Commander,
cannot skelder, cheat, nor be seen in a baudie house, but he shall be straight
in one of their wormewod Comedies. They are grown licentious, the Rogues;
Libertines, flat Libertines. They forget they are in the Statute, the Rascals,
they are blazond there, there they are trickt, they and their Pedigrees: they
need no other Heralds Iwisse.


Ovid se. Me thinks if nothing else, yet this alone; the very reading of the
public Edictes should fright thee from Commerce with them; and give thee
distaste enough of their actions. But this betrays what a Student you are:
this argues your proficiencie in the Law.


Ovid Iu. They wrong me sir, and do abuse you more,
That blow your ears with these untrue reports.
I am not known unto the open Stage,
Nor do I trafique in their Theaters.
Indeed, I do acknowledge, at request
Of some near friends, and honorable Romans,
I have begun a Poem of that nature.

Ovid se. You have sir, a Poem? and where is it? that is the Law you study.


Ovid Iun. Cornelius Gallus borrowed it to read.


Ovid se. Cornelius Gallus? There Is another gallant, too, has drunk of the
same poison: and Tibullus and Propertius. But these are Gentlemen of means,
and Revenues now. Thou art a younger brother, and have nothing, but thy bare
exhibition: which I protest shall be bare indeed, if thou forsake not these
unprofitable by-courses, and that timely too. Name me a professed Poet, that his
Poetry did ever afford him so much as a competencie. I, your God of Poets there
(whom all of you admire and reverence so much) Homer, he whose worm-eaten
Statue must not be spewd against, but with hallowed lips and groueling
adoration, what was he? what was he?


Tuc. Marry he tell thee old Swaggrer; He was a poor blind riming Rascal, that
lived obscurely up and down in Boothes and Tap-houses, and scarce ever made a
good meal in his sleep, the whoreson hungry beggar.


Ovid sen. He says well. Nay I know this nettles you now: but answer me;
Is It not true? Is It not true? You Will tell me his name shall live, and that now
(being dead) his works have eternised him, and made him divine: but could
this divinity feed him while he lived, could his name feast him?


Tuc. Thou speak sentences, old Bias.


Ovid sen. Well, the day grows old, gentlemen, and I must leave you. Publius,
if thou will hold my favor, aba^don these idle fruitless studies that so
traduce thee. Send Ianus home his back face again, and look only forward to
the Law: Intend that. I will allow thee, what shall suit thee in the rank of
Gentlemen, and maintain thy society with the best: and under these
conditions, I leave thee. My blessings light upon thee, if thou respect them:
if not, mine eyes may drop for thee, but thine own heart will ache for it
self; and so farewell. What, are my horses come?


Lus. Yes Sir, they are at the gate without.


Ovid sen, That Is well. Asinius Lupus, a word. Captain, I shall take my leave
of you?


Tuc. No, my little knight Errant, dispatch with Caualier Cothurnus there; I Will
attend thee, I.


Lus. To borrowe some ten Drachmes, I know his Proiecte.


Ovid sen. Sir you shall make me beholding to you. Now Captain Tucca, what
say you?


Tuc. Why, what should I say? or what can I say, my most Magnanimous Mirror of
Knighthood? Should I say thou art rich? or that thou art honorable? or wise? or
valiant? or learned? or liberal? Why, thou art all these, and thou-knowest it
(my noble Lucullus) thou know it: come, be not ashamed of thy virtues, old
Stumpe. Honor's a good brooch to wear in a man's hat, at all times. Thou art
the man of wars Mecaenas, knight. Why should not thou be graced then by
them, as well as he is by his Poets? How now my Carier, what news?


Lus. The boy has stayed within for his cue, this half hour.


Tuc. Come, do not whisper to me, but speak it out. what, it is no treason
against the State, I hope, is it?


Lus. Yes, against the state of my masters purse.


Pyr. Sir, Agrippa desires you to forbear him till the next week: his Moyles
are not yet come up.


Tuc. His Moyles? now the Bots, the Spauin, and the Glanders, and some dosen
diseases more, light on him, and his Moyles. What have they the Yellowes, his
Moyles, that they come no faster? or are they fowndred? ha? his Moyles have the
Staggers belike: have they?


Pyr. O no Sir: then your tongue might be suspected for one of his Moyles.


Tuc. He owes me almost a Talent, and he thinks to bear it away with his
Moyles, does he? Sirrah, you, Nut-cracker: go your ways to him again, and
tell him I must have money, I: I cannot eat stones and Turues, say. What, will
he clem me and my followers? Ask him and he will clem me: do, go. He would
have me fry my Ierkin, would he? Away Setter, away. Yet stay, my little
tumbler: the Knight shall supply now: I will not trouble him, I cannot be
importunate, I: I cannot be impudent.


Pyr. Alas sir no: you are the most maidenly blushing creature upon the earth.


Tuc. Do thou hear, my little Six and fifty, or thereabouts? Thou art not
to learn the humors and tricks of that old bald Cheater, Time: thou had
not this chain for nothing. Men of worth have their Chymara's, as well as other
creatures: and they do see monsters, sometimes: they do, they do.


Pyrg. Better cheap then he shall see you, I warrant him.


Tuc. Thou must let me have six, six, Drachmes, I mean, Old boy; thou shall do
it: I tell thee, Old boy, thou shall, and in private too, do thou see? Go,
walk off: there, there. Six is the sum. Thy sonn's a gallant Spark, and must
not be put out of a sudden: come hither, Callimachus. Thy Father tells me thou
art too Poetical, Slave: thou must not be so: thou must leave them, young
Nouice; thou must: They are a sort of poor starued Rascalles; that are ever
wrapped up in foul linen: and can boast of nothing but a lean visage, peering
out of a seam-rent suite; the very Emblemes of Beggary. No: do hear? turn
Lawyer, Thou shall be my Solicitor: It Is right old boy, Is It?


Ovid sen. You were best tell it Captain.


Tuc. No: fare thou well mine honest Knight, and thou old Beauer, Pray thee
Knight, when thou come to town, see me at my lodging, visit me some times:
Thou shall be welcome old boy: do not balke me good Swaggrer; Jove keep thy
chain from pawning: go thy ways: if thou lack money I Will lend thee some:
I Will leave thee to thy horse, now; Adue.


Ovid sen. Farewell good Captain.


Tuc. Boy, you can have but half a share now, boy. Exit.


Ovid sen. It Is a strange boldness, that accompanies this fellow: Come.


Ovid. I Will give attendance on you, to your horse, Sir; Please you. --


Ovid sen. No: keep your chamber, and fall to your studies; do so: the Gods
of Rome bless thee.

Exeunt.
Ovid. And give me stomach to digest this law;
That should have followed sure, had I been he.
O sacred Poesy, thou spirit of Arts,
The soul of Science, and the Queen of Souls,
What profane violence, almost sacrilege,
Has here been offered thy Diuinities!
Hmh! that thine own guiltless Poverty should arm
Prodigious Ignorance to wound thee thus!
For thence, is all their force of Argument
Drawn forth against thee; or from the abuse
Of thy great powers in Adultrate brains;
When, would men learn but to distinguish spirits,
And set true difference twixt those iaded wits,
That run a broken pase for common hire,
And the high Raptures of a happy soul,
Borne on the wings of her immortal thought,
That kickes at earth with a disdainefull heel,
And beats at Heaven gates with her bright hooues;
They would not then with such distorted faces,
And dudgeon Censures stab at Poesy:
They would admire bright knowledge, and their minds
Should nere descend on so unworthy objects,
As Gould or Titles: they would dread far more,
To be thought ignorant, then be known poor.
"The time was once, when wit drowned wealth: but now,
"Your only Barbarism's, to have wit, and want.
"No matter now in virtue who excells,
"He, that has coin, has all perfection else.

SCENA TERTIA.
Tibullus. Ovid. Tibull. Ovid?


Ovid. Whose there? Come in.


Tibull. Good morrow Lawyer.


Ovid. Good morrow (dear Tibullus) welcome: sit down.


Tibullus. Not I. what: so hard at it? Lets see,
What Is here? Numa in Decimo nono?

Ovid. Pray thee away.


Tibullus. If thrice in field, a man vanquish his foe,
It Is after in his choice to serve, or no.
How now Ovid! Law cases in verse?

Ovid. In troth, I know not: they run from my Pen Unwittingly, if they be
verse. What Is the news abroad?


Tibullus. Off with this gown, I come to have thee walk.


Ovid. No, good Tibullus; I Am not now in case.
Pray thee let me alone.

Tibullus. How? not in case!
S'light you are in too much case, by all this Law.

Ovid. Troth, if I live, I will new dress the Law,
In sprightly Poesyes Acoutrements.

Tibull. The hell thou will. what, turn Law into verse?
Thy father has schoold thee I see. Here, read that same.
There Is subject for you: and if I mistake not,
A Supersedeas to your Melancholy.

Ovid. How! subscribed Iulia! O my life, my Heaven!


Tibull. Is the Mood changed?


Ovid. Music of wit! Note for th'harmonious Spheres!
Celestial Accents, how you ravish me!

Tibull. What is it, Ovid?


Ovid. That I must meet my Iulia, the Princess Iulia.


Tibullus. Where?


Ovid. Why at Heart, I have forgot: my passion so transports me.


Tibull. I Will save your pains: it is at Albius house,
The Iewellers, where the fair Eycoris lies.

Ovid. Who? Cytheris, Cornelius Gallus Love?


Tibull. I, heel be there too, and my Plautia.


Ovid. And why not your Delia?


Tibull. Yes, and your Corinna.


Ovid. True; but my sweet Tibullus, keep that secret:
I would not, for all Rome, it should be thought
I veil bright Iulia underneath that name:
Iulia, the Gem, and Jewel of my soul,
That takes her honors from the goulden Sky,
As beauty does all Luster, from her Eye.
The Air respires the pure Elyzium sweetes,
In which she breathes: and from her looks descend,
The glories of the Summer. Heaven she is,
Praised in her self above all praise: and he,
Which hears her speak, would swear the Tune-full Orbs
Turned in his Zenith only.

Tibull. Publius, thou wilt loose thy self.


Ovid. O, in no Labyrinth, can I safelier err,
Then when I loose my self in praising her.
Hence Law, and welcome, Muses; though not rich,
Yet are you pleasing: let us be reconcilde,
And new made one. Hence forth, I promise faith,
And all my serious hours to spend with you:
With you, whose Music strikes on my heart,
And with bewitching Tones steals forth my spirit,
In Iulias name; Fair Iulia, Iulias Love
Shall be a Law, and that sweet Law I Will study,
The Law, and Art of sacred Iulias Love:
All other objects will but Abiects prove.

Tibull. Come, we shall have thee as passionate, as Propertius, anon.


Ovid. O, how does my Sextus?


Tibull. Faith, full of sorrow, for his Cynthias death.


Ovid. What, still?


Tibull. Still, and still more, his grieves do grow upon him,
As do his hours. Never did I know
An understanding spirit so take to heart
The common work of Fate.

Ovid. O my Tibullus,
Let us not blame him: for against such chances,
The hartiest strife of virtue is not proof.
We may read Constancy and Fortitude,
To other souls: but had our selves been struck
With the like Planet; had our Loves (like his)
Been ravished from us, by injurious death,
And in the height, and heat of our best days,
It would have cracked our sinnewes, shrunk our veins,
And made our very heart strings jar, like his.
Come, let us go take him forth, and prove, if Mirth,
Or Company will but abate his passion.

Tibullus. Content, and I implore the Gods it may. Exeunt.


Finis Actus Primi.
ACTVS SECVNDVS.
SCENA PRIMA.
Albius. Crispinus. Chloe. Maids. Cytheris. Albius, MAster Crispinus, you are
welcome; Pray', use a stool Sir. Your Cosen Cytheris, will come down
presently. We are so busy for the receceauing of these Courtiers here, that I
can scarce be a minute with my self, for thinking of them; Pray you sit Sir,
Pray you sit Sir.


Crispinus. I am very well Sir. Nere trust me, but you are most delicatly
seated here, full of sweet delight and blandishment; An excellent air, An
excellent Air.


Albius. I Sir, it is a pretty air: These Courtiers run in my mind still; I
must look out: for Jupiters sake sit Sir, or please you walk into the Garden.
There Is a Garden on the backside.


Crispinus. I am most strenuously well, I thank you Sir.


Albius. Much good do you Sir. Exit.


Chloe. Come, bring those Perfumes forward a little; and strew some Roses, and
Violets here; Fie, here be rooms savor the most pitifully rank that ever I
felt: I cry the Gods mercy, my Husband's in the wind of us.


Albius. Why this is good, Excellent, Excellent: well said my sweet Chloe.
Trim up your house most obsequiously.


Chloe. For Vulcanes sake, breath some where else; in troth you overcome our
Perfumes exceedingly, you are to predominant.


Albius. Hear but my Opinion, sweet Wife.


Chloe. A pin for your Pinnion. In sincerity, if you be thus fulsome to me
in every thing, I Will be diuorc't; Gods my body! you know what you were, before
I married you; I was a Gentlewoman borne, I: I lost all my friends to be a
Citizens wife; because I heard indeed, they kept their wives as fine as Ladies;
and that we might rule our husbands, like Ladies; and do what we listed: do
you think I would have married you else?


Albius. I acknowledge, sweet wife: she speaks the best of any woman in
Italy, and moves as mightily: which makes me, I had rather she should make
Bumpes on my head, as big as my two fingers, then I would offend her: But
sweet wife --


Chloe. Yet again? Is It not grace enough for you, that I call you Husband, and
you call me wife: but you must still be poking me, against my will to things?


Albius. But you know wife; here are the greatest Ladies, and Gallantst
Gentlemen of Rome, to be enterteyn'd in our house now: and I would feign advise
thee, to entertain them in the best sort, in faith wife.


Chloe. In sincerity, did you ever hear a man talk so Idly? You would seem
to be Master? You would have your spoke in my cart? you would advise me to
Entertain Ladies, and Gentlemen? because you can marshall your Packneedles,
Horsecombes, Hobby-horses, and Wall-Candlesticks in your ware house better then
I; therefore you can tell how to Entertain Ladies, and Gentlefolkes better
then I?


Albius. O my sweet wife, vpbraid me not with that: "Gain savors sweetly
from any thing; He that respects to get, must relish all commodities alike; and
admit no difference betwixt Oade, and Frankincense; or the most precious
Balsamum, and a Tarre-barrell.


Chloe. Mary fough: You sell snuffers to, if you be remembered, but I pray you
let me buy them out of your hand; for I tell you true, I take it highly in
snuff, to learn how to Entertain Gentlefolkes, of you, at these years, I
faith: Alas man; there was not a Gentleman came to your house in your the other
Wives time, I hope? nor a Lady? nor Music? nor Masks, Nor you, nor your
house were so much as spoken of, before I disbast my self, from my Hood and my
Fartingall, to these Bumrowles, and your Whale-bone Bodies.


Albius. Look here, my sweet Wife; I am Mum, my dear Mumma, my Balsamum, my
Sperma Cete, and my verry City of -- she has the most best, true, faeminine
wit in Rome.


Crisp. I have heard so Sir; and do most vehemently desire to participate the
knowledge of her fair Features.


Albius. Ah, peace; you shall hear more anon; be not seen yet; I pray you;
not yet; observe. Exit.


Chloe. S'body, give Husbands the head a little more, and they will be nothing
but Head shortly; what is he there?


Maid. 1. I know not forsooth:


Maid. 2. Who would you speak with Sir?


Crisp. I would speak with my Cosen Cytheris.


Maid. He is one forsooth would speak with his Cosen Cytheris.


Chloe. Is she your Cosen Sir?


Crisp. Yes in truth for sooth, for fault of a better.


Chloe. She is a Gentlewoman?


Crisp. Or else, she should not be my Cosen, I assure you;


Chloe. Are you a Gentleman borne?


Crisp. That I am Lady; you shall see mine Arms, if it please you.


Chloe. No, your legs do sufficiently show you are a Gentleman borne Sir:
for a man borne upon little legs, is always a Gentleman borne.


Crisp. Yet, I pray you, vouchsafe the sight of my arms, Mistress; for I
bear them about me, to have h'em seen: my name is Crispinus, or Cri-spinas
indeed; which is well expressed in my arms, a Face crying in chief; and
beneath it a bloody Toe, between three Thorns Pungent.


Chloe. Then you are welcome Sir; now you are a Gentleman borne, I can find in
my heart to welcome you: for I am a Gentlewoman borne too; and will bear my
head high enough, though twere my fortune to marry a Flat-cappe.


Albius. Dear wife be not angry.


Chloe. God's my passion!


Albius. Hear me but one thing; let not your maids set Cushions in the Parlor
windows; nor in the dining Chamber windows; nor upon stools, in either of
them in any case; for it is Tavern like; but lay them one upon an other, in some
out Room, or corner of the dining Chamber.


Chloe. Go, go, meddle with your Bedchamber only, or rather with your Bed
in your Chamber, only; or rather with your Wife in your Bed only; or on my
faith, I Will not be pleased with you only.


Albius. Look here, my dear Wife, entertain that Gentleman kindly, I pre'
thee; -- Mum. Exit.


Chloe. Go, I need your instructions indeed; Anger me no more, I advise you.
Citi-sin quotha'! she is a Wise Gentlewoman in faith, will marry her self to the
Sin of the City.


Albius. But this time, and no more (by heaven) Wife: hang no pictures in the
Hall, nor in the dining Chamber, in any case, but in the Gallery only, for it is
not Courtly else, on my word, Wife.


Chloe. 'Spretious, never have don!


Albius. Wife. Exit.


Chloe. Do I not be are a reasonable corrigible hand over him, Crispinus?


Crisp. By this hand Lady, you hold a most sweet hand over him.


Albius. And then for the great gilt Andyrons?


Chloe. Again! would the Andyrons were in your great guts, for me.


Albius. I do vanish, Wife. Exit.


Chloe. How shall I do, Master Crispinus? here will be all the brauest Ladies
in Court presently, to see your Cosen Cytheris: O the Gods! how might I behave
my self now, as to entertain them most Courtly?


Crisp. Marry Lady, if you will entertain them most Courtly, you must do
thus: as soon as ever, your maid, or your man brings you word they are come,
you must say, A pox on hem; what do they here? And yet when they come, speak
them as fair, and give them the kindest welcome in words, that can be.


Chlo. Is that the fashion of Courtiers, Crispinus?


Crisp. I assure you, it is Lady, I have observed it.


Chl. For your Pox Sir, it is easily hit upon; but, it is not so easy to speak
fair after, me thinks?


Alb. O Wife, the Coaches are come, on my word, a number of Coaches and
Courtiers.


Chlo. A pox on them: what do they here?


Alb. How now wife! would thou not have them come?


Chlo. Come? come, you are a fool, you: He knows not the trick on it. Call
Cytheris I pray you: and good master Crispinus, you can observe, you say; let
me entreat you for all the Ladies behauiors, Jewels, Iestes, and Attyres, that
you marking as well as I, we may put both our marks together, when they are
gone, and confer of them.


Crisp. I warrant you Sweet Lady; let me alone to observe, till I turn my
self to nothing but observation. God morrow cosen Cytheris.


Cyth. Welcome kind cosen. What, are they come?


Alb. I, your friend Cornelius Gallus, Ovid, Tibullus, Propertius, with Iulia
the Emperors daughter, and the Lady Plautia are lighted at the door; and with
them Hermogenes Tigellius, the excellent Musician.


Cyth. Come, let us go meet them Chloe.


Chlo. Observe Chrispinus.


Cri. At a hairs breadth Lady, I warrant you.


SCENA SECVNDA.
Gallus, Ovid, Tibullus, Propertius, Hermogenes, Iulia. Plautia, Cytheris,
Chloe, Albius, Crispinus. Gall. Health to the lovely Chloe: you must pardon me
Mistress, that I prefer this fair Gentlewoman.


Cith. I pardon, and praise you for it, Sir; and I beseech your Excellence,
receive her beauties into your Knowledge and Favor.


Iul. Cytheris, she has Favor, and behavior, that commands as much of me;
and sweet Chloe, know I do exceedingly love you, and that I will approve in
any grace my father the Emperor may show you. Is this your husband?


Alb. For fault. of a better, if it please your Highness.


Chl. Gods my life! how he shames me!


Cyth. Not a whit Chloe, they all think you politic, and witty; wise women
choose not husbands for the Eye, Merit, or Birth; but wealth, and Sovereignty.


Ovid. Sir, we all come to gratulate, for the good report of you.


Tibull. And would be glad to deserve your love, Sir.


Alb. My wife will answer you all, gentlemen; I Will come to you again
presently. Exit.


Plaut. You have chosen you a most fair companion here, Cytheris; and a very
fair house.


Cith. To both which, you and all my friends, are very welcome Plautia.


Chlo. With all my heart, I assure your Ladishippe.


Plau. Thanks, sweet Mistress Chloe.


Iul. You must needs come to Court Lady in faith, and there be sure your
welcome shall be as great to us.


Ovid. She will well deserve it Madam. I see, even in her looks, Gentry, and
general worthiness.


Tibull. I have not seen a more certain Character of an exlent disposition.


Alb. Wife.


Chl. O, they do so commend me here, the Courtiers! what is the matter now?


Alb. For the banquet, sweet wife.


Chl. Yes; and I must needs come to Court; and be welcome, the Princess says.
Exit


Gal. Ovid and Tibullus, you may be bold to welcome your Mistresses here.


Ovid. We find it so Sir.


Tibull. And thank Cornelius Gall^^.


Ovid. Nay, my sweet Sextus, infaith thou art not sociable,


Prop. Infaith I am not Publius; nor I cannot.
Sick minds are like sick men that burn with Feauers,
Who when they drink, please but a lingering taste,
And after bear a more impatient fit.
Pray, let me leave you; I offend you all,
And my self most.

Gal. Stay sweet Propertius.


Tibull. You yield to much unto your grieves, and Fate,
Which never hurtes, but when we say it hurts us.

Prop. O peace Tibullus; your Philosophy
Lends you to rough a hand to search my wounds.
Speak they of griefs, that know to sigh and grieve;
The free and unconstrained Spirit feels
No weight of my oppression. Exit.

Ovid. VVorthie Roman!
Me thinks I taste his misery; and could
Sit down, and chide at his malignant Stars:

Iul. Me thinks I love him, that he loves so truly.


Cyth. This is the perfect'st love, lives after death.


Gal. Such is the constant ground of virtue still.


Plau. It puts on an inseparable face.


Chl. Have you marked every thing, Crispinus?


Cri. Every thing, I, warrant you


Chl. What Gentlemen are these? do you know them?


Crisp. I, they are Poets, Lady.


Chl. Poets? they did not talk of me since I went, did they?


Crisp. O yes, and extold your perfections to the heavens.


Chl. Now in sincerity, they be the finest kind of men, that ever I knew;
Poets? Could not one get the Emper^^ to make my husband a Poet, think you?


Crisp. No Lady, it is Love, and Beauty make Poets: and since you like Poets so
well, your Love, and Beauties shall make me a Poet.


Chl. What shall they? and such a one as these?


Crisp. I, and a better than these: I would be sorry else.


Chl. And shall your looks change? and your Hair change? and all, like these?


Crisp. Why, a man may be a Poet, and yet not change his Hair, Lady.


Chlo. Well, we shall see your cunning: yet if you can change your Hair, I
pray: do.


Alb. Ladies, and Lordings, there is a slight Banquet stays within for you,
please you draw nere and accost it.


Iulia. We thank you good Albius: but when shall we see those excellent
Jewels you are commended to have?


Alb. At your Ladishippes service. I got that speech by seeing a Play last day,
and it did me some grace now: I see, it is good to collect sometimes; I Will
frequent these Plays more then I have done, now I come to be familiar with
Courtiers.


Gal. Why how now Hermogenes? what ailest thou trow?


Her. A little melancholy, let me alone, pray thee.


Gal. Melancholy! how so?


Her. With ryding: a plague on all Coaches for me.


Chlo. Is that hard favored Gentleman a Poet too; Cytheris?


Cyth. No; this is Hermogenes; as humorous as a Poet though: he is a Musician.


Chlo. A Musician? then he can sing.


Cyth. That he can excellently; did you never hear him?


Clo. O no: will he be entreated, think you?


Cyth. I know not. Friend, Mistress Chloe would feign hear Hermogenes sing:
are you interested in him?


Gal. No doubt, his own Humanity will command him so far, to the
satisfaction of so fair a beauty; but, rather the^ fail, we will all be suitors
to him.


Her. 'Cannot sing.


Gall. Pray thee Hermogenes.


Her. 'Cannot sing.


Gal. For honor of this Gentlewoman, to whose house, I know thou may be ever
welcome.


Clo. That he shall in truth sir, if he can sing.


Ovid. What Is that?


Gal. This Gentlewoman is woing Hermogeues for a song.


Ovid. A song? Come, he shall not deny her. Hermogenes?


Herm. 'Cannot sing.


Gal. No, the Ladies must do it, he stays but to have their thanks
acknowledged as a debt to his cunning.


Iul. That shall not want: our self will be the first shall promise to pay him
more then thanks, upon a favor so worthily vouchsaf't.


Herm. Thank you Madame; but 'will not sing.


Tibull. Tut, the only way to win him, is to abstain from entreating him.


Crisp. Do you love singing, Lady?


Chl. O, passingly.


Crisp. Entreat the Ladies, to entreat me to sing then, I beseech you.


Chl. I beseech your Grace entreat this Gentleman to sing.


Iul. That we will Chloe; can he sing excellently?


Chl. I think so Madam: for he entreated me, to entreat you, to entreat him to
sing.


Crisp. Heaven and earth! would you tell that?


Iul. Good Sir, lets entreat you to use your voice.


Crisp. Alas Madam, I cannot in truth.


Plau. The Gentleman's is modest: I warrant you, he singes excellently.


Ovid. Hermogenes clear your throat: I see by him, here is a Gentleman will
worthily challenge you.


Crisp. Not I sir, I Will challenge no man.


Tibul. That Is your modesty sir: but we, out of an assurance of your
excellency, challenge him in your behalf.


Crisp. I thank you Gentlemen, I Will do my best.


Her. Let that best be good, sir, you were best.


Gal. O, this contention is excellent. What is it you sing Sir?


Crisp. If I freely may discover, etc. Sir, I Will sing that.


Ovid. One of your own compositions, Hermogenes.
He offers you vantage enough.

Crisp. Nay truly Gentlemen, I Will challenge no man --:I can sing but one staff
of the Dittie neither.


Gal. The better: Hermogenes himself will be entreated to sing the other.


CANTVS.
IF I freely may discover,
What would please me in my Lover:
I would have her fair, and witty,
Sauouring more of Court, then City;
A little proud, but full of pity:
Light and Humorous in her toying,
Often building hopes, and soon destroying,
Long, but sweet in the enjoying,
Neither too easy, nor to hard:
All extremes I would have barde.
Gal. Believe me Sir, you sing most excellently.


Ovid. If there were a praise above Excellence, the Gentleman highly deserves
it.


Her. Sir, all this does not yet make me envy you: for I know I sing better
then you.


Tibull. Attend Hermogenes now.


2
She should be allowed her Passions,
So they were but used as fashions;
Sometimes froward, and then frowning,
Sometimes sickish, and then swowning,
Every fit, with change, still crowning.
Purely Ielous, I would have her,
Then only constant when I crave her.
It Is a virtue should not save her.
Thus, nor her Delicates would cloy me,
Neither her peevishness annoy me.
Iul. Nay Hermogenes, your merit has long since been both known, and admired
of us.


Her. You shall hear me sing another: now will I begin.


Gal. We shall do this Gentleman's Banquet too much wrong, that stays for
us, Ladies:


Iul. It Is true: and well thought on, Cornelius Gallus.


Her. Why it is but a short Air, 'twill be done presently, pray stay; strike
Music.


Ovid. No, good Hermogenes: we'll end this difference within.


Iul. It Is the common disease of all your Musicians, that they know no mean,
to be entreated, either to begin, or end.


Alb. Please you lead the way, Gentles?


Omnes. Thanks good Albius. Exeunt


Alb. O, what a charm of thanks was here put upon me! O Jove, what a setting
forth it is to a man, to have may Courtiers com to his house! Sweetly was it
said of a good old Houskeeper; I had rather want meat, then want Ghests:
specially, if they be Courtly Ghests. For never trust me, if one of their good
legs made in a house, be not worth all the good cheer, a man can make them.
He that would have fine Ghestes, let him have a fine Wife; he that would have a
fine Wife, let him come to me.


Crisp. By your kind leave, Master Albius.


Alb. What, you are not gone, Master Crispine?


Crisp. Yes faith, I have a desseigne draws me hence: pray' Sir, fashion me an
excuse to the Ladies.


Alb. Will you not stay? and see the Jewels, sir? I pray you stay.


Crisp. Not for a Million Sir, now; Let it suffice, I must relinquish; and so
in a word, please you to expiate this Complement.


Alb. Mum. Exit.


Crisp. I Will presently go and Enghle some Broker, for a Poets Gown, and
bespeake a Gyrland: and then Ieweller, look to your best Jewel in faith. Exit.


Finis Actus Secundi.
ACTVS TERTIVS.
SCENA PRIMA.
Horace, Crispinus. Hor. HMH? Hor. Lib. 1. Sat. 9.
yes; I will begin an Ode so; and it shall be to Mecoenas.


Cris. 'Slid yonder is Horace: they say he is an Excellent Poet: Mecoenas loves
him. I Will fall into his acquaintance, if I can; I think he be composing, as
he goes in the street ^ha? it is a good humor, and he be: I Will compose too.


Hor. Swell me a bowl with lusty wine,
Till I may see the plumpe Lyaeus swim
Above the brim:
I drink, as I would wright;
In flowing measure, filled with Flame, and spright.

Crisp. Sweet Horace! Minerua, and the Muses stand auspicious to thy
desseignes. How far'st thou sweet man? Frolic? rich? gallant? ha?


Hor. Not greatly gallant, Sir: like my fortunes; well.
I Am bold to take my leave Sir, you would naught else Sir, would you?

Crisp. Troth no; but I could wish thou did know us, Horace; we are a
Scholar, I assure thee.


Hor. A Scholar Sir? I shall be covetous of your fair knowledge.


Crisp. Gramercy good Horace; Nay, we are new turned Poet too, which is more;
and a Satyrist too, which is more then that: I write just in thy vain, I. I am
for your Odes or your Sermons, or any thing indeed; we are a Gentleman
besides: our name is Rufus Laberius Crispinus; we are a pretty Stoicke too.


Hor. To the proportion of your beard, I think it sir.


Crisp. By Phoebus, here is a most neat fine street; is it not? I protest to
thee, I am enamord of this street now, more then of half the streets of
Rome, again; it is so polite, and terse: There Is the front of a Building now. I
study Architecture too: if ever I should build, I Would have a house just of that
Prospectiue.


Horace. Doubtless, this Gallants tongue has a good turn, when he sleeps.


Crisp. I do make verses, when I come in such a street as this: O your
Citty-Ladies, you shall ha'hem sit in every shop like the Muses, -- offering you
the Castalian Deawes, and the Thespian Liquors, to as many as have but the
sweet grace and Audacitie to -- sip of their lips. Did you never hear any of
my verses?


Horace. No Sir; but I am in some fear, I must, now.


Crisp. I Will tell thee some (if I can but recover 'hem) I composed even now of a
velvet cap, I fawa Iewellers wife wear; who indeed was a Jewel her self: I
prefer that kind of Tire now; What Is thy opinion Horace?


Horace. With your silver Bodkin, it does well, Sir.


Crisp. I cannot tell, but it stirs me more then all your Court Curles, or your
Spangles, or your Tricks; I affect not these high Gable ends, these Tuscan
tops, nor your Coronets, nor your Arches, nor your Pyramid's; give me a fine
sweet -- little velvet Cap, with a Bodkin; as you say: and a Mushrome, for all
your other Ornatures.


Horace. Is It not possible to make an escape from him?


Crisp. I have remitted my verses all this while, I think I haforgot 'hem.


Horace. Here Is he, could wish you had else.


Crisp. Pray Jove, I can entreat 'hem of my Memory.


Horace. You put your Memory to too much trouble, Sir.


Crisp. No, sweet Horace, we must not have thee think so.


Horace. I cry you mercy; then, they are my Ears
That must be tortured; well, you must have patience, Ears.

Crisp. Pray thee Horace, observe.


Horace. Yes Sir: your Satin sleeue begins to fret at the Rug that is
underneath it, I do observe; And your ample Velvet hose are not without
evident stains of a hot disposition Naturally.


Crisp. O, -- I Will dye them into another Color, at pleasure: how many yards of
Velvet do thou think they conteyne?


Horace. 'Hart! I have put him now in a fresh way
To vex me more: Faith Sir, your Mercers book
Will tell you with more patience, then I can;
For I am crossed, and so's not that, I think.

Crisp. 'Slight; these Verses have lost me again: I shall not inuit 'hem to
mind now.


Horace. Rack not your thoughts, good Sir; rather, defer it
To a new Time; I Will meet you at your lodging,
Or where you please: Till then, Jove keep you Sir.

Crisp. Nay gentle, Horace, stay: I have it, now.


Horace. Yes Sir. Apollo, Hermes, Jupiter, look down upon me.


Crisp. Rich was thy hap, Sweet Velvet Cap.
There to be placed;
Where thy smooth black, sleeke white may smacke,
And both be graced.
White, is there usurped for her brow; her forehead: and then sleeke, as the
Parallel to smooth that went before. A kind of Paranomasy, or Agnomination: do
you conceive Sir?


Horace. Excellent. Troth Sir, I must be abrupt, and leave you.


Crisp. Why, what haste have thou? pray thee stay a little: thou shall not go
yet, by Phoebus.


Horace. I shall not? what remedy? Fie, how I sweat with suffering.


Crisp. And then --


Horace. Pray Sir, give me leave to wipe my face a little.


Crisp. Yes, do, good Horace:


Horace. Thank you Sir.
'Death! must crave his leave to piss anon;
Or that I may go hence with half my teeth,
I am in some such fear: This Tyranny
Is strange; to take mine Ears up by Commission,
(Whether I will or no) and make them stalls
To his lewd Soloecismes, and woorded trash.
Happy the bold Bolanus, now, I say;
Romes Common Buffon: His free Impudence
Would, long ere this, have called this fellow; Fool;
And rank, and tedious Fool, and have slung jests
As hard as stones, till he had pelted him
Out of the place: whilst my tame Modesty
Suffers my Wit be made a solemn Ass
To bear his Fopperies. --

Crisp. Horace, thou art miserably affected to be gone, I see But -- Pray thee,
lets prove, to enjoy thee awhile: Thou have no business, I assure me: Whether
is thy journey directed? ha?


Horace. Sir, I am going to visit a Friend, that is sick.


Crisp. A Friend? What Is he? do not I know him?


Horace. No Sir, you do not know him; and it is not the worse for him.


Crisp. What Is his Name? where is he lodged?


Horace. Where, I shall be fearful to draw you out of your way, Sir; a great
way hence; Pray sir, let us part.


Crisp. Nay, but where is it? I pray thee say.


Horace. On the far side of all Tyber yonder, by Caesar's Gardens.


Crisp. O, that is my course directly; I am for you. Come, go: why standst thou?


Horace. Yes Sir: marry the Plague is in that part of the City; I had almost
forgot to tell you, Sir.


Crisp. Fow: It Is no matter, I fear no Pestilence, I have not offended Phoebus.


Horace. I have, it seems; or else this heavy scourge
Could nere have lighted on me. --

Crisp. Come, along.


Horace. I am to go down some half mile, this way, Sir, first; to speak
with his Physician: And from thence to his Apothecary, where I shall stay the
mixing of diverse drugges --


Crisp. Why, its all one. I have nothing to do, and I love not to be idle;
I Will bear thee company. How call'st thou the Pothecary?


Horace. O, that I knew a Name would fright him now.
Rhadamanthus Sir:
There Is one so called, is a just Judge in hell;
And does inflict strange vengeance on all those,
That (here on earth) torment poor patient spirits.

Crisp. He dwells at the Three Furies, by Ianus Temple?


Horace. Your Apothecary does, Sir.


Crisp. Heart, I owe him Money for sweet meats, and he has laid to arrest me, I
hear: but --


Horace. Sir, I have made a most solemn vow: I will never Bail any man.


Crisp. Well then, I Will swear, and speak him fair, if the worst come. But his
Name is Minos, not Rhadamanthus, Horace.


Horace. That may be Sir: I but guest at his name by his Sign. But your Minos
is a Judge to, Sir?


Crisp. I protest to thee Horace (do but taste me once,) if I do know my
self, and mine own virtues truly, thou will not make that esteem of Varius,
or Virgill, or Tibullus, or any of 'hem in deed, as now in thy Ignorance thou
do; which I am content to forgive: I would feign see which of these could pen
more Verses in a day, or with more facility then I; or that could court his
Mistres, kiss her hand, make better sport with her Fan, or her Dog?


Horace. I can not Bail you yet, Sir.


Crisp. Or that could move his body more gracefully? or Dance better? you
shooed see me, were it not in the street.


Horace. Nor yet.


Crisp. Why, I have been a Reueller, and at my cloth of silver Suit, and my
long stocking, in my Time, and will be again --


Horace. If you may be trusted, Sir.


Crisp. And then for my singing, Hermogenes him self Enuies me; that is your
only Master of Music you have in Rome.


Horace. Is your Mother living, Sir?


Crisp. Au: Convert thy thoughts to somewhat else, I pray thee.


Horace. You have much of the Mother in you, Sir: your Father is dead?


Crisp. I, I thank Jove, and my Grandfather to, and all my kinsfolks, and
well composed in their Graves.


Horace. The more their happiness; that rest in peace,
Free from th'aboundant torture of thy tongue;
Would I were with them too.

Crisp. What Is that, Horace?


Horace. I now remember me, Sir, of a sad fate
A Cunning woman, on Sabella sung,
When in her Vrne, she cast my destiny,
I being but a Child.

Crisp. What was it, I pray thee?


Horace. She told me, I should surely never perish
By Famine, Poison, or the Enemies sword;
The Hecticke Fever, Cough, or Pleurisy,
Should never hurt me; nor the tardy Gout:
But in my Time, I should be once surpised,
By a strong tedious Talker, that should vex
And almost bring me to Consumption.
Therefore (if I were wise) she warnd me shun
All such long-winded Monsters, as my bane;
For if I could but escape that one Discourser,
I might (no doubt) prove an old aged man. By your leave Sir?

Crisp. Tut, tut: abandon, this idle humor, it is nothing but Melancholy. Fore
Jove, now I think out, I am to appear in Court here, to answer to one that
has me in suite: sweet Horace go with me; this is my hour: if I neglect it,
the Law proceeds against me: Thou art familiar with these things; pray thee,
if thou love me, go.


Horace. Now let me die Sir, if I know your Laws;
Or have the power, to stand half so long
In their ( (...)) Courts, as while a Case is Argued.
Besides, you know Sir where I am to go, and the Necessity. --

Crisp. It Is true: --


Horace. I hope the hour of my release be come: He will (upon this
Consideration) discharge me sure.


Crisp. Troth, I am doubtful, what I may best do; whether to leave thee, or
my affairs, Horace?


Horace. O Jupiter, me Sir; me, by any means: I beseech you, me, Sir.


Crisp. No faith, I Will venture those now; Thou shall see I love thee, come
Horace.


Horace. Nay then, I am desperate: I follow you Sir. It Is hard contending with
a man that ouercomes thus.


Crisp. And how deals Mecoenas with thee? Liberally? Ha? Is he open handed?
bountiful?


Horace. He Is still himself, Sir.


Crisp. Troth Horace, thou art exceeding happy in thy Friends and Acquaintance;
they are all most choice spirits, and of the first rank of Romans: I do not
know that Poet, I protest, has vsd his Fortune more prosperously then thou
have. If thou would bring me known to Mecoenas, I should second thy desert
well; Thou should find a good sure Assistance of me: One that would speak
all good of thee in thy Absence, and be content with the next Place, not
envying thy Reputation with thy Patron. Let me not live, but I think thou and
I (in a small time) should lift them all out of Favor, both Virgill, Varius,
and the best of them; and enjoy him wholly to our selves.


Horace. Gods, You do know it, I can hold no longer;
This Brize has pricked my Patience: Sir, your Silkenesse
Clearly mistakes Mecoenas; and his house;
To think, there breaths a Spirit beneath his Roof,
Subject unto those poor affections
Of vnder-mining Envy, and Detraction,
Moodes, only proper to base groueling minds:
That Place is not in Rome, I dare affirm,
More pure, or free, from such low common Evils.
There Is no man grieved, that this is thought more Rich,
Or this more Learned; Each man has his Place,
And to his merit, his reward of Grace:
Which with a mutual love they all embrace.

Crisp. You report a wonder! it is scarce credible, this.


Horace. I am no Torturer, to enforce you to believe it, but it is so.


Crisp. Why, this enflames me with a more ardent desire to be his, then before:
but, I doubt I shall find the entrance to his Familiarity, somewhat more then
difficult, Horace.


Horace. Tut, you will conquer him, as you have done me; There Is no standing out
against you Sir, I see that. Either your Importunacy, or the Intimation of your
good Parts; or --


Crisp. Nay, I Will bribe his Porter, and the Grooms of his Chamber; make his
doors open to me that way first: and then, I Will observe my times. Say, he
should extrude me his house to day; shall I therefore desist, or let fall my
suite to morrow? No: I Will attend him, follow him, meet him in the street, the
high ways, run by his Coach, never leave him. What? "Man has nothing given
him, in this life, without much Labor.


Horace. And Impudence.
Archer of Heaven; Phoebus take thy Bow
And with a full drawn shaft, nail to the earth
This Python; that I may yet run hence, and live:
Or Brawny Hercules, do thou come down;
And (though thou make it up thy thirteenth labor)
Rescue me from this Hydra of discourse here.

SCENA SECVNDA.
Aristius. Horace. Crispinus. Aristius. Horace. Well met.


Horace. O welcome my Redeemer.
Aristius, as thou love me, Ransom me.

Aristius. What aylst thou, man?


Horace. 'Death, I am seazd on here
By a Land- Remora, I cannot stir;
Not move, but as he please.

Crisp. Will thou go, Horace?


Horace. 'Hart! He cleaues to me like Alcides shirt,
Tearing my Flesh, and Sin was; o I have been vexed
And tortured with him, worse then forty Feauers.
For Jove's sake, find some means, to take me from him.

Arist. Yes, I will: but I Will go first, and tell Mecoenas.


Crisp. Come, shall we go?


Arist. The jest will make his eyes run, in faith.


Horace. Nay, Aristius?


Arist. Farewell, Horace.


Horace. Death! will a'leaue me? Fuscus Aristius, do you hear? Gods of Rome,
you said you had somewhat to say to me in private.


Arist. I, but I see, you are now imployd with that Gentleman: 'twere sin to
trouble you. I Will take some fitter opportunity, adue.


Exit. Horace. Mischief, and torment! O my Soul, and Heart,
How are you Crampt with anguish! Death it self
Brings not the like Conuulsion. O this day,
That ever I should view thy tedious face?

Crisp. Horace, what Passion? what Humors this?


Horace. Away, good Prodigy, afflictme not.
A Friend, and mock me thus! never was man
So left under the Axe -- how now.

SCENA TERTIA.
Minos, Lictors, Crispinus, Horace. Minos. That Is he, in the imbrodered hat,
there, with the Ash colored Fether: his name is Liberius Crispinus.


Lict. Liberius Crispinus; I arrest you in the Emperors name.


Crisp. Me Sir? do you arrest me?


Lict. I Sir, at the suite of Master Minos the Apothecary.


Hor. Thanks, great Apollo: I will not slip thy favor offered me in my
escape, for my fortunes.


Exit. Crisp. Master Minos? I know no Master Minos. Where Is Horace? Horace?
Horace?


Min. Sir, do not you know me?


Crisp. O yes; I know you, Master Minos: 'cry you mercy. But Horace? Gods
'Slid, is he gone?


Min. I, and so would you too, if you knew how. Officer look to him.


Crisp. Do you hear, Master Minos? pray' let us be used like a man of our own
fashion. By Ianus and Jupiter, I meant to have paid you next week, every
Drachme. Seek not to eclipse my reputation thus vulgarly.


Min. Sir, your oaths cannot serve you; you know I have forborne you long.


Crisp. I am conscious of it, Sir. Nay, I beseech you, Gentlemen, do not
exhale me thus; remember it is but for sweet meats --


Lict. Sweet meat must have sower sauce, Sir. Come along.


Crisp. Sweet Master Minos: I am forfeited to eternal disgrace, if you do
not commiserate. Good officer be not so officious.


SCENA QVARTA.
Tucca, Pyrgus, Minos, Lictors, Crispinus, Histrio, Demetrius, Tuc. Why how
now, my good brace of Bloodhounds? whether do you dragge the Gent'man? you
Mungrelles, you Curres, you Bandogges, we are Captain Tucca, that talk to
you, you inhumane Pilchers.


Min. Sir, he is their prisoner.


Tuc. Their Pestilence. What are you, sir?


Min. A Citizen of Rome, sir.


Tuc. Then you are not far distant from a Fool, sir.


Min. A Pothecary, sir.


Tuc. I knew that was not a Physician; fough: out of my Nostrils, thou stinkst
of Lotium, and the Syrringe; away Quacksaluer; Follower, my sword.


Pyr. Here, noble Leader, you will do no harm with it: I Will trust you.


Tuc. Do you hear, You, Goodman slave? Hook, Ram, Rogue, Catchpole, loose
the Gent'man, or by my velvet arms --


Lict. What will you do, sir?


Tuc. Kiss thy hand, my honorable active Varlet: and embrace thee, thus.


Pyr. O Patient Metamorphosis!


Tuc. My sword, my tall Rascal.


Lict. Nay, soft sir; Some wiser then some.


Tuc. What? and a Wit to? By Pluto, thou must be cherished, Slave; here is three
Drachmes for thee: hold.


Pyr. There Is half his Lendings gone.


Tuc. Give me.


Lict. No sir, your first word shall stand: I Will hold all.


Tuc. Nay, but Rogue:


Lict. You would make a rescue of our prisoner, Sir, you?


Tuc. I, a rescue? away inhumane Varlet. Come, come; I never relish above one
Jest at most; do not disgeste me: Sir, do not. Rogue, I tell thee, Rogue,
do not.


Lict. How sir? Rogue?


Tuc. I, why; thou art not angry Rascal? art thou?


Lict. I cannot tell sir, I am little better, upon these terms.


Tu, Ha! Gods and Feinds! why do hear? Rogue, Thou, give me thy hand; I say
unto thee, thy hand: Rogue. what? do not thou know me? not me, Rogue? not
Captain Tucca, Rogue?


Min. Come: pra' surrender the Gentleman his sword, Officer; we'll have no
fighting here.


Tuc. What Is thy name?


Min. Minos, an't please you.


Tucca. Minos? come hither, Minos; Thou art a wise Fellow it seems: Let me
talk with thee.


Crisp. Was ever wretch so wretched, as unfortunate I?


Tuc. Thou art one of the Centum-viri, Old boy, art' not?


Min. Noe indeed, Master Captain.


Tucca. Go to, thou shallt be then: I Will have thee one, Minos. Take my sword
from those Rascalles, do thou see? Go, do it; I cannot attempt with
patience. What does this Gentleman owe thee, little Minos?


Min. Fourscore Sesterties, sir.


Tuc. What? no more? Come, thou shall release him, Minos: what, I Will be his
Bail, thou shall take my word, Old boy, and Casheere these Furies: thou shall
do it, I say thou shall, little Minos, thou shall.


Crisp. Yes, and as I am a Gentleman and a Reueller, I Will make a piece of Poetry
and absolve all, within these five days.


Tuc. Come, Minos is not to learn how to use a Gent'man of quality, I know;
My sword: If he pay thee not, I will, and I must, old boy. Thou shall be my
Pothecary too: have good Eringo's, Minos?


Min. The best in Rome, sir.


Tuc. Go too, then Vermin, know the house.


Pyr. I warrant you Collonell.


Tucc. For this Gentleman, Minos?


Min. I Will take your word, Captain.


Tuc. Thou have it, my sword.


Min. Yes sir: but you must discharge the arrest, Master Crispinus.


Tuc. How, Minos? look in the Gentleman's face, and but read his silence. Pay,
pay; it is honor, Minos.


Crisp. By Jove, sweet Captain, you do most infinitely endeare, and oblige me
to you.


Tuc. Tut, I cannot complement, by Mars; but Jupiter love me, as I love good
words, and good clothes, and there is an end. Thou shall give my boy that
girdle and hangers, when thou have worn them a little more.


Crisp. O Jupiter! Captain, he 'shall have them now, presently; Please you to
be acceptiue, young Gentleman.


Pyrg. Yes sir, fear not; I shall accept: I have a pretty foolish humor of
taking, if you knew all.


Tuc. Not now, you shall not take, boy.


Crisp. By my truth, and earnest, but a'shal Captain, by your leave.


Tuc. Nay, and a 'sweare by his truth, take it boy: do not make a Gentleman
forsworn.


Lict. Well sir, there is your sword; but thank Master Minos: you had not
carried it as you do, else.


Tuc. Minos is just, and you are knaves, and --


Lic. What say you sir?


Tuc. Pass on, my good Scoundrell, pass on, I honor thee: But, that I hate
to have Action with such base Rogues as these; you should have scene me unrip
their noses now, and have sent 'hem to the next Barbers, to stitching: for, do
you see? I am a man of Humor, and I do love the Varlettes, the honest Varlets;
they have Wit, and Valor, and are indeed good profitable -- Arrant Rogues, as
any live in an Empire. Do thou hear, Poetaster? second me. Stand up; Minos,
close, gather, yet; so. Sir, (thou shall have a quarter share, be resolute) you
shall at my request take Minos by the hand here: little Minos, I will have it
so; All friends, and a health; Be not inexorable: and thou shall impart the
wine, Old boy, thou shall do it, little Minos, thou shall: make us pay it in our
Physic. What? we must live and honor the Gods sometimes; now Bacchus, now
Comus, now Priapus; every God a little. What Is he, that stalks by, there?
Boy, Pyrgus, you were best let him pass, Sirrah; do Leueret, let him pass,
do.


Pyr. It Is a Player, sir.


Tuc. A Player? Call him, call the lousy slave hither; what'l he sail by,
and not once strike, or veil to a Man of war? ha? do you hear? you,
Player, Rogue, Stalker, come back here: No respect to Men of worship, you
slave? What, you are proud, you Rascal, are you proud? ha? you grow rich,
do you? and purchase? you have Fortune and the good year on your side, you
Stinkard? you have? you have?


Hist. Nay, sweet Captain, be confinde to some reason; I protest. I saw you
not, sir.


Tuc. You did not? where was your fight, Oedipus? you walk with Hares eyes,
do you? I Will have 'hem glas'd, Rogue; and you say the word, they shall be
glazed for you: Come, we must have you turn Fiddler again, slave, 'get a Base
Violin at your back, and march in a Tawnie Coat, with one sleeue, to
Goose-faire, and then you will know us; you will see us then; you will, Gulch, you
will? Then; will it please your worship to have any Music, Captain?


Hist Nay, good Captain.


Tucca. What? do you laugh, Howleglas? death, you perstemptuous Varlet, I am
none of your fellows; I have commanded a hundred and fifty such Rogues, I.


1. Pyr. I, and most of that hundred and fifty have been leaders of a Legion.


Hist. If I have exhibited wrong, I Will tender satisfaction, Captain.


Tuc. Say thou so, honest Vermin? Give me thy hand, thou shall make us a
supper one of these nights.


Hist. When you please, by Jove, Captain, most willingly.


Tuc. Do thou swear? To morrow then; say, and hold slave. There are some
of you Players honest Gent'man-like Scoundrels: A man may skelder ye, now and
than, of half a dozen shillinges, or so. Do thou not know that Caprichio
there?


Hist. No, I assure you, Captain.


Tuc. Go, and be acquainted with him, then; he is a Gent'man, parcel- Poet,
you slave: his Father was a man of worship, I tell thee: go, he pens high,
lofty, in a new stalking strain; bigger then half the Rimers in the town
again: he was borne to fill thy mouth, Minotaurus; he was: he will teach thee
to tear and rand, Rascal; to him: cherish his Muse; go: thou have forty,
forty; shillings, I mean, Stinkard; give him in earnest; do: he shall write
for thee, slave. If he pen for thee once, thou shall not need to travel,
with thy pumpes full of gravel, any more, after a blind Jade and a Hamper.


Histrio. Troth, I think I have not so much about me, Captain.


Tuc. It Is no matter: give him what thou have: Paunch, I Will give my word for
the rest: though it lack a shilling or two, it skilles not: Go, thou art an
honest Twenty in the hundred; I Will have the Statute repealed for thee, Minos: I
must tell thee, Minos, thou have dejected yon'Gent'mans spirit exceedingly:
do observe? do note, little Minos?


Min. Yes sir.


Tuc. Go to then, raise; recover; do; suffer him not to droop, in prospect of
a Player, a Rogue, a Stager: put twenty into his hand; twenty; Drachmes, I
mean, and let no body see: go, do it; the work shall commend it self: be
Minos: I Will pay.


Min. Yes forsooth, Captain.


2. Pyr. Do not we serve a notable Sharke?


Tuc. And what new Plays have you now a foot, sirrah? ha? I would feign come
with my Cockatrice one day, and see a Play; if I knew when there were a good
baudie one: but they say, you have nothing but Humors, Revels, and Satyrs,
that girde, and fart at the time, you slave.


Histrio. No, I assure you Captain, not we. They are on the other side of
Tyber: we have as much Ribaldry in our Plays, as can be, as you would wish,
Captain: All the sinners, in the Suburbs, come, and applaud our Action, daily.


Tucca. I hear, you will bring me of the Stage there; you will play me, they
say: I shall be presented by a sort of Copper-lac't Scoundrels of you: Death
of Pluto, and you Stage me, Stinkard; your Mansions shall sweat for it, your
Tabernacles, Varlettes: your Globes: and your Tryumphes.


Hist. Not we, by Phoebus, Captain: do not do us imputation without desert.


Tucca. I woo not, my good two penny Rascal: reach me thy neufe. Do hear?
What will thou give me a week, for my brace of Beagles, here, my little
Point-trussers? you shall ha'them Act among ye. Sirrah, you, pronounce. Thou
shall hear him speak, in King Darius doleful strain.


1. Pyr. O doleful days! O direful deadly dumpe!
O wicked world! and worldly wickedness!
How can I hold my fist from crying thumpe,
In rue of this right rascal wretchedness!

Tuc. In an amorous vain now, sirrah; peace.


1. Pyr. O, she is wilder, and more hard, withal,
Then Beast or Bird, or Tree, or stony wall.
Yet might she love me, to vpreare her state:
I, but perhaps, she hopes some nobler Mate.
Yet might she love me, to content her Sire:
I, but her reason masters her desire.
Yet might she love me as her beauties thrall:
I, but I fear, she cannot love at all.

Tuc. Now the orrible fierce Soldier, you Sirrah.


1. Pyr. What? will I brave thee? I, and beard thee too.
A Roman spirit scorns to bear a brain,
So full of base Pusillanimitie.

Demet. Histrio, Excellent.


Tuc. Nay, thou shall see that, shall ravish thee anon: prick up thine ears,
Stinkard: the Ghost, Boys.


1. Pyr. Vindicta.


2. Pyr. Timoria.


1. Pyr. Vindicta.


2. Pyr. Timoria.


1. Pyr. Veni.


2. Pyr. Veni.


Tuc. Now, thunder, sirrah, you, the rumbling Player.


1. Pyr. I, but some body must cry murder, then, in a small voice.


Tucca. Your fellow Sharer, there shall do it; Cry Sirrah, cry.


1. Pyr. Murder, murder.


2. Pyr. Who calls out murder? Lady, was it you?


Demet. Histrio. O admirable good, I protest.


Tucc. Sirrah, Boy, brace your drum a little straighter, and do the the other
fellow there, he in the -- what sha' call him -- and yet, stay too.


2. Pyr. Nay, and thou dalliest, then I am thy Foe,
And Fear shall force, what Friendship cannot win;
Thy Death shall bury what thy life conceales,
Villain! thou die, for more respecting her, than me.

1. Pyrgus. O, stay my Lord.


2. Pyrgus. Yet speak the truth, and I will guerdon thee:
But if thou dally once again, thou die.

Tucca. Enough of this, Boy.


2. Pyrg. Why then lament therefore: damned be thy Guts unto King Plutoes hell,
and Princely Erebus; for Sparrowes must have food.


Histrio. 'Pray, sweet Captain, let one of them do a little of a Lady.


Tucca. O! he will make thee eternally enamourd of him there: do Sirrah; do:
'twill allay your fellows Fury a little.


1. Pyrgus. Master, mock on: the scorn thou give me,
Pray Jove some Lady may return on thee:

2. Pyrgus, No: you shall see me do the Moore: Master, lend me your scarf a
little.


Tucca. Here, it is at thy service, Boy:


2. Pyrgus. You, Master Minos, hark hither a little. Exeunt.


Tucca. How do like him? art not rapt? art not tickled now? do not
applaud, Rascal? do not applaud?


Histrio. Yes: what will you ask for 'hem a week, Captain?


Tuc. No you mangonizing slave, I will not part from 'hem: you will sell 'hem for
Enghles you; let us have good cheer to morrow night at supper, Stalker, and then
we will talk, good Capon, and Plouer, do you hear, Sirrah? and do not bring
your eating Plaier with you there; I cannot away with him: He will eat a leg
of mutton, while I am in my porridge, the lean Poluphagus, his belly is like
Barathrum, he looks like a Midwife in Man's apparel, the slave; nor the
villanous-out-of-tune Fiddler O Enobarbus, bring not him. What have thou there?
six and thirty? ha?


Hist. No, here is all I have (Captain) some five and twenty. 'Pray Sir, will
you present, and accommodate it unto the Gentleman: for mine own part, I am a
mere stranger to his Humor: besides, I have some business inuites me hence,
with Master Asinius Lupus, the Tribune.


Tucca. Well: go thy ways; pursue thy Proiects, let me alone with this
Desseigne: my Poetaster shall make thee a Play, and thou shall be a man of good
parts, in it. But stay, let me see: Do not bring your Father AEsope, your
Politician; unless you can ram up his mouth with Cloves: the slave smells
ranker then some sixteen Dung-hilles, and is seventeen times more rotten:
Mary, you may bring Friskin, my Zany: He Is a good skipping Swaggerer; and your
fat Fool there, my Mango, bring him too: but let him not beg Rapiers, nor
scarfes in his ouer-familiar playing face, nor roar out his barren bold
Iestes, with a tormenting Laughter, between drunk and dry. Do you hear,
Rascal? Give him warning, Admonition, to forsake his saucy glauering Grace,
and his goggle Eye: it does not become him, Sirrah: tell him so.


Histrio. Yes Captain: Jupiter, and the rest of the Gods confine your modern
delights, without disgust.


Tuc. Stay: thou shall see the Moore, ere thou go: what is he, with the half
Arms there, that salutes us out of his cloak, like a Motion? ha?


Histrio. O Sir, his dubblet's a little decayed; he is otherwise a very simple
honest fellow, Sir: one Demetrius, a dresser of Plays about the town, here;
we have hired him to abuse Horace, and bring him in, in a Play, with all his
Gallants: as, Tibullus, Mecoenas, Cornelius Gallus, and the rest.


Tuc. And: why so, Stinkard?


Histrio. O, it will get us a huge deal of money (Captain) and we have need
on it; for this Winter has made us all poorer, then so many starved Snakes: No
body comes at us; not a Gentleman, nor a --


Tuc. But, you know nothing by him; do you, to make a Play of?


Histrio. Faith, not much, Captain: but our Author will devise enough:


Tuc. Why, my Parnassus, here, shall help him, if thou will: Can thy Author
do it impudently enough?


Hist. O, I warrant you, Captain: and spitefully enough too; he has one of
the most ouerflowing villainous wits, in Rome. He will slander any man that
breathes; If he disgust him.


Tucca. I Will know the poor, egregious, nitty Rascal, and he have such
commendable Qualities, I Will cherish him: stay; here comes the Tartar; I Will make
a gathering for him; I: a Purse, and put the poor slave in fresh rags; tell
him so, to comfort him: well said Boy.


2. Pyrg. Where art thou Boy? where is Calipolis?
Fight earth quakes, in the entrails of the earth,
And Eastern whirle-windes in the hellish shades:
Some foul contagion of the infected heavens
Blast all the trees; and in their cursed tops
The dismal night-rauen and tragic Owl
Breed, and become forerunners of my fall.

Tucca. Well, now fare thee well, my honest Penny-biter: Commend me to seven
Shares and a half: and remember to morrow: if you lack a service, you shall
play in my name, Rascals; but you shall buy your own cloth: and I Will have two
shares for my Countenance: let thy Author stay with me.


Demetr. Yes, Sir.


Tucca. 'Twas well done little Minos: thou did stalk well: for-giue me that
I said thou stunkst, Minos: 'twas the savor of a Poet, I met sweating in the
street, hanges yet in my nostrills:


Crisp. Who? Horace?


Tucca. I; he, do thou know him?


Crisp. O, he forsook me most barbarously, I protest.


Tucca. Hang him fusty Satyr; he smells all Goat; he carries a Ram, under his
Arme-holes, the slave: I am the worse when I see him. Did not Minos impart?


Crisp. Yes, here is twenty Drachmes, he did convey.


Tucca. Well said, keep 'hem, weell share anon; come little Minos.


Crisp. Faith Captain, I Will be bold to show you a Mistres of mine, a
Iewellers Wife, a Gallant, as we go along.


Tuc. There spoke my Genius. Minos, some of thy Eringoes, little Minos; send:
come hither Parnassus. I must ha thee familiar with my little Locust, here; it is
a good Vermin they say. Exeunt.


Finis Actus Tertij.
ACTVS QVARTVS.
SCENA PRIMA.
Chloe. Cytheris. Chloe. BUT sweet Lady, say: am I well enough attired for the
Court, in sadness?


Cytheris. Well enough? excellent well, sweet


Chloe. This straight-bodied City attire (I can tell you) will stir a
Courtiers blood, more, then the finest loose Sackes the Ladies use to be put
in; and then you are as well Iewelld as any of them; your Ruff, and linen
about you, is much more pure then theirs: And for your beauty, I can tell you,
there is many of them would defy the Painter, if they could change with you.
Marry, the worst is, you must look to be envied, and endure a few Court-frumps
for it.


Chloe. O God! Madam, I shall buy them too cheap: Give me my Muffe, and my
Dog there. And will the Ladies be any thing familiar with me, think you?


Cytheris. O Hercules! Why, you shall see 'hem flock about you with their
puff wings, and ask you, where you bought your Lawne? and what you paid for
it? Who starches you? and entreat you to help 'hem to some pure Landresses,
out of the City.


Chloe. O, Cupid! Give me my Fan, and my Masque too: And will the Lords, and
the Poets there, use one well too, Lady?


Cytheris. Doubt not of that: you shall have kisses from them, go pit-pat,
pit-pat, pit-pat, upon your Lips, as thick as stones out of slings, at the
assault of a City. And then your (...) the (...) of (...) that you cannot
(...) your head (if you would) in three Winters after.


Chloe. Thank you, sweet Lady. O Heaven! And how must one behave her self
amongst 'hem? you know all.


Cytheris. Faith, impudently enough, Mistress Chloe, and well enough. Carry not
too much vnder-thought betwixt your self and them; nor your City mannerly
word (forsooth) use it not too often in any Case; but plain I, Madam; and No,
Madam: Nor never say, your Lordship, nor your Honor; but, you, and you my Lord,
and my Lady: the other, they count too simple, and minsitiue. And though they
desire to kiss Heaven with their Titles, yet they will count them fools that
give them too humbly.


Chloe. O intolerable Jupiter! By my troth Lady, I would not for a world, but
you had lain in my house: and in faith you shall not pay a farthing, for your
board; nor your Chambers.


Cytheris. O sweet Mistress Chloe!


Chloe. I faith, you shall not Lady; nay good Lady, do not offer it.


SCENA SECVNDA.
Cor. Gallus, Tibullus, Cytheris, Chloe. Cor. Gallus. Come, where be these
Ladies? By your leave, bright Stars; this Gentleman and I are come to man you
to Court: where your late kind Entertainment is now to be requited with a
Heavenly Banquet.


Cytheris. A Heavenly Banquet, Gallus?


Cor. Gallus. No less, my dear, Cytheris.


Tibullus. That were not strange, Lady, if the Epithete were only given for
the Company invited thither; your self, and this fair Gentlewoman.


Chloe. Are we invited to Court, Sir?


Tibull. You are Lady, by the great Princess Iulia; who longs to greet you
with any favors, that may worthily make you an often Courtier.


Chloe. In sincerity, I thank her, Sir. You have a Coach? have you not?


Tibull. The Princess has sent her own, Lady.


Chloe. O Venus! that is well: I do long to ride in a Coach most vehemently:


Cytheris. But sweet Gallus, pray you, resolve me, why you give that heavenly
praise, to this earthly Banquet?


Cor. Gallus. Because (Cytheris) it must be celebrated by the heavenly powers:
All the Gods, and Goddesses will be there; to two of which, you two must be
exalted.


Chloe. A pretty fiction in truth.


Cytheris. A fiction indeed Chloe, and fit, for the fit of a Poet.


Cor. Gallus. Why, Cytheris, may not Poets (from whose divine spirits, all the
honors of the Gods have been deduc't) entreat so much honor of the Gods, to
have their divine presence at a Poetical Banquet?


Cytheris. Suppose that no fiction: yet, where are your Habilities to make us
two Goddesses, at your Feast?


Cor. Gallus. Who knows not (Cytheris) that the sacred breath of a true Poet,
can blow any virtuous Humanity, up to Deity?


Tibull. To tell you the femall truth (which is the simple truth) Ladies; and
to show that Poets (in spite of the world) are able to Deify them selves: At
this Banquet, to which you are invited, we intend to assume the figures of the
Gods; and to give our several Loves the Forms of Goddesses. Ovid, will be
Jupiter: the Princess Iulia, Juno: Gallus here Apollo; you Cytheris, Pallas: I
will be Bacchus, and my Love Plautia, Ceres. And to install you, and your
Husband, fair Chloe, in honors, equal with ours; you shall be a Goddess, and
your Husband a God.


Chloe. A God? o my God!


Tibullus. A God; but a lame God, Lady: for he shall be Vulcan, and you Venus.
And this will make our Banquet no less then heavenly.


Chloe. In sincerity, it will be sugared. Good Jove, what a pretty foolish thing
it is to be a Poet! But hark you, sweet Cytheris; could they not possibly
leave out my Husband? me thinks a Bodies Husband does not so well at Court; A
bodies Friend, or so: But Husband, it is like your Clog to your Marmaset, for
all the world, and the heavens.


Cytheris. Tut; never fear, Chloe: your Husband will be left without in the
Lobby, or the great Chamber; when you shall be put in, in the Closet, by this
Lord, and by that Lady.


Chloe. Nay, then I am certified: he shall go.


SCENA TERTIA.
Horace, Albius, Crispinus, Tucca, Demetrius, Gallus, Tibullus, Cytheris,
Chloe. Gallus. Horace! Welcome.


Horace. Gentlemen, hear you the news?


Tibullus. What news, my Quintus?


Horace. Our melancholic Friend, Propertius,
Has closed him self, up, in his Cynthias Tomb;
And will by no entreaties be drawn thence.

Albius. May, good Master Crispinus; Pray you bring near the Gentleman.


Horace. Crispinus? Hide me, good Gallus; Tibullus shelter me.


Crispinus. Make your approach, sweet Captain.


Tibullus. What means this, Horace?


Horace. I am surpised again; Farewell.


Gallus. Stay, Horace.


Horace. What, and be tired on, by yond' Vulture? No: Phoebus defend me. Exit.


Tibullus. 'Slight! I hold my life,
This same is he met him in Via sacra.

Gallus. Troth, it is like enough. This Act of Propertius relisheth very
strange, with me.


Tucca. By thy leave, my neat Scoundrell: what, is this the mad Boy you talked
on?


Crispiaus. I: this is Master Albius, Captain.


Tucca. Give me thy hand, Agamemnon; we hear abroad, thou art the Hector of
Citizens: what say thou? are we welcome to thee, noble Pyrrhus?


Albius. Welcome, Captain? by Jove and all the Gods in the Capitol.


Tucca. No more, we conceive thee. Which of these is thy Wedlock, Menelaus?
thy Hellen? thy Lucrece? that we may do her honor; mad Bay?


Crisp. She in the little velvet Cap, Sir; is my Mistres.


Albius. For fault of a better, Sir.


Tucca. A better, profane Rascal? I cry thee mercy (my good Scroile) was it
thou?


Albius. No harm, Captain.


Tucca. She is a Venus, a Vesta, a Melpomene: Come hither Penelope; what is thy
name, Iris?


Chloe. My name is Chloe, Sir; I am a Gentlewoman.


Tucca. Thou art in merit to be an Empress (Chloe) for an Eye, and a Lip; thou
have an Emperors Nose: kiss me again: it is a virtuous Punque, So. Before
Jove, the Gods were a sort of Goslinges, when they suffered so sweet a breath,
to perfume the bed of a stinkard: thou had ill fortune, Thisbe; the Fates
were infatuate; they were, Punque; they were.


Chloe. That Is sure, Sir; let me crave your Name, I pray you, Sir.


Tucca. I am known by the Name of Captain Tucca, Punque: the noble Roman,
Punque: a Gent'man, and a Commander, Punque.


Chloe. In good time: a Gentleman, and a Commander? that is as good as a Poet?


Crisp. A pretty instrument: It Is my Cosen Cytheris Viole, this: is it not?


Cytheris. Nay, play Cosen; it wants but such a voice, and hand, to grace it,
as yours is.


Crisp. Alas Cosen, you are merrily inspired.


Cytheris. 'Pray you play, if you love me.


Crisp. Yes cousin: you know, I do not hate you.


Tibull. A most subtle wench! How she has bayted him with a Viole yonder, for
a song!


Crisp. Cousin, 'pray you call Mistress Chloe; she shall hear an Essay of my
Poetry.


Tuc. I Will call her. Come hither Cocatrice: here is one, will set thee up, my
sweet Punque; set thee up.


Chl. Are you a Puet, so soon, Sir?


Alb. Wife: mum.


CANTVS.
LOVE is blind, and a want on;
In the whole world, there is scant^
^one such another:
No, not his Mother.
He has plucked her Doves, and Sparrowes,
To fether his sharp Arrows,
And alone prevails,
Whilst sick Venus waileth.
But if Cypris once recover
The wag; it shall behoue her
To look better to him:
Or she will undo him.
Alb. O, most odoriferous Music!


Tuc. A, ha; Stinkard. Another Orpheus, you slave, another Orpheus; an Arion,
riding on the back of a Dolphin, Rascal.


Gall. Have you a Copy of this Dittie, Sir?


Crisp. Master Albius has.


Alb. I, but in truth, they are my Wives Verses; I must not show 'hem.


Tuc. Show 'hem Bankerupt, show 'hem; they have salt in 'hem, and will brook
the air, Stinkard.


Gal. How? to his bright mistress, Canidia?


Crisp. I, sir, that is but a borrowed name; as Ouids Corinna, or Propertius his
Cynthia, or your Nemesis, or Delia, Tibullus.


Gall. It Is the name of Horace his Witch, as I remember.


Tib. Why? the Ditt'is all borrowed; it is Horaces: hang him Plagiary.


Tuc. How? he borrowe of Horace? he shall pawn himself to ten Brokers, first.
Do you hear, Poetasters? I know you to be Knights, and men of worship.
He shall write with Horace, for a Talent: and let Mecoenas and his whole
College of Critickes take his part: thou shall do it young Phoebus: thou shall,
Phaeton; thou shall.


Demet. Alas, sir, Horace? he is a mere sponge; nothing but Humors and
Observation; he goes up and down sucking from every society; and when he comes
home, squeazes himself dry again. I know him, I.


Tuc. Thou say true, my poor Poetical Fury, he will pen all he knows. A
sharp thorny-tooth'd Satyricall Rascal, fly him; He carries Hay in his
horn; he will sooner loose his best friend, then his least Jest. What he
once drops upon paper, against a man, lives eternally to vpbraide him in the
mouth of every slave Tankerd-bearer, or Water-man: not a Baud, or a boy that
comes from the bake house, but shall point at him: it is all Dog, and
Scorpion; he carries poison in his teeth, and a sting in his tail; fough.
Body of Jove! I Will have the slave whipped one of these days for his Satyrs,
and his Humors, by one casheer'd Clarke, or another.


Crisp. We'll undertake him, Captain.


Demet. I, and tickle him in faith, for his Arrogancy, and his impudence, in
commending his own things: and for his tra^slating: I can trace him in faith:
o, he is the most open fellow, living; I had as lieue as a new Suite, I were
at it.


Fuc. Say no more then, but do it: it is the only way to get thee a new
suite: sting him, my little Neufts; I Will give you instructions: I Will be your
Intelligencer, we will all join, and hang upon him like so many horseleaches:
the Players and all. We shall suppe together soon; and then we will conspire,
i'-faith.


Gall. O, that Horace had stayed still, here.


Tib. So would not I: for both these would have turned Pythagoreans then.


Gall. What, mute?


Tib. I, as fishes in faith: come Ladies, shall we go?


Cyth. We await you, sir. But Mistress Chloe asks, if you have not a God to
spare, for this Gentleman.


Gall. Who, Captain Tucca?


Cyth. I; he.


Gall. Yes, if we can inuit him along, he shall be Mars.


Chloe. Has Mars any thing to do with Venus?


Tibull. O, most of all, Lady.


Chloe. Nay, then I pray' let him be invited: and what shall Crispinus be?


Tib. Mercury, Mistress Chloe.


Chloe. Mercury? that is a Poet? is it?


Gall. No Lady; but somewhat enclyning that way: he is a Herald at Arms.


Chloe. A Herald at Arms? good: and Mercury? pretty: he has to do with Venus
too?


Tibull. A little, with her face, Lady; or so.


Chloe. It Is very well; pray' let us go, I long to be at it.


Cyth. Gentlemen, shall we pray your companies along?


Crisp. You shall not only pray, but prevail, Lady. Come, sweet Captain.


Tuc. Yes, I follow; but thou must not talk of this now, my little Bankeroupt.


Alb. Captain, look here: mum.


Demet. I Will go write, sir.


Tucc. Do, do: stay; there is a Drachme, to purchase Ginger-bread, for thy
Muse.

Execunt.
SCENA QVARTA.
Lupus, Histrio, Lictor, Minos, Mecoenas, Horace. Lup. Come, let us talk here;
here we may be private: shut the door, Lictor. You are a Player, you say.


Hist. I, and't please your worship.


Lup. Good: and how are you able to give this intelligence?


Hist. Mary Sir, they directed a Letter to me, and my fellow Sharers.


Lupus. Speak lower; you are not now in your Theater, Stager my sword Knave.
They directed a letter to you, and your fellow-Sharers: forward.


Hist. Yes, sir; to hyre some of our Properties; as a Scepter, and a Crown,
for Jove; and a Caduceus, for Mercury: and a Petasus --


Lupus. Caduceus? and Petasus? Let me see your Letter. This is a Coniuration;
a Conspiracy, this. Quickly, on with my Buskins: I Will act a Tragedy, in faith.
Will nothing but our Gods, serve these Poets to profane? dispatch. Player, I
thank thee. The Emperor shall take knowledge of thy good service. Who Is there
now? Look knave. A Crown, and a Scepter? this is good: Rebellion, now?


Lictor. It Is your Pothecary, sir, Master Minos.


Lupus. What tell thou me of Pothecaries, Knave? Tell him, I have affairs
of State, in hand; I can talk to no Pothecaries, now. (...) Heart of me! Stay
the Pothecary there.

You shall see, I have fish't out a cunning piece of Plot now; They have had
some intelligence, that their Project is discovered, and now have they dealt
with my Pothecary, to poison me; it is so; knowing, that I meant to take Physic
to day: As sure as Death, it is there. Jupiter, I thank thee, that thou have
yet made me so much of a Politician. You are welcome, sir; Take the potio^
from him there; I have an Antidote more then you wot of, Sir; Throw it on the
ground there: So. Now fetch in the Dog; And yet we cannot tarry to try
Experiments, now: Arrest him, you shall go with me, sir; I Will tickle you
Pothecary; I Will give you a Glyster, in faith. Have I the Letter? I: it is here.
Come, your Fasces, Lictors: The half pikes, and the Halberds, take them down
from the Lares, there; Player, assist me.


Mecae. Whether now, Asinius Lupus, with this Armory?


Lup. I cannot talk now; I charge you assist me: Treason, Treason,


Hor. How? Treason?


Lup. I: if you love the Emperor, and the State, follow me.


Exeunt. SCENA QVINTA.
Ovid, Iulia, Gallus, Cytheris, Tibullus, Plautia, Albius, Chloe, Tucca,
Crispinus Hermogenes, Pyrgus. Ovid. Gods, and goddesses, take your several
seats. Now, Mercury, move your Caduceus, and in Jupiters name command
silence.


Crisp. In the name of Jupiter; Silence.


Her. The Crier of the Court has too clarified a voice.


Pall. Peace Momus.


Ovid. Oh, he is the god of Reprehension; let him alone. It Is his office.
Mercury, go forward; and proclaim after Phoebus, our high pleasure, to all
the Deities that shall partake this high Banquet.


Crisp. Yes, Sir.


Gal. The great God, Jupiter,
Of his licentious goodness,
VVilling to make this Feast, no Fast
From any manner of Pleasure;
Nor to bind any God or Goddess,
To be any thing the more God, or Goddess, for their names:
He gives them all free License,
To speak no wiser, then persons of baser Titles;
And to be nothing better, then common Men, or Women.
And therefore no God
Shall need to keep himself more strictly to his Goddess,
Then any man does to his wife.
Nor any Goddess
Shall need to keep herself more strictly to her God,
Then any woman does to her Husband.
But, since it is no part of wisdom,
In these days, to come into Bonds;
It shall be lawful for every Lover,
To break loving oaths,
To change their Lovers, and make love to others,
As the heat of every ones Blood,
And the spirit of our Nectar shall inspire.
And Jupiter save Jupiter.

Crisp. The great, etc.
Of his, etc.
VVilling, etc.
From any, etc.
Nor to, etc.
To be, etc.
He gives, etc.
To speak, etc.
And to, etc.
And there. etc.
Shall need, etc.
Then any, etc.
Nor any, etc.
Shall need, etc.
Then any, etc.
But, since, etc.
In these.
It shall, etc.
To break, etc.
To change, etc.
As the, etc.
And the, etc.
And Iupi. etc.

Tib. So: now we may play the Fools, by Authority.


Herm. To play the fool by Authority, is wisdom.


Iul. Away with your Mattery Sentences, Momus; they are to grave, and wise, for
this meeting.


Ovid. Mercury, give our Ieaster a stool, let him sit by; and reach him of our
Cates.


Tuc. Do hear, Mad Jupiter? We Will have it enacted; He, that speaks the
first wise word, shall be made Cuckold. What say thou? Is It not a good
Motion?


Ovid. Deities, are you all agreed?


Omnes. Agreed, great Jupiter.


Alb. I have read in a Book, that to play the Fool wisely, is high wisdom.


Gall. How now, Vulcan! will you be the first Wizard?


Ovid. Take his wife, Mars; and make him Cuckold, quickly.


Tucc. Come, Cocatrice.


Chl. No: let me alone with him, Jupiter: I Will make you take heed, sir, while
you live again; if there be twelve in a company, that you be not the wisest
of 'hem.


Alb. No more I will not indeed, wife, hereafter; I Will be here: mum.


Ovid. Fill us a bowl of Nectar, Ganymede: we will drink to our daughter
Venus.


Gall. Look to your wife, Vulcan: Jupiter begins to Court her.


Tibull. Nay, let Mars look to it: Vulcan must do as Venus does, bear.


Tuc. Sirrah, Boy: Catamite. Look you play Ganymede well now, you slave: Do
not spill your Nectar; Carry your Cup even: so. You should have rubd your
Face, with whites of Eggs, you Rascal; till your Brows had shone like our
sootie brothers here, as sleeke as a Horne-booke: or ha'steept your lips in
wine, till you made 'hem so Plumpe, that Juno might have been Jealous of 'hem.
Punque, kiss me, Punque.


Ovid. Here daughter Venus, I drink to thee.


Chloe 'Thanke you, good Father Jupiter.


Tucca. Why, Mother Juno! Gods and Fiends! what, will thou suffer this ocular
Temptation?


Tib. Mars is enraged; he looks big, and begins to stut, for anger.


Her. Well plaide, Captain Mars.


Tuc. Well said, Minstrell Momus: I must put you in? must I? When will you be
in good fooling of your self, Fiddler? never?


Her. O, it is our fashion, to be silent, when there is a better Fool in place,
ever.


Tuc. 'Thanke you, Rascal.


Ovid. Fill to our daughter Venus, Ganymede; who fills her father with affection.


Iul. VVilt thou be raunging, Jupiter, before my face?


Ovid. Why not, Juno? why should Jupiter, stand in awe of thy Face, Juno?


Iul. Because it is thy wives Face, Jupiter.


Ovid. What, shall a Husband be afraid of his wives Face? will she paint it so
horribly? We are a King, Cotqueane; and we will reign in our pleasures; and
we will cudgel thee to death, if thou find fault with us.


Iul. I will find fault with thee, King Cuckold-maker: what, shall the King of
Gods turn the King of Good fellows, and have no Fellow in wickedness? This
makes our Poets, that know our Profaneness, live as profane, as we: By my
Godhead, Jupiter; I will join with all the other Gods, here; bind thee hand
and foot; throw thee down into earth; and make a poor Poet of thee, if thou
abuse me thus.


Gall. A good smart-tongu'd Goddess; a right Juno.


Ovid. Juno, we will cudgel thee, Juno: we told thee so yesterday, when
thou were jealous of us, for Thetis.


Pyr. Nay, to day she had me in Inquisition too.


Tuc. Well said, my fine Phrygian Fry, inform, inform. Give me some wine,
King of Heralds; I may drink to my Cocatrice.


Ovid. No more, Ganymede; we will cudgel thee, Iuuo: By Styx, we will.


Iul. I'ts well; Gods may grow impudent in Iniquity, and they must not be
told of it.


Ovid. Yea, we will knock our Chinne against our Breast; and shake thee out of
Olimpus, into an Oyster-boate, for thy scoulding.


Iul. Your Nose is not long enough to do it, Jupiter; if all thy Strumpets,
thou have among the Stars took thy part. And there is never a Star in thy
Forehead, but shall be a Horn, if thou persist to abuse me,


Crisp. A good Jest, I faith.


Ovid. We tell thee, thou angerst us, Cotqueane; and we will thunder thee in
pieces, for thy Cotqueanity: we will lay this City desolate, and flat as this
hand, for thy offenses. These two fingers are the Walls of it; these within,
the People; which People, shall be all thrown down thus, and nothing left
standing in this City, but these walls.


Crispinus. Another good Jest.


Albius. O, my hammers, and my Cyclops! this Boy fills not wine enough, to make
us kind enough, to one another;


Tucca. Nor thou have not collied thy face enough, Stinkard.


Albius. I Will ply the table with Nectar, and make them friends.


Her. Heaven is like to have but a lame Skinker, then.


Albius. "Wine, and good Livers, make true lovers: I Will sentence them together.
Here Father: here Mother: for shame, drink your selves drunk, and forget this
dissension: you two should cling together, before our faces, and give us
example of Unity.


Gallus. O, excellently spoken, Vulcan, on the sudden!


Tibull. Jupiter, may do well to prefer his Tongue to some office, for his
Eloquence.


Tucca. His Tongue shall be Gent'man Usher to his Wit, and still go before it.


Alb. An excellent fit office.


Crisp. I, and an excellent good jest, besides:


Herm. What, have you hired Mercury, to cry your ieastes you make?


Ovid. Momus, you are envious:


Tucca. Why, you whoreson block-head, it is your only block of wit in fashion
(now adays) to applaud other folks ieastes.


Herm. True: with those that are not Artificers them selves. Vulcan, you nod;
and the mirth of the feast droopes.


Pyrgus. He has filled Nectar so long, till his brain swimmes in it.


Gallus. What, do we nod, fellow Gods? sound Music, and let us startle our
spirits with a song.


Tucca. Do, Apollo: thou art a good Musician.


Gallus. What says Jupiter?


Ovid. Ha? ha?


Gallus. A Song.


Ovid. Why, do, do, sing:


Plautia. Bacchus, what say you?


Tibullus. Ceres?


Plautia. But, to this song?


Tibullus. Sing, for my part.


Iulia. Your belly weighes down your head, Bacehus: here is a song toward.


Tibullus. Begin, Vulcan.


Albius. What else? what else?


Tucca. Say, Jupiter.


Ovid. Mercury.


Crispinus. I, say, say.


CANTVS.
WAKE; our mirth begins to die:
Quicken it with tunes, and wine:
Raise your notes; you're out: fie, fie;
This Drouzinesse is an ill sign.
We banish him the Queere of Gods,
That droopes again:
Then all are men,
For here is not one, but nods.
Ovid. I like not this sudden and general heaviness, amongst our Godheads:
It Is somewhat ominous. Apollo, Command us louder Music, and let Mercury, and
Momus contend to please, and revive our senses.


CANTVS.
Her. THEN, in a free and lofty strain,
Our broken tunes we thus repair;

Cris. And we answer them again,
Running division on the panting Air:

Ambo. To celebrate this Feast of Sense,
As free from Scandal, as Offense.

Her. Here is Beauty, for the Eye;


Cris. For the Ear, sweet Melody;


Her. Ambrosiack Odours, for the smell;


Cris. Delicious Nectar, for the Taste;


Ambo For the Touch, a Ladies Waste;
Which does all the rest excel.

Ovid. I: This has wak't us. Mercury, our Herald; Go from our self the great
God Jupiter, to the great Emperor, Augustus Caesar: And command him, from us
(of whose Bounty he has received his Surname, Augustus) that for a
Thankeoffring to our Beneficence, he presently Sacrifice as a Dish to this
Banquet, his beautiful and wanton Daughter Iulia: She Is a cursed Queen, tell
him; and plays the scould behind his back: Therefore let her be Sacrificed.
Command him this, Mercury, in our high name of Jupiter Altitonans.


Iulia. Stay, Feather-footed Mercury; and tell Augustus, from us, the great
Juno Saturnia; if he think it hard to do, as Jupiter has commanded him, and
Sacrifice his Daughter, that he had better to do so ten times, then suffer
her to love the well-nos'd Poet, Ovid; whom he shall do well to whip, or cause
to be whipped, about the Capitol, for soothing her, in her Follies.


SCENA SEXTA.
Caesar, Mecoenas, Horace, Lupus, Histrio, Minos, Lictors, Ovid, Gallus,
Tibullus, Tucca, Crispinus, Albius, Hermogenes, Pyrgus, Iulia, Cytheris,
Plautia, Chloe. Caesar. What sight is this? Mecoenas, Horace, say;
Have we our senses? Do we hear? and see?
Or, are these but Imaginary objects
Drawn by our Fantasy? Why, speak you not?
Let us do Sacrifice? Are they the Gods?
Reverence: Amaze: and Fury fight in me.
What? Do they kneel? Nay, then I see it is true
I thought impossible: o impious sight!
Let me divert mine eyes; the very thought
Euerts my Soul, with Passion: Look not Man.
There is a Panther, whose unnatural eyes
Will strike thee dead: turn then; and dye on her
With her own death.

Mecoenas. Horace. What means imperial Caesar?


Caesar. What, would you have me let the Strumpet live, That, for this
Pageaunt, earnes so many deaths?


Tucca. Boy, slinke Boy.


Pyrgus. 'Pray Jupiter, we be not followed by the sent, Master.


Exeunt. Caesar. Say, Sir, what are you?


Albius. I play Vulcan, Sir.


Caesar. But, what are you, Sir?


Albius. Your Citizen, and Ieweller, Sir.


Caesar. And what are you, Dame?


Chloe. I play Venus, forsooth.


Caesar. I ask not, what you play? but, what you are?


Chloe. Your Citizen, and Iewellers wife, Sir:


Caesar. And you, good Sir?


Crispinus. Your Geutleman, parcel- Poet, Sir.


Caesar. O, that profaned Name!
And are these seemly company for thee,
Degenerate Monster? all the rest I know;
And hate all knowledge, for their hateful sakes.
Are you, that first the Deities inspired
With skill of their high Natures, and their Powers,
The first Abusers of their useful light;
Profaning thus their Dignities, in their forms;
And making them like you, but counterfeites?
O, who shall follow Virtue, and embrace her,
When her false bosom is found naught but Air?
And yet, of those embraces, Centaures spring,
That war with humane Peace, and poison Men.
Who shall, with greater comforts, comprehend
Her unseen being, and her excellence;
When you, that teach, and should eternize her,
Live, as she were no Law unto your lives:
Nor lived her self, but with your idle breathes?
If you think Gods but feigned, and Virtue painted,
Know, we sustain an actual residence;
And, with the Title of an Emperor,
Retain his spirit, and imperial power:
By which (in imposition too remiss,
Licentious Naso, for thy violent wrong,
In soothing the declined Affections
Of my base Daughter,) I exile thy feet
From all approach, to our imperial Court,
On pain of death: and thy misgotten Love
Commit to patronage of Iron doors;
Since her soft-harted Sire cannot contain her.

Mecoenas. O, good my Lord; forgive: be like the Gods:


Horace. Let royal Bounty (Caesar) mediate.


Caesar. There is no Bounty to be showed to such,
As have no real goodness: Bounty is
A spice of Virtue: and what virtuous Act
Can take effect on them, that have no power
Of equal habitude to apprehend it;
But live in worship of that Idol Vice.
As if there were no Virtue, but in shade
Of strong imagination, merely enforced?
This shows, their Knowledge is mere Ignorance;
Their far fetched Dignity of soul, a Fancy;
And all their square pretext of Gravity
A mere vain Glory: hence: away with 'hem.
I will prefer for knowledge, none, but such
As rule their lives by it, and can becalme
All Sea of Humor, with the marble trident
Of their strong spirits: Others fight below
With Gnats, and shadows; Others nothing know. Exeunt.

SCENA SEPTIMA.
Tucca, Crispinus, Pyrgus, Horace, Mecoenas, Lupus, Histrio. Tucca. What Is
become of my little Punque, Venus; and the poult-foote Stinkard, her Husband?
ha?


Crisp. O, they are rid home in the Coach, as fast as the wheels can run.


Tucca. God Jupiter is banished, I hear: and his Cockatrice, Juno, locked up:
'Hart; and and all the Poetry in Parnassus get me to be a Player again, I Will
fell 'hem my share for six pence. But this is Humors; Horace, that Goat-footed
envious Slave: he is turned fawn now; an Informer, the Rogue: it is he has
betrayed us all; Did you not see him, with the Emperor, crouching?


Crisp. Yes.


Tucca. Well, follow me. Thou shall libell, and I Will cudgel the Rascal. Boy,
pronide me a Trunchion; Revenge shall gratulate him, Tam Marti, quam Mercurio.


Pyrgus. I, but Master; take heed how you give this out, Horace is a Man of the
Sword.


Crisp. It Is true, in troth: they say, he is valiant.


Tucca. Valiant? so is mine Arse: Gods, and Fiendes? I Will blow him into air,
when I meet him next: He dares not fight with a puck-fist.


Pyrgus. Master, here he comes.


Tucca. Where? Jupiter save thee, my good Poet; my Prophet; my Noble Horace. I
scorn to beat the Rogue in the Court; and I saluted him, thus fair, because
he should suspect nothing, the Rascal; Come; we will go see how forward our
Iourneyman is toward the vntrussing of him.


Crisp. Do you hear, Captain? I Will write nothing in it but Innocence:
because I may swear I am Innocent. Exeunt.


Horace. Nay, why pursue you not the Emperor for your reward, now; Lupus?


Mecoenas. Stay, Asinius; you, and your Stager, and your band of Lictors:
I hope your service merits more respect,
Then thus, without a thanks, to be sent hence?

Histrio. Well, well, jest on, jest on.

Horace. Thou base unworthy Groom. (Lupus.) I it is good.
Was this the Treason? this, the dangerous plot,
Thy clamorous tongue so bellowed through the Court?
Had thou no other Project to increase
Thy Grace with Caesar, but this Wooluish train;
To pray upon the life of innocent Mirth,
And harmless pleasures, bred, of noble wit?
Away: I loath thy presence: Such as thou,
They are the Moathes, and Scarabbes of a State;
The Bane of Kingdoms; and the dregs of Courts:
Who (to endeer themselves to any 'mploiement)
Care not, whose fame they blast; whose life they endanger:
And under a disguised, and cobweb Masque
Of love, unto their Sovereign, vomit forth
Their own prodigious malice; and pretending
To be the Props, and Columns of his safety,
The Guardes unto his Person, and his Peace,
Disturb it most, with their false Lapwing cries.

Lupus. Good. Caesar shall know of this; believe it. Exeunt.

Mecoenas. Caesar does know it (Wolf) and to his knowledge,
He will (I hope) reward your base Endeavors.
"Princes that will but hear, or give access
"To such officious Spies, can nere be safe:
"They take in poison, with an open Ear,
"And free from Danger, become slaves to Fear. Exeunt.

SCENA OCTAVA.
Ovid. Ovid. Banished the Court? Let me be banished life;
Since the chief end of Life is there concluded:
Within the Court, is all the Kingdom bounded;
And as her sacred Sphere does comprehend
Ten thousand times so much, as so much Place
In any part of all the Empire else;
So every Body, moving in her Sphere,
Contains ten thousand times as much in him,
As any other, her choice Orb excludes.
As in a circle, a Magitian, then
Is safe, against the Spirit, he excites;
But out of it, is subject to his rage,
And loses all the virtue of his Art:
So I, exiled the circle of the Court,
Loose all the good gifts, that in it I joyed.
"No Virtue current is, but with her stamp:
"Nor no Vice vicious, blaunch't with her white hand.
The Court's the Abstract of all Romes desert;
And my dear Inlia, the Abstract of the Court.
Me thinks, now I come near her, I respire
Some air, of that late comfort, I received:
And while the Evening, with her modest veil,
Gives leave to such poor Shadows as my self,
To steal abroad; I, like a hart-lesse Ghost,
Without the living Body of my Love,
Will here walk, and attend her: For I know,
Not far from hence, she is imprisoned,
And hopes, of her strict Guardian, to bribe
So much admittance, as to speak to me,
And cheer my fainting spirits, with her breath.

SCENA NONA.
Iulia, Ovid. Iul. Ovid? my Love?

Ovid. Here, heavenly Iulia.

Iul. Here? and not here? O, how that word does play
With both our Fortunes, differing, like our selves,
Both one; and yet divided, as opposed?
I High, thou Low: o, this our plight of Place
Doubly presents the two lets of our Love,
Local and ceremonial Height, and Lowness:
Both ways, I am too high; and thou, too low.
Our Minds are even, yet: o, why should our Bodies,
That are their slaves, be so without their rule?
I Will cast my self down to thee; If I die,
I Will ever live with thee: no height of Birth,
Of Place, of Duty, or of cruel Power,
Shall keep me from thee; should my Father lock
This body up within a Tomb of Brass,
Yet I Will be with thee: If the Forms, I hold
Now in my Soul, be made one substance with it;
That Soul immortal; and the same it is now:
Death cannot raze th'affectes, she now retains:
And then, may she be any where she will.
The souls of Parents rule not Childrens souls,
When Death sets both in their dissolved estates:
Then is no Child, nor Father: then Eternity
Frees all, from any temporal respect.
I come, my Ovid; take me in thine arms:
And let me breath my soul into thy breast.

Ovid. O, stay my Love: the hopes thou do conceive
Of thy quick Death, and of thy future Life,
Are not autenticall. Thou choosest Death,
So thou might joy thy Love, in the other Life.
But know (my princely Love) when thou art dead,
Thou only must survive in perfect soul;
And in the soul, are no Affections:
We pour out our Affections with our Blood;
And with our Bloods affections; fade our Loves.
"No life has Love in such sweet state, as this;
"No Essence is so dear to moodie Sense,
"As Flesh, and Blood; whose Quintessence is Sense.
"Beauty, composd of Blood, and Flesh, moves more,
"And is more plausible to Blood, and Flesh:
"Then Spiritual Beauty can be to the Spirit.
Such Apprehension, as we have in Dreams
(When Sleep, the bond of Senses, locks them up)
Such shall we have, when Death destroys them quite.
If Love be then thy Object, change not life,
Live high, and happy still: I still below,
Close with my Fortunes, in thy height, shall joy.

Iul. Ay me, that Virtue, whose brave Eagles wings
With every stroke, blow Stars, in burning Heaven;
Should like a Swallowe (praying toward storms)
Fly close to earth: and with an eager plume
Pursue those Obiectes, which none else can see,
But seem to all the world, the empty Air.
Thus thou (poor Ovid) and all virtuous men
Must pray like Swallows, on invisible food;
Pursuing Flies, or nothing: and thus Love,
And every worldly Fancy, is transposed,
By worldly Tyranny, to what plight it list.
O, Father; since thou gave me not my Mind,
Strive not to rule it: Take, but what thou gave
To thy disposure, thy Affections
Rule not in me; I must bear all my griefs,
Let me use all my pleasures: "Virtuous Love
Was never scandal to a Goddess state.
But he is inflexible; and, my dear Love,
Thy life may chance be shortened, by the length
Of my unwilling speeches to depart.
Farewell, sweet Life: though thou be yet exiled,
Th'officious Court, enjoy me amply still:
My Soul, in this my breath, enters thine Ears,
And on this Turrets, Floor, will I lie dead,
Till we may meet again; in this proud Height,
I kneel beneath thee in my prostrate Love,
And kiss the happy sands, that kiss thy feet.
"Great Jove submits a Scepter, to a Cell;
"And Lovers, ere they part, will meet in Hell.

Ovid. Farewell all company; and if I could
All light with thee: Helles shade should hide my brows,
Till thy dear Beauties beams redeemed my vows.

Iul. Ovid; my Love: alas, may we not stay
A little longer (think thou) vndescern'd?

Ovid. For thine own good, fair Goddess, do not stay:
Who would engage a Firmament of fires
Shining in thee, for me, a falling Star?
Be gone, sweet Life-bloode: if I should descerne
Thy self but touched, for my sake, I should die.

Iul. I will be gone then; and not Heaven it self,
Shall draw me back.

Ovid. Yet Iulia, if thou will,
A little longer stay.

Iul. I am content.

Ovid. O mighty Ovid! what the sway of Heaven
Could not retire, my breath has turned back.

Iul. Who shall go first, my Love? my passionate Eyes
Will not endure to see thee turn from me.

Ovid. If thou go first, my soul will follow thee.

Iul. Then we must stay.

Ovid. Aye me; there is no stay
In amorous pleasures: if both stay, both die.
I hear thy father; hence my Deity. Exit Iulia.
Fear forgeth soundes in my deluded ears;
I did not hear him: I am mad with Love.
There is no Spirit, under heaven, that works
With such illusion; yet such witchcraft kill me,
Ere a sound mind, without it, save my life.
Here, on my knees, I worship the blessed Place
That held my Goddess; and the loving Air,
That closed her body in his silken arms:
Vain Ovid; kneel not to the Place, nor Air;
She Is in thy heart: Rise then, and worship there.
"The truest wisdom silly men can have,
"Is dotage, on the follies of their flesh. Exit.

Finis Actus Quarti.
ACTVS QVINTVS.
SCENA PRIMA.
Caesar, Mecoenas, Pallus, Tibullus, Horace, Equites To. Ces. WE, that have
co^quer'd still, to save the co^quer'd,
And loved to make inflictions feared, not felt;
Grieved to reprove, and joyful to reward,
More proud of Reconcilement, then Revenge,
Resume into the late state of our Love,
Worthy Cornelius Gallus, and Tibullus:
You both are Knights; and you, Cornelius,
A Soldier of Renown; and the first Provost,
That ever let our Roman Eagles fly
On swarthy Egypt, quarried with her spoils.
Yet (not to bear cold Forms, nor men's out-termes,
Without the inward fires, and Lives of men)
You both have Virtues, shining through your Shapes;
To show, your Titles are not writ on Posts,
Or hollow Statues, which the best men are,
Without Promethean stuffings reached from Heaven.
Sweet Poesies sacred Gyrlands crown your Knighthoodes:
Which is, of all the Faculties on Earth,
The most abstract, and perfect; if she be
True borne, and nursed with all the Sciences;
She can so mould Rome, and her Monuments,
Within the liquid Marble of her Lines,
That they shall stand fresh, and miraculous,
Even, when they mix with innouating dust:
In her sweet streams shall our brave Roman spirits
Chase, and swim after Death, with their choice deeds
Shining on their white shoulders; and therein
Shall Tyber, and our famous Rivers fall
With such attraction, that the ambitious Line
Of the round World shall to her Center shrink,
To hear their Music: And for these high Parts,
Caesar shall reverence the Pierian Arts.

Mecoe. Your Majesty's high Grace to Poesy,
Shall stand against all the dull detractions
Of leaden Souls; who (for the vain assumings
Of some, quite worthless of her sovereign wreaths)
Contain her worthiest Prophets in contempt.

Gal. Happy is Rome of all Earths other States,
To have so true, and great a president,
For her inferior spirits to imitate,
As Caesar is; who adds to the Sun,
Influence, and luster; in increasing thus
His inspirations, kindling fire in us.

Hor. Phoebus himself shall kneel at Caesar's Shrine,
And deck it with Bay Gyrlands deaw'd with Wine,
To quite the worship Caesar does to him:
Where other Princes, hoysted to their thrones
By Fortunes passionate and disordered power,
Sit in their height, like Clouds, before the Sun,
Hindering his comforts; and (by their excess
Of cold in Virtue, and cross heat in Vice)
Thunder and tempest, on those learned heads,
Whom Caesar with such Honor does advance.

Tibul. All humane business, Fortune does command
Without all order; and with her blind hand,
She, blind, bestows blind gifts; that still have nursed
They see not who, nor how, but still, the worst.

Caesar. Caesar, for his Rule, and for so much stuff
As Fortune puts in his hand, shall dispose it
(As if his Hand had eyes, and soul, in it)
With worth and judgment. "Hands, that part with gifts,
"Or will restrain their use, without desert;
"Or with a misery, numm'd to Virtues right,
"Work, as they had no Soul to govern them,
"And quite reject her; seuering their Estates
"From humane order. Whosoever can,
"And will not cherish Virtue, is no man.

Eques. Virgill is now at hand, imperial Caesar.

Caesar. Romes Honor is at hand then. Fetch a chair,
And set it on our right hand; where it is fit,
Romes Honor, and our own, should ever sit.
Now he is come out of Campania,
I doubt not he has finished all his AEneids,
Which, like another Soul, I long t'enioy.
What think you three, of Virgill, Gentlemen,
(That are of his profession, though rankt higher)
Or Horace, what say thou, that art the poorest,
And likeliest to envy, or to detract?

Hor. Caesar speaks after common men, in this,
To make a difference of me, for my poorness:
As if the filth of Poverty sunk as deep
Into a knowing spirit, as the Bane
Of riches does, into an ignorant soul.
No Caesar; they be path-lesse, moorish minds,
That being once made rotten with the dung
Of damned Riches, ever after sink
Beneath the steps of any Villainy.
But Knowledge is the Nectar, that keeps sweet
A perfect Soul even in this Grave of sin;
And for my Soul, it is as free, as Caesar's:
For, what I know is due, I Will give to all.
"He that detracts, or enuies virtuous Merit,
"Is still the covetous, and the ignorant spirit.

Caesar. Thanks Horace, for thy free, and wholesome sharpness:
Which pleases Caesar more, then servile fawnes.
"A flatterd Prince soon turns the Prince of Fools.
And for thy sake, we will put no difference more
'Twixt Knights, and Knightly spirits, for being poor.
Say then, loved Horace, thy true thought of Virgill.

Hor. I judge him of a rectified spirit,
By many reuolutions of discourse
(In his bright reasons influence) refined
From all the tartarous Moodes of common Men;
Bearing the Nature, and similitude
Of a right heavenly Body; most severe
In fashion, and collection of himself;
And then as clear, and confident, as Jove.

Gal. And yet so chaste, and tender is his Ear,
In suffering in any Syllable to pass,
That, he thinks, may become the honored name
Of Issue to his so examined self;
That all the lasting fruits of his full merit
In his own Poemes, he does still distaste:
As if his minds Piece, which he strove to paint,
Could not with fleshly Pensils have her right.

Tibul. But, to approve his works of Sovereign worth,
This Observation (me thinks) more then serves:
And is not vulgar. That, which he has writ,
Is with such judgment, labored, and distilled
Through all the needful uses of our lives,
That could a man remember but his Lines,
He should not touch at any serious point,
But he might breath his spirit out of him.

Caesar. You mean, he might repeat part of his works,
As fit for any conference, he can use?

Tib. True, Royal Caesar.

Caesar. It Is worthily observed:
And a most worthy virtue in his works.
What thinks, Material Horace, of his learning?

Hor. His Learning labors not the Schoole-like Gloss,
That most consists in Ecchoing Words, and Terms,
And soonest wins a man an Empty name;
Nor any long, or far-fetcht Circumstance,
VVrapt in the curious General'ties of Arts:
But a direct, and Analyticke Sum
Of all the worth and first effects of Arts.
And for his Poesy, it is so ramm'd with Life,
That it shall gather strength of Life, with being;
And live hereafter, more admired, then now.

Caesar. This one consent, in all your doomes of him,
And mutual Loves of all your several merits,
Argues a truth of merit in you all.

SCENA SECVNDA.
Caesar, Virgill, Mecoenas, Gallus, Tibullus, Horace, Equites To. Caesar. See,
here comes Virgill; we will rise and greet him:
Welcome to Caesar, Virgill. Caesar, and Virgill
Shall differ but in sound; to Caesar, Virgill
(Of his expressed Greatness) shall be made
A second Surname; and to Virgill, Caesar.
Where are thy Famous Aeneids? do us grace
To let us see, and surfeit on their sight.

Virgill. Worthless they are of Caesar's gracious Eyes,
If they were perfect; much more, with their wants;
Which yet are more, then my Time could supply:
And, could great Caesar's expectation
Be satisfied with any other service,
I would not show them.

Caesar. Virgill is too modest;
Or seeks, in vain, to make our longings more.
Show them, sweet Virgill.

Virgill. Then, in such due fear,
As fits Presenters of great works, to Caesar,
I humbly show them:

Caesar. Let us now behold
A humane Soul made visible in life;
And more refulgent in a senseless paper,
Then in the sensual Complement of Kings.
Read, read, thy self, dear Virgill, let not me
Profane one accent, with an untuned tongue:
"Best matter, badly shown, shows worse, then bad.
See then, this Chair, of Purpose set for thee
To read thy Poem in: Refuse it not.
"Virtue, without presumption, place may take
"Above best Kings, whom only she should make.

Virgill. It will be thought a thing ridiculous
To present Eyes, and to all future times
A gross untruth; that any Poet (void
Of Birth, or wealth, or Temporal dignity)
Should, with decorum, transcend Caesar's Chair.
"Poor Virtue raised, high birth and wealth set under,
"Crosses Heavens courses, and makes worldlings wonder.

Caesar. The course of Heaven, and Fate it self, in this
Will Caesar cross; much more all worldly Custom.

Horace. "Custom, in course of Honor, ever erres:
"And they are best, whom Fortune least preferres.

Caesar. Horace has (but more strictly) spoke our thoughts.
The vast rude swinge of general Confluence
Is, in particular ends, exempt from sense:
And therefore Reason (which in right should be
The special Rector of all Harmony)
Shall show we are a man, distinct by it,
From those that Custom rapteth in her preasse.
Ascend then Virgill: and where first by Chance
We here have turned thy Book, do thou first read.

Virgill. Great Caesar has his will: I will ascend.
'Twere simple injury to his free hand,
That sweeps the Cobwebs, from unused Virtue,
And makes her shine proportiond, to her worth,
To be more nice to entertain his Grace;
Then he is choice, and liberal to afford it.

Caesar. Gentlemen of our Chamber, guard the Doors,
And let none enter. Peace. Begin, good Virgill.

Virgill. Mean while, Vir. lib. 4. Aeneid.
the Skies began thunder; and in tail
Of that, fell pouring storms of sleete, and hayle:
The Tyrian Lords, and Trojan youth, each where
With Venus Dardane Iulus.
Nephew, now, in fear
Seek out for several shelter through the Plain;
Whilst Floods come rolling from the Hills amain.
Dido a Cave, The Trojan Aeneas.
Prince the same
Lighted upon; There, Earth, and Heavens great Juno.
Dame
That has the charge of Marriage, first gave sign
Unto this Contract; Fire, and Air did shine,
As guilty of the Match; and from the Hill,
The Nymphs, withshriekings, do the Region fill.
Here first began their Bane; This Day was ground
Of all their Ills: For now, nor Rumors sound,
Nor nice respect of State mooues Dido ought;
Her Love, no longer now, by stealth is sought:
She calls this Wedlock, and with that fair Name
Couers her fault. Forthwith the Bruit, and Fame,
Through all the greatest. Lybian Tawnes, is gone;
Fame, a fleet Evil, then which is swifter none:
That moving grows, and flying gathers strength;
Little at first, and fearful; but at length.
She dares attempt the Skies, and stalking proud
With feet on Ground, her Head does pearce a Cloud.
This Child, our Parent Earth, stird up with spite
Of all the Gods, brought forth; and, as some wright,
She was last sister of that Giant Coens. Encleadus, etc.
Race
That thought to scale Jove's Court; right swift of Pase,
And swifter, far, of Wing. A Monster vast,
And dreadful: Look, how many Plumes are placed
On her huge Corpse, so many waking Eyes
Stick underneath: and (which may stranger rise
In the Report) as many Tongues she bears,
As many Mouths, as many listening Ears.
Nightly, in midst of all the Heaven, she flies,
And through the Earths dark shadow, shrieking, cries;
Nor do her Eyes once bend, to taste sweet sleep:
By Day, on tops of Houses, she does keep,
Or on high Towers; and does thence affright
Cities, and Towns of most conspicuous site;
As covetous she is of Tales, and Lies,
As prodigal of Truth: This Monster, etc.

SCENA TERTIA.
Lupus, Tucca, Crispinus, Demetrius, Histrio, Lictors, Caesar, Virgill,
Mecoenas, Gallus, Tibullus, Horace, Equites To. Lupus. Come, follow me, assist
me, second me: where is the Emperor?


Eques 1. Sir, you must pardon us.


Eques 2. Caesar is private now, you may not enter.


Tucca. Not Enter? Charge 'hem, upon their Allegiance, Cropshin.


Eques 1. We have a charge to the contrary, Sir.


Lupus. I pronounce you all Traitors, horrible Traitors:
What? Do you know my Affairs?
I have Matter of danger, and state, to impart to Caesar.

Caesar. What, noise is there? who is that, names Caesar?


Lupus. A Friend to Caesar. One that for Caesar's good would speak with Caesar.


Caesar. Who is it? look, Cornelius.


Eques 1. Asinius Lupus.


Caesar. O, bid the turbulent Informer hence;
We have no vacant Ear, now, to receive
The vnseasond fruits of his officious tongue.

Mecoenas. You must avoid him there.


Lupus. I conjure thee; as thou art Caesar, or respect'st thine own safety; or
the safety of the state, Caesar: Hear me, speak with me, Caesar: it is no
common business, I come about; but such as, being neglected, may concern the
life of Caesar.


Caesar. The life of Caesar? Let him Enter. Virgill, keep thy Seat.


Equites. Bear back there: whether will you? keep back.


Tuc. By thy leave good man Usher: mend thy Periwig, so.


Lupus. Lay hold on Horace there; and on Mecoenas, Lictors. Romans, offer no
rescue, upon your Allegiance: Read royal Caesar; I Will tickle you, Satyr.


Tucca. He will, Humors, he will: He will squeeze you, Poet Puckfist.


Lupus. I Will Lop you off, for an unprofitable branch, you Satyricall Varlet.


Tucca. I, and Epaminondas your Patron, here, with his flaggon Chain; Come,
resign: Though 'twere your great Graund-fathers, the Law has made it mine
now, Sir. Look to him, my party-colourd Rascals; Look to him.


Caesar. What is this, Asinius Lupus? I understand it not.


Lupus. Not understand it? A Libell, Caesar. A dangerous, seditious Libell. A
Libell in Picture.


Caesar. A Libell?


Lupus. I, I found it in this Horace his study; in Mecoenas his house, here; I
challenge the penalty of the Laws against 'hem.


Tucca. I, and remember to beg their Land betimes; before some of these
hungry Court-hounds sent it out.


Caesar. Show it to Horace: Ask him, if he know it.


Lupus. Know it? His hand is at it, Caesar.


Caesar. Then it is no Libell.


Horace. It is the imperfect Body of an Emblem, Caesar, I began for Mecoenas.


Lupus. An Emblem? right: That Is Greek for a Libell. Do but mark, how
Confident he is.


Horace. A Just man cannot fear, thou foolish Tribune;
Not, though the Malice of traducing Tongues,
The open vastness of a Tyrants Ear,
The senseless Rigor of the wrested Laws,
Or the red Eyes of strained Authority
Should, in a point, meet all to take his life:
His Innocence is Armor against all these.

Lupus. Innocence? o Impudence! Let me see, Let me see. Is not here an Eagle?
And is not that Eagle meant by Caesar? ha? Does not Caesar give the Eagle?
Answer me; what say thou?


Tucca. Have thou any Evasion, Stinkard?


Lupus. Now he is turned dumb. I Will tickle you, Satyr.


Horace. Pish. Ha, ha:


Lupus. Do thou pish me? Give me my Long sword.


Horace. With reverence to great Caesar, worthy Romans, Observe but this
ridiculous Commenter:

The Soul to my Devise, was in this Distich.
Thus, often, the base and ravenous multitude
Survive, to share the spoils of Fortitude:
Which in this Body, I have figured here;
A VVLTVRE --

Lupus. A Vulture? I; now, it is a Vulture. O, abominable! Monstrous!
Monstrous! has not your Vulture a Beak? has it not Legs? and Tallons? and
Wings? and Feathers?


Tucca. Touch him, old Buskins.


Horace. And therefore must it be an Eagle?


Mecoenas. Respect him not, good Horace: Say your Devise.


Horace. A VVLTVRE and a WOLF --


Lupus. A Wolf? Good. That Is I; I am the Wolf: My name's Lupus; I am meant by
the Wolf. On, on; A Vulture, and a Wolf --


Horace. Praying upon the Carcass of an ASS --


Lupus. An Ass? Good still: That Is I, too. I am the Ass. You mean me by the
Ass.


Mecoenas. 'Pray thee, leave braying then.


Horace. If you will needs take it, I cannot with Modesty give it from you.


Mecoenas. But, by that Beast, the old Egyptians
Were wont to Figure in their Hieroglyphics,
Patience, Frugality, and Fortitude;
For none of which, we can suspect you, Tribune.

Caesar. Who was it, Lupus, that informed you first, This should be meant by
us? or was it your Comment?


Lupus. No, Caesar: A Player gave me the first light of it, indeed.


Tucca. I, an honest Sycophant-like Slave, and a Politician, besides.


Caesar. Where is that Player?


Tucca. He is without, here.


Caesar. Call him in.


Tucca. Call in the Player, there; Master Aesope, call him.


Equites. Player? where is the Player? Bear back; None, but the Player, enter.


Tucca. Yes: this Gent'man, and his Achates must.


Crisp. 'Pray you, Master Usher; we will stand close, here.


Tucca. It Is a Gent'man of Quality, this; though he be somewhat out of
Clothes, I tell ye. Come Aesope: have a Bay leaf i'thy mouth? Well said; be
not out, Stinkard. Thou shall have a Monopoly of playing, confirmed to thee and
thy Couey, under the Emperors broad Seal, for this service.


Caesar. Is this he?


Lupus. I, Caesar: this is he.


Caesar. Let him be whipped. Lictors, Go, take him hence.
And Lupus, for your fierce Credulity,
One fit him with a pair of larger Ears:
It Is Caesar's Doom, and must not be reuok't.
We hate, to have our Court, and Peace disturbed
With these quotidian Clamours. See it done.

Lupus. Caesar.


Caesar. Gag him, we may have his silence.


Virgill. Caesar has done like Caesar. Fair, and Just
Is his Award, against these brainelesse Creatures.
It Is not the wholesome sharp Morality,
Or modest anger of a Satyricke Spirit,
That hurts, or wounds the body of a State;
But the sinister Application
Of the malicious, ignorant, and base
Interpreter; who will distort, and strain
The general Scope and purpose of an Author,
To his particular, and private spleen.

Caesar. We know it, our dear Virgill; and esteem it
A most dishonest practice, in that man,
Will seem too witty in another work.
What would Cornelius Gallus, and Tibullus?

Tuc. Nay, but as thou art a man, do hear? a man of worship; and
honorable: Hold, here, take thy chain again: Resume, mad Mecoenas. What?
do thou think, I meant to have kept it, old Boy? No; I did it but to fright
thee, I: to try how thou would take it. What? will I turn Sharke, upon my
Friends? or my friends Friends? I scorn it with my three Souls. Come; I love
Bully Horace, as well as thou do, I: it is an honest Hieroglyphick. Give me
thy wrist Helicon. Do thou think, I Will second ere a Rhinoceros of them all,
against thee? ha? or thy noble Hippocrene, here? I Will turn Stager first, and
be whipped too; do thou see, Bully?


Caesar. You have your will of Caesar; use it Romans.
Virgill shall be your Praetor; and our self
Will here fit by, Spectator of your sports;
And think it no impeach of Royalty.
Our Ear is now too much profaned ((Grave Maro)
With these distasts, to take thy sacred Lines:
Put up thy Book, till both the Time and we
Be fitted with more hallowed circumstance
For the receiving so divine a Labor.
Proceed with your desseigne.

Mecoe. Gall. Tib. Thanks to great Caesar.


Gall. Tibullus, draw you the Indictment then, whilst Horace arrests them, on
the Statute of Calumny: Mecoenas, and I will take our places here; Lictors,
assist him.


Horace. I am the worst Accuser, under Heaven.


Gallus. Tut, you must do it: 'Twill be noble Mirth.


Horace. I take no knowledge, that they do malign me.


Tibullus. I, but the world takes knowledge.


Horace. 'Would the World knew How heartily I wish, A Fool should hate me.


Tucca. Body of Jupiter! What? Will they arraigne my brisk Poetaster, and his
poor Iourneyman, ha? Would I were abroad skeldring for Twopence, so I were out
of this Labyrinth again: I do feel my self turn Stinkard already. But I
must set the best Face I have, upon it now: well said, my divine, deft Horace;
bring the whoreson detracting Slaves to the Bar, do; Make 'hem hold up their
spread Golls; I Will give in Evidence for thee, if thou will. Take courage
Crispinus; Would thy man had a clean band.


Crispinus. What must we do, Captain?


Tucca. Thou shall see anon: Do not make Division with thy Legs, so.


Caesar. What Is he, Horace?


Horace. I only know him for a Motion, Caesar.


Tucca. I am one of thy Commanders, Caesar; A man of Service, and Action; My
Name is Pantilius Tucca: I have served i'thy Wars against Mark Antony; I.


Caesar. Do you know him, Cornelius?


Gallus He Is one, that has had the Mustring, or Conuoy of a Company, now, and
then; I never noted him by any other Employment.


Caesar. We will observe him better.


Tibullus. Lictor, proclaim Silence, in the Court.


Lictor. In the name of Caesar, Silence.


Tibullus. Let the Parties, the Accuser, and the Accused, present them selves.


Lictor. The Accuser, and the Accused; Present your selves in Court.


Crisp. Demet. Here.


Virg. Read the Indictment.


Tibul. Rufus Laberius Crispinus, and Demetrius Fannius, hold up your hands.
You are, before this time, toyntly and severally indicted; and here presently to
be arraigned, upon the Statute of Calumny, or Lex Remmia ( The one by the name
of Rufus Laberius Crispinus, alias Crispinas, Poe^taster, and Plagiary: the
other by the name of Demetrius Fannius, Play-dresser and Plagiary) That you
(not having the fear of Phoebus or his shafts, before your eyes) contrary to
the peace of our liege Lord, Augustus Caesar, his Crown and dignity, and
against the form of a Statute in that case made, and provided; have most
ignorantly, foolishly, and (more like your selves) maliciously gone about to
deprave, and calumniate the Person and writings of Quintus Horatius Flaccus,
here present, Poet, and Priest to the Muses: and to that end have mutually
conspired, and plotted, at sundry times, as by several means, and in sundry
places, for the better accomplishing your base and Envious purpose; taxing him,
falsely, of Sefe love, Arrogance, Impudence, Railing, filching by Translation,
etc. Of all which Calumnies, and every of them in manner and form aforesaid,
what answer you? Are you Guilty, or not Guilty?


Tuc. Not Guilty, say.


Crisp. Them. Not Guilty.


Tibullus. How will you be tried?


Tuc. By the Roman Gods, and the noblest Romans.


Crisp. Them. By the Roman Gods, and the noblest Romans.


Virg. Here fits Mecoenas, and Cornelius Gallus;
Are you contented to be tried by these?

Tucca. I; So the noble Captain may be joined with them in Commission; say.


Crisp. Them. I; so the noble Captain may be joined with them in Commission.


Virgill. What says the Plaintiff.


Hor. I am content.


Virg. Captain, then take your Place.


Tuc. Alas, my worshipful Praetor! it is more of thy Gent'nesse, then of my
deserving, Iwusse. But, since it has pleased the Court to make choice of my
VVisdome, and Gravity, Come my Calumnious Varlets; Let Us hear you talk for
your selves now, an hour or two. What can you say? Make a noise. Act, Act.


Virg. Stay; turn, and take an Oath first. Youshall swear,
By Thunder-darting Jove, the King of Gods;
And by the Genius of Augustus Caesar;
By your own white, and uncorrupted Souls;
And the deep reverence of our Roman Justice;
To judge this Case, with Truth and Equity:
As bound, by your Religion, and your Laws.
Now read the Evidence: But first demand
Of either Prisoner, if that Writ be theirs.

Tib. Show this unto Crispinus. Is it yours?


Tuc. Say I. what? do thou stand upon it, Pimpe? Do not deny thine own
Minerua; thy Pallas; the Issue of thy Brain.


Crisp. Yes, it is mine.


Tibull. Show that unto Demetrius. Is it yours?


Demet. It is.


Tuc. There Is a Father, will not deny his own Bastard, now, I warrant thee.


Virg. Read them alowd.


Tibul. Rampe up, my Genius; be not Retrograde:
But boldly nominate a Spade, a Spade.
What, shall thy Lubricall and glibbery Muse
Live, as she were defunct, like Punque in Stews?
( Tucca. Excellent.) Alas! That, were no modern Consequence,
To have cothurnall Buskins frighted hence.
No; teach thy Incubus to Poetize,
And throw abroad thy spurious Snotteries,
Upon that puft-vp Lump of Barmy froth,
( Tucca. Ah, ha!) Or Clumsy Chil-blain'd Judgment; that, with Oath,
Magnificates his Merit; and bespaules
The conscious Time, with humorous Foam; and brawles,
As if his Organons of Sense would crack
The sinews of my Patience. Break his Back,
O Poets all and some: For now we list
Of strenuous Venge-ance to clutch the fist.

Subscri. Cris: alias, Innocence. Tuc. I mary, this was written like a Hercules
in Poetry, now.


Caesar. Excellently well threatened.


Virgill. I, and as strangely worded, Caesar.


Caesar. We observe it.


Virgill. The other, now.


Tucca. This's a fellow of a good prodigal tongue too; this'll do well.


Tibull. Our Muse is in mind for th'vntrussing a Poet:
I slip by his Name; for most men do know it:
A Critic, that all the world bescumbers
With Satyricall Humors, and Lyricall Numbers:
( Tucca. Art thou there, Boy?) And for the most part, himself does advance
With much self-love, and more Arrogance:
( Tucca. Good: Again.) And (but that I would not be thought a Prater)
I could tell you, he were a Translater.
I know the Authors from whence he has stole,
And could trace him too, but that I understand 'hem not full and whole.
( Tucca. That line is broke loose from all his fellows; chainehim up shorter,
do.) The best note I can give you to know him by,
Is, that he keeps Gallants company;
Whom I would wish, in time should him fear,
Least after they buy Repentance too dear.

Subscri. De. Fannius. Tuc. Well said. This carries Palm with it.


Horace. And why, thou Motley Gull? why should they fear?
When have thou known us wrong, or tax a Friend?
I dare thy malice, to betray it. Speak.
Now thou curlst up, thou poor and nasty Snake;
And shrinkst thy poysnous head into thy Bosom:
Out Viper; thou that eat'st thy Parents, hence.
Rather, such speckled Creatures, as thy self,
Should be eschew'd, and shund: such, as will bite
And gnaw their absent Friends, not cure their Fame;
Catch at the loosest Laughters, and affect
To be thought Iesters; such, as can devise
Things never seen, or heard, to impair men's Names,
And gratify their credulous Adversaries;
Will carry Tales; do basest offices;
Cherish divided Fires; and increase
New Flames, out of old Embers; will reveal
Each secret that is committed to their Trust:
These be black Slaves; Romans, take heed of these.

Tucca. Thou twangst right, little Horace; they be indeed:
A couple of Chap-falne Curres. Come, We of the Bench,
Let Us rise to the Vrne, and condemn 'hem, quickly.

Virgill. Before you go together (worthy Romans)
We are to tender our Opinion;
And give you those Instructions, that may add
Unto your even Judgment in the Cause;
Which thus we do Commence: First, you must know
That where there is a true, andperfect Merit,
There can be no Deiection; and the Scorn
Of humble Baseness, oftentimes, so works
In a high Soul upon the grosser Spirit;
That to his bleared, and offended Sense,
There seems a hideous Fault blazed in the Object;
When only the Disease is in his Eyes.
Here-hence it comes, our Horace now stands taxt
Of Impudence, Self-love, and Arrogance,
By these, who share no merit in themselves;
And therefore, think his Portion is as small.
For they, from their own guilt, assure their Souls,
If they should confidently praise their works,
In them it would appear Inflation;
Which, in a full, and well-digested man,
Cannot receive that foul abusiue name,
But the fair Title of Erection.
And, for his true use of translating Men,
It still has been a work of as much Palm
In clearest Judgments, as to invent, or make.
His sharpness, that is most excusable;
As being forced out of a suffering Virtue,
Oppressed with the License of the Time:
And howsoever Fools, or Ierking Pedants,
Players, or such like Buffonary wits,
May with their beggarly, and barren trash,
Tickle base vulgar ears, in their despite;
This (like Jove's Thunder) shall their pride control.
" The honest Satyr has the happiest Soul.
Now, Romans, you have heard our thoughts. Withdraw, when you please.

Tibul. Remove the Accused from the Bar.


Tucca. Who holds the Vrne to us? ha? Fear nothing: I Will quitte you, mine
honest pitiful Stinkards. I Will do it.


Crisp. Captain, you shall eternally girt me to you, as I am Generous.


Tucca. Go to.


Caesar. Tibullus, let there be a case of Vizardes privately provided: we
have found a Subject to bestow them on.


Tibull. It shall be done, Caesar.


Caesar. Here be words, Horace, able to bastinado a man's Ears.


Hor. I. Please it great Caesar, I have Pills about me
(Mixed with the whitest kind of Ellebore)
Would give him a light vomit; that should purge
His Brain, and Stomach of those tumorous heates:
Might I have leave to minister unto him.

Caesar. O! be as Aesculapius, Gentle Horace;
You shall have leave, and he shall be your Patient.
Virgill, use your Authority, command him forth.

Virg. Caesar is careful of your health, Crispinus;
And has himself chose a Phistian
To minister unto you: take his Pills.

Hor. They are somewhat bitter, but wholesome;
Take another, yet; so: Stand by, they will work anon.

Tibull. Romans, return to your several seats: Lictors,
Bring forward the Vrne; and set the Accused at the Bar.

Tucca. Quickly, you VVhorson Egregious Varlettes; Come forward. What? shall
we sit all day upon you? you make no more haste, now, than a Beggar upon
Pattins: or a Physician to a Patient that has no money, you Pilchers.


Tibull. Rufus Laberius Crispinus, and Demetrius Fannius, hold up your hands.
You have (according to the Roman Custom) put your selves upon Trial to the
Vrne, for diverse and sundry Calumnies, whereof, you have before this time been
indicted, and are now presently arraigned: Prepare your selves to harken to the
verdict of your Tryers. Caius Cilnius Mecoenas pronounces you, by this
handwriting, Guilty. Corneli.


Tuc. Gallus, Guilty. Pantilius Tucca --
us Parcel Guilty; I.

Demet. He means himself: for it was he indeed,
Suborned us to the Calumny.

Tuc. I, you whoreson Cantharides? was it I?


Demet. I appeal to your conscience, Captain.


Tib. Then, you confess it, now.


Demet. I do, and crave the mercy of the Court.


Tib. What says Crispinus?


Crisp. O, the Captain, the Captain.


Hor. My Physic begins to work with my Patient, I see.


Virg. Captain; stand forth and answer.


Tuc. Hold thy peace, Poet Praetor: I appeal from thee, to Caesar, I. Do me
right, Royal Caesar.


Caesar. Mary, and I will, Sir. Lictors, gag him:
And put a case of vizards over his head,
That he may look Bi-fronted, as he speaks.

Tuc. Gods, and Fiends. Caesar! thou will not Caesar? will thou? Away, you
whoreson Vultures; away. You think I am a dead Corpse now; because Caesar is
disposed to jest with a man of Mark, or so. Hold your hook't talons out of my
flesh, you inhumane Gorboduckes. Go to, do it. What? will the Royal Augustus
cast away a Gent'man of worship, a Captain, and a Co^maunder; for a couple
of condemned Caitiue Calumnious Cargo's?


Caesar. Dispatch, Lictors.


Tucca. Caesar.


Caesar. Forward, Tibullus.


Virg. Demand, what cause they had to malign Horace.


Demet. In troth, no great cause, not I; I must confess: but that he kept
better company (for the most part) then I: and that better Men loved him, then
loved me: and that his writings thriu'd better then mine, and were better liked
and graced: Nothing else.


Virg. Thus, envious Souls repine at others good.


Hor. If this be all; faith, I forgive thee freely.
Envy me still; so long as Virgill loves me,
Gallus, Tibullus, and the best-best Caesar,
My dear Mecoenas; while these, with many more
(Whose names I wisely slip) shall think me worthy
Their honored and adored Society,
And read, and love, prove, and applaud my Poemes;
I would not wish but such as you should spite them.

Crisp. O.


Tib. How now, Crispinus?


Crisp. O, I am sick.


Hor. A Basin, a Basin, quickly; our Physic works. Faint not, man.


Crisp. O -- Retrograde -- Reciprocal -- Incubus.


Caesar. What Is that, Horace?


Hor. Retrograde, Reciprocal, and Incubus are come up.


Gall. Thanks be to Jupiter.


Crisp. O -- Glibbery -- Lubricall -- Defunct -- O --


Hor. Well said: here is some store.


Virg. What are they?


Hor. Glibbery, Lubricall, and Defunct.


Gall. O, they came up easy.


Crisp. O -- O --


Tibull. What Is that?


Hor. Nothing, yet.


Crisp. Magnificate.


Mecoe. Magnificate? that came up somewhat hard.


Hor. I. What cheer, Crispinus?


Crisp. O, I shall cast up my -- Spurious -- Snotteries --


Hor. Good. Again.


Crisp. Chilblaind -- O -- O -- Clumsie --


Hor. That Clumsie stuck terribly.


Mecoe. What Is all that, Horace?


Hor. Spurious, Snotteries, Chilblain'd, Clumsie.


Tibull. O Jupiter!


Gall. Who would have thought, there should have been such a deal of filth in
a Poet?


Crisp. O -- Barmy Froth!


Caesar. What Is that?


Crisp. -- Puffy -- Inflate -- Turgidous -- Ventosity.


Horace. Barmy Froth, Puffy, Inflate, Turgidous, and Ventosity are come up.


Tibullus. O, terrible, windy words!


Gallus. A sign of a windy Brain.


Crispinus. O -- Oblatrant -- Obcaecate -- Furibund -- Fatuate -- Strenuous. --


Horace. Here Is a deal: Oblatrant, Obcaecate, Furibund, Fatuate, Strenuous.


Caesar. Now, all is come up, I trow. What a Tumult he had in his Belly!


Horace. No: there is the often Conscious behind, still.


Crispinus. O -- Conscious.


Horace. It Is come up, thanks to Apollo, and Aesculapius: Yet, there is
another; you were best take a Pill more?


Crispinus. O, no: O -- O -- O -- O.


Horace. Force your self then, a little with your Finger.


Crispinus. O -- O -- Prorumped.


Tibullus. Prorumped? What a noise it made! as if his Spirit would have
Prorumpt with it.


Crispinus. O -- O -- O.


Virgill. Help him: it sticks strangely, what ever it is.


Crispinus. O -- Clutcht.


Horace. Now it is come: Clutcht.


Caesar. Clucht? It Is well, that is come up. It had but a narrow Passage.


Crispinus. O --


Virgill. Again, hold him: hold his head there.


Crisp. Tropologicall -- Anagogicall -- Loquacity -- Pinnosity.


Horace. How now, Crispinus?


Crispinus. O -- Obstupefact.


Tibullus. Nay: that are all we, I assure you.


Horace. How do you feel your self?


Crispinus. Pretty, and well, I thank you.


Virgill. These Pills can but restore him for a Time;
Not cure him quite of such a Malady,
Caught by so many surfets; which have filled
His Blood, and Brain, thus full of Crudities:
It Is necessary, therefore, he observe
A strict and wholesome Diet. Look, you take
Each morning, of old Catoes Principles
A good draught, next your heart; that walk upon,
Till it be well digested: Then come home,
And taste a piece of Terence; suck his Phrase
In steed of Licorice; and, at any hand,
Shun Plautus, and old Ennius: They are meats
Too harsh for a weak Stomach. Use to read
(But not without a Tutor) the best Greeks:
As Orpheus, Musaeus, Pindarus,
Hesiod, Callimachus, and Theocrite,
High Homer; but beware of Lycophron:
He is too dark, and dangerous a Dish.
You must not hunt for wild, outlandish Terms,
To stuff out a peculiar Dialect;
But let your Matter run before your Words:
And if, at any time, you chance to meet
Some Gallo-Belgick Phrase, you shall not straight
Rack your poor Verse to give it entertainment;
But let it pass: and do not think your self
Much damnified, if you do leave it out;
When, nor your Understanding, nor the Sense
Could well receive it. This fair Abstinence,
In time, will render you more sound, and Clear;
And this have I prescribed to you, in place
Of a strict Sentence: which till he perform,
Attire him in that Robe. And henceforth, learn
To bear your self more humbly; not to swell,
Or breath your insolent, and idle Spite,
On him, whose Laughter, can your worst affright.

Tibullus. Take him away.


Crispinus. Jupiter guard Caesar.


Virgill. And, for a week, or two, see him locked up
In some dark Place, remoou'd from Company:
He will talk idly else after his Physic.
Now, to you, Sir: Th'Extremity of Law
Awards you to be branded in the front,
For this your Calumny; But, since it pleases
Horace (the Party wronged) t'intreat, of Caesar,
A Mitigation of that iuster Doom;
With Caesar's tongue, thus we pronounce your sentence.
Demetrius Fannius, thou shall here put on
That Coat, and Cap; and henceforth, think thy self
No other, then they make thee: vow to wear them
In every Fair, and Generous Assembly,
Till the best sort of Minds shall take to knowledge
As well thy satisfaction, as thy wrongs.

Horace. Only (Grave Praetor) here, in open Court,
I crave the Oath, for good Behavior,
May be administered unto them both.

Virgill. Horace, it shall: Tibullus, give it them.


Tibullus. Rufus Laberius Crispinus, and Demetrius Fannius, Lay your hands on
your hearts. You shall here solemnly contest, and swear; That never (after
this instant) either, at Booke-sellers Stalls, in Tauernes, Two-penny Rooms,
'Tiring-houses, Noble-mens Buttryes, Puisne's Chambers (the best, and farthest
Places, where you are admitted to come) you shall once offer, or dare (thereby
to endeare your self the more to any Player, Enghle, or guilty Gull, in your
Company) to malign, traduce, or detract the Person, or Writings of Quintus
Horatius Flaccus; or any other Eminent Man, transcending you in Merit, whom
your Envy shall find cause to work upon, either, for that, or for keeping him
self in better Acquaintance, or enjoying better Friends: Or if (transported by
any sudden and desperate Resolution) you do; That then, you shall not under
the Bastoun, or in the next Presence, being an honorable Assembly of his
Favorers, be brought as voluntary Gent: to undertake the forswearing of it.
Neither shall you at any time (ambitiously, affecting the Title of the
Vntrussers, or Whippers of the Age) suffer the Itch of writing to ouer-run your
performance in Libel; upon pain of being taken up for Lepers, in Wit, and
(loosing both your Time, and your Papers) be irrecouerably forfeyted to the
Hospital of Fools. So help you our Roman Gods, and the Genius of great
Caesar.


Virgill. So: now dissolve the Court.


Hor. Tib. Gall. Mec. Vir. And thanks to Caesar,
That thus has exercised his Patience.

Caesar. We have, indeed, you worthiest friends of Caesar.
It is the Bane, and Torment of our Ears,
To hear the discords of those Iangling Rimers,
That, with their bad and scandalous Practices,
Bring all true Arts, and learning in Contempt.
But let not your high thoughts descend so low,
As these despised Objects; Let them fall,
With their flat groueling Souls: Be you your selves.
And as with our best favors you stand crowned:
So let your mutual loves be still renownd.
Envy will dwell, where there is want of Merit,
Though the deserving man should crack his Spirit.

CANTVS.
BLVSH, Folly, Blush: here is none that fears
The wagging of an Asses Ears,
Although a Wooluish case he wears.
Detraction is but Baseness Varlet;
And Apes are Apes, though clothed in Scarlet.
Finis Actus quinti and vltimi. Exeunt. Rumpatur, quisquis rumpitur inuidia.
To the Reader.
HERE (Reader) in place of the Epilogue, was meant to thee an Apology from the
Author, with his reasons for the publishing of this book: but (since he is no
less restrained, then thou deprived of it, by Authority) he prays thee to
think charitably of what thou have read, till thou may hear him speak what
he has written.

FINIS.

