THE LITTLE GARDEN OF OUR B. LADY. Or, diverse practical Exercises in her Honor.

Written in Latin, by the R. Father, Francis de la Croix, of the Society of
JESUS.

And translated into English.

ornament IHS



Permissu Superiorum. 1631.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL HIS MVCH HONORED LADY, THE LA. E. M.
MADAME,
THE true Devotion which your Ladyship is known to have always borne unto the
B. Virgin MARY (together with the many courtesies You lately showed me, far
beyond my deserts) has emboldened me to present this little GARDEN of our LADY
(beset with most fragrant, and odoriferous Flowers) unto you: well knowing the
Nobleness of your Mind to be such, as will accept of a mean gift, where
better ability does want in the giver; as having no other way where by to
manifest the high Estimation, and most faithful Observance, wherewith he
abounds toward You.

Into this GARDEN may you often, and confidently enter, both for your
spiritual and corporal Exercise. A GARDEN it is, most pleasant, and planted
with the Flowers of all celestial Delights. And if at any time your Lad.
Pchance to be distracted through worldly Cares, or other business, retire hither
with speed to recreate your wearied Mind and Senses, with the Variety, and
sweet Air thereof.

Walk through the same daily and diligently. Co^pose for your self a Nose-gay
of sweet smelling Flowers. Here gather a Rose of Love and Confidence: There a
Lilly of entyre and sincere Devotion: Here a Violet of humble reverence and
submission. There a Marygold of perfect Imitatio^ of the B. Virgins virtues

And as the industrious Be, in sucking Honey out of Flowers, does with no less
Wisdom then Discretion, choose what is most fit and apt for her artificial
Building; so may your Ladyship imitate that provident, and laborious Creature,
in selecting, amongst so great variety, what shall be most fit for your
spiritual Edifice.

I will not be over troublesome with a longer Epistle, since the Bou^ty of your
good Nature assures me, as well of a grateful Acceptance of this mean Offer; as
of a careful Imitatio^ of the virtues which the ensuing Garden does lively
represent. In confidence wheof, I rest, very respectfully,

Your La.Ps ever devoted servant in Christ JESUS. I. Woe

THREE INSEPArable companions of Devotion, toward the Sacred Virgin Mary.
The first, is Diligence, and Fervor.
THAT the B. Virgin is not to be honored negligently, slouthfully, and only
for fashion sake, is clear and evident; yet, that the fire of our love, and
devotion may daily be more fervent toward her, behold beer three principal
reasons taken out of the 86. Psalm, which by frequent meditation may be cast
into this flame, as fuel to maintain it.

The first reason why me ought with feruor to honor the B Virgin, is her
Excellency, the which is by the Psalmist expressed under the Type of the Temple
of Jerusalem in these words: Her foundations are in the holy mountains; our
Lord loves the gates of Sion, more then all the Tabernacles of Jacob. Out of
which words, Doctors do commonly infer, that the first, and least grace that
was bestowed upon the Bl. Virgin in the first moment of her Conception, was
greater the^ he greatest that ever any man or Angel received.

They say also, that our B. Lady did continually increase the grace with she
had received, yea doubled the same. From whence some no less piously, then
probably discoursing, do conclude, That her grace and glory alone, is more
perfect the^ that of all the Saints and Blessed together, and consequently
more esteemed, and beloved of God, then all other pure creaturs whatsoever.
Wherefore if honor and reverence must answer in proportion unto the
Excellency; who cannot easily gather from hence that our Bles. Lady is more to
be honored and loved, then all the Blessed together?

Cast now the eye of your Understanding upon the whole world, and consider
every kingdom, Province, City, and Village, how greatly, by how many, and in
what manner, as well privately as publicly the Angels, Apostles, Martyrs,
Confessors, Virgins, and the rest of Blessed are honored; and after that your
have well pondered, and admired the same, and making one mass of them all, O
how great will it seem to be? and verily, if the B. Virgin may lustly
challenge unto herself far greater honor and reverence then all that; how
fervent then, how ready, how enflamed, how many wings of Devotion ought you to
have, how many heads and hands, to adore and honor her, as you ought? Her, I
say, whom the B. Trinity so much honors; how much more ought you (poor
worm and abject Creature) to honor?

The Second reason, why we should honor and reverence our B. Lady with feruor
is, because she is the Mother of God; the which the Prophet David touches in
these words: Glorious things have been said of thee, O City of God. Psalm. 86
Do you desire to know what glorious things may, and ought to be said of her,
whom God has chosen for the City, in which himself meant to dwell, to wit
his B. Mother? First this title of Mother of God, gives unto the Bles Virgin a
dignity in some sor^ infinite. Secondly it declares her woderful merits at the
hands of our Savior Christ whom as a^^en^er and loving Mother she most
lovingly brought up, clothed, cherishd, defended, forsook not until death,
and even buried his dead body with unspeakable care and lous. What honor
therefore does she not deserve at our ha^ls, who so much honored our Savior
Christ, our Father, and the Love of our Heart?

Lastly, the prerogative of the Mother of God, comprehends her innumerable
merits toward all mankind. For when the Son of God came to take humane
Nature upon him, then should the world have received him with great reverence,
and open arms of Love, it should have gone out to have met, and embraced him
with the fervent love of the Seraphims, with the beauty of the Cherubims, with
the variety of the Virtues and Thrones: but such was the blindness, ingraticude
and unworthiness thereof, as that it despised and rejected him, and as much as
lay in it, even abandoned that necessary, and so long desired work of our
Redemption. Yet you, O most Blessed Virgin Mary, you only amongst all the
world, enflamed with Charity like the Seraphims, in Wisdom like the Cherubims,
by your Humility and purity did present your self a most grateful Throne unto
Almighty God, and with the fragrant odor of your Virtues, did so temper the
unsavory stench of sin, which had made the world so abominable to the Son
of God, as that you allured, yea drew him down from heaven to earth; most
officiously le^ding your bowels unto men, to receive him, your arms to embrace
him, your tongue to praise him, and finally even your self wholly to serve him
perpetually for them.

And to omit other merits of the B. Virgin toward men; as also her many
services exibited in their behalf unto the Son of God, let us weigh what S.
Bernard says of her only consent in the conceyuing of the Son of God.
(Homilia super Missus est.) You have now heard (says he) O Virgin the tidings
sent from heaven (to wit, that you are chosen to be the Mother of God) the
Angel expects your answer, for it is time that he return unto him that sent
him. And we likewise. O Lady, expect a word of commiseration: for behold the
price of our Redemption is offered unto you; if you give your consent, we shall
be forthwith set all liberty. This humble supplication, O pious Virgin, the
doleful Adam, with his miserable progeny cast out of Paradise, does present
unto you. This is the humble request of Abraham, of David, and of the other
Holy Patriarchs, your Progenitors, who dwell in the region of darkness, and in
the shadow of death. This the whole world prostrate at your feet does expect.
And not without cause, seeing that upon your word depends the comfort of the
miserable, the redemption of the captive, the ransom of those that are
condemned, and finally the health, and welfare of all the Children of Adam,
that are of your stock. Thus S. Bernard. O how glorious things, and with what
feruor of affection have been said of you, and hereafter ought to be used by us,
O City, O Mother of God!

The third cause that ought to stir us up to Feruor, in honoring our Bles.
Lady is her infinite Mercy toward all mankind: For (as the Psalmist says in
86. Psalm.) The habitatio^ in you, is as it were of al rejoicing. Verily of all;
and why rejoicing, but for the manifold benefits which she daily heaps upon
us? In so much that I may boldly and truly say with S. Bernard: Let him be
silent, O B. Virgin, in the praises of your Mercy, whosoever he be, that having
called upon you in his distresses, can truly say, that you have bin wanting to
help him. And because there is none such to be found, therefore let none be
silent, but all joy full and fervent; let them honor the Lengh of her Mercies,
with a perpetual devotion; the Breadth with all kind of excellent Praises; the
Height with most divine worship; and the Depth with a most profound reverence.
But of the benefits and Mercyes of our B Lady, we shall speak more afterward.

The second Companion, is Constancy.
THere is to be pondred also another thing in these words of the Psalmist: The
habitation in you, is as it were of all rejoicing. Psalm. 86. The habitation
(says he) such as is that of Cittize^s, not an abode of some few hours, or of
one day, as that of Pilgrims is wont to be; to give us to understand, that the
floods of heavenly graces and delights, are wont to be derived unto such only,
as are constant in the honor of our B Lady and do persevere in piety toward
her. For those who honor or salute her as it were in passing by, and make
themselves as passengers only and strangers in her service, and do neglect
their exercises of Devotion begun toward her; besides that they are liable
unto the punishment due to their inco^stancy, they incur also the
Displeasure of the Mother of God, as may be gathered by the examples following
of two (otherwise most devout unto the B. Virgin, and also Saints) who were
sharply reprehended by our B. Lady for their slacknes and negligence in their
wonted exercises of reverence and devotion toward her.

The first of these was one Herman, who was so inflamed with devotion toward
the B. Virgin, that therefore he deserved to be admitted of her for her Spouse,
giving him the Name of Joseph. This man, through many businesses, and wordly
cares being distracted in recyting his accustomed Hymns, and office of the B.
Virgin, and grown more negligent in her service; our B. Lady one day met him,
not beautiful as she was wont, but with an old withered, and wrinckled face:
Behold, said she, I appear such a one as I now am become with thee. Where be
now those times in which thou did so often make mention of me, salute me,
and praise me? Art thou not ashamed to be so remiss and negligent in this
point? Is my remembrance with thee now grown old? Herma^ by this sweet
correction renewed his first fervor. [Surius in eius vita. 5. Aprilis.] The
other was Thomas a Kempis (whose name is famiously known to all) to whom our
B. Lady once appeared, being yet a youth and going to School at Dauen try in
Gelderland, and was very angry with him for omitting his accustomed devotions
unto her, refusing to embrace him, as she did his other schoole-fellows. [Spec.
Exem. did. 10. n. 7.]

The third Companion, is Discretion.
TO the end that Constancy in honoring of our B. Lady may be observed, the
which so greatly she desires, and is so necessary for the reaping of fruit; it
is requisite to adioyne a third Companion of Devotion, to wit, Discretion,
which sets down a rule, and order unto the Exercises of Piety, that neither
too many things together, nor yet too hard, or not agreeing with our state of
life, be undertaken: for which cause our devotions are sometimes performed which
anxiety, little gust, and over much have, and finally are often through
tediousness wholly omitted.

And this is the cause, why so many Exercises are hereafter set down, in such
plain manner (for we only mean to show the practice, and prove the same by
some few Examples,) to the end, that every one may make choice of such as are
most fit for himself, distributing them into diverse times some for every day,
some for Sundays and holy days, others for more principal and sosemne
Feasts.

THE TABLE OF Chapters.
THE I. BED.
NOt to go rashly, and without recollection to prayer. C 1. To commit our
office of saluting the B. Virgin to the Angels. Cap. 2. To honor the sacred
Name of Mary. Cap. 3. To salute her Image. Cap. 4. To go on Pilgrimage to her
Churches. Cap. 5. To reverence all things that belong unto her. Cap. 6. To
honor her by often bending our knees. Cap. 7. By prostrating our selves and
kissing the ground. Cap. 8. To deny nothing lawfully, and prudently asked in
her Name. Cap. 9. To dedicate all our purposes unto her. Cap. 10.
THE II. BED.
TO stir up affection to the B. Virgin, by contemplating her Perfections.
Cap. 1. By remembrance of her Mercyes and benefits to us. Cap. 2. A renewing of
our Love, and devotion unto her. Cap. 3. An Exercise of Love and Confidence in
the B. Virgin. Cap. 4. Effects and signs of true Love toward her. Cap. 5. 6.
and 7.
THE III. BED.
HOw to commit our selves to the protection of the B. Virgin. Cap. 1. How to
dedicate our selves in special manner unto her, Cap. 2. and 3. To deuote our
selves unto her, by entering into Religion. Cap. 4.
THE IV. BED.
OF the Aue Maria, or Angelical Salutation. Cap. 1. Of the Corone, or Rosary
of the B. Virgin. Cap. 2. The second manner of saying the Rosary. Cap. 3. The
third manner. Cap. 4. Of the Office of our B. Lady C. 5. Of her Psalter,
Letanyes, and Office of her Couception Cap. 6. How to observe the Saturday in
her Honor. Cap 7. Of honoring the Feasts of our B. Lady. Cap. 8.
THE V. BED.
The general practice of imitating the B. Virgin. Cap. 1. The first help, is
to representin our mind her Virtues. Cap 2. The 2. help, is to purpose truly to
imitate her. Cap. 3. The 3. help, is a particular Examen of our selves. Cap. 4.
The 4 help, is to implore her aid and assistence often Cap. 5. How to beg any
thing four B. Lady. Cap. 6. Of her contemplation of heavenly things. Cap. 7. Of
her devotion toward the Sacrifice of the Mass. Cap. 8. Of her receiving the
B. sacrament. Cap. 9. Of laboring with her hands, and corporal exercise. Cap.
10. Of her eating, and bodily Refection. Cap. 11. Of her repose and sleeping.
Ca. 12. Of her Purity. Cap. 13. Of her Chastity. Cap. 14. Of her Poverty. Cap.
15. Of her Humility, Modesty, Patience, and Obedience. Cap. 16. Of her charity
toward her Neighbor. Cap. 17. Of her Love to God. Cap. 18.
OUR B. LADIES LITTLE GARDEN.
THE FIRST BED, planted with Violets.
From whence may be gathered diverse Exercises of Reverence, and Submission;
whereof the Violet is a Token.

THe acts of Reverence (chiefly internal) toward the B. Virgin, co^taind, in
the first Bed; as all the Acts of Love which are delivered in the second, are
the principal, and as it were the ground and foundation whereon the Exercises
following do rely. For if one, either with little or no Reverence at all, or
without due attention, or only for fashion sake, and rather of custom then
devotion, should make his prayers and offer his Exercises unto the Bl. Virgin;
he should neither win her favor, not reap that fruit which they are known
to have gathered by these exercises by whose example the things following are
confirmed. Let it therefore be the first, and chiefest care of him, who has
devoted himself unto the service of the B. Virgin, to be always conversant in
some practices of reverence and love, in which more ordinarily and familiarly
he may exercise himself.

CHAP. I. The first Exercise of Reverence toward the B. Virgin, is not to go
rashly, and without recollection to prayer.
AS often as you shall go to make your Prayer unto our B. Lady, and repeat
her praises, to the end you may perform the same with due reverence; before
you begin it shall be good to recollect your self a little, and (all other
cogitations laid a side) weigh well with your self, whither you go, what to
do, and with whom you are to speak. Surely you go to salute her who is the
Mother of God, the Queen of Heaven and earth, who sits full of Majesty in a
Throne of Glory, environed with the Quiers of Angels; with how great reverence
and attention then, should you, a poor and vile worm, appear in the presence
of such a Queen?

That you may therefore make this recollectio^ more easily, and without
yrkesomnes, it is expedient you have in readiness some short Versicles which you
may use before you begin to say your Beads, Office of our Lady, or other
prayers; as for example this: Ah, let my lips sing, and display,
The B. Virgins praise this day.
which is found in the beginning of that most ancient little office of her
Immaculate Conception; or this which is the beginning of the Hymn, made by S.
Casimire. Do thou, my Soul, early and late,
Praises to the Virgin consecrate.
Or else this, which is commonly used by the Church. Grant me, O Virgin, thee to
praise,
Against thy foes, give strength always.
This kind of recollection does S. Ignatius Founder of the Society of JESUS set
down in general terms, when in his book of spiritual exercises he
teaches, that such recollection is necessary to be made before all kind of
prayer.

CHAP. II. The second Exercise of Reverence toward our B. Lady, is to commit
our Office of saluting her, unto the Angels.
IT will be noe small testimony of true reverence and submission, toward the
Virgin Mother, if remembering your own baseness, and considering her
excellency, you accoumpt your self as most unworthy of her great presence, and
do make your recourse unto the Angels, begging and craving of them that they
would be pleased to discharge your duty in this so high and noble service of
saluting, and earnestly praying unto the Queen of Heaven.

Turning your self therefore to your Angel Guardian, beseech him earnestly by
that immense goodness and mercy of our Lord, by which he was given unto you for
a Governor and Keeper, and by his fatherly love and continual care over you
(well knowing your unworthiness and lack of utterance) that himself who both
for the grace of his virtue, and ornaments of glory, is most gracious in the
sight of the B. Virgin, and withal most eloquent and expert in that Angelical
office which you commit unto him, would salute our B. Lady in your behalf with
al-beseeming reverence, and devout affection, and obtain for you all that he
knows necessary, as well for your profit in virtue, as for the eternal
weal, and salvation of your soul.

Make also your humble supplication unto the Archangell Gabriell, that he would
vouchsafe in your name to salute the Mother of God, once again with the very
same words, with that reverence and love, demonstration of joy, congratulation,
and like affections, as he then felt within himself, and which he uttered,
when being sent on that Embassadge from the sacred Consistory of the Bless.
Trinity unto Nazareth, to report unto the Virgin Mary the first and happy
tidinges of the Incarnation of the Son of God. In the mean while, supposing
you see and hear the Archangell Gabriell, and your Angel Guardian saluting
the Bless. Virgin in your behalf, you shall do well to offer, in the deuoutest
manner you can devise, unto the same Virgin, their submission and reverence, as
proceeding from your self; their words as if they were your own, and the most
true interpreters of your heart and mind.

S. Gerard of Pannonia Bishop and Martyr having erected an Altar in Honor of
our Blessed Lady, caused a silver Censar to be placed before it, and ordained
that two Venerable men should attend both day and night, only to provide, that
Incense were never wa^ring in the Censar. [ Sur. in his life 24. Septem.] Now
if you being moved with the like zeal of Honor unto our B. Lady do commend
your prayers to the Angels (who are said in holy Scripture to carry a Censar,
for the discharge of that duty) you may be assured, that their kindling the
incense of your prayers with the flames of their earnest devotion, will make
them so grateful and odoriferous unto that Heavenly Queen, that she with
manifold benedictions will abundantly accomplish your requests.

To the practice of this devotion those very figures, shapes, diversity of
forms that daily appear in the air, might serve us for a sufficient
incitement, by which we may evidently gather not only with what promptitude,
and constancy the Angels employ themselves in the service of the B. Virgin, but
also in how many, and what kind of offices they endeavor to serve her. In so
much as that demand of the Prophet Jsay 6. may fitly be applied unto the: Qui
sunt isti, qui vt nubes volant? who are those that fly like unto clouds? Not
only because by their feruor, speed, and promptitude in these functions they
surpass the swiftness, or to speak in the words of holy Scripture, the
flight of the clouds; but also as the clouds to perform the will of God do in
diversity of forms often visibly show themselves to men, some thick some
thin, some plain and smooth, others rough and gathered into heaps like
rocks; others resembling high mountains, with flocks of sheep grasing
thereon; and sometimes also they represent gulfes, whirlpooles, Crowns,
battayles, raynebowes and such like spectacles: Even so, the Angels attending
on our B. Lady, and seeking to advance her Honor and Reverence, do according
to their offices, assume unto themselves diverse shapes. One while they seem as
chief Peers of her Court, and enuirone her throne and Chair of State: other
whiles they appear like armed men, divided into squadro^s ready to guard her
person, and fight for the defense of her honor. Somtymes as Executioners of
the divine Justice they draw their weapons to strike the heretical Blasphemers
of her sacred Name. One while like stewards, and Houshoud-seruants, as when
they administered meat and drink unto the B. Virgin herself while she lived
in the Temple of Jerusalem before she was espoused to S. Joseph; and in time
of necessity likewise they often assist those that are her devoted servants.
They often like curious painters have artificially expressed in colors the
feature of her body, beauty, and comeliness of her countenance; Often with
melodious harmony have they resou^ded her praises, sometimes like unto Masters
of Ceremonies, by diverse acts of devotion and Reverence, have they taught how
me^ addicted to her service should more religiously worship her. Lastly like
unto Masters of Requests do they represent, with most humble, entire
submission, our prayers unto her, this being their special charge, in which
they be daily employed. Most memorable examples of all these things might be
alleged, if they were not frequent in Histories.

CHAP. III. The third Exercise of Reverence is, that we ought to honor the
must sacred NAME of Mary.
THis Reverence may be practiced diverse ways.

1. By never using rashly the sacred Name of Mary, but as it were reuere^tly
co^cealing the same, say, the B. Virgin, the mother of God our B. Lady, or the
like; and so doing you shall imitate the Archangel Gabriel who for the
reverence, and respect he bare unto that sacred Name, forbear to pronounce it
at the first, saying only, Aue gratiaplena, Hayle full of grace: yet
afterward beholding the greatness of her humility, and that she was somewhat
disturbed with words of such commendation, he then pronounced the same, Ne
timeas MARIA, Fear not Mary etc.

2. By uncovering your head, or bowing down the same, by bending your knees
when you hear that sacred Name pronounced. For (as a devout Contemplant
speaking unto the B. Virgin said) the most Holy Trinity has bestowed on you a
Name which next after the Name of your Bl. Son, is to be honored above all
Names; and that in your Name all knees do bend (as is manifest) both of those
that are in heaven, on earth, and in hell; and every tongue confesses the
Grace, the Glory, and Virtue of this most holy Name. [ lib. Contemp. de Virg.
Ma. c. 5.]

S. Gerard, whom we mentioned before, instructing the Hungaria^s in the
Christian faith, willed them that they should in common talk, seldom use the
proper Name of the most B. Virgin, but in familiar conference should call her,
Lady; and if by themselves or others the Name of Mary should by any chance be
uttered, that the^ they should bow their heads, or bend their knees etc.

3. You shall much honor and reverence the Name of the B. Virgin, if when you
either write, paint, or engraue the same, you endeavor to do it curiously,
comely, and devoutly, both with external and internal Reverence. [ Canis.
lib. 1. de B. Virg. c. 1.]

For if ever any mortal creature had a Name, renowned, delectable, gracious,
which for the worthynes and excellency thereof ought to be written, read song,
painted, or engraue^, it is the Name of the most sacred Virgin Mary, which
indeed most worthily deserves to be placed before every ones eyes, to be
sounded in their cares, and engraven in their hearts, and by every one publicly
and privately, with the greatest devotion to be uttered. To the exercise of this
devotion and reverence, the holy Angels by their examples inuit us, who have
often written this Name in gold silver, and diversity of most rare colors;
sometimes by it self, sometimes conjoined with the Venerable Name of JESUS;
sometimes also with a part of the Angelical Salutation.

It is a known history which we read of an old soldier, who after long
service in war became a Cistercian Monk, where he began so to imprint the
Angelical Salutation in his heart (which Prayer only by reason of the slownesse
of his wit, he was capable to learn) as that he was accustomed every moment
almost to repeat the same a which devotion of his how acceptable and pleasing
it was unto the B. Virgin, did then most manifestly appear when after his
departure out of this life, there sprung forth of his grave, yea out of his
mouth, a little tree, in every leaf whereof was written, with letters of Gold,
the sacred Name of Mary, with the beginning of the Angelical salutation: which
we may undoubtedly believe was performed by the hands of Angels. [Tho.
Cantipra. l. 2. apum. c. 29. p. 9.]

This very Name, as diverse Histories do recount, has been often painted with a
heavenly Pencill, and written by the hand of Angels, in garments, in flowers,
and in the air it self. Take therefore, in this singular devotion, those
celestial Citizes for your directors and masters. Imprint this Name with the
most amiable Name of JESUS in the Center of your heart. Let your heart be in
charity a Rose, in purity a Lilly, in humility a Violet, in desire of heavenly
things, a Hyachinth. Let it be marked with these names JESUS, MARIA, your only
repose and comfort. Then shall you be like the flower which displaieth his
leaves to the rising sun, when every morning shaking off drowsy sleep, you
turn your soul to God the fountain of light, and the sun of Justice;
opening it by manyfould thanks, dilating it more and more with desires of
pleasing him, and confirming it with strong and resolute purposes of never more
offending him: which if you seal up with these most fragrant Names JESUS and
MARIA, your heart, being made a true flower of sweet smelling devotion, will
breath out an odor most acceptable to God, his most sacred Mother, and to the
holy Angels and Saints in Heaven. And likewise when in the Evening, like unto
the flower, shutting it self at the setting of the sun, you shall silently
consider all things passed that whole day, and pondering every thought, word,
and deed, shutting up within the Center of your heart these most sweet Names,
JESUS, MARIA, then shall you enjoy a peaceful security, and a secure
happiness.

4. It will be also an argument of especial Reverence toward this sacred
Name, to recite those five Psalms or Hymns whose first letters make the Name
Maria. These are, Magnificat. Ad Dominum cum tribularer. Retribuc Jn
conuertendo, and Ad te leuaui. Or these, Magnificat. Aue Regina caelorum.
Regina caeli. Jnuiolata, and Aue Maris stella, being the most pious, and
singular invention of a holy man of the order of S. Benet. This exercise did S.
Joscius a Monk of admirable piety, of the Monastery of S. Bertin in S. Omers,
observe daily living, and being dead commended the same to all posterity. For
after his death five Roses of rare beauty did spring from his head. One out of
his mouth, (wherein the Name Maria was written in letters of gold) two out of
his eyes, and other two out of his ears: which Roses not only all the
Religious that were then living in the monastery, but also the Bishop of Arras,
the Clergy and all the whole City and Country that then flocked thither, did
with amazement behold. [Vincent. Bellonac. Spec. Hist. l. 7. c. 116. An. Domini
1163.]

O Blessed Mary, most merciful, most benign! Place your most amiable Name as
a signet upon my eyes, that being prevented with the benedictions of your
sweetness, I may be refreshed by the light of your mercyes. Place it upon my
ears, that being secure of your protection, I may not fear in that terrible
day of judgment to hear the dreadful sentence which shall be uttered against
the damned. Place it also on my mouth, that recreated with the milk of your
co^soiation, I may both in this and the next life, with perpetual praises,
exalt the Glory, and sweetness of your Holy Name.

CHAP. IV. The fourth Exercise of Reverence toward our Blessed Lady, is to
Honor her Image.
THE devout Servant of the Blessed Virgin must first have an especial regard
that her Image be placed in some decent and conspicuous part of his Oratory:
which S. Charles Borromeus of Millan, for his singular devotion unto that
sacred Queen did always most carefully observe; and amongst other things
appointed, that through his whole Diocese, there should be placed over every
Church door the Picture of our B Lady. For as that holy Bishop (according to
the opinion of S. Bernard) thought there was no place more worthy upon earth to
receive the son of Almighty God then the sacred Temple of his Mothers womb,
nor no place more noble in Heaven then the royal throne which our B. Savior
bestowed upon his Mother: so did he judge that place fittest for the Picture of
the B. Virgin, which for sanctity and worthynes was most eminent. For another
reason also, would he have it placed over the church door, thereby to admonish
all those, who entered to make their prayer, that the best means to come to
Almighty God, was by the intercession of his Blessed Mother, and that never any
man is to be admitted into that Heavenly Temple, which does not love and
reverence her who is called, The Gate of Heaven.

2. It is behouefull also that when you se the picture of this sacred Virgin,
especially if you pass by it, that you make some sign of Reverence unto it,
either by putting off your hat, bowing your head, bending your knee, or the
like. This devotion all true Servants of our B. Lady have always diligently
observed: and to let pass in silence many others, S. Margarite daughter to the
King of Hungary, passing by any picture of our Lady, was always wont to
recite the Angelical Salutation upon her knees. [Sur. in her life. 28. Ian.]

And for more confirmation of the excellency of this practice of Reverence, I
will adioyne here a miracle that happened at Affligem in Brabant in the
Monastery of S. Benet, where there is yet an image of our B. Lady to be seen,
which being on a time saluted by S. Bernard after his wonted custom, with
these words of Salve Maria, Hail Mary; did again with an intelligible and
courteous voice resalute him with Salve Bernarde, God save thee also Bernard. O
most happy, O sublime salutatio^! with the truest and most earnest desires of
our hearts to be wished for. I should easily believe these two words, as so many
darts of love, to have so pierced the breast of this mellifluous Doctor, with
such sweetness and heavenly delight, that his heart did leap, and the rest of
his body exult with joy, and tenderness of love. And as the soul of the Spouse
did melt at the voice of her beloved; so was his soul in like manner even
melted when he heard the voice of his beloved Mother. The like testimony of
love may you securely expect from the B. Virgin, if in your carriage toward
her, you behave your self like another S. Bernard.

3. The third manner of honoring the Images of our B. Lady, is, to handle them
with Decency and Reverence, imparting kisses of piety, and devotion unto them,
praising the pictures, and chiefly her, whom the picture does represent. Lewis
surnamed the pious Emperor, son to Charles the Great, when he went a
hunting, carried always with him an Image of our B. Lady, and in the midst
of the woods he was wont with great devotion upon his bare knees to make his
prayers and supplications before the same. [Canis. l. 5. de B. Ma. cap. 29.

4. Some devout servants of hers, use always to hang about their necks
putting it against their heart either her Image, or some medall at their beads
having her picture on it, or else they invent some other means to be sure
always to carry her picture about them.

This manner of reuerencing our B. Ladies Image gave help to a sick noble
yongman, whose cure was desperate, in the co^fines of Ebora in Spain in the
year 1593. of which the Annual letters of the Society make mention. This
young Noble man by reason of a vehement sickness, had wa^ted a good while the
perfect use of his wits, when once being one a time left by some chance alone
in his bed without any attendance, he suddenly by the devils instigatio^,
perceauing the chamber free from all company starteth up, puts on a doublet
in which not long before he had sowed two meddals of our B. Lady, and had
hanged another at his neck; which done, he precipitateth himself out of the
window upon a heap of sharp stones, falling secure without hurt of bruze The
devil amazed with the miracle who in the shape of a man appeared unto him,
conducted him by the hand to a deep well, where the distracted man still
obeying him, he caused him first to loose the medall from his neck (as not
knowing of the other he had sowed in his doublet) and cast it into the water,
and throw himself in afterward; down sinks he to the bottom, when as
sudde^ly having implored the help of our Lady, who was always present to
affist him, he appears to the arm pits above water sustained by the two
medals, until succor coming, and drawing him out of the well, he was
restored to his perfect health both of soul and body.

5. We may honor also her Image by adorning it with flowers, costly robes,
jewels, and with burning of lamps, and wax candles before it. Which Reverence
though it be in it self but small, yet how gatefull the same is to the B.
Virgin may be seen by this example which here follows.

The Daughter of a poor Shepherd feeding her Fathers flock near to an old
decayed Chapel, wherein yet remained an Image of our B. Lady all disfigured
and defiled with dust and filth, did often enter in thither, desirous to adorn
and garnish the said image with some better ornaments. She was grieved that
the slendernes of her estate, could not correspond with her good desires.
Wherefore on a time coming thither she declares her mind unto the B. Virgin
before the Image, and although her poverty could not afford any thing of price;
notwithstanding instead thereof, she daily offered up the Angelical salutation,
with great devotion for many years, until at last being taken with a fever
she found how grateful the desire of adorning her Image is to our B. Lady: for
being by the vehemence of her disease almost spent, behold our B. Lady
accompanied with 3. troops of Virgins, (the first of such who all their lives
had remained voluntary Virgins, the second, which had vowed chastity, and the
third, which to the Lilly of Virginity had adjoined the Rose of Martyrdom) not
disdayning the poor man's Cottage, humbly vouchsafed to enter to the sick
maid, recreating her with her Blessed presence, comforting her with words of
great consolation, and attending the departure of her holy soul, which she
joyfully received into her sacred arms, embraced it, crowned it with a garla^d
of glory, and lastly with joys of triumph ascended with it, into heaven.
[Spec. Exemplor. distinct. 29. Exempl. 118.] Thus ought we to deck and adorn
the Image of our B. Lady whiles we live, if we will seek to enjoy the like
triumph after death.

6. But that Reverence seems especially laudable when with solemn pomp and
procession her Image is carried through the Cities. Of this piety and devotion
Ioannes Zemisces Emperor of the East, left a rare and worthy example to all
posterity, when having vanquished the King of Bulgaria and his Country,
returning to Constantinople caused a most Venerable Image of the Bles. Virgin,
with the enemies spoils laid at her feet, to be carried in a triumphant
Chariot, he himself acco^panying it mounted on a white steed. [Zonaras hist.
tom. 7.] The like rare devotion was performed to the Sacred Virgin by Ioannes
Comnenus Emperor also of the East, which in the next Bed of Roses we shall
recount.

There have been many Emperors also in the West, which being inflamed with like
zeal and emulation, have co^tended with those of the East in honoring our B.
Lady. A most noble truly, and happy contention, where the Monarchs of the
world strive to reverence the Empress of Heaven, and Mother of God; where the
field appointed for the combat are Temples, the weapons Rosaries, and such like
devotions: where to love the B. Virgin best, is to conquer; to honor her most,
is to triumph.

7. The last Exercise of reverence to the Image of our B. Lady, is to procure
that the like honor and respect be done by others; and also to defend against
the Iconoclasts or Image-breakers, Caluiuists, Luthera^s, and all enemies of
Images, the reverence due unto them; to stir up Catholics seriously and
fervently to honor them, by sermons, by private Conference, by good example,
by distributing pictures or medals to others, endeavoring by the like means to
procure, conserve, and augment piety.

As for defending the honor due to Images S. John Damascene has left us a
most singular example, who for constantly maintaining by writing and
disputation the reverence due to our B. Lady and her Image, had his right hand
cut of by that furious Emperor Leo Jsauricus, a professed enemy of Images, but
not long after by a strange miracle had it restored, to the same use as before.
To which also may be added that of S. Hyacinthus. [Ribad. 16. Aug. in his
life.] when as the Tartarians rushing into the Church, he taking the Blessed
Sacrament in his hands began to fly, and flying heard a voice of a statue of
our Bles. Lady, O son Hyacinth, why forsakest thou me? Will thou thus leave
me to the reproach and malice of mine enemies? Come, Come, transport me with my
son to some other place: but he mistrusting his own strength alleged the
heaviness of it being made of Alabaster: To whom the Image replied, that he
should co^fidently undertake it, and that his strength should be made equal
with his burden. Whereupon with tears taking the Image on his shoulders, he
perceived it very light, and coming to the river Guaristin, finding no means
of passage neither by bridge nor boat, he made the sign of the Cross, and
trusting in the protection of the Blessed Sacrament, and the Statue of our B.
Lady, having spread his cloak on the water, passed over safly. A monument of
which Miracle as yet remains to be seen.

In the other kind, of exhorting Catholics to the honoring of our Ladies
Image, the singular piety of B. Father Borgia may be a pattern. He being
first, Duke of Gandia, afterward Religious and the third General of the
Society of JESUS, a man excellent for humility, and true contempt of himself,
notable for the gift of contemplation, and singular for his affection to our
B. Lady, of which he often gave most manifest testimony, but then especially
when procuring many Images to be drawn out according to that of S. Lukes
painting, which is reserved in the Church of S. Mary Mayor at Rome, and had in
great honor amongst the Romans; he sent some to Princes and Persons of great
worth, distributed others to all the Colleges then of the Society, that so in all places the glory of our B. Lady might more increase. And Fa. Jgnatius
Azebedius of the same Society of Jesus, and a famous Martyr, most intierely
devoted to the sacred Virgin, being to depart from Rome in the year 1570.
returning Prouincial into Brasile, carried with him one of these Picturs, and
being with his companions intercepted by certain Caluinist Pirates, his
fervor to God and trust in his sacred Mother did with admiration show it
self, when managing well the office of a stout Captain, he took the Image in
his hands, exhorted his companions to die generously for God; and then
courageously going forth to meet his enemies, houlding the said Image in his
hand, and protesting to dye for our Saviors sake, a Caluinist co^te^ding by
violence to wrest the picture from him, gave him three wounds in the breast,
and one in his head: not being able otherwise by force to take it from him, he
threw him, clasping fast the Image, headlong into the sea; and although the of
bodies of thirty eight his fellows being all there martyred, did presently
sink, he notwithstanding having stretched out his arms in form of a cross
was seen with admiration of al, to swim above water, as far as the eyes of
the behoulders could discern him, which undoubtedly was by virtue of the Image
he still carried in his hand. [Jn vita P. Borgiae l. 3. c. 10.]

CHAP. V. The fifth Exercise of reverence toward the B. Virgin, is to honor
Places dedicated unto her.
ANother great argument of piety, and Reverence toward our B. Lady, is to
build Churches, and erect Altars in her honor, which notwithstanding we will
omit, because the performance of this, is in few men's power; neither do we
determine to infer any particular matter concerning the adorning thereof, for
that most of those things alleged in the former Chapter may be reduced to
the same point: But by going on pilgrimage, we may honor places dedicated unto
her, and this may be done in two sorts. First by undertaking Iourneys to
remote places, as to the Holy House of Loreto, Mont-serat, Sichem, Foy; which
pilgrimages, with what devotion we ought to begin them, with what virtuous
exercises continue them, with what fruit finish them may be gathered out of
Father Richeome in his Book entitled, The Pilgrim of Loreto.

Neither is it necessary to search far Countries for examples of piety and
devotion in this kind, when not long since we have beheld the Example of
Albertus the Archduke and Lord of all the Low Countries, who as a pattern to
all Princes, for all the continual affairs of his Princedome, though very
feeble by reason of the weakness of his body, was wo^t yearly to spend nine
days in visiting our Lady of Sichem, the Infanta his Lady accopanying him with
the like devotion; which he performed also not many months before his death,
besides other Holy places in Flanders dedicated to our B. Lady, which he had
wo^t often to visit, and to adorn with votiue tapers, and all sorts of
ornaments, performing such acts of piety toward the B. Virgin, as perhapes
few ages can show the like testimony of devotion in so great a Prince.

Secondly, we may make our Pilgrimages to some places nere at hand, namely to
some Chapel either in the same Town, or City, or not far distant; of which
devotion, because it may be common and practiced by all, we will here propose
two Exercises, which every one may use as they will, and as occasion shall
permit.

The first manner of visiting places dedicated to our Lady.
What is to be done in the Journey.
FIrst you shall take unto your self two Companions of this your Pilgrimage;
on the one side your Angel Guardian, on the other some Saint, who was famous
for devotion toward our B. Lady: Then shall you implore the assistance of your
good Angel in the manner following. I beseech thee, O Angelical spirit, my
faithful keeper, that by thy protection I may be securly co^ducted in the way
of peace, safety, and happynes, and that no wicked temptations may oppress me.
I desire also, that thou beg for me thy poorest Servant, grace entyrely to
serve the Blessed Virgin in this life, that in the next, I may sing her praises
with thee, for all Eternity. Amen.

To the other companion you shall say: O Blessed N. most singular lover and
worshiper of the sacred Virgin, obtain for me that I by thy imitation may truly
reverence and serve that Holy Queen, and by thy intercession may be succored
in all perils, and tribulations of this life. Amen.

Secondly. In this Pilgrimage, you may take upon you diverse persons, according
to the diversity of considerations, by which you mean every day to stir up
your mind to devotion, recyting one of the Hymns of the Blessed Virgin: for
example, on Sunday you shall suppose your self the servant of our Blessed
Lady, bound and obliged unto her by a just and strait bond, going to praise and
glorify your most potent mistress and Queen, and you shall recite the Hymn,
Regina coeli; your companion shallbe B. Father Ignatius who being by apparitio^
(in which the B. Virgin visibly represented herself unto him) called from a
secular war to a more spiritual conflict, in the Mount of Serrato, began his
conversion, dedicating himself wholly to the service of our Lady, and hanging
his sword at her Altar, afterward his whole and only employment and endeauours
were, to augment both by himself and his sons, the honor of our B. Lady
throughout al parts of the world as much as possibly he could. [Orland. in
hist. Soc. l. 1.]

On Monday, Imagine your self a pilgrim in the world, exposed to a thousand
errors and dangers, going to salute your most faithful Lady. Choose, with
your good Angel, S. Dominicke, to accompany you in the way, whom our B. Lady
did with her particular protection assist, in defending her honor against the
Heretics called Albigenses, and procuring her greater service by teaching the
saying of the Rosary. In the way, say the hymn, O gloriosa Domina.

One Twesday, suppose your self laden with an infinite weight of sins,
going to salute your most merciful Advocate; in the way recite the Hymn,
Salve Regina, and choose for your Companion S. Bernard, who speaking (as
always was wont) most swetly of the Blessed Virgin his Advocate says:
Filioli, haec peccatorum scala, haec meae maxima fiducia, haec tota ratio spei
meae. My sons, this is the ladder, by which sinners must climb to heaven,
she is my greatest confidence, yea the only means of my hope. With which
inward feeling and affection whilst in the Cathedral Church at Spire he
recited the Salve Regina, being absorpt with heat of devotion, he kneeled three
times, in three diverse places, at those last words, O Clemens, o Pia, o Dulcis
Virgo Maria, in the memory whereof, three plates of brass, to distinguish
those three places, are nailed.

On Wednesday think your self a Scholar, rude and ignorant, yet desirous of
true wisdom, going to honor your most wise and learned mistress: recite the
Hymn, Aue Regina caelorum, and let S. Augustine accompany you, who being
placed between the wounds of JESUS, and the breasts of MARY, as on the one side
he was nourished with those joyful waters of heavenly doctrine flowing from
the wounds of our Savior, so from the other he sucked the sweet milk of
eternal Wisdom.

On Thursday, imagine your self a Spouse without any desert of yours, and one
far unworthy of such a marriage, freely loved and chosen by our B. Lady, going
to honor your most beautiful and beloved Espouse. You shall retite the himne,
Jnuiolata; and take for your companion S. Joseph, who was the Spouse of the
Bles. Virgin, and Foster-father to our Savior.

On Friday, imagine your self full of sores and almost wounded unto death,
going to your most merciful Surgeon, the Mother of our Redeemer, who on this
day with the effusion of his own precious blood made a salve for our sins.
Recite the Hymn, Stabat Matter dolorosa, and choose S. Francis your companion,
who having undertaken in the house of the B. Virgin, by her authority and
patronage that holy Institute of Poverty and abnegation of himself, did by her
assistance, so constantly persevere therein, arryuing to the top of such
perfection, that he was as it were transformed into our Savior crucified,
bearing the marks of his most sacred wou^des in his body.

On Saturday, imagine your self as a Son dearly beloved, notwithstanding you
have often degenerated and run astray, going to honor your most loving mother.
Say the Hymn, Aue maris stella, and let your companion be S. John the
Evangelist, whom our Savior, hanging on the Cross, gave to our Blessed lady
for her Son, and to whom also he gave the Blessed Virgin for his Mother.

When you shall come to the Church, or Chapel of our B. Lady.
Having made a low Reverence to the Image of our B. Lady, recyte on your knees
the Letanies of Loreto, and also three Aues: after the first, recyte this
prayer. O most Blessed Virgin, I humbly beseech you, since God the Father by
his Omnipotency has made you most powerful, that you will be pleased to be
present with me in the hour of my death, and to expel all the temptations,
and assaults of my mortal adversaries. After the second Aue, say. O Holy
Mother of God, since your sacred Son has endewed you with such knowledge and
clarity, that with your sple^dour the brightness of Heaven is augmented,
enlighten I humbly beseech you, my soul in the hour of my death, and confirm
it with the true knowledge of Faith, that it be not darkened with any mist of
error or ignorance. After the third Aue, say. O most sacred Queen of Heaven,
as the Holy Ghost has infused all abundance of love into you; so you at my
death distill into my soul the sweetness of divine love, by which all bitterness
may be made most sweet, and all heaviness joyful unto me. This manner of
recyting the Aue did B. our Lady teach unto Saint Maude, promising, that if
she daily observed it, she would be present with her, at the hour of her
death.

In your return from the Chapel.
REcyte the Magnificat, Te Deum, or some part of your Rosary in thanks giving
to our B. Lady for the gift of devotion, using almost the same considerations
that you did in your going thither.

The Second manner of visiting the Churches, or Chapels of our Lady. -- As you
go.
FIrst implore the aid and assistance of the same companions which were
designed for every day, in the precedent Paragraphe.

Secondly, consider some journey undertaken by our B. Lady whilst she lived on
earth; and the^ adjoining your self unto her for companion, endeavor to
imitate her modesty, devotion and the like virtues, expressed in that mystery:
which that you may the better perform, crave the help of that sacred Queen,
by recyting the Letanies of Loreto.

Every day choose these iourneyes according to the order prescribed. On Monday,
think how the Blessed Virgin went to visit her cosen S. Elizabeth. On
Tewsday, consider her journey to Bethleem, where she brought forth the Savior
of the world. On Wednesday, think how she went to the Temple of Jerusalem,
either when she presented her little Son JESUS to his Eternal Father, or when
being lost for the space of three days, she found him again with incredible
joy. On Thursday, suppose her going to Christ our Lord during those three last
years, which he bestowed in preaching the Gospel. On Friday, imagine how she
followed our Savior carrying his Cross to Mo^te Caluary. On Saturday, ponder,
how after his Ascension, she went to visit the holy places. On Sunday behold
her gloriously assumpted into Heaven.

In the Chapel.
YOu shall say your Beads after the manner prescribed in the fourth Bed and
2.3. and 4. Chapters.

In your Return.
IMagine the Blessed Virgin returning from those places, whither you
accompanied her going, namely on monday returning from the house of S.
Elizabeth: on Tewsday from Bethlem into Jerusalem, and from thence into
Nazareth etc. But on Sunday you are to have a most pleasant and delectable taste
of the most sweet love, and Motherly care, with which she imbraceth her
Servants and Clientes.

In the mean time whilst you meditate these things in your mind, recyte these
five Ant-hymns in the honor of the name Maria, the Magnificat. Aue Regina
celorum. Regina celi. Inuiolata. Aue Maris stella.

Many have obtained great favors and benefits at the hands of our Blessed
Lady, by this kind of pilgrimage, visiting, not of curiosity, but of zeal, and
fervent desire of her honor, places either dedicated unto her, or else famous
for some Image of hers. Among the rest S. Bernardine being a young man, was
accustomed to go daily to the gate of the City of Sienna called Camulia, and
there before the Image of our Blessed Lady seuerently and humbly to bend his
knes, and to salute the Mother of God, his beloved spouse and friend, as he was
wont to call her. Afterward this fragrant flower being transplanted from
amidst the brambles of the world, into a pleasant garden of Religion, so burned
with heat of devotion unto the same Bles. Lady which by diverse humble
obsequies he declared, that one day the Blessed Virgin visibly represented her
self unto him, as he was reciting her Beads, and with a great affability thus
spoke unto him: O Bernardine my devout servant, I have bin much delighted with
thy piety; for reward of which, I have obtained of my son for thee, the gift
of preaching and working of miracles; and assure thy self, that at last, with
me thou shall be made partaker in heaven of the eternal happiness. [ Pebl. in
Stell. l. 2. p. 2. art. 3.] After which time S. Bernardine became most famous,
for the gift of preaching, and working of miracles, with diverse other rare
gifts bestowed on him by the B. Virgin.

CHAP. VI. The sixth Exercise of Reverence toward the B. Virgin is, to honor
all that does any way belong unto her.
WE ought not only to reverence her Name, her Image, and places dedicated unto
her, but also in particular all things which any way do appertain unto her,
as her Rosary, her Office, or Psalter, or little books in which are contained
either prayers, miracles, praises due unto her, or the Acts and Virtues of her
Blessed life, and to be commended to all posterity. Also any thing dedicated to
her, as oblations or Offerings, or any Monument erected or set up in her
honor. Lastly her Parents, Kinsfolks, and all those that are particularly
devoted unto her are to be held in great Reverence and esteem by us, because
by them the B. Virgin hereselfe has been honored. It is not necessary to
discourse of all particulers, because we may gather out of the ensuing Beds
many flowers for this Exercise. Let therefore these two Examples of the Rosary
which now I shall rehearse, suffice for proof of all the rest.

One Antony of the order of S. Francis in Spain, as he went to Vincentia being
overtaken by a great shower of rain, and finding no shelter at hand, put his
Rosary on his head, craving the protection of our Blessed Lady. Scarce had he
made an end of speaking, but behold a strange thing, as if his Beads had been
turned into some fair dry roof, they defended and covered him so, that he
passed securely unto the City through all the vehemence of the storm, not
touched with the lest drop of rain. [Chron. Min. p. 3. ^. 1. c. 36. and 37.]

Neither can we omit to recount the devotion of Alanus a Dominican Friar unto
the Rosary by reason of the often succor which he found in his great
distresses, by the virtue thereof. For having learned that devotion of S.
Dominike, he did allwais esteem most highly the Rosary, yea before his
admission into that order, he recited it daily on his knees, and not without
fruit eue^ whils he was a lay man and soldier. And upon a time being in the
wars, and in a conflict against the Hetetikes named Albigenses, and environed
on every side by his Enemies, with great danger of his life, the B. Virgin was
seen standing by him, fighting for him with 150 stones, which thrown by her
own hand, gave an utter overthrow unto his foes, making her Client a famous
Conqueror.

Another time the same Alanus suffering shipwrake and being in the midst of the
sea tossed hither and thither, in most apparent danger of his life, he saw
suddenly by the favor and assistance of the Bles. Virgin a 150. little
hillockes rising above the waves, which all in rank reached unto the shore, by
the which he was safely co^ducted to land. A man might say, that the 150. beads
of the Rosary were turned first into so many stones; then into so many hills.
But that especially was a singular testimony of his devotion, that not only his
mouth which had oftentimes so piously pronounced the Angelical salutation, but
also his hands which had so reverently touched the Rosary, did shine like
Cristall, after his death. [Chron. S. Dom. l. 1. c. 34.]

O how merciful is this B. Virgin who does reward such small services, piously
performed by her servants, with such ample gain? Of whose benignity, that we
may make experience, let us study how to honor, and esteem any thing
whatsoever, dedicated to her. But on the contrary side let us seriously take
heed that we offer no abuse unto them, or apply them to profane uses, least we
incur justly the high displeasure of our B. Lady, being well admonished by the
example following.

In a certain Sodality of our B. Lady there were two Pens fayrly decked,
appointed to write the letters Patents, which the fellows of that Sodality
going from one place to another, were always accustomed to carry with the^. One
of these Pens a Youth of the same Sodality had secretly stolen who though by
inward inspirations he felt himself often called to Religion by Almighty God,
yet notwithstanding being entangled with the love of a certain woman, he
neglected this vocation. Upon a time determining to write unto the said woman,
and having taken the stolen pen in his hand, he felt suddenly a great blow
given him on the ear, and a voice rebukinge him in these words: And dare
thou, wicked fellow, by thy unclean atte^pts defile a thing dedicated unto me?
With which blow the youth being astonished, altered his determination: but the
print of the blow remained for certain days in his face, showing that it was
a force more then humane which gave it him. [Bonif. in hist. Man. l. 5. c. 1.
ex Bencio.]

CHAP. VII. The seventh Exercise of Reverence to the B. Virgin is, by be^ding
our knes to give her the worship of Hyperdulia.
THis Honor of Hyperdulia, is inferior, and less, then that of Latria, which
is due only to God, and yet superior and greater the^ Dulia which is common to
other Saints: And it is convenient that it be given to our B. Lady by reason
of her Excellency. You may practice the same by bending your knees after the
manner following.

First standing before an Oratory, or Image of our Bles. Lady, contemplate her
sitting in a stately Throne, exalted next unto her Bles. Son above all the
quires of Angels, full of majesty, and amongst all Creatures the most excellent.

Secondly, observe how all the Orders of Angels, and Saints falling before her
as to their Queen and Lady, with great submission, honor her.

Thirdly acknowledging your self the most poorest and abject of all her
Servants, and most unworthy to be admitted to so noble and glorious a
Congregation, and so high an Office, yet trusting in her benignity, and
clemency, with an inward reverence, most profoundly, submit your self before
her, with your arms cast a cross upon your breast, or hands joined devoutly,
and humbly bowing your knees unto the ground without uttering a word; of if you
had rather speak, only say, and repeat these two, Salve Maria, or Aue Maria.
Fourthly, rising up a little after, and recollecting your self as before,
together with all the Court in heaven, bend your knees again, and again, as
often as discreet devotion shall suggest.

You may commodiously thryce a day repeat this Exercise, in honor of the 15.
Mysteries contained in the Rosary. Rising in the morning bend your knees 5.
times in honor of the 5. glorious Mysteries, the first of which was performed
at the time of the Resurrection of Christ our Lord: but you may reverence those
Mysteries, if bending your knees either with your heart alone, or with your
mouth also, you say, Hayle Mary whose Son rose again: Hayle Mary whose Son
ascended into heaven, and so concerning the rest etc. About Noone, bend your
knees again in honor of the 5. Dolorous Mysteries, the chief of which was
done about that time, namely the crucifiyng of our dear Lord and Savior. At
Night before you go to bed, bend again your knees in honor of the 5. Joyful
Mysteries, whereof the chiefest, to wit the Annuntiation, was accomplished as
many Authors suppose, at that time. Upon the solemnity of any Feast of the B.
Virgin you may add one bending of your knee more in honor of the Mystery then
celebrated.

This Exercise has been very familiar and usual to many servants of our Bles.
Lady. And Saint Mary of Oegnia did (as we read) sometimes in the space of a day
and a night, bend her knees a thousand and an hundred times saluting the mother
of God, and perseuered in this kind of salutation 40. days together. [Sur. in
her life 25 of June.]

It is recounted that a religious person neglecting the like duty to the B.
Virgin was sharply rebuked, who when upon a time through sloth lying in his
bed, he omitted the usual custom of bending his knees at the sign of the Aue
bell, which is given thrice a day to renew the memory of the Angels saluting
the Blessed Virgin, the night following he perceived in his sleep the little
bell of the Church to bow it self three times so low that the very top almost
touched the earth, hearing withal a voice reproouing him, and saying: Thou
slothful fellow, behold how senseles creatures bow themselves before the
Blessed Virgin, and thou a reasonable Man neglectest it.

CHAP. VII. The eight Exercise of Reverence to our B. Lady is, to exercise the
foresaid acts of Hyperdulia by prostrating our selves, and kissing the ground.
YOu may also use this exercise at three times as you did the former. First
standing still, without motion, behold the sacred Virgin adua^ced to the top
of the Empyriall heaven in a princely Throne, all the heavenly Court beholding
and applauding her, and the most Blessed Trinity crowning her with a Crown of
twelve Stars, which do signify her twelve privileges or virtues, and the
rewards thereof, with which she is endowed in a most high degree, above al
other Creatures. Conceive then a fervent desire to add something also to this
noble triumph and glory of our B. Lady, and to bestow your self wholly in
honoring her, and to that end recite this Prayer.

O most excellent and most pure Virgin, Mother of God, and our Qneene, behold
me the most abject, and poorest of all your Servants here prostrate at your
feet I do present unto you these two little Mites, to wit, my SOVLE and my BODY,
to serve and obey you as perpetual slaves for ever. I also bequeath unto you
my understanding, and my Memory, that I may think and meditate on you; my Heart
that I may fervently love you; my Head that it be bowed in your honor; my
Hands that I may join the^, my knees that I may humbly be^d them before you;
my Tou^g that it may utter your praises: lastly my whole Body, that I may
prostrate it in reverence to your Royal Majesty.

Then in presence of all the heavenly Citizens, as if you were a fellow, or
companion among the Blessed, al performing the same with you, recite the little
Rosary, at three diverse times, containing twelve Aues, equally divided with
three Pater Nosters in remembrance of the 12. Prerogatives of our B. Lady, and
after every Aue prostrating your self, kiss the ground. The manner of
dividing these prayers, is this.

In the morning, say in honor of God the Father, the first Pater Noster, who
in sight of all the Court of heaven did crown the B. Virgin his beloved
daughter. Then with the holy Patriarchs salute the Sacred Virgin, saying first
an Aue Maria, in honor of her most excellent Faith, and Hope, since no pure
Creature was ever enriched with greater. The second recite with the Prophets,
in honor of her sublime Contemplation. The third with the Apostles, in honor
of her most fervent Charity and Zeal. The fourth with the Martyrs, in honor
of her Fortitude and Magnanimity; and after every one you may, as is before
said, kiss the ground.

At Noone, recite the second Pater Noster, in honor of God the Son, who
crowned his B. Virgin Mother. Adioyne also 4. other Aues in honor of these
four Privileges following: The first with the holy Doctors, in honor of her
discretion and wisdom. The 2. with the Priests, in honor of her sanctity. The
3. with Religious persons in honor of her Poverty and Obedience. The fourth
with Eremits in honout of her solitarines and prayer.

In the Evening say the 3d. Pater Noster in honor of God the holy Ghost, who
crowned the Bles. V. Mary his Espouse. Adioyne also 4. Aues in honor of 4.
other Privileges. The first with holy Confessors, in honor of her Patience.
The 2. with Virgins in honor of her Virginity. The 3. with widows, in honor
of her humility. The 4. with married persons in honor of her Fidelity, and
Concord in wedlock.

Sometimes instead of these privileges you may meditate upon these things
following. In the Morning, 1. Consider the most copious grace, infused into the
B. Virgin in her immaculate Conception. In the 2. That high dignity in the
angelical Salutation. 3. The ouershadowing of the holy Ghost. 4. The Conception
of the son of God.

At Noone, Consider 1. That she was a B. Virgin most pure, without any spot,
or blemish of her Virginity. 2. That she was a Mother and yet remained a
Virgin. 3. That she bore our Savior in her womb without either weight, or
trouble. 4. That she was delivered without pain or grief.

In the Evening, Consider 1. The firmness of her Faith, in believing. 2. Her
profound humility in obeying. 3. Her great discretion in speaking. 4. Her high
perfection in undertaking and following any work. This exercise is explicated
otherwise in the Mirror of Examples, and is called there, The Crown of our B.
Lady, namely when the 3. Paters, and 12. Aues are recited at once in honor of
the Privileges before mentioned. In commendation of which Exercise, I must not
omit an example set down in that Book.

Three men going a journey together, two of them, ouergoing the third, and
passing through a wood, fell into the hands of thieves, by whom they being
first spoiled of their clothes were afterward cruelly murdered. The third,
who with great piety and constancy was daily accustomed to recite this foresaid
Crown or Rosary, ignorant of his fellows misfortune, entered into the same
wood, and was suddenly apprehended by the same thieves; and ready to be
slain, he earnestly entreated of them, that they would but spare him so long,
until he might recite that short Rosary. To which they easily condescended.
But the B. Virgin moved with motherly piety, being not able without compassion
to behold the distressed estate of her afflicted Clie^t, made have presetly to
relieve him and came unto him sitting by him in a thron of glory, full of
Majesty, and brighter then the sun. On each side S. Catherine and S. Lucy, the
especial Patrones of this poor man did guarde her. The thieves with steadfast
eyes beheld all that was done, and did see falling from his mouth, at every
Pater noster, a red Rose, and at every Aue, a pure white one, which by the
commaundment of our B. Lady S. Catharine gathered up, and delivered them unto
Saint Lucy; who bound them on a circle of gould with silver thread. The garland
being finished, they gave it to their Queen, who putting it on her Clients
head, vanished away. Whereupon the thieves, renouncing that wicked course of
life, and sorry for their fault, told their Captive what they had beheld, and
for a testimony of the truth showed him the Crown put on his head: whether he
was more struken with astonishment of the thing, or rapt with joy is hard to
say, but with a grateful mind he acknowledged this benefit of the sacred
Virgin, and that he might more fully afterward dedicate himself unto her, he
became a Religious Man.

CHAP. IX. The ninth Exercise of Reverence, is to deny nothing which lawfully,
and prudently may be granted to those who ask it in our B. Ladies Name.
WIth this Exercise, as with a vital bayte, did the B. Virgin entice Alexander
of Hales into the Order of S. Francis, a man famous for learni^g but more
renowned for his rare piety and devotion toward our B. Lady, of which he gave
an evident argument, when as he vowed he would never deny any thing asked of
him in her Honor. [S. Ant. 3. p. hist. 24. c. 8.. 1.]

One day a friar of S. Francis Order meeting him, and falling into discourse of
spiritual matters, said unto him: And why do you not leave a secular life, and
in Religion bequeath your self wholly to God? I beseech you, for the honor of
the most Bles. Virgin to enter into our Order. Alexander at first was amazed
with a Petition so unexpected, yet calling a little after his vow to
remembrance, together also with the inspiration of God, who still urged him,
he promised he would perform what was requested, and so for the reverence and
love borne to our B. Lady he enterd into that Order, greatly gracing the same
with the excellency of his learning.

Whosoever will seriously labor in the rooting out of any vice or imperfection,
let him with great diligence, and fidelity attend unto this devotion; to wit,
that in the morning at his vprising let him fervently, and sincerely beg of
himself, for our B. Ladies sake to abstain from such an imperfection for that
one day: or if he be accustomed to fall often into that imperfection, let him
ask but for the space of some few hours. Afterward that time being spent,
let him demand it earnestly again for one day, or 3. or 4. hours more, so
abstaining day by day in this manner until by the assistance of the B. Virgin
he shall get a full conquest over himself. And if at any time upon occasion
the temptation do oppress him more grievously, let him urge himself more
fervently in this manner: What, and will thou not hear the B. Virgin asking,
desiring, and beseeching thee, to abstain from this imperfection? By the like
practice S. Bernard moved a Noble man of France to reform his life. For after
applying many other remedies in vain to recall him from a certain vice: well,
said S. Bernard, if it be so, that you cannot long restrain yourselfe, yet for
Almighty Gods sake, for bear for 3. days, which he did. The 3. days being
ended he urged him again that for 3. days more he would in honor of our B.
Lady abstain, to which he also agreed. After being desired to abstain 3.
other days in Honor of all the Saints in heaven, he did, and so forth, until
at last coming to S. Bernard, he professed he would now make no more truce
with God Almighty for 3. days, but a perpetual peace, being changed into
another man. [ De la Puent. t. 3. de perf. Christ. tract. 2. c. 8. ex spec.
Exemp.]

CHAP. X. The tenth Exercise of Reverence to the B. Virgin, is to dedicate all
our good purposes unto her.
IT is a thing of very great moment, and much auayling to the attaining of true
perfection and eternal salvation, if renewing daily your good purposes and
intentio^s before an Image of the B. Virgin, you resign the^ into her most
sacred hands, and lay them in her most holy lap, as in a sa^ctuary; or add
them to her Crown as so many stars, that so you may the more efficaciously
be moved by this Exercise to the accomplisshing of your purposes by reason of
the reverence and dignity of our B. Lady, and may conceive a more firm hope of
obtaining help from her.

To this S. Bern. stirs us up in his Sermon of the nativity of our Bles.
Lady. Remember says he, to commend whatsoever you undertake to the Blessed.
Virgin Mary. And a little after: Have (says he) a diligent care, that you
endeavor to give that little which you desire to offer, into the most grateful
and most worthy hands of the Bles. Virgin MARY. Which if you do, you shall
doubtless find the B. Virgin as favorable to you in this spiritual traficke,
as she was at another time in a worldly negotiation unto a certain Merchant. [
Vincent. Bellouac. specul. hist. lib. 1. c. 81.]

This Merchant having borrowed money at Constantinople of a Jew, promissed the
payment of it again at such a day, using our Lady as a witness, before whose
Image he made this bargain. Wherefore the Jew remaining satisfied, he took his
journey with his money to Alexandria, negotiating there very prosperously. When
as now the day was at hand in which the debt was to be paid, and so near that
he could neither return by any means himself, nor se^d the money by any
messe^ger, what should he do? He undertakes a strange course, which was a
peculiar devotion into our B. Lady scarce ever heard of before, suggested unto
him. He closed the money in a little Chest, which he sealed with his own seal,
with this inscriptio^: Receive Abraham (for that was the Jews name) the money
which I borrowed of you. This little Coffer he put into the sea, a day before
the money was due, humbly beseeching the B. Virgin, that by her help it might
safely be co^ducted unto Constantinople into the Jews hands. When behold the
money being miraculously carried through all the seas, arrived to the shore of
Constantinople, where the same Jew walking on the bank side received it.
Neither here ceased the miracle, for the perfidious Jew after the receipt of
this money, hid the Coffer, demanding, after the merchants return, the debt
before the magistrates, and (constrained thereunto because other testimony was
wanting) took his oath before the said Image of our Bles. Lady that never any
such money came to his hands. Scarce had he sworn, but the Image with a loud
voice in the hearing of all, replied; Thou lie, for thou have received both
money and box, and have hid them. The Jew, astonisshed with the wonder and
amazed with the nouelty of the thing, confessed his wickedness, and
acknowledging the power and mercy of the B. Virgin, became a Christian.

Do you imitate this confidence in our B. Lady, and representing your self
before her, make your desires of attaining to perfection. Renew good purposes
of amending your life, and casting of ill habits: and with greatest reverence
and submission of your self resign all to her, and doubt not, though many
obstacles and difficulties oppose themselves, but that the Blessed Virgin
executing the office of a good Mariner, will direct your good intentions
through floods, rocks, sa^des and te^pests, conducting them to the safe haven
of a good and prosperous end.

With this love and reverence toward the B. Virgin did holy Father Ignatius,
as with a most strong seal, sign and confirm his first purpose of altering
his manner of life, into a better course, giving his Sword as a pawn, and
sealing his intentio^s as it were in the motherly bosom of the Sacred Virgin.
He did offer also up into the hands of our B. Lady the Vows which he, and his
fellows made at Paris in her Chapel called, The Mont of martyrs, on the day
of her Assumption, commending in like manner to her the solemn profession made
by himself and his fellows in Rome, at S. Paul's, within her Chapel. Neither
intended he any thing else, when in the Rules of his Order he interposed these
words, [Before the most Blessed Virgin Mary] then that he might leave it as a
document unto his Sons, that as their Vows, so all their good purposes
should be offered up before the Blessed Virgin, to the end that partly by the
reverence and respect due unto her, partly by the confidence of her assistance,
they may be made more ready and cheerful in bringing them to effect.

OUR B. LADIES LITTLE GARDEN.
THE SECOND BED, planted with Roses.
Wherein diverse Exercises of Love to our B. Lady are contained.

BEhold the Rose, the second flower of this Virginal Garden, an Emblem of
Love, which if you gather with such devotion, diligence and constancy as it
behooves; you may easily compose thereof a most fair Garland, fit both in
beauty and odor for the glorious Head of the Bles. Virgin. First therefore
strive daily to stir up in your self as soon as you rise, a tender and
sweet affection unto this glorious Queen, remembering as well her singular
Perfections, and beauty, as her infinite Mercies showed unto us sinners. Which
two considerations will serve as fuel, to increase and nourish within your
breast the fire of divine love toward so beautiful a Queen, and so loving a
Mother: But least this heat of devotion, which you enjoy in the morning wax
cold ere night, by reason of many cares and employments which daily are like to
trouble you, you must labor to kindle and quicken the same, by frequent,
though briefer, deuotio^s, as the practice following shall instruct you.

CHAP. I. The first way to stir up Affection to the B. Virgin, is the
contemplation of her Perfections and Beauty.
YOur composition of place shall be to imagine, that you see the B. Virgin
shining with infinite beauty, and glory, in the midst of men and Angels,
toward whom are directed the affections of every Saint in particular.

Your petition shall be to demand grace of our Lord to perceive, and taste in
some sort, how dearly our Bles. Lady ought to be loved for her rare Pefections,
and Beauty.

The first Point.
Of the multitude, and greatness of our B. Ladies Perfections.
I Magin you see the Blessed Virgin in the midst of all creaturs, darting our
of her own heart, as from a bow, innumerable arrows, whereof every one flying a
diverse way, wounds a several heart. These arrows are so many perfectio^s of
hers, which wound the beholders of her beauty with love, to wit, Men, Angels,
yea and God himself. Thou art all fair, O my beloved, thou art all
beautiful, and there is no spot in thee. [Cant. 4.] Void she is from
original, yea and from the very least blemish of actual sin; Beautiful in
body, fair in soul, pleasing in this life by grace, resplendent in the other
by glory, most excelent and worthy of love above all creatures; because she
being first ordained, predestined, and elected before all others, by the
mouth of the Higbest [Eccles. 24.] was by law of birthright, by her portion of
grace and inheritance of heavenly glory, preferred by her celestial Father
before all creaturs. Yea whatsoever otherways is found amongst Creatures good,
fair, holy, or amiable, all that in a far more ample manner is fully contained
in the B. Virgin.

Affections of Love.
WIth this consideration you shall stir up in your self, affections of love,
rejoicing to see your dear Mother indewed with so many perfectio^s, worthy of
al honor, praise and love; in such sort, that if you enjoyed the same, she
being deprived thereof, you would most willingly resign the^ all unto her
again. With this so ardent charity, was Charles the Son of S. Brigit
enflamed, who received great comfort and exulted with joy, as often as he
considered the excellent prerogatives of this B. Virgin, but especially when he
remembered, how she amongst all others was chosen by God to be the Mother of his
only Son; and he did often protest, that he had rather choose to lie in the
grievous torments of hell, for all eternity, the^ that the B. Virgin should be
deprived, although but for one moment (if it were possible) of that dignity, in
which now she shines. This was a great expression of love.

The second Point.
Of the exterior Perfection, and Beauty of our B. Lady.
AFter you have thus in general be held the admirable perfection of our B
Lady, you may begin by little and little to desce^d to po^der in particular every
part thereof. And in the first place, remember to consider the excellent beauty
which externally proceeded either from the admirable proportion of her body, or
from the exterior Portraiture of her divine virtue. Let not that worthy saying
of Saint Denis, or rather some other unknown, though most excellent Writer,
go out of your mind, who, in an Epistle to S. Paul, after he had beheld our
Bles. Lady, says thus of himself: Eftsoons as I came into the presence of the
sacred Virgin, so great a light suddenly enuyroned me exteriourly, and fully
enlightened me interiourly, so fragrant a smell of all kind of odours abounded
in me, as that neither my unhappy body, nor my poor soul was able to sustain
the ensigns of such, and of so great happiness. My heart fainted, and my spirit
failed, overwhelmed with the majesty of so great glory; I take God to witness,
who was then present in the Virgin, had not that doctrine which I learned of
thee, taught me the contrary, I should have believed that she had been the true
God.

So he. If such were the beauty of this Virgin, while she lived yet a pilgrim
in this vale of tears, how great may we imagine the same to be, whilst she now
triu^pheth in the kingdom of heaven.

Affections of Love
YOu shall make a firm purpose to employ allwaies hereafter the powers of your
body and soul, in celebrating the praises of this so glorious and beautiful
Virgin speaking unto her in the words of Blosius, a most devout Client of hers.
[ in Prec. pijs endolog. 4.] Hail MARY, Virgin most honorable, Virgin more
clear then the sun brighter the^ the stars, more sweet the balsamum, more
ruddy then the Rose, whiter then the Lilly, far more gracious and comely then
can be imagined. Morouer you shall desire to use the tongues of all men, and
Angels; to play on all kind of instruments, that so with most pleasant harmony,
you might sound forth both in heaven and earth, honor and renown unto the
Name of MARY.

And for an example or pattern of this tender affection, you may take Fa.
Peter Faber of the Society of JESUS, and one of the Ten first Companions of S.
Ignatius, who being present at Spire, in a Church dedicared to the most sacred
Virgin, where he heard Euensong sung with as great pomp and celebrity as
possible could be, upon the eve of our B. Ladies Assumption to heaven, and
perceauing the Altar to be decked with flowers, shining with ca^dels, adorned
with many holy relics, the walls hu^g with Tapestry, the Quiers sounding with
variety of music, was so ravished with inward joy, that he began to wish
all happiness unto those, who had ra^ked and lighted the candels in such good
order, who had adorned the walls with Tapestry, had exposed the sacred relics,
had gathered the musicians together: In such affectuous manner did the signs
of a mind rejoicing in God, and exulting at the Honor of our Bles. Lady show
it self on every side. [In eius vita.]

The third point.
Of the internal Beauty of our Blessed Lady.
THat you may in some sort perceive how great the internal Beauty of our Bles.
Lady is in very deed, you shall consider first the beauty of a soul free from
sin, and indewed with virtues. So great, says S. Catharin of Siena, is the
beauty of a soul, as that if it could be seen with corporal eyes, there
would be none who would not most willingly give his life to conserve the same,
in so beautiful and amiable estate. [Surius in eius vita.]

For if all beauty, grace, comeliness, or amiablenesse whatsoever that shines
in any creature, as in the Sun, Moon, stars, Gold, Silver, Precious stones,
rich apparel, gorgeous Palaces, rare Gardens, curious Pictures, or in the
excellent feature and composition of body, that either is, was, or shall be:
If, I say, all the beauty that might be gathered out of all and every one of
these, should be amassed, and put together, to make one beauty, although it
seem it would be almost infinite and incomprehensible, yet would it not
parallel that beauty, which the least degree of Grace, (or of any virtue, that
comes with it) imparteth to a Soul.

Raise now your mind as high as you shall be able, and contemplate the beauty of
the B. Virgin her soul, endewed not only with one, two, or some few degrees of
grace, but with so many and those so great, as that some Deuines renowned as
well for piety, as learning, hold, that she had imparted to her alon, more
grace in this life, and glory in the other, the^ all the rest of the Saints
together; as we said before in the Preface.. 1.

Affections of Love.
YOu shall admire and praise these so great and singular perfections in the
most Bles. Virgin, saying: [with Proverb. 31. verse. 29.] Many daughters have
gathered and heaped up riches, yet have you exceeded the^ all. You surmount the
Patriarchs in Faith, the Prophets in knowledge, the Apostles in zeal, the
Martyrs in patience, in humility the Co^fessours, and in purity the Virgins.
You being decked and trimmed up with Jewels of inspeakable worth, draw the
heavenly Spirits to behold you. You are as it were a most clear Sun void
of Eclipse, a Sun displaying his beams from earth upon heaven, and from
heaven upon earth; and even a Sun dissoluing the very clouds of our
iniquities.

After this, you shall be sorry, that hitherto you have esteemed so lightly the
admirable sanctity of this divine Virgin and say; O if she with the sweet
pe^sill of her singular mercy would but with the first ground, or color of
divine grace paynt my soul forth unto her own likeness! O if she would cle^se
and adorn it, with such virtues, as might make it acceptable unto her self
and herdeare Son! Then do you aspire with burning desires after that true
beauty, which only deserves to be sought for, and this to no other end, but
only that you may love, and be beloved of the most glorious and B. Virgin.

The Speech or Colloquy.
YOu shall adioyne to these Contemplations, and Affections of Love, thanks
giving to the most B. Trinity, which has been pleased to set forth the most
pure Virgin with so many gifts, and rare virtues; which has enriched her, with
so great perfection, and made her amiable in the eyes of all: and therefore
shall you also honor Her, even with the whole powers of your soul and body,
provoking with great and most lively affection, all Creaturs to do the same.
Lastly, you shall beseech the most B. Virgin that she would shoot one only
dart of her Love into your soul, and grant you this only favor, that you may
live, and dye her most true, and Faithful Servant. Then say, Pater Noster, and
Aue Maria.

CHAP. II. The second contemplatio^ to stir up love in us toward the B.
Virgin, is the remembrance of her mercyes, and benefits to us.
YOur Preamble shall be the same, as in the former meditation.

THE FIRST POINT.
Of the greatness of the mercyes of our B Lady, by reasons he is the Mother of
God.
THe second incitement to love the most sacred virgin, after the co^templation
or her Perfectio^s and Beauty, is a pious consideration of her Mercy,
Liberality, and Care of us humane creatures. The which that in some sort you
may conceive how great it is, remember her to be the Mother of God, whose
bowels, doubtless were wholly turned into Mercy, since therein she bare, for
nine months together, Mercy it self. Whose heart, and breast were thoroughly
enkindled with the fire of charity, since she often embraced and fostered in
her bosom, Fire, and Charity it self. She well knew into what plight the love
of us lost Sinners had brought even God himself her dearest son: she heard
his words, in which every syllable, was an argument of his love to us. Lastly
she both saw and felt, how great the torments, griefs, and molestatio^s were
which he suffered, only for the redemption of makind. And is it possible that
she should not most vehemently thirst after our good, and salvation, who heard
on the Cross her dearest Son, though all his body were torn, and mangled
with whips and scourges, and his hands and feet pierced with hard nails, yet
notwithstanding (more mindful of us then of himself) cry out, I thirst? For
if this voice of our most beloved JESUS, understood by Faith, and distilled
into the ears of the heart by meditation, did move and incite those
Apostolical men, those Paul's, those Dominickes, those Francis'es those
Ignatius'es, those Xaucrius'es to so noble, and heroical attemps, for the
Salvation of their neighbors; what did it not work in the Bles. Virgin, who
in the stage of Mount Caluary, in that Scaffolde of divine love, heard, saw,
and even felt the wonderful love her Son bare to mankind?

Affections of love.
YOu shall proceed further, and begin to taste, and see how benign, and
sweet our B. Lady is. Then shall you congratulate with her, for her most
singular mercy, whereby she is made so dear and acceptable unto all persons;
yea you shall rejoice and co^gratulate with all mankind, that our Lord God has
chosen so amiable a Mother to himself, who also was to be unto us the Mother
of Mercy.

With the sweetness of this affection, was S. Bernard filled, when he spoke unto
the same B. Virgin in these words: We thy humble servants, o most glorious
Queen, rejoice and exult with thee for all the rest of thy Virtues, but for
this one we congratulate with our selves: we praise thy Virginity, we admire
thy Humility, we honor thy Modesty, but thy Mercy to the miserable sauoureth
more sweet: we embrace thy Mercy more lovingly, more often remember it, and
more frequently call upon it. [Serm. 4. de Assump.]

THE SECOND POINT.
Of the greatness, and extension of our B. Ladies Mercyes.
TO the end you may the better conceive the greatness of her Mercyes, you must
measure the^ after the manner of some corporeal substance, taking the length,
the breadth, the height, and the depth thereof. The Length may be said to be
that continuance of her most singular favors, for so many ages always to
endure, even to the end of the world, as S. Bernard notes, saying: The length
of her Pity will endure unto the last day, and never be wanting those who
shall call upon it. [Ibidem vbi sup.] Turn over the Annalls, and rehearse the
times of our Forefathers, and you shall find no age, no year, no month, no
week, no day, no hour, yea not so much as a moment in which have not
proceeded, as out of a continual fountain (and shall always pro^ceed as long
as there shall be any distressed person) rare, and notable signs of her
mercyes unto us.

The breadth, may be called the diverse and manifould extensio^s of her mercyes
to all. In so much as S. Bernard in the same place affirms, the Latitude of
her favors, to compass the whole world, and all the earth to be full of her
mercies. For if we consider the manifold benefits received from her, there will
be found no gift, neither corporal nor spiritual, which was not derived unto
us, chiefly by her means. In corporal; she helps women in child birth,
cures wou^des and diseases, defends from dangers, grants victories and
triumphs unto us. In spiritual; she procures us baptism, helps in the
defense of chastity, is present in desperation, admits religious Families
into the Church of God, and lastly never fails us in the hour of death.
Wherefore it seems to me that these so great mercies of this most sacred
Virgin, were not vnfittly expressed by that famous Cloud, which covered the
Children of Israel from the Aegiptia^s pursuing the^, which guided them
through dangerous wildernesses, both by day and night, which shaddowed them
from the great heat of the sun, and finally through which God did give
answers, and Oracles. [Exod. 13. and 14.]

Affections of love.
YOu shall desire exceedingly to see all creaturs most grateful to her; from
whose hands they have received so many benefits, and that they would keep well
registered in their minds a perpetual memory thereof, endeavoring alwais
according to their ability, by services of reverence and devotion to requite
them. O if you could by all your labors, afflictions, and toils obtain, that
even one of so many lukewarm worldlings would become fervent and studious in
the service of this most glorious Queen; how well should you then have bestowed
your pains, how worthy a service word it be of your labor? Wherefore at least
purpose most firmly allwais to defire and effect the same, endeavoring to
honor her which way soever you can, imitating heerin S. Bonauenture who
burning with this zeal, inuiteth all the just and holy men, who have
experienced the mercy of our B. Lady, to recioyce, co^gratulate, and render
millions of thanks giuings. [In Psalt.] Exult, and rejoice alyee just in the B.
Virgin, in righteousness of heart pra^ise her. Approach unto her, with reverence
and devotion. Let your heart be delighted in saluting of her. Offer sacrifices
of Praises unto her; and be inebriated with the sweetness that flows from her
breasts. For she will send through your hearts the beams of her piety, and
clarify you with the splend our of her mercyes.

THE THIRD POINT.
Of the heigh, and depth of our B. Ladies Mercies.
THe height of our B. Lagreat Pity is such, that it cannot possible be
contained in the strait bounds of this world, it penetrates even to the top of
the Heavens, where the most pleasant fruit thereof buddes forth, and from
whence she shoots on every side the bright beams of her love, and affection.
O that we did know, or could for one moment only, behold, with what kind of
joy, exultation, and pleasure she does recreate the City of God; sending forth
the streams of her sweetness as a most true Arch upon those happy cytizens of
the Celestial Jerusalem, whom she recreated with the ointments of her
singular mercies, being yet pilgrims in the desert of this world!

The depth of our B. Lamercies desce^deth even unto Hell it self. For this is
she, who has often withheld infinyte multitude of souls running head long
into that bottomless pit of damnation, by procuring grace of her beloved son
for the amendeme^t of their lives. This is she, who puts to flight the
roaring lions of hell, and breaks their forces, by helping us against them in
time of temptation. Lastly, this is she, who alwais refreshes with the sweet
showers of her consolations, the souls in Purgatory; as herself revealed to
S. Gerirude.

Affections of Love.
YOu shall aspire to the kingdom of heaven, that you muy with all the Angels,
and Saints lay down your heart at the feet of the B. Virgin, setting forth
her great mercyes, together with the mercies of God, and melting with oue, as
often as you shall hear repeated the sacted, and holy Name of MARY.

You shall also imitate this Mercy of our B. La. by praying, and offering such
works as may satisfy for the souls detained in Purgatory: requesting her
first that she will be pleased to free the poor souls from their pains, and
help them to heaven, making thereby her singular mercyes more known, and
apparent to all creatures, and increase the number of her Praysers.

And truly how grateful this is unto the B. Virg. she declared herself unto
John Ximenez, a Coadiutor of the Society of JESUS, who upon the feast of
All Saints, as he was praying before a picture of the Immaculate conception of
our B. Lady for the Souls in Purgatory, being thoroughly sorry to see the
Faithful living, labor no more for the delivering of the out of those
exceeding pains, heard a voice, crying: Ximenez, Ximenez, be mindful of the
souls in Purgatory: by which words he was so greatly moved, that until his
dying day, which was about 8. years after, he offered up all his devotions,
prayers, and mortifications, for no other end, but only for their delivery out
of torments. [In vita P. Baltazaris Aluarez. cap. 45.]

The Speech, or Colloquy.
IN the end of this Meditation you shall make your Colloquy thus. First you
shall give thanks to the B. Virgin both in your own, and all other creatures
names, for her exceeding great mercyes toward us. Secondly you shall lay down
your own heart before the heart of our B. Lady, which you may imagine to lie in
the midst of the whole world, wounded and pierced with darts of Love by the
most B. Trinity, by all Angels and Saints, by the Souls in heaven, Earth, and
Purgatory: For you are dearly beloved of all. O Mother of God, Mother of men,
Desire of the Eternal Hills, Glory of humane nature, and Delight of the world; I
desire to offer unto you a thousand, and a thousand times multiplied, all the
praises, congratulations and signs of joy, all the ditties songs and
Canticles that ever any Creature made in your honor, and with them I also
bequeath my self most straightly obliged unto you, by innumerable, and these
most just, titles.

This meditation and exercise will be most grateful to the B. Virgin, and very
meritorious also to your self, wherein as it were in a great Pomp of all
praises you carry the name of our B. Lady in triumph, as diverse Emperors did,
having obtained by her Intercession, Victories over their enemies; and in
particular John Comnenus Emperor of Constantinople, who after he had, by the
only aid of the B. Virgin the year 1123. vanquisshed, and put to flight the
proud Scithians, inuading Thracia with their puislant army, for thanksgiving
to this most glorious Queen, he caused a most sumptuous Chariot to be made,
drawn by four snow-white horses, wherein he did place a fair Statua of the
most glorious Mother of God, riding in triumph. The raines of the horses were
managed by the chief Peers of the Realm, the Chariot was guided by his own
Kinsmen, and he himself going on foot immediately before, carried a Cross in
his hands. [Nicetas in Annal.] Even so let the Bles. Virgin be honored, so let
her triumph over you, shining with no other pomp then the frequent Exercises
of love, and carried in no other Chariot, then in the seat of your own Heart.

CHAP. III. A Renewing of Lone, and Devotion toward the most B. Virgin, to be
made in the day time by a more brief Recollection.
IT is not sufficient for a devout Client of our B. Lady only to stir up
himself in the morning by some long meditation to the love of so noble a
Queen, unless he also labor to renew it hourly by other, though shorter
Considerations, all the day following. For which kind of recollection, it will
not be amiss to practice this Excrcise following, in imitatro^ whereof you may
form to yourselfe diverse others to the same fastion.

First therefore laying a side for a while, all other business, and turning to
your self, you shall be hold with the eyes of your understanding, Saint John
Evangelist with the most sacred Virgin placed at the foot of the Cross,
hearing these words of our Savior, (Behold thy Mother,) and fulfilling that
which is writie^ of him, (And from that very hour the disciple of JESUS
received her for his Mother.) Secondly, you shall incite your self to imitate
Saint John, and from that very hour, to renew your affection unto the Blessed
Virgen, insisting somewhat the longer upon these words; (And from this very
hour,) making seven meditations for the seven days of the week.

First therefore, begin with Sunday, and say secretly to your self: (From this
very hour) wherinso many with filial love and affection do wholly deuote,
offer, and consecrate themselves to this their most loving Mother, singing
forth her praises, in heaven and earth. Put your self into the midst of them
and it is not possible but that the ye of your cold deuotio^s will therewith be
thawed and dissolved. O Seraphicall Flames! o singular deuotio^s of all the
holy Saints and Angels unto the most Blessed Virgin! Where are you? Where are
you? Why will you not send forth at least one only spark of affection unto us,
who are so dull, so cold, so negligent in celebrating the praises of your most
glorious Queen!

On monday. (From this very hour.) Before which time percha^ce you have never
served the B. Virgin as it was fitting. Good god! Is it possible, that you have
as yet rendered nothing unto such a benefactrix! so great a Queen! having
received almost every moment so many and so great benefits! of so many hours
as you have lived, never to have spent one in the service of so dear a Mother!
Why are you so slow? what hinders you, that you do not even now presently begin
to offer, and consecrate unto her service, at the least, this very Hour?

One Twesday. (From this very hour.) Wherein so many do perish for want of
love and recourse unto the B. Virgin: thousands perhaps, and thousads in this
hour lying on their death beds, being by the just judgment of Almighty God,
to be thrown in the next minute into the bottomeles pit of Hell: whereas, had
they but once craved the aid of this glorious Virgin they should have reigned
and triumphed eternally in heaven. What a thing is it to be damned eternally?
to perish eternally? for all eternity? to lie scorching and broyling amongst the
blasphemous devils for all eternity? And how small a labor is it to call upon
MARY, to love and reverence her? See that you carefully perform this, even
now, that you may escape the other.

On Wednesday. (From this very hour.) In which on the one side three
powerful, and dreadful enemies, the Devil, World, and the Flesh do persecute
us, being naked and unarmed: On the other side, the divine Justice calls us
to receive punishment due unto our sins. We doubtless shall be ouerthrown with
the violence of temptation, we shall become a prey unto our enemies, unless
our B. Lady do assist us, unless she make intercession for us.

Whosoever therefore thou be, that read this, having thy conscience defiled
with the least mortal sin, consider and ponder, I pray thee, thy own estate
in this sort following: Thou being cast out of the protection of Almighty God,
in the which by grace thou did remain before, bereaved of all the fair
ornaments both of thy virtues and merits, liker to a beast then a man, and as
another Nabuchodonosor feeding with wild beasts, in the desert of sin: all
the Angels, but chiefly thy good Angel, bewailing thy calamity, whose counsels
had thou followed, thou would not now, unhappy wretch, lie groaning,
oppressed with the weight of misery. Thou live continually beaten with the
whipps of thy guilty conscience, all alone, forsaken of thy frieds; perhaps to
morrow, perhaps to day, yea perhaps this very moment to be cited to the
dreadful Tribunal of the severe judge, and can thou yet live in this estat?
Behold our Bles. Lady, the sanctuary, and refuge of sinners, offering freedom,
security, peace; why the do thou not fly unto her?

On Thursday. (From this very hour.) In which so many Idolatours, Heretics,
blasphemers, and sacrilegious Caytiffs, revile the Name of the B. Virgin, tread
her Images under their feet, detest to reverence her; and will thou through thy
slothfulnes omit to make recompense for their wrongs done unto her, by loving
her even this very hour, more fervently; by honoring and worshipping her more
devoutly, especially seeing both thy own, and the Angel keepers of these
Blasphemers do demand, and expect it at thy hands?

On friday. (From this very hour.) In which Christ himself does so much
desire that thou should reverence his Mother; doubtless thou would have
consented to Christ, had he in the midst of his cruel torments which he
suffered for thy sake, only demanded this comfort from thee, standing hard by
him, that thou would take from henceforth his Sacred and Holy Mother to be
the ine, yielding her due reverence: what he then asked of S. John, that did he
ask of thee, and this very hour yet asks; and do thou not consent? Will thou not now more truly reverence her, being demanded of such an one, at such
a time, and with such words, when thou ought of thine own accord much more
adore, and reverence her?

On Saturday. (From this very hour.) Wherein the B. Virgin most lovingly
remembers thee, occupied in thy daily affairs, she parlieth with thy Angel
Guardian, and with others, thy dear Patrons concerning thee: for thy sake she
interrupteth her B. Son otherways employed: she bestows on thee benefits
without number; and shall not such motherly care, so tender affection, so
constant charity once pierce thy heart with the most sweet dart of love, making
thy Soul even to languish and melt away with the desire of pleasing her?

Now, after that for some short space of time, you have daily considered one of
these points, you must first strive to stir up in your self a desire and
purpose all ways to serve the B. Virgin with moie fervor hereafter. Then say
either once Auc Maria, or else, this prayer ensuing. Holy Mary Mother of God,
and Virgin, I from this very hour, and for ever, do choose you for my
perpetual Patroness and Advocate, and take you for my Mother hence forth,
commending my self and all my affairs unto your protection: wherefore take and
receive me likewise into the number of your devout servants, and let me, though
unworthy be accounted your Son, be favorable unto me in all my actions, and
forsake me not, but assist me in the hour of death. Amen. How much this
Exexcise did avail a wicked Soldier, and notable Robber may worthily appear:
for that the devil did in humane shape for the space of fourteen whole years
wait on him, having leave by the permission of Allmighty God, to break his
neck that very day wherein he should first omit this his holy custom of
saluting the most Glorious Virgin. [Spec. Exempl. exempl. 6.] Yea how much the
whole world should have needed the shelter of this Exercise, when Christ our
Savior incensed with wrath and indignation against sinners, did brandish, and
with threatening shake three spears or Lances, one over the haughty necks of
the Proud, another against the greedy bowels of the Covetous, and the third
against those who followed the desirs of the flesh, ready to destroy them all,
had not our B. Lady made intercession for the world, at that very instant, and
brought forth her two most faithful servants S. Dominicke, and S. Francis, who
should reclay me mortal men from sin, and bring them to true repentance. [B.
Anton. 3. p. Hist. tit. 22. c. 3.]

CHAP. IV. An Exercise of the love, and trust we must have in our Blessed Lady,
when we demand any thing of her, especially in the time of Adversity.
FIrst you shall ponder how our Blessed Lady hearing these words of Christ,
(Behold thy Son. Joan. 19.) by which she was ordained the Mother of all men,
presently enlarged her bowels, and stretched abroad with her singular charity,
the arms of her mercyes to receive and embrace with a motherly affection, such
a company of children, and your self one amongst the rest.

2. You may demand, that she will now in heaven remember these words, and
that state of Christ, and account us her Sons, as he was, and as he
commanded her to do, by tendering us with the same care, as she did him
incarnate upon earth.

3. You shall unfold all your necessityes unto her, crauyng help with
confidence in her as from a most careful and most diligent Mother. Then add
thereto these 7. considerations.

1. Throw your self down, as it were an infant before her feet, with this,
or such like prayer. OB. Mary, my dearest Mother, behold me here, as an infant
not able to go, or any way to vp-hold my self; and though altogether unworthy
of your celestial help, yet doubt I not to crave, that you will be pleased to
shroude me, under the arms of your singular protection, as you did your
Blessed Infant, and Son JESUS.

2. Offer your self as an infant al naked saying. O B. Mary my most liberal
Mother, be hold me your poorest Child, an infa^t, bereft of all virtues,
exposed to the injuries of cold, and spiritual repidity; I do beseech you,
that as you did shroud sweet JESUS your Son in his swathing bands: so you
will be pleased to enwrappe me with the swathing clothes of virtue, that I may
so obtain a spiritual heat.

3. Offer your self as an infant hungry, seeking his Mothers breasts. O
Blessed Mary my dearest Mother, behold me your own Son, as an Infant even
starued and void of all food: I most humbly desire you, that as you did give
the sweet milk of your breasts unto your little Infant JESUS for his
nourishment: so you would give unto me the breasts of your love, and the milk
of devotion.

4. Offer your self as a Child, that is to be spiritually circumcised, and
offered unto God. O Blessed Mary, my most true Mother behold me your Son
altogether impure, and therefore afraid to approach unto the most holy
Eucharist, least instead of life I should take judgment and death; I humbly
crave, that as you did offer sweet JESUS the fountain of purity, newly
circumcised in the Temple of Jerusalem, unto the Eternal Father with a pair
of Turtle Doves, as a most grateful sacrifice: so you will also be pleased to
offer me your Son, unto the same Father, first cleansed by condign penance,
by your pious intercession, from all spot and filth of sin; and with the
sharp edge of mortification circumcised from all my inordinat passions,
adorned with humble simplicity and love of God, and united to his dearest Son
in the holy Eucharist.

5. Offer your self as one that is banished, driven out of his own country by
the fury of his Enemies. O my most potent Mother, behold me your own Sone,
whom the devil, the world, and the flesh labor by all means to destroy,
crying out for help unto you: I humbly beseech, that as you hiding most wisely
your little Son JESUS, conuayed him from Herod's fury, and carried him into
Egypt: so you will be pleased, in all chances, to guard and defend me with a
Motherly charity, against the force of all my most dreadful Enemies.

6. Offer your self as one wandering out of his way, and say. O my most wise
Mother, B. Mary, behold me your most unworthy Son, like a lost sheep, through
ignorance, straying from the right way: I humbly beseech you, that as you did
seek little JESUS being lost, and after three days found in the Temple, did
bring him back again, feeding, sustaining, and nourishing him even to the
thirtith year of his age: so you would be pleased to inquire after me your
strayd child almost lost in the error of imperfection, and bring me back to
the Fatherly house of divine grace and mercy, instructing and teaching me with
your wise precepts, in such sort that I may hereafter become perfect in all
virtue.

7. Offer your self as one being judged to death. O my most glorious Mother,
behold me your Son judged by the divine Justice to death, although uncertain
of the time of execution, yet howerly expecting and searing the same. Therefore
as you did accompany your Blessed Son JESUS with an unspeakable affection of
grief, condemned to death for our sakes, and were present with him dying upon
the Cross: In like manner I humbly beseech you, to assist me with present
aid, and not to forsake me in that last hour of my life. And as you received
into your bo some the body of your Son JESUS, taken down from the Cross: so
receive I humbly deseech you, O Blessed Mary, Mother of Grace, Mother of mercy,
into those your Motherly arms, my poor soul departing out of my body.

These seven consideratio^s may be divided into the seven days of the Week,
adding to the end of each one the hymn Aue Maris stella. And truly, how great
profit this kind of filial confidence brings unto our souls, may easily be
known by the example of S. Bernard, to whom for this cause only, our Blessed
Lady descended from heaven, giving unto him the milk of her own breasts. From
whence, as it is credible, he sucked that admirable sweetness, intermixed with
piety, which every line of his writings does savor off.

But what shall I say concerning Blessed Stanislaus Kostka a Nouice of the
society of JESUS, who even from his infancy nourished in his breast so tender an
affection unto our B. Lady, that he doubted not allwaies to call her his
Mother, and that with so great feeling of devotion, and in so loving a manner
that he always moved exceedingly the standers by to piety. Neither did our B.
Lady omit to show her Motherly affection many times unto him, but chiefly when
she placed her little Son JESUS in his bed, as he lay sick, and thereby
filled his Soul with comfort, and restored health unto his body, and departing
commanded him to enter into the Society of JESUS.

CHAP. V. That the often devout remembrance of our B. Lady, is an effect, and
sign of true love toward her.
WHere thy Treasure is, there is thy heart says the holy Scripture. Where love
is, there is often remembrance of the thing beloved. Hence it comes, that the
true Servants of our B. Lady, do recreate as it were their minds, with the
remembrance and contemplation of her; and when they see any Image of hers, then
do they show their devotion, by saluting her as present in the same, with
these, or the lik words. Hail Mother of beautiful love of fear, of
knowledge, of Holy Hope. Show your self to be a Mother etc. Or else they have
always in readiness, some other Iaculatory prayer.

Of which kind of devotion S. Philip Nereus had great store, as for example: O
Virgin Mary, Mother of God, pray unto JESUS for me. O Glorious Virgin, grant I
may always be mindful of you etc. Many more like unto these, had he gathered
together, to the number of the Beads of his Rosary, reciting them often instead
of his Pater Nosters, and Aue Mary's. What we have said heretofore of showing
reverence both to other things, and to the pictures of our Bles. Lady, may be
reduced unto this place: for the Reverence we ^^eated of there, is a filial
duty joined with love and proceeding from the same.

You may adioyne unto the former discourse that which is recounted in the life
of S. Dominicke, concerning the first Friars of that Order, who were allwaies
accustomed to place in their Ceis, our B. Ladies picture embracing her little
Son Jesus, with another of Christ hanging on the Cross; by the behoulding
whereof, their memory might be always styrred up, and their exterior senses
gather new spiritual force. [Vita S. Dom. lib. 6. c. 20.]

Moreover the lovers of our Blessed Lady, as if some sweet honey were distilled
into their bowels, do rejoice and exult as often as they hear her most Blessed
Name: which thing was most ordinary with B. Aloysius Gonzaga of the Society of
JESUS, who being yet but a child, conceived so great devotion toward our B.
Lady, that as often as he heard her Name, he seemed to be moved, and begin to
melt with a spiritual feeling of devotion. [In eius vita lib. 1. c 6.]

And for this cause does S. Bonauenture cry out not without reason: O Blessed
Mary, how famous is your Name! how can it choose but be famous, seeing it is
never pronounced without some very great profit unto the speaker? Let your
Bernard be witness of this, who says: O Great, O Godly, O Worthy Mary! You
cannot be so much as named, but you enkindle us with your love, nor thought
upon without comfort unto the minds of your Servants! You never do enter into
the gates of our pious affection, but you are accompanied with an heavenly
sweetness, engrafted in you by the divine hand.

Lastly, all who are truly vigilant in the service of this Glorious Virgin, do
hourly, when they hear the Clock strike, recite an Aue Maria in the honor
of the Angelical Salutation, and the Incarnation of the Son of God: for
which kind of devotion Pope Leo the tenth, and after him Paul the fifth, have
granted a thousand days pardon.

CHAP. VI. Another evident sign of Affection unto the B. Virgin, is, to speak
often of her.
THe tongue always speaks out of the abounda^ce of the heart: and whose
Soul the love of our Bles. Lady does once possess, his tongue does challenge
it, as its own. For your speeches, most B. Virgin, are sweet in the mouth of
them that love you, therefore they often use them, and with great contentement
hear the^ uttered by others and utter them unto such as will hear them. S.
Bernardine being yet a child was carried with such fervor to talk of Christ,
and his B. Mother, that his companions durst not bring in any other discourse
in his presence. [In eius vita.]

This also was observed in B. Stanislaus Kostka aforesaid, that although he
spoke frequently of the B. Virgin, yet he always inverted new, and those most
magnificent Names wherewith be did entitle her, and ever sought the highest
degrees to place her in; yea it seemed oftentimes grievous to him, that he
could not parallel the excellency of his Judgment with words, and that he
could not invent some higher places to allot her.

Neither would I have you imagine in this place, that our affection to the B.
Virgin must be only declared in private meetings; but also in public Sermons,
by setting forth her praises in great Assemblies, by refuting Heretical
blasphemies, and lastly by exorting Catholics to a more fervent reverence of
her.

This devotion was very profitable unto a certain Religious man, a pious and
Godly Preacher, who for the singular affection he bore unto the Bles. Virgin,
was wont to end all his Sermons with the rehearsal of some miracle of hers.
This man being at the point of death, was much strengthened by the assistance
and visible presence of our B. Lady, and ouerwelmed with incredible joy, and
iubily of heart, singing the Virgins praises, the devils storming in vain he
departed out of this life into heaven. [Spec. Exempl. d. 7. Exemp. 56.]

Nor can I omit the devotion of S. Francis Xauier to our Bles. Lady, which he
showed in teaching the Christian doctrine in the Indies; for in explicating the
Articles of the Creed, and the Ten commaundemets, he used this method, that in
the end of Every Precept, he would first crave, by reciting the Pater Noster
our Saviors help; but afterward he caused all the assembly to sing with a loud
voice these words: Holy Mary Mother of God, obtain for us grace of thy B.
Son JESUS Christ, always to observe this precept. And not being content
with this admirabe devotion, he always did end his Catechism with a Salve
Regina, whereby the whole company craved the assistance of the B. Virgin. [lib.
1. epist. Xauer. ep. 5.]

Out of the same fountain of love toward our Bles. Lady springs their
piety, who sing forth her praises and celebrate them as well by songs and
dytties as by other their labors. And truly all posterity may take for a
parterne in this kind S. Casimirus, Son to the King of Polonia. This man
being very much addicted unto the B. Virgin, daily on his knees saluted her
with most Excellent and learned verses, made by himself, wherein were contained
all the mysteryes of Christ incarnate. [Bellar. de offic. c. 3. in eius. vita.]

CHAP. VII. Another euidente sign of Love toward our B. Lady is, to honor,
and reverence her Friends.
FIrst together with our Bles. Lady, we ought to love, reverence and honor S.
Joseph, whom our B. Lady esteemed as her most chaste and dearest Spouse, as
most careful in the education of Christ our Savior; and defireth much that he
be beloved, and honored by those who serve her. There is extant a little devout
Office unto this holy Saint Joseph, as also many other devotions, which do
require a longer discourse. After him, by order of good consequence, do follow
S. Ioachim, and S. Anne, our B. Ladies Father and Mother; to whom there are
many goodly prayers used by holy Church, us witnesses of the affection and
reverence our Ancestors did bear unto them.

To conclude, all other Saints, who for their singular devotion have been
dear unto our Bles. Lady, ought also to be dear unto us; and all who love and
honor her, ought likewise to be beloved and honored of us* Of the honor
which we are to give to the friends of our B. Lady, these shall be the signs,
and arguments.

1. Among the other praises of the Saints, to place this as most singular and
excellent, that they have been great lovers of our B. Lady.

2. To honor these Saints with great affection, beseeching them, that they out
of the furnace of their love to our B. Lady, would send one only spark
thereof into our hearts.

3. To make great esteem, and to love, and imitate the piety toward our B.
Lady of such as we live withal, and willingly to converse with them, chiefly
and principally for this cause.

4. To pray often for the devout Clients of the B. Virgin, and with a great
readiness of mind to be willing to help them, as far as lies in our power, when
they stand in need of us.

To these kind of charitable Offices, we are incited by the example of the
Angels themselves, who love most intierely the friends of our Bles. Lady,
indeauoring to cherish them with their presence, help, and consolation:
whereof let this example of S. Catharine of Siena give us testimony, who even
about the fifth year of her age, as often as she either went up, or came down
the stairs of her Fathers house, did kneel at Every step, and recited an Aue
Maria; in which devotion she was often lifted up above the ground by the hands
of Angels. [B. Ant. 3. p. Hist. tit. 25. c. 14.]

Neither is this a wonder: for that Virginity is a virtue, which clay meth
affinity with the celestial Spirits, who do admire, love, praise, uphold, and
promote the beautiful steps of the Virgins daughter (that is, of the Soul,
tending to Perfection) in ornaments of reverence, and love toward the B.
Virgin. And who can consider this affection of the Blessed Spirits? Who can
behold these dutiful offices without honoring the Virgin Mary, and loving her
followers?

Let us add unto these, another fair spectacle, no less pleasant then pious.
S. Mary of Oegnta was accustomed every year to go in pilgrimage unto our
Ladies Church at Oegnia, situated about some two miles from her house, and
although it was in the very depth of cold winter, yet never was she in any case
slack to perform that excellent work, even on her bare feet. For the
internal fervor, and heat of her devotion toward Christ and his B. Mother,
easily banished all the external cold. Through the sweet feeling of devotion,
the used to shed tears of comfort, wherewith her face and garments were largly
bedewed. She breathed forth hot flames of fervent aspirations, crying out for
flowers, to underprop her, even languishing with love. The Angels came
straight to aid her; some of them holding her up by the hands as she went;
others that she might not go astray in a blind, crooked, and unknown way,
carried before her a heavenly light: others when it was needful, were ready to
cover her head, and to defend her from the snow and rain; yea, and brought her
home safe again from the injury of air, wind, and tempests. [Sur. in eius
vita.] O what a spectacle was this to behold! How is the fervor of a loving
Soul, even in this life, recompensed with the services of so many Angels! O
heart! O tongue! O affection! O words! Go sigh, run, fly, unto our sweetest
Loves of JESUS and MARY.

OUR B. LADIES LITTLE GARDEN.
THE THIRD BED, flourishing with Lillyes.
Wherein are contained Exercises proper for those, who like unto Lillies,
shining in purity of life, and sincerity of affection, do after a peculiar
manner consecrate themselves unto our B. Lady.

CHAP. I. How profitable a thing it is, to commit our selves in a special and
peculiar manner unto the protection of our B Lady.
MANY things are wont to be offered up unto the Mother of God, and committed
unto herpeculiar protection and custody, either by way of consecration,
oblation, devotion, or the like. And to speak of some in particular, how many
Kingdoms, Provinces, Cities, and other such like places do we see in these
our days, to be sollemnly devoted and consecrated unto the protection of the
B. Virgin? And how many also have we both heard, and read off in former ages to
have been offered and dedicated unto her, with no less good success then
clear testimony of that ancient piety?

But to omit others, Rupertus first Bishop of Worms in Germany providing for
the eternal Weal of his Country, dedicated all the Dukedom of Bauaria unto
the Mother of God: the fruits of which oblatio^ (to say nothing of times past)
the present estate thereof now so much flourishing, to the great good of the
whole Christian Commonwelth, does sufficiently testify.

Constantinople, whose first foundation was laid under the protection of the B.
Virgin, was in former times so famous for the multitude of Churches built in
her honor, and celebrated whith so fervent devotion, that it was commonly
called The Parthenian City, that is, dedicated unto the Virgin. Whiles this
title remained, it never left rising until it arrived to that height of
prosperity, that riches, chiualry, honors, victory, peace, and abundance of
all things might seem to have fixed their feate with the B. Virgin in her
Virginal City. But after that the impiety of Image-breakers, and the fury of
Scismatikes had extinguished that ancient reverence of the Mother of God, all
the glory of that Name, and Empire soon vanished away. And the Moon, so often
there triumphant, fled from Constantinoples Banners, to the Mohammedan flagges,
eclipsed of her ancient beauty, deprived of her former glory.

It is also an ordinary devotion of Mothers, especially in childbirth, to give
and dedicate unto the Virgin Mother, the fruit of their womb, for the
obtaining of a prosperous delivery; of which piety Margaret of Austria late
Queen of Spain, wife to Philip the third, left unto posterity a very singular
example. For when she was near the time of her travail, both she her self did
with peculiar devotion pray unto the B. Virgin, and also caused her whole
Family to implore her assistance, and powerful hand in time of her labor.

Amongst other particulers she commanded nine days prayer with general
processions to be made unto diverse Churches of our B. La. Which nine Masses
were solemnly song in her honor. The First of the Immaculate Conception of our
B. Lady: the second of her Nativity: the third of her Presentation: the the
fourth of her Annu^ciation: the fifth of her Visitation: the sixth of the
Expectation of her Childbirth: the seventh of her Purification: the eight of
her Assumption: and the ninth of the feast of our B. Lady ad Niues. And in time
of her Labor, was song the office of the Childbirth of the B. Virgin, and
Nativity of Christ our Lord.

The Queen having thus prepared her self, was very happily delivered of a
Son, and not long after having caused the infant to be carried with a solemn
Procession to a Church of our B. Lady, named, of S. Florentius, there standing
before her miraculous Image, she devoutly presented him unto the B. Virgin and
gained a copious blessing both for her self and her posterity, as experience
at this present does, and shall in future ages witness to postetity both at
home and abroad, to the joy of the whole Church. [In hist. vitae and mortis
eius p. 2. c. 10. and 11.]

But let us pass unto that oblation, which in the ensuing Chapters we are to
treat of. It is evident, that those who in peculiar manner do oblige
themselves to be the Clients of our B. Lady, are also in a peculiar manner
beloved of her, and do experience her present succor in all troubles and
difficulties. Witness hereof is S. Hermanus whose most ardent affection toward
the Mother of God, was carried away with so violent a stream of divine love,
that he had no mind either to think or speak of any other thing, then of God
and his B. Mother. And his Love at length came to so high a pitch, that one
night as he was in prayer, being presented by the hands of Angels before the
face of the Mother of God, by their advise he gave himself to be her Spouse
(after which affiance he took the name of Joseph) and shortly after
experienced what wonderful care his most beloved Espouse the V. Mary had of
him, not only in matters of great moment, but also in every occasion, were it
never so little. As for example: Once when in his sickness he had been let
blood, he was directed by our B. Lady how he was to lie in his Bed the next
night, so that the vein which had been newly closed up, might not again be
opened. Another time as he was going to vifit a Cloister of Nuns, the B. Virgin
a little before he arrived there, gave them warning to entertayne him with all
courtesy and kind nesse. Many more such like examples there be of the love and
care that the Mother of God showed toward him, which may be read more at large
in the history of his life, in Surius the 5. April.

CHAP. II. The first way how to consecrate our selves with peculiar reverence
to our B. Lady, common to all sorts of people.
EAuing first made your Confe^ssion, and received the holy Communion upon some
solemn Feast day, and if it may be, on some Feast of the B. Virgin, you shall
place her Image in your Oratory, or in some other decent place of your chamber,
and with a full and true intention, co^secrating your self, and all that you
have for ever, unto the Mother of God, you shall say this prayer on your knees.

O most B. Virgin Mary, Mother of God, I N. N. a poor and wretched sinner,
though in all respects most unworthy to be numbered amongste the meanest of your
servants, yet trusting in your exceeding great piety and mercy, and moved with
a great desire of serving and honoring you, do here in presence of the whole
Court of Heaven, choose you this day for my peculiar Lady, Patroness, and
Mother: and I do most firmly purpose, and promise henceforth to obey and
serve you faithfully, and also to procure with my whole power, that others may
do the like. I do therefore most humbly beseech you, O most merciful Mother, by
the most precious blood which your sweet Son JESUS has shed for our sake that
you would vouchsafe to admit me into the number of your Clients, and to receive
me for your perpetual servant, to be present with me in all my affairs, and
obtain for me grace of your most dearly beloved Son, that I may so behave
my self in all my thoughts, words, and works, as never to do any thing that
may be displeasing to his eyes, or yours, and lastly to be mindful of me, in
the hour of my death. Amen.

From henceforth you shall imagine your Chamber to be a Chapel of the B.
Virgin, whom you shall reverence in her Image as if she were present with you,
not suffering any thing to remain therein which may offend her sacred eyes.

In the morning as soon as you are risen, as also at night before you lie
down to sleep, with low and humble reverence you shall ask her blessing,
like as good children in our country are wont carefully to do their Parents
every morning and night, saying, The Virgin Mary, with her benign Son,
bless us.

After that you be apparelled kneeling down before the said Image, then shall
you say this prayer following. O Blessed Mary, my good Lady, I recommend my
self unto your Blessed protection, and singular custody, casting my self into
the bosom of your mercy, both this day, and every day, and in the hour of my
death. I commend also unto you my Soul and Body. In you do I place all my
hope, and consolation. To you do I commend all my distresses and miseries, my
life and the final conclusion thereof: that by your most holy intercession and
merits, all my works may be directed and disposed, according to your will, and
the will of your most Blessed Son. Amen.

Always at your going out, and coming into your chamber, see you salute the
said Image, imitating heerin the Courtiers who in their passing to and fro, do
never omit to make reverence unto their Prince.

You ought not to undertake any thing of moment, having not first acquainted
the B Virgin Mother therwich. You shall seriously also comme^d unto her, both
your private and public affairs; and if any thing do occur of greater
importance; write the same briefly in a paper, and lay it at the feet of the
Image. Finally in all your temptations and difficulties you shall have recourse
unto her, as to a merciful, and tender-harted Mother.

Examples in Confirmation of such things, as have been said.
THe holy Mother S. Teresa does approve, and much commend this practice and
devotion, who being made Prioresse of a certain Monastery, at her very first
entrance into her Office, she consecrated both her self, and the whole
monastery to our B. Lady, placing a fair Image in the Chair where the
Prioresse was to sit, and offering her the keys of the Monastery together with
the go^uerment thereof as Superior, whose place she was only to supply. Which
oblatio the Mother of God, not long afterward showed to be most grateful unto
her, For upon the Eve of S. Sebastian, our B. Lady put her self visibly in
place of the picture, and declared that she took indeed upon her the gouerme^t
of the house. [ In eius vita lib. 3. c. 1.]

It is also recounted by those who have been conversant with Father Francis
Suarez, a man famous for holiness and learning, that he was accustomed to confer
with the B. Virgin concerning all doubts, which occurred in his studies, from
whom he received often the solution of many hard and difficile Questions; and
he has been also seen to kneel down, and give her thanks for the same
upon his knees.

To these I add a story which Boniface relates out of Alanus and Albertus.
[l. 4. c. 9. hist. Virginalis.] A certain Religious Virgin, named Ioane,
living in a Monastery somewhat dissolute and disordered, upon a time (according
to her accustomed manner) being very attentive in saying of her beads, she saw
a letter fall down from heaven before her, with this superscription: Mary
Mother of God, to her daughter Ioane health. The contents of the letter were
these. My most dear Daughter, Persevere consta^tly in saying my Rosary
always as thou have begun; fly from men, and shun all conversation with them
which may not profit thee to the attaining true virtue and good of thy
conscience: Beware of sloth, dissolutenes, and idleness; remove far from thee
dainty meats, and curiosity of apparel, and purge thy Cell of some things
which are not decent for a Religious woman, and in place thereof put the Images
of thy Savior Christ, and his Saints, and other holy things, whose protection
and defense shall preserve thee from all dangers. If thou give ear unto me,
and perform with due obedience those things which I shall prescribe unto thee,
thou shall obtain favor of my beloved Son, and I will make intercession to
him for thee in all thy necessities.

The hand maid of Christ having read his Letter, was very much encouraged to
set forward the honor of our B. Lady with all possible devotion, and with all
diligence put in execution what was commanded her. Not long after a certain
holy Abbot coming thither to reform the said Monastery, according to their
former discipline and religious Institute, as he was praying devoutly for that
end, he saw the cell of the before named Virgin, shining and sending forth
radiant beams with an incredible luster, and in the middle of that light, the
Queen of heaven environed with a troop of glorious Angels in whose company
Ioane the Virgin was devoutly praying. In the mean time, at the Cell door
without a great multitude of devils stood raging, and to make themselves more
terrible put on the shape of diverse kind of ugly and monstrous beasts: but
being all shamefully put to flight by the powerful command of the B. Virgin,
they retired back to the chambers of the other foolish Virgins, dispersing
themselves through the whole Monastery, some to one Cell, some to another. The
holy Abbot was much astonisshed at this vision: but afterward when he had
understood of the singular zeal, and devotion which Ioane the Virgin had
toward our B. Lady, he caused immediately beads to be provided and
distributed to the other Nuns, exhorting them constantly to the pious use
thereof. Which devotion when they had seriously embraced, not long after they
all voluntarily submitted themselves to the Rule of their Order.

From hence you may learn, what the Mother of God does expect of those (every
one according to their profession) who have consecrated themselves unto her,
according to the aforsayd manner; and how great accoumpt she makes of that
devotion, and with what a bountiful hand she rewards it. Therefore not
without cause S. Bonauenture so much commended this kind of devotion toward
the Mother of God in an Epistle of his which is entitled, Of 25. Memorials,
where amongst other devotions, how to lead a good like, in the 13. Memorial he
has these words: Alwais have great reverence and tenderness of affection unto
the glorious Queen Mother of our Lord, and have recourse unto her as unto a
most safe refuge, in all your necessities, dangers and troubles craving the
defense of her perfection; and taking her for your Advocate: make known your
petition and sui^e unto her, with all devotion and confidence; because she is
the Mother of mercy, and therefore you must endeavor to show singular and
special reverence toward her.

CHAP. III. The second way of dedicating our selves unto the B. Virgin, by
entering into her Sodality.
TO be one of the Sodality of our B. Lady is nothing else, but openly to
profess our selves in peculiar manner to be her servant, and before witness to
commit our selves, and all that we have unto her protection. How great the
merit, and profit of this kind of devotion is, as also the duties and exercises
toward our B. Lady thereto belonging, remain sufficiently declared by that
which diverse have put out in print about the same. Here will I only commend
three things very necessary for the conservation, and increase of that devotion
which all ought to have at their first entrance into the Sodality.

1. That every morning as soon as they are up and ready, or if they please
when they are ready to hear mass, they say the prayer of the Sodality,
endeavoring to pronounce it with the same intention, desire, and purpose to
serve our B. Lady, and to keep the rules prescribed of the Sodality, as they
did, when first they were admitted into that Congreation.

2. Also, that in the morning they make choice of some one fault or
imperfection which themselves are subject unto, and make a firm purpose to
abstain from the same that day: and to offer up some good work in honor of
the Mother of God.

3. That at night they examen themselves concerning these two points: first
about the Prayer which they recited in the morning, especially these words [J
do fully determine, and purpose, that I will never leave thee, nor permit any
thing to be done against thy Honor by any of those, who are under my charge.]
whether, I say, they have fulfilled these words of their devout and propense
affection toward the honor of the B. Virgin. Secondly, whether they gave
abstayned from that fault or imperfection aforesaid, and performed that good
work which in the morning they purposed to do.

Whosoever does earnestly endeavor to put these things in execution, he shall
infallibly find that tender affection of the B. Virgin toward him, which she
showed unto a certain dissolute, and negligent youth, being for this one
respect only worthy of commendation, that he had always great care of his
Chastity. This young man after that he had prodigally spent his patrimony, at
length by persuasion of an Uncle of his who had heretofore used all means in
vain to bring him to better life, did determine for a remedy, and redress of
all his miseryes to recite every day for the space of one year, a pair of
beads, or the third part of the Rosary of our Lady. Neither was this done
without profit: For now he had already shaken of most of the ill company he was
wont to keep, and he also abstained from committing any grievous sins.
Wherefore at the beginning of the 2. year he doubled his devotions, and daily
said two pair of beads; and because the good success which he had therein
raised up his heart to a more firm and steadfast hope of obtaining greater
matters, therefore the third year he said every day a whole Rosary, with no
less co^stancy then true devotion. To conclude, having performed his third
years task, and now become another man, of grave, modest, and mature
conversation, hedid so win the hearts of all, but especially of his Uncle,
that he procured him an honest and sufficient marriage. But see what happened
upon the very wedding day, in the midst of the Feast. The yo^g man on the
sudaine calling to mind, how that being hindered by other affairs he had not
yet offered up that day his accustomed prayers to the B. Virgin, faining some
other excuse, rose from the table, and shutting himself up in his chamber,
fell on his knees, and recyted his Rosary with no less feeling then fruit of
his devotion. For he had no sooner ended, but the B. Virgin far brighter then
the sun, vouchsafed him avisible sight of her glory, and showed him 3.
garments which she carried fastened to her own robe; one before her, and one
upon either side, and then said unto him: Behold thy salutations here written
in golden letters, with which thou have diligently honored me by recyting my
Rosary. Thou shall receive a reward for the same especially for keeping thy
Chastity entire, by being made partaker of the marriage of the lamb, and that
within the space of 3. days. Neither did his devotion, nor the merciful
promise of the B. Virgin fail him, for after 3. days he dyed to the world,
and began to live in heaven. [Cantip. l. 2. Apum. c. 29.]

It much imports us the^ to offer daily to the B. Virgin, with a firm and
constant resolution, some particular and determinate devotion, and likewise to
call our selves to an account thereof every day, but especially at night, that
if we find we have deferred it until then, yet may we at least correct and
recompense our negligence by penance, and if it may possibly be done, even
then to perform our promise.

CHAP. IV. The third way to deuote our selves unto the B. Virgin, by entering
into Religion.
FOr as much as every Religious Order may justly be called, the Family of our
B. Lady, be cause they are in a special manner fouded under her protection and
defense; it is evident that whsoeuer imbraceth a Religious life, does in the
very same act, peculiarly deuote himself to the B. Virgin, and is espoused
unto her with the ring of his Vows, especially the vow of Chastity. And this
is made manifest by the example of S. Robert, Founder of the Order of
Cistercians, to whose mother, named Engardis, being great with child of him,
the B. Virgin appeared, with a goulden ring in her hand, and said thus unto
her: Engardis, I will have thy Son which thou bear espoused unto me with
this ring. Engardis when she awaked, with great joy took notice of what she
had seen. Neither was the event of the thing any other ways approved, then
by the entrance of her Son Robert into Religion, which under the name of
espousing was foretold by the Mother of God, even as she signified the Vow of
Chastity by the ring of gold. [Plat. de bono stat. Relig. lib. 1. cap. 34.

I omit innumerable other examples, whereby it is evident, that all Religious
Families be under the protection of our Bles. Lady. There is just cause [sayth
Platus ibid.] that all Religious persons should extraordinarily rejoice and
congratulate amongst themselves, that they have for their Queen and Patroness
upon earth her, whom all the Saints in Heaven do adore. For what ca^ be
wanting unto him who is sustained by such a Virgin, seeing that no evil is to
be feared which may not easily be auerted by her power, no good to be desired,
which cannot easily by her favor and intercession be obtained. Therefore all
Religious men and women, ought to apply themselves wholly to the service of the
Mother of God, in whose Family they live, as her househould servants, or rather
as her children.

Let them have certain peculiar Exercises, conformable to their Rule and
Institute, by the daily practice whereof they may honor our B. Lady.

Let them endeavor to increase, and advance the love and reverence of the B.
Virgin, and exhort them to the pious use of reciting her Rosary, and devout
celebration of her Festival days, by frequenting the holy Sacraments, and
other such devout Exercises.

Finally, and especially, let them be mindful daily to give hearty thanks,
and be very grateful unto the B. Virgin Mother, for the singular benefit of
their vocation to Religion.

An Exercise proper to Religious Persons, by which they give thanks to the B.
Virgin for the benefits received from her, and most especially for the benefit
of their Vocation to Religion.
Having by way of preamble demanded aid of the holy Ghost, you shall place
your self in presence of the B. Virgin, as if you did behold her environed
with the Quiers of Angels and all the Saints of your own Order, looking upon
you with a mild and merciful countenance:

And, 1. Consider, and call to mind how many benefits you have hitherto
received of the Mother of God; and then divide them into two parts, whereof one
may co^taine the benefits bestowed upon you before your Vocation; the other, of
your Vocation, and other benefits which you have received after your entrance
into Religion. And this Motherly mercy of the B. Virgin toward you was figured
by Rebecca, Jacobs Mother, who showed two principal favors to her Son from
which as from two fountaynes, all his felicity did flow. For first with great
solicitude she procured for him the benedictio^ of his Father Jsaac. Secondly
she secretly conveyed him out of his own Country into Mesopotamia to declin
the rage of his brother Esau, where he married a wife, and so became very rich.
Even so the B. Virgin like another Rebecca, a most loving Mother, has obtained
for you of the Eternal Father a benediction, and other singular favors, and
above all the grace of your Vocation. She has procured also that you departing
out of your Country, and forsaking all your friends, should enter into Religion
as into the land of Promise, flowing with milk, and honey of consolation, and
merits.

2. You shall ponder and weigh all these benefits both according to their
multitude, being indeed innumerable, and according to their greatness. And
amongst the rest, consider how great that is, that by this your vocation into
Religion, procured by the Virgin Mother, you are made a member of that
Congregation, in which she is served with so much Honor and Reverence. Out of
which it proceeds, that all the worship and devotion which is performed
toward the Blessed Virgin throughout your whole Order, either by themselves or
by their means, is as much attributed unto you as if you performed it your
self. Therefore you may truly say, I am partaker (O Lady) of the merits of all
those who do fear, love and honor you, either in this Religions Order, or out
of it, by their labor and industry.

3. By these Considerations you shall stir up in your self the affections
following. You shall humble and cast your self down at the feet of the B.
Virgin MARY, houlding your self most unworthy of so great love, and favor. You
shall give her thanks with as great fervor of devotion as possible you can,
for her Motherly care over you, and you shall inuit all creatures to accompany
you in thanksgiving; imitating young infants who do most willingly acknowledge
themselves beholding to their Mother or Nurse, for all they have received. But
how may you recompense so great a Benefactresse? Assuredly you must purpose to
requite her with a filial affection, and for ever to do her such service, as
the same requires. To this S. Beruard exhorts us, saying [sermone de
Natiuitate B. Mariae.] Let us adore the B. Virgin from the very bottom of our
heart, with the most inward affections and desirs as we can possibly. For such
is the will of him, who will have us to receive all, by the means of the B.
Virgin Mary; she in all things, and by all means providing for the miserable:
She strengthens our hope; she puts diffidence to flight; she erecteth our
pusillanimity.

It will he also very profitable to the increasing of this gratitude and love
toward the B. V. to essay, and take as it were a taste by way of meditation, of
those most tender affections which diverse Religious Orders have had toward
that sacred Queen, and in particular the Order of S. Dominicke, who, having
understood that they were seen by their own Founder S. Dominicke, and by a
certain holy Woman, covered under the mantle of the Bles. Virgin, and embraced
with the Virginal arms of her love and peculiar affections, so great was
their devotion toward her ever after, so enflamed their desire to love and
serve her, so devout and fervent were the prayers they continually so^ge unto
her, so exceeding the confidence and trust they always had in her protection,
so greedy and insatiable the contemplation of her Virtues and Excellencyes,
that no humane tongue would be able to express. [Jn vita S. Dominick. l. 2. c.
12. and l. 5. c. 6.]

The like vision happened unto Father Martinus Gutterus a Spanyard, and a very
holy Religious man of the Society of JESUS, who as he was in fervent prayer,
saw the B. Virgin shining with unspeakable beauty, having her Robe spread all
abroad, and under the same the whole Society contained, which she embraced with
a motherly affection, and shrouded under the wings of her most tender love and
protection. [Hier. Platus l. 1. de bon. stat. Relig.]

OUR B. LADIES LITTLE GARDEN.
THE FOVRTH BED, adorned with Iacynths.
Wherein are contained certain Services and Duties toward the B. Virgin, as
if they were so many exercises of a heavenly life and conversation: of which
the Iacynth is a token.

CHAP. I. Of the AVE MARIA or Angelical Salutation.
BEFORE all other, this Salutation is most grateful to the B. Virgin, as her
self declared to Saint Maude, who being in some anxiety of mind, what kind of
service she might exhibit as most acceptable unto her, she beheld our Blessed
Lady bearing in her breast the salutation of the Angel Gabriell, written in
golden letters, and withal heard these words: Higher then this Salutation none
can ever arrive; nor ca^ any one more sweetly salute me, then with that accent
of [HAYLE] with which God the Father was pleased to salute me, freeing me by
his Omnipotency from all trespass, and curse of sin. The Son of God with
his divine Wisdom has also so thoroughly enlightened me, that with the Name of
[MARY] as with a most bright and glittering Star, both heaven and earth do
shine. The Holy Ghost by penetrating me with his divine sweetness, has filled
me so [FVLL OF GRACE] that every one who seeks grace, may by my means soon
obtain the same. By these words [OVR LORD IS WITH THEE] are declared that
unspeakable union and operation, which the Blessed Trinity did perfect in me,
when he conjoined the Substance of my flesh to the divine Nature in one person;
so as God became Man, and man God; I being in that hour made worthy to taste
the joy and sweetness which no other Creature could experience. And by the
words [BLESSED ART THOU AMONGST VVOMEN] every Creature with admiration does
acknowledge and profess me to be Blessed, and exalted above all. By the words
[BLESSED IS THE FRVITE OF THY VVOMBE] the most excellent fruit of my womb
which has sanctified every Creature, is blessed and extolled, for all
eternity. [In vita S. Mechtildis.] This holy Virgin of Christ afterward in
saying her Beads, was always accustomed to add three Aue Mary's, for the
obtaining of a happy death, of which we have spoken before in the first Bed,
and 5. Chapter.

It will be also very profitable at all hours of the day and night, when the
Clock strikes to say once the Angelical Salutation: to which devotion
certain Indulgences are granted by the holy Sea Apostolic, as we have said
before in the second Bed and V. Chater. The custom likewise is devoutly to be
kept, to recite thrice a day, morning, noone, and night three Aue Mary's,
according to so many tolles of the bell, adding these usual Versicles before
every Aue [The Angel of our Lord. Behold the Handmayd. And the Word became
flesh.] in honor of the principal Mysteries, to wit, The Resurrection, the
Passion, and Incarnation of our Lord.

CHAP. II. Of the Crown, or Rosary of the B. Virgin, and of the first manner
of saying the same.
THat manner of saluting the B. Virgin is very ancient and famous, which
consists of an hundred and fifty Aue Mary's, and one Pater Noster before
every decade. Neither is that less in use, which consists of 63. Aue Mary's,
according to the number of years, which our Blessed Lady is thought to have
lived on earth, adjoining to every Decade, one Pater Noster. The first of these
manners, is called the Rosary, both because it is knit together with mystical
Roses, as S. Dominicke the Author thereof, is recounted to have so received the
same. The latter is termed, the Crown, wherewith, as with a garland, the B.
Virgin showed her self adorned, as afterward we shall declare Chap. 4. And the
Religious Order of the Minimes has greatly propagated the same: although the
Crown it self is usually every where called by the name of Rosary, in regard
whereof we will use these Names confusedly, without any regard of distinction.

But the thing of greatest profit and consolation is, to recite daily, and
offer unto our B. Lady the Rosary or Crown; the which oblation, that it may be
done with more fruit and gust, it is expedient to season the same with diverse
considerations, which are found every where, in devout books: and here we
will propound three only, as it were fountains of the rest.

The first manner of saying the Rosary, is that, wherein chiefest regard is had
of attentio^ to the words, with some application of the sense to the same;
which is very easy, if with discretion the Rules following be observed.

1. Before you begin, recollect your self a little, marking with attention how
Noble and Angelical an Office you are about to perform, and for what intent.

2. Blessing your self with the sign of the cross, begin, with saying one of
these Versicles, or the like. Now let my lips sing, and display. The Blessed
Virgins praise, this day. Grant me, O Virgin, thee to praise: Againsts thy
foes, give strenght always.


Then recite the first Decade or Ten, pondering the Consideration next ensuyng.
This being duly performed, say: O mother of God, and Virgin Mary, let all the
holy Angels ten thousand times, extol and bless you. The second decade with
the Consideration being also ended, say: Let all holy Patriarchs and Prophets
twenty thousand times extol and bless you. After the third say: Let all holy
Apostles thirty thousand times etc. After the fourth: Let all holy Martyrs
forty thousand times etc. After the fifth: Let all holy Confessors fifty
thousand times etc. After the sixth: Let all holy Virgins, widows, and
others, bless and extol you a hundred thousand times.

Then reciting the three last Aue Mary's; in the first you shall salute the B.
Virgin Mary, daughter of the Eternal Father, demanding the virtue of Faith,
and offering your body to her perpetual service. In the second you shall
salute the B. Virgin Mary, Mother of the Son of God, asking the virtue of
Hope, and offering your soul unto her. In the third you shall salute the
Virgin Mary, Spouse of the Holy Ghost, craving the virtue of Charity, and
offering unto her whatsoever you have, or by any just title can lay claim
unto: and after this conclude by saying the Creed devoutly.

When you have thus ended the Rosary, you may recite the Hymn Aue Maris
stella, with the versicle, and Prayer. Diverse do add the Psalm De profundis
for the dead; Or, Laudate Dominum omnes gentes etc. These aduertisemens may be
common to all the manners of saying the beads; but that with follows is most
proper for our purpose.

In saying the first Decade, or Ten.
YOu shall imagine all the Aues thereof to be as so many precious stones, or
other ornamets most beautiful to the sight, which are offered to the Mother of
God by the hands of your Angel Guardian, for composing a Garland, or Crown to
adorn her head. Neither does this conceit want good warrant, as shall be manifest
by the following history, taken out of Dionysius Carthusianus in his first
Sermon of the Assumption of our Blessed Lady and 13. verse.

A certain Monk of the Religious Order of Cistercians, who had accustomed
daily with great devotion to salute the B. Virgin by reciting the Rosary, when
upon a certain day all alone in his chamber he was paying on his knees his
accustomed task, the most devout Virgin appeared unto him, showing him a most
beautiful Robe, shining with admirable splendor (except only a little part
thereof) being all over engraven with Golden Aue Mary's, and saying: See thou
(quoth she) in what esteem I have the Aue Mary's, which hitherto thou have
offered up unto me? And when this part of the Robe that is unfinished, shall be
adorned also with the like Aue Mary's, I will cause thee to enter into the
kingdom of my Son, adorned also with comelines, and glory.

After the same manner do you behold the B. Virgin present, whiles you are
saying the first Decade, offering those salutations unto her, as if they were
so many precious stones, and rich jewels most pleasing and grateful to
hereyes, and to all the heavenly Court; and you shall most humbly entreat her,
that she will vouchsafe to present unto herself, and her beloved Son your
Soul, first made beautiful with the ornaments of graces and virtues.

In reciting the second Decade.
YOu shall imagine all the salutations to be a most sweet and grateful
harmony, like unto that, which the Angels did sing in the Nativity of our
Lord, and at other times when they salute the B. Virgin. To those heavenly
Quires conioyne your self, and offer unto her these your salutations, which
although thereby rudely uttered and pronounced with a harsh and unpleasant
voice, nevertheless they are of themselves most grateful to the ears of the B.
Virgin. Demand withal that she will vouch safe, to give you a more ^killful
voice in heaven, whereby to sound forth her mercies and praises for ever.

In saying the third Decade.
IMAGINE, that these Salutations of the Angel, are as so many most fragra^t
Roses, fit for the sight and smell of some great Princess.

A certain religious man of the Order of the Minimes, out of a pious custom
did never taste meat before he had recited the crown of our B. Lady. But as by
nature we are often forgetful, and do fail sometimes in those things, which
he have before determined to do; this good religious Man, one day being set
down all the table, as yet fasting, he remembered himself of his intermitted
custom. Being much perplexed and sad, at last he asked, and obtained leave of
the Suepriour to rise, and without further delay, he went into the Church to
say his crown. He had now well near finished the same, when as one of the
Religious was sent to call him away by order of the Superior, who coming into
the Church saw the Mother of God upon the Altar in a bright shining manner,
accompanied with two Angels, who received from the mouth of the holy man as he
prayed, most beautiful Roses, and put them upon the head of their Lady and
Queen. Moreover he observed, that as often as the other pronounced the most
Holy Name of JESUS, at the end of the Angelical salutation, the B. Virgin and
the Angels did reverently bow down their heads. [Chron. Minim. p. 3. l. 1. c.
36. and 37.]

What contentment of mind, what measure of joy and heavenly delight, how great
affection of love toward the B. Virgin, did both these Religious men taste at
this spectacle, cannot be declared: Neither shall it need, since that whosoever
shall read these things, will be able sufficiently to gather the same of
himself; and he much more, who moved by this example, shall daily recite the
said Crown of the B. Virgin.

Another story not unlike to this is recounted in the same place of a certain
Religious Nouice who had received from his spiritual Father this document as a
most preset remedy against whatsoever temptations, to wit, that every day before
he took any corporal food he should recyte the Corone of our B. Lady. On a
time sundry imployme^ts imposed upon him by holy Obedience, did so distract his
mind, as he became unmindful of his accustomed devotion. Being set down at
table, and his Superior advertised of his error, commanded him to rise, and
go to the Church to perform his deuotio^s. While be obeyed, and was now
devoutly saying the Crown, an Angel was seen to stand by him, who knitting
together upon a golden third ten Roses, and therein also inserting a golden
Lilly, made a most fair Crown, and put it upon the head of the said Nouice,
and for testimony of this miracle, from the place, where this devout and
obedient Beadsma^ did kneel, for a long time after a most sweet and fragrant
odor of Roses and Lillyes did continue.

Thou therefore, as if thou were moved with the like spectacle, shall offer to
the B. Virgin these Angelical Salutations, as so many Roses, giving a most
fragrant smell both to her, the Angels, and thy self: and being an humble
suppliant unto her, thou shall beseech her to vouchsafe, to obtain for thee
the grace to send forth according to the the quality of thy state and
condition, the sweet odor of good example, and precious oyntement of her holy
Name.

In reciting the fourth Decade.
YOu shall here imagine, that the Angelical salutations which you recite, are
as most sweet honey in your mouth: as a devout and grave Matrone of Cullen did
experience, who as often as she said the Rosary, felt her mouth seasoned with
so grateful a relish, as that she thought her spittle to be converted into
honey. Which thing a certain Anchoret named Marsilius, living a Recluse near
to the Church of S. Seuerinus understanding, did after her example daily say
the Rosary, and after six weeks space that he had so contidued, he felt also
that swetnes in his mouth whilst he pronounced the said Salutations, which did
far exceed all deliciousnes of honey. [ Caesar. lib. 7. c. 50.]

Do you in like manner, tastyng these Salutations, with spiritual gust,
declare unto the Bles. Virgin how sweet her praises are unto your thoate,
humbly beseeching her also, that she will vouchsafe to accept of your prayers,
although presented her in a dish neither very clean nor precious, and that she
will also be pleased to obtain for you, the sweetness of heavenly consolations,
in respect of which, all earthly things may seem unto you unsavory.

In saying the fifth Decade.
YOu shall think with your self, that these Angelical Salutations are as
most holy and sacred things, which ought to be touched with reverence; or as
vessels full of precious treasures; or finally as imbracings and holy kisses,
offered unto the feet both of the B. Virgin herself, and of her little JESUS.
That these salutations are most holy appears sufficiently since they were
anointed with the oil of the Holy Ghost from whose sacred Mouth they were
dictated; and pronounced by the Archangell Gabriel, S. Elizabeth, and the
Church his holy spouse.

That also they are vessels of precious Treasures, may be gathered by the
vision axhibited to S. Gertrude, who in saying the Rosary, beheld all the
Angelical Salutations that she uttered, or rather every word thereof, to be as
so many golden Crowns, offered unto the Mother of God out of the treasure of
her heart, which she with great content did handle, and made much more esteem
of, then covetous men are wont of their money. [lib. 4. Revel. c. 55.]

And lastly as the B. Virgin, gave her little JESUS to be embraced, by the
three Kings, by the sheephearps, by old Simeon, and by many of her devout
Servants, in sundry apparitions as they have been saying the Rosary; so do you
imagine the same benefit to be now inuisibly given unto you; and testify to the
B. Virgin, that amongst all earthly things, nothing is more holy and precious
unto you, then with humility and devotion to kiss the prints of her feet, and
of her little JESUS, with so many kisses of love as you utter words in saying
the Rosary. You shall also humbly demand, that the B. Virgin her self would
accept of your salutations, as things precious and worthy of her self; and
that she would embrace you, in the arms of her mercy, and make you worthy of
the holy kiss of her motherly love, and favor.

In reciting the sixth Decade.
YOu shall imagine, that the acts of your understanding and will, which you
produce in saying the Rosary, to be as so many flames most bright, or rather
darts thrown from your heart transpierced with her love, into the heart of the
B. Virgin. Surely it was revealed to S. Gertrude, that the Archa^gell Gabriel
is so often enlightened with a new brightness of the holy Ghost, as often as the
salutation pronounced by him to the B. Virgin, is renewed and recited. [vbi
supra c. 12.] Why then may we not say that these Salutations be Flames, why not
Darts, when as we read also, that the holy Mother Teresa, one most addicted to
the service of the Blessed Virgin, was by an Angel pierced through with a
golden dart of divine love?

Therefore in saying the sixth Decade of the Rosary, you shall declare unto the
B. Virgin, that these salutations, as are so many Suns wherewith you desire to
be enlightened; as so many flames of love wherewith you may burn; as so many
Darts, with which your heart being pierced, you may melt away and consume. You
may also piously demand, that being drawn on by these your services although
little and far unequal to her deserts; she by the plentiful influence of her
mercies, will not cease in like manner to exhibit her love unto you;
especially that she will be pleased to illuminate your mind with the knowledge of
her perfections and virtues, and wou^d your heart, with her love, that you may
remain faithful until death. In these considerations you may observe another
method, to wit, that every one thereof, assigned to every Decade, may suffice
for every Rosary, and so in this Chapter you have six diverse manners of saying
the Rosary.

CHAP. III. The second manner of saying the Rosary.
THe second manner is that, wherein atte^tion chiefly is given to the sense of
the words of the Angelical Salutation, and of the Pater Noster. And that this
attention may be the easier, let us call to mind that famous miracle, which
happened at Rome in the year 590. in a solemn procession which was ordained
for auerting the plague, greatly annoying all Italy. In this procession was
carried a most devout and ancient picture of the Mother of God, painted by
Saint Luke, and with such happy success, that forthwith in all places, health
was obtained. The Angels were heard singing by all that were there present
(whether with greater amazement, or pleasure it is doubtful) and
co^gratulating with the B. Virgin in these words: O Queen of heaven rejoice
(Alleluia) because whom you have merited to bear, (Alleluia) has risen as he
said (A leluia) whereto S. Gregory being taught by divine instinct, in the name
of all the people, added, Pray unto God for us (Alleluia.) And shortly after an
Angel, who standing upon the top of Adrians Tower, and showing himself to be
a just Revenger of sins committed, having already drawn the sword of
Justice for punishment thereof, was seen to put the same again into the
scabbard, in sign that mercy was obtained, and gotten for them. [Baron. tom.
8. ann. 590.]

Now after you have framed to your self the like imagination; first, consider
on the one side, that you pronounce the words of the Archangell Gabriell,
environed with a troop of Angels, saluting the B. Virgin now triu^phant in
heaven, as before he had done in Nazareth. Then do you endeavor to stir up,
and express in your self the same effects of reverence, gratulation, praise,
joy, and such other like, as the words require.

On the other side, you shall imagine S. Elizabeth with all the holy and
Blessed men, leading a distinct Quire, and congratulating the B. Virgin with
the same applause, love, joy, and other affections wherewith in times past
together with her holy infant S. John Baptist, whom she carried in her womb,
she had saluted her in these words: [Blessed art thou amongst women etc.] and
do you imitate her with the same feeling and affection, in pronouncyng the
self same words.

Lastly, you shall with the eye of contemplation behold the whole present
militant Church, vexed and afflicted with many miseryes and persecutions in
this vale of tears, lying prostrate at the feet of the B. Virgin, and
imploring her mercy, in like manner as the former History did represent unto
you: and in the person of this Church you shall recite the last part of the
Saluta^tion (Holy Mary, etc.) asking with all humility, comfort and aid
against so many evils, and craving her wholesome and efficacious intercession
for the atcheyuement of all good things; and withal you may present unto her
your own particular intention.

These considerations may for your commodity be so parted and divided, that in
the first two Decades you may atte^d chiefly unto the sense of the Angels
words; In the other two, unto the words of S. Elizabeth: In the last two, to
the words of the holy Church. And you may begin and conclude this manner, as
the former.

CHAP. IV. The third manner of saying the Rosary.
THis manner also of saying the Rosary is very easy, wherein chiefly Attention
is used about the mysteries of the life of our Savior Christ, and his B.
Mother, interlacing withal, the same after some sort with the former two
Attentions spoken of before. These mysteries always assigned are fifteen,
which you shall divide in this manner.

The mysteries of Joy (which are the Annunciation, the Visitatio^, the Nativity
of Christ our Lord, his Presentation, and his finding amongst the Doctors in
the Temple) you may recite on Mu^day, Tuesday and Wensday, assigning to every
decade a several mystery. As you recite the same, you shall imagine your self
to declare unto the B. Virgin that mystery which you do contemplate, and to
relate the virtues expressed therein, and benefits bestowed upon us by the
same, by rejoicing, thanks giving, offering your self, and whatsoever is
yours, asking things conformable to the mystery, and commending your particular
intention unto her.

The dolorous mysteries (which are, The prayer of Christ in the Garden, His
whipping at the Pillar, His Crowning with thorns, His carrying of his Cross,
and Crucifying) you shall renew every Friday and Saturday, after the same
manner as you did the Joyful, adding thereto chiefly affections of Compassion.

The Glorious mysteryes (which are the Resurrection of our Lord, his Ascension,
the coming down of the holy Ghost, the Assumption of the B. Virgin and her
Coronation in heaven) you shall recite upon Sundays and Thursdayes, as you did
the former, exercising chiefly affections of Congratulation, and desire of the
Glory of Heaven.

Some divide the whole life of Christ, and of our B. Lady into two weeks,
after this manner. On Monday they call to mind, 1. The Expectation of the birth
of the B. Virgin from the very beginning of the world, by how many Oracles the
same was promised; by how many figures represented; and by how many
supplications sought for. 2. Her immaculate Co^ception. 3. Her holy Nativity.
4. Her Presentation in the Temple. 5. The years of her Childhood, and her vow
of Virginity made in her tender age. 6. Her betroathing to S. Joseph.

On Twesday they consider, 1. The Annunciation of the Angel. 2. The visitation
of Saint Elizabeth. 3. The Nativity of Christ. 4. The adoration of the
Sheepheardes. 5. The Circumcision. 6. The Adoration of the three kings.

On Wednesday they bear in mind, 1. The Purification of the B. Virgin, and
Presentation of Christ in the Temple. 2. Their flight into Egypt, and seven
years abode there. 3. The remaining of Jesus in the Temple, and his finding
there. 4. His childhood, and life until thirty years of age. 5. His departure
from the company of his Mother, his Baptism and fasting. 6. His preaching and
miracles.

On Thursday, they meditate, 1. The solemn entrance of Christ into Jerusalem.
2. His washing of the Apoles feet. 3. The institution of the most B. Sacrament.
4. His prayer in the Garden. 5. His apprehending. 6. That which he suffered in
the house of Annas and Cayphas, and S. Peter's denial of him.

On Friday they contemplate, 1. Christ our Lord led unto Pilate and Herod. 2.
His whipping at the pillar. 3. His crowning with thorns. 4. His showing to the
people, and the words [Ecce homo.] 5. His condemnation and carrying of his
Cross. 6. His crucifying.

On Saturday they ponder, 1. The words of Christ our Lord uttered upon the
Cross, and chiefly these, (Behold thy Mother, and, Behold thy Son.) 2. His
death. 3. The great grief and sorrow of our Bles. Lady. 4. The taking down of
Christ's body from the Cross. 5. His Buryall. 6. The desceding of his soul
into Hell.

On Sunday, they call to mind, 1. The Resurrection of Christ our Lord. 2. His
Ascension. 3. The sending down of the holy Ghost. 4. The rest of our B. Ladies
life until her death. 5. Her triumphall Assumptio^. 6. Her Coronation, and the
patronage of all men given unto her.

This exercise of meditating the mysteries of Christ our Lord and of the B.
Virgin in saying the Rosary, has been had in great esteem, and was
constantld practysed by Saint Charles Borromeus, that famous Contemplant of our
B. Lady. [in eius vita l. 8. c. 2.] S. Bernardinus also of Sienna has left
testified, that whatsoever Graces, or Spiritual gifts at any time he obtained,
came from the devout remembrace of the Joys of our B. Lady, in the honor of
which, he daily recyted her Rosary. [Ineius vita.]

But a singular testimony of this devotion, may be taken out of the Chronicles
of S. Francis, where it is recounted, that a certain Priest, who had
accustomed daily to adorn an Image of our B. Lady with a garland of flowers,
entered into Saint Francis Order, where, when as he could not daily offer his
wonted garland unto the B. Virgin, he thought of retourning back to the world
again. But the Mother of God full of Mercy, permitted not that her Client
should long remain in error, but compassed about with a heavenly light, she
appeared unto him, and with the beams of her benignity did she drive away the
dark mist of his mind, comma^ding that he should not rashly cast from him so
great a Jewel of Religious vocation, which now he had vndertake^, least
otherwise himself also, might perhaps afterward come to be rejected of God,
and withal she instructed him, how he should daily offer to her another
garla^d more odoriferous and grateful, composed of the fixty three Aue Mary's,
and seven Pater Nosters, in memory of the seven Joys which she tenderly and
entirly felt. 1. In the Conception of her Blessed Son. 2. When she carried
him in her womb, and visited S. Elizabeth. 3. In his birth. 4. In the
Adoration of the three Kings. 5. In her finding him in the Temple. 6. In his
Resurrection 7. When she was assumpted into heaven. So that every joy
correspondeth to every Decade, and the seventh to the three last Salutations.

This good Religious man obeyed the admonition and wholesome counsel of the B.
Virgin, and from thence forth began to recite daily the Corone, after that
method and manner. A long time after (notwithout a great miracle) the B.
Virgin appeared again unto him being in danger of his life, no less
powerful and benign a Guardian, then before she had been a prudent and wise
Mistress toward her servant. For on a time, as he trauayled by Obedience
with his companion through a wood, which was much haunted with thieves,
reciting the Rosary and meditating upon of the foresaid Mysteries; the thieves
espied him, together with a most beautiful Virgin, who at every Angelical
Salutation, gathered from his mouth as he spoke a Rose, and with a thread of
gold fastened the same to a circle, in manner of a Crown. When he had ended
his beads, and the B. Virgin departed, forthwith the thieves came rushing with
great violence upon the Religious man, inquiring of him from whence that Virgin
came, and whither she was gone. He denied to have seen any, as also his
companion did the like: at which the thieves were enraged, and ready to kill
them. In the mean space they both with very great earnestnes and inward
fervor cried upon our B. Lady: O Mother of God, aid and succor us. And behold
the B. Virgin presently appeared with a glorious company of Angels adornd with
that same garland, and first rebuking the thieves, turned to the Angels, and
with a cheerful countenance, said: Lo, with what a beautiful Crown thi^
Brother has adorned me, and foothwith vanished away. Leaving the mynds of the
beholders in great astonishment at this incredible motive and aspect, which so
moved the thieves to the true understanding of themselves, and serious
conversion of their lives, that they entered into religion, and became devout
servants of the B. Virgin.

The same also, that this religious man now spoke of did accomplish, was no
less devoutly performed by S. Thomas of Canterbury, who was accustomed daily
to call to mind the seven joys, wherewith our B. Lady was replenished living
upon earth, and in the pious remembrance whereof he took great contentement
and sweetness. Wherefore the Virgin Mother (having a desire to transfer his
devotion to more sublyme joys) appeared and spoke unto him in this manner:
Why, O my beloved Thomas, do thou meditate only upon those joys that I had
on earth? call to mind also those, which I now enjoy in heaven, which are these.

1. I rejoice, that above all pure Creatures I am placed, next in honor, unto
the most Blessed Trinity.

2. I rejoice for the garland of my unspotted Virginity, whereby I far excel
all the orders of Angels and Saints.

3. I rejoice, that even as the Day is replenished with light from the Sun, so
the whole Heavenly Court, more abundantly shyning by my beatitude, is
replenished with joy.

4. I rejoice, that all the Citizens of that Court do obey and reverence me,
the Mother of their King.

5. I recoice, because mine and the divine Maiestyes highest Will is one, and
the self same; and whatsoever shall be pleasing to me, my Son will a slent
thereunto with most ready, and gracious favor.

6. I rejoice for the infinite grace, wherewith I was enriched on earth; and for
that also, a reward in Heaven is given by my Son to all those who serve me
here on earth.

7. I rejoice, that not only my glory shall never diminish, but shall
continually be increased, without ever ceasing, to the worlds end, and so
continue for all eternity. When the B. Virgin had vouchsafed to lay all this
open before the eyes of her beloved servant, she vanished away, bidding him
farewell. And he by these divine admonitio^s and documents, became much more
fervent and devout toward so powerful a Mother. That is also worthy of
memory, which the same Author adds, thereby to styr up an assured Confidence,
toward our B. Lady, in the hearts of men.

Neither is it, says the Author, to be omitted, that often times the Mother of
God appeared to this her faithful servant, and with so great bounty showed her
self familiar unto him, that as often as he had any great affair to manage,
so often would the most pious Virgin offer up the same to her Son Jesus,
until she obtained his petition; and finally brought unto him the palm of a
most glorious Martyrdom which he constantly offered for the defense of his
church and flock, in the year of Christ 1171.

CHAP. V. Of the Office of our B. Lady.
IF your business will permit, you may daily, or at least upon Sundays and Holy
days, say the Office of the B. Virgin, and so doing you shall perform a thing
most grateful unto her. S. Charles Borromeus had the reuiewing thereof, and
brought it to that form which is now approved, and enriched with Indulgences
by the Sea Apostolic, the which he himself was accustomed daily to say upon
knees. (In eius vita.)

It is anciently recounted of the first Fathers of the holy Order of
Carthusia^s, who in absence of S. Bruno suffering great pressures and anxiety
of mind, were very much comforted and encouraged by S. Peter the Apostle, who
promised unto them the B. Virgins aid and assistance, if they would daily
recite her Office in her honor. By which vision being filled with great joy
and gladness, they made choice of our B. Lady for the Patroness of their Order,
reciting daily her Office in her Honor, and forthwith by her assistance were
freed from all trouble and grief of mind.

It is also a thing very famous, which Cardinal Baronius does recou^t to have
happened in the year 1159. as touching the Monastery of Gamugi in Italy, the
Religious where of when they had intermitted their pious custom of reciting
the office of our Lady, began to be so afflicted with calamities and incursions
of the Band its and Outlawes, that they were induced by Petrus Damianus a holy
man and great lover of the B. Virgin to resume again their accustomed manner
of reciting her Office whereto when they had al agreed, and did fulfull the
same, they were by the Bles. Virgins patronage delivered from their troubles,
and clearly understood, how powerful the same Virgin is, and ready to assist
all that do implore her aid.

And that you may recite the said Office, with greater devotion and benefit,
these few things you are carefully to practice. First, recollect your self a
little before the saying of every Hour, as has been said touching the
Rosary: next in saying thereof being myndfull of the threefold attention there
also explicated, you must atte^d unto the distinct pronunciation of the words,
and sense thereof, embracing the same affections that the Psalms and Hymns
themselves contain. And you may assign to every Hour some Mystery or other,
which was done about that time, to contemplate on.

For example at the Martins and Lauds (for which the night time is appointed
by the Church) you may call to mind the Nativity of Christ; or else his
captivity and apprehension, which was most sharp unto him all the whole night
long, both in the house of Annas and Cayphas. At the Prime you may consider his
conuenting and accusation before Pilate and Herod, or his Resurrection, and
Apparition to the B. Virgin his Mother. At the third, his Scourging and
Crowning with thorns (which perchance the B. Virgin herself beheld) or else
the sending down of the Holy Ghost upon the said B. Virgin and the Apostles.
At the sixth, his carrying of his Cross, and crucifying upon Most Caluary. At
the ninth, his words uttered upon the Cross, and his death thereon. At
Euensong, his taking down from the Cross. And at Compline, his buryall, and
the sorrowful mourning of the B. Virgin.

CHAP. VI. Of the Psalter of our B. Lady, Letanyes, and Office of her
Immaculate Conception.
THe Psalter of our Lady, composed by S. Bonauenture, a most devout, and
singular lover of the Bles. Virgin, is all replenished with allurements of
devotion toward the same glorious Queen. Neither is there any other manner of
saying the same, then has been said touching the former office. Thomas
Cantipratensis records, how a young maid of seaue^ years old earnestly
demanding of our Lady a book of her Psalter, obtained it, and withal the
manner how to say the same. [lib. 1. Apum c. 23. p. 2. and 3.]

The Letanies of our B. Lady you may recite with a twofold sense and affection.
First, that by rehearsing so many Epithetes, and high Praises, you endeavor to
declare the Excellency of the B. Virgin to be so great, as that you cannot
sufficiently explycate the same by one or more titles only, nor yet even by
infinite. Secondly, that by repeating those Elogies, or praises, as though they
were different and most efficacious motives, you shall induce the B. Virgin to
give you a favorable hearing.

But as these Letanies do stir up great devotion toward the B. Virgin, so not
without great profit and commodity are they used by Christians, as well in
things appertayning to the soul, as the body. Wherefore that godly custom,
amongst many familyes even of secular persons, is greatly to be commended, in
calling together at night those of the household, to hear the Letanyes daily
read in honor of the B. Virgin.

Also, the renowned piety of certain persons toward our Bles. Lady has
greatly appeared of late, who have erected a Confraternity among themselves,
that for obtaining a happy death by our Ladies intercession, every one for
himself, and for his Companio^s in this spiritual negotiation, do every day
recite her Letanyes, adding thereunto the Collect, or Prayer of S. Joseph her
holy Spouse.

The little Office of her immaculate Conception is short, and very fit to move
most sweet affections in the hearts of those that daily say it. And truly how
grateful the recital thereof is to our B. Lady, she herself did sufficiently
declare to Alphonsus Rodriquez Coadiutor of the Society of JESUS, famous for
miracles both alive and dead, to whom she appeared as he was saying this her
Office, according to his cuustome, (as she had very often done at other times)
and gave him in charge, to cause the same to be diuulged in print. [Jn eius
vita.]

CHAP. VII. How Saturday is to be observed with reverence, in honor of the B.
Virgin.
BEcause this day is peculiarly consecrated to the reverence of our B. Lady,
you shall likewise observe the same in a peculiar manner, exercising your self
in the things following, having first every Satturday morning conceived a firm
purpose to fulfill them.

1. You shall that day, undergo some mortification, either by keeping it fast,
or observing some peculiar abstinence; or by recyting one of our Ladies
Ant-hymnes with your arms stretched forth at length, or on your bare knees;
or some other like devotion at your pleasure.

Saint Nicolas Tolentinus did use but only once on the Saturday to refresh his
body with meat, after the imiration of the great S. Nicolas. [Surius in ^ius
vita to^. 5.]

Saint Antonius does recount, how that the B. Virgin appeared to S. Thomas of
Canterbury, and affoarded him her helping hand in mending his haire-shirt,
which in her honor he did wear, not only on Satturdayes, but at other times
also very often. [p. 5. t. 15. c. 2.. 2.]

2. You shall on that day exercise for the Blessed Virgins love, some work of
Mercy, whether it be corporal, as giving alms, visiting the sick etc. Or
spiritual, especially by godly and pious speeches and exhortation to stir up
your neighbors to virtue, and to more fervent honoring of our B. Lady.

3. You may perform also that day some exercise of devotion, by visiting some
Chapel or Oratory of the B. Virgin; which pious custom of many devout
Christians has been very often approved by mirales from heaven. [Nauar
Manual. de orat. c. 19. n. 189.]

It is reported also, that in the valley of Ronca in Spain, Angels are
accustomed every Satturday, to sing the Salve Regina, at a Fountain there,
which for that cause is called the Fountain of Angels.

This peculiar thing that I will now recount, is no less grateful to be
heard, then in times past, was admirable to be seen. At Constantinople there
was an Image of our B Lady, which was covered all the week with a veyle,
excepting that upon Friday after Euensonge, it was always miraculously lifted
up, no man touching the same, and was drawn back from the picture, to the
full view of all the Be houlders, and so remained until Eue^song on Saturday:
which being ended it was drawn again before the Image, and covered the same
as before. [Spinel. c. 29. n. 17.] Who understands not by this miracle, that
even from Heaven it self, men were invited to Honor the B. Virgin with
peculiar devotion, specially upon Saturdayes?

4. With diligence, you shall make your recollection before the Image of the B.
Virgin, and exactly examyne, what you have done the whole week past; whether
you have gone forward or backward, profited much or little; adding new desires
and purposes against the next ensuing week, still committing and commending
the same to the Virgin Mother with all confidence and submission.

5. The same day in the Evening you shall examine your self, whether you have
performed the things which you promised to do that day, in honor of our B.
Lady, or no.

CHAP. VIII. Of honoring the Feasts of our B. Lady.
HOw fervent, and even profuse has ever been the devotion of the lovers of our
B. Lady, toward the celebrating of her Feasts with due piety and respect,
appears many festly out of almost innumerable histories. Let this one serve
instead of all the rest, which is recorded of S. Margaret Virgin, Daughter to
the King of Hungary. This devout Soul (as the Author of her life writes)
whilst on the Vigils of the Nativity of our Savior, and the four Feasts of
the B. Virgin, the solemnity of the festival day following was denounced in
the Chapter House, she always used to show a wonderful joy and devotion,
prostrating herself on the ground, and praying, with tears gave thanks to
God. On those Vigills, bread alone was her meat, and water her drink,
tasting nothing else all day. Moreover in all the festiuityes of the B. Virgin,
and within their Octaues, she offered up unto her, a thousand Angelical
Salutations, and at every of them did prostrate herself on the ground. [In
cius vita.]

To the end, that with greater devotion you may pursue and follow this holy
example, with hundreds of others, and obtain also a more copious reward in
heaven, you shall well ponder the aduerisements following, and endeavor to put
them in practice.

1. First of all, the day before any Feast of our Bles. Lady, you shall
perform the same that we have commended in the precedent Chapter to be
observed on Saturdayes. On the Festival day it self, first, you shall recite
the whole Rosary, that is to say, three Crowns, after the manner above
prescribed; and as opportunity does serve, you shall adioyne thereto either the
Office of the B. Virgin, or her Psalter, or at least her Letanyes.

2. You shall visit some Chapel, Oratory, or Image of hers, and shall put in
practice the things which before we have expressed in the first Bed of this
Garden, Chap. 5

3. You shall receive the holy Communion in the honor of the B. Virgin; and to
the end you may more duly and devoutly perform the same, the Exercise set
down in the 5. Bed Chap. 9. will direct and guide you as it were by the hand.

4. You shall read, or hear read, somewhat of the present Feast, or somewhat
treating of the life and praises of our B. Lady, or at least some other
spiritual matter in her honor; and when you have fit occasion to frame any
familiar speech, or talk of her life, your good will must not be wanting. These
are to be observed generally upon all her feasts; and these which follow
shall be proper, and peculiar to every one.

On the feast of the Conception of the most B. Virgin, you shall recite the
Office of her immaculate Co^ception, and for the eight days following continue
to recite the same, so assigning to every feast an Octaue to be particulerly
kept by your self, although the Church shall not observe it.

On the Feast of the Nativity of our Lady, you shall honor the B. Virgins
Name, by reciting of the five Psalms, throughout the octaue, in her Honor,
beginning with the letters of her Name, spoken of before in the first Bed, and
3. Chap.

On the Feast of the Annunciation, you shall frequent, throughout the Octaue,
the exercise of reverence, which we delivered also in the first Bed, and chapter 7.
by exhibiting, by way of many kneelings, the worship of Hyperdulia, that is,
most high Service, or reverence to the B. Virgin.

On the Feast of the Visitation, and throughout the Octaue, you shall observe
the Exercise of Reverence which is mentioned before in the 1. Bed c. 5. by
making of some station, or visiting some Chapel or Oratory dedicated to the
B. Virgin, after that manner and fashion, which is there prescribed.

On the Feast of the Purification, you shall practice throughout the octaue,
the Exercise, which you have in the 2. Bed, and 5. Chap.

Finally, on the Feast of her Assumptio^, and throughout the whole Octaue, you
shall make some meditation or other of the B. Virgin; for which purpose those
may serve you which are above set down in the second Bed, and 2.3. and 4.
Chap. And you shall besides, every day perform the Exercise of Reverence,
which is delivered in the first Bed, and 8. Chapter.

OUR B. LADIES LITTLE GARDEN.
THE FIFTH BED, beset with Marygolds.
Containing the practice of imitating the B. Virgin, whereby those who honor
her, do daily (like as the Marygold does the Sun) look toward the bright
beams of her Perfections, by a continual regard of her Virtues.

CHAP. I. The general Practice of Imitating the B. Virgin.
WE are now come unto the last Bed of this Virginal Garden planted with
Mary-golds, the nature of which Flower is, to look always toward the sun
following the motion thereof by continual turning, and displaying it self from
the East to West. Such is the imitation of the B. Virgin, whereby her devout
lover becomes a follower of a more noble Sun, I mean the glittering and
resplende^t beams of her Virtues, and Perfections.

This flower (if you will follow the advice of S. Bernard) you must gather
constantly and often, who co^cluding briefly in few words, all the former
exercises already treated of, says: Think upon Mary, invoke Mary, let her
not depart from thy mouth, let her not depart from thy heart: And to the end
that thou may obtain the suffrage of her prayer, fail not to follow her
example. For surely al thy other acts of reverence, confidece, or love, how
solid or fect soever they be, nay all which thou can do besides, without this
imitatio^, will neither be pleasing to her, nor profitable to thy self. [hom.
2. sup. Missus est.

This did the B. Virgin once make known herself to a certain young man, who
though he were devout unto her, yet was he of a life impure and dissolute. To
whom she appearing (as he strayed in a vast wood, and was very hungry) brought
with her, and set before him very wholesome meat, but in so soul and loathsome
a dish, as he chose rather to starve then touch a bit thereof. Whereupon she
took occasion to speak unto him in this manner: Even such are thy Beads,
Offices, and other Exercises of Piety, which thou daily offerest unto me; and
although in themselves good and sauoury, yet come they from so foul a dish,
from a conscience so impure and unclean, as that their very sight does make me
loath and abhor them. The young man instructed by this sight, and sharp
admonition, presently began to amend his life. [Albert. Castle. de Rosario.]

On the contrary the B. Virgin has at other times declared how much she is
pleased, and delighted with the purity, modesty, humility and other acts of
virtue, exercised by those who truly honor her: and how much also she does
favor and assist them to the attayning of this perfect imitation of her
virtues. For upon a time, S. Gertrude of the order of S. Benedict, offering up
her own prayers, together with the prayers of others who had commended
themselves unto her devotion, the B. Virgin appeared unto her, apparelled in a
rich garment, all imbrodered over with golden three-leau'd flowers of an
admirable fayrnesse and beauty; the mystery of which garment she declared unto
her in these words: The prayers of all those (said the Glorions Virgin) whom
you offer unto me are as so many flowers in my garment, which you see, are not
all of one fayrnes, because the purer their prayers be, which they offer up
unto me, the more fair and flourishing are the flowers which do spring from
them; and I in the mean time do adorn the Souls of them, who pray unto me
and honor me, with as many flowers of virtue, as they do this my garment with
those of their prayers, and piety. [lib. 4. Insin. divine. c. 49.] That you may
therefore orderly and profitable go forwards in the imitation of the B. Virgin
so much desired of her, it will be necessary to observe this order following
consisting of four general heads, as so many instruments, or helps conducing
thereunto.

1. To know in what she is to be imitated, and to frame in your mind a certain
fair and excellent pattern of her perfections, on which you may continually
reflect.

2 To conceive within your self, an earnest desire to imitate these her most
lovely graces, and perfections; and also seriously to propose unto your self,
a means how to arrive the better thereunto.

3. Supposing this your desire and purpose, you shall earnestly lay hand upon
the practice it self, and use a particular Exame^, as the chief help, and
furtherance toward the attayning of any virtue whatsoever.

4. Lastly, seeing all we can do of our selves, is of no force nor effect,
unless it be strengthened by the divine help and assistance, we must therefore
beg most earnestly of the B. Virgin, that she would be pleased to obtain for
us the imitation of her virtues.

CHAP. II. The first help to the imitation of the B. Virgin, is to frame in our
mind a lovely representation of her Virtues.
THere be two ways, by which we may arrive to no small knowledge of the
virtues of the Bles. Virgin. First, by a particular discussion, and meditation
of the mysteries of our Saviors life, and Hers, which may be done, by exactly
considering how, and in what manner, she led her life whilst she was a child;
how afterward when she came to riper years; how she lived before she was
espoused to S. Joseph; how after her Virginal marriage with him; and how in her
widdowhood. Consider also both her life whilst her B. Son was still on earth,
as also after be was departed to heaven; all that she said, all that she did,
and what examples of this or that virtue she has left unto us.

Secondly, by a diligent informatio^ of these things out of the holy
Scriptures, Ancient Fathers, and other latter Authors, who have written in her
praise: all which to omit, I will only set down one Sentence out of S.
Ambrose, which will present unto us a certain lively imagination of the
perfections of Gods holy Mother. Set the Virginity (says he) and life of our
B. Lady, as a glass, before your eyes, wherein do appear the true forms and
shapes of Virtue and Chastity; for from hence may you take examples of good
life, where, as in a pattern, the lively Maister-peece of Virtue, does
instruct you what to amend, what to eschew, what to follow. She was a Virgin
not only in body but in mind, whose chaste affections were never taynted with
the least thought of evil. She was humble of heart, grave in words, prudent in
mind, spare of speech, studious of reading, not relying on the uncertainty of
riches, but in the prayers of the poor, ever labourious, bashful in speech,
making God, not man the true Judge of her thoughts; hurtful to none,
well-willer to all, reuerencing her Superiors, not envying her equals, enemy
to boasting, a follower of reason lover of virtue, mild in her aspect, bashful
in her actions, modest in her gate, comely in her behavior, and of a most
pleasant and delectable voice: so that even the shape of her body, was the
Image of her mind, and the lively figure of virtue and goodness. [Ambros. lib.
2. de Virgin.]

The like shall your find in diue^s of the Holy Fathers, especially S. Anselme
Archbishop of Canterbury, in his book he wrote of her praises, to whom he was
always most particulerly devoted. We are to conceive in our mynds (says he)
this perfection of the B. V. to be the most fair, and love lie thing that
can posibly be imagined, in the liknes of some external and corporal
perfection, which may be sesibly understood by our imagination. As for example,
to imagine that you see her Humility, Patience, and Obedience like so many
bright stars shining in the most Glorious Virgin. To conceive internally in
your hearing her Love, as a delicate voice, sounding most sweetly in the ears
of God. That you smell the sweet perfume of her virtues, and taste the sweetness
of her spirit, replenished with all inward peace, and heavenly delights. So S.
Anselme. And truly he could find no more fit and convenient manner to represent
unto himself the internal beauty of her graces and virtues, and to make them
dear and gracious unto us. Yet has S. Agnes otherwise expressed them in these
words: The Blood (says she) of my Spouse Christ JESUS, has beautifyed my
cheeks, he has adorned me as his beloved with a glorious Crown, and has
betroathed me with the Ring of his Faith; he has incircled my neck and right
hand with precious stones; he has enriched mine ears with pearls of
inestimable value; he has vested we with a golden garment; he has compassed
me about with shining and resplende^t jewels; his voice does sound sweet
music to my years, I have tasted milk and honey from his mouth, and he has
showed me his incomparable treasures. Thus far Saint Agnes. And if her
chastity, her faith, her Hope, her Charity, Humility, and Fortitude was so
lovely; how much more amiable may we imagine the virtues of the B. Virgin to
have been?

Almost in the same manner, (accompanied with S. John Baptist) did she appear
unto S. Brigit, giving her self to be seen, or rather the fayrnes of her
virtues to be contemplated, wearing upon her head a Crown of seven Lyllies
and seven Pearls, under which her hair hung down at full length, clothed in
a golden garment, and over it a Robe of Azure color. The mystery of which
ornaments were thus explicated unto S. Brigit, by S. John. The Crown (said he)
does signify the greatness of her Empire, and her large Dominion over all living
Creatures. The seven white Lillyes signify her Humilitaty, Fear, Patience,
Obedience, Constancy, Mildnes, and Pity. The seven Pearls, the Excellency of
her Virtues, her perfect Purity, her fair Comlines, her perspicuous Wisdom,
her strong Fortitude, her resplenda^t Clarity, and her most chaste Delight; her
hayr hanging down does signify the purity of her mind. The Azure Robe, her
perfect abnegation of all earthly things: and lastly the goulden Garment, her
buring Charity. [Reuelat. c. 31.]

Wherefore as often, as you shall cast your eyes upon any picture of our B.
Lady, or meditate upon any of her virtues, so often you are to represent her in
this manner unto your mind and render her fair and lovely, by saluting her
frequently in your heart, turning toward her, with some sentence taken out of
holy Scripture that may express the beauty of her virtue. As for example: How
fair are you my love, how fair are you? your eyes are like the eyes of the
Dove, and your cheeks to those of the Turttle? You have wounded my heart my
sister, with one of your eyes. I am the Mother of beautiful Love, of Fear, of
Knowledge, and of holy Hope etc. Of which kind you shall find store in holy
Scripture.

CHAP. III. The second Help, is to conceive an earnest desire and purpose to
imitate the B. Virgin.
THis desire and purpose is easily conceived from that which went before? for
if the virtues which are in the Mother of God do render her so fair and lovely,
that with the first sight thereof, she even rauisheth our eyes, drawing our
heart, and affections wholly unto her; how gracious would the same virtues, if
you were endued therewith, (although you exercised them in a far inferiout
manner) make you to the Bl. Virgin, and her Son, the fountain of all
sanctity and perfection?

Be you therefore not only an Admirer, but also a Lover; not only a Lover, but a
diligent and constant Imitator of the perfections of the B. Mother of God:
which she herself does above all other things desire of us, saying: Now
therefore my Son hearken unto me; They are Blessed who keep my ways: Give
ear unto my discipline, and be wise, and cast it not away from you. Blessed is
the man who hears me, and who watches daily before my doors, and waits at
the entrance of my gates. (Prou. 8.) And truly if you desire to be called her
son, and be so esteemed; if you would love and honor her with all sincere
affection, hearken then unto her, take her counsel and advise, depart not
from her ways, but always follow carefully the footsteps of her virtues; with
which imitation it is incredible, how much the B. V. is delighted, and in what
abundant measure, by her self and her B. Son, she does reward, and bless
every act of Virtue, every act of Humility, Confidence, christian Prudence,
Patience, graciously behoulding eue^ the least act of Devotion done unto her,
most carfully attending it, and abundantly rewarding the same.

This did Saint Gertrude once experience, who lying very sick in her bed, was
much troubled, that she could not say over her beads in honor of the B.
Virgin, yet she resolved at least, to pronounce, and ponder in her mind, with
all the affection she could, the three first clauses only of the Angelical
Salutation, to wit, Hayle Mary, full of grace, our Lord is with thee. Whereupon
the B. Virgin presently appeared unto her clothed in a fair green garment,
which besides other flowers, was imbrodered with six-leau'd Roses, whereof 3.
seemed to be of gould, enriched with diverse precious stones, and the other
three leaves were beautifyed with an unspeakable variety of color. By the
first three leaves were understood the three first heads, or branches of the
Angelical Salutation that S. Brigit had pondred in her mind; and the other
three, adorned with that admirable variety of color, were to reward, first her
so pious affection, with which she had saluted his most B. Mother, then her
Wisdom, who being unable, by reason of her sickness, to recite the whole, had
so wisely made choice of those 3. first parcells, on which the whole frame of
Praying, did depend; and also her Hope and confidence, in that she did not
doubt, but that little devotion exercised in her sickness, would be grateful to
God, and his Holy Mother. [lib. 4. Insin. divine. c. 49.] S. John Damascene that
singular Honourer of the B. Virgin, promises this reward to those virgins who
are devout unto her. If (says he) with a prompt and cheerful mind we do
eschew all vice, and labor to the attayning of virtues withal our endeauours
and affections, making them familiar, and as it were our Companions; the B.
Virgin will come frequently unto us, replenished withal graces and goodness: And
her Son Jesus Christ, the sovereign King and Lord of all, will take up his
habitation in our breast.]

What these vices be, which especially we should fly and detest, as also what
be the virtues, which by imitation of the B. Virgin, we are to pla^t in our
souls, he sets down in this manner.

Let us endeavor (says he) to make our minds and memories the Storehouse of
the B. Virgin, for that she is a Virgin, and a lover of virgins, pure and a
lover of Purity: and if we be chaste both in body and mind, if we avoid all
uncleanness, if we expel all impure and wicked thoughts, if we chase from us all
scurrilous and obscene speech, hate all rancour of heart, resist all proud
thoughts, and lay aside all envy, debate and hatred, we shall with ease obtain
her grace and favor. For she is highly delighted with virginal chastity and
Purity, she imbraceth peace and quietness of mind, cherishes charity, mercy,
and humility in her own bosom, as her proper children, and in a word is most
highly offended with any the least vice whatsoever. (Orat. 2. de dormit. B.
Virgin.

Therefore as often, as at any time you shall frame in your mind any resemblance
of the beauty, and exeellency of the Virtues of the most sacred Virgin, do you
presently aspire, with all your soul extended, run with all your heart open to
embrace them, by a lively imitation; and sighing with desire of love, say: O
admirable, O lovely Mother, when shall I be like unto you, in such excellent
and admirable perfection? When shall I cheerfully follow your footsteps, as
innumerable others of your Lovers have done, running and even flying as it
were, in the way of perfection, having you for their guide and leader? I am
ashamed to have thus de generated through my sloth. I have said, and firmly
purpose, that I will keep your ways; the which with more the accustomed
fervor, by your holy help and gracious assistance, I will now endeavor to
perform.

CHAP. IV. The third Help, to the Imitation of the B. Virgin, is a serious and
particular Examine.
AFter you have made use of the former two Helps, you must apply your self to
the practice, in which do commonly occur the greatest difficulties. For
perfection is not so easily obtained as desired, and that for diverse causes,
but chiefly, and most commonly, because the exercise of Virtue is begun
confusedly, and without method, or order; or else, because we undertake more at
once then we can well, and solidely perform; whereby it easily falls from us,
and we soon loose it again. Which inconvenience may be prevented by an
orderly and diligent examine, which is the third Help to the imitation of the
B. Virgin, and consists chiefly in these two things: First in the well
composing and ordering the matter was take in hand; secondly in the constant
keeping of the time in which it is to be put in practice.

The matter of this examine may be said to be twofold. The first may be about
those actions of ours in which we strive to imitate the B. Virgin, examining
each one particularly and orderly, by themselves; as for example: In seeking to
make our meditation in some sort like unto that of the V. Virgin; in some sort
I say, for so much perfection as was in her, even the Seraphims never attained
unto. Or else, by indeauouring to imitate her devotion, in hearing of Mass,
Hand labor, or any other corporal Exercise; and so likewise in any other
thing.

The other may be, concerning the virtues of the B. Virgin, which in their
degrees we are to labor to attain unto. As for example, in making a
particular examine of Humility, we are to begin with some one of her actions,
and so go on by degrees unto the rest. And when we have in some sort profited
our selves in Humility, we may pass, (observing the same method) unto other
virtues, as fraternall Charity, Obedience, and so unto the rest; in such manner
nevertheless, that we may chiefly insist upon those which we find most useful,
and necessary for our selves.

To this Examine three several times belong. The first is the morning, when we
must observe 3. things. 1. To make a resolution and conceive an earnest desire
of imitating the B. Virgin in such or such an action or virtue. 2. That we take
some sign of remembrance, to put us in mind at certain times to renew our good
purposes. For example, some short sentence, or iaculatory praiet, or the sight
of some Image, or as often as we hear the clock strike, or else whenever we
shall go out of our chamber, or the like. The 3. is to beg humbly of the
divine goodness, we may keep this our our purpose and resolution.

The second time is at noone when as we must examine, 1. Whether we have
performed our morning-purpose. 2. Whether we have made use of the sign of
remembrance, which we took; and whether we have noted our defects, or the
profit we have made, comparing day by day, week by week, and month by month. 3.
We are to conceive a new purpose for the time to come, in confidence of the
help of God, and his most B. Mother, whose aid we are again humbly to implore.

The 3. time is the Evening when we are to make our Examine, in the same manner
as we did before at Noone.

And because it helps very much toward the constant performing of our good
purposes, to call the^ often to mind, therefore diverse have used sundry means
and special helps thereunto. S. Hedwigis a Polonian Duchess, did use still to
wear about her neck an Image of the B. V. to the end that she might be thereby
stirred up both to reverence and devotion toward that sacred Queen, as also
to a fervent desire of imitating her perfectio^s. Which her piety was
afterward made notable by a famous miracle. For at her departure out of this
life, she held the said Image so fast with three fingers of her left hand, that
it could by no means, or force be taken thence, and so was buried with her.
After 25. years her body being to be translated to another place, was found
all consumed to dust, except those three fingers which held still the Image of
our B. Lady, and her head, which was not only found, whole and uncorrupted, but
also full of a most fragrant odor, which like oil distilled from thence, in
great abundance. [Sur. in eius vita. 15. October.]

S. Edmund Archbishop of Canterbury did use another kind of sign, or token to
put him always in mind of the virtues and perf^ctions of our B. Lady, and
chiefly of her Chastity, which virtue above all others be practiced, and had in
most high honor and veneration. It was this. After he had, by the instinct of
the Holy Ghost, solemnly espoused himself to the B. Virgin, in memory of this
his betrothed faith he put a ring upon the finger of a certain Image of the
Blessed Virgin, and made another most like unto it which himself did
continually wear; on which afterward, as often as he did look, he seemed to
see the most amiable Virgin his spouse there present before his eyes, and in
her a lively and excellent pattern of all virtue, and perfection. In this Ring
was engraven the Angelical Salutation, and that miraculously, as by the
relation of diverse of undoubted faith and sincerity was affirmed. [In eius vita
16. Nouemb.] Others have invented, and used other signs, and memorials to the
same end.

CHAP. V. The fourth Help to the Imitation of the B. Virgin, is to implore her
aid, and assistance often.
ALl that industry which has been expressed in the former Chapters, will
produce but little, or no fruit at all, unless it be watered with the ple^teous
dew of the divine Grace: therefore we must humbly, and often implore, and beg
the same with a great distrust of our strength, and no less confidence in our
B. Savior, and his Holy Mother. To which end, and instead of Iaculatory
prayers, we may use certain Versicles approved by the Holy Church, in craving
now this, now that virtue of the Bles. Virgin. As for Example, in craving of
Chastity and Meeknes, these words of the Hymn, Aue Maris stella, will be most
proper.

O Virgin singular, in mildnes passing all,
Make us both meek and chaste delivered from sins thrall.
As likewise, in craving of sincere and ardent Charity, out of the Hymn,
Stabat Matter Dolorosa, these words thus.

Mother, Fountain of true loving,
Me to feel thy Sorrow moving,
Cause that I may mourn with thee.
Let my Heart with fervor burned,
Toward Christ with Love be turned,
Which to him may pleasing be.
The B. Mother of God herself, gave unto S. Ioane Found resse of the
Annuntiates, three most wholesome documents, whereby she attained unto great
Perfection. The first was, that she should say ten Aue Mary's in memory of
those ten Virtues wherein the Bles. V. so greatly excelled, to wit, Chastity,
Prudence, Humility, Faith, Gratitude, Obedience, Poverty, Patiece, Piety, and
Constancy in affliction. The second was, that she should salute with 5. Pater
Nosters, and 5. Aue Mary's, the 5. most precious wounds of our Savior
Jesus Christ, in imitation of that devotion, with which the B. V. saluted, and
contemplated them whilst he hung upon the Cross. The third was, that daily in
honor of the fruit of the B. Sacrament, she should recite twelve Aue Mary's.
Unto which threefold devotion the Popes of Rome have granted many pardons and
Indulgences. [In Chron. Annunciat.]

That you may styr up in your self, and more and more enkindle in you, both a
firm trust in the B. Virgin, as also fervor in demanding the gift of the
imitation of her virtues, it will be necessary, that you often practice these
following Exercises and the manner of begging her help and aid.

CHAP. VI. The practice of begging of our Blessed Lady.
IN craving of grace and aid, you must with as great feeling as may be,
acknowledge your own wa^ts and the liberal graces, and favor of the Mother of
God.

And first you shall imagayne your self to be in a threefold state. 1. As one
sick and wounded (for so indeed spiritually you are, through your sins,
unbridled passions, and inordinate affections,) so as from head to foot there
is no sound part in you. 2. As one poor, and in extreme want of all virtues,
merits, and divine graces. 3. As one hungry, longing and thirsting after
Justice and perfect union with God in this life, and Glory in the life to come,
desiring to be healed of your infirmities, and relieved in your wants, and
nakedness, still looking about you if by chance you can espy any rich and
merciful person, who may bestow an Alms upon a Soul, so miserable, so poor,
so diseased, so hu^gry as yours.

Secondly, you shall imagine, that you hear within you the B. Virgin calling
of all mortal men unto her, who want or seek for help offering them aid and
assistance in these words: Blessed is he who watches daily at my doors, and
waits at the entrance of my gates. He that finds me, shall find life, and
salvation from our Lord. [Prou. 8.] Then think upon the Motive which may
persuade you with humility and confidence to have recourse unto this Lady and
Queen: As first, how that she is replenished with all those graces, which you
so much need. 2. That she is so pure, as never taynted with the least blemish
of Venial or Original sin, 3. So holy that she excels in all kind of
virtue. [Many daughters have gathered together riches for themselves, but you
have surpassed them all.] 4. That she is so united with God, that there is no
pure creature either in heaven, or earth, who enjoys him in greater
perfection. Lastly co^fider both the means, and the will she has to do you
good. For she is called the Queen of Mercy (says S. Bernard) because she can
when she will, how she will, and to whom she will, open the Treasure of divine
Grace; in so much as no wicked sinner can perish, to whom the Saint of Saints
does lend a helping hand. [Serm. 1. in Salve Reg.]

Thirdly, being now stirred up with these cogitations, resolve to approach
near to the B. Virgin, like as a poor and needly begar. And to the end you
may the better obtain what you desire, help your self with the intercession
of your Angel Guardian, and of all the other Angels, also of the Patriarchs,
Prophets, Apostles, and the rest of the Saints in Heaven, of all whom you
must earnestly entreat, to beg an Alms for you of her. Then present your
self before that sacred Queen and Lady, humbly saluting, and magnifying her,
laying open your own miseries, and begging redress, with no less earnestnes
and affection, then beggars use to do when they cry out for pity in the
streets; lastly make a firm purpose to be more fervent in honoring her
hereafter, and humbly say, as follows.

I salute you humbly, O most sacred Virgin, I praise and glorify you, O most
Clement, most Pure, most Holy and most Happy Lady, most powerful Queen of
Angels, most glorious Queen of Patriarchs, Prophets, and Apostles, most
pote^t Queen of Martyrs, most wise Queen of Co^fessors, most vnspotte^d
Queen of Virgins, and most faithful Queen of all Holy Saints. O most Blessed
Mother of God, you know my miseries, my infirmities and wounds, my poverty and
nakedness, behold here my groans, and the languishing of my desire! Your
breasts are so filled with pity, that being but touched with the knowledge of
our wretchedness, they insta^tly flow forth with the milk of mercy.

Behold me here prostrate at your feet, O Sanctuary of the Miserable, hubly
begging of you, by those motherly breasts of yours, by that inflamed love you
bare unto your Blessed Son JESUS Christ, by that burning Charity, with which
you have accepted us to be your servants, your votaryes, yea, and which is
more, your most unworthy children, that you would be pleased to obtain for me a
fullremissio^ of all my sins, and a true and hearty detestatio^ thereof, also
worthy fruits of penance and repentance in this life, perfect mortification of
all my senses, and victory over all my passions, and temptations.

Obtain likewise for me O sacred Virgin, a strong Faith, a firm Hope, and
perfect Charity, a full resignation of my self to the will of God, Purity of
intention, and true Devotion toward Christ JESUS Crucified, the B. Sacrament,
and your most Holy self. Obtain likewise for me, I humbly beseech you,
Obedience toward my Superiors, Affability and Mildnes toward all, profou^d
Humility, Fortitude, and Patience in all aduersityes, and lastly the gift of
Perseverance, and a happy, and holy End.

Grant unto me, O Blessed Advocate, at the hour of death, your most glorious
and delighfull presence, and shield me then, under your shadow, against the
fearful threats of divine Justice So shall you alwayer be my most honored
Lady, my most reverenced Queen, and my most beloved Mother. So shall I with
all the force, and powers of my soul, thus confirmed by your Grace and Favor,
always endeavor to set forth your worship, honor, and glory.

CHAP. VII. The Imitation of the B. Virgin, in the contemplation and meditation
of heavenly things.
THe help for imitatio^ of the B. Virgin which hitherto we have set down in
general, are now to be reduced to practice and applied to each particular act
and virtue of hers. Wherefore two things are briefly to be noted. 1. How to
frame unto our selves a pattern of those actions principally, in the which the
B. Virgin was most conversant. 2. How to make a Catalogue of such principal
Virtues which she chiefly exercised.

The first of her Actions, was prayer and meditation of heavenly things. For so
[ in Med. vitae Christi c. 3.] says S. Bonauenture, following the opinion of
S. Hierome, who writes that the Bles. Virgin continued from morning until the
ninth hour of the day in meditation of divine matters. Even so in like manner,
as well in order as in esteem, with all care and affection, must we make our
meditation in the morning before all other things: and that we may do it well,
we are to indeanour to imitat the Blessed Virgin in four things. 1. In
diligent preparing our selves thereunto. 2. In making prudent choice of the
matter whereon we are to meditat. 3. In exercising offeruent acts and
affections. 4. In recollecting diligently the fruit of our meditation. In all
which, what clear example the B. Virgin has left unto us, we shall here
briefly consider.

Of her preparation to Meditation.
OF our B. Ladies preparing her self for Meditation, Dion. Carthusianus
explicating these words of the Canticle (I sleep, but my heart watcheth]
speaks of her in this manner: The most holy Virgin could justly say this of her
self, (says he) because she always led a most contemplative life, and (mark
here the things required in contemplation) being wholly free from all external
trouble and inordinate noise, from all superfluous care and perturbation of
mind, attended only to God, with a quiet and watchful heart. She was of an
ardent and laborious charity, of a resplendant and abundant wisdom, and of a
daily and continual recollection. [ In Cant. 5.] To which may be added, how
much she was given to the reading of spiritual books, wherein ordinarily she
spent a great part of the day.

Mark now diligently, this example, and see that you follow it as near as may
be. Feed your soul every morning, of which you ought to have more regard then
of your body. Srengthen it, I say, and cherish it with that Angelical bread,
and most sweet Manna of conte^plation: and that you may the sooner a riue unto
perfection, prepare, your self before hand thereunto (as did the B. Virgin)
with purity of life, internal repose of mind, frequent aspirations unto God,
and by a true desire of meditation, and the reading of spiritual books. Take
also the Blessed Virgin for your Guide and Patroness in this so especial a
work, and desire of her in most humble manner that she would obtain for you,
divine light, fervent and pious affections.

S. Eleazarus the Earl, being demanded of a Religious man, what order and
method he observed in his prayers, and what patrons he chose among all the
Saints for his guide and direction therein, answered thus: Truly I have chosen
the B. Virgin to be my Guide and Patroness, and when I set my self to prayer,
I put before my eyes, first mine own unworthiness, and so recomending my self
unto the Mother of Mercy, I humbly beseech her to put that into my mouth and
heart, which may be most gratful to her, and to her Blessed Son JESUS, and
withal I offer up unto her, with as much fervor and devotion as I can, the
Angelical Salutatio^, which having once recited, I never want matter to
meditate on. [ Sur. in cius vitac. 5.]

Whereon the B. Virgin did meditate.
THE matter on which our B. Lady meditated, was the law of God, his holy Wll
and pleasure, also upon those Prophecies which chiefly fortold the coming of
the Messiah. For (as Origin says) she had the knowledge of the Law and
Prophets, and did daily meditate thereon. [Homil. 6. in Luc.] Next she pondered,
the benefits of God, wherewith (as Bernardinus Senensis says) her mind was
continually exercised, in the heat of Charity, [ sermon. 51. c. 2.] After the
birth of Christ, she meditated upon the mysteries that did daily occur before
her eyes, and conserved the memory thereof in her heart by meditation, as
witnesses S. Luke. After the ascensio^ of her B. son (as Saint Hierome and
others do write) she did co^template in her secret bosom, his Life and
Doctrine, his Cross, Death, and Glory, and to that end did oftentimes asce^d
to the top of mount Caluary, where our Lord was Crucified, that she might fill
that place with tears, which was once stained with the blood of her dear
son, flowing from the cross, to wash away our sins. From thence would she
go into the cave to worship the sepulcher of our Savior, and adore the glory
of her Son in his Resurrection. She would also go to the Mount Oliuet, and
there kiss the print of his holy feet ascending into heaven And when she went
to Bethleem and visited that most happy place, where she first had brought
forth her sweet son, who can imagine the inward joy she felt, and the tears
of sorrow she shed in viewing this and other places, whilst in the mean time
she most studiously meditated upon mysteryes which had there been wrought.
[Canisius de B. Virgin. E 5. c. 1.]

Take you now the same matter, and argument for your daily meditation: think
diligently and often on the life of Christ, and of his Holy Mother, and be
assured it will be most pleasing and gratfull unto the^ both. F. Jews dela
Puente does relate in the life of F. Baltazar Aluarez, that, to a certain
devout woman, replenished with the spirit of God, and adorned with the gift of
high Contemplation, an Angel did one morning appear, when as making the
spiritual Exercises of S. Ignatius, she was meditating on the life of Christ
his Blessed Mother; telling her that he came of a message from the B. Virgin,
to let her understand, that those devotions and spiritual Exercises which she
used, were most grateful and pleasing unto her, especially those of the divine
Mysteries of her Blessed Son JESUS, as being most apt to styr up the
affection unto heavenly things. Willing her also to go forwards daily as she
had begone; for that her self was both the Patroness and Inuentresse of those
kind of Exercises, and did first instruct S. Ignatius in the making thereof, and
disposing the^ into method, And that also they were the same, which herself
had daily used, whiles she lived upon earth. [P. Burghesius in libello, quod
Societas fit Virgini sacrat. c. 12.]

Of the solid purposes made by our B. Lady in meditation.
THat our Blessed Lady did exercise most solid acts and affections in her
meditations, S. Brigit will witness, who treating of her continual meditation
in the Temple from her tender years says thus: When B. Mary being yet but an
Infant, began to conceive a knowledge of God, she did not childishly, but
maturely consider, with fear and care to discharge her duty, how much she was
to honor and reverence so high a Majesty. And when afterward she came to
understand how God the Creator of all things, did behold and judge the lives
and actions of every one, she firmly purposed with her self to adore him in
the humblest manner, and to commit nothing that might be displeasing to so
great a Majesty. Again, coming to know that this God was the peculiar Judge
of Israel, who had been always so good and gracious unto that People, she
resolved to love, and honor him alone, with all her heart and mind. But when
she came at last to understand, that he was to come into the world as a
Redemer, and to be borne of a Virgin, she began so to burn with charity and
love toward him, that she thought of nothing, nor desired nothing but him.
[lib. 1. Revel. ca. 10. and l. 3. c. 8.]

And Canisius speaking of her affections in meditation eue^ in her childhood
says: That fair Virgin who was most dear to God, began even the^ to be
wounded with the darts of the divine Love, and to be chosen out among thousands
to be the only Beloved of God. O what heat, what fire of love, did the^ burn
within her? What scope, or end had she of loving, when the most sweet and
precious spirit of God did move her to shed pious and loving tears, and to
send forth innumerable sighs? Whose senses were so wholly absorpt therewith,
and suffered such divine violence that her mind would in a manner be ravished,
and eue^ languish in the most sweet contemplation of the only Good [Canis. l.
1. c. 13.]

The Doctors of holy Church are of opinion, that whatsoever rapts,
illustrations, divine Contemplations, and Ecstasies were ever granted unto any
Saint, or holy person, the same were communicated to our Bl. Lady in a far
more perfect and excellent manner, by her Blessed Son.

Imagine therefore, that when you contemplate S. Paul burning with most ardent
charity, and crying out, Who shall separate me from the charity of Christ? Or
when you see S. Mary Magdalen like snow, melting away in a most tender passion
of love, before the presence of her Lord Christ JESUS: or Saint Augustine
wounded to the heart with the Dart of Love, wholly languishing in the midst of
his kisses bestowed upon the wounds of Christ, and dying to himself, as unto
him he lived: or S. Francis uttering of these word, My God, and my All, whilst
he embraced the Cross of his Love, with his Seraphicall arms: or else S.
Thomas of Aquin sighing unto JESUS, from his pure and fervent flames of love; I
desire thee thy self, and nothing else but thee: Or S. Ignatius with this motto
of his Contemplation, O how vile does the Earth seem, when I look up to
heaven? And that other, O God of my heart o that the world did but know thee?
Or that Earthly Angel B. Stanilaus Kostka whilst he was elevated from the
earth, al wet, with the tears of a teder devotion, and wholly rapt with
cerestiall delight, yea so burning with divine love during the time of his
meditation, as it was necessary, often to apply a wet cloth, to cool his
burning bosom: Imagine (I say) when you ponder these, and a thousand like
rapts, and ecstasies, as the true and lively effects of Contemplation, and
compare them to that divine and most ardent flame which burned in the B.
Virgins breast, they will all appear but as little sparks only in regard of
hers. Oh that we could but warm our frozen hearts sometimes whilst we
meditate, at the furnace of her most arcent love! If thou would when thou
art dull and drowsy propose Her, unto thy self, as a pattern to be imitated:
If thou would say unto thy self whilst thou meditatest; how much more
ferue^tly would the B. Virg. handle this matter in which I so dully and
slothfully meditate! with what zeal and affection! with what higher desires
and firmer purposes would she be united unto God the only good!

Of the the Recollection of the Blessed Virgin.
IN the recollection, which the Bl. Virgin used after her Meditation, she was
always most careful to keep in memory the illustrations which were diuinly
revealed unto her during the time of her meditation, as also all the good
desires and purposes which she conceived from thence. All which she first
preserved for her own help, and then for ours as says Eusebius Emissenus
[Homil. 5. in festo Assump.] And betwixt her times of meditation, she did so
feed and stir up the flame which was kindled in her heart, by that which she had
meditated, that her whole life was no other then a perpetual burning heat,
and an extreme excess of love, as says Rupert. [serm. de Assump.

Neither is it to be doubted, but the same B. Virgin who instructed S. Jgnatius
in the making that admirable Book of his Spiritual Exercises (as we have
formerly declared) did teach him also that Addition, wherein is prescribed,
that when we have ended any meditation, we should alway^s spend a quarter of an
hour in examining the fruit and success thereof, which both he himself did
most diligently observe, by putting down in writing all the conceyts and
affections of his mind every day. And the like did that holy man Fa Peter
Faber, of whom are extant a few, but very pious Commentaries which he wrote of
his daily actions in Meditations, to the end that no benefit which he received
of God might escape his knowledge, and that he might be stirred up to
thanksgiving for the same, and to a greater love of so bountiful a Father,
from whom he did acknowledge to have received all his progress in virtue, all
his heavenly consolations and delights, all the divine revelations and inward
lights of his mind, and lastly all those graces and blessings which had been any
way bestowed upon him. And he acknowledged, that he was first moved heerunto,
when as he devoutly celebrated the Feast of our Lady De Portiuncula, or; Of the
Angels.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Devotion and Reverence of the B. Virgin toward the
Sacrifice of the Mass.
SVarez and other Doctors are of opinion, that the B. Virgin after her sons
Glorious Ascension into Heaven, did hear Mass every day celebrated by S.
John, or some other of the Apostles. Nor can it be justly doubted that the
Bles. Virgin whilst she lived in this mortal life, did hear Mass daily,
since that she, now triumphing in heaven, has been often seen, to come down
from thence, and be present whilst the Holy Mass was celebrated.

It is recorded that S. Bonitus Bishop of Auuerne in France, praying on a time
all alone in the Church of S. Michael, our Bles. Lady descended from heaven
acco^panyed with a glorious troop of Angels and Saints, and commanded him to
say Mass; which he forthwith performing, the Angels served him with all
reverence, the Mother of God with all her heavenly Company hearing the same,
with great Devotion, and unspeakable signs of joy. Mass being ended, she gave
unto him, in testimony of her presence, and of her devotion to holy things, a
Vestement made of a strange, and unknown, and of a wonderful white, and
unusual light stuff. [Sur. in eius vita.]

Also the Bles. Virgin did another time honor with her presence, and multitude
Angels, S. Andrew surnamed Carmelitanus, Bishop of Fesuli; whilst he was saying
Mass, saluting him with this no less honorable, then friendly greting Thou
art my servant whom I have chosen, and in whom I will be glorified. [Sur. in
eius vita.]

But that which happened unto Henry the Emperor, the great imitator of the B.
virgins purity, was yet more miraculous. For coming on a time to Rome, and
watching all the first night, as his custom was, in the Church of S. Maria
Mayor, he found our Savior there ready to say mass, having for his Deacon and
subdeacon S. Laurence and S. Vincent, the whole Church being full on every side
of celestial Company, among whom, and above them all the B. Virgin did
appear. The Angels did sing the Introit, which was [Suscepimus Deus
misericordiam tuam etc.] and in singing those words [Iustitia plenaest dextera
tua] all the glorious Audience, imitating JESUS and his B. Mother, did point
with their hands toward the Emperor. When the Gospel was song our Savior,
his B. Mother and all the other Saints and Angels in their order, did kiss the
book. After which the B. Virgin made sign unto the Angel who then held the
Book, that he should likewise carry it to the Emperor to kiss, with whose
Virginity she was so much delighted. All which whilst the Emperor beheld with
exceeding joy, an Angel stroke him, like another Jacob, in the sinews of his
leg, saying: This shall be a sign of divine love, and favor unto thee, for
thy Justice and Chastity: after which time he halted to his dying day. [Surin
eius vita 19. Junii.

The holy Virgin has not only manifested her Religious honor and reverence to
the holy Sacrifice of the Mass, but also to all other things that do any
pertain unto the same, as to churchs Altars, and their ornaments; also to the
Priestly vestements some of which she is said to have made, and adorned with
her own hands; the which, both whilst she lived here on earth, and whilst she
now triumphs in heaven, she has often manifested to have in especial regard
and reverence. She once admonished John a Senator of Rome, together with his
wife, in their sleep, that, in that place which they should the next morning
find covered with snow, they should build a Church in her honor; and that it
was very pleasing unto her, that they had made her heir of their wealth.

No less memorable is that apparition of the Blessed Virgin unto S.
Ildephonsus Bishop of Toledo, who presented him with a sacred Vestment as he
was ready to celebrate Mass, saying: Receive from my hands, this small gift,
which I have brought unto thee out of the Treasury of my Son, as a reward of
thy Chastity and Purity, and for that thou have also defended my Virginity. And
whilst she spoke these words, with her own hands she put the Vestement upon
him, bidding him to celebrate mass therein upon all the Feasts of her B.
Son, and Hers throughout the year. [Sur. in eius vita.]

Of our B. Ladies behavior during time of Mass.
THe Honor, and more the^ Angelical Reverence, which the B. Virgin showed unto
this most dreadful Sacrifice, by obseruiug and marking every Ceremony thereof,
with a most sweet taste of piety and denotion, may easily appear. For if (as
has been said before) she were so affected to all Holy places, because by them
she found her self stirred up to the memory and contemplation of the divine
mysteries and actions of her B. Son JESUS, and perceived in her self a
sensible increase of sundry pious affections; with how much more pleasure,
devotion and love may we imagine, her to be present at this most Holy sacrifice
of the Mass, in which the mysteries of the life and death of her B. Son (who
is there corporally and really present) are by the holy Ceremonies of the
Church expressed and called to mind,

Do you therefore imitate the B. Vir. in hearing mass daily, with reverence and
devotion, setting often before your eyes the example of her internal and
external reverence, her admirable Charity in contemplating the several
mysteryes of that dreadful sacrifice: and lastly be you wholly inflamed with the
fire of devotion, especially at the time of Elevation of the B. Sacrament,
supposing that then you even see the B. Virgin offering up her dearly beloved
Son into the hands of his Eternal Father: As S. Mary of Oegnia did use to
see upon every Ca^dlemas day, our B. Lady offering her little JESUS in the
Temple, and old Symeon embracing him in his arms, with admirable gust, and
content [Vitriac. in eius vita.]

Imagine likewise the B. Virgin to be present at the Holy Sacrifice of the
Mass, expounding the mysteries thereof unto you, as once she did to a certain
devout Priest, who being often tempted to doubt of the Real Presence of the
Body of our Lord in the Sacrament of the Altar, one Saturday as he was saying
Mass, perceived the sacred Host to be suddenly vanished away; whereat being
much amazed, whilst he looked about the Altar to find it, he beheld our
Blessed Lady standing near him, holding her little I ESVS in her arms, who
spoke thus unto him; Behold him, who^ I brought forth of my chaste womb, whom
thou have consecrated, handled, and elevated; I deliver this my son unto
thee, take him, and finish thy Mass. The priest received the heavenly Infant,
laying him down upon the Corporal, and when he came to that place of the
Mass where he was to divide the holy Host, the child suddenly vanished away,
and the Host remained in place thereof as before. Whereupon the clouds of his
misbeliefe being wholly dispersed he ever after inioyed great peace, and
tranquillity of mind. [Pelbart. in pomer. B. Vigin. lib. 12. p. vlt.. 1.]

Oh that you could, in hearing of Mass, but once hear the B. Virgin saying
unto you, Behold this, or that is now presented, or signified! Or that at the
elevation she would say, Behold now my B. Son, whom I bare in my most chaste
womb, here offered up in this vnbloudly sacrifice! Or in time of Communion,
you did imagine her, putting her most beloved son into your arms, as she did
once to old Simeon, to the Sheephards, to the three Kings, and others!

CHAP. IX. Of the Imitation of the B. Virgin, in receiving the Blessed
Sacrament.
THe most fervent Piety of the B. Virgin and her unspeakable propensio^ unto
things divine, together with the devout custom of Christians in those
primitive times, do manifestly prove, that whiles she remained on Earth after
the Ascensio^ of our Savior she did daily receive the Blessed Sacrament of the
Altar. Whosoever therefore desires to imitae our B. Ladies most holy Example in
often frequenting the Holy Communion (yet by the special direction of his
Ghostly Father) let him have a special care of that due preparation, purity,
humility, charity, and other Virtues, which she daily practiced, and diligently
observed.

And first of all, let it be your chiefest care to make that consideration very
familiar unto you (especially the day before you are to communicate, or else the
same morning) which F. Robert Southwell of the Society of Ieus (famous for his
constant suffering for the Catholic Cause in England) did daily use with
great gust of mind, and no less fruit of Spirit, and which he has left
written with his own hand, in these words. If (says he) the B. Virgin were to
bear Christ again in her womb, (or receive him in the holy Communion) and
knew the hour and moment in which he were to come, with what preparation would
she dispose herself? What continual acts of love, do you think, would she
make? How carefully would she prepare the chamber of her heart to receive him?
with how many tears, with what sighs with what arde^t prayers would she expect
that day and hour? And when she knew the time to be at hand, how humbly, how
devoutly, how reverently, would she prepare herself for the entertayning of
him? She would no doubt spend that time wholly in the contemplation of God, and
consideration his infinite Goodness, Love, Mercy and Majesty; in such manner,
that even enflamed with the fire of Charity, she would now become more divine
then humane; and for getting all earthly things, would even be ravished amongst
the Celestial Quires of Angels, together with him, whom she prepares to
receive. So writes Fa. Southwell, concerning a more remote preparation.

But now in the time of that Mass whereat you are to receive, you must dispose
your self in another manner; by styrring up in your self acts of Faith,
Humility, Confusion, and Sorrow for your sins, with these, or the like short
Aspirations; O how fervent, how intent were those acts of Faith which the B,
Virgin stirred up in her self, when she was to communicate! They were even as
great as that which she exercised, in believing the Angel Gabriell; announcing
the so admirable, and incomprehensible Nativity and Conception of the Son of
God! Or as that, wherewith she believed, and adored him as true God, most wise,
most Powerful, most Holy, of an infinite Majesty, Perfection, and Glory, even
when she saw him hanging naked on the Cross, exposed to injuries and scorns
of men, and last of all dying an infamous death! With this light of Faith how
profundly did she enter into herself, and how lowly did she humble herself
before the divine Majesty! she I say, who being elected the Mother of God, yet
reputed, and called herself his Handmayd? and who among the Apostles, and
disciples when they were gathered together expecting the coming of the Holy
Ghost, had placed herself in the lowest rank among them? Do you strive to
imitate as near as you can this humility and faith of the B. Virgin, and
falling down before the most B. Sacrament acknow ledge your own
unworthiness, confessing your sins, and detesting them from the bottom of
your heart; begging earnestly of the most pure Virgin who prepared a most decent
place to receive our Savior coming into the world, that she would offer you
up unto her Bl. son, cleansed, and purged from all sin, and render you
gracious in his sight.

You must also exercise acts of Hope, and Confidence in the mercy of God and
stir up in your self an carnest desire of receiving Christ in the same manner,
in imitation of the B. Virgin. Who can imagine how she did erect her self up
toward God, that so she might be made a most worthy habitation to receive his
B. son, having first tasted of the divine Mercy, and perceived her self to
be invited unto this most holy Sacrament, and disposed thereto by celestial
gifts and virtues? Or who can once conceive her earnest and fixed desire of
receiving Christ, which was with out doubt no less, then that with which, more
earnestly then any of the Patriarchs, she expected his coming into the world?
Or that, wherewith she sought him with so great solicitude the three days he
was lost in the Temple: Or else that, wherewith for the 3. days after his death
like the mourning Turtle, she sighed after his Resurrection. Imitate the most
B. Virgin in exercising the like acts of Hope, Confidence, and Desire of
receiving so bountiful a guest, by whom so many benefits do accrue unto thee.
Desire of her, that she would entreat thou may be drawn after him by the
odor of those celestial perfumes of his, and that he would adorn thy soul
with all decent ornaments of virtue.

S. Gertrude does recount of her self, how that she was admonished by the B.
Virgin, to repeat three times over the 116. Psalm, [Laudate Dominum omnes
gentes] in her honor, as often as she did communicate, thereby to prepare
herself more worthily to receive that holy Sacrament: First, to beseech our B.
Lady, by that most immaculate Purity, whereby she was made a pleasing Tabernacle
for the Son of God, to free her from the stayne of her sins, by her
intercession. Secondly, by that most profound Humility, whereby she deserved to
be exalted above the Quires of Angels, that she would be pleased to supply,
and make ame^ds for all her negligences. Thirdly, by that inestimable Love,
whereby she was inseparably united unto God, that she would obtain for her,
store and abundance of merits.

And the same S. Gertrud adds, that once upon a time whilst the Religious
drew near to the Communion, she did perceive the Queen of Glory on the right
hand of one who was among the rest, clothing her with a Robe adorned and
beautifyed with the flowers of prayer and devotion, and desiring her sweet
Son for her sake to have this Virgin in particular regard: Who at the
petition of his B. Mother presently showed great signs of grace and favor
unto them all. [E. 4. Insin. divine. cap. 49.]

You must likewise stir up in your self frequent acts of Love, following
therein the Example of Gods most Holy Mother. For who ca^ comprehe^d the fire
of that love, which always burned in the Blessed Virgins breast, when she was
ready to communicate, being as it were, even changed into a Holocaust,
especially when she considered that he was now wholly to be given unto her, who
had before wholly given himself for all mankind, as a bloody Sacrifice upon
the Cross? Who had given those hands and feet, to be cruelly boared through?
That breast to be pierced with a lance, which was yet more deeply wounded with
love? And lastly, who had given all his whole body, to be molded, and (as we
may say) baked with so many wounds, that it might become thereby bread more
delicious to our taste? Labor to beget in thy self the like love, and union
with Christ, by calling to mind every time thou do communicate, some one
passage or other, of his passion: so shall thou do a thing most grateful and
pleasing both to God, and his B. Mother.

S. Lydwine the holy Virgin, on a time lying sick in her bed, was very
desirous to communicate, but not having the commodity at that present, she was
comforted by her Angel Guardian, who told her, that very shortly Christ her
Lord, whom she so much desired would come and visit her. Whereupon converting
her self wholly to her prayers, being wrapped in contemplation, she perceived
diverse Angels coming toward bed her, one carrying the Cross, another the
Lance, some the whippes, others the reed, the nails, crown of thorns, with
all the Instruments of the passion. In the midst of the troop went the B.
Virgin, and last of all our B. Savior. Being come into her Chamber, they
compassed her Bed round. And then our Savior first turning toward her, with a
smiling countenance, in the likeness of a beautiful child, presently appeared
under the form of an Host, which she received with such abundance of solid
joy, that it was wonderful how so narrow a breast, could conteyne such an Ocean
of divine delights. [In eiu^ vita men's. April.]

Oh that thou could obtain but one only drop, out of this Ocea^ of divine,
Mercy, by the intercession of the B. Virgin, when thou art about to
communicate? Or at least, that thou could, with a sincere, and simple heart,
say with Thomas a Kempis: O Lord my God, my Creator, and my Redeemer, I do
desire to receive thee this day, with the same affection, reverence, praise and
honor, with the same gratitude, dignity and love, with the same Faith, Hope,
and purity, that thy Most Holy Mother the Glorious Virgin Mary did receive
thee, when most devoutly and humbly she answered unto the Angel Gabriel
announcing unto her the mystery of thy wonderful Incarnation: Behold the
handmayde of my Lord, be it do^e unto me according to thy word. [lib. 4. cap.
17.]

What we are to do after Communion, in imitation of the B. Virgin.
WHen you have communicated, you are principally to observe three things. 1. To
give thanks unto so great a guest whom you have received. 2. To desire to be
perpetually united unto God. 3. To demand of him, what may be necesary for
your self and others, in this, or the like manner.

O with what great joy and exultation, with what celestial delight was the B.
Virgin filled, when she had received the B. Sacramet? What infinite thanks did
she render unto the Divine Majesty for the same? She did, no doubt, ever and
anon repeat* that Ca^ticle with Iubilation: My soul does magnify our Lord.
With how great sincerity and simplicity of heart, did she offer her self, and
al she had unto him, whom she the^ lodged within her breast Christ JESUS, her
Son and her God? Do you offer up your self in the same manner, and imagine
that your Angel Guardian does salute you with words of congratulation and joy,
as did her Cosen S. Elizabeth our B. Lady: Blessed art thou, because thou have
believed, and receaned God in the sacred Communion. And do you answer joyfully
again: My soul does magnify our Lord etc. pondering particulerly every word
of that Canticle, the better to beget in your self affections like unto those
which the Bles. Virgin had when she song the same.

Ponder also, with what desire the holy mother of God did burn of seeing her
Son, not hidden under the Sacramental form of bread, but with his face
discovered, shining with glory in heaven? And that you may the better conceive
the same, hear the B. Virgin herself declaring this her desire, out of
Rupertus in these words: I did weep (says she) and could not speak a word
for the abundance of sighs that vehemently burst forth. For how could I
speak of him without weeping? Yet those tears were my only consolation, and
my sole delight: even as any one may conceive by those which themselves shall
sweetly shed, in memory of them whom they love best and dearest. And if David
could say; My tears were my bread both day and night, whilst it was said unto
him daily, Where is thy God: how much more reason had I to say the same of my
self, when it was said unto me daily, Where, is thy God, where is thy Son? Or
when I my self should say, My God, and my son has sent me hither into this
banishment [Rupert. l. 5. in Cant.]

And lastly, ponder with what feruor the B. Virgin did demand of Christ now
her Guest, new celestial gifts, both necessary for herself and others. With
what affection did she commend the universal Church unto him, with all the
faithful, both alive and dead? Do you seek to imitate her herein and
conclude this Exercise of the holy Communion. with the like petitions,
strengthened and seconded by the help and intercession of Gods most holy Mother.

CHAP. X. Of the Imitation of the B. Virgin, in laboring with our hands, or
corporal Exercise.
SAint Bonauenture, Euthymius, Sophronius, and others do write of our B. Lady,
that after she had spent the time from the morning to the 9. Hour in her
devotions, from that time until Midday, she used to employ herself in some
work or other. Before our Saviors Incarnation, she was wo^t during her living
in the Temple, diligently to spend her time, working in linen, woollen, and
silk, and in adorning the holy Vestments of the Priests. After the Conception
and birth of Christ, she carfully exercised the office of a Martha in his
education, and bestowed her time and labout in the active life, by procuring
things necessary for her house.

There is an Orchard of Balsamum, between Heliopolis and Babylon abundantly
made fruitful and watered by a Fountain, which springs up therein. In this (as
it recounted) the B. Virg. did use often to bath her little JESUS, and wash his
Clothes, whilst for fear of Herod they lived banished in Egypt. There is
likewise thereby a Stone, on which it is said she did use to dry those cloths
which she had washed. [Baron. in Annal. an. 7.] Others do affirmethat with her
own hands she wrought that seamles Garmet which our Savior wore at his
passion.

Whosoever therefore will imitate the B. Virgin, let him be sure to fly idleness.
As she admonished Rupertus a singular honourer of hers to do, to whom being of
a very dull wit before, she opened many secrets of holy Scripture, and filled
him with hidden knowledge, but with this charge, that he should fly idleness,
or else he should again be deprived of that singular knowledge, which she had
bestowed on him.

How grateful the exercise of laboring with the hands is unto our B. Lady,
does well appear, be it done either by obedience of Superiors, or of charity,
or with any pious inte^tion and end. For it is written in the Chronicles of the
Cistercians, that when the Religious of that Order one day had much labored
and sweat with reaping of Corn, the V. Virgin appeared to one of the^ a very
Holy and wise man, having a viol-Glasse in her had which she put often to their
noses, that they might smell the sweet savor which was within; saying these
words: To day I have seen my Religious laboring in the field, and I have
gathered their sweat into this viol, which does send forth a most grateful
odor unto my B. Son, and me. All that you do, I take to be done to me, I
accept it, and in due time I will reward you for it. [Spec. exempl. l. 9. exem.
102.

Of the internal devotion of our B. Lady.
NOw with what internal devotion and recollectio^ of mind, did the B. Virgin
exercise corporal labor, is evident by that which Petrus Damanus writes in
these words: The active and contemplative life (says he) were so aptly myxt,
and conjoined in the Bles. Virgin, that neither her Action did hinder her
Co^templatio^, nor was her Contemplation wanting in her Actions. [serm de not.
Dom,

The same is also testified by Guarinus [serm. de assu^pt B. Mariae] who says,
That the Virgin Mary did so perform the part of Martha in the care of well
bringing up her son, as she is believed to have had no less part with Mary,
in the contemplation of the Eternal word. And al those, who have gloryed in
the Title of being the Servants of the B. Virgin, have carefully imitated her
example in that kind, manteyning always their internal recollection even the
midst of their external labors.

S. Catharine of Siena, whilst her Parents did often seek to distracte her
mind, and divert her from holy purposes, by putting her to do the ordinary
offices of the house, was divinely instructed to build her self an Oratory in
her breast, more lasting the^ any could be made by hands from whence she should
never have occasion to be removed. The holy Saint did so, and imagined her
Father to be Christ JESUS her Mother our B. Lady, the rest of the house hold
to be the Apostles, and disciples of our Lord: by which pious imagination, she
served the^ all, to their great ad miratio^, with wonderful care and
diligence, being nevertheless no ways distracted from the presence of Christ her
true spouse, for whom, and unto whom she intended all that she did. [in eius
vita.]

B. Aloysius Gonzaga of the Soc. of JESUS was wont in like manner, whilst he
made ready the Refectory (that he might keep his Soul more attent unto God)
to imagine every place to belong unto some one in heaven; as the Rectors place
unto Christ our Lord, the next to it, unto our B. Lady, the rest which
followed, unto the Apostles, Martyrs, Confessors, and Virgins. So as when
soever he helped the Refectorian to make ready the tables he would say; Come
now, let us lay our Saviors Napkin, or his B. Mothers, and so in the same
manner would he call the rest by their several names, laboring in this manner
with a heart no less inflamed, with a will and affection no less ready and
fervent toward God then if indeed he had bin then to do the very same offices,
to the above named Saints in heaven. [In eius vita l. 2. c. 25.

CHAP. XI. The imitation of the B. Virgin, in her Eating, or Corporal
refection.
OF the admirable sobriety and abstinence of our Blessed Lady, S. Bonauenture
following the distribution of the time observed by the B. Virgin before the
Incarnation of Christ, has these words: From the ninth Hour she left not of
her Exercise before mentioned, until the Angel came unto her, from whose
hands she was wont to receive her sustenance. S. Ambrose speaking of her
abstinence says, what should I speak of the frugality of her diet, and the
abundance of her devotion? the one being wanting to nature, the other above
nature? the one adding day to day in fasting, the other letting pass no time
nor occasion? and whenever she had desire to eat, she made choice of what
was next at hand, and such as sufficed to maintain her life, not to please her
appetite. [c. 6. de Virgin.]

Neither did the B. Virgin herself use abstinence only, but has commended the
same also the others, who desire to honor her. We read of a certain Carthusi
an Brother who was so wholly devoted unto the love of God, and to the memory of
his B. Mother, as it was judged by those who knew well his I fe, that he knew
nothing but JESUS Christ Crucified, and his Holy Mother. One might being in his
cell, he seemed suddenly to be compassed about with a great troop of devils
in the sharp of wild swine gaping all-fearefully on him, with very long and
sharp teeth. Then entered also into his Cell, one in humane shape, of a huge
bigness, reprehending the foresaid Monsters for their slothful coward lines; and
having a terrible iro^ book full of long and crooked teeth threatened to tear
the holy man in pieces: but the Moher of God insta^tly appeared unto him,
having in her hand a little wand, saying: How dare you, ye vile monsters, come
near unto him, he is none of yours, neither can you prevail against him. At
which words the wicked crew, swifter the^ thought, did vanish away. Then she
turning to the Religious man said: thou shall understand that thy devotion is
very grateful and acceptable both to God and me, therefore persevere as how
have begun, and strive daily to profit therein. And that I may also give thee
some directions in particular, be sure to eat the worst meat thou can find:
Exercise thy self devoutly in the labor of thy hands, and choose the worst
and coursest clothes. And having thus spoken unto him, she sently departed.
[Vincent, Bellou. l. 7. spec. hist. c. 117.]

How the Bl. Virgin did join the Refection of her mind with that of her Body.
Neither may we make doubt, but that the B. Virgin whilst she fed her body,
did also nourish her soul, since that she had the Angels always to serve
her, and Christ our Lord sitting at the Table with her.

If you desire to imitate this recollection of the B. Virgin, and nourish your
soul with some pious meditation whilst you are feeding your body; on Sunday
you may imagine, that you see the heavenly banquet, wherewith the Angels and
Blessed souls in heaven, together with Jesus Christ and his B. Mother are
sweetly replenished with the Glory of God. On monday, you may imagine Christ
our Lord in his Holy Mothers arms when he was a child, feeding, and sucking at
her breasts. On Tuesday, think you see him now more grown, sitting at the
Table with the Bl. Virgin, and S. Joseph. On Wednesday, that you see him
seeding in the desert, after he had fasted forty days, receiving food from
the hands of Angels. On thursday, that you see him eating his last Supper with
his disciples. On Friday drinking gal on the cross. On Saturday, that you see
the Bl. Virgin, as before said, feeding with the Angels who administer unto
her; or else, saying grace at your table, giving a sweet taste and relish to your
meat with the honey of her divine Goodness and Mercy. Which benefit she has
often bestowed on many, especially Religious persons: as she was once seen to
go about the Table of the Cistercia^ monks, and with her own hands distribute
a certain Electuary, or sweet confection to all of them, one only excepted who
refused to eat as the rest did, but was of a particular diet [Caesar. l. 7. c.
48.]

It is recorded also of one Fulbertus, a singular Honourer of the Bles. Virgin,
that being once very sick, and loathing all kind of meat, the B. Virgin
apeared to him, and gave him her virginal breasts to suck, whereby he
presently recovered his health. O that the Bles. Virgin would bestow upon us
some of that celestial sweetness, out of her motherly breasts! how then should
we despise and contemn all these corporal delicacies, and sensual pleasures,
which are as well common even unto brute beasts, as to us.

With what discourse did the B. Virgin recreate her mind, after her Refection.
AFTER her sparing and temperate repast, we may piously imagine what recreation
the B. Virgin used, being so nearly conjoined to God, that daily she conuersed
with him, or with Angels, or else with S. Joseph, or some of the sacred Virgins
who had dedicated their service to the honor of God in the Temple. It was
revealed to S. Brigit that Christ JESUS when he was yet a Child (in private and
domestical discourse with his Mother and S. Joseph) did reveal unto them
diverse hidden and divine things; and that the sweetness of his words caused in
the^ both singulardelight, kindling a great fiame of the divine love in their
breasts. [lib. 6. de revel. cap. 58.]

And it has been said before, that those who are truly lovers and honourers of
the B. Virgin, are very much addicted to spiritual colloquies and discourses;
therefore there is no need to say any more thereof in this place.

CHAP. XII. How the Bles. Virgin i to be imitated in Sleeping.
YOu may learn out of S. Ambrose, what the repose of our B. Lady was. The B.
Virgin (says he l. 2. de Virg.) had sooner necessity the^ desire to sleep and
yet, whilst her body did rest, her soul was still watchful, often repeating
in her sleep what she had read; or interrupted of her rest, she continued
still the same. To which may added out of S. Bernard, that whilst the B. Virgin
slept, by a meritorious act, she did wholly aspire unto God and was even then a
perfect co^templant. [serm. 51. c. 2.]

The which sanctity of hers even in sleeping you are to imitate, as near as
you can. To the attaining whereof a continual devotion and exercise of virtue
will wonderfully help. Besithe B. Virgin does use to bestow her benediction upon
those who take their rest in decent and holy manner, as S. Dominicke did see
her once sprinkle with holy water, and bless all his Religious being a sleep,
excepting one, who lay indecently in his bed, although he were ignorant thereof.

CHAP. XIII. Of the Imitation of the princicipall Virtues of the B. Virgin: and
first of her Purity.
THat the B. Virgins Purity was never so much as blemished, with the least spot
of sin, S. Basil in one word does sufficiently declare when he says: That
among all Creatures living there was not any greater nor the like Purity to be
found then that of the Bl. Virgin. [in orat. de hum. Christi gener.] And S.
Anselme says: The pure Sanctity, and most saintly Purity of her pious breast,
did infinitely surpass the purity of all other creatures whatsoever. (de
Excel. B. Virgin. c. 9.)

And the better to preserve this purity the B. Virgin did accompany it with two
other Virtues, to wit, the continual Presence of God, and as careful Custody
of her self. Of the presence of God, Canisius does thus discourse. What is
more happy then the B. Virgin, who whithersoeuer she went, did always
contemplate the Everlasting Divinity of God adoring inwardly so great a Majesty
in spirit and truth, conceyuing nothing in that her so pure and holy breast but
what was also most divine and pure. (lib. 1. c. 13.) Of her ever watchful care
to keep this Purity, the B. Virgin herself said thus unto S. Brigit. Even from
that time (said she) that I first understood there was a God, I was always
fearful and solicitous of my self, and of my observance toward him, inwardly
loving him, and every hour fearing least by word, or deed, I might any ways
offend him. [lib. de revel. cap. 10.]

Of the love and desire of the like Purity.
NOw that you may not only know this Purity but that knowing it, may also love
it, and that loving it, may likewise desire and embrace it, you must often
represent unto your self the most admirable purity of the B. Virgin as most
resplendant, fair, lovely and grateful both to God, Angels, and Men. She
appeared once to S. Gertrude, like to a most white and shining Lilly, spreading
it self before the most Holy and Indiuidual Trinity: at what time the B. Virgin
likewise taught her the following Salutation, as most gratful unto herself.
Hayle O white Lilly of the ever resplendant, and peaceable Trinity. Hail o
fair Rose of the celestial Delights, of whose Root, the king of heaven
vouchsafed to be borne, and of whose milk he would be fed, thereby to nourish
our souls with divine Influence. [lib. 3. insin. divine. c. 19.] Even so when
you shall behold any Image of our B. Lady, as if you perceived some lively
purity therein say; O B. Mary, more fair then the sun by thy purity, and in
sple^dour surpassing the stars, I have Ioued you eue^ from my youth, and I am
become a lover of your Beauty.

Another time the Blessed Virgin appeared to S. Clare of Monte Falco (who
though, she were then but six years old, did labor to obtain this purity, by
despising althings for the most pure love of Christ) bearing in her arms her
little JESUS, and so soon as the holy Child beheld S. Clare, he desired to go
down on the ground, to embrace her as his beloved spouse. Whereupon S. Clare
coming to embrace him, he again as in play and sport ran from her, and hid
himself under his Mothers garments, leaving notwithstanding in the heart of
the little Saint, a meruaylous sweetness of his love.

A particular examen touching the practice of imitating the said Pu^rity.
TO the practice of this Purity, a particular Examine is very necessary to be
made, at a certain time and place, as near as may be, observing these two
special points. 1. To Examine your greater sins, if by chante you have
fallen into any, making a firm purpose by the grace of God utterly to forsake
them. 2. You must conceive a great and most vehement desire to root out all
sin wholly. For the first, think often with your self, how displeasing such
offenses are unto the B. Virgin, being so pure, and thirsting so greatly after
the divine Honor and Glory and so extremely auerted from all sins,
especially mortal. Of which her auersion, we have an example of one, who
coming unto her House of Loreto on Pilgrimage, burdened with a number of
sins, and of a life most impure was twice frighted from entering into the
sacred House by certain terrible visio^s which the saw before him at the door;
nor was he able by any means to enter before he had been at confession, and
received absolution of his sins. [Tursell. in hist. Laur. l. 5 c. 27.]

The like happened unto S. Mary of Egypt sometimes a grievous sinner, who was
hindered by a celestial force from entering into the Holy Sepulcher of our Lord
at Jerusalem, until by help of the Mercy and pity of the B. Virgin, she began
seriously to amend her life.

Secondly when you have purged your self from greater sins by the
intercession of the B Virgin, and by the help of divine Grace, you are to
proceed unto the rooting out of venial sins; and first, and chiefly, those,
which may incline you to commit greater and more dagerous Crimes, and into
which you do more ordinarily fall; persuading your self for certain that not
only mortal, but even the least Venial finne is greatly displeasing to the B.
Virgin.

S. Catharine of Siena contemplating on a time a divine Vision, for only
casting aside her eyes, out of curiosity, was for that so little distraction
sharply reprehe^ded by the B. Virgin in such sort, that it caused her to shed
abundance of bitter tears. [in eius vita.] As also a certain Monk of the
cistercians Order of an innocent life, by chance falling a sleep one night
after Mattins before an Altar in the Church, was presently awaked by the
Bles-Virgin, telling him, that was no place of sleeping, but of praying.

How to beg the gift of Purity of the B. Virgin.
You must also beg often, and humbly the gift of Purity of the B. Virgin: to
which end you may repeat these words of Holy Church, in the Hymn of Aue Maris
stella.

Grant us pure life we pray, And make our way secure: That so behoulding Christ
our joy may always dure. And since that the first degree of Purity, is the
true knowledge of our self and of our own defects, you must frequently desire
the same of the B. Virgin, and that she would give you so much light whereby to
see and discover all your sins and imperfections, that so you may detest
them, and make a full confession thereof, at your first opportunity.

This favor she once imparted to a youth of her Sodality in Germany, who upon
a tymevery carefully examining his conscience of all thoughts, words, and
deeds, and humbly desiring of the Queen of heaven, that he might leave none
of his sins unconfessed; behold suddenly, there fell down from above, a
paper of wonderful whitnes, just before his face as he was praying, wherein
all his sins, in a very small, but curious character were written, with this
addition, that if he confessed all which was in that paper contained, and did
but devoutly say over his Rosary in the honor of the B. Virgin, he should be
in a very good state. And that which incresed the miracle was that an other
youth of the same Sodality, as also his Father, the Pastor of the parish, and
many others endeavoring to read the same paper, could never understand one
letter thereof. [Annuae Soc. Jesus. an. 1588. Coll. Monast.]

Moreover you are to co^ecyue a most vehement detestation of all your sins,
as well of those you know as of those you know not, or may have forgotten, such
as S. Anselme conceived, when he said: If (quoth he) on the one side I should
see hell, and on the other side a Mortal sin, and must needs choose one of
them; I had rather go into Hell a thousand times, then commit but that one
Mortal sin. And he adds: That he had rather go to Hell, free and pure from
sin, then to Heaven, defiled with the filth, and ordure of sin.

Lastly you must most humbly, and often beg pardon of your sins, and
amendment of your life, even from the bottom of your heart through the mercy
and pity of Gods Holy Mother who does lovingly receive all those which fly
unto her for help; like unto that Cloud which God did once spread over the
children of Israel to protect them in their flight out of Egypt, and in their
journey in the Desert, covering and shading them like a Canopy, from the
intolerable heat of the Sun. O how often had the ardor of divine Justice
even consumed al humane kind, had not the B. Virgin interposed her prayers
betwixt us and the same like to another cloud, and defended us from the fury of
his offended Majesty? In vain should we seek refuge against the reuengefull
hand of God, who with sword, sulphur, thunder, and most direful flames daily
menaceth the world, having every where so great and enormous sins to punish:
for who could be able to persuade, or mitigate his most just wrath and fury,
but only the pious Mother of our Lord, by extending the bosom of her pity and
commiseration to save us miserable sinners, and by interposing her
intercessions to keep us from the deadly stroke? whereof the world is full of
examples, as once S. Gertrud did see her, as it were protecting all kind of
wild beasts under her garment, by which was signified sinners flying unto her
for refuge and succor. A notable example whereof we will here recount.

A certain wicked soldiar having no hope of his salvation, by reason of the
multitude and hey nousnes of his sins, coming once into a Church, fell down
on his knees prostrate before an Image of the B. Virgin, desyring help of her
with many tears: when behold the Child JESUS in the arms of his B. Mother
seemed also to weep with him, and a fountain of water to issue out of the B.
Virgins hand, which moystened all the Altar whereo^ it fell: thereby to give
the Soldier to understand, how great trust and confidence he was to have in her
who was the fountain of all Mercy, and how easily the Son would be won by
his Mothers prayers, who did with tears receive a lost man returning unto him.
His Companions understanding of the miracle, came running thither, to the end
their eyes might be witness, and more credit given to the wonder; who in
testimony thereof did divide among the^ as a precious relic, a Ha^dkercher
wet in the said water. The soldiar having made confession of all the wickedness
of his former life, vowed to enter into Reigion. [Bonif. and Orland. E. 4. c. 5.

CHAP. XIV. Of the Imitation of the Chastity of the B Virgin.
HOw excellent the Chastity of the Bles. Virgin was, S. Antoninus well declares
when he says: That it did not only exceed the Purity of all earthly Creatures,
but eue^ of the Angels themselves. And truly the Epithete, or addition of the
world VIRGIN, is so proper to the Mother of God, that Epiphanius exclayming
out, says: Who durst ever yet pronounce the Name of Blessed Mary, and being
demanded whom he meant, did not presetly reply the VIRGIN Mary? Abraham had
given him the Title, of Friend of God, nor shall it be taken from him: Jacob had
the Name of Israel, and it shall not be altered: and B. Mary the Syrname of
VIRGIN, nor shall it be ever changed for she always remained most chaste and
pure. [Haeres 78.]

And although God himself had particular care of this her Treasure of
Virginity, yet did she also use all posssible diligence for preservation
thereof, as in shu^ning the sight and conversation of men, and therefore is
called. ALMA by the Prophet I say, which is as much as to say, a Virgin, hidden
or retired from the sight of men, and of a most approved Chastity. And
Galatinus says; that the eyes of the B. Virgin did never behold any unlawful
thing and that among other her many perfections, she was indewed with the
spirit of Prophesy, in such manner, as if at any time she might chance to
hear, or see any indecent thing her ears and eyes should presently be shut,
and wholly reserved to fulfill the divine pleasure, ( lib. de Arcan. cap. 5.)

Nor did the Bl. Virgin only, love and preserve her own Virginity, but also
did beget the same in others. For although (as says S. Bonauenture) she were
of a most fair and admirable aspect, yet did she move all men thereby unto
greater purity of life. And now in heaven (says S. Ambrose) she has hu^g out
her banner of Purity, and sacred Virginity, and by her protection secureth all
to follow and embrace the same. (l. de instit. Virg. c. 5.)

Let this her Angelical virtue therefore move and incite us to her imitation.
O how fair is a chaste generation with nobleness? And let vt conceive a most
earnest desire of obtaining the same by often representing to our selves the B.
Virgin, calling upon us in these words of Ecclesiasticus: Come unto me all you
who seek after me, and you shall be filled with my generations. For my spirit
it sweeter the^ honey, and the honey comb. I have fructifyed like the vine, and
brought forth the sweetness of odor; and my flowers are fruits of honor and
honesty.

Now that you may the better obtain this virtue, you must often call to mind
this versicle of the Church. O Virgin singular, in mildnes passing all,
Make us both meek and chaste delivered from sins thral,
As also this other: By thy immaculate Conception, o most glorious Virgin, we
beseech thee deliver us. Which short prayer, Doctor Auila a most famous
Preacher in Spain, does affirm to be of great force against all impure, and
unclean thoughts.

Lastly in what esteem the pure lovers of Chastity are with God and his B.
Mother, may appear by the following history. One Iulianus a Noble yongman, who
intended to live chaste, was contrary to his pious desire enforced by his
parents to mary a like Noble virgin called Basilissa. Now when night drew on,
and they retired to their Bridal Chamber, there was such a sent of Lillyes and
Roses (although it were then winter) that the Bride Bas^^ssa thought herself to
be in some pleasant Garden in the month of May. Whereupon her husband took
occasion to tell her of his desire and purpose, and so far prevailed with her,
that she likewise there vowed Virginity unto JESUS the most pure spouse of al
chaste hearts. She had no sooner done, but they perceived the Chamber to shine
with a wonderful light, and saw Christ Jesus in the midst of a multitude of
Celestial wights, all clothed in white garments, and the B. Virgin environed
with virgins one every side to approach unto that holy Marriage feast; together
with most melodious music, fit for so great a solemnity sounding forth these
words, Julia^ how have conquered: And, Blessed be thou, O Basilissa, who have
obeyed the wholesome counsel of thy spouse. Then was there given unto Julian a
fair book to read, in which was written this: Those who for the love and
desire of me, have despised the world, shall have their place among the^, that
never knew any woman. Basilissa shall remain among the Order of virgins,
whereof MARY the Mother of JESUS is Queen and Princess, After Julian had read
this, he shut the Book, and all the holy Quires of Saints there present
answered with one voice, Amen. O with what solid and pure delight was this most
chaste Pair of pure Souls filled? where are ye, O ye vanities of the
deceytfull fading impure, wretched world? how poor and miserable will ye
seem compared with these celestial, and most solid delights?

CHAP. XV. The Imitation of the Poverty of the B. Virgin.
1. HOw poor the B. Virgin was in her proper choice, and how much she despised
and neglected all earthly riches, Saint Brigit does declare in these words:
That high-soaring Soul, (says she) which did co^templat the rewards prepared
for the just in heaven, did prefer them before all other temporal riches, yea
in regard of them she did so contemn all other external goods and faculties,
that she was alone content with that which did only seem enough unto her, to
the only necessary sustenance of her life. (.10 Revel. cap. 10. and 3. cap. 8.)
And Richelius (cited by Canisius lib. 1. cap. 10.) testifies the same, when he
says that the B. virgin after her Son was glorified and ascended into
heaven, did so conform her self with his new glory, that the world grew daily
more and more vile in her sight and esteem, she thirsting insatiably after
celestial things.

2. How truly poor she was in her temporal estate the same S. Brigit
declares thus from the B. Virgins own mouth. From the beginning (says she) I
made a vow in my heart, if so it might be acceptable to God, never to possess
any thing in the world. The which our Saviors poor Nativity in the stable,
and the handicraft of Saint Joseph, as also her own hand-labour do
sufficiently witness, yea after the Ascension of Christ into heaven, she lived
among the poor and Evangelical widows of the Jews, with whom she received
her alms, out of the common Charity of others, with great simplicity, and joy
of heart. And although it be not improbable, that the B Virgin when she fled with
her little son JESUS into Aegipt did live by the charity of others, and did
ask alms from place to place: Nevertheless diverse grave Authors are of
opinion, that afterward she lived not so, it being an indecent thing that so
most holy and chaste a Matrone should so offer frequent the houses and
conversation of others, or that so great a lover of priuacy, should so often
appear in public.

3. Thirdly, that this Poverty of our blessed Lady was free, of her own
accord, and not constrained thereto through want or necessity, appears as well
by the quality of her parents, whose only daughter and inheritresse she was, as
also by the many rich, and precious gifts of the three Kings, and of others,
who would never have suffered her to have wanted any thing had she but desired
the same.

4. Fourthly, she was most obseruant of neatnes and beseeming decency in ber
habit, and clothes, as having them always very neat and handsome, and of a
most grave and modest color. And the like also in her Chamber, of which the
Archangel Gabriell had the charge, as testifies Guarinus and many others.

Lastly, how much the B. Virgin desires, this her Poverty, (which was our
Saviors perpetual companion on Earth) should be esteemed off by men, all good
Religious persons do abounda^tly testify by their obserua^ce of the Holy
Poverty which they profess and vow. And Saint Francis, famous for his poverty,
throughout the Christian world, received that spirit in no other place the^ in
the church of our B. Lady, named Portiuncula, or, Of the Angels; unto which
Place, as witnesses S. Bonauenture, he bare a more special reverence, then
unto any other place in the world, as having there humbly begun, virtuously
proceeded, and most happily ended; and at his death commended the same unto his
Friars as a place most pleasing to the B. Virgin. [In cius vita c. 2.]

CHAP. XVI. The Imitation of the B. Virgin, in humility, Modesty, Patience, and
Obedience.
HOw great the virtue of Humility, as the foundation of al other virtues, was
in the Blessed Virgin S. Mechtild declares thus: The first virtue wherein she
exercised her self was Humility, thinking always so humbly of her self, that
although she were adorned which so many graces, and privileges yet did she
never prefer her self before any other person, but humbled her self even
unto al, conseruing silently in her breast the many virtues, and praises due
unto her; as may appear by her ca^ticle of Magnificat; the which S. Mary of
Oegnia did sing forth, as she lay a dying, thereby to declare the honor which
she bare unto the Bles. Virgin, as having burned all her life time with a most
arde^t desire of imitating her humility. In recompense whereof the B. V. willed
her to call for the last Sacrament of Extreme Unction, and was present at her
death, with all the ho^ly Apostles, and Christ himself, who at the feet of the
dying Saint fixed his triu^phant banner of the Cross as a token of her
Victory, whereby she triumphed by the Humility of the Cross over all her
enemies. (Ineius vita cap. 3.)

Nor can we here pass over in silence that rare and singular fervor of
imitating the Humility of the Blessed Virgin, which was observed in S. Lewis
King of France, whose custom was every Saturday through out the year, in
honor of the B. Virgin to wash, wipe, and kiss privately in his chamber, the
feet of certain poor people; leaving to posterity a rare, and new example of
kingly submission. (In eius vita. of the Modesty of the B. Virgin.

Unto Humility, did the B. virgin join Modesty, as an inseparable companion:
Whereof S. Bernard speaking, thus writes. When as (says he) the B. Virgin did
hear her Son either speaking to the people in parables, or revealing unto
his disciples the mysteries of the kingdom of heaven; or when she saw him
work miracles, yea hanging on the Cross and breathing out his soul, rising
again in glory, or lastly ascending into heaven; yet at any of these times do
we never read that the voice of this most bashful Virgin, of this most chaste
Turtle has bin heard to speak. (sermon. Signum magnu^.) And if at any time she
had occasion to speak, with what modesty, and humility did she utter her
words? She spoke, says Nicephorus (l. 2. hist.) unto al without pride, without
laughter, without perturbation, as deuoyd of all haughtines, simple, obseruant,
and of most excellent humility.

And this Virtue, so highly esteemed by the Blessed Virgin, she much comme^ds
to those who honor her. For, as witnesses S. Gregory [l. 4. dial. cap. 17.]
on a ty me she admonished one Musa a young Virgin, much devoted unto her, to
abstain from idle play, jesting, laughter, and all other childish leuity, if
she desired to raygne with her. And truly, if the B. Virgin living here on
earth were so careful, as says S. Bonauenture (in medit. vitae Christi c. 3.)
that none with whom she co^uersed should offend by any speech of theirs, nor
that they should be heard at any time to laugh, or utter any injurious words of
others: how much more solicitous may we now think her to be in heaven, that we
should observe this Virtue of hers?

Of the Patience of the Bl. Virgin.
THe virtue of Patience springs also out of Humility, the which shined most
clearly throghout the life of the B. Virgin. For that she was most cheerful in all her persecutions and afflictions, never complaining in her want or
necessity, yea always most obseruant and officious even toward her enemies.
And S. Ambrose treating of her Constancy, and Fortitude whilst she stood at the
foot of the Cross, says; The mother stood by the Cross of her Son, as not
fearing the danger of her own life. The Son hunge upon the Cross, and the
Mother of fred herself unto the persecutors, whereby she became more then a
Martyr, and is therefore commonly called the Queen of Martyrs. (l. de ins^t.
virg.)

But how many, and how solid arguments of patience did the B. Virgin suggest
unto S. Lidwyne a most devout servant of hers, whilst she lay grievously sick
for many years, may easily appear, in that she often sent unto her an Angel
to recreate and comfort her with his presence in the midst of her dolours and
afflictions. This Angel would often carry S. Lidwyne to an Image of the B.
Virgin to salute the same: often also to a most pleasant Garden of flowers, and
into a most sweet and temperate air, where she suffered neither heat nor
cold. Sometimes also would he carry her to see the pains in Purgatory, that she
might learn to set light by what she suffered here on earth. At other times
would he raise her up to behold the Blessed Souls in heaven, from whence she
received such abundant pleasure and delight, that she was even ravished with
the sight thereof. And the Blessed Saints did call unto her, and animate her in
these words: Suffer constantly, Lidwyne, that which yet remains for thee to
suffer; for we all have passed through fire, and water, before we came to enjoy
this rest and happiness as you see. (Jn eius vita.) Do you likewise imagine, that
you hear the B. Virgin animating you with like words, to suffer courageously
whenever occasion is offered.

To this may be added the example of Hermanus surnamed Co^tractus, or the
Cripple (borne of a noble Family in Sueueland) so called for that all his
members were from his youth shrunk up, and contracted. This man led a
Religious life famous for learning, in the holy Order of S. Benedict, about the
year of Christ 1060. And praying once unto the Bles. Virgin most earnestly to
grant him the use of all his lymmes, she appeared unto him and gave him his
choice of these two things, either to remain as he was, and have the gift of
al humayne and divine science and learning, or else to be made whole, and
altogether ignorant and unlearned. But he considering well the matter, chose to
remain a cripple as he was (Tritem. de viris illustr. lib. 2. c. 84.)

No doubt but the Blessed Virgin persuaded this singular example of patience
unto Hermanus, to give us to understand, that whosoever will please the Blessed
Virgin, according to her example, must patiently embrace all troubles and
afflictions. But to return unto our story. From that time forwards Hermanus
did so excel in all kind of Learing both in the Latin, Greek, and Arabicke
tou^ge as he was inferior to none of his age. And among many other things he
set forth the Ant-hymne of Salve Regina, usually sunge by the^ Church in her
Office, and often celebrated by Angelical music, and many miracles.

Of the Obedience of the B. Virgin.
LAstly, Obedience, the Daughter of Humility, was most excellent and rare in
the B. Virgin the which Gerson does confirm when he says: That she standing
by the Cross, exercised a most high Act of Obedience, in offering her Son
unto God, and in conforming her will, in his most bitter death, unto the will
of God. She was most obedient unto all, but especially unto her Parents, as
says S. Metchtild of whom she was so obseruant, that she never offended them
in any the least thing. The Virtue of her imitation in this so excellent manner
she commended unto S. Catharine daughter to S. Brigit, who living at Rome with
her Mother, did so greatly desire to return to her Country of Sueuia again,
that her Mother could by no means persuade her from the same. Whereupon the B.
Virgin appearing, did sharply reprehend her, saying: Shall I help, or favor
thee in any thing, when thou neither obeyest God, nor me, nor thy Mother, nor
thy Confessor? After this admonition, S. Catherine began to desist, and was
ever after of a most ready, and prompt obedience. (Sur. in eius vita.)

The great propension and readiness of Fa. Peter Canisius of the Society of
JESUS, and late Apostle of Germany, to honor the B. Virgin, is well known
unto all; and himself has declared in the end of his fifth Book written of
her praises. The which our B. Lady did as greatly and abundantly reward, by
bestowing on him the Virtue of Obedience to his Superiors, with such true
feeling and impression of heart, as he was ready to undergo any Office, or
ministry of the Society, though never so mean, or humble without respect or
care of himself, but reposing all his comfort and confidence in God and his B.
Mother. These be his own words.

I desire you earnestly, O most glorious Queen, whom none do call upon
without pious fruit, that you would favorably accept this poor testimony of
my devotion toward you. I confess I am not Ephrem, that I would dare to say
with him; Make me worthy to praise you, o holy Virgin. Neither am I Damascen,
that I should make new hymns unto your honor? Nor am I Hildephonsus, that I
should be honored with a peculiar reward for undertaking your defense: But I
shall think my self fully and highly rewarded, if you would be pleased to
enrole me, not in the number of your friends, or children, but of your servants
and vassals.

Thus he of his devotion toward the B. Virgin. Hear now what a true feeling
of Obedience she therefore, in recompense bestowed upon him. For he thus
answered S. Jgnatius commending Obedience unto all those of his Society, and to
him in particular.

I do simply profess, that it will be most grateful unto me, whatsoever
office or ministry shall be enjoined me by holy Obedience be it of Cook,
Gardener, Porter, or any other office, in which I am ignorant and wholly to
learn. And from this day forwards, I do make a holy vow, setting aside all
respect whatsoever, that I will have no care hereafter either of the disposal
of my self for Mission or habitation, or any other commodity whatsoever, but
remit all unto the Care and disposition of our Reverend Father General; to
whom I offer up, and faithfully commend in Christ Jesus our Lord, the
government both of my body and soul my understanding, my will, and all that I
have. (Orla^d, hist. l. 8. n. 4.)

Do you by these examples implore the aid of the B. Virgin, that you may be
obedient in so excellent a degree, imagining you hear her often say unto you
as she did to those servants of the wedding feast in Cana of Galiley:
Whatsoever he shall say unto you, that do.

CHAP. XVII. The Imitation of the B. Virgin in Charity toward our Neighbors.
SAint Bonauenture speaking of the Alms which the B. Virgin was wont to bestow
upon the poor when she was yet a Child, says: She refreshed her body with the
food she received from the hand of her Angel and gave all that was allowed
her by the Priests of the Temple, unto the poor. (medit. c. 13.) Saint
Ignatius also says: she was very pitiful toward the poor and afflicted;
being always ready to help their necessityes. in Canis. l. 1. c. 13.) From
hence may we imagine, that she distributed all the offerings of the three Kings
unto the poor, as also assisted toward the poor wedding in Cana of Galiley.

And how pleasing the giving of Alms is unto the B. Virgin, may appear out
the life of S. Lydwyne before mentioned, who by order of the B. Virgin was once
conducted by an Angel into Paradise, where she saw as it were an army of
Saints, in the midest of whom was the B. Virgin herself, sitting at a Table
richly covered with silk feeding upon the Alms which S. Lidwyne had given
unto the poor in Earthen vessels, but now set forth in dishes of gold and
crystal, with admirable joy and content. Upon whom herself also did seem
ioifully to wait, and administer all things fitting. After this vision she
always increased her liberality and alms unto the poor. (Jn eius vita.)

What should I say of the zeal of souls, wherewith the B. Virgin did so burn
whilst she lived on Earth? She became all, unto all, that she might gain all,
perfectly knowing the end of the Law and consumatio^ thereof, to be only
charity. Wherefore as witnesses S. Brigit, she was the Mistress of the
Apostles, Example of Martyrs, Doctresse of Confessors, Mirror of Virgins,
Comfortresse of Widows, wholesome admonshier of the married, perfect
strengthner of al in the Catholic faith, by whose words, works, examples,
studies and honest labors many Jews and Ethnicks have been converted to the
faith of Christ. Neither does she now, since her assumption into heaven, cease
continually to seek the salvation of souls by all means possible. She it is,
who sent aid unto S. Bernard, S. Dominicke, and S. Francis, and to those of
their Orders laboring in the world for the conversion of souls. She it is who
has led forth Ignatius, Xauerius, Barzeus and others, into the lists, and
field to fight the combats of Christ Jesus. Whosoever therefore thou art, that
labourest in the conversion of souls, remember that thou offer up, and
seriously commend thy function unto this Glorious Virgin, and give her thanks
for all the fruit which thou already have, or shall reap, either by thy own,
or by others labor, in the Vineyard of our Lord.

CHAP. XVIII. The Imitation of the B. Virgin in the Love of God.
Whatsoever has bin hitherto said of the Excellency of the B. Virgins
Sanctity, is to be ascribed unto her Love of God, whereof she was full, and by
which she was led unto all the rest at the first Motion thereof. Of this so
great flame of her love Sophronius thus writes. The love of Christ (says he)
did beget the desire of his Mother and the desire so increased and enkindled
within her, being still repaired, and augmented with fresh fuel, that I
believe, as at al times she surpassed all others, so at sometimes she even
exceeded herself. For who ca^ ever imagine with what unquenchable flames of
pious love she burned, who was so full of grace, infused by the holy Ghost,
that there was nothing in her to violate her affection, but a continual ardour
and rauishment of love? [sermone de Assumpt.

Whosoever thou art that seek after this most fair and odoriferous flower
of Divine Love; whoseouer thou art, that with S. Augustine, or S. Bonauenture,
desire to have the inermost bowels of thy soul pierced through with the
most sweet, and healthful wound of the divine love, or with S. Francis to have
thy mind wholly absorpt, and consumed in the furnace of the love of God, that
thou might eue^ dye for him, who for thy love was pleased to give up his life
upon the Cross; approach near unto the B. Virgin, and first contemplate her
virtues and perfections from which, after thou shall have admired them as
incomprehensible and innumerable, thou may pass to the consideration of the
fountain of al these gifts and graces, to wit, God himself; in comparison of
whom, all the excellencyes and perfections of the Bl. Virgin, all her beauty,
sanctity, yea and the whole mass of all her graces, heaped together, will
seem but as a drop, derived from that Ocean of Goodness and Love which is in
him. Who with this consideration does not burn and wholly consume with the
Love of God? Who now will not cry out with S. Augustine, Oh what is it that I
love, loving my God! This contemplation you must accompany with fervent prayers
unto the B. Virgin, that she will imprint in your heart, the inviolable
affection of this Charity. O how readily, how easily will she hear your
petition, coming from a heart sincere and pure? To which end, she gave once
unto a certain Virgin who had long desired that high favor of her, her little
Blessed son into her arms of whom Jesus demanding whether she loved him or
no? She answered him, yea even more then her own body. He asked her, how much
more? she said more then her heart. He asked her again, how much more the^ her
heart? Whereunto the Virgin answered, Let my heart answer for it self, for I
have no more to say; at which words it presently burst asu^der with the
vehemence of Love, wherein were written these words in golden letters: I love
thee more then my self, since thou have created, redeemed and espoused me.
[Spec. exemp. d. 9. ex. 74]

O sweet Eclypse of a loving soul! O lively Love of God, which by taking away
this mortal, does lead us unto an immortal life! O profitable Love, and service
of the Bl. Virg. which does beget in our souls the Love and honor of Almighty
God, by so happy and blessed a death! For so shall the lovers of the B. Virgin
dye: who ready to depart out of this life, and drawing toward their last end,
la^guishing more with the love of God, then the force of sickness, shall aspyre
unto the celestial kingdom, desire to be dissolved, and be with Christ: and
turning unto the B. Virgin, shall in most humble manner implore her aid and
assistance, saying: O B. Mary, help me, and protect me from mine enemies, and
receive me now in the hour of my death.

There needs no more to be said; for one only sigh, one only tear of such as
are truly devoted unto the B. Virgin, in their necessity and affliction, does
beyond all imagination so stir up her motherly pity and co^miseratio^, that
she presently is ready to assist them, saying: [I am here ready to help you,
be confident. A worldly Mother may neglect her own child a dying; she may be
absent, or not care for his last imbracement: but I cannot be unmindful of you,
neither will I ever forsake you.] And this is certain. For whilst they be
prepared with their Viaticum for their last iourny, and armed with the shield
of Extreme Unction, this most loving Mother sits by the^, comforts them,
strengthens them, and even warmes the^ in her own most sacred bosom,
entreating her Blessed son to be propitious unto them, and embrace the^, and
so joins their hearts unto the heart of Jesus, while the Angels sing and
triu^ph, and themselves intone that heavenly Canticle of Love and Iubilation
with old Simeon: Let thy servant now, O Lord, depart in peace, according to thy
word etc. and in the middst of these celestial joys, do they securely give up
their souls into the hands of God, and the B. Virgin, to be crowned for all
Eternity.

And as the Patriarch Noe did pass out of his Arc, to wit, out of the prison,
and captivity of his bodyly mansion, so soon as the Dove did bring him an
Oliue-branch: so the B. Virgin bringing that sacred Oliue-branch her dear
Son Jesus for their comfort, and consolation to this their last passage; they
send forth their souls with all alacrity, joy, and Iubilation.

O death, how bitter art thou to one in love with the deceyt of the world? O
death how sweet art thou to one in love with B. Mary the Mother of Mercy? O
death, how fearful and terrible art thou to one a dying, against whom Hell it
self does fight? O death, how secure, and quiet art thou to one a dying, whom
the B. Virgin does defend?

What horror, what desperation shall we then conceive, from the remembrance of
our sins, and chiefl^y of our neglect of not honoring God, and his Blessed
Mother? What joy on the other side, what hope shall we have, when we find that
we have served her all our life? Oh how terrible will it seem to be when we
come to dye among so many enemies? Oh how happy, how secure to dye in the arms
of the B. Virgin? Wherein, without doubt, all shall dye that live truly devoted
to her. And this Flower (to conclude) of eternal Salvation does this Garden of
the B. Virgin offer unto us; not to be gathered here in this life, but
afterward in the Kingdom of Heaven.

FINIS.

