FOUR LETTERS: One from the Duke of Bouillon to the French King. Dated in Feb.
1619.

Another from the French King to the Duke of Espernon. Dated the 11. of Ian.
1619.

Two other from the Duke of Espernon to the French King; the one dated the 17.
of Ian. the other the 7. of Feb. 1619.

ANCHORA SPEI printer's or publisher's device

LONDON, Printed by RICHARD FIELD for Robert Mylbourne, and are to be sold at
the great South door of Paul's. 1619.

A letter from the Duke of Bouillon to the French King.
Sir,
I Have received with the honor and respect I ought to bear to whatsoever
comes from your Majesty, the message wherewith it has been pleased to charge
the Lord de la Chainee toward me, with the letter which he has delivered me,
dated the 26. of Febr. In the which mention is made of another sent two days
before, which did declare unto me the unexpected depart of the Queen your
Majesty's mother from Bleis, which I have not received; neither had I learned
these troublesome news before the coming of the said Lord de la Chainee, who
being endued with many good qualities, is among others an old faithful
affectionate servant of your Majesty. By the election it has pleased your
Majesty to make of him, your Majesty does testify and assure me of its good
will and affection, which is a treasure I desire to possess above any other
riches. Your Majesty does command me to give him my advice upon the occasions
which are offered. I cannot in obeying it be blamed as presumptuous, but rather
as ignorant, for the small insight I have in affairs. My love and the
fidelity I owe to your service directing my pen, shall with your Majesty's
good pleasure supply what may be defectuous. In the Queen mothers depart, all
true Frenchmen receive at first this grief, to see an alteration in the
natural love and mutual benevolence, which (as it should seem) ought to be
perpetual between your Majesty's. But as it does cause a sudden sorrow, so
does it instantly mitigate it with an assured hope, that by Gods help and
natures assistance, your Majesty's cannot remain disunited in love, you Sir
being a good King, and a good son; she not only a loving mother, but also a
most humble subject. Your Majesty may have been informed by the letter which
she has written unto you from Lorches, that two passions (as she does tell
you) have moved her to go out of Blois not without danger; The first, the
notice which she has of many disorders that concern your Majesty; the other,
of her life; leaving and submitting to your choice and good liking the means
she ought to take to let you understand them. By this means your Majesty
shall without constraint rest free of her actions, to the end that taking the
profitable aduices for your affections, they may reject those that are less
convenient. France above all other Realms has been obnoxious to like sudden
accidents, or rather greater; but also better then any where else, have they
been helped and cured without force of arms, which are always hurtful,
especially in this State, which I may say has now less need of them then at
any other time. So (Sir) by a royal, just, and mild power, your Majesty may
reap some profit from this, in judging what is wanting to a sure
tranquillity; in the which your authority may be respected, the laws of the
kingdom maintained, your Edicts of pacifications kept and observed, the
infractions repaired, the difference of your subjects taken away, and
preferments and dignities i^rted unto such as your Majesty (both for their
birth and merit) shall esteem worthy to be bestowed upon. So (Sir) shall you
enjoy an immortal glory within your kingdom, and an assured felicity. And I
hold that your Majesty cannot be counseled to make use of arms but by those
that aim at a dissipation, and to equal their duty in the equality which
they hope to obtain in weapons: which intention is most detestable, and shall
have heaven for judge, and on earth due punishment; and likewise those that
proffer their service that they may have the means to be disloyal, of whom
there is great number. Sir, give ear to your mother by faithful and
sufficient persons. Hearken to the common desires of your State, and appoint
what shall be most convenient for it. Thus doing, if there be any who under a
fair show mask any false intentions, they will be manifested, and will serve
to demonstrate your power, and your justice in their punishment: in the
execution whereof you shall be aided by your good subjects, according as their
duty binds them. As for my self, (to whom there remains but a little life,
and less health) I consecrate whatsoever belongs to me and mine, without any
excuse, to the service and establishing of your authority.

From Sedan. Feb. 1619.
A Let^^^ sent from the French King to the Duke of Espernon.
COusin, I will defer my answer to the Letters which the Lord of Fauieres
has delivered unto me from you, as also to those I have received before,
until I have heard him more particularly, and be informed how he has executed
the commission which I had given him. But forasmuch as in them you make no
answer to the command I sent you, not to stir from Mets; and that by the
discourse you held to the said Fauieres upon this subject, it seems that your
mind is rather not to stay there, then to conform it self to my will; I
therefore expressly send this messenger unto you with these presents, to advise
you, that having very lately received news from Germany, which not only
confirm the precedents, but witness the broils to increase, and that it is
to be feared that wars fire already kindled is not so quickly nor so easily
quenched, but disperseth it self throughout the greatest part of the country.
I judge your presence necessary in the City of Mets, and charge you again,
and that expressly, not to leave it until you receive farther directions from
me; which you shall have (as I have promised you) so soon as the affairs will
permit you to remove from the Frontiers of my king dome; assuring my self that
in the mean while you will perform that service I desire, and unto the which
the duty of your charge does oblige you. I give you no other commission at
this present, but only that you suffer not the Archdukes Commissaries, or any
other whatsoever, to carry away any saltpeeter; and look that my commandments
in that and all other things be duly observed.

I beseech the Almighty,Cousin, to have you in his keeping. From Paris this
11. Ian. 1691. Signed Lewis And Lower Ratier.


The first letter of the Duke of Espermon to the King.
Sir,
I Have learned by the letters wherewith it has pleased your Majesty to
honor me, written the 20 of the last month, and the 11 of this present, that
upon the news you have received of the continuing of the wars in Germany,
you judge it fit for the profit of your service that I should not yet stir
from the Frontires of this kingdom. As to that (Sir) I have nothing to answer
to your Majesty, but that having always absolutely depended on your
commandments, and propounded to my self in all my actions (for only aim)
the good of your State, in the smallest interest that shall regard it within
the limits of my charge; which is not only capable to stay me here, but does
oblige me at all times and in all places whatsoever, to esteem my life
nothing, so I may be so happy as to spend it for the service of your Majesty.
But at this day (Sir) the peace and tranquillity of France is grown so
general, your State so powerfully established, and your friendship so dear to
all your neighbors; that as there is nothing within this Realm but stoopes to
your authority, so out of it there is no Prince but does respect your power,
and maintain himself by your justice. As for the wars in Bohemia, to the
which hitherto it has not been possible to give remedy (besides that means
are now intended for the ending of them in the friendliest manner that may be,
and that there is no condition how unprofitable soever, but the Emperor will
accept rather then to hazard the little authority that yet remains unto him)
the danger (fained by such as make things far greater then they are,) is so
remote from this Frontire, that the fear which we might have thereof should be
without ground; seeing moreover that not any as yet are come over on this side
the Rhene, and that the ancient friends and allies to this Crown (who are the
nearest to these broils) expect the issue without any stirring, up or taking
either the one or the others part. These considerations (Sir) require not my
staying in this country, where all things are in so good a being, as almost of
themselves they may subsist and be maintained: and the abode that my son de
la Valette shall make here in my absence (being sufficient to give order to
whatsoever shall concern the good of your affairs:) I trust your Majesty
will with equity regard the necessity of mine own particulars, and be
pleased to let me return to my house, from the which I have been absent above
these 15 months. I crave but the liberty which you deny not to the least of
those whose greatest honor is to be under your government. I make no doubt
(Sir) but that you will be pleased with the desire I have to perform this
journey; and assure my self that you will take the pains to consider, that
since your coming to the Crown, having indebted my self above an 100000
crowns for your service, for the which I pay interests at Paris: and having
not since these two years received of your liberality any other gratification
but the bare wages of a Colonel, after the rate of 10 months for a year, it
is not possible I should hold out in the great and necessary expenses which I
am bound to make here, as well for the maintaining of the dignity of my office,
as for the performing of your Majesty's service with more eminence. Furthermore
(Sir) since my enemies do daily endeavor to infuse into your Majesty's heart a
mistrust of my purest intentions, and that I am so unhappy, that even waxen
old in the service of three great Kings, I should yet have much ado to defend
a so constant and approved fidelity from calumnies; I must (and with grief I
must) speak it, that I have remained in my duty when as rewards were promised
to unfaithfulness; that I have maintained your authority when it was abused of
some, and despised of others. It is to wrong me much to think that at these
years I would begin to prove disloyal, and that my private passions should be
dearer to me then my fidelity to your service. In this case (Sir) I will freely
anow, that I have no cause to complain but of my bad fortune; being most
certain that it is not where your Scepter-doth bear sway that virtue is
suspected, and a good reputation odious; and that your Majesty is too just to
put no difference between the oppressed innocent and the guilty. For indeed
(Sir) if then, when you were not as yet free, the gentleness of your nature
has been such, that you have always withstood violent counsels, and not
suffered your authority to be employed to the overthrow of your subjects,
there is no likelihood (now that you only depend of your self, and that your
mild inclination is not fostered by any with violent passions) that in his
hoarie age you would oppress one of your best servants, and ancient officers
to your Crown; or deny to his years the rest which nature does require of
you. I think, Sir, I may presume to deserve that for a recompense of my long
and faithful service, and your Majesty may grant it me (as humbly I do
beseech it) without any disparagement to your State: for as I never expected
other profit from my actions but the pleasure I receive to have done them, so
will I think my self sufficiently happy by the testimony which my
conscience all my life time will yield me, that I have truly been, and intend
to remain unto my end,

Sir, Your most humble, most dutiful, faithful, and loving subject and
servant, Espernon.
From Mets this 17 of Ian. 1619.
Another Letter of the Duke of Espernon to the King.
Sir,
Having heretofore represented unto your Majesty with what patience I have
expected in my government of Mets the occasions to do you service, and hoping
that having put to your consideration the necessity of my business, you would
have been fully satisfied with my resolution so long ago concluded: I have
thought that I could not be blamed of your Majesty, nor of any other, if at
these years, having given the best part of my life to the public good, I did
desire at least to go spend the remnant of it with some ease, and be partaker
of the peaceable rest you have stored up for your kingdom. Nevertheless, Sir,
the least of your commandments is so dear unto me, and I am so religious in
all the circumstances of my duty, that I had not undertook my journey, if the
occasions of the staying thereof had not been taken away, and the difficulties
of the wars in Bohemia altogether finished. But having learned by certain
advise which the Lord Duke of Lorraine has received from that country, that
the Differents are upon terms of agreement, to the furtherance whereof shall
be proceeded by the deposition of arms on both sides: I thought that the
profit of your service did not require my abode any longer in a place which in
time of peace is not in any danger, and will increase by the decay of the
Empire if the wars continue. That if there be any part of this country less
participant then other of the public tranquillity, and needing more
carefully to be conserved, I am sure that your Majesty will judge that it is
that Province into the which I am going; which since it depends of my charge,
it is my duty to be careful in whatsoever does concern the good of it, and
not to give way throught it to the prejudice of your authority. So, Sir, that
if at this time I will not omit the occasions, your Majesty shall be pleased
to do me the honor to consider, that I do not therein disobey your
commandments, but that contrariwise I expound them according to the right
sense, and that I give them the best interpretation, since it is that which is
the most profitable for your service. For indeed, Sir, every one does know,
that as the chiefest law of your Realm is the maintaining of your authority,
so your most express and most important commandment is the good success of
your affairs; which being absolutely true, what likelihood should there be,
that (being in me to conserve unto your Majesty the affections of a Province
disunited; and to retain by my presence those spirits that might affect a
changement, if there were no body to confirm them in their duty) I should
propound to my self (for the hindering of so necessary a voyage,) such weak
considerations as the wars of Bohemia. I am not of that age (Sir) that will
permit me to seek after vain glory; yet nevertheless I do not think that
your Majesty esteems of me so little, as to employ me in no other service
then for the surer directing of your pacquets from Germany: I do not hold my
self yet so unprofitable that I should only be thought fit to perform to you
and to your State service of so little consequence. Sir, this is that which I
humbly request your Majesty to judge of my faults; and in the mean time to do
me that honor to believe, that wheresoever I be, and what bad usage soever I
have had these 20 months, no condition in the world, and never so profitable
shall corrupt me, nor any necessity how great soever hinder me to remain with
the same affection, with which I have always been,

Sir, Your most humble and most obedient subject, most faithful and loving
servant, I. Jews de le Valette.
From the Bridge of Vichy this 7. of Feb. 1619.

