ANNO. IIII. Henrici octaui.

English blazon

These be the Statutes established in diverse Parliamentes for the mystery of
ye pewterers of London, and concerning the search of pewter, brass, and
untrue beams and weightes, and for deceiuable Hawkers, with diverse other
orders and redresses to be had in the said mystery, with the renewinge and
confirminge of the same Statutes.

An act made the fourth year of our Sovereign Lord, King Henry the.viii.
concerning Pewterers, and true weyghts and beams. the.vii. cap.
FOrasmuch as a certain Act was made and stablished in the Parliament holden
at Westminster the.xix. year of the raygne of the last most famous King your
Father Henry the.vii. (whom God pardon:) Concerning Pewterers and Brasiers,
hawkinge and walkinge about the countries, and also concerning false beams,
scales and weyghtes, with a provision for casting of fine metal and of perfect
goodness, which act was made to endure to the next Parlyament, the tennor
whereof insueth. That where many simple and evil disposed persons of this your
Realm of England, vsinge the said crafts, daily go about this your Realm
from village, from town, and from house to house, as well in woods and forests
as other places, to buy Pewter and Brass. And that knowinge thieves and other
pickers that steal as well pewter and brass belonginge to your highness, and
under your mark, and to the Lords spiritual and temporal, as to other your
subjects of this your Realm, bring such stolen vessels to them in such hid
places to sell, and sell it for little or naught, and about they bring it to
priuye places or into corners of Cities or towns, and there sell much part of
it to strangers which carry it over the Sea by stealth.

Also the said persons so goinge about, and diverse other using the said
crafts, use to make new vessels and to mix good metal and bad togeathers,
and make it naught and sell it for good stuff: where in deed the stuff and
metal thereof is not worth the fourth part that it is sold for, to the great
hurt, deceyt, and loss of your subjects.

Also diverse persons vsinge the said crafts have deceyuable and false beams
and scales, Nota.
that one of them will stand even with twelve pound weight at the one end,
against a quarter of a pound at the other end, to the singular advantage of
themself, and to the great deceyte and loss of your Subjects buyers and
sellers with them.

For reformacion of the premises, it would please your Highness of your most
habundant grace, The ordinance.
with the advice of your Lords spiritual and temporal, and the commons in
this present Parlyament assembled, and by the auctority of the same, to enact
and stablish that no person nor persons using the said craft of Pewterers and
Brasiers, from henceforth shall sell or change any pewter or brass, new or
old, at any place or places within this your realm but only in open Fayres
or Markets, or in their own dwelling houses: but if they be desired by the
buyers of such wares, upon pain of forfeyture to our Sovereign Lord the
King, Penalt x. pound.
for every such default ten pounds.

Also by the same auctority may be it established that no person nor persons of
what condition or degree so ever he or they be, Nota.
from henceforth within the City of London and York or without, either cast
or work any Pewter vessels or Brass, at any place or places, within this your
Realm: but that it be as good fine metal as is the pewter and brass, cast
and wrought after the perfect goodness of the same within the City of London,
and by the statutes of the same ought to be, upon pain of forfeyture of all
such Pewter and Brass so cast and wrought of worse Pewter or Brass than
ought to be wrought in the same Cities. The one half of every such forfeyture
to be to the use of your Highness, and the other half to the use of the
finders thereof.

Provided always that this forfeyture in no wise extend to brass or pewter,
Provision.
beeinge in the possession of any person, other than the woorkers of the same,
or such as have the same to sell, and being of the crafts or mystery. Also
that it may by the same auctority be enacted and stablished that no manner of
person or persons of what degree or condition soever he or they be, Nota.
from henceforth make no hollow wares of pewter. That is to say, Saltes and
Pots that is made of pewter called ley metal, but that it may be after the
assise of pewter ley metal wrought within the City of London. And yt the
makers of such wares shall mark the same with several marks of their own,
Penalt.
to the intent that the makers of such wares shall auow the same wares by them
(as is above said) to be wrought.

And that all and every such wares not sufficiently made and wrought, and not
marked in form above said, founden in the possession of the same maker or
seller, to be forfeyted. And if the same ware be sold, Penalte.
the said maker to forfeyt ye value of the same so unlawfully wrought and
sold, the one half of the said wares or the value thereof to be to the use of
your Highness, and the other half to be to the use of the finders or
searchers of the same.

Beams and weights.
Also that it may by the same auctority be enacted and stablished, that if any
person or persons hereafter vsinge buyinge and sellinge of pewter or brass,
that hereafter occupy any deceable or false beams or weights of the said wares,
that every such person or persons using or occupying such deceiuable and untrue
beams or weightes, to forfeit twenty shillinges. The one half to the King,
and the other half to the party that therefore shall sue by action of det. And
that in the said action no protection nor essoyne shall be allowed. And also
the said party so offendinge shall forfeyt his Beam to him that shall sease
it. And if the said offender or offe^ders be not sufficient to pay the said
sum or sommes by them so forfeyted, that then it shall be lawful to the
Mayres, Baylifs, or other head Officers of such place or places where any such
offenders shall be found, to put them in the Stocks, and them so to keep till
the next Market day next adioyninge, and in the Market place to put them in the
Pillory all the Market time. Search.
And furthermore that it be lawful by the said auctority, that the Master
and VVardaines of the said craft of Pewterers within every City or Borough
of this Realm where such wardaynes are. And where no such wardains are, the
head officers or governors of the same City or Borough to appoint certain
persons most expert in knowledge of the same, to make search within the said
Cities or boroughs where they dwell. And over this the Justices of peace,
within every Shire at the general Sessyons holden at Mighelmas shall assygne
and appointe two certain persons having experience therein, to make search in
the premises in every part of the Shire as well within ye fraunchise as without,
saving in Cities or boroughs where searchers be appointed by the heads or
governors of the same. And that all such unlawful pewter or brass, as the said
searchers shall find, the one half to the use of your Grace, and the other
half to the searchers. And that in the default of the said Masters and
VVardaines of the said occupacions not searching in form as is aforesaid, and
whereby that any such unlawful metal is cast or made, or unlawful weightes
used, that then it shall be lawful to any person or persons having sufficient
cunning and knowledge in the said occupacions by oversight of ye Maires,
Bayliffes, or head Officers of the said Cities and Boroughs and towns, to
search all the said places, and to put those said authority and act in
execution, in form aforesaid. Please it therefore your Grace and wisdoms in
so much as ye said act is thought good and profitable, that it be ordained,
enacted, and established by the Lords, spiritual and temporal, and the
commons in this present Parliament assembled, and by the auctority of the same,
that the said act may endure for ever. And over that be it enacted by the said
auctority, For true metal and work manship.
that if any untrue or deceiuable metal or workmanship of Tin or pewter,
be founden either in Platters, Chargers, Dishes, Sawcers, Potengers,
Trenchers, Basins, Flagons, Bottels, Pottes, Saltsellers, Goblets, Spoones,
Cruets, or Candelstickes, or in any other such wares of tin or Pewter,
whersoeuer it be cast, made or wrought within this Realm or without, and
brought to be sold within the same Realm. That then it shall be lawful to the
Maire of the City of London, and the Master and Wardaynes of the craft of
Pewterers of the said City for the time being, and their deputies, to have
search of the same within the City of London and the Subbarbes of the same,
and that in all other Cities, Boroughs and Towns where any Wardaines be or
shall be, the Maires, Bayliffes, or head Officers and Wardaines to have like
auctority.

And where no wardaines be, then the head Officers or governors of the same
Cities, Boroughs, and Towns to appoint certain persons most expert and
cunning in knowledge of the same, to make search within ye said cities,
Boroughs, and Towns where they dwell.

And if any such new wares wrought of Tin and Pewter as is aforesaid be found
defective, Pewter being defective to be forfaited.
and being in the possession of the seller, that then the same person or
persons that puts any such new wares of pewter to sale shall forfait the same
wares, the one half to ye use of our Sovereign Lord the King, and the other
half to the searchers or finders of the same.

Provided always that this act concerning ye forfaiture be not prejudicial nor
hurtful to any person or persons having grant of our Sovereign Lord ye
King, Provision.
or of any of his noble Progenitors by his letters patents of such forfaiture,
but that they and every of the^ shall have and enjoy the same according to their
former graunts and liberties.

An Act concerning Pewterers, made in the xxv. year of the reign of our
Sovereign Lord, King Henry the eight, in the ninth Chapter.
IN their most lamentable wise showen, Petition.
and pitteously complain unto the Kings most royal Majesty, and to this most
high Court of Parliamente, the Kings most humble poor, and obeysaunt
subjects, the Master, wardaines, and pore fellowship of the craft and mystery
of Pewterers, as well of the City of London, as of all other places within this
Realm of England, that where the said craft or mystery before this time has
bin one of the best handycraftes within this Realm, which has not only grown
and continued by mean of diverse good acts and statutes made for the true
exercise of the same, whereof one was made in the.xix. year of the Kings most
renowned Father, whose soul God pardon. And one other was made in the fourth
year of the Kings most victorious reign, concerning the crafts of Pewterers
and Brasiers, of and for the true making, mixting, and sellinge of good and
true pewter, and brazen vessels. And also for exercising and vsinge of true
weightes and beams to be occupied by the sellers of any such pewter or brazen
vessels within this Realm, so that none of the Kings Subjects, nor any other
person should by any sale of any false mixed brazen and pewter vessel, or any
untrue weightes be deceived, as by the said statutes more plainly does
appear.

Which good Statutes duly put in execution, has caused the said craft to
increase and multiplye, to the great profit and vtility of a great number of
the Kings subjects, and the commodity of pewter vessel much to be had in
reputation in all strange Regions and Countries, until now of late diverse
evil disposed persons, being the Kings Subjects borne, which have been
apprentices and brought up in the exercise of the said craft of pewterers,
have now of late for their singular lucre repaired into strange regions and
countries, and there do exercise the said craft of Pewterers, teachinge
strangers (not only the cunninge of mixtinge and forginge of all manner of
pewter vessel) but also do teach all things belonginge to the said craft
of Pewterers. By mean whereof there is not only brought (daily into this
Realm) out of strange Regions to be sold, great number of things made of
pewter untruly mixted and made of Tin, wherewith the Kings subjects be
daily deceived, and the people of strange countries greatly instructed in the
cunning of the said craft of pewterers, in such wise ye thereby not only a great
number and quantity of pewter vessel, and other things of pewter made in
diverse sorts and fashions, amounting to a great value, which was daily and
continually wont to be carried and conveyed out of this Realm by Merchants
into straung regions and countries, and there to be sold and vended. Whereby
the commodity of Tin made into pewter vessel, which has been had in great
estimacion, as things very necessary and commodious, and the Kings customs
thereby much advanced, is now like utterly to cease and decay, and not to be
esteemed as heretofore has bin, but also the said craft of Pewterers, which
at this day sets and keeps in work and occupacion a great number of
people, shall be utterly undone. And a great multitude of the Kings natural
Subjects thereby fall into idleness, to the great impouerishment of this
Realm, if spedy remedy for the redress of the premises be not provided.

In tender consideracion whereof, and for reformation of the premises, Any
manner of pewter wrought out of this Realm to be forfaited.
it may please your highness, by the assente of the Lords spiritual and
temporal, and the commons in this present Parlyament assembled, and by the
aucthority of the same, to ordain and enact, that no person or persons
hereafter, at any time now inhabitinge, or which hereafter shall inhabit within
this Realm shall buy or otherwise take by exchaung for other wares, any wares
made, or hereafter to be made out of this Realm of Tin, or mixed with Tin, as
Platters, Search and seasure.
Dishes, Sawcers, Pots, Basins, Ewers, Flagons, Goblets, Salt, Saltsellers,
Spones, or any other thing made of Tin or Pewter as aforesaid, whatsoever
it be, upon pain of forfaiture of the same ware, in whose hands soever it
may be found or taken: and also lawful money current in this Realm to the
value thereof. The one half of the same forfaiture to be to the use of the
Kings highness, and the other half to the use of the finders of the same.

Penalte.
And furthermore be it enacted, that it shall be lawful to the Master and
VVardaines of the said craft of Pewterers, as well within the City of
London, as within every other City, Borough, and Town of this Realm where
such wardaines be. And where no such wardaines be, to the head Officer or
governor, head Officers or governors of the same City, Borough, or town
for the time beeinge to appointe diverse persons most expert in knowledge of
the same, to make search and seasure, and to take into their hands and
possession all such wares as hereafter shall be brought contrary to the true
intent and effect of this present Act, in whose soever hands or possession
any such shall be found.

And also be it enacted by the auctority abouesaide, Pre^tices or journey me^
strangers borne.
that no person nor persons occupyinge the said craft or occupacion of
Pewterers, within this Realm shall set on work or retain in his or their
service any person or persons to be his or their Apprentice, or Journey man
being stranger borne out of this Realm, upon pain to forfait for every such
Apprentice and Iourneyman ten pounds sterlinge. Strangers shall not work
pewter within the realm
And that no stranger borne out of this Realm shall occupy, exercise, or use
from the feast of Pentecost next coming, the said craft of Pewterers, nor
work any manner of vessel or other ware aforesaid to be made of Tin or
Pewter, within any place or places of this Realm, upon pain of forfaiture of
ten pounds sterlinge. And also upon pain of forfaiture of the same pewter
or tin so wrought, in whose hands soever it may be taken or found.

And also be it enacted by aucthority aforesaid, Exercise beyond Sea.
that no person nor persons beeinge borne within this Realm, occupyinge or
exercisinge the said craft of Pewterers, shall at any time hereafter resort to
any strange Regions or Countries, there to use, teach, or exercise the said
craft of Pewterers upon pain to lose the Privilege and benefit of an
Englishman. And if in case any of the Kings Subjects, at this present time
being dwelling in any straung Country or Region, and there occupying the said
craft of Pewterers do not repair into this Realm within three Months next
after request and warninge to him be given, by writing sealed with the common
seal of the Wardaines of the said craft, within the said City of London,
and here in this Realm continually from henceforth dwell and inhabit that
then and from henceforth he shall be taken and reputed as no Englishma^, but
shall stand and be from henceforth out of the Kings protection.

And forasmuch as sundry evil disposed persons which commonly be called
hawkers, Hawkers
by aucthority of the Kings letters patentes or placarde, do not only go
about from place to place within this Realm, vsinge buying and selling of
brass and pewter. And by color and pretense of the same Licenses and
Placardes, use unlawful and deceuable Weyghtes and Beams, but also do use to
sell both Pewter and Brass, which is not good, nor truly, nor lawfully mixed
nor wrought, to the great deceit of the Kings true lyege people contrary to the
form and effect of the said good Act and Statute made in the said fourth
year of the Kings most noble reign. Be it therefore enacted by auctority of
this present Parliament, that all such lycences and placardes heretofore had,
made, or granted to any such person or persons contrary to the true meaning,
form, and effect of this Statute shall be from henceforth by aucthority of this
present Parlyament clearly void and of none effect. And where as in the
said act of Parlyament (concerning the craft of Pewterers and Brasiers) made in
the said fourth year, for diverse causes and considerations in the same
contained, among other things it is expressed that no person or persons using
the said craft of Pewterers or Brasiers should from henceforth sell or change
any pewter or brass, new or old, at any place or places within this Realm,
but only in open Fayres or Markets, or in their own dwellinge houses, but if
they were desired by the buyers of such wares, upon pain of forfaiture for
every such default ten pounds.

Forasmuch as the same forfaiture is to the only use of the Kings highness,
Hawkers
and that any party searching or findinge the same is not entitled to have any
benefit thereby, it has not bin known that any person or persons have taken
any pain to insearch or make any inquire thereof. By reason whereof diverse and
many evil disposed persons vsinge bying and selling both of Brass and Pewter
and not regarding the said good act, nor the said penalty, daily go about from
Village to village, Town and town, and from house to house, to sell such
Pewter and Brass, which is not good. And also use deceiuable Weyghtes and
Beams as they did before the making of the said act to the great hurt and
deceyt of the Kings true liege people and Subjects. Penalty for hawkers.
Wherefore be it enacted by the aucthority abouesaide, that as well the moyte of
the said forfeiture of ten pounds limited in the said estatute made in the
said fourth year, as also the moyte of all other forfeytures before
expressed, and every of them be and shall be to the use of the Kings
highness, his Heirs and Successors, and the other moyte of the same
forfeytures and every of them to the use of him or them, that shall seize,
find or present the said forfeytures or any of them, or that shall sue for
the same in any competent Court or Courts, within this Realm by action of
debt, bill, plaint or information, wherein the defendant shall in no wise be
admitted to wage his law, or any protection or essoyne to any person or persons
which shall be impeached to have offended contrary to the form and effect of
this Statute, shall be alowable. This act to endure to the last day of the next
Parlyament.

The annotacions of the confirmacions and renouacions of the aforesaid
Statutes.
Confirmation.
ANd it is to be noted that the said last act was renewed in the Parlyament
holden at Westminster the.viii. day of June, in the.xxviii. year of our said
Sovereign Lord, to and among other acts. And that all clauses, articles,
and provisions therein contained to stand in their force and strength, to the
last day of the next Parlyament. And also the said act was renewed again in
the Parlyament holden at Westminster the.xxviii. of April, in the.xxxi. year
of our said Sovereign Lord, amongst other acts, as is aforesaid. etc.

An act concerning Pewterers made in the.xxxiii. year of the reign of our
Sovereign Lord King Henry the.viij. Chap. iiij.
Recital of the statute made the xxx. year.
WHere at the Parlyament begun at London the third day of November, in the.xxi.
year of the reign of the King our Sovereign Lord, and from thence adiourned
to Westminster and there holden, and from that time continued by diverse
prorogations unto the.xv. day of January the.xxv. year of his most noble
reign, it was ordained and established by the assent of the Kings Majesty, his
Lords spiritual and temporal, and the commons in the said Parlyament then
assembled, and by the aucthority of the same, that no person or persons, from
that time than inhabitinge, or which after that time should inhabit within this
Realm should buy, or otherwise take by exchange for other wares, any manner
wares made, or hereafter to be made out of this Realm, of Tin, or mixed with
Tin, as Platters, Dishes, sawcers, Pots, Basins, Ewers, Flagons, Goblettes,
Saltes, Saltsellers, Spones, or any other thing made of Tin or Pewter as
aforesaid, whatsoever it were, upon pain of forfaiture of the same wares, in
whose hands soever it might be found or taken, and also lawful money current
in this Realm to the full value thereof, the one half of the same forfaiture
to be to the use of the Kings highness, and the other half to be to the use
of the finders of the same: And further it was enacted, that it should be
lawful to the Master and VVardaines of the Pewterers, as well within the
City of London, as within every other City, Borough, or Town within this
Realm where such wardaines were, and where no such wardaines were, to the head
Officer or governor, head Officers or governors of the same City, Borough,
or town for ye time being, to appoint diverse persons, most expert in
knowledge of the same, to make search and seasure, and to take into their
hands and possession all such wares as thereafter should be brought contrary
to the true intent and effect of the said act, in whose soever hands or
possessions any such should be found. And it was also enacted by the auctority
abouesaide, that no person or persons occupyinge the said craft or occupacion
of Pewterers within this Realm should set on work, or retain in his or their
service any person or persons to be his or their Apprentice, or Iourneyman
estraunger borne out of this Realm, upon pain to forfait for every such
Apprentice and Iourneyman ten pounds sterlinge: And that no stranger borne
out of this Realm should occupy, exercise, or use, from the feast of Pentecost
than next coming, the said craft of Pewterers, nor work any manner of vessels
or other ware aforesaid, to be made of Tin or Pewter, within any place or
places of this Realm, upon pain of forfaiture of ten pounds sterlinge: And
also upon pain of forfaiture of the same pewter or Tin so wrought, in whose
hands soever it should be found or taken: And it was further enacted by the
said aucthority that no person or persons being borne within this Realm, than
occupying or exercising the said craft of Pewterers, should from thenceforth
resort into any strange Regions or Countries, there to use, teach, or
exercise the said craft of Pewterers upon pain to lose the Privilege and
benefit of an Englishman.

And if in case any of the Kings Subjects, at that time being dwelling in
any straung Country or Region, and there occupying the said craft of
pewterers, did not repair into this Realm with in three Months next after
request and warning to him to be given, by writing sealed with the common
seal of the Wardaines of the said craft within the said City of London, and
here in this Realm continually from thenceforth dwell and inhabit that then
and from henceforth he should be reputed and taken as no Englishma^, but should
stand and be from henceforth out of the Kings protection.

And it was than further enacted, that where sundry evil disposed persons,
which commonly were called hawkers, by aucthority of ye Kings letters patentes
or placarde, did not only go about from place to place within this Realm,
using buying and selling of brass and pewter, and by color and pretense of
the same Licenses or Placards, did not only use unlawful and deceuable Weyghtes
and Beams, but also did use to sell both Brass and Pewter, which was not
good, nor truly or lawfully mixte or wrought, to the great deceit of the
Kings true lyege people contrary to the form and effect of a good and
laudable Act and Statute made in the fourth year of the Kings said most noble
reign, that all such lycences and placardes before that time had made or
granted to any such person or persons contrary to the true meaning, form,
and effect of the said estatute, should be from thenceforth by the aucthority
of the said Parlyament clearly void and of none effect. And where as in the
said act of Parlyament (concerning the said craft of Pewterers and Brasiers)
made in the said fourth year, for diverse causes and considerations in the
same act contained, amongst other things it was expressed, that no person or
persons, vsinge the said craft of Pewterers or Brasiers should from henceforth
sell or change any pewter or brass, new or old, at any place or places
within this Realm, but only in open Fayres or Markets, or in their own
dwellinge houses, but if they were desired by the buyers of such wares, upon
pain of forfaiture for every such defaulte ten pounds. And so than the same
forfaiture was to the only use of ye Kings highness, and the party searching
or findinge the same was not entitled to have any benefit thereby: it was not
known that any person or persons had taken any pains to insearch or make any
inquire thereof. By reason whereof diverse and many evil disposed persons than
vsinge bying and selling as well of Brass as Pewter, and not regardinge the
said good act, nor the said penalty, went daily about from Village to village,
Town to town, and from house to house, to sell such Pewter and Brass, which
was not good, and also used deceiuable Weightes and Beams, as they did before
the making of the said act to the great hurt and deceyt of ye Kings true liege
people and Subjects. Wherefore it was enacted by the aucthority of the said
Parliament, that as well the moytie of the said forfeiture of ten pounds
limited in the said statute made in the said fourth year, as also the moytie
of all other forfeytures and penalties, expressed and specified in the said
acts, and every of them should be to the use of the Kings highness, his
Heirs and Successors, and the other moytie of the same forfeytures and
penalties and every of them to ye use of him, or them that would seize, find
or present the same forfeytures or any of them, or that would sue for the same
in any competent Court or Courts within this Realm by action of debt, bill,
plaint or information wherein the defendant should in no wise be admitted to
wage his law, or any protection or essoyne to any person or persons which
should be impeched to have offended contrary to the form and effect of this
Statute, should be alowable, as in the said act more plainly appears, which
act was appointed to endure only to the end of the next Parlyament than next
followinge, and which act was after renewed in the Parliament holden at
Westminster, in the.xxviii. year of the reign of our said Sovereign Lord,
to endure until the end of the next Parliament than next folowinge: And which
act was also renewed at the Parliamente holden at Westminster, in the xxxi.
and.xxxii. years of our said Sovereign Lords reign to endure until the
last day of the next Parliament than next ensuinge: Confirmacion.
Prayen therefore in this present Parliamente our said Sovereign Lords true
and obedient Subjects, the Pewterers of this his said Realm, and other the
true commons of the same, because the same act is beneficial and necessary for
the common wealth of this Realm: That it may be enacted by the King our said
Sovereign Lord, the Lords spiritual and temporal, and the commons in the
present Parliament assembled, and by authority of the same forasmuch as the same,
act and every thing therein contained, is good and beneficial to the common
wealth of this Realm, that all and every the said acts and statutes, and all
and every, article sentence and clause comprised in the same, may from
henceforth stand and abide in as full strength and effect for evermore from
henceforth to endure, according to the purport, tenor and effect of the same
act and acts, as though the said articles sentences and clauses were specially
limited recited or declared in this present act. VVares made and brought from
beyond the Sea.
And that no person ne persons from henceforth buy or take by exchange, or
otherwise take into or within this Realm, to the intent to sell any such
things or wares above rehearsed, made or to be made out of this Realm upon
pain of like forfaitures and penalties, as are and were expressed in the said
several acts, the same penalties and forfaitures to be leuyed as is before
expressed.

Master and VVardaines shall not be let to search.
And that it may be further enacted by auctority aforesaid, that if any person
or persons do unlawfully withstand, interrupt, disturb, or let the Master
and VVardaines, or their deputies of the said craft of Pewterers for the time
being, or the head Officer or governor, head Officers or governors of
Cities, Towns and Boroughs within this Realm, wherein no such Master and
VVardaines are or shall be, or any of them in searching, seasing, and taking into
their hands and possessions such wares as shall happen to be bought or
brought into this Realm contrary to the purport and effect of the said
estatute, made in the said.xxv. year of the raygne of our said Sovereign
Lord, that then every such person and persons so offendinge, in lettinge
disturbing or withstanding the said seizure or taking of such wares as is
aforesaid, shall lose and forfayte for every time so dooinge the sum of five
pounds sterlinge, the one half whereof, shall be to ye Kings use, and the other
half to him or them that will or shall sue for the same, by action of debt,
writ, bill, plainte, or informacion in any the Kings Courts of record, in
which action or suite no Protection, Privilege nor wager of law shall be allowed
nor admitted.

God save the Queen. Thomas Elyot Master. Thomas Nogey. Thomas Hawke.
Wardens.


Londini excudebat Guilielmus How.


