An order to be published and executed by the Lord Mayor of the City of
London, and other officers in all places within three miles of the said City,
for avoiding of all kind of Beggars that do wander about contrary to the
Laws and Statues of the Realm.
WHereas it has been ordered by Act of Parliament, that all poor aged and
impotent persons, should repair to the places where they were borne, or where
they were most conversant by the space of three years, and there to be
maintained: And likewise that all other persons wandering about as Beggars, and
being whole and strong in body and able to work, having no lands or other
means to get their living, should be taken as Rogues and Vagabonds: And if any
impotent person being provided for, within the Parish where he was borne, or
had been conversant by the space aforesaid, should without license wander
abroad out of the same, he shall be whipped and returned again to his Parish:
and if he shall eftsoons offend, then to be punished as a Rogue. And for that
also in this time of Parliament, order has been taken by a collection of
certain sums of money, that all such as were found in and about the City of
London, having been maimed and sore hurt in her Majesty's service, should have
a convenient relief in money to repair to the Counties where they were borne
with Pasports for that purpose, (which has been accordingly performed) and
there to be maintained with weekly portions of money for the space of twenty
weeks; before the end whereof it is provided by an Act of Parliament made in
this late Session, that such maimed soldiers are to have a continual weekly
payment in the places of the Counties where they were borne. For this purpose
therefore all officers to whom the execution of these Statutes do belong within
the city of London, in Westminster and in all other places within three miles
of the city, shall forthwith cause inquisition to be made of all kind of
persons wandering up and down as beggars, and being aged and impotent to
compel them to depart and repair to the places where they were borne, or were
most conversant by the space of three years past; with convenient Pasports
there to be maintained according to the laws, and to forbear from their
further begging in any other place: and such others as wander abroad as
beggars, being able to work, and having no lawful means whereby to live, to
be taken and punished as Rogues, according to the laws in that behalf
provided. And further, to suffer no soldier that pretends to have been hurt
and maimed in her Majesty's service, to whom relief has been given as
aforesaid, or any other pretending himself to have been a soldier, and not
thought worthy to be partaker of the late relief given, to continue near or
about the city of London, or Westminster, the Borough of Southwarke, or in
any place within three miles of either of the Cities or Borough, but to be
compelled likewise to depart to the Counties where they were borne, there to
receive convenient maintenance. And these Ordinances conformable to the laws
of the Realm, the Lord Mayor of the city of London; and all other Officers to
whom it may belong within the limits aforesaid, are to see duly and speedily
executed, and the offenders punished as they will answer to the contrary at
their perils.

At the Court of S. James the xvij. of April. 1593. Anno 35. Elizabethae. Io.
Puckering. W. Burgley. Essex. C. Howard. Hunsdon. T. Heneage. To. Cecill. Io.
Fortescue.


Printed, published and set up by order from the foresaid Lords of her
Majesty's most Honorable privy Council.

William Row Mayor.

Printed at London by Hugh Singleton.


