An Abstract of the case of Lawrence Lownes Esquire, Concerning the Manors of
Hutton, Wandisley, and Angram, with advowson of the Church of Hutton, in the
County of the City of York, as it rests upon the proofs.
Peter Bland of London Esquire, was seized of, and in the Manors and advowson
afore-sayd, in his demeasne as of Fee, and being so thereof seized according to
a deliberate agreement betwixt him, and the said Lawrence Lownes upon accounts
made betwixt them, and due consideration of his the said Peter's estate, did
give and deliver unto the said Lawrence Lownes bonds, and specialties,
amounting to 1150 l'. and by his deed indented, bearing date the 12. of Nouem.
22. Jacob. Reg. sealed and delivered before many sufficient witnesses without
exception, and acknowledged before Sr. James Husse one of the Masters of the
Chancery, and there duly enrolled, did bargain, and sell, the said Manors and
premises, unto the said Lawrence Lownes, and unto James Milles, and Ioliffe
Lownes, and their heirs for ever; yet in trust only for the said Lawrence
Lownes and his heirs.

And afterward, the said Peter Bland 24. Nouem. 22. Jacob. by his other deed
indented, sealed, and delivered before many likewitnesses, and likewise
acknowledged before the said Master of the Chancery, and there duly enrolled,
did further bargain, and sell, assure, release, and confirm the said Manors
and premises, to the said Lawrence Lownes, James Milles, and Iolliffe Lownes,
and their heirs, in trust, as afore-sayd, with a covenant for assurances of
the premises.

And afterward, for further assurance according to his covenant, 27. Iunij, 1.
Caroli, the said Peter Bland acknowledged a fine of the said Manors and
premises before a Serieant at Law, in the presence of many persons of good
worth, quality, and credit, which by his Indenture sealed and delivered before
many like witnesses, dated 26. Iunij, 1. Caroli, was declared to be to the
former uses.

The reasons and considerations inducing the said Peter Bland, to make the said
assurances of the said Manors and premises, and disposal of specialties for
the said 1150. l'. to the said Lawrence Lownes.
1. Valuable Considerations.
1. 340 l'. in hand paid by the said Lawrence Lownes, to the said Peter Bland.
2. 310 l'. per annum, to be paid unto the said Bland during his life, by the
said Lawrence Lownes, the said land being worth, and let for 216 l'. per annum,
and no more. 3. 50 l'. to be paid after the said Peter Blands death yearly, by
the said Lawrence Lownes, to Mrs. Ioane Langhorne, one of the said Blands
Daughters during her life, she being a healthy woman, not yet exceeding forty
years of age. 4. The said Lawrence Lownes, is by appointment of the said Peter
Bland to pay at several days after the said Blands death 2509 l' 3 s'. 4d'.
to several persons, being children, grandchildren, and others near of kin,
unto the said Peter Bland.


Note that 1. For these Executory payments, the said Lawrence Lownes gave
security by Indenture of covenants, and bonds of 4000 l'. 2. The Lands not
worth above 3000 l'. to be sold.


Considerations of love, etc.
1. For that the said Lawrence Lownes had formerly at the instance of the said
Peter Bland, married his the said Blands niece, whom the said Bland had brought
up from her infancy, and was also esteemed by him as his daughter. 2. For that
the said Lawrence Lownes had been for a long time a careful and faithful
dealer, and preserver of and for the said Blands estate, which was very
trouble-some and perplexed. 3. That the said Peter Bland loved the said
Lawrence Lownes very tenderly, had an especial opinion of him grounded upon
sufficient trials, and desired therefore some way to engage him the more, not
for himself only during his life, but afterward with the care and managing
of the estates of his grandchildren.


It is fully and directly proved by many Witnesses of credit without all
manner of exception, that at and during the making and perfecting of those
conueyances and assurances, (being almost eight months in doing) as also
before and after the said Peter Bland was of an able disposing memory, and
understanding, and that at sundry times, and before persons of great credit, he
voluntarily expressed his hearty love to the said Lawrence Lownes, with wishes
that the before bargained premises had been more worth, and that he the said
Peter Bland had been of better ability, to do him, the said Lawrence Lownes
more good in requital of his great love and pains.

This bargain was ratified and allowed of by the said Peter Bland, by
subsequent Acts during all his life after. 1. In his the said Peter Bland
receiving the said 310 l'. per annum during his life, being about two years
after according to the said bargain by quarterly payments, as appears by
eight several acquittances, under his hand and seal proved. 2 Besides the
before mentioned Acts and conueyances) the said Peter Bland by his last Will
and Testament in Writing, made and Published the 27. of June, 1. Reg. Caroli,
made a principal relation unto the said bargain, and made thereof the said
Lawrence Lownes, and his brother John Bland his Executors, and lived a year
and a half after, still continuing his the said Lawrence Lownes, Executorship,
in sign also of his constant love and opinion of him, and approbation of the
said bargain.


The premises considered the said Lawrence Lownes hopes that it appears that
1. This was no great benefit unto the said Lawrence Lownes. 2. No prejudice but
advantage to the said Peter Bland in his own particular. 3. The said Peter
Bland might the better do thus, having no Sons. 4. Little or no prejudice
came hereby to his Children, grandchildren, and other kindred, among whom
besides his former chargeable preferments of his Daughters in marriage; and the
said 50 l'. per annum to his Daughter Langhorne, he did by and upon the said
bargayne dispose the said whole 2509 l', 3 s'. 4 d'. besides the rest of his
estate, to and among them also being about 6000 l'. albeit amongst them there
were not wanting some just causes of Peter Blands displeasure toward them.


The sole objections against the said bargayne and assurances are, that all the
benefits thereby redounding unto the said Lawrence Lownes was corruptly, by
circumuention, and without just consideration drawn by the said Lawrence
Lownes, from the said Peter Bland in his weakness; and therefore in the Court
of Chancery, decreed against him the said Lawrence Lownes only, albeit the
said Court would not declare, that the said Peter Bland was at the making of
the assurances, or of the said Will De non sane memory, or that he was not of a
disposing memory, nor would make void the said Conueyances, or Will, or
disadvantage any whom they concerned, but the said Lawrence Lownes only, as by
the decree of the said Court made Septimo die Februarij Anno Regni Regis
Caroli, tertio: Inter Arnoldum Harbert mil. and al. querend, Lawrencium Lownes
and al. defend. whereto for more truth and certain relation be had, it may
appear. The post script is to come in at this place.

To this as concerning all matter of supposed corrupt dealing, circumuention,
or want of just consideration, being matters which trench upon the said Lownes
his reputation as well as profit, he with all due reverence Humbly offers the
contrary; and that as he hops upon most just grounds and reasons, humbly
desiring the proofs may be considered, and the cause examined.

Lawrence Lownes has been in prison in the Fleet close prisoner 3 years for
nonperformanc^of the said decree, and without any good ground sentenced* fined
v s in the starchamber for the obteining of the said Conveiances from Peeter
Bland and not freed of the said imprisonment until he his wife and two
Children being Infants by fine and recovery made assurance of the said Manor
and lands unto us according to the compulsion of ye said decree in Chauncerye


