An Act to avoid a Decree in Chancery there made, between one Francis
Verzelline, son and heir of Jacob Verzelline the Elder, Plaintiff; And
Peter Manning, Michaell Pallmer, and their Wives, Daughters of the said Jacob
the Elder, and others, Defendants.
1. THe Defendants set forth, That the said Jacob the elder, being seized of
diverse Lands in Kent, worth 260. li. per Annum, conceiving displeasure against
the said Francis Verzelline, for that He the said Francis, had married (Ka.
Burly) a second wife (the first being alive) and otherwise had abused himself,
and was also of evil life; did purpose to settle his said Lands upon his
second son, and his said daughters, and the heirs of their bodies: And to that
end, the 29. of May, 1604. made his last Will and Testament in writing by
Indenture, both signed and sealed by him, in the presence of seven credible
witnesses.

2. Gave his Land by the same Will to his said second son, and to his said
daughters, and their children in tail.

3. Gave a rent of 40. li. per annum by it, to his said son Francis.

4. With Prouiso, to be void, if he should at any time attempt to make void,
or interrupt the execution of any part of the same Will.

5. Made his Wife Elizabeth Executrix.

6. He caused the same Will to be often, and publicly, and carefully read unto
him before he sealed it, being about a month in framing.

7. He did all this by the advice of Mr. Sergeant All tham.

8. After this, He (by deed) dated xxvi. Martij, 1606. recites this Will,
confirms and strengthens it, and by the same deed, grants unto the same
Francis Verzelline 60. li. rent more per annum for his life only.

9. With a Prouiso, to the same effect, as in the Will, if he should attempt to
make void the same Will.

10. He ratified also the same Will at another tiem by an Indorsement
thereupon, declaring again his intention touching the settling of the said
Lands, according to the body of the said Will, and this was on the 9. of
September, 1606. in the presence of three witnesses of good credit.

11. After his death, the said Eliz: his wife (after Citation of the said
Francis, to see the said Will proved in the prerogative Court) proved the same
by seven witnesses upon their Oath testifying the same, and the said often
publications and confirmations thereof.

12. And the said Francis Verzelline permitted the same.

13. And accepted of his said Rent according to the said Will, and made
Acquittances for the same.

14. And knew that his said Mother paid diverse Legacies by virtue of the same
will.

And yet nevertheless in Easter Term, 1609. He the said Francis Verzelline
exhibited his Bill in Chancerie, to overthrow the said Will, pretending the
same to be unduly obtained, and drawn from his said Father, and after Answer
and Examinations of witnesses, the cause coming to hearing, A Decree was made
for the Plaintiff. By which, 1. It was adjudged, That the said Will should be
taken to be void, to all purposes against the said Fra: Verzelline.

2. And, The present possession of all the said Lands, established with him
the said Francis, and that the said Defendants in the said suite should be
barred to take any benefit by the said Will.

3. And, That the Defendants and their Wives should within six months then
next coming make Assurance of the said lands to the Plaintiff. For non
performance whereof, the said Peter Manning, endured long imprisonment, and
the said Michael Pallmer, went beyond the Seas to his utter undoing, refusing
to perform the said Decree, for that the same was grounded upon suggestions
and allegations utterly mistaken, and manifestly, either without proof, or
against proof.

1. As first, That the Defendants had pleaded a Pardon for the undue procuring
of the said Will in the Star Chamber. Which was only repeated in their
Answer, as that, whereof they might have taken benefit, if they had bin
faulty. But they did neither insist, nor demand Judgment of that honorable
Court thereupon. But pleaded over the Truth of the matter, and concluded their
said answer, with the general issue, Not guilty.

2. That they did incense the Plaintiffes Father against him.

3. That they had untruly charged him, to have said, That he was ashamed of
his Father.

4. That there were no Instructions given by the said Testator, for making of
the said Will to such as drew it.

5. That it was doubtful whether it was at any time read to the Father, or not.

6. That some did depose the said reading thereof, but to their rememberance,
and with some contrarieties, which were clearly otherwise, and very untrue.

But on the other part of the Defendants, it was fully proved.

1. That the very paper book of the said draught, was read and amended to,
and by the said Testators own directions.

2. That it was drawn by a former Will by his directions.

3. That the same paper book was sent afterward to Mr. Sergeant Altham to be
perused.

4. That it was by him perused, and brought back again, and read to him a
second time.

5. That it was by the Testators direction engrossed in parchment in two parts
indented.

6. That the said Testator invited diverse men, of purpose to let them know
that it was his last Will and Testament.

7. That the same was brought and read unto him before the sealing, by one of
his servants that drew it in paper.

8. That a former Will was then in his presence and view, and by his special
directions cancelled and defaced.

9. That then he sealed the said Will (decreed against) in the presence of the
said witnesses.

10. That he then delivered one duplicate thereof to one Mr. Fitch to be kept,
and the other he kept himself.

11. That he afterward delivered one of the said duplicates to the deputed
Towne-Clearke of London, to be by him safely kept.

12. That the same was so made two years and more before his death.

13. That he did again publish the same to one Doctor Manning about one year
after the date thereof, who read it unto him.

14. That he, at all these times well knew, that the said Fra: Verzelline had
married Kath: Burley his second wife, the first being alive.

15. That he said, No Bastards should inherit his Lands, and held the said
Francis, prodigal and lewd.

16. And that the said Testator was of very perfect memory at all these times.

For all which, and for that the said Fra: Verzelline had all the personal
estate of the said Jacob the Elder, amounting to the value of 1200. li. and
upwards, as Executor to Eliz. Executrix of the said Testators last Will and
Testament. And for that the validity and inualidity of the said last Will and
Testament, being for Lands of Inheritance, ought by the Laws of this Kingdom,
to have bin tried at the Common Law, upon an issue of deuisauit or, non
deuisauit, and not to have bin determined in the said Court of Chancery.

The said Peter Manning and his Wife, Michaell Palmer, and John Palmer his Son
and heir, by the said Marriage, and Jacob Manning, son and heir of the said
Peter, do humbly pray his most excellent Majesty, the Lords spiritual and
temporal, and Commons in this present Parliament assembled, That it may be by
them enacted, That the said Decree may be utterly reuersed; and that they may
have full power and liberty (the said Decree notwithstanding) to enter into
the said Lands, or to recover the same, at and by the Common Laws of this
Realm, and that all persons interessed by the said Will, may hold and enjoy all the lands to them devised, according to the same, the said Decree in any wise
notwithstanding.

(...)


