1589.

Est natura hominum nouitatis auida. THE SCOTTISH Queens Burial at
Peterborough, upon Tuesday being Lammas day. 1587.

London. Printed by A I, for Edward Venge, and are to be sold at his shop
without Bishops-gate.

The Scottish Queens Burial at Peterborough, upon Tuesday, being Lammas day.
1587.
HEr body was brought in a Coutch (about 100 attending thereon from
Fotheringham castle upon Sunday at night, the Bishop of Peterborough, the
Deane, the Prebendes, and the rest meeting the same at the Bridge, being not
far from the town, and so conueighed it to the Bishops Palace, and from thence
upon Tuesday being Lammas day, was carried to the Church where she was buried on
the south side of the hearse by torch light.

The Hearse was made field-bed wise, the vallance of black velvet with a gold
fringe, the top of the imperial covered wite Baies: About it was set 10
Posies, In my defense God me defend, with 10 Scutchions great and little, and
at the top a double one with a Crown imperial thereupon. The supporters,
Unicorns with 100 Pendons or little Flags: It was impaled with Baies, and in it
14 stools with black velvet cushions: upon the pillars sustaining the
imperial of the Hearse, the which were all covered with vel: uet, were fixed
Scutchions, bearing either red Lion alone, or else parted with the Arms of
France, or with the Arms of the Lord Lineaux. The Church and Chancell were
hanged with baies, and Scutchions as at other Funerals. The Mourners came out
of the Bishops palace, being set in order in the by the Herralds thus. First
100 Releeuants poor old women, for the most part widows in black cloth
gowns, with an ell of white Holland over their heads, which they had for
their labor, and 9. shillings apeece in money: These divided themselves in the
body of the Church, and stood half on the one side, and half on the other,
and there stood during the whole solemnity. At the Church door the singing
men and Quiristers met the Mourners with a psalm, and led them the way into
the Chancell, continuing singing with the Organs until the sermon began. Then
followed two yeomen, viz. the Sherifes bailiefe, and the bailiefe of
Peterborough, with black staves, and after them mourning coats. Then Sir
Nicholas Sauell in a mourning gown carrieng the great Standard, viz. a^ Cross
in a Field Azur: the Streamer, an Unicorn Argent in a field of Guiles, a
poesy written. In my defense God me defend. Then followed mourning cloakes by
two and two, a great number, whereof the first were late the Queens officers,
and after them mourning gowns: Among these officers of her house, was a French
Jesuit her Confessor, with a golden Crucifix about his neck, which he did
wear openly, and being told that the people murmured and disliked at it, he
said he would do it, though he died for it. Thus we may see how obdurate their
hearts are in malice, and how obstinate they show themselves in the vain
toies and superstitious trifles of their own imaginations.

Then the Deane, next the two Bishops of Peterborough and Lincoln, the L.
Willoughby of Parhan, the L. Mordant, the L. Compton, Sir Thomas Cicel all
four in gowns with white staves, representing the Steward, Chamberlain,
Tresurer, and Comtroller: after these 16 Scotts and Frenchmen which had bin
officers in her house: then Sir Andrew Nowel alone, carieng the banner of
Scotland: then Percullis the Harralde bearing the Crown and Crest, thereon a
red Lion rampant crowned, holding a sword the point upward, the Helmet
ouermanteled Guiles pondered ermyne: then the Target by Roges Dragon: the Sword
by York: the coat of Arms by Somerset. Then Clarenceaux with a Gentleman at
Arms. Then followed the Coffin covered with a paul of velvet, six Scutchions
fixed thereon, upon the head wheref stood a Crown of gold, 6 Gentlemen bearing
the Corpse under a velvet canapie born by these 4 Knights: viz. Sir Thomas
Manners, Sir John Hastings, Sir James Harrington and Sir John Knightly: eight
other banorets borne by 8 Squires, 4 on either side of the Coffin. After the
corpse came the head Mourner, the Countess of Bedford, assisted by the two
Earls of Rutland and Lincoln. The Lady Saint-Iohns of Basing bearing her
train. Then followed by two and two other Ladies: the L. Talbot the L.
Mordant, the L. Sauell, the L. Manners, the L. Cecill, the L. Mountegew, the
Lady Nowell. The other Gentlemen. The ten Scottish and French women of the
Queens with black attire on their heads, of taffate before, and hehind white
Lawne, hanging down like French-hoodes. They with the Scottish and French men
did all go out before the Sermon (except M. Meluin who stayed) and the rest
came in when it was ended: the head Mourner, and the Ladies, with the two Earls
assistants were placed within the Hearse: the two Knights with their banners
were set at the east end of the Hearse without the pale, and the eight Squires
with their bannorets, 4 of a side in like manner without the pale. All the rest
of the Mourners were carried up by an Harrald above the Hearse, and placed of
each side, the women next the altar. The Bishop and the Deane standing at the
Altar with two gilded basins, al which being placed and set, and the Church
quiet, the Bishop of Lincoln began his Sermon, and in his prayer used these
words, Let us bless God for the happy dissolution of Marie, late the
Scottish Queen and Dowager of France: of whose life and departure, whatsoever
shall be expected, I have nothing to say, for that I was unacquainted with the
one, and not present at the other, of her M. faith and end I am not to judge:
It is a charitable saying of the Father Luther: Many one lives a Papist, and
dies a Protestant: Only this I have been informed, that she took her death
patiently, and recommended her self wholly to Jesus Christ.

The Sermon ended, a long piece of velvet and a cushion was carried and laid for
the Countess to go and kneel upon, hard before the Bishops feet, then by the
King of Harralds were carried the four officers with their white staves, and
placed two at the top of the stairs under the Bishop and two beneath them Then
the two principal Harralds fetched up the Countess, the two Earls leading
her, and the Lady Saint-Iohns bearing up her train: there she kneeled a while,
and then all returned to their places, this was the first offering (not that
Brakenburie went this time before her) The two Earls placed without the pale
before the Countess, one of the Kings of Harralds fetched from the Hearse the
coat armor brought it down to the other King of Harralds, and he delivered it
to the two Earls, they carried it (obeisance being done to the Countess) to
the Bishop, and kissed it in delivering of it. A third Harrald took it of the
Bishop and laid it down on the Altar, the Sword, the Target, the Helmet,
Crown, and Crest in like sort was all done by the two Earls, kissing their
hands before them: then were the two banners carried up one after another
severally by those that brought them, and so set upon the Altar, leaning to the
wall, the other 8 Bannorets were put into the Hearse as they stood. Then went
the Countess, M. John Manners holding up her train the second time, and
offered alone to the Bishop.

Then the Ladies and Gentlewomen by two and two went up and offered, then the
officers with white staves offered: and last of all came there a Harralde to
the pulpyt, and fetched the Bishop of Lincoln, and then the most part of the
Mourners departed in the same order they came in, and toward the door of the
Chancell stood the Scottish women, parted on both sides, and as the English
Ladies passed by, they kissed them all.

Then over the Vault where the body lay, the Deane read the ordinary words of
burial, an this being done, the four officers brake their white staves over
their heads, and threw them into the Vaulte.

FINIS.

