THE TRIVMPHS OF THE GOLDEN FLEECE.

Performed at the cost and charges of the Ancient and Honorable SOCIETY of
the DRAPERS: For the enstaulment of their Worthy Brother Mr. MARTIN LVMLEY in
the Maioraltie of LONDON.

On Wednesday, being the nine and twentieth day of October 1623.

Written by A. MVNDY, Citizen and Draper of LONDON.

LONDON: Printed by T. S. 1623.

TO THE Worshipful and worthy GENTLEMEN, Mr. John Gualter, Mr. John Foster,
Mr. Robert Awbrey, Mr. Walter Couentrey, the Masters, Wardens Batchelers, and
their Assistant Brethren, of the Ancient and Honorable Company of the DRAPERS.
TO you worthy Gentlemen, whose provident care and liberal cost, has run
through the troublesome travail of so serious an employment, do I justly, and
(as no more then is your due) dedicate this poor pains of mine, which might
have been more, had time so favored; but such as it is, take you the honor
of my best endeavor, in this days Triumphs of the GOLDEN FLEECE, and what
service else you shall please to command me.

Your poor loving Brother, A. Mundy.

THE TRIVMPHS of the Golden Fleece: Gracing the Triumph-day, for the
Inauguration of the DRAPERS worthy Brother, Mr. MARTIN LVMLEY, in the
Maioraltie of London, for the year ensuing.
FIrst, for the water-Seruice in the Morning, when his Lordship takes Barge
for his Conuoye to Westminster, accompanied with the Knights and Aldermen, his
worthy Brethren of several Societies, and all the other Companies in their
Triumphall Barges, with Drums, Fifes, Trumpets, and other Iouiall
Instruments: There is readily mounted on a Barge of apt conueyance, a
beautiful and curious Argoe, shaped after the old Grecian Antique manner, not
with Mastes and Sails, as prepared for rough and boystrous Seas; but like to
the Grecian Argoes, for carriage of passengers, in time of calm and gentle
weather, having Banks for men to sit and row with Oars, for more quick and
agile passage on the Seas.

This Argoe, figureth that of so great fame and renown, wherein Prince Jason,
and his valiant Argonautes of Greece, passed to Cholchos, to fetch from thence
the Golden Fleece; which is the Creast of the DRAPERS Armorie, and therefore
the maine motive, of our employing the Invention, alluding to that famous
Moral, and ancient History.

We suppose this Argoe to be returned from Colchos, purposely to honor this
Triumphall day, by the rare Art of Medea the Enchantresse, that kept the
Fleece there so long a time, and wherewith she was now the more willing to
part; in regard of her affection to the DRAPERS Company, to whom she gave it
freely, for an honor and Ornament to their Arms.

And to make the Triumph the more full of Majesty, she vouchsafed to come her
self in person, attended with the fair Queen Jrene her daughter, and
accompanied with the famous Princes Jason, Hercules, Telamon, Orpheus, Castor
and Pollux, all armed with fair guilt Armours; and bearing Triumphall Lances,
wreathed about with gilded Laurel, and curious Shields, all carrying the
Impresse of the Golden Fleece.

Six Tributarie Indian Kings, holding their several dominions of Medea, and
living in vassalage to her: are commanded by her to row the Argoe, all of
them wearing their Tributarie Crowns, and Antickely attired in rich
habiliments.

The Service being performed upon the Water, the like is done on the Land, all
the rest of the day following: always attending his honors service, and for
adding the more splendour to the Triumphs Solemnity.

Whatsoever credit or commendation (if any at all) may attend on the Artefull
performance of this poor denise: it belongs to the Arts-Maisters, Richard
Simpson, and Nicholas Sotherne, and freely I give it to them.

A. M.

FINIS.

