SIX EXCELLENT TREATISES of LIFE and DEATH, Collected (and published in French)
by PHILIP MORNAY, Sieur du Plessis: And now (first) Translated into English.

Imprinted at London by H.L. for Matthew Lownes: and are to be sold at his shop
in Paul's Churchyard, at the sign of the Bishops head, 1607.

The Treatises, and Discourses contained in this Volume.
PLATO his Axiocus; a Dialogue entreating of Death. A Discourse of TVLLIVS
CICERO'S, concerning Death. Collections out of SENECA'S Works, touching Life
and Death. A Sermon of mortality, made by S. CYPRIAN Bishop of Carthage, and a
Martyr of JESUS CHRIST. A Treatise of Saint AMBROSE, Bishop of Milan, touching
the benefit and happiness of Death. Certain places of Scripture, Prayers and
Meditations, concerning Life and Death.
The Translator to the Reader.
Here know, that the first Discourse, mentioned in the Advertisement ensuing,
is none of these six here set down; but another precedent to these, and
formerly translated by the Countess of Pembroke.

The French Authors Advertisement to the Reader.
COncerning the Argument of this discourse, it te^deth principally to the
abating of that hope, and presumption, which we usually have, to obtain, in
this life, that which never was enjoyed here since the transgression of our
first Parents, nor never shall be; as it is very well inferred, especially in
the first Discourse, by the description of man, from his beginning, while he
leaves this world. As for this word Fortune, the which ye shall here meet
withal, in diverse passages, entertain it, out of the toleration of Custom and
Use, or rather, indeed, out of the necessity of our tongue; the which, in stead
of quite abolishing, does too stiffely retain the use hereof: because those
things which commonly happen, without it being known why, or wherefore, unto
men; they were referred by our Ancestors, according to the heathen phrase, to
Fortune. And, to conclude: whereas Plato, Cicero, and Seneca, who were called
Philosophers, are brought in, speaking by way of Dialogue, after the first
Discourse, let not this be understood, of any want we had of more Authentike
Authors, that is to say, amongst the ancient Christians, upon this argument
(seeing we have in like manner produced two in this second edition, which are
Saint Cyprian, and S. Ambrose): but this was only thought a better means to
awake us thoroughly, by the cry of these strange witnesses, who tasting only,
but out of their natural judgment, and some knowledge and experience which
they had of the vanities of man; it seems, they would fain hail us along to
some better Port, and Retrait, than themselves have attained for them, or
witnessed unto others by their example.

AXIOCVS. A Dialogue, written by PLATO, or by some other heathen Philosopher,
containing a discourse against death; between SOCRATES, CLINIAS, and AXIOCVS.
SOCRATES.
MInding to go to Cynosarges, and being come near to Elissus, I heard a man's
voice, calling me out alowd by my name: and so turning back to see who it was,
I might perceive Clinias, Axiocus his son, together with Damon the Musician,
and Charmides the son of Glaucon, running toward the fair fountain: I
presently left my own way, to go meet them, to the end we might more
conveniently discourse and talk together. Then Clinias, weeping bitterly, said
unto me; Socrates, now is the time, wherein thou may put that great wisdom
in trial, which makes thee so highly esteemed of every one. For, my Father is
sudde^ly fallen so grievously sick, that we look rather for his death than
life; for which cause he seems to be wonderfully perplexed, although when he
was in perfect health, he laughed at them, that feared death (as though it had
bin some hideous Hobgoblin, or grisly Antic) taunting, and scornfully mocking
them for the same* I pray you therefore, come and see him, that he may be
fortified by your good instructions, as you know very well how to do it, that
he may patiently and acceptably attend his death. And for my part, this will
be one of the last dutiful offices, which I shall perform toward my Father.
For me, Clinias, then I answered, you shall ever find me ready to endeavor my
self for you in any thing within my power; but especially in a respect, so
devout and religious. Wherefore let us go quickly; for if it be so, we must not
delay time. Clin. I am sure that your very presence will much comfort my
Father, if he be yet alive; for, by such good means he has ofte^-times
escaped, of dangerous maladies. Socr. Well, we found Axiocus in reasonable
good state of body; but in his mind so afflicted, that he stood in great
need of some consolation: for he never left turning, sometimes on the one, and
then on the other side, sighing and lamenting with a great agitation and motion
of his arms. Seeing him in this state, I began thus to break with him. Why,
Axiocus, what means this? what is become of your daily brags, and commendations
of Virtue? where is now your invincible courage? when you have showed your
self so valiant throughout the whole combat, and now drawing near to the end,
when you should receive the reward, and recompense of your travails, silly
Champion, do you now faint? why do you not better observe the condition of
all mankind, you being a man well experienced by your years, and an Athenian?
Do you no more remember, what all men have often in their mouths, that this
our life is but a Pilgrimage? and that after having honestly passed over our
days, we must then cheerfully and merrily remove out of this present life? But
to be thus dejected, and to leave this world, with as much grief, as a little
child would do; this ill beseemes that wisdom and prudence, which is
expected to be in men of your years. Axio. It is true, Socrates, and you do
advertise me for my good: but I know in what manner; for when it comes to the
point, and to be apprehended indeed, all this bravery of words closely slinkes
away, without so much as a cogitation thereon: and in stead thereof, a certain
fear takes place, which surpriseth my mind, when I think that I must be
deprived of this light, of so much worldly goods, to lie and rot, I know not
where, in a place where I shall not not be seen, or heard, of any body, there
to be changed into worms and loathsome creatures. Soc. This falls out unto
thee Axiocus, because through incircumspection, and without thinking well
thereupon, you couple sense, and the state of death together; so that your
words and deeds are one repugnant to the other: For you consider not, that at
one instant, you grieve for the loss of sense, and the putrefaction which you
fear to feel, together with the prevention of the delights of this life: even
as if after death, you were to lead another earthly life, and to enjoy the
senses which now you do; whereas your body shall be dissolved as it was
before your conception. And, as you felt no kind of evil, in that time, when
Draco and Calisthenes governed the Commo^wealth (for, then you were not
existent, to feel either good or evil) so after death your body shall be
sensible of nothing, it being then free from the touch of any discommodities.
Away therefore with all these apprehensio^s, and be assured, that after our
dissolution, and that the soul is returned to her proper place, the body which
remains behind is not that which we call man, but rather a lump of earth and
clay, without reason or sense. And to say the truth, we are and should rightly
be termed soul; which is an immortal creature, enclosed in a corrupt body,
as within a stinking prison. As for this fleshly tabernacle, Nature has
environed us therewith, for our chastisement; the pleasures thereof being
inconstant, ready swiftly to fly away, and intermingled with many diseases:
whereas, on the contrary, the vexations are vehement, and of long continuance,
being destitute of all kind of consolation. What should I speak of diseases,
of the heat and concupisce^ce of our senses, and of the vices which lurk, and
are couched in the same? The soul being diffused, and spread through all the
conduits of the body, is urged to cry out, and sigh after heaven, which she so
truly resembles, desiring this life and releasment, as affectionately, as the
thirsty do pant and breathe after the cool and fresh waters: and so the
departure from this our life, is a change from evil to good. Axi. But,
Socrates, if you term this life so evil, why do you tarry in it; seeing you
are of far greater understanding, than we simple people are? Socrat. Axiocus,
you speak not of me as you should do; but, after the example of Athens, you
suppose that I am a very wise man, because I dispute, and argue of one thing
and another; for my part, I desire to know even that which is common; so far
off am I, from thinking my self able to resolve of so important matters as
these, whereof we now entreat. In effect, whatsoever before I delivered, was
taken out of the discourses of wise Prodicus, whom you know well, and to whom
I have given money twice or thrice: For he never reads a Lecture to any for
nothing; for in his mouth he has ordinarily that saying of Epicharmus, One
hand must wash another; we must give one thing to receive another. Lastly, when
we were at Callias his lodging, he that is the son of Hippocin, this Prodicus
minding to utter his whole sufficiency, produced so many reasons, against the
love of this life, as I was ready to have hastened my own death: and after
that, my soul did nothing but desire death. Axi. What said he the^? Soc. I
will rehearse it unto you, so far as I can remember. He therefore used this
speech: Is any part of our age without vexatio^s? does not the Infant weep at
his coming out of his mothers womb, beginning his days in affliction? he
never finds repose in any of his actions: want, cold, heat, or some burning,
torments him; he not being able to recount his accidents, but always crying,
and by this only sign, he sufficiently enough discouers his misery. After
much trouble, when he comes to be seven years old, then his executioners lay
hold on him; that is to say, his Tutors, Masters, and Teachers of all
exercises. When he grows greater, then he is environed, with Instructors, and
often discourse, with overseers, with Mathematicians, with Captains, and
briefly with a great troop of Lords and Gallants. Afterward, if he attain
to man-like years, his miseries draw nearer unto him, being carried from the
Licaeum, to the Academie, into places of public exercise, and into many evils,
as well of body as mind. All the years of his youth are subject to his
Masters correction, and to such Tutors as are appointed for the education of
his youth. When he is gotten once out of this straight, new cares assail and
enforce him to resolve what course he should take: and, if we compare the
disco^modities of his youth, with those that afterward set upon him, they
will appear to be but pleasant and supportable; and, to speak in a word, but
childish scar-crowes, in respect of the other. For, he must go to the wars,
take blows, be in perpetual combat, and fight: and then old age comes on,
fair and softly, being the right rende-uouz of all calamities, and remediless
evils. If any man be long a dying, and paying of this debt, Nature, like a
rigorous creditor, that will be paid at his just day, sues out an Execution
against her debtors; taking from one his sight, from another his hearing, and
sometimes both of them together. And then if thou tarriest yet any longer in
the world, she foundereth, maimeth, and disnerves thee. It is true, that some
have a long and vigorous old age; but then they renew and verify the Proverb,
which says, that old men become children again. And therefore the immortal
God, knowing well the state and condition of humane life, he quickly takes
them from hence, whom he loves best. Let Agamedes, and Trophonius be witness
hereof, who after they had built the Temple of Apollo Delphick, and prayed
instantly that God, to grant them that, which would be most beneficial for
them, they went to take their last sleep; for the day after they were found
dead. Also, the sons of that Presbyteresse of Argos, their mother having
prayed the Goddess Juno, to reco^pense their piety and devotion, in that,
wanting horses, they themselves had drawn their Mother, in her chariot to the
Temple; the same night, after her prayers made, gave up the ghost. On the other
side again, it would be a tedious thing, to recite the lamentations which
Poets make (these being men that prognosticate of things to come) when in their
excellent poemes, they describe the condition of all worldly things. At this
time, I will only bring forth the testimony of a principal man amongst them,
who affirms, the Immortal Gods to have sentenced, that the life of man should
be miserable; and that considering the travails and troubles of all other
creatures, they are nothing, in respect of the misery of man. What says
Amphiaraus to this matter? though Jupiter and Apollo loved him so dearly above
all others, yet could he never attain unto perfect old age. But I will
proceed no further, for fear of extending my discourse more largely than I
promised, by discoursing upon other matters. But, I pray you, Is there any
travail, either of mind or body, wherein thou have not some just occasion to
complain? Do thou patiently accept of whatsoever is prefented unto thee? By
the way, let us but consider of men of any Art or Mystery, which labor night
after night, and yet they can scarcely thereby furnish their necessary wants,
even bedeawing the works of their hands, with tears, and sighs. Shall we
come to those that traffic by Sea? Behold the life of a certain kind of men,
that cut the waves, amidst a thousand perils and dangers: so that Bias had
very good reason to say, that those which sail by sea, were to be esteemed
amongst those, neither living, nor dead. For, man being created to live upon
the earth, he launches out into the waters (minding at one instant to
participate of two contrary elements) and casts himself desperately into the
arms of Fortune. Thou will peradventure say, that the labor, and tillage of
the earth is a pleasant thing. I agree thereunto: but with how many miseries is
this contentment accompanied? Does it not bring forth every day some occasion
of grief and sorrow? now rain, by and by drought; to day burning heat, to
morrow nipping frost; and thus, by times, either unseasonable scorchings, or
immoderate cold. But, not to insist upon many other vocacations of life, to how
many perils is the government of States subject, whereof many do so highly
esteem? The joy and pleasure therein comprehended, resembles fitly an ulcer,
or violent beating of the pulse: the being put beside the saddle, in such
offices, makes the ambitious cold at heart, and procures them more
coffeehouse, than if they were to suffer a thousand deaths. Can a man be
happy, while he lives at the discretion of the vulgar, what reputation
(otherwise) soever he be in, or though every one reverence him never so much?
seeing he is but the peoples puppit, who may disgrade him, hiss at him,
condemn him to penalty, bring him to misery, and sometimes also puts him to
death. I demand of thee, Axiocus, because thou have swayed this Scepter of
Magistracy, where died Miltiades, Themistocles, Ephialtes, with other Princes,
and great Captains which preceded them? For my part, I would never accept of
their suffrages, supposing it a thing very improper for me, to be an
associate, or head of so dangerous a beast, as the common people: but
Theramines and Callixines, together with their guarde, sending Judges the day
after (co^stituted upon purpose) condemned to death all those, that any ways
were their opposites, without permitting the^ any hearing. As for thee,
Axiocus, thou, with Triptolemus, vpheldest equity, although in the assembly
there were thirty thousand of a contrary opinion, and which gave negative
voices. Axi. You say but truth, Socrates: and since that time, I have had
enough of such conuentions, and nothing seems unto me more harsh and vnfauorie,
than the management of public affairs. They that ever had to do therein, can
well auerre so much: as for your self, you speak but afar off, and as one
judging, by the blows, which have light upon others. But we, that have played
our part therein, may speak by better proofs. In very truth, my friend
Socrates, the people are very ingrate, cumbersome, cruel, envious, evil
taught, compounded of the very dregs of men, and of those that are insolent,
and great mockers. I judge him to be most miserable, that will be too familiar
with such a beast. Soc. Why then, Axiocus, seeing you detest the fairest
employment of all others, what may we say of the rest? must we not shun them?
But for the remainder, I have heard this Prodicus, adding to the other
discourses, this also ensuing; that death concerned not either the living or
the dead. Axio. What Is this you affirm, Socrates? Socr. Why, because Death is
no ways hurtful to those that are living: and for the dead, they are out of
his jurisdiction. And therefore now it does not endammage you, because yet you
live: and when you shall not be alive, he can have no power over you, because
then you are past his stroke any more. It is therefore but a vain sorrow,
for Axiocus to lament that, which neither does, nor shall hereafter concern
him; no otherwise, than as it would be a notable folly to be afeard of monsters
which thou see not, which presently have no existence, and that after thy
death have no being. That which is redoubtfull therein, is hideous only to
those, that forge fears to themselves. For, is there any thing that can bring
terror to the dead? Axioc. You have stolen these wise persuasions, from the
Orators, that at this day bear all the sway: for they are the men, that make
these pleasant relations, to sooth, and humor young men: but I, for my part, am
exceeding loath, to leave these worldly goods, whatsoever you are able to
allege unto me (in your conference) of pleasing appearance; and my mind finds
no perfect contentme^t, in this smooth course of words, which do but a little
delight and tickle in their utterance. They bear a good show with them, but
they are too remote from truth: and our cogitations are not fed with
fantasies; but with things firm and solid, that are able inwardly to pearce,
and settle themselves. Soc. But, Axiocus, you inconsideratlie couple together
those things which should not be co^ioined; in making us believe, that to feel
evil, and be deprived of good, are the self same things: for the suffering of
evil, brings grief unto him, that loses a good. Now, you forget, that being
dead you are no more; and he that is not, cannot perceive this privation: how
can he therefore be grieved at a thing, whereof he shall have no apprehension?
If at the first you had resolved with me, that in death our bodies are
deprived of sense, you would never have been so fond, as to fear death: Now,
you contradict your self, in fearing to be deprived of your soul; joining
this soul, to your imagined loss. For in fearing to lose your sense, you
suppose by the same sense to comprehend an evil, which you build unto your
self in the air, and that you are afraid to feel. Besides this above
alleged, there are many excellent arguments, to prove the immortality of the
soul. For, a mortal nature would never have undertaken such great matters, as
to contemn the violence of cruel beasts, to cross the Seas, to build cities,
to establish public governments, to contemplate the heavens, to observe the
course of the stars, of the Sun and of the Moon, their Eclipses, and
sudden restitutions, the rising and falling of the Pleiades, the Equinoctials,
the Solstice of Winter and Summer, the winds, violent raines, with flashings,
lightnings, and thunder. She would not have comprehended in writing, nor
consecrated to eternity, those things that fall out in the world, were she not
accompanied with some divine Spirit, to have the intelligence, and knowledge of
such high and mystical matters. And therefore, Axiocus, thou must pass unto
an immortal life, and not to death: thou shall not be stripped of all, but
enjoy true goods, thou shall have pleasures, no way intermingled with this
mortal body, but absolutely pure, and indefectiue, and such as most truly
deserve to be called pleasures. For, thou being loosed out of this prison, and
become truly free, thou shall go unto a place, where there is no travel, nor
lamentation, from whence sorrow and old age are banished: thy life shall be
exempted from all evil, replenished with secure repose, and eternal joys.
Thou shall there behold the nature of al things: conferring no more thy minds
travel, to their affections, who honor thee in this world; but to resplendent,
and most excellent verity her self. Axi. Thy discourse has made me change my
mind; and I am now so far from fearing death, that contrariwise I ardently
desire the same: and to express my self more magnanimiously, I am already, in
a manner, out of the world, and begin to enter into these divine and eternal
paths; so that being wholly eased of my infirmity, I am quite become another
man than that I was before.

CICERO, in his dialogue of old age, toward the end.
THere remains a fourth reason, which seems to vex, and torment old age;
that is to say, the approach of Death, which at that time, can not be far
off. But, I think that old man to be very miserable, which in the space of so
long time before, never learned, that death simply was not to be feared, but
rather to be contemned, if it destroy the soul, as some think: but according
to my opinion, it ought to be desired; seeing it leads man to a place where
he shall live eternally. We cannot find any one betwixt these two opinions.
What should I then fear, if I either feel no misery at all, or if I shall be
happy after death? Besides this, is there any man so foolish, how young a Gul
soever he be, to suppose, that he has a Patent of his life, but til the
evening? He is so far from that, that even youth it self is subject to many
more kinds of death than old age: young men sooner fall into diseases, they are
more grievously sick, and hardlier healed: so that it is rare, to see men live
to be old. If this were not, we should live more wisely, and happily: for
old men are endued with the understanding of counsel and wisdom; and without
them, Co^mon-wealths could not stand on foot. But, let us come to this fear
of present death: and in that, old age is wrongfully charged to be subject to
this apprehension; feeing this is a more common accident with youth. For my
part, I felt in the death of my son, and your brothers, of whom great hope of
good, hereafter, was conceived, that death threatens all ages. Some body may
reply, that a young man hopes to live long: which one aged, cannot expect. This
hope, is truly the hope of a young man, that is to say, of a light head. For,
is there a greater sottishnes, than to make sure and certain of that, which is
altogether uncertain, and unsure? But an old man has no reason in the world
to conceive any such hope: and I affirm that his condition herein, is far
better, tha^ a young man's, in that he has obtained what the young man does but
hope for; and that is long life, which the old man has passed. I pray you,
what length do you find in a man's life? fet down unto me, the longest of all
others: Let us consider the age of the King of the Tartessians; for I find in
books, that one Arganthonius reigned fourscore, and lived sixescore years:
but I see that there is nothing long, but tends to some period; the which
being attained unto, all the rest is gone and past, there remaining nothing but
what thou have obtained by Justice and piety. The hours pass away, so do
the months: that past, never returns again, and what will come hereafter we
know not. Every one must be contented, with the time allotted him to live.
For, as he that plays a Part upon a stage, needs not to repeat the whole
Comedy from one end to the other (to make him be accounted a good Actor) so
that in the Part which he properly plaieth, he give contentme^t to the
spectatours: no more is it requisite, that the wise man should live as long as
the oldest man that ever lived in the world; because a short life is long
enough, for a man to carry himself therein honestly, and virtuously. And so
if our days shoot out at length, we must be no more weary of them than
laborers, that after the beauty of the Spring time, see Summer ensue, and
then Autumn. For, the Spring time resembles youth, and makes some
demonstration of the fruits which afterward must be reaped. Other ages are
proper, to gather, and lay up the increase of the earth: and the fruit of old
age, is the remembrance of those goods which we have formerly purchased:
whatsoever is done according to nature, we may place in the rank of good
things. But, what is more natural, than to see old men die? The same falls
out to youth: but, somewhat against Nature; and, as it were, in despite of her:
so that when young men die, me thinks I see as it were a great fire, quenched
by an huge quantity of water: where as contrariwise, old men drop away of
themselves, without any violence offered, like to a fire that quenches of it
self. And, even as apples, but green and unripe, fall not from the trees,
except we violently pluck them off; and being ripe, they fall off without using
any great force thereto: so also young men seem to die, not without some
violence offered to their nature: and old men quite otherwise. The which so
cheares me up that the nearer I approach unto death, the nearer I discern my
self to hale in with that harbor, and port, where I pretend to anchor, after
so long, and dangerous a nauigatio^. All the ages of our life, are limited but
only old age, wherein we live virtuously, as long as the means yet remains to
labor in our vocation; and otherwise, to hold death in contempt: the which may
be the reason also, that old age is more ardent and courageous, than youth.
This is that, which Solon answered to the Tyrant Lisistratus, who interrogated
him concerning virtue, wherewith he so braued him, and was always opposite to
his designs, because, said Solon, I am old: but the end of this life is then
most sweet, and excellent, when the same Nature which built, defaceth also her
work, when a man til the last retains his senses, and understanding, entire.
For even as the Carpenter, or Architect, can easily, when he lists, pluck the
ribs and beams of his ship asunder, or the other pluck down that building
which he had erected: even so, Nature most properly dissolueth a man, whom she
before had sodered together of two so different pieces: now, al kind of Soder,
and conglutination lately made, is hardly dissolved; but in that old and long
worn, it is otherwise: and so the remainder of life is not much desired, or
sighed after, by the aged; who have reason rather to be ready to dislodge,
expecting minutally the great Captains commandment, which is God: without whose
will and pleasure, as Pythagoras said, we are prohibited to leave our
Guarison, and Corpse du guard, wherein we are constituted in this world. There
is a notable saying, ascribed to the wise Solon, wherein he would have his
friends to mourn and lament his death: which makes me think, that his meaning
only was herein, that they should show, to have made great account of him.
But, the Poet Ennius, peradventure hit better upon this point, when he forbade
his death to be lamented, or that any mourning funerals should be performed:
he supposing, that such a death was not to be deplored, which was seconded by
immortality. For the rest, if there be some sense or feeling in death, and in
our last gaspes, it lasts not long, especially in a very aged man: and as for
any feeling after death, it is either nothing at all, or else a thing to be
much desired. But we must have learned betimes to contemn death: for without
this Meditation, none, can have any repose in mind; seeing it is most
certain, that die we must, not knowing when: and it may be, at the same
moment, or instant of our thought. How can that man therefore enjoy a peaceable
soul, if he fear death, which threatens him, every minute of his life? I
need not dilate more at large, of this, wen I call to mind, not only Lucius
Brutus, who was slain in the delivery of his country; or of the two Decij, who
viole^cly plunged themselves, the one, within an huge deep Dell; and the other
within a Battalion of armed men, amongst whom he verily thought to have been
slain; or Marcus Attilius, who courageously returned to cruel punishment,
choosing rather to lose his life, than break his oath, which he had plighted
to his enemies; and the two Scipioes, that exposed their bodies to the enemies
fury, for the stopping of a passage; or Lucius Paulus, who by his own death,
defaced the temerity and rashness of his collegued Consul, in the discomfiture
of the Romans at Cannas; and also Marcus Marcellus, who being dead, was
honored with a Toombe, by his most mortal enemy: but I will also set before
your eyes our modern Regiments, which have oftentimes chearefully, and with
noble courage assaulted those places, from whence no one of the troops, ever
hoped to come off. Should it be said, that learned old men, do fear that,
which youth, and those rusticall and ignorant, for the most part, valiantly
despise? And moreover, me thinks the being satisfied with all things else,
makes one also well satisfied with living. Infancy has certain disports and
recreations, which young men desire not to put in practice. Old age feels no
contentment in the pleasures of youth; and men of ancient years, seek not
after that, wherein men delight, that are yet in the flower of their age: and
old age discernes the very last employments of our life; but yet in such sort,
that all in the end vanishes away, as the exercises of precedent times have
done: the which coming to pass, to be satisfied with living, clearly
shows, that then it is high time to die. For my part, I see nothing that
hinders me, from setting down my opinion touching death: and me thinks, I may
speak thereof, with good motive, seeing it appears so near unto me. Out of
doubt, Scipio, and Laelius, I think that your fathers, which were honorable
men, and my best friends, though dead to the world, do yet live; and such a
life, as only deserves to be so called. For, while we are enclosed within
these strait precincts of the body, we travel, and we must (will we, nill
we) yield, unto the yoke and burden; the celestial soul, and offspring of
the highest Tabernacle, being overwhelmed, and, as it were buried in earth,
this being a contrary habitation to eternity, and a divine nature. But, I
believe, that the immortal Gods have planted souls in humane bodies, to the
end there might be people to replenish, and preserve the world, to contemplate
the beautiful course of heavenly bodies, and to imitate them, in constancy,
and regular life. Besides many reasons and arguments, which have induced me to
believe this, the authority and reputation of the greatest Philosophers, has
much furthered me: I have heard say, that Pythagoras, and the Pythagoreans,
sometimes named the Philosophers of Italy (and consequently, inhabitants of our
country) were always of opinion, that our souls were extracted from
Divinity. I have understood also of Socrates his discourse (who was judged by
the Oracle of Apollo, to be the wisest man of the world) toward the later part
of his life, about the immortality of souls. What need we any more? behold
my opinion herein. Seeing the souls of men are so pregnant, so retentiue and
mindful of things past, foresee so discreetly those to come, have invented so
many mysteries, and diverse other worthy Sciences, and excellent matters, it is
impossible, that a nature capable of so great good, should be mortal. And the
soul having perpetual motion, without receiving any inferior beginning
thereof, considering that she only moves of her self, it must necessarily
follow, that she shall have this motion for ever, because she can never
abandon her self. Also, in that the nature of the soul is simple, there
concurring in her no mixed difference, she cannot be divided. And so, being
judicial, she is by consequent immortal. For, this is a manifest proof, that
men are intellectual, before their being born, in that children, learning the
most difficult Sciences, do suddenly comprehend such an infinity of things,
that we may suppose, they begin not then to know what is, but only remember,
and call again unto mind: These are almost the very words of Plato. On the
other side, the great Cyrus, of whom Xenophon has written at large, at the
hour of his departure, said thus unto his children: My dear beloved, though I
remain no more amongst you, yet do not think, for all this, that I have
afterward no more being, nor am resident in any place; for when I was in your
company, you could not perceive my soul: but only you imagined it to be within
my body, by my exterior actions. Believe therefore, that this soul remains
so still, although you see the body no more. The virtuous should not be
honored after death, if their souls had performed nothing worthy of their
memorial long time before their death. I could never yet be persuaded, that
if souls live within mortal bodies, that ever they can die, issuing out of
the same: or that the soul going out of the body, which of it self is stupid
and senseless, becomes then also inexistent, and insensible: but, on the
contrary, when she is freed from all commixtion with this body, she then
begins to be pure, and entire; then say I, she is mounted unto the height
and top of all wisdom. Moreover, it being so, that humane nature, is
dissolved by death, we plainly see whither all other things tend, that is to
say, thither from whence they were first extracted; the soul only excepted,
the which we neither see enter, soiourne, nor issue out of the body. But, for
the rest, you see there is nothing which so truly rese^bles death, as sleep:
And, the souls of them that sleep, clearly in this point show their divinity,
that being free, and in repose, they foresee things to come; which plainly
argues their being, after their relaxation from these corporal bonds. The
which being granted, honor me then as a thing divine: but if the soul were to
perish with the body, yet for all this, forbear not to fear the Gods, which
support and govern this principal work of theirs, that is called man; the
which (like to good children) performing, you shall inuiolably preserve the
memorial of my name. This was Cyrus his discourse, a little before his death:
But if I shall not herein be too burdensome unto you, hearken what I will
deliver unto you, in mine own behalf. No body shall ever persuade me, O
Scipio, that either your predecessors, or other men of great note, who^ it is
not requisite to name, would ever have enterprised such memorable exploits to
all posterities, but that they considered, that their being in the world was to
no other end, but to procure the good of their successors. Think you (to
speak plainly, and after the manner of old men, which love to set forth
themselves) that I would have so traveled, both day and night, in war and
peace, if my renown, and glory, should finish with this present life? would it
not be better then, to live idle, and in repose, without any trouble or
vexation? But, my soul, I know not in what manner, gathering together new
forces, regards happiness, with such a penetrant eye, as if departing this
world, she should but only then begin to live. And if it were otherwise,
that souls were not immortal, honest men would not aspire unto a perpetual
glory. What is the meaning of this, that every wise man dies willingly; and the
wicked with great grief? Think you not that the soul, which sees far
clearer, and further off, knows well, that she is going to a better place?
and, on the contrary, he which has an heavy and disturbed soul, sees not
the like. Surely, I desire nothing more, tha^ to see your Fathers, whom I have
honored and cherished. And, besides the desire which I have to draw near
the^, that I have known, I would willingly also talk with those of who^ I
have heard, which showed themselves unto me by their books, and whose names I
have set down, amongst mine own writings. Now that I draw near unto them,
it would displease me much to hang backward, or to be rolled down again, as
we might do with a round ball. And if some God had permitted me to return
again, into my infancy, and to cry in my cradle, I would very constantly,
and flatly refuse such an offer: for, seeing I have almost run my race, I would
not be called back again from my goal, to the first setting forward. Is there
any true commodity in this life? Is it not troublesome, through all the periods
thereof? But, admit there are some commodities therein, yet are we far from
finding satisfaction, or obtaining of our wished ends and desires. I will not
rail against the same, as diverse learned men have oftentimes done; neither
repent I, that I have lived: for I have so passed my time, that I am of
opinion, I have done some good in the world: I go out of this life, as out of
an Inn, not as out of mine own house; seeing Nature has sent us forth hither,
for a little time, to pass forward in our journey, and not continually here to
inhabit. Oh, happy will that day be, when I shall depart to this celestial
assembly of souls, and leave the rascallitie of this world: for, I shall not
only, then, be with those good men, aboue-named, but also with mine own
son, one of the best men, that ever the earth brought forth: whose body I
have seen brought to ashes; whereas in reason, he should rather have seen the
like by mine. But see: his soul never leaves me, but continually fixing her
looks upon me, she is flowen up now into those places whither she knows that
I must follow. I bare this loss patiently, as it appears: but yet I confess
that I was much trobled therewith; ever comforting my self, with this
Meditation, that there should be no long space, between her departure and mine.

Out of the Epistles of SENECA.
Epist. XXIIII.
RVminate, I pray thee, in thine own mind, what thou have often heard, and as
often spoken: but then make trial of it, by effect, if you have either heard,
or seriously uttered the same. For, it would be too great a baseness in us, as
men use to cast in our teeth, that we should only use the words and not the
works of Philosophy. As I remember, I have heard you sometimes handle this
common place; that we fall not suddenly upon death, but march toward the same
by little and little. To say the truth, we die every day: for, every day a
piece of our life slides away; whatsoever is past and gone of our years, Death
has it already in his hands: yea, and ever when we our selves do grow, our
life decreaseth: First, we lose our Infancy, then our Adolescencie, and then
our youth. Even to the day before this, what time soever is past is lost and
gone: and the present day which now we pass, we share stakes therein with
Death. So ought we always to be confirmed, both in the one, and the other,
that we do not too much love nor hate our life: we must end it when reason
summons us thereunto: but we must not desperately nor rashly leave it, like
one, that takes his run, to fetch the better rise. A wise, and magnanimious
man, must never fly nor shun this life, except when he is departing
therefrom; but avoid, like a rock, a vicious passion which surprizeth and
lays hold of many, which is to say, the desire and hastening of death.

Epist. XXVI.
Doubtless I debate with my self, I discuss, and make exact examination, as
if my trial were at hand, and the day already comne, that must give sentence
of al my years, and days past. Whatsoever we have either done or said
hitherto, is nothing: they are but vain and slight testimonials of our
courage, intermixed with much deceit and cousinage. Death only will assure me,
what I have profited in Philosophy. I therefore prepare my self, without all
fear, for that day, wherein (without all sophistication) I shall be able to
judge, whether I have been faint hearted, or magnanimious, both in word and
deed, when I used to bulk forth so many injurious and reproachful words
against Fortune.

Concerning the esteem we are in amongst men, it is always doubtful, and
declining, on every side: also, concerning thy studies, and endeavors, examine
well al thy whole life: Death shall denounce sentence upon thee. I say, that
disputatio^s, learned discourse, sentences collected from the precepts of wise
men, and speech adorned, show not the true force of courage: the greatest
cowardes have many times the hardiest talk: then it will only appear what
thou have profited, when thou come to combat with Death. I am well content,
with humane condition; I have no fear of this judgment. Thou art younger: what
cares he? Here is no account made of years: no man knows in what place Death
attends him: look for him therefore in all places. Consider, said a certain
Philosopher, whether is most commodious, that Death come to us, or we go to
Death; that we lay hold of him, or he of us. Mark the meaning hereof. It is an
excellent thing to learn to die: but it will be superfluous, may thou say,
seeing we can but once put it in practice. Why, with the greater reason, we
should the more carefully understand and meditate thereupon. For, we must
always study thereon, because till that hour, we can make no just trial of
our own sufficiency. He which exhorts to meditate on Death, exhorts to
meditate on liberty: and he that has learned to die, has forgotten to be
servile. For, this is above all other power, or, at the least, out of the power
of any other thing whatsoever. What cares he for prisons, for guardes, for
iron bars? He has always a gate open. There is but one chain only, which
keeps us bound, which is the love of this life: and this must not wholly be
shaken off, but extenuated, and loosened: that when occasion serves, nothing
may hold or hinder us.

Epist. XXVII.
But above all other things, we must endeavor that our vices may die before our
selves; and that in like manner, we give over all these vain pleasures; the
which, though they do no great hurt, yet they are mutable, and soon pass
away: virtue, only, is a secure, solid, and perpetual delight: if any other
thing present it self unto us, it is but like a fogge or clowd, which can never
obscure the brightness of the Sun.

Epist. XXX.
IT is an excellent thing, my good friend Lucilius, and that which should be
well learned long before, to depart cheerfully from hence, whenever this
inevitable hour comes. He has never been willing to live, that is unwilling
to die. For, Life was given us, with a condition to die, and with such a
prouiso: we must merrily meet Death, the which in no ways we are to fear,
considering there is nothing more certain than the same, and usually we look
after certain things, and fear those uncertain: but Death brings an equal
and inevitable necessity over all. Now, who can complain, for being of such a
condition, as from which no man else is exempted? for the first and chiefest
point of equity, is equality: and would thou never stand in fear of Death?
why then, think thereupon continually.

Epist. XXXII.
OH, what a goodly matter it is, to perfect, and accomplish our life, before
our deaths! Oh, when shall thou see the times when thou may know, that thou
have nothing to do with Time, that thou shall be quiet, and still, not careful
for to morrow, and plentifully replenished only with thy self!

Epist. XXXVI.
A Child that were borne in Parthia, would quickly learn to bend a bow. If
it were in Germany, every ladde would throw a Dart. If in our forefathers
days, he would be expert in riding of an horse, and to charge the enemy.
These be things which the discipline of each country enioineth, and lays
upon every one. What then of this? Marry hereupo^ we must consider that against
all kinds of darts, against al kinds of enemies, there is not any thing more
properly preualent, than to make no reckoning of death: which surely no man
doubts, but that it has in it some thing terrible, that offends our minds and
courages, which nature has compounded and framed, with a love of themselves;
for otherwise there were no need of any preparation or fortification of our
selves against that, whereunto we all did willingly run, out of a natural
instinct and desire, as we use to go in cases of our preservation and
defense. Out of question, no man learnes how he should lie, if need were, upon
a bed of roses; but, how he might endure torments, rather than to speak any
thing against his faith; how, if necessity required, he might pass an whole
night without sleep; being sore wounded, how to be wary of leaning so much as
against a Pike, for fear sleep surprise him not, when he thus rests himself.
But, death has no discommodity in it at all. For then there must needs be
something in the same thus incommodious. For, if thou desire greatly long
life, think that of all things, which are hidden from thine eyes, and are
concealed in nature (by who^ either they are already, or presently to be
brought forth) nothing is clean consumed. They finish, indeed, their time,
but so they perish not: And, the death, which we so much fear and fly, takes
not from us life, but, gives it only a truce, and intermission for a little
time: A day will come, to bring us again to that light, which many would fear,
but that they shall be reduced to such a state, as wherein, they shall not
remember whatsoever is past. But hereafter I will more precisely declare, that
all this, which seems to perish, does only but change. He should depart
willingly, that goes to come back again. Observe how all things return in
their due season. Thou may see, that in this world there is nothing utterly
extinct, but it descends, and ascends again by turns. The summer, is it past?
The next year brings it again. The Winter, is it done? his due months will
reduce it again. Has the night obscured the sight of the Sun? why, the next
day will discover it again. The course of the stars is performed through the
same circles, which before they passed. Always, some part of the heavens
rises up, and another goes downward. In brief, to conclude, I affirm, that
neither children, nor mad men fear death: and how base a part would it then
be, that reason should not be as able to furnish us with security, as they are
fortified by their simplicity and idiotisme?

Epist. L.
THe swiftness of time is incomprehensible: and so it appears principally to
those that look backward to it. For, it deceiues them that are too intentive,
on present things: So swift is the passage, of so precipitant a flight: that
which we live, is but, as it were, a minute, nay, and less, if it were
possible, then a minute, and yet notwithstanding, as little as it is, Nature
has distributed and divided it, as if it were some long space. Of this minute,
she has allotted part to our Infancy, another proportion to Adolescencie, the
other part to those years which decline from youth, tending to old age; and to
another part, old age it self. Mark but how many degrees she has
constituted, in so narrow roumes. Even now I pursued it, and this very now, is
a portion of our life; of which, one day, we shall conceive the brevity.
Sometime, I thought not time swift footed. but now his violent course seems unto
me incredible; wherefore I wonder at those, that in this little space employ
the greatest part thereof, in superfluous things: we must no longer amuse on
these matters of nothing: we have a greater business in hand: Death pursues
me; Life flies from me. Arm me against this, set down unto me some
prescription, whereby I may not fear Death, and that life may not thus slip
from me: Teach me how the happiness of this life consistes not in the length,
but in the usage of the same; and that it so may, and does oftentimes fall
out, that he which lives longest, has lived least time; and he living least
while, longest. Nature has sent us into the world very docile: She gave us an
imperfect reason, which by our endeavors may be made more perfect.

Epist. LVII.
Our bodies ebb, and turn back, like the course of the waters: All the time,
which thou see, flits away with the time it self. Nothing remains of all
that we see: Even I, while I am now saying, that all things are changed, am
changed my self. Is it not that which Heraclitus affirmed: we in a manner
descend, and not descend, in one and the self same river? the river retains
the same name, but the waters fall away. The like is in man, but, that it may
more easily be discerned in a river: we are transported, with no less swift
course than this. And therefore, I can not but wonder at our folly, that we
should so dearly love a thing, that so quickly leaves us; I mean this body: of
whose death, we are so much afraid: seeing every moment of this life is the
death of the other. Will thou fear that once, which is acted always? fear
thou to die once, when thou die every day, by little and little?

Epist. LXII.
I Endeavor, that every day may be unto me, as all the rest of my life: and yet
I follow it not hard, as if it were the last; but questionless, as
pote^tially it may be the last. In the same manner I wright unto you this
Letter, even as if in writing the same, Death should call me away: I am now ready
to depart, and yet enjoy still this life. For, making no great account of
future time, I labor to live well, before old age; and in my old age to die
well. To die well is no other thing but to die willingly. Take a course, that in
all things which requisitely thou must perform, thou do not anything by
compulsion. Constraint, and necessity, is for those that resist: and not for
those that do things willingly. He that does of his own accord, is not urged,
nor constrained. And therefore, I say, that he which willingly embraces
commandments, is acquitted of the most burdensome part of servitude: which is,
to do that, we would not. He is not miserable, that does any thing by
command; but he, that does it in despite of his own will. Let us therefore so
frame our courage, and wills, that we may affect whatsoever the thing
requires, and above al, without sorrow, let us think on our end: for it is
convenient to prepare for death, before Life. Life is well enough furnished of
it self; but we are too eager after the provisions of the same: we daily do,
and will think, that still we want something. Neither years nor days hinder our
living long enough, but only our own wills and desires. I have lived, my
dear friend Locilius, so long, as is sufficient: I expect death, as being
fully replenished and satisfied with life.

Epist. LXXI.
WE must one day arrive at this pleasant Port, and we ought not to refuse it:
but, if any one come there to anchor in his first years, he must no more
complain therefore, than he which has quickly made his voyage by Sea. For, as
you know well, the winds hold and detain some long upon the Sea, or he is
hindered by retardatio^ of calms, when others run their course swiftly, with a
fuzzing, and galla^t gale: Imagine, it so falls out with us. Life caries some
speedily, to the place, whither they must have come at last, though at leisure.
Others she holds a long time, and scorcheth them in their course: but we our
selves must never seek to detain her. For, properly it is not a good to live,
but to live well: and therefore a wise man lives as long as he should, though
not as long as he might. Not one of us, amongst a thousand, considers, that one
day we must leave this earthly tabernacle: we do like the ancient
inhabitants of a place, which by habit and custom, continue their abode,
though with a thousand injuries and oppressions. But would thou be free, in
despite of this body? in habit it, as before the cha^ging of a lodging:
propound unto it, that one day, thou must leave that habitatio^. Thou shall, by
this means, be the more courageous against the necessity of thy departure: but
how can he truly think of his end, that endlesly wishes for, and desires al?
There is nothing wherein ordinary Meditation, is so necessarily required.

Epist. LXXVIII.
THere is not so stupide, or gross ama^, which knows not, that one day he
must die: and yet when he comes to the point, he turns his back, he
trembles, he laments. I pray you, he that should mourn, because he had not
lived a thousand years ago, would you not judge him the veriest sotte in the
world? As very a fool is he, that weeps because he shall not live a thousand
years hence. These be like things: Thou shall not be, and, thou were not. All
these two times belong to an other. To this present point thou art reduced: and
admit thou extendest the same a little, whither supposest thou to extend it? Why
lamentest thou? what defirest thou? thou loosest but thy labor: Never think
that Gods preordination will be diuerted by thy prayers: It is firm,
irreuocable, and conducted by a wonderful, and eternal necessity. Thou shall
go, whither all things go: what thing is new unto thee? thou were borne to
this condition: the same happened to thy Father, thy Mother, to all thy
predecessors, and those went before thee, as also to all them that shall come
after thee: It is an indissoluble chain, an immutable order, which attracts,
and concatenates unto it all things. There is no path but has his end.
Miserable wretch as thou art, thou make thy self a slave unto men, a slave
unto goods, a slave unto Life. For, where there is not virtue, and willingness
to death, life is but a servitude. And what have thou, I pray thee, for which
thou attendest? Thou have consumed all those pleasures, which might slothen, or
detain thee: There is nothing new unto thee, nay more, there is nothing, which
may not justly stir up in thee a disdain; so well should thou be satisfied.
And yet, forsooth, these are ye things, from which thou so unwillingly do
depart: For, what did thou ever, worthy to come to light? Confess the truth:
it is not for thy love of the Palace or Court, nor for a grief to leave the
nature of things, that thou drawest back from dying: Thou leauest, with grief,
the market place, where thou leftest nothing behind thee. It stands with life,
as with a Stage Play; It is no matter, how long it last, but how well it is
acted: whersoeuer thouendest, it is all one: end where thou will, so thou
concludest with a good periode.

Epist. XCIIII.
WE chide Destiny every day: why takes not death such an one? why takes he him
in the midst of his course? why does such an one tenter out an old age,
irksome to himself and others? I pray you, which is more reasonable, that
Nature should obey you, or you Nature? and why take thou care, at what hour
thou shall depart, seeing from hence thou art sure to go. We must not be
careful, how to live long, but how to live suficiently. To live long, depe^ds
on Destiny; to live sufficiently depe^ds on thine own will. That life is long,
which is accomplished; and then it is accomplished, and fulfilled, when the will
is content, when the mind enioies her happiness, and is settled in her own
power. What good has such an one, by having idly passed over fourscore
years? He has not properly lived, but soiourned in this life. He died not
slowely, but long; seeing his life was no other but a death. But, thou will
say, he lived fourscore years; thou must observe from what day thou
reckonest his death: for the unprofitable part thereof has been but death. On
the contrary, another, although he died in his vigor, and strength, discharged
the offices of a good citizen, a good friend, and a good child: he omitted
nothing of his duty; though his age were imperfect, yet his life was perfect.
Why then, dear friend Lucilius, let our life be unto us, as the most precious
things are: let us measure it, not according to the time, but according to our
actions; not according to the continuance, but after the effects of the same.
We may commend, and repute him happy, that well employed the little time he had
to live. Age is an external thing, and without ourselves. Though I be here,
yet this depends of another thing; but, to be an honest man, depends on my
self. Require you of me, that I pass not my time obscurely, as it were in
darkness, that I lead a true life, that my time be not lost? demand you,
which is the longest life? It is to live, while we attain to wisdom: he which
comes to this point, though he arrive not to the longer mark, at least yet he
has obtained the principal. Death passes over all: He that killed, follows
him that was slain. It is nothing, for which we take so much care. And what
matter is it, how long thou auoidest, that which in the end cannot by any
means be avoided: why fliest thou back from that, which thou can not
shun?

Epist. C.
Observe the swiftnes of time, consider the shortness of this carriere, the
which we also run so speedily. Mark the following on of all humane kind,
tending all to one place: They which seem to be far off, follow
notwithstanding hard after others. He who thou supposest to be dead, is but
only sent before. Can there be a more unreasonable matter, than when thou
must necessarily perform the same journey, to weep for him, which has
out-gone thee in the way? Whosoever lame^ts for any ones death, laments only
because he was a man. One self all the world. Whosoever was first born, must
afterward die. We are distinguished, by measurable space, but equal in the
issue. One goes before, another follows, but both go the same way. All things
are dissolved, all things pass into their contrary; this being Dame Natures
pleasure. In all these revolutions of humane things, there is nothing certain,
but Death; and yet every one co^plaines of that which never failed, nor
deceived any body. But he died being an infant: I will not in this point also
affirm, that it was the better for him, to be so soon dispatched out of this
life. But, let us come to him that has lived to old years; I pray you what
great matter has he gained of this Infant? In understanding, and ideally,
propound unto thy self, this wonderful distance of time, and comprehend it all
together. Afterward compare me, with this Infinite, the ordinary age of man,
and then thou shall see how small a matter it is, that we desire, and how
little it is, that we extend out in length. And yet of this age, let us but
consider how much is spent in grief, how much in cares, how much in the
conceit of death, before it comes to our wished desire; how much in sickness,
how much in fears, and briefly, how much in our young and unprofitable years:
And, notwithstanding, of all this we even sleep out the moity. Add hereunto,
the troubles, sorows, and dangers: you shall see, that in the longest life of
all, the time which we truly live is the least of al. Life is neither good, nor
evil, but it is the place of good or evil. He that dies in his youth (in
that by all likelihoode he might as well have impaired as amended) is like one
that has lost a die, wherewith he might rather have lost, tha^ won. In brief,
for the brevity of age, if you compare it to the infinity of time, we are al
equally young and old: for the most extended age of a man is but as a point, or
minute.

Epist. CII.
Each day, each hour teaches us, that we are nothing, and by some very
fresh and unanswerable argument, puts us in mind of our fragility, when we
would otherwise forget it; urging us to have an eye unto death, when
intellectually we conceive in our selves some eternity. Graft Pear Trees,
plant vines in order, said a certain man: Oh, what a foolish thing it is to
proportion out our age! we have not so much as the power of to morrow in our
hands. Oh what a wonderful foolerie their hopes come unto, which enter into
long and tedious affairs! I will buy, I will build, I will put out for profit,
I will exact, I will purchase Honors: and then in time we come to these
resolutions: but I am old, and my old age being satisfied in all these things,
I will lead it in repose and quiet. Believe, that even to those, deemed most
happy, all things are doubtful: No man can promise any thing to him self of
future things; and that which we hold, slippes even out of our hands: that
hour it self, which we instantly run, some incommodity or other, glides
between our fingers. Time passes away, according to a certain and immutable
law, but co^cealed from us. Now what have I to do, whether this be certain,
and known unto Nature or not, seeing it is uncertain, and unknown unto me?
We many times propound unto our selves long nauigations, and not to return
again in a long time, while we have run vaging about, and discovering many
strange coasts: we propound to our selves the wars, and the slow
recompenses of our military endeavors; briefly, of place, honors, and
advancement from one office to another. And, in the mean while, Death comes
upon us, without ever thinking thereon, if it be not sometimes exposed to our
eyes, by the examples of others mortality: which takes no longer impression
also in our minds, than we wonder at the same. But, what greater
sottishness is there, then to wonder, that the thing which falls out every
day, should happen one day? Our limits are expressly set down, where the
inexorable necessity of Destiny has placed them: but no man knows, how
near the time is. Let us therefore so frame our minds, as if it were already
come unto the point: Let us not defer, nor procrastinate. He that sets
his last hand every day to his life, has nothing to do with time. Therefore,
my friend Lucilius, make haste to live, and think that as many days as thou
leadest, so many lives thou live. He that lives in hope, the nearest time
ever slippes him: and he is possessed with such a greediness of living, that
the fear of death makes him most miserable. Lame him of an hand, of a foot,
of a thigh, break his back, dash out all his teeth, so he lives, it is
enough for him, all goes well. Moreover, is it such a misery to die? He
desires the extremest evils, and that which is most hard to endure, he
wishes, to prolong and undergo a great time: And at what price? for what
reward? To obtain long life. But then, what manner of life is this? A lingering
death. Is there any one that would request to linger in torment, to perish
member after member? or, that would rather lose his life by little and little,
than to be suddenly and quickly dispatched? Deny now therefore, if you can,
that it is not a great benefit of Nature, this necessity of death imposed upon
us. Many are ready to make worser bargains: to betray their friends, for to
live longer themselves; to prostitute their own children, that they may see
the day of testimonial of so many impieties. We must shake off this desire of
living, and say, it is no matter when we suffer, seeing that one day, suffer
it we must. It imports not how long thou live, but how well. And long life,
is often a prejudice to living well.

Epist. CIII.
WE attend another original, and state of things. Wherefore without fear expect
this diffinitiue hour, which shall fetch thee from hence. All that thou see
about thee, suppose it to be but moveable, and the necessaries of thine Inn:
thou have further to go. Nature satisfies men at their departure, as well as
at their entry. We carry away no more than we brought; all that couers thee
must be taken away: thy skin shall be thy last covering. And this thy skin
also, thy flesh, thy blood dispersed, and diffused over al thy body, these
bones, these veins and sinews, which nourished the fluent parts, shall be
snatched and taken away from thee. The day which thou fear to be thy last,
shall be thy nativity to an eternal life. Thou criest and lamentest: so does
he that is borne. Wherefore art thou sad? so ordinarily is he. So the
couerings and swathing bands of those that are borne, perish, and come to
nothing? How love thou these things as thine own? these are things wherewith
thou art but covered: But, a day will come wherein thoushalt be laid open, and
that shall draw thee from the habitatio^ of this stinking and corruptible
body. From this time forward, meditate on higher things: The secrets of Nature
shall one day be discovered unto thee: There shall be a dissipation of this
darkness, and a most clear light shall reverberate on all our parts: Imagine
to thy self, that it shall be the resplendence of a number of stars, joining
their lights together. There shall be no more vapor, or shadow, to obscure the
clear air: all quarters of heaven shall be equally relucent: the day and the
night, which come by turns, are but accidents of this inferior air. Thou will say, thou liuedst here in darkness, when being perfect and entire, thou
beholdest the whole light it self, which now thou have but a glimpse of, by
the narrow casements of thine eyes, and thou admirest it a-far off. What will thou then think of divine light, when thou see it in the proper place? This
contemplation, will suffer nothing, base, abject, or vile, to creep into the
mind. It intimates unto us, that God is a witness to all our actions: it
commands us to approve our selves before him, to prepare our selves hereafter
for him, to set before our eyes that eternity; the which whosoever comprehe^ds
in his intellect, he is afraid of no army, nor daunted with the sound of the
trumpet, nor trembles for any threats that can be used against him. For,
what can he justly fear, which hopes to die? Conceive how beneficial good
examples are, and then thou will see, that the memory of worthy men, is no
less profitable than their presence.

Epist. CVIII.
WHy, it is no such excellent thing to live. Thou art entered into a long and
tedious way: thou must fall, and rise up again, droop, and be weary. Here thou
leauest one companion, there thou cariest another to his grave; and in another
place art put thy self in the same fear. Must this rough and uneven way be
passed, amids so many obstacles? Must we needs die? Let the mind be prepared
against all things. Let him know, that he is come into a goodly place, where
tears and cares make their residence; where pale sickness, and sad old age,
have chosen their habitation. We must necessarily pass our life in such
company: These things cannot be avoided. Thou may well contemn, and make
little reckoning of them: But you cannot make this slight regard, when you often
think thereon, and cast your count as of things that must come to pass. There
is no man but he approaches more courageously to that, whereunto of long time
he has been prepared, and makes the more forcible resista^ce: whereas
contrariwise a man taken on the sudden, and not prepared, is astonished with
the least matters. Now, seeing all things are cumbersome, though it were but for
their instability, and novelty; by ruminating thereon continually, thou shall
be not apprentise, or unskillful of any evil: Let us admire nothing whereunto we
are born. And none can complain of them, because they are equal to all;
equal I mean in this point, in that he which once escaped them, is subject to
incur them another time. For, the law is not said, to be just, and equal,
because all men equally use the same; but in that it was justly constituted for
all. Let our minds be reduced to an equity; and without complaining of our
mortal nature, let us pay our tribute cheerfully. Does Winter bring cold?
why, cold is necessary. The Summer is it hot? why, heat also we must have.
Does intemperate air prejudice our health? Sickness cannot be avoided:
Sometimes a savage beast encounters us, and an otherwhile a man, more
pernicious tha^ the wild beasts themselves. Fire consumes one, water another.
We cannot tell how to change the nature of things. The best is, to pay that we
cannot be released of, and to second, and follow the will of God, without
murmuring; from who^ all things have their original. It is the part of a badde
Soldier, to follow his captain mournfully. Destiny leads him by the hand that
goes willingly, and drags him along, that goes by co^pulsion. So must we live,
so must we speak, that Death may find us ready, iocund, and not hanging back.
He is, truly, of an haughty and generous courage, that thus rangeth his own
mind: and, contrariwise, that man is degenerate, and base, which strives
against it, thinking corruptly of this worldly ordinance, that will rather
correct God, than himself.

Epist. CXXI.
A Man is never so divine, as when he considers well of his mortal nature,
and conceiues, that he was borne a man, to die; and that this body, is not his
proper habitation, but rather an Inn; nay, and that but a baiting place, the
which he must presently leave. It is a great argument, of a spirit descended
from above, if he esteem these places where he conuerseth, base, and
incapacious, not fearing to depart from thence. For, in that he knows, from
whence he is come, and often calls the same to mind, he also knows whither
he must return. Do we not see, how many discommodities we undergo, and
that this body of ours evil befittes us? One while we complain of our
bellies, another of our breasts, and then of our throats: sometimes our
sinews, and then our feet torment us: one while a deiection, and then some
distillation. Now there is too much blood, and then too little; we are tempted,
and harried, hither, and thither: For, so it ordinarily falls out with him that
dwelles in another man's house. And, notwithstanding being endowed with such a
goodly body, we here propou^d unto our selves eternal things: and as far as
humane age can extend it self, so far we promise to our selves, by hopes.
We are content with no riches, with no puistance. Can there be a more
shameless, or sottish thing than this? We were created to die, and yet even
when we are ready to die, nothing seems enough unto us. For, every day we are
nearer to our last periode: and there is no hour, which spurs us not forward
to the place, wherein we must be laid. See, how humane understanding is
dazeled And, therefore, a great spirit, which in the end comes to discover a
better nature, than this bodily structure, takes an order to bear himself
industriously and honestly, in the place, allotted unto him: as for the rest of
all the things before him, he esteems not one of them his own; only using
them, as belonging unto him for a time, like to the Pilgrim, and Traveler.

Out of the first Book of tranquillity of life.
ALl our whole life, is but as it were a service: and we must inure our selves
to the condition thereof, complaining as little as may be, and embracing all
that, which has properly any commodity in it self. There is nothing so harsh,
wherein a mild spirit may not find some consolation. He lives evil, that knows
not how to die: He that fears death, shall never perform any man-like action
while he lives: but he that vndersta^ds, how this was allotted unto him, from
his conception, will live regularly, and with like courage take order, that
whatsoever may happen, it light not on him suddenly, or unlooked for. Sickness,
imprisonment, decay of estate, fire; none of these will be sudden to him. For,
says the wise man, I know in what a tumultuous house, Nature has placed me.
So many times ye alarm has bin given, hard by me, so many times there have
bin untimely funerals gone by my gate, oftentimes the fall of a ruinus house
has thundered in mine ears: one night has taken from me many of those, which
the Court, and familiar conversation had conioined with me, and cut them off,
even hard at mine elbowe. I wonder, that so many dangers coming about me,
they have always failed. But see on the contrary, the greatest number of men,
when they embark, they never dream of a storm. No man thinks, how ye same
which happens to one, may fall out to any other whosoever. For, every one that
had but made a goodimpression of this, even in his bowels, and diligently
observed other men's harms, the same having as free access to himself, he would
be well armed, long before his being assailed. It is too late after a danger,
to frame his courage to bear peril patiently: but rather he says, I thought
such a thing would never have been; I could never be brought to believe, that
it would have come thus to pass: And why not? Where are the riches, which
poverty, famine, and beggerie do not follow, step by step? Where are the
dignities, the Augurall, and Consular roabes, that are not subject to putting
out of their place, or banishment, to some blemish of infamy, or to some
extreme ignominy? Where is the kingdom, whose ruin is not threatened, whose
executioner, and heads-man is not at hand, etc.

Out of the Book, of the shortness of life.
PAulinus, the greatest part of mortal men, complain of Natures malignity,
that we are begotten for so short an age; and that the time allotted us,
passes so violently and swiftly away, that life then leaves the greater part
of men, when they have scarcely made their preparation for to live. But the
time which we have is not small: only we lose much thereof. Our life, that is
given us, is large, and long enough to compass great matters, if it were well
employed. But when it runs away in delights, and idleness, when we employ it
in nothing that is good, extreme necessity pressing us in the end, we then
perceive our life is gone, without discerning how it went away. Thus much it
imports: we received not a short life, but have made it so short our selves. We
are no ways indigent of life, but prodigal. Even as great opulencie, and
wealth, when it comes into the hands of an evil husband, is wasted in a moment;
and mean riches on the contrary, increases by the employment of a thrifty man,
the more that he uses the same: so, this our age is wonderfully extended, by
him that can dispose well of it. Why complain we then of Nature? she has
been very courteous, and benign toward us. Life is long enough, if thou
can but tell how to use it. One is possessed with insatiable avarice, another
vexes himself, with double diligence, in superfluous labors: one is imbrued
in wine, another languisheth in idleness: this man is tormented, and tossed,
with an ambition, depe^ding on another voice, and suffrage: that man with an
hope of gain, in the precipitant desire of traffic, runs over al
Countries, and Seas. Others are in travail with a great desire of war, being
ever occupied either in their own dangers, or in persuading other men to
perils. There are also some, who like to follow no course; but Death lays hold
of them, languishing, and gasping with annoy and weariness: so that I make no
doubt of ye truth of that, which the greatest amongst Poets pronounced, by way
of oracle: Of all our life, that which we live, is the least part: For the
rest; all that other space, is not properly a life, but a time. Every one
allotteth his life, to diverse things: they are miserable, and sparing in
holding their patrimony, but prodigal in losing of time; of time, I say,
wherein avarice is only honest, and not ignominious. But choose we one, out of
the troup of the most ancient in years: Very well Sir, we see you have
attained to the very top of humane nature, even as far, as a man's age may
possibly reach. You go on the hundredth year, or more: well, call your years a
little to an account. Of all this time, tell me how much your creditor has
taken from you, how much your Love and Mistress, how much the commo^-wealth,
how much your friend; then after this, how many conflicts you have had with
your wife, what punishment you have inflicted upon your servants, what running
up and down the city you have been driven unto, for your familiars, and
acquaintance. Annexe hereunto the diseases which you have fallen into, by your
own default: and add also, unto this, that which remained, without any good
imployme^t: Thou shall the^ see, that thy years are fewer, tha^ thou make
reckoning of. Call to mind, when in thy self, thou were resolute in any
determination, how many days passed away conformably to that which in thy
mind thou did set down; how many of the^ profited thee: when thy
countenance was fresh, thy heart without fear, what great need you had of so
long a life: then, how many sundry men have as it were stolen, and impaired it,
you no ways perceiving, when, or what you lost: how much has some causeless
grief taken away from you, sottish contentments, some unsavory desire, or
flattering conversation: briefly, after all these abstractions, how little
remains, that was properly thine own; and then thou shall see, that for all
this thou die, before thou art full ripe, and before thy best time. Who is the
cause hereof? Why, you live as though you should live for ever. Good husbandry
never comes into your mind; you never consider what time is spent and gone; you
spend and waste, as though you had abundance; you fear like a mortal man, and
covet all, like one immortal: Hear what the most of them use to allege. At
fifty years I will betake my self to mine ease, when I am threescore year old
I will give over all public office: I pray ye tell me, where made you purchase
of such a long life? who gave you Letters Pate^ts for living a longer time? who
can have the patience, while these things take effect, even as you have
ordained and set them down? Art thou not ashamed to reserve the refuse of thy
life only to wisdom, and assign such an age unto that, which can no more be
imployd in anything else? Oh, it is too late to begin then to live, when we
must leave living. Is not this a sottish obliuio^ of out mortal nature, to
defer good and healthful counsel, til the fiftith year, and to begin to live
at such years, unto which few ever attain unto? Thou shall many times hear
the greatest and mighti'st personages utter words to this effect, that they
desire repose, they commend, and prefer it before all other goods: They
would, if securely they might, give over all the sollitie, and triumph, wherein
they live. That great Emperor Augustus, to whom God vouchsafed more favors
than to any one, ceased not to sigh after this repose, and to wish for
vacations, that he might be exempted from public negotiations: all his
speech tended, for the most part, to this end. This rest and tranquillity see
med unto him so precious a thing, that not being able effectually to enjoy it,
he apprehended it in conceit. He which saw all things depend on himself, which
imposed on all nations what stood with his will and pleasure, thought that day
most happy, when he might but lay aside his worldly greatness. He knew well,
how great toil, the goods of Fortune, which are so estimable upon earth, put
us to, and how many secret cares they harbor. It would but be superfluous, to
make mention of diverse, that unto others appeared to be very happy, and yet
they themselves proved faithful testimonials to the contrary, when the whole
accounts of their years were cast up. But by these complaints, they could
never persuade others nor themselves: for even at the very instant, when such
words escaped them, their affections returned to their old wont. Out of
question, though our life should extend even to a thousand years, yet would it
be restraind, and brought into a little compass; the several ages would
consume all that: and that space, which although Nature conceal, reason might
exspatiate, if it were well guided, it must needs fly from us in a moment.
For, we redeem not this time, we do not retain, nor slacken it, by being
circumspect and industrious in all things; but do rather suffer it to roll
away, as a superfluous thing, that may be again recovered. Throughout our
whole life, we must learn to live: and, which is yet more strange, through
every hour of our life, we must learn to die. There have been many great men,
that leaving their places, renouncing their estates, offices, and pleasures, in
the height of their age they sought after no other thing but to know how to
live well: and yet the most of them left this life, confessing even then, they
had not attained to this understanding. Every one hurries on his life, and
travels in the desire of future things, and weariness of present times: but
he, which bestows his whole time in this practice, and truly disposes all his
days, in such a life, neither desires nor fears, what may happen the day
after. What comes to pass? how busy soever thou art, thy life passes away;
and Death will presently surprise thee: for then (will ye, nill ye) you must be
at leisure. They acco^modate their lives with their lives expense and charge,
they discourse and cast above the Moon. Now the greatest loss, that can be
in life, is retardation: Delay, takes up the first years, and plucks from thee
things present, while it promises thee those future. An attending life
procures great impediments, which loses to day, and depends on to morrow.
Thou disposest of that, which is in the hands of Fortune, and leaves that at
random, that is in thine own. Whereon castest thou thine eye? what would
thou attempt? All future things are accompanied with uncertainty; would
thou know why the elder sort live not long? Why, but observe, how old men,
even when they doat, desire longer life: They beg by vows, and prayers, the
proroguement of a few years. They conceit themselves to be younger than they
are, they are flattered with fantasies, and are as sillily gulled, as if they
meant at an instant to go beyond both Death, and Destiny. But if any
infirmity put them in mind, that they are mortal; Oh, how dastardly they die!
It seems not that they go, but rather that they are haled out of this life.
Then they can say, how they had been fools; and that, by reason of their
folly, they had not lived out half their life: but, if they could escape this
disease, they would live quietly, and abandon all affairs. Then they call to
mind, how they had borrowed, in vain, that which they were not always to
enjoy; and that all their labor, and travel, is now come to nothing. But they
are only wise, and they only live, which find time and leisure, wherein to
learn wisdom. For, they do not only bear their years well; but, they add
all the time past, unto their own. All the years, which passed before them,
they have overtaken: and so we likewise, if we be not too ingrate. The famous
Authors, of these excellent and sacred opinions, were born for our sakes, they
prepared a life for us. By other men's labors we are conducted to admirable
things, drawn and dug out of darkness, to bring them to light and
knowledge. There are no ages forbidden us, we may enter into al. And when we
take pleasure, out of a great mind, to issue a little out of the straight
siege of humane imbecillitie, there is fit time enough to fetch our walks
abroad at large. We may dispute with Socrates, doubt with Carneades, take
repose with some, and with others vanquish, and subdue humane nature. Now,
seeing Nature admits us to the communion, and fellowship of all ages past,
let us not therefore lose this little and frail passage of time, but addict
our selves with our whole hearts, to things supernatural, eternal, and that
participate with the best. These people, that hitch from office to office, that
importune both others and themselves, when they have well scudded the streets,
trotted soundly up and down, from gate to gate, when there is not an open
door but they have peept in at, when they have ietted, with salutations from
one house to another; in an huge city, transported away with other delights,
how many would there be, that they should never see? how many that will absent
themselves from them, and send them away with a flea in their ear, because
they would either sleep, or pass their time in lasciviousness? Let us
therefore be mindful of better offices: All men, whatsoever, may, when they
will, have private co^uersatio^, with Zeno, Pythagoras, Democritus, Aristotle,
Theophrastus and with other principal and famous Authors of good and liberal
Sciences. He shall find none of them otherwise occupied, none but he will find
leisure to entertain him, none that will not send him back, more happy, more
content, and more desirous of his amity, none that will let him depart empty
handed.

Out of the Book of Consolation.
IT is therefore a singular consolation, to think, that whatsoever all men
before have passed, and all to come must likewise undergo, shall or may happen
to himself. And Nature, in my opinion, made that which was most grievous, most
common unto all; to the end, that such an equality, might assuage the rigor
and severity of Death. Go to then, cast thine eye on every side, upon all
mortal men: and over all thou shall easily discern great and continual
occasion of grief. One is vexed with an ambition that never has repose:
Poverty calls another daily to his work. Another fears the same wealth, which
erst he desired, and is tormented with his own wishes. One is afflicted with
care; another, with labor; a third, importuned with a troop of people, that
daily lay siege to the portall of his house. Here Is one angry for having
children, there is another laments for having lost them. Tears sooner fail us,
than just cause to lament. May thou not perceive what manner of life Nature
has allotted us, when she ordained, that whosoever was borne, should enter
into the world with cries and tears? We came into the world with such a
beginning; and all the sequel of our years, is correspondent to the same: in
this manner we pass over our whole life. All those goods wherein we delight
through a certain pleasure but in appara^ce, being inwardly replenished with
cosinage and deceit (I say, treasure, dignities, power, authority, with diverse
other things, by which the blind avarice of humane care becomes stupide and
besotted) we possess the^ with wonderful molestation, men envy us the
enjoying them, and even amongst those that have them, they rather threaten,
than make the owner more powerful: they are smooth, and slippery; one can
never possess them securely, there is ever some danger of their peril and
shipwreck. And though one did not fear any thing to come, yet ye only
preservation of a great worldly state, is full fraught with cares. If thou will
give credit to the^, which do more profoundly look into truth, our whole life
is a punishment, we are here lanched forth into this deep and inconstant sea,
where there is always flood, and ebb; which one while hoystes up with the
waves, and then throws us down again with the more damage, daily tossing, and
tormenting us, whether it raise us up, or bring us down; we, I say, most
miserable, have never any settled, or assured place: we ever hang in suspense,
we always floate, we always rush one against another and oftentimes even
suffer wrack. We are never out of fear in this vast Sea, subject to all kind
of tempests, and storms; and those that sail therein, have no other Port, to
make withal, but Death.

Out the Book of Divine providence. In what manner diverse evils light on good
men.
YOu required of me, Lucilius, if it were so, that the world was governed by
providence divine, how it could come to pass, that so many inconveniences fell
to honest men's shares. I will yield you hereof a more lively reason, in my
written work; wherein I determine to prove, that Gods providence is over all
things, and that GOD himself, dwelles, and conuerseth amongst us. There is an
amity between GOD, and honest men, which virtue makes and contracteth; and
not only a friendship, but also a near alliance, and resemblance. For, an
honest man differs from God, but only in time; he is his disciple, his
imitator, and his true offspring. And therefore this magnificent Father, which
exactes hardly of his own, that they should be virtuous, he brings them up
hardly, as severe fathers use to do. When as, therefore, thou see honest men,
and those so near unto God, travel, and take pains, mounting up, by rough and
craggie ascents: and contrariwise, the wicked, to spend their time in follies,
being drowned in sensual pleasures; imagine how we delight to rain in our
own children, and loose the raines to our slaves progeny. For the one, we
contain them within their duties, by a severe, and sharp discipline: for the
other, we lay the bridle on their necks. Thou may evidently perceive the
like taken by God: He lets not an honest man have his head; he proves, he
tries, he prepares him for his service.

Out of the same Book. Of the means how to endure adversity.
WHy do so many evils happen unto good men? there can nothing occur, which
is evil, to a good man. Contrary things move him not. He esteems all
adversities, as so many exercises. Who is that honorable man, which is not
desirous of some noble and virtuous labor, and even with hazard, and peril,
to go forward in honorable endeavors? virtue pines and wears away, if it have
not an opposite. Then she appears what she is, of what value, and what she is
able to perform, when by patience, she discouers her puissance. Let honest men
therefore take every thing in good part, and turn unto good whatsoever
happens unto them. It is all one, what thou suffer: but how thou suffer,
take great heed. Seeest thou how fathers, and mothers sometimes entreat their
children. Fathers command their children to endeavor, to go about a thing
speedily, they cannot endure that they should be idle, no, not on Holy and
Festival days; and in brief, they oftentimes bring both sweat, and tears
into their eyes. Contrariwise mothers, they would have the^ always under their
noses, in ye chimny corner, and in the cool shade: they would never have them
cry by their wills, never afflicted, annoyed, or any ways troubled. God
carries a Fathers heart, toward honest men, his is a more man-like love, he
tosses and harries them up and down, with travail, grief, and loss, to the
end they should purchase by this means, true and powerful force: But those
bodies, that we put out to grass, do not only faint under labor, but they
languish in idleness; and under their own burden, and weight, sink, and fall
down. That felicity, which was never so much as shaken, cannot stand out a
geat storm. Amongst many other singular sayings of our friend Demetrius, this
pleases me well, the which is always fresh in my memory, and sounds as it
were in mine ears. I think no man, says he, more unhappy than he that
never had any adversity, or evil Fortune. The more labor, and toil, the
greater and truer honor.

Out of the same Book. Of Prosperity.
Prosperity falls out to the vulgar sort, to base and abject spirits: but it
is proper to a worthy and famous man, to subdue calamities, and whatsoever
daunteth mortal me^. I Judge thee miserable, in that thou never were so; and
unfortunate, in never meeting with any mishap. Thou have past al thy life,
without having an enemy: no man by this can discern of thy worth, nor thou
thy self of thine own. To know our selves well, it is needful to make some
trial: and who can do this, that never came to proof? virtue desires danger,
and observes to what it tends, what the scope thereof is; and not what she
must endure, for to attain to the same: For, even her very indura^ce, is a
great part of her glory. A Pilot may be well known in time of a tempest; a
soldier, in the heat of battle. How shall I know thy courage in resisting of
poverty, as long as thou swimmest in wealth? How may I discern, with what
constancy of mind, thou art able to withstand Infamy, Ignominy, and the
peoples hate, if thou wallowest in general applause; if an insupplantable
favor, by a certain inclination of hearts and affections, prosecute thee
perpetually? Thy calamity, is a spur unto virtue: whom God loves, therefore,
those he proves, he hardens, he acknowledges, he visits, he exercises.
Contrariwise, those whom he seems to flatter, and spare, he does but weaken,
and effeminate them, for evils to come. Why does God afflict the better sort,
with sickness, grief, and discommodities? Why, in a camp, are the most
perilous actions committed to the most courageous, and valiant? Why do
Captains send out choice soldiers to give the enemy a Camisado, to discover
a way, to win a passage, and to drive them away that guarde the same? There
is none of them will say, my Captain has done me wrong; but rather, he holds
me in great esteem: The same must they allege, that endure evils sent from
God, whereat cowards, and effeminate men lament. God thought us worthy, as in
whom to make trial, how much humane nature is able to suffer and endure. Shun
pleasures, fly this feeble and effeminate felicity, which distempers and
intenerates the heart, drowning it in a perpetual drunken sleep, if sometimes
there happen not another contrary accident, to put him in mind of his humane
conditition. Ah, is it not far better to support a continual infelicitie,
which inuiteth unto virtue, than to stoop under an infinite burden of
prosperities? And therefore God deals with honest men as masters do with their
scholars, who set the^ the greatest lesson, and task, of whom most hope is
conceived. I pray you tell me, Do you think that the Lacedaemonians hated
their children, when they made such a trial of their nature, and condition, as
to whip them publicly? Their fathers themselves, animated them to bear
courageously the ierkes of the whips: and being lamentably lashed, and half
dead, they yet requested them to add lash unto lash. No marvel then, though
God tempt, and hardly entreat, the more generous spirits. To be in daily
danger, makes us lightly esteem the same. Thus are the bodies of Mariners
hardened unto the Sea. Thus grow knobs in the poor Laborers hands. Thus are
the soldiers arms trained up to throw a dart: The members of those that
run, made nimble to pass the race. To conclude, that part is strongest in
any one, that most is exercised. There is not so firm nor solid a tree, as
that which the wind oftenest beats upon: for, by being thus beaten and
blasted, it knits together, and spreads his roots more firmly in the earth.
I remember also, that I heard this courageous speech from Demetrius: O
immortal Gods, said he, I complain of you for this one thing, that you made
me not sooner to understand your will: For, I would have come thither of my
self, whither I go now, but being sent. Will you take away my children? Why,
here they are. Will you have away one part of my body? why, take it freely. It
is no great matter, which I promise: for I must leave it all, ere it be long.
Will you have my soul? Why not? it belongs not to me, I will not hinder you,
from taking that which you have given me: you shall, with heart and good will,
have whatsoever you demand. But what then? I had rather offer it my self, than
give it, when I am demanded: what need you to have taken it away from me? You
may indeed take it, but you shall not take it from me; for nothing is taken
away, but from him that resists: but I am not constrained, I endure it not
against my will, and herein I yield not to God, but only consent to his will.
The fire tries gold, and mysery men of courage. But why then does God endure
the injuries done to good men? Why, quight contrary, he does not endure it.
He remoues all evils, far off from them, wickedness, ill thoughts, corrupt
counsels, covert luxuries, and avarice, which is always prying into other men.
He guardes them himself, and keeps them close by him: would any body
peradventure require of God, to guard their goods and chattels also? They
discharge God of this labor, in making no account of external things. Among
others, Democritus removed all his wealth far off; he supposing, that it
would but be a burden, to a good understanding. Imagine therefore, that God
thus speaks unto thee; Why complain ye of me, you that have delighted in
equity? I have environed others with false prosperities, and occupied their
spirits with a long and lying dream. I have outwardly adorned the^ with gold,
silver, and Iuory, when as inwardly they are of no value. Those which, at the
first sight, seem happy, if you but observe them well, not in the place where
you meet them, but secretly some where else, they are sordid, base, and
miserable, and are but like their own walls, outwardly painted, and set
forth. This is not true, and perfect felicity: it is but a rind or bark; and
that also, but slight, and thin. And therefore while they can hold out, and
show themselves in no place, but where they like best, they glitter, and abuse
men's judgments: but if an accident fall out, that does but discover, and
display them, then we may easily perceive, what deep villainy lies hid under
adulterate shows. But, to you, on the contrary, I have given certain goods,
and those that will continue. The oftener they are turned, or beheld on every
side, the better and more resplendent they will seem; which is to say, lightly
to esteem of any thing that is feared, and to disdain that which ordinarily is
desired: you do not shine outwardly: all your goods stand inward. So does all
this world: it contemnes external parts, being content with the contemplation
of it self: All the wealth thereof is inward. Your felicity is to have
nothing to do with worldly happiness.

A Sermon of Saint CYPRIANS, Bishop of Carthage, concerning Mortality.
THE ARGUMENT.
IN this Sermon, made for the consolation of such Christians, as then were
visited with the plague, Saint CYPRIAN exhorts all those that truly love the
Lord, chearefully to leave this earthly life, when God calls them away;
confirming the same by diverse reasons, and showing afterward that death is a
way, which the wicked also must go: and he teaches every one how to observe
the difference betwixt the one, and the other; that is to say, the good are
called to happy rest, and the wicked, to eternal punishment.

THough many, amongst you, my dear brethren, have your understandings so
settled, your faith so firm, and your souls so elevated up to heaven, that
they are not so much as shaken, by seeing the plague, on all sides, to sweep
away so many: but, like a rock immoueably planted, they withstand, without
bouging, the violent storms of the world, breaking the raging waves of this
present life, in stead of being battered or broken by them; and finally are not
overthrown, but only proved by temptations: Yet, seeing some among the people
half daunted and discouraged, either for want of good resolution, by reason of
their little faith, respect of the love which they bear to this world, or
through the tenderness of their sex, or (which is worse) for want of good
instruction; so as we can not see them employ that celestial force, and
vigor, wherewith their hearts should be armed: I could not contain my self
according to my weak power, from suppressing this effeminate cowardice, by a
preualent discourse taken out of the holy scripture; to the end, that those
which have begun to feel, that God is their Father, and Jesus Christ their
Savior, they may do nothing unworthy of a Christian, or of the true child of
God. For, most dear brethren, he that fights under the ensign of God, which
inhabiting in the celestial pauilions, aspireth to none but high matters, he
must truly know himself, and we must not in any wise be dejected, or
astonished at the torments, or tempests of this world: seeing God has
advertised us, that these things must come to pass: instructing and teaching
us, by the exhortation of his loving, and careful voice, and preparing and
fortifying the people of his Church, to bear such things, as must happen,
patiently; he having declared, and foretold, that the earth should be
afflicted in every quarter, by war, famine, plagues, and earthquakes. As
also, for fear we should fall into despair, through the strangeness of so
many evils at once oppressing us, he has divulged before, that the
afflictions should be far sharper in ye later times. Seeing whatsoever he
foretold, is now accomplished, let us conceive hereby that all his other
promises in like manner shall be fulfilled, as he himself has spoken, When
you see all these things come to pass, know that the kingdom of heaven is at
hand. My dearest brethren, this kingdom has already begun to come unto us:
for, the reward of life, the joy of eternal salvation, perpetual bliss, the
possession of Paradise, which were lost by sin, return unto us, so soon as
we leave the world. Now, when celestial things succeed the terrestrial;
great, those but little; and eternal, those transitory and frail; Is there
then any occasion to be in grief and anguish of mind? and who is that
affrighted and daunted man, but he that is destitute of Faith, and hope? In
effect, it only belongs to him to fear death, that would not go unto Christ:
and he refuses to go unto Christ, which believes not, that then he begins
to reign with Christ.

It is written, Abac 2. Romans 1.
The just man lives by faith. If thou be just, and live by faith, firmly
believing in God, why art thou not forward to go to Christ, who calls thee?
Why do thou not embrace Gods promises? Why reioycest thou not, to be
delivered from the power of the wicked? Simeon the just, which in true faith
yielded himself to Gods obedience, knowing by revelation, that he should not
die, before he had seen Christ, and the little Infant called Jesus; being
come into the Temple with his Mother, he knew then that Christ was born: whom
having seen, he knew that the end of his life approached: wherefore,
rejoicing in his death so near at hand, and being assured that God would
presently call him, he took the Infant in his arms, and praising God, he
cried out, and said, Lord, thou suffer now thy servant, to depart in peace,
according to thy Word; for mine eyes have seen thy salvation. By this he did
declare, and make evident, that Gods servants are in peace, and enjoy a free
and quiet repose, when we are drawn from the violent waves of this world, and
that we enter into the Port of eternal security and safety; when after the
defacement of this present life, we attain to most glorious immortality. For,
this is our repose, our assured peace, our firm, and perdurable security: and
in this world, what is there more to be found but a daily conflict and combat
with the devil? a continual war, where we must be daily at hand blows, to
receive and entertain his charges? We carry on our arms, in front, upon the
flank, and on the back, avarice, impudicity, choler and ambition: we must
wrestle incessantly, and with loss of breath, against the desire of the flesh,
and the allurements of the world. Man's understanding, being assaulted and
battered on al sides by Satha^s artillery, knows not whither to retire, or how
to resist, but with great danger. If avarice be vanquished, then concupiscence
marches fair and large: if this be repelled, ambition gives ye onset. Ambition
being disco^fited, choler is in a mutiny, pride mounts on horfebacke,
dru^kennes storms, envy gives th'alarme, discord cuts off all hope of
reco^ciliatio^. Thou art urged to do that which the law forbids: thou promisest
that which is not lawful for thee to perform. Seeing the soul is continually
subject to so many evils, seeing so many dangers attend us without ceasing, is
it possible that we can take any great pleasure, to be here amongst the devils
glittering and trencha^t blades? We might rather be desirous, by a ready and
sudden death, to be quickly conveyed to Jesus Christ, as he himself has
sufficiently summoned us, saying: Verily, verily, John 16.
I say unto you, you shall weep and lament, and the world shall rejoice: but
your sadness shall be converted into joy. I know no man but he takes delight to
go to a place, where mirth is: and no body seeks after sadness and mourning.
The same Lord sets down, when our sadness shall be turned into joy, saying: I
will see you once again, and your hearts shall rejoice, when no man shall be
able to take your joy away from you. Seeing then that there is nothing but joy,
in seeing of Jesus Christ, and that we cannot be truly joyful, but in
seeing of him; what a blindness, and folly is it, to love anguish, and the
travels and miseries of the world, in stead of chearefully embracing the life
and joys eternal.

This false out, my dear brethren, for want of faith: Men think, that what God
promises (who is truth it self, and whose word is eternal, and inviolable
toward those that believe) should not be performed. If any honorable man of
authority, and place, should promise thee this, or that, thou would make
account of it, believing that he, who^thou know to be very obseruant of his
word, would not abuse, or deceive thee. Hearke^ therefore to God who speaks unto
thee: and yet like a disloyal wretch as thou art, will thou still waver in
inconstancy? God promises unto thee perpetual and eternal life at thy
departure out of this world: doubtest thou thereof? This is the true ignorance
of God, to offend by incredulity, Jesus Christ, the Doctor of all believers, to
live faithless, in the house of faith, which is the Church. Christ the Author
of our good and salvation, shows the profit which redownds unto us, by death:
when he observed his disciples sadness, because he had told them of his
departure out of this world, he said unto the^, If you loved me, John 14.
you would be joyful for my going to my Father: teaching us by this, to be
merry, and not sad, when our friends do but as it were dislodge out of this
life. Saint Paul being mindful of such a matter, entreats thereof in one of
his Epistles, and says; Christ is gain unto me both in life and death: he
reputing it for a wonderful gain, to be no longer detained by the snares of
this world, Phil. 3.
to be no more subject to the sins and vices of the flesh, to be exempted
from all afflictions, delivered from the devils jaws, and to go into the
joys of eternal salvation, whither his Savior called him.

Some wonder, to see the heat of this disease, lay hold on Christians, as well
as on Infidels: as if Christians had received the promises of the Gospel, to
be touched with no disco^modities before the performance of the same, but to
enjoy at their pleasures, the happiness of this world: whereas on the contrary
he is tormented with a thousand evils here below, that by this means he may
conceive how eternal joys are reserved for him. But whereas we find it
strange, that the plague should sweep away Christians, as well as Infidels; have
we any privilege in this world, from others, so long as we are clad in this
mortal body, correspondent to the law of our first birth? While we live here
below, we are joined with other men, by the bonds of this corruptible flesh:
but so in spirit we are separated from them. While therefore this corruptible
puts on incorruption, our mortal parts be made immortal, and that we ascend
to God our Father, all the disco^modities of the world are common to us, and we
have our shares therein with other men. For example, when any Frosts procure ye
earths sterility, every one has his part in the famine ensuing: If an enemy
take into his hands any town, all the inhabitants lose their liberty together:
when the seasons are clear and scorching, all are constrained to endure this
drought: and if the rocks split a ship asunder, the passengers perish. We
are subject, as others be, to the infirmity of the eyes, to burning agues, and
to all kinds of diseases, that afflict all the members of the body, as long as
we live a mortal life in this world, as well as other men. Nay, and if a
Christian man do but well understand, upon what covenants he believed in God,
he will conceive, and be clearly resolved, that he ought to be in conflict,
more than others, by reason he has a continual war above all others,
against the devil.

The holy Scriptures teach and admonish us of this: saying, My son, when thou
entrest into Gods service, be firm in righteousness; fear, and prepare thy
soul for temptation. Also, persevere in sorrow, and fear, be patient in
humility; for iron tryes both gold and silver. In this manner, Job, having
lost his goods, and children, and being all spread over with botches and sores,
yet was he not vanquished for all this, but only tried: considering that in
all his pains, and grief, he showed the patience of a man, that feared God,
when he said, Naked came I out of my mothers womb: Job 1. and 2
and naked I must return to the earth again. GOD gave, and GOD took away, as
God would, so has it happened: blessed be ye name of ye Lord. And his wife
importuning him to grow impatient, and to belch out some blasphemous complaint
against God; his answer was: thou speak like a fool; for if we have
received good from Gods hand, why should we not also suffer evils from him?
During al these hard accidents, Job never let any thing slip out of his mouth,
wherein God might be offended. For, so God himself witnesses, saying unto
Satan, Have thou well considered my servant Job, how there is not his like in
the world? Tobias, after so many religious works, and so high commendations
of his charitable pity, became blind: and yet for all this he feared and
blessed God in his affliction: and he was the more worthy of praise, in
withstanding his wives temptation, who would have corrupted him, saying, Where
are thy good deeds. Tob. 2.
Thou soundly feel now, the evils which thou endurest: but, he being
settled in the love of God, and armed with the reverence of his name, to
support all affliction, he yielded not in fury to such an assault, but
honored the Lord the more, by this his second patience: so that afterward
this testimonial was given him by Raphael, saying: It is an excellent thing,
to understand, and magnify the works of God: for when thou and thy fair
daughter Sarra prayed, I presented the same before the face of the Lord. And
when thou did bury the dead with out delay, rising eue^ from the table for
this purpose, I was sent to prove thee, and to heal thee, and thy fair
daughter Sarra: for I am Raphael, one of the holy Angels, which assisteth, and
am co^uersant before Gods brightness.

The righteous always showed themselves patient, and the Apostles knew well
the Lords meaning herein, that his servant should not murmr in adversity;
but courageously, and patiently endure whatsoever fell to their share in this
world. There was no sin that the Jewish people ran oftener into, tha^ this of
murmuring, and impatience against God; as he himself declares, when he
adds, Let them cease from despiting me, and they shall not die. Dearest
brethren, we must not murmr in adversity, but patiently and constantly
endure whatsoever may happen, calling to mind what is written, that an
afflicted spirit is an acceptable sacrifice Psalm. 51.
unto God; and that he reiects not the humble and contrite heart. The holy
Ghost also speaks by the mouth of Moses, The Lord thy God shall afflict thee,
and send thee famine, to make thee look into thine own heart, whether thou
keep his commandments or no. Also, Deuteronomy. 8.13.
the Lord your God, tempts you, to know whether you love the Lord your God,
withal your heart, and with all your soul. Observe, how Abraham was
acceptable unto God, when to obey him, he made no account to lead his own
son to death, and so was ready to be a paricide. Thou, which can not loose
thy son, he being subject to death as others are, what would thou do, if
God should sentence thee, to put thy self to death? Faith and the fear of
God, should make thee ready to perform whatsoever his pleasure is. Though thou
losest thy goods, though diseases vex and torment thee on all sides: though
thy wife, thy children, thy friends be haled from thee by death, all this
should not make thee to shrink, although such blows be very heavy: such
trials ought not to quail and daunt the faith of a Christian, but rather
stir up his force, and courage to fight; considering that the assurance of a
future good, should make us contemn the annoyaunce of all present evils. There
can be no Victory, before the battle fought: if after the coming to
hand-blowes, the field be left by either side, then the victor obtains a
glorious crown. A good Pilot is discovered in the storm, and a good soldier
in the conflict. It is but ridiculous, to brave and brag, when blows are far
off: to set up the bristles against adversity, is a certain brand and mark
of virtue. The tree, deep rooted in the earth, is not shaken with the blustering
of winds, the ship that is well keeled, and strongly ribbed, may well be
tossed, but never pierced by the waves: when we winnowe the corn in the open
air, the sound grain fears not the wind, which quickly blows away the
straws and chafe. Even so the Apostle S. Paul, after his shipwracks,
whippings, long and durable afflictions of body, protested, that such trials
hurt him not at all, but rather did stand him in great stead, so that in the
full course of all these calamities, he profited the more in good. An angel of
Satan, 2. Cor. 12.
said he, the sting of my flesh was sent to buffer me, for fear that I might
be puffed up: for the which I thrice prayed unto the Lord, that it might be
removed from me; and he said, Let my grace suffice thee, for my virtue is
perfected in infirmity. When as therefore some infirmity, weakness, or other
adversity does rage, then our virtue is made more perfect: If proved faith
persevere, at last it is crowned: according to that which is said, that the
furnace tries the potters vessels; and temptations, righteous men. For the
rest, they which know not God, differ from us in this point, that they murmr
and complain in adversity: and, contrariwise, afflictions are so far from
distracting us, from piety, and Justice; that we are rather fortified by them
amidst griefs, and sorrow it self. If the bloody flux did weaken us, if
heat make the infirmities of our mouths more grievous, if our stomach be
sore with continual vomiting, if our eyes look red like blood, if any one
lose his feet, or other members, when he is constrained to cut them off,
because they are ready to fall away in pieces; if by diverse la^guors and
maladies, happening to the body, the strength of the legs come to diminish, the
hearing be deafened, or the sight dulled, all this learnes us to profit more
and more in the grace of God. What notable valor is this, to enter
courageously into the field, against so many plagues and evils? Can any man
obscure his excellency, that stands firm, amidst so sundry resolutions,
without declining or falling to them, that put not their trust in God? He must
unfeignedly rejoice, and think the time well employed, when in making trial of
his faith, and travailing courageously, we march unto heaven by the strait
gate, to receive from Christ our Judge the reward of our faith, and of eternal
life. Let him fear death, who having never been regenerate with water, and
the spirit, is ordained to hell fire. He that has no part in ye cross and
death of Christ, he that enters by the first, into the second death; he, that
when he leaves this present life, is tormented with perpetual flames: he,
that only stands, through Gods patience, whose sorrow and grief is only
differred, and not forgotten: Let such an one, I say, fear death. Many of our
brothers are dead of this plague, which is to say, many of them are delivered
out of the world. As such a mortality is a plague to the Jews, and Painimes,
who are Christ's enemies; so is it a comfortable departure to the servants of
God.

Though the just die, as well as the unjust, yet think not that good men die the
like death as the wicked. The children of God are taken into a place of ease,
and repose; but the reprobate are drawn to the punishment of eternal fire: the
believers are presently taken into protection; and the infidels receive such
punishment, as they deserve. My dear brethren, we are evil advised, being
ungrateful and forgetful of Gods benefits, and not acknowledging the graces,
which he has bestowed upon us. See how our daughters carry their honor
unspotted out of this world, fearing neither the menaces, violation, or
villainies, of the enemies of Christ's religion: young lads have, by this means,
escaped the slippery paths of youth, and have happily gotten the goal, to
obtain the crown of their continency, and innocence: the tender woman needs
no more to fear torments, having gained by a light, and easy death, this
privilege, that the hang-mans hand has now no power over her. The time, and
apprehension of such a death heateth the lukewarm, confirms the feeble,
rowseth the sleepie, constrains those revolted to return unto the Church,
induces Idolatrers to embrace the doctrine of the Gospel, procures the
faithful, that, of long time, have made proiession of this Religion, to enter
into repose; and they lately come into the Church, in great number, gather
assured strength and courage, from that time forward to fight, without any
fear of death, when dangers present themselves; being entered into the
skirmish, in so troublesome, and perilous a time. Furthermore, dear brethren,
is it not a commendable, and necessary thing, that by this mortal malady, the
thoughts and affections of every one should be revealed? We may now see whether
the found will assist the sick, whether one kinsman, according to God, has
loved another; if Masters have had compassion of their slaves languishing; if
Physicians have visited those patients, that implored their help, if the
insolent refrained their violence, if thieves and pilierers, by the fear of
death, have given over their insatiable thirst of avarice, if the proud have
bowed their heads, if the wicked have bridled their impudency, and briefly,
whether the rich, that have lost their children, and nearest kindred, seeing
themselves now destitute of heirs, and successors, do distribute their alms
liberally to the poor.

And though the plague served to no other end, but to put into Christians a
desire to shed their blood for Religion, learning in such a time not to fear
death, this would be a singular benefit. This visitation is rather an
exercise, than a death unto us: It gives occasion to the mind to glory in the
force given unto it, and making death co^temptible, it disposes us to run
hastily to the receiving of our crown. But some body perhaps will reply, and
say, That which grieves me in this mortality, is, that being prepared to
maintain Religion, and feeling my self disposed to endure death courageously
and joyfully for Gods name, I am deprived of this benefit, by the prevention of
death. I answer first, That to suffer for Jesus Christ, lies not in thine own
power, but is a gift of God: and then, thou can not justly complain, for
losing of that, which peradventure was not requisite for thee. For the rest,
God which searches and knows the heart, and the secret thoughts thereof,
sees thee; and, if thou speak from a pure and uncorrupted heart, he approues
and co^mends thy good will; and discerning the virtue which he himself put
into thee, he will reward thee for the same. When Cain offered sacrifice unto
God, he had not yet killed his brother; and God, notwithstanding, condemned
his paricidie, not the^ perpetrated, having discovered his deep malice, and
pernicious determination: and even so, when the servants of God secretly
resolve and determine in themselves stoutly to maintain the truth, with the
expe^ce of their own blood, God who sees their good minds and hearts does
crown them, as well as if they had performed the co^bate. There is a great
difference, between saying, that will was wanting to Martyrdom, and that
martyrdom was wanting to will. Such as God finds thee, when he calls thee, so
he judges thee; eue^ as he himself protests, saying, And all the Churches
shall know, that I search the reins, and heart. For, in other respects, God
demands not our blood, but our faith. Neither Abraham, Isaac, nor Jacob were
slain: and yet nevertheless, they are ranked amongst the chief Patriarchs,
bearing the titles of faith, and righteousness; and whosoever is faithful, just,
and worthy of praise, he comes to the table, and banquet of these Patriarchs.

To resume our former discourse, let us call to mind, that we must perform
Gods will, and not our own; following that prayer, which Jesus Christ has
taught us. What is it, but to disturb, and over throw all piety, when
demanding that the will of God may be fulfilled, we recoyle, and draw back,
when he would take us out of the world. When we thus hang tail, and like
rebellious slaves, come not in our masters presence, but with evil will, and
by compulsion, leaving the world, because it would be a fault to do otherwise,
and notthrough any desire we have to rest satisfied in the will of God, how can
we request, at his hands, the heavenly rewards, to which we do not approach,
but by compulsion? Why do we pray, that his kingdom may come, seeing we
take such delight to remain in the prison of the world? Why heap we prayers
upon prayers, that the general restauratio^ of all things may approach, if our
greater, and more affectionate desires would rather serve here below, the
enemy of our salvation, than to reign above with Jesus Christ? But, that the
testimonies of divine providence may the better be laid open, and that we may
understand, that the Lord (who fore-knoweth all things to come) has care of
his childrens salvation, it so happened, that one of our companions in the
Ministry, being plucked down by this disease, and perceiving himself near
to death, demanding the Eucharist, as if he aspired to God, and had bin
drawing his last gasp, an honorable young man, very maiesticall, high of
stature, and welfauoured of countenance, being so relucent, that no humane eye
could firmly behold him, appeared, and was seen by this man, being rather out
of, tha^ in this world. Then this glorious young man, with a loud voice, and as
it were in choler, said unto him sick: You fear adversity, you would not
willingly remove; what should I do unto you? It is a voice, which chides, and
admonishes us, and iumps not with their desires which fear persecution, and
care not for going to God, but to provide still for hereafter. Our brother, and
companion in dying, learned a thing, which all suruiuants ought to think upon:
for, he understanding it, when he went out of the world, it was told him, to
the end, that he should deliver it unto others, and he understood it, not
only for himself, but for us. For though he have need to learn, that is ready
to go out of this world, yet this man learning at his last hour, he was lively
admonished, to the end that we, which survive after him, may learn to
understand that which is expedient, and necessary for us. How often have we, of
little faith, understood? how often has the Lord vouchsafed to teach us? How
often has he commanded me, to protest and preach, incessantly before you al,
that you should not lament for your brethren, when it pleases God to call, and
to deliver them out of this world, seeing I know, that they do not perish,
but precede, and go before those that remain behind; and that we may be
grieved, or a little touched for them, as for friends that remove to some
other place, or that embarke themselves, to arrive in a good Port: But we must
not lament, nor wear mourning weeds for them, here below on earth, seeing
they have now put on white roabes in heaven: We must not give the Painims just
occasion to tax, and reprehend us, when they shall see, that through immoderate
love, we seem to judge those perished, and forgotten, who^ otherwise we
affirm, to be living with GOD; when they perceive, that by evident
testimonial of our thoughts, we condemn the faith, whereof we make profession
by mouth. In this wise, we should overthrow our hope and belief: that which
we say, would but proceed from hypocrisy: It is nothing to appear courageous
in words, if we subvert the truth by effects.

The Apostle S. 1. These. 4.
Paul condemns, and sharply reprehends those, that are too sorrowful for the
death of their kinsmen, and friends. Brethren, said he, I would not that you
should be ignorant concerning those that sleep; to the end, you may not
lament like those that have no hope. For if we believe, that Jesus Christ died,
and was raised again, in like manner they that sleep in Jesus, God will bring
the^ unto him. He says, that they, which are void of hope, sorrow for the
death of their friends. But we that live by hope, which believe in God, which
are assured that Christ died, and rose again for us, remaining in Christ, and
rising again, in, and by him; why should we refuse to go out of this world?
why do we mourn, and lament for our friends, which GOD takes to himself, as if
they perished? Why give we not ear to our Lord and God, Jesus Christ,
admonishing us, and saying, Ioh. 11.
I am the resurrection; he that believes in me, though he be dead, shall live:
and whosoever lives, and believes in me, shall never die. If we believe in
Jesus Christ, let us give ear unto his sayings and promises; that, in stead of
dying eternally, we may undoubtedly and joyfully come unto our Savior, with
whom we shall live and reign for ever. For, this our temporal death, it is but
a passage unto immortality, and we cannot attain to everlasting life, before
we dislodge, and remove out of this world. Death is not a going forth, but a
passage, and transportation out of the way of this life, to eternal rest. Who
is he, that does not merrily go forward, when there is any possibility of his
honor and profit? Who refuses to be tra^sformed and changed into the image of
Christ, and quickly to come to the graces of God? Our conversation, Phil 3.
says S. Paul, is in heaven, from whence we look for the Lord Jesus Christ,
who shall change our vile bodies, to the end they may be conformable to his
glorious body. Our Lord Jesus Christ promises, that we shall be such, when he
entreated his father for us, that we might be with him, that we might live in
his eternal mansion, and that we might rejoice in his heavenly kingdom:
Father, said he, I desire, that those whom thou have given me, may be where I
must be, and that they may see the glory, which thou gave me, before the
world ever was. He that is to go to the Court of Jesus Christ, and into the
light of the kingdom of heaven, should not weep and lament; but rather,
according to the promise of the Lord, and the certainty of his word, he should
rejoice at his departure, and transportation. To this end we read, that Enoch
was translated, it so pleasing God, and the holy Scripture affirming, in
Genesis, Genesis 5.
Enoch walked according to God, and was no more seen, for God took him up.
See what it is to please God; for, it is to be taken from the corruptions and
contagions of this world.

The holy Ghost also teaches us by ye mouth of the wise man, Eccle. 14.
that those whom God loves, he quickly delivers out of this world; for fear,
lest soiourning there too long, they might be infected with the ordures
thereof. Wisd. 4.
The just man, says he, was taken away, to the end that malice might not
deprave his understanding: for his soul pleased God, and therefore made haste
to be removed from out the midst of iniquity. In the self same manner, the
faithful and devout soul runs a great spiritual pase, toward her God,
saying: Psa. 84.
O God of armies, my soul sighs, and makes haste toward Gods Courts.

For the rest, it belongs to him, that takes all his pleasure in the world,
that suffers himself to be caught with the bait of earthly delights, and the
flatteries of the flesh: such an one, I say, it concerns to desire to tarry
long in the world. But seeing ye world hates the children of God, why love
thou thine enemy? why folowest thou not, rather, Jesus Christ thy Redeemer,
who so ardently loves thee? Saint John admonishes us very earnestly in his
first Epistle, saying, Love not the world, 1. Ioh. 2.
nor the things that are in the world. If any man love the world, the love of
the Father is not in him. For, all that is in the world (that is to say, the
concupiscence of the flesh, the desire of the eyes, and the pride of life) are
not of the Father, but of the world. The world, and the desires thereof pass
away: but he that performs the will of God, lives for ever, even as God
himself is eternal. Let us therefore, dear brethren, attend patiently,
whatsoever God sends, with a pure understanding, an assured faith, and a
constant resolution. Let us drive away, far from us, the apprehension of death,
and be mindful of ye immortality which is to succeed. Show we our selves
such, as our profession imports, not to lament the death of our friends; but
our hour being come, let us merrily, and cheerfully go to the Lord, when he
calls. For, seeing Gods servants should be always prepared to this point,
they ought most of all to be so now, considering how the world declines; it
being assieged with infinite evils that ouerwhelm it. We have seen, and passed
many dangers: these are but slight evils, in respect of those that are to come:
we may therefore think our gain great, in going out of the same so quickly. If
the walls of thine house shake with age, if thy roof totter, if thy hole
edifice, not being able any longer to stand, presage a near fall, and ruin,
would thou not make more tha^ ordinary haste to be gone? If thou were
sailing in the main sea, and that a furious storm, swelling the waves with the
wind, should threaten thy shipwreck, would thou not endeavor to recover
some Port? Behold the world, how it shakes, and is ready to dissolve,
manifesting in the end, her utter ruin: Why therefore think thou not on
God? Why reioicest thou not the condition wherein thou stand, seeing thy
self taken betimes out of those ruins, and shipwrackes, and warranted from
the blows, that threaten those which survive.

We must consider, dear brethren, and seriously meditate, how we have
renounced the world; and that we reside therein, but for a time, as pilgrims and
strangers. Let us eue^ embrace that day, which summoneth every one of us, to
his proper dwelling place, which hales and pulls us out of the snares of this
life, to put us in possession of the kingdom of heaven. He that travels up and
down countries, to some far place, desires he not to return to his own
home? If any man be under sail, in the course toward his country, desires he
not a good wind, to fall quickly with the land, and the more speedily by this
means, to come to the imbraceme^ts of his kindred and friends? We call Paradise
our country, and the Patriarchs our Fathers? Why run we not then, with all
speed, to see our country, and to salute our Parents? A great number of
friends, kinsfolks, brothers, and children, already assured of their
immortality, and desirous of our good, do there attend and wish for us. What
a joy will this be both to them and us, there to review, and meet one another?
what pleasures there are amongst the inhabitants of the heavenly kingdom, which
now fear death no more, and are sure to live for ever? There is the glorious
company of the Apostles, the troops of Prophets, reioicing in God, the
innumerable armies of martyrs; who, after having valiantly fought, and
suffered, are immortally crowned. In this place, the Virgins triumph, which
subdued their own concupiscence, and bodily pleasures, by the vigor of true
contine^ce: the charitable, that by alms deeds, and diverse other good works
toward the poor, showed themselves the performers of righteousness, and who
having obeyed the commandments of God, heaped up unto themselves a treasure in
heaven, where they are richly recompensed. My most dear brethren, let us with
all affection run toward them, and desire to be there quickly, and so to
come unto our Savior. God behold our cogitations and thoughts: the Lord Jesus
Christ vouch safe to cast his eye on the resolution, which our hearts, in his
promises, have undertaken, that they may have the richest and most glorious
rewards, that with most ardent and zealous affection, desire his presence. Amen.

A Treatise of S. AMBROSE, Bishop of Milan, who flourished twenty years after
S. CYPRIAN, which is to say, 370 years after the birth of CHRIST.
Of the happiness of death.
THE ARGUMENT.
IN this Treatise, being divided into 12. Chapters, S. Ambrose shows in what
sense Death may be called good or evil; and how many kinds of death there are:
Also, what it is, which the holy Scripture calls life and death, and what the
meaning is of spiritual death. Afterward, he proves, that death is happiness
to the faithful, seeing it is an end of sin, and by the same, the world was
redeemed. Hereupon he co^cludes, that therefore it is not to be feared; teaching
us, how we should meditate thereupon: But the better to take away all
apprehension and bitterness, he discourses upon all the dangers, that in this
world enuiron us, and upon the discommodities of this life. And then he
reenters into his former argument, showing that there is nothing terrible in
death, but the opinion thereof. Then he proves, that the soul does not perish
with the body, and entreats of the great contentment of souls after this
present life, as also of the happiness of the celestial kingdom; and what
ways we should take to come thereunto.

Of the happiness of Death. CHAP. 1. In what sense death may be termed good,
or evil.
BEing to entreat of the happiness of death, we must first conceive, in what
respect it may be called good, or evil. If it therefore hurt ye soul, it
appears to be an evil thing; and, on the contrary, if the soul be endamaged
nothing thereby, it cannot justly be blamed. Now that which is not evil, is
good: for, that which is vicious, is evil also; and so, oppositely, whatsoever
is without vice; may be reputed good: and therefore good is contrary to evil,
and evil to good. In brief, where there is no will to hurt, that may be
called innoce^ce: and him we term culpable, that is not innocent; and he that
pardons, merciful; and so him cruel that will not pardon, nor remit. But, some
may reply, that there are no things more contrary tha^ life, and death. If
life the^ be reputed a special good, must not death be esteemed as great an
evil? We must then observe, what life, and death is. Life is the enjoying of
breath; and death the privation thereof. Many think, that it is a great
happiness to breathe: to enjoy life therefore, is a good unto them; and a
death it is, to be deprived thereof. So the Scripture says, Behold, Eccl. 15.
I have set before thee, life, and death; good, and evil; calling life, good,
Genesis 2.3.
and death evil, comparing them one with another. And to produce yet a more
express testimony hereof, the first man was placed in the garden of Eden, to
eat of the fruit of the Tree of life, and of other fruits in the garden, with
a precise prohibition, that he should not eat the fruit of the Tree of
knowledge of good and evil; threatening him, that he should that day die the
death, when he did eat thereof. He went beyond his commission, lost the Tree of
life, and being driven out of the garden, tasted of death. Wherefore it
follows, that death is a notable evil, seeing it is the reward of
transgression and condemnation.

CHAP. 2. That there are three kinds of Death.
But there are three kinds of death: The first is the death of sin: of which
it is written: Ezekiel. 18.
The soul which sins shall die. The second is, death mystical, when any
one dies to sin, and lives to God: of which the Apostle says, that we are
buried with Jesus Christ, Romans 6.
in his death by Baptism. The third is, the end of our course and vocation in
this world, which is to say, the separation of the soul from the body: we see
therefore, that there is an evil death, that is, when we die in sin; another,
good; wherein whosoever dies, he is delivered from sin; and the third, betwixt
both; for honest men repute it good, and others stand in fear of it. Though it
delivers all men, yet are there but a few that take pleasure therein: but, that
proceeds not from any vice that is in death, that is, in the separation of the
soul from the body, but from our infirmities; in that giving our selves over
to the pleasures of the flesh, and delights of this life, we are afraid to
see so quick an end of this our earthly course, wherein notwithstanding,
there is more gall, than honey. Virtuous men, and such as fear God, have
always done otherwise; for the long continuance of their travels in this
world, made them to mourn, and think it much better, to be separated from
this body, Phil. 2.
to be with Jesus Christ: so that some of them have grown to such a point, as
to detest the day of their birth: witness he who said, Job 3.
And let the day, wherein I was borne, perish. For, what pleasure is there here
in this life, full of anguish and care, replenished with a million of calamities
and miseries, with the tears and lamentations of the afflicted, wholly
destitute of all consolation? Therefore it is, that Solomon, in his book of
Ecclesiastes, rather co^mends ye condition of the dead, than of the living:
Eccles. 4.
and further adds: Nay, and I think him better than them both, that never
was borne; for he never saw the wicked works that are committed under the
Sun. In another place he holds opinion, that the dead infant, is in better
state and condition, than an old man, by reason he never saw the evils that
are wrought in the world, he never came into this darkness, he never walked in
the vanities of this present life: and therefore, he that never entered into
the world, enioyes more peace and repose, tha^ he that is come into the same.
And in deed, what good can a man reap in this world, that walks therein but
as an image, and can never be satisfied with the desires thereof? If there be
any wealth to devour, he loses his peace, being constrained to have his eye
always over that which with miserable greedines he sought after, most
miserably to possess that, which can stand him in no true stead: could there
be a greater slavery, tha^ to see a man labor to amasse, and heap those goods
together, that bring him no profit? If this present life then be a continual
and insupportable burden, we must needs count the same for a great comfort.
This end is death: and comfort is a good thing; it follows therefore, that
death is a good thing. That was the cause, why Simeon so rejoiced: who knowing
that he should not die before he had seen the anointed of the Lord, when
they brought Jesus into the Temple, he took him in his arms, and said, Lord,
thou let now thy servant depart in peace, as if he before had remained in
this life, rather by compulsion, then of his own free will, he requiring to be
set at liberty; as if being hampred in some bonds, he had then gone to take
possession again of his freedom. This body is as it were chained, yea, and
(which is worse) with the chain of temptations; which shackles, binds, and
torments outragiously, by reason of the cruelty of sin. For, we see in dying,
how the soul of man loses it self, by little and little, from the bands of
the flesh, and being let out by the mouth, flies away, being delivered out of
the dungeon of this body. David made haste to go out of this temporal course,
saying, I am a stranger, Psalm. 39.
and pilgrim before thee on the earth, as all my Fathers were: wherefore, as a
stranger he ran speedily toward the common country of all the Saints,
requiring before death, pardon of his sins, wherewith he was defiled, while
he soiourned on the earth; For, he that obtaines not pardon of his sins in
this world, shall never attain to eternal life. And, therefore, David adds:
Let me retire my self, suffer that I may be refreshed, before I go, and be
no more. Why pant we therefore after this life, wherein the longer any one
remains, the more he is surcharged with sin? The Lord himself says, Every day
is content with his own misery. Mat. 6.
And Jacob complained, that the hundred and thirty years of his life, Genesis 47.
were short, and irksome: not that the days were tedious of themselves, but
because malice here increases, as the days pass away. For, there is not a
day that passes over our heads, wherein we do not offend. And therefore the
Apostle said very well: Phil. 1.
Christ is gain unto me, both in life and death: in the one, having relation to
the necessity of his life, for the service of the Church; and in the other, to
the particular benefit, which he received by dying: as we also live in serving
of Christ; toward who^, his servants must needs show their good affection, in
delivering unto others the doctrine of his Gospel. And as for Simeon, who said:
Now thou suffer thy servant, he stayed because of Christ, who is our King;
so that we may not omit nor reject his commandments. How many men were there,
that the Roman Emperors caused to remain in remote, and strange Regions, in
hope of future recompense, and honors? Came they from thence without their
masters leave? and without all comparison, is it not a more excellent thing to
obey the will of God, than of men? CHRIST therefore is gain to the believer,
as well in life, as in death: for in the quality of a servant, he refuses
not to serve in this life; and as a wise man, he embraces the gain of death.
It is a great gain to be out of the harvest of sin, to be removed from
evil, and in full possession of good. Saint Paul also adds, My desire is to
remove, and be with Christ, which were far better for me: but, for you, it is
more necessary, that I should remain in the flesh. He set down this word
necessary, by reason of the fruit of his travels; and the word better, by
reason of his celestial grace, and thrice happy conjunction with Christ.

CHAP. 3. What death is, and what life, according to the Testimony of the holy
Scriptures: and of spiritual death.
SEeing then the Apostle teaches, that whosoever leaves this mortal body,
goes to Christ, if he has truly known, and served him: let us a little
consider, what death, and what life is. We know, because the holy Scriptures
auerre it, that death is a loosing of the soul from the body, and, as it were,
the separation of a man: For, in dying, the soul is disioined from the body.
David, therefore, seems to allude hereunto when he says: Thou have broken my
bonds; Psalm. 116.
I will offer thee sacrifice and praise. The precedent verse of this Psalm,
because the death of the Saints is precious in the eyes of the Lord, shows,
that by these bonds is understood, the conjunction of our bodies, with the
soul. And therefore, foreseeing even then, that he was in the number of those
faithful, that had devoutly rendered their lives into the hands of Christ, he
rejoices on his part; he also faithfully offering up himself for the people
of God, to fight with huge Goliath hand to hand, and by himself alone, to
remove the opprobrie, and peril, which then threatened the people of God: In
which, when he presented himself frankly unto death, to appease the wrath of
God, being ready in the name of all others and for their comfort, to bear the
scourge of GOD: he knew well, that it was far greater glory to die for
Christ, than to reign in this world: can there be a more excellent thing,
than to offer up our selves unto CHRIST?

Although therefore, the Scripture speaks of diverse Sacrifices of David, yet
is there a mention of this one particular, in this Psalm, which says, I will
sacrifice unto thee praise, and thanksgiving: he said not, I do sacrifice;
but, I will; minding hereby to infer, that a sacrifice is then perfect, when
every believer is delivered out of the bands of this body, to appear before
the Lord, and then presents himself to him in a sacrifice of praise; because no
praise, nor thanksgiving, is perfect, or accomplished, before death: and no man
can be truly praised in this life, by reason of the uncertainty of that to
come. Death therefore is a separation of the soul from the body; for that
which further remains, we said before, how S. Paul declared, That to be
dissolved, and be with Christ, he esteemed a far better thing than to tarry
here still. What else procures this separation, but the dissolution of the
body, and bringing of it to repose; and as for the soul, it is her freedom,
and introduction to peace, and joy, that is to say, to live with Christ, if it
believe. The chrildren of God, therefore, do nothing in this world but purify
themselves from the contaminations of the body, which are as bands to tie us
in, and labor to free themselves from these difficulties, renouncing of
pleasures, shunning dissolutenes, and the flames of co^cupisce^ce. Is it not
the^ true, that every faithful soul, living here below, is conformed and
joined unto death, when she studies to die in her self to all carnal
delights, and to all the desires, and allurements of the world. Thus was the
Apostle dead, when he said: Gal. 6.
The world is crucified to me, and I to the world. In fine, to the end we
might know, that death is in this life, and that it is good, he exhorts us
to bear in our bodies, ye death, or mortificatio^ of our Lord Jesus: for, he
who has in him the death of the Lord Jesus, he shall have his life also in
his body. Death therefore is necessary in us, to the end, that life may be
necessary also. There is a good life after death; that is to say, a great
felicity after victory, a good life at ye end of the combat, when the law of
the flesh, can no more contradict the law of understanding; when death strives
no more against the body, but that the victory over death is enclosed in the
same. And I know not whether of these two are more effectual: 2. Cor. 4.
this life, or this death; considering the Apostles authentike testimony, who
says, Death therefore is necessary in us, and life in you. How many nations
were revived by the death of one man? The Apostle then as you see, 2. Cor. 4.
teaches, that those who enjoy this present life, must also desire this
present death; to the end that the death of Christ may appear in our bodies,
and that we may participate of this felicity, by which our external man is
destroyed, to the end, that heavens mansion place may be open unto us. He
therefore conformes himself well unto death, that retires from the earnest
desires of the world, and that loses the bands, whereof the Lord speaks in
Esaias: Loose the bands of unrighteousness, Esa. 51.
break the obligations of unjust exchange: let them go free, that are trodden
under foot, untie the knots of wickedness. He approaches near unto death,
that strips himself of the pleasures of the world, that disintangleth
himself, from terrestrial cogitations, and raises his mind to the heavenly
Tabernacle, within the which Saint Paul was conversant, even while he lived
here below: otherwise he would not have said, Phil. 1.
Our conversation is in heaven: the which may also be applied to the zeal and
meditatio^s of this holy man: for his thoughts were there, there his soul
frequented, the studies and endeavors of his mind, were raised up thither, the
limits of this body being indeed too strait, to comprehend the apprehensions of
a man truly wise; who aspiring to such a good, separates, for the time, his
soul from his body, and has no more to do with the same, in contemplating of
that truth, which he desires openly to see; for which cause he seeks nothing
more, than to be freed from the snares, and darkness of this body. For, we
cannot with our hands, with our eyes, or our ears, conceive this celestial
truth, because things visible are temporal; and those invisible, eternal. And
besides, our sight is oftentimes deceived: and we discern things far
otherwise than indeed they are: our hearing also deceiues us; and therefore we
must look to invisible things, if we will not be deceived. When may we then
be assured, that our foul is not deceived? When is it that she lays hold on
the throne of verity? even when she is separated from the body, which then can
abuse, nor deceive her no more? The same deceived her by the regard of the
eyes, and by the hearing of the ear: and therefore it is necessary, that she
should leave and abandon it. And therefore the Apostle minding to show, that it
was not by bodily repose, but by the eleuatio^ of the soul, and the hearts
humility, that had found out the truth, he says, that our conversation is in
heaven. He therefore sought in heaven, that which is truth, and shall so remain
for ever. And thus retiring his thoghts and all the force of his understanding,
without revealing himself to any other: but knowing and considering well of
himself, resolving to follow that, which he took to be truth, and
perceiving that to be false, and flitting which the flesh desires, and chooses
fraudulently; he rightly blasoned this body, calling it the body of death. For,
who can discern, with his eyes, the brightness of virtue? Who can gripe
righteousness with his hands, or see wisdom with his bodily eyes? Briefly,
when we meditate on any thing, we would not willingly see any body, we like
not to hear any noise about our ears; having sometimes our minds so fixed, as
we see not that, which is before our eyes. And in the night our cogitatio^s
are more firm, and we conceive the better of that in our hearts, which serves
for our document and instruction; whereunto that saying of the Prophet, in the
4. Psalm, has reference: Ponder with your selves, upon your beds. Oftentimes
also, diverse men cloase their eyes, when they would profoundly consider of any
affair, avoiding at such a time the impediment of sight. Otherwhiles we seek
out solitary places, to the end, that no body may trouble us, or by his
prattle turn us out of the right way, into some straying and by-path. Even so
this body procures diverse occupatio^s, which dull the souls point, and
slacken our intentions: so as the holy man Job, said well to this purpose; Job.
10.
Thou have made me of clay and slime. If this body be of clay, we are only
plaistered therewith: but it dissolues not, nor distempers the soul, with the
filth of his Intempera^ce. Thou have apparelled me (says he) with skin, and
flesh: thou have interlaced me with bones and sinews. So that our soul is
confined and extended through the sinews of the body: many times she is as it
were stiff, and otherwhiles crooked. He adds, Thou have not exempted me
from iniquity: but if I be wicked, accursed be I: and yet if I were just, I
durst not lift up my head, because I am all confusion; for thou have environed
me with temptation: What is this life, but a place full of ginnes and snares. We
walk amidst the nets, and converse in the thickest of many dangers. Before,
Job had said, The life of man, is it not a battle upon earth? It is very
material that he said, upon earth; for there is a life for man in heaven: Job
7.
His life (adds he) is like a laborers work, (which is to say, spent in toy!
e and travel) consuming it self in vanities, ebbing away in words, having a
mansion place in dust, a life in slime, and clay, without resolution, or
constancy. In the day he desires night; before he eats, he cries, and weeps
at the time of his repast* there is nothing but tears in this life, grief,
fear, carefulnes, incessant troubles, travel without solace, anger, and
horrible anguish. Many wish death, and cannot obtain it: if they obtain this
good, they rejoice; because it is only death, that brings a man to repose.

CAAP. 4. That Death is altogether good; as well because it procures an end to
sin, as in that the world is thereby redeemed.
But I hear some reply, how it is written that God made not Death: that life
was in the Garden of Eden, wherein God had planted the Tree of life, and life
is the light of men; and so consequently the death that entered in is evil. I
demand in what sense, one may term it evil, if according to the opinion of
the heathen, it has no more feeling? or if, according to the Apostle, Christ
is gain, with whom it were better to be? How then can death be an evil thing,
if after the same we have no feeling at all? For where there is no sense of
feeling, there can be no grief, seeing to be grieved, is to feel ones self
evil: Or if there be any sense, and seeling after death, there is then life
after death, and the soul which uses sense, and has life, suruiueth the body
after a separation by death. But seeing the life and soul remain after death,
that which is good continues, it not being annihillated by death, but
contrariwise it is augmented: for there is no impediment of death, that can
detain the soul, but she labors with the more efficacy, being intentive on
those things that properly belong unto her without being tied to the body;
which in stead of pleasuring, ouerchargeth, and makes the soul to sink under
her burden. What evil then receives the soul, if it be maintained in purity,
that is to say, in the knowledge and fear of God. But if she have done
otherwise, death, notwithstanding, is not evil; but the life, which was not a
true life: for, we cannot rightly call the course and race of mankind, a life,
which is so daily assaulted, and corrupted by sin. Why then do we accuse
death, which does give the reward of life, or else which finisheth the
afflictions, and miseries of the world. I conclude therefore, that either death
enioyes the happiness of his repose, or is tormented by reason of the evil of a
precedent life. Now, consider me this point well: If life be a burden death is
then a discharge, and releasement thereof: if life be a punishment, death is a
deliverance: if there be any judgment after death, there is then a life after
death: Shall we then say, that such a death is not good? When as life here
below is good, how ca^ the death out of the world be evil, seeing there is no
apprehension, which we need to fear, during this life? What makes this
mortal life good, but piety, and righteousness? Life therefore is not good, in
respect of the soul and bodies vnio^; but because by the fear of God, it
puts to flight this evil, and obtaines the happiness of death, more
performing that which concerns the good of the soul, than that which
pertaines to the society and conjunction of the soul and body together. If we
call life good, which is the mirror of the soul, separated from the body, and
if the soul be good, which raises and retireth it self from the company of
the body: out of question death is good, which frees and delivers the soul,
from the society and company of the body. In what sense therefore soever we
take it, death is good, both because it separates two adverse parties, for fear
lest they should ruin one another; and in that it is a Port of refuge to those
who having roued up and down the sea of this world, search by faith the haven
of repose; as also because it makes not our condition worse, but reserues us to
a judgment to come, such as particularly we are found: hereunto may be added,
that it holds us at rest, it withdrawes us from their malice, that survive in
the world, and replenisheth us with the enioyance of those things, which before
we desired and expected. To this we may also annexe, that it is in vain, for
men to fear death, as if it brought an end to Nature. For, in calling to mind,
that God made not Death; but man, after he fell to sin, received the sentence
of his disloyalty, and revolt, which was, that he should return to dust, out
of which he was framed, we shall find, that death is the end of sin; for
fear, least if life had been prolonged, sin might the more have augmented.
The Lord therefore suffered Death to enter into the world, to the end, that
sin might cease. And to prevent, that Nature might not end in death, he has
set down a day, when all shall rise again: so that Death does extinguish
sin, and makes our nature perdurable for ever. And thus death is the portion
of all the living. And thou must pass it with a good courage: for, so we go
from corruption, to incorruption, from death to immortality, from labor to
repose. Let not therefore the very name of death terrify thee: but rather
rejoice in the commodities of so excellent a passage. For what other thing is
death, but the funeral of our vices, and resurrection of our virtues? and
therefore there was one that said very truly: Let my life die the death of the
Just, which is to say, let it finish, for the laying aside of imperfections,
and putting on of that grace which is imparted to all the faithful, which bear
the mortification of our Lord Jesus, in their soul and body. Now, this
mortification consists in the remission of sins, in the wiping away of
offenses, in the oblivion of error, and in the participation of mercy: what
can we say further of the benefit of death, except we should also once more
add, that the world was thereby redeemed.

CHAP. 5.
But I pray you, let us deliver somewhat of the death which is common to all.
Why should we fear it, seeing it procures no hurt or prejudice unto the soul?
For, it is written: Fear not them, which kill the body, and cannot kill the
soul. Now by the means of this death, the soul is delivered, being separated
from the body, and disintangled from these troublesome snares. For which
cause, while we are in this body, let us prepare our selves for death, let us
raise our souls above the bed of our flesh: and, to speak aptly, let us
rise out of this sepulcher, let us retire from the conjunction of the body,
let us leave all earthly things, to the end that the adversary coming, he
may find nothing, that belo^gs to him, in us. Let us cheerfully march toward
this eternal happiness, let us mount up, and with the flight of love and
charity, soar up from hence, which is to say, from these frail and worldly
things, hearing this exhortation from the Lord: Rise up, depart from hence;
minding that every one should leave the earth, reform his soul, which hangs
backward, lift it up to heaven, rouse up his Eagle-flight, that he may enjoy
the benefit of this promise; Psalm. 103.
Thy youth shall be renewed, as that of the Eagle: this was spoken to the
soul. Let our souls therefore soar up aloft like the Eagle: for she flies
above the clouds, she glitters and shines again, by ye renouation of her
plumes, she raises her flight, even up to the skies, where she cannot be
intrapped by any snare: for, the bird, which descends from aloft downward, is
oftentimes taken with the whistle, and snare, or by some other subtle devise.
And so let our souls also take heed, of descending down upon the earth. There
is a snare in gold, and silver is limed: there be nets in possessions, and
pricks in the pleasures of this world. In running after gold, the snare lays
hold on our necks, in seeking after silver, we are taken in the lime: and
setting down our feet in possessions, the nets catch us. Why contend we
after that gain, which serves for nothing, but to ruin the soul, that is so
precious? All the world is nothing, in comparison of the loss of one soul:
for, what benefits it a man, Luke 10.
to have won all the world and lost his his own soul? What will thou give
in excha^ge of thy soul? It cannot be redeemed, neither by gold, nor silver,
and yet it is gold that makes it to perish. Adulteries, wrath, choler, and all
other passions, are so many spikes which are fastened in our souls, and that
pearce our very bowels, and intrailes. Let us therefore shun these evils, and
raise up our souls to the image and similitude of God. To fly sin, is a
resemblance unto God, whose image and similitude is purchased by piety, and
righteousness.

CHAP. 6. That all the world is full of ginnes and snares.
THere be Principallities of the air, and Powers of the world, that labor to
throw us down headlong, from the ra^pire of the soul: either they hinder us
from marching upright, or seek the means to overthrow us: if we fly a
little aloft, beating us down again to the earth: but even then let us strive
the more, to mount up our souls to heaven, having the word of God, for our
guide. These Principalities do blow, into thy eyes, the vanities of the world,
to make thee stumble: but, oh, faithful soul, the more zealouslie guide thy
steps toward Jesus Christ: If they solicit thee by the avarice of gold,
silver, or of possessions; for the purchase of which thing they would have thee
excuse thy self, from his banquer, that inuites thee to the marriage of his
Son, which is his eternal word; take heed of making any excuse, but
contrariwise put on thy marriage garment, be at the banquet of this rich man;
for fear, if thou deferrest, and intanglest thy self in the affairs of this
world, he call others, and shut thee out of doors. The powers of ye world
propounde also, unto thee, the desire of honor, that thou might grow proud
like Adam; and so comparing, and equalling thy self to God, thou may
contemn his commandments, and begin to lose the true riches, which thou
did enjoy: for, he which has not, shall lose eue^ that which he has. How
often, in our prayers (wherein we draw neeter unto God, than by any other
mean) are our thoughts seized upon, by wicked, and vile cogitations, to the
end to hinder our affections, from striving to Godward? How often does carnal
concupiscence lay hold of us? How often are we encountered with wanton eyes, to
assault a modest heart, and to pearce it suddenly, with the dart of wicked
desires? How often are bad words fixed in thy will, and secret thoughts, of no
value, against the which God speaks: Take heed of harboring, in thine heart,
wicked thoughts, lest the Lord say unto thee; Why think thou evil in thine
heart? or else, when thou have heaped together gold, silver, and riches enough,
thou may say unto me, my virtue, Deu. 8.13
and wisdom has purchased this, and so thou forget the Lord thy God? Behold
the obstacles which that soul meets withal, that bends her flight up to
heaven: But for thee, loving brother, fight like a good soldier of Jesus
Christ; and forgetting base matters, and contemning earthly things, aspire to
those celestial, and eternal: raise up thy soul, that it be not allured,
with the bait of the snare. The pleasures of this world are baits: and, which
is worse, they are the baits of sin and temptations. In seeking after
delights thou lightest on the ginne: for the eye of lust, is the snare, which
entrappes him, that treads on the same: as also her words are another snare,
which for a time taste as sweet as honey; but when sin comes to be feelingly
pricked, in a vanquished Conscience, then is it but gall, and sharp bitterness.
Other men's goods, alluring the eye, are likewise a ginne: there be no paths
throughout the whole course of our life, which are not laid all over with
the^. And therefore righteous David said: they have laid snares for me, Psalm.
142.
in my ways: but see that thou follow the way which says; I am the way, John
14.
ye truth, and the life, to the end that thou may affirm. I restore my
soul, and she conducts me by the paths of righteousness, for the love of his
name. Let the world therefore be dead unto our eyes, let us die to the
wisdom of the flesh, which is enemy to God. Subject we our souls only to
Jesus Christ, that every one may truly say, My soul, Psalm. 62.
is it subject unto God? then it is not subject unto the earth, nor this world.
The covetous rich man cannot say so: It is the just and temperate man's
protestation. But, the covetous man says, My soul, thou have goods enough
for many years, enjoy good days, eat, drink, and make good cheer: for the
auaricious soul is subject to the pleasures of the flesh; whereas, on the
contrary, the righteous man's soul uses her body only as an instrument: or,
as the handicrafts-man disposes of his work, as he pleases, and makes such
inventions as are best liking to himself, she setting forth such virtues as
are best pleasing; singing sometimes an Hymn of chastity, otherwhiles a song
of temperance, a verse of sobriety, the melody of integrity, the harmony of
virginity, and then the solemn music of widdowhood and co^tinence. It is
true, that the Musician addapts himself, sometimes to his instrument. But,
howsoever, sing none but honest and religious ditties; to the end, that the
voice and instrument may be truly accorded.

CHAP. 7. That life is annoied, with many evils and disco^modies.
But why make I mention of the snares that are without us? we had need take
heed of those ginnes that are laid within our selves: for, within our bodies
there are too many, scattered abroad, on every side, which we ought to shun.
We must not commit the guard of our selves to this body, nor mingle our
souls therewith. Join with thy friend, and not with thine enemy: thy flesh
is thine enemy, because it contradicts the law of understanding, and
contends after nothing, but to sow enimities, seditions, quarrels, and
troubles: Mingle not thy soul therewith, for fear thou confound, and defile it
altogether. For, making this co^mixtion, thy flesh, which should be subject,
comes to contemn the soul, which ought to command as Souereign, seeing she
gives life to the body; and the flesh on the contrary, effects the death of the
soul. This would therefore be an overthrowing of the operation, and almost a
confounding, both of the one and other substance. Shall we then affirm, that
the soul receives into it self, the insensibilitie of a dead body? and that
the body likewise communicates with the virtues of the soul? Though the soul
be infused into the body, yet we may not think, that she is there
confounded. Consider the light, for an example; though it pearce into every
place, yet is it not for all this mixed therewith: We must not therefore
confound the offices, and effects of so different substances; but let the soul
reside in the body, to quicken; govern, and enlighte^ the same. To this we
agree, that it suffers with the body; for she is sad: and Jesus said, My soul
is sad, even to the death; discovering, in himself, humane passion, and
affection. The Prophet says also, My soul is troubled. And as the Musician
is moved, according to the song which he singes or plaieth upon a Recorder,
Harp, or Organs, and by his countenance we may discern his passion: so the
soul, which touches, and plaieth on this body, as on an instrument of
Music, if she be sage, and wise, she will express with the ends of her
fingers, the most inward parts, which is to say, the affections; so that a
pleasant harmony of good manners, will redound thereof, and we shall see her
observe such melody in her thoughts and actions, as that her deliberations, and
executions, will most sweetly accord. It is the soul therefore, that needs
the body but as an instrument. And therefore souereigntie is one thing, and
service another, and there is difference between that which we are, and that
which is our own. Whosoever loves the beauty of the soul, he mav well
affirm, that he loves the person also: but he that loves only the bodily
beauty thereof, loves not the whole person, but only an external appeara^ce,
which withers, and consumes away, in a small time. We rise up every day to
eat, and drink, and yet there is not any one so replenished, as that he may
justly say, I need to eat no more. We seek to gain, day after day, and yet
there is no end of our desires. The eye (says the wiseman) is not satisfied
with seeing, nor the ear with hearing. He that loves silver, cannot be
satisfied therewith: Eccles. 1.4. and 7.
We never leave traveling, and yet never can we reap the fruit of
abundaunce. We desire, without intermission, to understand new things: and, I
pray you, what is all humane Science, but a new breaking of the brain, and an
augmentation of dolor, and grief? Whatsoever is, has heretofore been: and
under the Sun there is nothing new; but, All is vanity. I do hate all the
parts of this life; said Ecclesiastes: But, he that hated life, must needs have
thought well of death; yea, he did certainly think better of the condition of
the dead, than of the living, and judged him happy, that never made entrance
into the world, nor had any part in vanity. My heart, said he, turned aside to
discover the pleasures, annoiance and bragges of the wicked and I found them
more bitter than death it self: not that death in it self is bitter, but
because it is so to the wicked. And life is also more bitter than death; for,
without all comparison, it is a more grievous thing to live in sin, than to
die: for, as long as a wicked man lives, his iniquity increases; if he die,
his sin comes to an end. Many are glad, when they are absolved of their
crimes; and they do well herein, if they determine to amend: but they are very
sottish in this, if their wills still stand to the propagation of offenses;
and better it had been for them, to have been condemned betimes, for impairing
the great heap of their sins and misdeedes. The Apostle speaks very well, and
gravely to this purpose, Romans 1.2.
That not only those, which commit wickedness, but they also which approve of
it, are worthy of death: and they which perform that, that in others they
greatly condemn, are inexcusable, and condemned by their own sentence; for,
in condemning of others, they judge themselves. He adds, that such me^ should
not flatter themselves; although for a time they seem guiltles, and exempted
from punishment: seeing that even then, they are grievously tormented in their
own consciences, being guilty, by their own sentence, while every body else
iustifies them; and in themselves double afflicted, whenever, and as often as
they condemn their neighbors faults. But, take good heeds, O thou man, (said
the Apostle) how thou contemnest ye treasure of patience, and the goodness of
God, who calls thee to repentance, and summons thee to change of life; but,
for thy obstinacy, and headstrong perseverance in error, augments the
severity of judgment to come, to the end thou may then receive the due
reward of thine iniquities. Out of all this before spoken, let us conclude, that
death in it self, is not an evil thing; for there is no death, either for
those in this world, or those out of it. For the living, it is nothing to them,
because they live: and for the dead, they are out of his clouches. And so it is
no evil, or discommoditie to the living, who have nothing to do therewith, nor
to those, which in respect of the body, are insensible, and in their souls
freely delivered from the same.

CAAP. 8. That it is not Death it self, of which men are afraid: the opinion,
and apprehensio^ thereof only terrifies.
IF death be redoubted of the living, I say, it is not death it self, but the
apprehension thereof, as every one applies the same, to his own affections; or
in respect of his conscience, as it is touched therewith, whose wounds we may
well accuse, and not the sharpnes of death. For ye rest, death is the gate of
repose to the righteous; as on the contrary, it is the shipwreck, and ruin of
the wicked. Out of question it is not the passage of death, that offends
them, that fear to die: but it is the apprehension, and horrible conceit of
this passage, that thus tormenteth them. In brief, as I said before, death
greeues us not, but the apprehension thereof. Now, this terrible apprehension
is grounded upon a precedent opinion of our infirmity, and contrary to
truth: for, verity encourages; opinion daunteth us. I will further auerre,
opinion it self has a reference to life, and not to death: and, we shall find,
that it is life it self, which we judge grievous: where upon it appears, that
the apprehensio^, which we have of death, must not be referred to death it
self but to life: for, if we have done nothing in our lives, whereof to be
afeard, we have no just cause to fear death; for, punishment deserved by
reason of offenses committed, fears those of true judgment: and to commit
sin, is an action of the living and not of the dead. Life therefore has
relation to us; and the vigor, and propagatio^ of the same, is supposed to be
in our power: but, death (which is the separation of the soul from the body)
does prejudice us nothing at all. The soul is delivered, and the body
returns unto dust, from whence it came. The delivered part reioiceth: the body
which goes to ye earth, feels nothing; and consequently, has no apprehension
thereof. But, if death be an evil thing, how comes it to pass, that young men
fear not to grow old, and fly not the neighbor age unto death? From whence
proceeds it, that one which foresees his own death, dies more willingly, than
another, whom death surpriseth of a sudden? So that I suppose, they are very
well satisfied, which took death to be an evil thing; and it were but for
this only reason (amongst many others) that by life we pass to death, and by
death we return to life: for, none can rise again, except he first die. It is
true, that fools fear death, as the worst thing that can befall them: but,
the wise desire it, because it is the ease of their labors, and the end of
their travels. For, that which otherwise may be said, there are two reasons,
why fools fear death; one is, that they call it death, and annihilation:
which in deed cannot be, considering that the soul lives, when the body is
reduced to ashes; and besides, the body it self also, must rise again:
Another is, because they fear the torments and punishments, whereof Poetical
books make often mention; that is to say, the barkings of Cerberus, the
terrible profunditie of the river Cocytus, the Ferri-man Caron, the troops of
Furies, the Infernal depths, wherein the monster Hydra remains, that deuoures
all; where we may see Titius, whose intrailes renew, and grow again, after
they have been eaten by a great huge Vulture, which never ceases to torment
him: In like manner Ixion, who rowles incessantly the great stone, with the
huge rock hanging just over their heads that make good cheer, being ready to
fall upon them. These be the Poets fables. But so, that we must not deny, but
there is punishment after death: And, if we refer that to death, which
happens after it, let us also refer unto life, that which falls out after
life. Punishment therefore must have no relation unto death; the which as
before was delivered, is but a separation of the soul from the body. And this
separation is not evil, seeing that to be dissolved, Phil. 1.
and live with Jesus Christ, is the best thing of all others, says the
Apostle. It follows then, that death of it self is not evil. True it is,
that the death of sinners is evil. From whence I collect, that therefore all
death in general is not bad, but that only of sinners, in particular: for,
Psalm. 14. and 116.
the death of the righteous is precious: the which once more declares, that the
evil lies not indeath, but in sin. The Grecians expressed death, by a word,
which imported, to have end, because it is the end of this earthly life. The
Scripture also calls death a sleep: witness hereof, that which JESUS CHRIST
said, John 10.
Our friend Lazarus sleeps, but I will go, and wake him. Sleep is a good
thing: for then we take repose, according unto that which was written: Psalm. 3.
I slept, took my rest, and awaked again, because the Lord received me into
his protection. The sleep of death therefore, is a sweet repose. Furthermore,
the Lord awakes, and raises up them that sleep, for he is the resurrection.
There is also a notable sentence in the Scripture, which says, Eccle. 2.
Praise no man before his death; for, every one is known at the end of his
life, and he is judged in his children, if he have taught, and instructed them,
in his own knowledge: for, the childrens misgouernment, is ever ascribed to
the fathers negligence. And because every living man is subject to offend, old
age it self, not being exempted here-from: we read, that Abraham died in a
good old age, because he continued still constant in the good affection, which
he had to serve God. Death, therefore, serves for a restimonie to a precedent
life. For, if the Pilot be not worthy of his commendation, before he has
brought his ship secure into the Port; what reputation can we hold a man in
before the hour of his death? He is his own Pilot amongst the storms, and
waves of this life: as long as here he soiournes, he is in danger to perish.
The Captain receives not his triumphaunt Crown, before the victory be
won; the Soldier lays not aside his Arms, nor has his due recompense,
before the overthrow of the enemy. The conclusion is, that death is the full
and entire payment of the faithful man's wages; it is the sum of his reward,
and his final Quietus est. Let us also consider what Job says, Job 29.
That the blessing of the dead came upon him: for, though ISAAC blessed his
children dying, and JACOB also blessed the Patriarchs, these benedictions can
not be referred to any further matter, but to that, which the benedicents
considered in those, who^ they blessed, or to their fatherly affection. But
here we neither see the one, nor the other, more then the privilege only of
death; the benediction of him who dies, being of such efficacy, as the holy
Prophet desired to be made partaker thereof. Let us meditate, and consider well
on this verse, to the end, that when we see the poor man die, we may assist
him, and every one of us say, the blessing of the dead come upon me. If we see
any body sick, let us not abandon him; if he be forsaken of others, let not
us draw back, but let us remember to desire, that the benedictio^ of the dead
may come upon us. How many men has this short verse procured to be blessed?
How often has it made me blusn, when I forgot the dying, when I visited not
the sick, when I despised the poor, when I have suffered the poor captive to
be oppressed in prison, or when I contemned and neglected the ancient man? Let
this therefore be deeply imprinted in our hearts, for the spurring forward of
the more dull, and for the further encouragement of all those, which are
already in a good course. Let the last words of a dying man resounde in thine
ears: and let his soul, issuing out of his body, carry with it from thee,
this benediction: Deliver him, that is led to die, and who had perished,
without thy succor; to the end thou may then justly say to thy self, The
blessing of the dead light upon me.

CHAP. 9. That the soul perishes not together with the body.
WHo can then make any doubt, but that death is good? seeing that which
troubles us, that makes us ashamed, that is our enemy, that which is
violent, tempestuous, alluring to all vices, remains then unprofitable for
the earth, and as it were enclosed in an iron cage, that is, in the grave. On
the contrary; Virtue, Science, Honor, Justice, and Piety, fly up to heaven;
the soul continues with immortal goodness, being conjoined and dwelling in
him, Act 17.
from whom she had her being, as one said very well; that we are his line and
progeny. For ye rest, it is most certain, that the soul dies not with the
body: for it is not of the body, as the Scripture proves, by diverse reasons.
Genesis 2.
Adam received from our Lord God the spirit of life, and was made a living
soul. And David said, Psalm. 116.
My soul, return to thy rest: because the Lord has done good unto thee. But
wherein? He has (said he) delivered my feet from destruction. Thou see, how
he rejoices to be assured of this death, wherein all error takes end, and
where sin, and not nature fails. Afterward being stripped, and at full
liberty, as it were, he adds: I will please the Lord in the land of the
living. Heaven is the land of the living, where fowls have repose, and where
sins enter not, but where virtues have their true force and vigor. But, the
world is a region full of the dead, because it is replenished with sin: and
in all reason it was well said: Mat. 8.
Let the dead bury the dead. It is said in another Psalm, Psalm. 23.
His soul shall lodge amidst riches, and his seed shall have the earth to
their inheritance: which is to say; His soul, that fears God, shall be
placed in the midst of riches and wealth, so as it shall remain near, and
amidst the same. This may also be understood of him, that lives in the body,
who inhabiteth in the midst of riches, conuerseth in celestial places, if he
fear God, possesses his body, and the sovereignty thereof, having brought it
into servitude, briefly, he enioyes the inheritance of glory, and the promises
of salvation. If we would therefore be placed amidst wealth and riches, after
the death of this body, let us take heed, that our soul be not co^bined,
mingled, nor united to this body; for fear it draw her out of the right way,
and make her stagger to fall like a dru^ken man, being disturbed by the
illusions of the same: let her defy it, and the recreations thereof, that she
may not be ouer-ruled by the external senses. For the eye may run into
error, and be fondly deceived, by reason this member may be mistaken: ye like
may fall out, to hearing, and taste. In sum, it is not in vain, that the
wise man says unto us: Let thine eyes behold that which is right, Prou. 4.
let not thy tongue utter perverse things; whereof we should not be admonished,
were it not, that the senses erred very often. If thou have beheld a shameless
woman, and have been taken in her looks, or have lusted after her, as she was
fair: thine eyes have looked astray, they have seen pernicious things, and
have reported that, unto thee, which they ought not to have done: For, if they
had beheld as they should, they would have discovered the villainous desires of
this impudent woman, her detestable impudency, her shameless immodestie, her
stinking ordures, her infamous villainy, the wounds of the soul, and the
scarres of the conscience. He has committed adultery with a woman in his
heart, whom he beheld at any time, to desire her. Thou see that such an one
sought after deceit, in desiring the Adultresse, and not truth; because he
desired to see, to covet, and not to understand truth. The eye therefore
looks astray, when the affection leaves the true path, the which deceiues, as
the eye also does: and therefore it was said unto thee; Be not taken, that
is, Let not thy soul be taken by thine eyes; for a woman takes the precious
souls of men. Prou. 6.
The hearing also deceives, and by speech alluding unto wantonness, has often
seduced, abused, and cousined evil instructed youth. Let us therefore defy
these traps and snares, which deceive, and surprise: for hearts are tempted,
and thoughts entangled by the senses. In stead of following these allurements,
let us adhere to that which is good, and prosecute it. For, the presence, and
communication thereof, makes us the better, this company gives tincture and
gloss unto our manners: for, he which cleaves to good, draws good therefrom.
The soul that cleaues to the invisible, and immortal good, which is God,
flying, and abandoning frail, earthly, and mortal things, becomes like unto
the good, which she desires, wherein she lives, and finds true nourishment; and
so leaning to that immortal, she is no more mortal. The sinful soul dies; not
because she turns to nothing, but in that she dies to God, and lives to sin. On
the contrary, the soul which works not iniquity, dies not at all; for she
remains still in her first substance, and afterward, in her full perfection
and glory. How can the substance thereof perish, seeing it is the soul that
gives life? he that receives the soul, receives life; and when the soul
departs, life flies away. The soul therefore, is life: for, how can that die,
which is directly opposite to death? For, as snow cannot receive heat, but
that it presently melts; and light does not receive, but dissipates all
darkness by his claritie; as at the approach of heat, the ice turns to
water: even so the soul, which creates life, cannot receive death, nor any
ways die.

CHAP. 10. Testimonies of Scripture, to prove, that the soul dies not with
the body, but remains immortal.
TO the reasons before deduced, let us add that which ye Lord says, I have
power to leave my soul, and to take it again. You see therefore, that it
perishes not with the body; seeing he might leave in, and take it again,
after he had reco^mended it into the hands of God the Father. But, because thou
shall not reply, that Christ had this particular power; although we might
answer thee, that he was like unto us: yet hearken what he says, to exhort
us, not to linger out the time at length: Luke 13.
What know thou, whether this night thy soul may be demanded of thee? Said
he, thy soul shall die this night within thee? No, but it shall be
redemaunded. That is redemaunded which remains, and not that which perishes:
for, how should ye soul perish? of which the wisdom of God says, Mat. 10.
Fear not those that can kill the body; and cannot kill the soul: Of which the
Prophet speaks: Psalm. 119
My soul is always in thine hands: always, says he, and not at certain
times only. As for thee, commend thy soul to the Lord, not only at the
departure thereof, out of thy body, but also as long as it there inhabiteth:
for, it is the Lord which keeps it, and thou know not from whence it
comes, nor whither it goes. Thy soul is in thee, and with God also. Behold,
here under set down, more ample and express testimonies, of the souls
immortality.

CHAP. 11. Of the joys of souls after this life.
FOr the ioies of faithful souls, we must consider it, according to certain
degrees. First, they shall be victorious over sin, and warranted from all the
allurements of the flesh. Secondly, they shall enjoy the reward of their
fidelity, and of the preservation of their innocence, without having bin
defiled with errors, and perturbatio^s, as wicked souls are, nor tormented
with the remembrance of their vices, or surcharged with boiling apprehe^sio^s.
Thirdly, they rest in this testimony, that they pleased God; to whose will,
they have so applied themselves, as they need not be doubtful, or fear ye last
judgment. Fourthly, they then begin to know their repose, and to foresee
their greater glory in the last resurrection: and so, being fed with this
consolation, they peaceably rest in their mansions, being environed with an
infinite number of Angels. Fifthly, they participate of an inexplicable joy and
delight, in that they are freed out of the prison of this corruptible body,
Apoc. 14.
to enter into the kingdom of light, and liberty, where they enjoy the
inheritance, that was promised them. There is an order of rest, as there is an
order of resurrection: and as all die in Adam, so shall all be quickened in
Christ, 1. Cor. 15.
says the Apostle: every one in his rank; the first fruits, that is Christ;
afterward, those that are of Christ, shall be quickened by his coming, and
then comes the end. There shall be then diverse orders of brightness and
glory, as there have been servants, some more excellent, than othersome.
Sixthly, the faithful shall perceive a light splendor to enuiron them, making
them to shine, like the Sun, and resembling the stars: but so
notwithstanding, as this brightness, shall not be subject to change; or
decline. Seventhly, they shall rejoice in their security, and be secure
instantly, they shall be merry without fear, having no other desire but to
behold his face, to whom they have submitted themselves out of a frank and
free will; and calling to mind the grace, whereof he has made the^ partakers,
which is to hate sin, and be wholly dedicated to his service, they shall
receive the glorious guerdon of their easy travels, and then perceive, that
all ye sufferings of the world are not worthy, in any sort, to be recompensed
with such a glory in heaven. Behold ye repose of souls, and the beginning of
their glory to come, before that in their eternal habitations, they shall
perfectly enjoy this unspeakable happiness, the which they must have all
together, in the day of the bodies resurction.

CHAP. 12. Of the happiness of the eternal kingdom, and how we should
endeavor to come therinto.
BEing thus defensed with authenticke testimonials out of the word of God, let
us courageously march, toward the Lord Jesus Christ our Savior, toward the
assembly of the Patriarchs, and Abraham our Father; and when this day is come,
let us chearefully advance forward, to the company of the Saints and
righteous. For, we shall go to meet our Fathers, the instructours of our
life: and though we be naked, and destitute of good works, faith will assist
us, and our promised inheritance will be our warrant: we shall go to the place,
where Abraham has his bosom open, to receive the poor, as he received
Lazarus, and where all they have rest, that were afflicted in this world. Oh
most heavenly Father, I beseech thee, extend forth thy hands, to embrace the
poor, expatiate thy lap, enlarge thy bosom to receive the great number of
believers. It is true, that iniquity abounds, and charity waxes cold, though
the faith has taken good increase: we shall then go to meet them, that sit
at the table with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, in the kingdom of God; and with
those, who being called to the banquet, sought not to excuse themselves. We
shall go to the Paradise of true delights, where Adam (who was once so evil
entreated by spiritual thieves) cease his lamentations, for the wounds he
had received: and the thief himself there reioiceth, because of his
entertainment into the celestial kingdom: there are no clouds, there are no
thunders, no lightnings, whirle-winds, nor darknesses; the seasons there change
not their course; frost, hail, rain, the Sun, the Moon, and the stars, are
not there in use. There shall be no other brightness, but that of the
everliving Lord, who will be a light to all: and this true light, which
illuminates all men, shall shine unto all the happy for ever. We shall all go
to those habitations, that the Lord Jesus has prepared for his humble
servants, to the end we may be where he is. Seeing his pleasure is, it should
be so: Attend, what manner of dwelling places these are. John 14.
In my Fathers house there are many mansions, says he: when at his good
pleasure he declares that which follows: I will come, and take you to my
self, that where I am, you may be also. But thou will peradventure allege that
he spoke this only to his disciples, and that he made this promise only to
them. Did he then prepare many habitations, only for eleven persons? Mat. 8.
Why said he in another place, that there should come, out of all quarters of
the world, those that should sit in the kingdom of God? Do we doubt of the
performance of his divine will? The will, and deed of our Savior, are all
one. Besides, he points out the way, and deciphers the place, saying, You
perceive whither I go, and know the way. The place is in heaven, with the
Father; Christ is the way, as he himself says: I am the Way, the Truth, and
the Life; John 14.
none can come to the Father, but by me. Let us therefore enter into this Way,
embrace this Truth, and follow this Life. This is the Way, which guides us;
the Truth, that confirms us; and the Life is given us. And to the end we might
be resolved of his bountious and frank will, he afterward adds: Father, my
desire is, that those whom thou have given me, may be there where I am, with
me, John 17.
to the end they may see my glory. O, Lord JESUS, we follow thee; but, call
thou us, that we may march the more cheerfully: for, no man can advance
forward, without thee; thou being the Way, the Truth, the Life, the
Possibility, the Faith, the Reward. Receive us, seeing thou art the Way;
confirm, and quicken us, seeing thou art the Truth, and the Life. Manifest
unto us, that happiness, which David desired to see, when he should dwell in
the house of the Lord. There is also treasure, without sin, where eternal
life is. He says in another place, Psalm. 27.
We shall be replenished with the riches of thy house: Discover therefore unto
us, O Lord, Psalm. 63.
this true happiness, which imparts unto us, true life, true being, and
sanctified motion. We have motion in the way, and being in eternal life. Cause
us to see that felicity, which is always like to himself, indissoluble,
immutable, in whom we are eternal, in whom we know all good; in whom there
is entire and perfect rest, immortal life, perpetual grace, holy inheritance
for the soul, and a secure tranquillity, not being subject unto death, but
absolved and freed from the same, without tears or lamentations. For wherefore
should any one there lament, seeing no body there offends either God, his
neighbor, or himself? Briefly, it is in this land of the living, where the
Saints are delivered from all error, from care, from ignorance, from folly,
from pride, from fears, from perturbations, covetous desires, passions; and
lastly, from all other co^tamination. Seeing the land of the living is in
heaven, we must account this world, the Region of the dead: the which is most
true, seeing there are the shadow, the body, and the gates of death.
Notwithstanding, if the righteous man govern himself according to the will of
God, to do the same, he shall live, and then come to the Region of the living,
where life is not confined, but free; where, in stead of shadow, there is
glory. S. Paul, being in this world, was not yet in glory: he mourned in this
body of death, and said, that our life was laid up with Christ, in God, Romans 1.
but when Christ our life should appear, we should also appear with him in
glory. Let us therefore chearefully advance forward toward the way. He that
enters into the true way, Coloss. 3.
shall live. We have testimony thereof, Luke 1.
in the woman, which touched but the hem of Christ his garment, and she was
delivered from death, as he said unto her, Thy faith has saved thee, go away
in peace. For, if he that touched a dead man, was defiled, he that touches
the living, shall certainly be quickened. Let us therefore seek after the
Lord of life. But so we must be careful, not to search after him, amongst the
dead, lest it be said unto us, as it was unto the women: Why seek you him
living, amongst the dead? he is not here, but risen up: The Lord himself
shows, where it is, that he would have us seek for him, saying: Go unto my
brethren, and tell them, I ascend up to my Father, and your Father; to my God,
and your God. John 20.
Let us inquire for him, where John his disciple enquired for him, and found
him out; that is to say, living with his Father, from the beginning, and being
his eternal Son. We must seek him out, in these last times, embracing his
feet, and worsnipping him; that so, he may vouchsafe to say unto us, Fear not:
which importes thus much: Fear not the sins of this age, nor the worlds
iniquities, or the furious waves of carnal passions; for I am the remission of
sins: fear not darkness, I am the Light: fear not death, I am the Life.
Whosoever comes to me, shall never see death. As the plenitude and fullness
of all Deity is in him: so, to him be ascribed all honor, glory, and
immortality, for ever, and ever. Amen.

Certain places, and sentences of the holy Scriptures, concerning Life, and
Death.
The rule, and scope of our life.
SEek first ye kingdom of God, and the righteousness thereof, and then all
things shall be administered unto you. Mat. 6.33.

Al things which you would men should do unto you, do unto them again: for
this is the Law and the Prophets. Mat. 7.12. Luke 6.37.

Eternal life promised to those that observe the commandments of God.
Observe my laws and judgments: the which if a man keep, he shall live by
them, says the Lord. Leuit. 18.5.

Keep my commandments, and my law, as the apple of thine eye, and thou shall
live. Prou. 7.3.

I have given them my commandments, and showed them my judgments; the which,
if a man perform, he shall live by them. Ezech. 20.11.

If thou would enter into life, keep my commandments. Mat. 19.

Good Master, what might I do, to obtain eternal life? Jesus answered, thou
know the commandments: do that and thou shall live. Mark 10.17. Luke
10.28. and 18.18.

The Law is not of faith: but the man that does these things shall live by the
same. Galat. 3.12.

That we cannot fulfill the commandments of God, and consequently not obtain
eternal life by the Law: but contrariwise, we lose life by transgressing the
Law.
WE knowing that a man is not justified by the works of the Law, but by faith
in Jesus Christ: we also believed in Jesus Christ, to the end that we might
be justified by faith in Christ, and not by the works of the Law: because no
flesh shall be justified, by the works of the Law. Galat. 2.16.

All those that depend on the works of the Law, are under the curse: for it
is writtten, Accursed be he that continues not in all those things, which are
written in the book of the Law, to perform them. Galat. 3.10.

Enter not into judgment with thy servant: for no living man shall be
justified in thy presence. Psalm. 143.

There is no man, but he sins. 1. King. 46.

The children of God say always: Forgive us our sins. Math. 6.11.

The reward of sin, is death. Romans 6.23.

Eternal life, which we lose by our corruption and transgression, is restored
again unto us by Jesus Christ.
THe gift of God is eternal life, by Jesus Christ our Lord. Romans 6.23.

At the same time, when we were dead in sin, he revived us together by
Christ, by whose grace you are saved. Ephe. 2.5.

The determination, and grace of God, is manifested unto us, by the apparition
of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has destroyed death, and brought to light, life
and immortalititie, by the Gospel. 2. Timot. 1.10.

In this the love of God appeared unto us, when he sent his only Son into
the world, to the end we might live by him. 1. John 4.9.

And this man is witness, that God has given us eternal life, and this life
is in his Son. 1. John 5.11.

To whom eternal life is given.
GOd so loved the world, as he gave his only begotten Son, that no man which
believes in him, might perish, but have everlasting life. He that believes in
the Son, has eternal life: but he that believes not in the Son, shall not see
life, but the wrath of GOD shall remain upon him. John 3.15, 36.

Verily, verily I say unto you, whosoever hears my words, and believes in
him that sent me, he has eternal life, and shall not come into condemnation,
but pass from death to life. This is the will of my Father, which sent me,
That whosoever sees the Son, and believes in him, he may have eternal life,
and I will raise him up at the last day. Verily, verily, I say unto you, he
that believes in me has eternal life. John 5.24. and 6.40, 47.

Jesus said, I am the resurrection, and the life: he that believes in me,
although he be dead, shall live. John 11.25.

These things are written, that you may believe, that Jesus Christ is the Son
of God, and that in believing you may have life in his Name. John 20.31.

God shall give to every one according to his works; which is to say, to those
that with patience in well-doing, seek glory, honor, and immortality,
eternal life. Romans 2.6, 7.

Being now delivered from sin, and made the servants of God, you have your
fruit in sanctification, and for your end eternal life. Romans 6.22.

If we be children, we are also heirs: heirs, I say, to God, and coheirs with
Jesus Christ; that is to say, if we suffer with him, that with him we may
also be glorified. Romans 8.17.

Seek peace with all men, and holiness; without which none can see the Lord.
Hebr. 12.14.

The excellency of eternal life.
WHen the account is cast: I think the sufferances of this present time, no
ways equivalent to the glory to come, which shall be revealed in us. Romans 8.18.

The things which the eye has not seen, the ear heard, and that never entered
into the heart of man, are those which God has prepared for those that love
him. 1. Cor. 2.9.

This present life is limited.
THe days of a man are short: the number of his months remain with thee:
thou have set down limits, which he must not exceed. Ioh 14.5.

The shortness, and vanity of the same.
WE are strangers and forreiners before thee, as our Fathers were, our days
are as the shadow upon the earth, and there is no mention of them. 1. Chron.
29.15.

Man, borne of a woman, is but of little continuance, and those few days are
replenished with trouble and sorrow: he comes out like a flower, and is
gathered up, he flies away like a shadow, and stays not: Are not his days
set down? Job 14.1, 2, 5.

Thou have assigned my days, the measure of an hand-breadth; and my life time
is before thee, as nothing, in effect: there is nothing but vanity, with every
man that lives. As soon as thou chastisest a man, reprehending him for his
iniquity, thou consumest all his excellency like a moth, so slight a thing is
every man. Psalm. 39.12.

The sons of men are nothing, they are but the liars of great Princes: so
that if they were all put together in a balance, they would be found lighter
than vanity it self. Psalm. 62.10. The days of our life, are threescore and
ten years; and of those that live longest, but fourscore: and yet the best of
them are but affliction and misery, they soon pass hence, and we our selves
fly away swiftly. Psalm. 90.10. The days of a man are like the grass, and
flourish like the flower of the field. Psalm. 103.13. Man is like to nothing,
his days are as the shadow, which vanishes away. Psalm. 144.4. See thorowout
all Salomons Ecclesiastes.

All flesh is grass, and all the glory thereof, is as the flower of the field,
Isa. 40.6.

I tell you this, my brethren, that the time is short. 1. Cor. 7.29.

What is this your life? it is certainly but a vapor, which appears for a
while, and then vanishes away. James 4.14.

The end of man's life.
WHether you eat, or drink, or whatsoever you do, do it al to the glory of
God. 1. Cor. 10.31.

The first death, which is the separation of the soul from the body; and the
second, which is eternal death, proceed from sin.
THe day wherein thou eatest of the fruit of the Tree of knowledge of good and
evil, thou shall die the death. Genesis 2.17.

As by one man sin entered into the world, and by sin death: so death came
upon all men, because al men sinned. Romans 5.12.

The first death is common to all.
IT is ordained that all shall once die, and after that comes Judgment. Heb.
9.27.

The Children of God ought to fear death.
Fear not those that can slay the body, and not kill the soul. Math. 10.28.

He that loves his life, shall lose it: and whosoever hates this world, he
shall find it in eternal life. John 12.25.

We know when our terrestrial lodging is defaced, we have a dwelling place in
God, an house not made with hands; but eternal, which is in heaven. 2.
Corint. 5.1.

I am enclosed on the one side, and the other; desiring to be dissolved, and to
be with Christ: the which were much better for me. Phil. 1.23.

Death destroyed by Jesus Christ.
Jesus Christ has destroyed Death, and brought to light, Life, and
immortality, by the Gospel. 2. Tim. 1.10.

Death is swallowed up in victory. 1. Cor. 15.54.

Who sits at the right hand of God, having swallowed up death, that we might be
made partakers af eternal life. 1. Pet. 3.22.

What opinion we should hold of the dead.
Happy are those, that die in the Lord: yea, says ye holy Ghost, for they
rest from their labors, and their works follow them. Apo. 14.3.

We must not mourn for the dead, as profane persons do.
ALso my brethren, I would not have you ignorant, concerning those which sleep,
to the end you may not be sorrowful, as others are, that have no hope. 1.
These. 4.13.

Their souls, which die in the Lord, are received into rest and glory, in
heaven.
ANd it happened that Lazarus died, and was borne by the Angels into Abraham's
bosom. Job 16.22.

Verily, verily, I say unto thee, thou shall be this day with me in Paradise:
Lue. 23.43. They stoned Steven, who cried out, and said; Lord Jesus receive my
spirit. Acts. 7.59. We know, when the earthly habitation of this our body, is
destroyed, we have a building in God; which is to say, an eternal ma^sion in
heaven, which is not made with hands. 2. Cor. 5.1.

I am enclosed on all sides, my soul longing to remove, and be with Christ:
which would be far better for me. Philip. 1.23.

The Soul of man is immortal.
LEt dust return to the earth from whence it was taken, and let the soul
mount up unto God, who gave it. Eccles. 12.7.

Fear not those, that kill the body, and cannot kill the soul: but fear
him, that can send both body, and soul, into hell fire. Math. 10.28.

I am the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob: God is not the God of the dead, but
of the living. Math. 22.32.

He that believes in me, though he were dead, yet shall he live. John 11.25.

Testimonies of the Resurrection of the body.
I Know my Redemer lives, and that in the last day, he will take me out of
the earth, and I shall be clad again with my skin, and thou my flesh shall
see God: Job 19.25, 26.

Many of those that sleep, in the dust of the earth shall awake; some to
eternal life, and others to perpetual shame. Daniel, 12.2.

As concerning the resurrection of the dead, have you not read, what God said
unto you, I am the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob? He
is not the God of the dead, but of the living. Matthew. 23.31, 32.

The day comes, wherein all those that are in the graves, shall hear the voice
of the Son of God. John 5.28.

Martha said unto him, I know that he shall rise again in the last day. Ioh.
11.24.

If we preach, that Christ is raised from the dead, how do some amongst you
say, that there is no resurrection of the dead? 1. Cor. 15.12. Look over all
that Chapter.

What shall come to pass after the resurrection of the body, in the last day.
When this corruptible shall have put on incorruption, and this mortal,
immortality, then shall those words which are written, be fulfilled, Death is
swallowed up in victory, 1. Cor. 15.54.

They which are dead in Christ, shall first rise: and afterward those that
live, and remain, shall be taken up together with them into the clouds,
before the Lord, in the air: and so we shall be always with the Lord. 1.
These. 4.16, 17.

When the Son of man shall come in glory, and all the holy Angels with him,
then shall he sit upon his throne of glory. And all the nations shall be
assembled before him, and he shall separate the one from the other, as the
sheepherd does distinguish the sheep from the goats: and he will set the
sheep on his right hand, and the goats on the left. Then shall the heavenly
king say unto those, on his right hand; Come, you blessed of my Father,
inherit that kingdom, which was prepared for you, before the beginning of the
world. To them then on the left hand he will say: Go, you accursed, depart
from me into everlasting fire, which is prepared for the devil, and his
angels. And so they shall go into eternal torments; but the Just shall be
taken into eternal life. Matthew. 23.31, etc.

Prayers, and Meditations concerning Life and Death.
Meditation 1.
THE life of a Christian man should be employed, in the consideration of those
things, which here-vnder ensue, to put them in practice: that is to say,
oftentimes to remember the benefits he has received from GOD, to thank him,
with his heart, and mouth, incessantly for the same; to love him, who is bou^tie
and goodness it self; to fear, and worship him, seeing he is almighty, and
wise; and so by ye love which they bear unto God, to be also excited to the
love of their neighbors. The love of God withdraws us, from the love of
corruptible things, raises us up to heaven, and enflames our hearts, with
holiness of life. The love of our neighbor holds us back from all prejudice,
either in will or deed, and excites us to integrity, and benificence.

Another.
LEt us often think on that, which we are. The soul is our principal part,
which is endowed with understanding, reason, and judgment, to know the chief
good which is in God, to love, adhere, and be united unto him, to be partakers
of his immortallitie, and happiness: But we contemn this Sovereign good, to
grouell on the earth, and to slampe into the ditch of carnal desires, applying
the vigor and force of our understanding and judgments to things which are not
worthy of the pains we take about them: We bury our selves alive, if we
may so say; of celestial, we become terrestrial; and of men created for
eternal life, we endeavor, as much as in us lies, to be like to the brute
beasts themselves. And yet our most merciful and good God forsakes us not,
for all this, notwithstanding that our ingratitude deserve as much, but by his
word, in the mean while, he graciously calls us, and presents us with
infinite testimonies of his loving favor; daily he continues the fame, he
supporteth us, he exhorts, he counsels, advises, and fatherly chastises
us: and yet, for all this, we remain blind, deaf, and stupide, contemning
these graces; either in not using them, as we should, or else in abusing of
them. And, which is worse, we love vain and transitory things better, and
are too intentive, and perseuerant in the same. God reaches forth his hand to
conduct us: but we draw back our own, and fly away, when he calls us. If
he bring us into the way of salvation, we mourn for the world, we look
behind us, we defer, and procrastinate our desire of well doing. We must
therefore rouse up our selves, and not remain still in the mire: we must be
fortified in his virtue, and power, who supports and co^forts us: let us a
little attempt to despise corruptible things, and to desire those truly good,
and eternal: when God calls us, we must hearken to him: if he be our guide
we must follow him, for to arrive in his house: Let us receive his benefits,
and himself too, for he gives himself unto us, in the person of his Son: he
causes us to see the means, how to come into heaven: we must therefore
require of him, that he will vouchsafe to bestow upon us, will, and desire to
come thither, by faith, repentance, hope, and charirie, and to maintain his
gifts and graces in us, to the end, that we may mourn in this mortal life,
and attend, in the assurance of his mercy, for the end of this world and our
last day, which shall be the beginning of our true life.

A Meditation, and a Prayer.
HOw great are the delusions, and impostures, of the enemy of our salvation?
He shows us vain and ridiculous things, afar of, and persuades us, that
all is magnificence, and happiness: he terrifies us, with such things as we
should not be afraid of: and makes us fly that, which we should embrace. He
calls, summons, allures, and flatters us, by the interposition of our
concupiscences: if this be not enough, he stormeth, and rages, endeavoring
to terrify us both within and without. O eternal light, and truth, Oh
heavenly Lord, and most merciful Father, scatter and dissipate these clouds
of ignorance and error, illuminate our understandings, and permit us not to
approach unto that, which thou comma^dest us to fly, which is pernicious and
hurtful to us; that we may desire nothing but that which is truly to be
desired: that is to say, thy self, who art the source, and spring of all
goodness, and of our life and eternal felicity. All flesh is grass, and the
glory of a man is as the flower of the field: procure then, that we may seek
for our stay and co^tentment in ye grace, which thy Son brought unto us, that
our life may be enclosed in him; so that in the day of separation of our
souls from their bodies, we may absolutely find it again in heaven, in
expecting cheerfully, and with assured joy, the most happy resurrection of
this flesh: wherein all corruption, infirmity, and reproach being abolished,
and death it self swallowed up in victory, we may live eternally with thee, in
an inco^prehensible felicity, wherewith thou shall be glorified. Maintain
therefore thy children, good Lord, in this faith and hope, acco^plishing in
them thy work till they entirely be with thy self, to enjoy the inheritance,
and glory, which thy only Son purchased for them, by his merits: Amen.

A Prayer.
O Lord Jesus Christ, creator, and redeemer of mankind, who did say, I am the
Way, the Truth, and the Life: I beseech thee, by that unspeakable charity,
which thou shewedst in offering thy self up to death for us, that thou will
not permit me, to swerve a whit, from thee, that art the Way, or to distrust in
thy promises, seeing thou art Truth, and performest whatsoever thou do
promise. Make me to take delight only in thee, who art eternal Life; without
who^ there is nothing worthy to be desired, either in heaven, or earth. Thou
have taught us the true, and only way to salvation, that we might not go
wandering up and down in the bypath of this world; revealing unto us, more
clearly than the Sun at noon days, what we ought to believe, perform, and
hope after, and wherein we should rest satisfied, and contented: It is thou,
that made us to understand, how unhappy we were in Adam, and that there is no
means to escape the perdition, wherein we are altogether plunged, but by
faith in thee. Thou art that resplendent light, which appearest unto those,
that travel through the desert of this life; and who, having delivered us out
of the darkness of spiritual Aegypt^ do disperse the clouds of our
understanding, and enlightenest us, that we may contend after the promised
inheritance, which is eternal life: into the which the unfaithful shall never
enter; but those, who assuredly rely, on thy holy promises. Oh, what goodness
have thou vouchsafed to send down, from the bosom of thy Father (and his
eternal throne) upon earth, in putting on our beggarly nature, and (of a
Master) to become a servant, that by thy doctrine, thou might chase away the
darkness of our ignorance, prepare, and address our feet, unto the way of
peace, and make plain unto us, the way of salvation: such a way being
appointed us, in following whereof, no man can go astray, or be weary;
seeing thy grace, and power, does accompany us therein, all the days of our
life. And moreover by the comfort of thy holy Spirit, thou do strengthen us,
and redouble our courage in passing the same. Thy word is the bread,
wherewith we are nourished, and thy promise is the staff whereon we lean. Thou
thy self, by a secret, and incomprehensible power, do conduct, and maintain
us therein, after an admirable manner, that we might the more courageously march
toward thee both in foul and fair weather. And as thou hindrest and
preseruest us, from falling into the snares of the world and Satan: even so,
in that thou art the truth it self, thou remouest far from us all doubts,
scruples, and distrusts, that might any ways disturb, arrest, or divert us,
during this our course: Thou make us to discern the end and scope of
heavenly vocation, the worlds misery, and vanity, the fragilitie of this
present life, the gate of death, and the happy and blessed life, which is
within the same. And as thou art this true life, even in this world, thou
do quicken us by thy truth, that are poor miserable dead wretches in sin.
Thou augmentest this life by the ministry, and efficacy of thy holy Gospel,
and confirmest it by the use of the Sacraments, which thou have ordained for
the fortification of thy childrens faith, while our corruption, and that which
is mortal in us, being defaced, by the resurrection, we may exist, and live
eternally with thee in body and soul, then, when thou shall be all in all.
Eternal life is to know the true God, and thee his Son, who was sent unto
us. Now we behold thee by faith, as in a mirror, obscurely; but one day, we
shall see thee face to face, to be tra^sform'd into thy glory, and wholly
reformed according to thine own image. I beseech thee, most merciful Savior,
that thou will increase my faith, that I may be so well grounded in the
doctrine of my salvation, as nothing may be able to misleade me: augment, in
mine heart, the reverence which I owe unto thee, that I may never swerve from
thy obedience: strengthen me, in such a sort, that neither allureme^ts, nor
threatenings, either catch, or astonish me, but that I may adhere constantly to
thee (who art my life) even unto death. Procure, that in the power of thy
promises, and holy spirit, I may be heated, more and more, in thy love; and so
leaving behind the things of this world, I may bend my self, to that which is
solid, and perfect. Increase thy grace in me, that from day to day I may die
in my self, to be revived, and conducted by thy favor; fearing none, but
thee, O most mighty and puissaunt God; loving none but thee, even as there is
nothing truly amiable but thy glorious self; boasting in nothing but thy
grace and mercy, which is that whereof only thy servants should glory, they
seeking after none other happiness but thee, nor desiring nothing but thy
self, who art the full and perfect felicity of all the faithful: Amen.

Another.
LOrd Jesus, that art always merciful, and ceasest not to be my Savior, as
well in adversity, as prosperity; grant me the grace, to rest satisfied
with all humble obedience, in thy will, whensoever it shall please thee, to mix
some sower, amongst so much sweet, as thou have caused me to taste, in living
under thy protection. Thou art admirable, graciously good, in time of
affliction, in that by such means, thou healest our spiritual maladies; and
visiting us, thus, in this world, thou framest us to meditate on a better life,
thou thy self having showed us a lively example thereof. It is true, that I
find it hard to digest; but thou were brought to another manner of condition,
when to redeem me from hell, thou did descend thither, and for the
reconciling me to thy heavenly Father, did undergo his curse. By reason
of my sins, I have so many times deserved hell, and everlasting fire, and
thou deliueredst me, I being secure, that I have a part in thy merit, and
obedience, and that I am one of thy coheires, to reign one day with thee in
thy kingdom, and even at this present, in the midst of all afflictions, to
be seated nevertheless in heavenly places. Having therefore my part in so many
felicities, why should I grudge, to suffer a little time, by means whereof,
thou meanest to awake, improoue, and draw me nearer to thee? But, seeing thou
know me better than I know my self: if thou please to make some trial of
me, grant me necessary power, and patience, to glorify thee, converting all
the evil which may occur unto me to my good and salvation. And, if in
graciously supporting my debilitie, thy benignity do vouchsafe to advertise
me, by some light affliction, effect that this thy clemency, may draw me,
more and more to love and honor thee, to give thee thanks for the care thou
have of thy poor humble servant: and by this means, dispose me to attend, and
expect thee in death, that after the same I may find that life, which I
obtained by thy death, and there be made partaker with thee, of perpetual
joy, and rest for evermore: Amen.

Another.
O Lord God, heavenly Father, when I consider how many ways I have offended
before thy presence, and high Majesty, I abhor my self: in thinking how
many times I have forsaken thee, my favorable and gentle Father, I detest my
ingratitude, when I see, into what servitude of sin, I have too often thrown
my self headlong down, selling (as far as in me lay) the precious
liberty, which thy Son purchased for me; I condemn my folly, I absolutely
discover my self, I see nothing but death and malediction hang over my head,
my conscience rising up against me, for a judge and testimony of mine
iniquities: But, when I behold, on the other side, thy infinite mercy, which
surmounteth al thy other works, and wherein (if I may dare so to speak) thou
exceedest thy self; my soul is then somewhat comforted. And, indeed, why
should I doubt to find grace in his sight, that so often, and gently calls,
and summoneth sinners to repentance; expressly protesting, that he desires not
the death of a sinner, but that he should be converted and live? Moreover,
thy only Son, has so assured us, that we shall find grace in thy
presence, by the goodly parables, which he himself propounded; as of the mite,
of the lost sheep, and of the prodigal child, whose lively image I
acknowledge to be in my self: as, I should be ingrate, incredulous, and very
wicked, to recoyle, and be ashamed of thy presence, though I be never so
miserable, seeing that thou put forth thine hand, with so merciful an
affection, to draw me to thee. O loving Father, I have faintly forsaken thee,
I have scattered thy graces most unhappily, in cleaving to the desires of my
flesh, and swaruing from thy obedience, I have entangled my self in the base
servitude of sin, I am fallen into extreme misery, I know not whither to
retire, but to thee, whom I have forsaken. Let thy mercy receive thy poor
suppliaunt; whom, during his error, thou did support. I am unworthy to lift
up mine eyes to thee, or to call thee Father: but, I humbly beseech thee, abase
thine eyes, to look down upon me, seeing thy pleasure is so, and that
otherwise I must needs fall into the power of thine enemies. The regard of thy
countenance will quicken, and lead me toward thee: I already feel some
effect thereof: seeing in some sort, I plainly discover my self, I know thou
do behold me: thou gave me eyes to discern the dangers wherein I
stood, thou did seek and find me out in the world, and death, and out of
thy mercy have granted my desire, to enter into thine house. I dare not
require, that thou should embrace or kiss me, or that thou should weep
for joy, in having found out thy poor servant, and slave: I look not for those
precious ornaments, wherewith thou honor thy greatest servant, and best
affected children: it suffices me, to be in the troop of the least in thine
house, amongst the greatest sinners, that have obtained pardon of thee, and
that are vouchsafed some retiring place in thy heavenly palace, where there are
so many several habitations. And that even in thy house, I may be as the least
that pleases thee, so thou do but auow me, thine own, for ever. O merciful
Father, I beseech thee, for the love of thy best beloved Son, my only
Savior, to vouchsafe me thy holy Spirit, for the cleansing of my heart, and
strengthening of me, after such a sort, that I may always remain in thine
house, there to serve thee in righeousnesse, and holiness, all the days of my
life: Amen.

Another.
WHat do we in this world, but heap sin upon sin? So as the present day
is ever somewhat worse than the day before, and we never cease to draw upon us
thy wrath and indignation: But, when we shall be out of this world, in thine
inheritance, we shall be wholly assured of perfect and eternal felicity;
the miseries of the body being laid apart, and the vices, and contaminatio^s
of the soul, quight annihilated. O heavenly Father, increase in us thy faith,
that we may cast no doubt of things so infallible: Imprint thy grace and love
in our hearts, for the raising up, and fortifying of us in thy fear. And,
because thou have seated us in this world, there to remain so long as
pleases thee, without manifesting unto us the day of our departure, which is
only known to thy self, I beseech thee take me from hence, when thou see
the fit time come; and then to vouchsafe me this favor, that I may willingly
acknowledge the same, and in the mean while, that I may dispose of my self,
as thou have ordained in thy most holy word: Amen.

Another.
THis body is the souls prison, and a prison that is obscure, close, and
uncomfortable: We are as banished men in this world, and our life is but
grief, and misery: But contrariwise, O Lord, it is in thy heavenly kingdom,
where we shall find our liberty, our natural country, and most perfect
contentment. Rowse up our souls by thy Word, to the remembrance, and
apprehension, of such a good: engraue, in our hearts, the desire of goods
eternal, and which only are to be sought after: afford our consciences some
taste of this joy, wherewith the blessed in heaven are fully replenished, that
I may esteem that, which worldlings account so beautiful (and so earnestly
covet, retaining the same with obstinate avarice, and even adoring it with such
mad frenzy) but filth and dyrte. And procure, that I feeling no taste, but in
thy verity and grace, calling continually upon thy Name, I may attend the day
of my true deliverance, by JESUS CHRIST thy Son; to whom, with thee, and the
holy Ghost, be ascribed eternal glory and praise. Amen.

Another.
Lord JESUS, the only saving health of the living, and the eternal life of
those that die, I wholly submit my self to thy will, whether it shall please
thee, yet a little while, to suffer this soul, in my body, to serve thee, or
that thou mindest to take it out of this prison: I being assured, whatsoever
thou will preserve, can not perish. I am content, with a very good heart, that
my body should return to the earth, out of which it was taken, believing in
the last resurrection, which shall make it immortal, incorruptible, and full
of glory. I humbly beseech thee to strengthen my soul against all
temptations, cover me with the buckler of thy mercy, to hold out Satan's
darts. As for me, I am but weakness it self: but yet I will rely on thy
goodness, and power. I can allege nothing good before thee, wherein to
glory: but contrariwise, alas, my sins, in infinite number, accuse and torment
me; but yet do thy merits assure me that I shall be saved. For, I hold
this for most certain, that thou were borne for me, that thou were tempted,
and were obedient to GOD the Father, and that thou have bought and purchased
eternal life for me. Seeing therefore thou have bestowed thy self on me,
with all other thy benefits, suffer not such a donation, to prove void, and
unprofitable. Let thy blood wipe away the corruption of my offenses, and thy
righteousness cover mine iniquities: Let thy merits procure me grace and
favor, before thy heavenly throne. If my sins increase, augment thou also in
me thy grace; that neither Faith, Hope, nor Charity may grow dead, but be
corroborated in me; that the apprehension of Death discourage me not; but
even when this my body shall be, as it were, clean dead, cause the eyes of
my soul to look up unto heaven; and let my heart then feruentlly cry out to
thee, and say, O Lord, I commend my soul into thy hands, accomplish thine
own work, for thou did redeem me: I am thine, by thy Fathers gift; to
whom, with thee, and the holy Spirit, be given all glory and praise. Amen.

FINIS.
AT LONDON Imprinted by H. L, for Matthew Lownes: and are to be sold at his
shop in Paul's Church-yarde, at the sign of the Bishops head. 1607.


