July 6. Numb. 32.

THE CONTINVATION OF OUR WEEKLY Avisoes, since the 30. of the last month to
this present.

Containing amongst the rest these particulars following.

1 The free exercise of the Protestant Religion in Ratisbone, or Reginspurgh. 2
Other Letters written and sent by Henry Earl of Vandenberg; the one to the
Infanta, manifesting his discontent, the other to the the States, Prelates,
Nobility, Gentry, Cities, and Provinces of the Netherlands. 3 A Letter from
Norimberg concerning the King of Sweden his being at Furte with 20000.
experienced Soldiers, intending to meet with Walsteyn in Bohemia. 4 The
passages of the Duke of Saxony, and Walsteyn, or Freedland, before the King of
Sweden came near them. 5 The late accord betwixt the French King, and the D.
of Lorraine. 6 General Pappenheym beaten by the Lands-graue of Hessen. 7 The
great discontent amongst the subjects of the Arch-Dutches, upon the revolt of
the Lords.
LONDON. Printed by I. D. for Nathaniel Butter and Nicolas Bourne. 1632.

The Continuation of our Weekly NEWS.
From Venice the 7. of June, 1632.
FRom Mayland we receive tidings that the Commander and Governor there has
sent Serbellone with his foot-forces against Riva; and Philippo Spinola against
Como, with the horsemen: for fear least the Duke de Rohan should fall into
Italy with the French forces and the Gr^^bunters, or Grisons.

We understand by Letters from Constantinople, that the great tempestuous
broils are somewhat of late appeased. The great Turk forseeing the exstreame
misery and bloodshed which was like to follow, has been the means himself
to still the Commotion; and what by fair speeches, promises, and gifts, has
qualified and quieted the Ianizaries: so that now the state is in a better
plight than formerly; but God knows how long this fair weather will hold, and
how soon a thundering shower may bluster forth.

From Mantua we are certified that Don Camillo Gonzaga is departed thence, and
has betaken himself into the Emperors service. And that General Walsteyn
Duke of Fridland, has given him the command of 1000. Curassiers.

From Ratisbon the 10. of June.
All is indifferently quiet for the present. The March is up and down, too and
fro. The Soldiers daily ride a pillaging for booty. Bavaria and the
Vpper-Palatinate do now go to wrack, and are utterly ruined. This City is
fortified; Gods religious worship is here brought to its form and ancient
state, and freely exercised. Upon Trinity Sunday there was Service and Sermons
in both the new Churches; where many thousand people came together with great
joy and exultation to serve God: and for very joy, many tears were shed. The
Sermons were much applied unto the present miserable estate and calamities of
the Church.

From Norimberg the 18. of June.
We receive news out of Bohemia, that the Elector of Saxon has forsaken
almost all he did possess in Bohemia, since the City of Prague was surrendered
again to the Duke of Fridland: and that he keeps nothing there, but only the
City of Eger and the Castle Elenbogen; and that he with the rest of his Army,
is gone back toward Dresden and to Tirna, which are distant one from the
other but two leagues. Therefore the said Duke of Fridland was resolved to
pursue and follow him with his Army, consisting of near 40000. men. The said
General Fridland has also sent an Army into Silesia against the Elector of
Brandenburgs forces there; by reason whereof the said Elector does excuse
himself, that he cannot send any succors to him of Saxon. And therefore it is
conceived, that the King of Sweden (being made acquainted with all this) has
been induced to change his other designs and resolution. Thus his Majesty
has forsaken Bavaria, only he has well fortified and strengthened with
sufficient Garrisons, Augsburg, Donawert, and Rain: And that in his absence,
the promises made unto him may be the better kept, and the moneys due at
Munchen and els-where for contribution and upon agreement, the surelier paid:
his Majesty has caused many persons of quality, as Burgemaisters,
Counselors, and other Ecclesiastical persons to be brought from thence to
Augsburg, thereto remain as Hostages. Two Dukes of Saxon Wimar (named, as I
understand, Ernest and Bernhard) have been left by his Majesty about
Memmingen and in the upper part of the Circle of Swaben, with an Army of above
8000. men. And the Duke Administrator of Wirtemberg is to join 8000. more with
them; and withal to observe together, the actions both of General Ossa, and
of the Archduke Leopolds forces. The said Dukes of Saxon Wymar have lately
defeated the troops of the Soldiers and Boores commanded by the Earl of
Embs, taken the said Earl with his Countess; and now they are marching
toward Lindaw.

On this very day his Majest. of Sweden is at Furt, one league distant from
hence, where I understand he does keep his general Rendezvous, and mustereth
20000. good men. In his passage this way, he has taken in Aichstadt, because
the Magistrates there had not kept the Treaty they made formerly with his
Majesty; and had never paid the promised Contribution. His Majesty has also
beaten with Canons, and quickly taken in the strong Town and Castle (a good
place and of great consequence) called Pappenheym, belonging to General
Pappenheym. The people that went to see the Mustering do much extol how brave
an Army it is: In this City there has been made bread for the said Army of
above 200. bushels of Corn, which with other victualles has been sent
thither. There was also made very great preparation for the entertainment of
his Majesty; for it was hoped he would have come into the City, as indeed
the Magistrates did humbly invite him. But he excused himself, and I hear his
Majesty amongst other merry words said: He had at this time a greater desire
to see Walsteyn then Norimberg. His Majesty has dispatched from hence 2000.
horse toward Coburg, there to join with other forces, to observe and hinder
(as some do suppose) Pappenheym, if he should endeavor to pass: There have
been stayed in this City all Waggon-horses, for the carriage of the Ordnance
toward Forcheim, which is said shall now be besieged; Yea some do believe,
that the King himself has an enterprise against it; But I dare boldly say,
that no body as yet knows what his Majesty intends to do, and therefore
we must expect till time does discover it.

The King of Bohemia has been these three days (before the King of Sweden a
rived at Furt) in this City. The Magistrate does much respect and honor him,
and has presented him after the wonted manner, with a present of Fish, Wine,
Oats, etc. His Majesty gave yesterday a visit unto the Princess Palatine of
Sultsbach, and to the Marchioness Dowager of Onspach.

The Bavarian forces that lie in the Vpper-Palatinate, have made an inrode into
the Marquisate of Onspach, and have pillaged the chief Town called Onspach.

It is certainly believed, that the King of Sweden will take his March through
the Vpper-Palatinate into Bohemia, directly to Eger; and thereabouts to join
with the Elector of Saxony his Army; for we do get notice, that there is sent
to Eger great store of victuals and other provisions: His Majesty of Sweden
has also sent back to the said Elector some Ambassadors, to give him notice
of what he is desired to do, and to represent unto him the ill and suspicious
behaviors of his Lieutenant-generall Arnheim. We do not yet know, whether
King Frederick of Bohemia will follow his Majesty of Sweden, or whether he
intends to go to the Lower Palatinate, as some do presume. Of all which as
soon as we shall be sure, you shall receive news from us.

The Copy of a Letter which Count Henry vanden Bergh, General of his
Majesty's Army, wrote to the Arch-Dutches Infanta Isabella, concerning the
discontent, and displeasure which he has received, and his resolution for the
welfare of the Countries.
Sovereign Lady,
I Cannot but with all possible obedience unto your Highness declare unto you,
and complain of the evil usage, and great wrong done unto me; forasmuch as I
am deprived of my Government through want of men, and now would they also if
they could deprive me of mine honor, credit, and reputation. And all this
without having any respect unto all the faithful services done by me within,
and during the space of 40. years: as also, of those of mine house and
kindred, we having lost six brothers in the service of the King of Spain.
Likewise to make complaint of the ill government which is in the Country, and
the decay and ruin of the same, and of the Catholic, Apostolical, Roman
Religion, through the progress and good success of the Armies of our Enemy.
Moreover, of the neglect and disrespect of the Nobility and Gentry of our
Country and Nation, and all of Us in general; for the Spanish alone will rule
and govern all, and so enrich themselves (as indeed they do) to the loss,
damage, and prejudice of the poorer sort of people: and that with such a
violent and strong domineering hand over all our Nobility, Gentry, and
Commonaltie, that they have already subdued them, and brought them all under
their command. That also they labor to continue a perpetual war in these
Netherlands. That they are the cause, (as your Highness is well acquainted
with) that the truce was not contracted; and that they will ever take the upper
hand, and highest places, and pre-eminence, with contempt of all other Nations.
I am sure enough that your Highness does earnestly wish and desire that all
things might be reduced to a better state and condition; and that it is now
more than time that the States of the Country should undertake some other and
better course under the command of your Highness, for the extirpating and
excluding of the Spanish.

And whereas some two years ago, your Highness in the name of his Majesty,
caused the commission to be given unto me, for supplying the Office and place
of General of the field, seeing the Countries now falling into a total ^uine;
I am resolved to execute that place and Office, for the service, profit, and
welfare, and easement, and disburdening of the Country; as also, for the
maintenance of the privileges thereof, and the upholding of the Catholic,
Apostolical, and Romish Religion. And that I may the better testify my care,
love, and singular affection, which I do bear the State, and welfare of the
Country; I am resolved to employ all my means to help to restore the same to
a prosperous and happy estate; and to cause the same to enjoy an assured
tranquillity and peace: to the end that your Highness might govern with more
quiet and safety; as also, with more contentment and satisfaction unto the
whole Country: which now is governed (through the interest of some particular
persons) with extreme pr^judice of all the Inhabitants.

And indeed I do suppose, that I cannot perform a better or worthier service
unto your Highness, (for the preservation of the whole Country) than this is
like to prove. Wherefore I have retired my self into this City of Liege, where
I will expect and wait for that prosperity and good luck which it shall please
God to afford me, for the furtherance and accomplishment of these my so just
designs. Wherefore I will earnestly entreat the Almighty, that he will be
pleased to preserve your Highness in a long, prosperous, and happy life, and
good estate; like as all Christendom at this prefent stands in need of his
help, and I in particular.

From Liege the 18. of June. Your Highness humble and obedient Subject and
Servant,Henry Count de Bergh,

The Copy of another Letter written by Count Henry Vanden Bergh, General of
his Majesty of Spain, unto the Prelates, Nobility, Gentry, Cities and
Provinces of the Netherlands.
My Lords,
Whereas I do certainly know that all the world will speak and censure
diversely, concerning the loss of my government; and that many will blame me
(though unjustly for the same: I cannot but acquaint your Honors, that because
it was ordained (against my will and good liking) that the Soldiers should be
drawn off, which then I stood in so great need of, for the preservation of the
Country. Yea, and notwithstanding that I had given intelligence and notice,
how that the Enemy was about to assemble his forces at Moock, not far from my
Government, by which means I am at this present sensible of a great loss. As
also by reason of the evil usage which I have received, and do yet daily
receive, for recompense of all those faithful services, which I have done his
Majesty during the space of 40, years: having (as your Honors do very well
know) lost in his Majesty's service six brothers. And whereas I still continue
a most natural affection and inclination to the prosperity and welfare of the
Country, it sorely grieves me to see matters brought to such a lamentable
pass, and the State in this so woeful a case as it is now in: this has
caused me to send these printed lines to your Honors, wherein you shall find
and see the resolution which I have taken for the redress, welfare, and
happiness of the Country, and of us all in general: well hoping, yea
trusting, that it will not only be agreeable and acceptable to your Honors,
but also that you will moreover be pleased, to contribute to this my design
and enterprise, to the end we may obtain a golden and a happy peace in the
state of this Country. Wherefore I am further willing to declare unto your
Honors, that this discontent and displeasure of mine has partly proceeded
from that grudge and evil conceit, which the Marquis de Leganes (whose credit
and reputation your Honors are well acquainted withal) has taken against me:
and those evil services and turns which he has done me in Spain, at the
Court, and with his Majesty: and all upon these two reasons especially.

The one was, because it was the means of preventing and hindering the City
Bruxels from being pillaged, when the Army was before it, and when the Citizens
were in such perplexity, and knew not how to yield that which was demanded of
them. And moreover he himself was in such a passion, that he plucked the
feathers from his hat in my presence, and in the presence of many more. Whereas
the Marquis Spinola of happy memory, gave me great thanks for that I was the
means of freeing those Citizens from such a danger, when they opened the gates
to the end they might not incur the extremest danger.

The other reason was, because (as the aforesaid Marquise de Leganes once
vpbraided me in a vehement anger and passion, in the presence of the a foresaid
Marquise Spinola of happy memory) I had sometimes given the vauntguard to the
Italians, which (as he thought) was due to none but the Spanish according to
the order and direction of the Kings Majesty. Moreover I do perceive, and
find it sufficiently that the Spanish do desire my death, which also by this
appeared, when they having on a time my picture or portraicture, did shoot the
same thorough and thorough, which is at Bruxels in the street near unto the
stone-gate. And which is more then all this, they would never send me the
Letter which according to their own relation was written by the King to me
concerning the office or place which his Majesty did proffer me in Spain, and
yet notwithstanding they would know my mind and declaration concerning the
voyage into Spain before ever the Letter was delivered into my hands. These
and many other discontents so well grounded, and given me upon several
occasions (which would be too long to relate) and would cause all the world to
wonder, how possibly I could so patiently bear them, as also of those manifold
wrongs which your honors have suffered these many years, and do yet daily
suffer, and that withal, you now see the poor people so miserably oppressed
and ruinated; the soldiers not paid, but evil entreated do give me great
hopes that your honors will contribute unto, and assist and further me in
this my design and resolution, and that hence forward you will loath and
abhor the Spanish Government, which Spaniards by their daily meetings and
assemblies (which we call Iuntas) have utterly spoiled and depraved the whole
business and matter. Wherefore it will be necessary that your honors be
pleased to find out another course under the Government of her Highness the
Arch-duchchesse; for the safety, rest, peace, and welfare of the Country, unto
which good work I am assured both Kings and Princes are willing to assist and
to contribute with all their power. And I for mine own part do proffer my
self to serve you with all the affection and fidelity you can expect or
require.

Of your humble servant, Henry Conte De Bergh.
From Liege the 18. of June. 1632.
From Bruxels the 4. of July, still. nov.
As for news you shall have this little, which is as much, as the shortness of
time will permit me to set down, to wit, that we have (as yet) no tidings
that the Spanish Army has fought with that of the Hollanders before Mastricht:
True it is that they have been near one unto the other for this seven nights
space, but the Hollander is so well entrenched, that the other does not know
where to attacque him unless with great loss of men, and uncertain success,
and therefore holds it better, to endeavor to cut off the means of victualing
the Hollanders Army, about which (as we understand) they are now in hand. In
the mean space, there is a rumor that the Rhyne-graue has passed over the
Mosell with great forces, and is coming into this land to do more hurt, so
that the common people are in a great Quandary, we have (every day) in this
City a watch of a thousand men which stand at the Gates, who are all Citizens,
and we expect out of hand a thousand soldiers to come, and two Cornets of
horse, which news does much discontent, but there is no remedy, forasmuch as
their loyalty is much suspected, and the reason (in particular) moving
thereunto is this, upon S. Peter's Eve last (in the night) there were certain
unknown persons assembled together in the streets who upon no occasion given,
did beat down a sign which represented the King of Spain, and not contented
therewith, they threw stones at the Jesuits Church-doore, sang Psalms, and
cried aloud voice Vive le Prince d'Orange. This noise continued two nights
together, so that upon Thursday last being the 29. of the last Month, at 3. a
clock in the Morning (by order from Court) the Drums began to beat and to call
up the Citizens to Arms, but all in vain, for the parties who had made the
great noise were gone before the others were assembled, nevertheless there is
a Proclamation, that whosoever can appeach any of the foresaid offenders, shall
have 500. Florins for his good service. Finally the Cardinal keeps altogether
within doors, not daring to st^^^e abroad for fear of being massacered by the
common people.

From Leipsich June 12.
We have tidings, how that part of Walsteyns forces coming out of Silesia,
marched through Gorlitz in Lusatia, without stay or hurt doing: and that they
went directly toward Bud^ssen, the chief of the 6. Towns of the upper
Lusatia. But they were scarcely set down to the siege of it, when they were
beaten up again by the forces of our Duk of Saxony: they retyring the same way
they came into Silesia again.

General Wallensteyn has one where or other near forty thousand men in his
Army: The most of which are already upon the frontiers of Bohemia and Saxony,
betwixt Luitmeritz and Dresden, which has so much terrified us in these parts,
that diverse Merchants of Leipsich, have sent some of their goods down the Elb
unto Hamborough: But hearing his Majesty of Sweden to be upon his march, to
aid our Duke against Wallenstein, the whole Country is very much comforted,
and no more goods sent away.

From Minden upon the Weser the 14. of June 1632.
The City Rodenbergh in the Bishopric of Verden is by agreement rendered to
the King of Swedens forces, and the Imperial Garrisons is conducted to
Nieuburgh: so that the Bishopric of Breme and Verden are now both freed from
the Emperors forces. The Swedes make a Bridge of Boats about Dranckemburgh,
but the Earl of Groens-field is gone thither with 12000. men to prevent their
proceedings. Those of Hildesheym have now at the last received 1500. men from
the Duke of Lunenburgh, for the strengthening of the same City; they would in no
wise suffer the Ecclesiastical persons (which are sifteene Cloisters besides
the Prelates and Abbots) to go forth of the City. They have demolished a
Monastery which hindered the defense of the City, and have besieged the Castle
of Steorwald, the Citizens themselves helped to bring the Canons and Ordnance
before the said Fort. The General Pappenheym is before Cassell, where he has
taken a small Fort, built upon a Mountain, which Fort commands the City, and
now plays furiously with his Canon upon the said City. The Citizens have
transported and conuayed most of their best moueabels into the Zeigenheym.

From Marpurgh in Hassia, the 17. Ditto.
Two thousand Horse of Pappenheyms forces, lately showed themselves before
Cassell upon the tenth day of this Month, whereupon seven Companies came forth
of the City against them, and since that another Company under the Command of
Colonel Dalwing, where the Landgraue of Hessen himself was present, their
forces after a long combat disordered Pappenheyms troops, and in the pursuit
of them slew fourscore in the place, among them a Lieutenant, Colonel, and
took many of them prisoners, Amongst other Colonel Lhene, of the Regiment of
Westphalia, the said Colonel was constrained to stay behind, by reason of
some wounds, which in the Combat he had received, and so was taken.

The Country people of Hassia are fallen upon Pappenheyms forces (to wit,
those troops which he left near Minden on the River War) and have slain
above three hundred of them, which news as soon as Pappenheym received, he
brake up with his Army from Cassell, and has betaken himself into the
Country of Brunswicke, not far from thence, where he has caused diverse
thousands of the Country people to come to him with Spades, and Pickaxes, to
divert as some do suppose the Current of the River Fulda which comes about
Cassell.

From Cazall, the 14. Ditto.
This City is provided for even according to our hearts defire and content, so
that now we shall not fear the third affront and assault of any Enemy
whatsoever that shall dare to undertake it. We are readily prepared against all
comers, how ever we are sorely afflicted and grieved at the death of the Duke
of Mayenne the third son of our Duke of Mantua, who deceased on the 22. day
of May, in the 20. year. of his age, being taken with a Plurisy.

From Madrid the 16 of June 1632.
The Duke D. Alue under the name of the Queen of Spain in the Absence of the
King does Gonerne Castile. Whom we expect here from Bercelonia, where Count
Don Ognato was lately proclaimed President of the Council of the Order. Men
would have made us to doubt concerning the truth of the last ship wrack or
subversion of the fleet, but I must assure you that the confirmation hereof
with the doleful news of the revolt in the Low Countries does stagger the
strongest of opinion amongst us, and perplexeth the hearts of all men.

From Metz, the 28. of June.
The news which at this present I shall relate unto you, is very good for the
Dukedom of Lorraine, for all is now appeased, and the King and the Duke are
agreed. And there remains nothing more to satisfy their mind, but only how
the affairs of France would have been carried if they had been managed in
such sort as hitherto.

The King of Sweden has escaped a great conspiracy against his preson, but we
houe not yet the particularities.

From Pont Moussen in Lorraine, the 29. of June.
The King sojourneth in this City and wayts upon the execution of the Articles
agreed upon betwixt himself and the Duke of Lorraine. The three places
mentioned in the Articles are to be consigned over to his Majesty within three
days. The some being effected his Majesty with all diligence (which is
natural to him) in betaking himself whither the affairs of the State and
good of his subject shall invite him. Monsiour is passing into Anvergne. The
French which are within Hermensteyn have prescribed three days unto the
Garrison of Coblens for their departure, if not they will by force assault and
displace them.

From Dijon the 25. of June.
Here I afford you the brief sum and abstract of what has passed since
Monsieur came before this City. After his declaration was published on the 13.
of this Month at Dandelot signed. Gaston et Goulas. On the 17. day, the Lord
of Vellepelle his Gentleman accompanied with a Trumpeter presented unto the
whole Body of this City a Letter from Monsicur, and returned back with this
answer that if they would deliver them the Letter they would send it to the
King, but that they would in no wise trust nor give ear to Monsieur.

The 18. day he returned with the Lord Fargye and two Trumpetors, who accorded
to their former demand, that the conference which Monsieur required to have
with them, was only to desire them to assist him that his Army might subsist.
They returned with the same answer they received formerly, and that withal
they should acquaint Monsieu the Duke Delboeuf with their refolution.

The 19. day early in the Morning, they sent a Drum unto Monsieur with this
message that they could not hearken to any of his propositions until they did
fully understand the Kings pleasure.

The afternoon following, there happened a small skirmish by reason of some
Sheep which the Soldiers and taken. Monsieur lodged that day at Mesiguy, two
miles from hence, and on the 20. came to Gilly which day the Marquise
D'Espoisse accompanied with 80. Gentlemen entered into this City.

On the 21. day a Trumpeter brought Letters again from Monsieur, which Letters
were received by those that commanded at the Gates, and were sent to the King
not yet opened. In the same day the house of the President Bercheres happened
to be on fire, and was quite burnt down, but he protested that he was hardly
sensible of that loss in respect of the great contentment which he conceived
in that he had done his Majesty such faithful and loyal service, as his
Majesty himself did testify by Letters which he had newly received from him.

Monsieur having passed the Countersharpe of Nuis lodged at the Village Migny
two miles from Chaalon, where the Marquise De Varennes came unto him with all
speed and diligence.

From Paris the 2. of July.
Upon Saturday last here was burnt a wicked Book entitled, The Questioning of
the State, which Book was condemned the day before.

On Wednesday following, here arrived in the behalf of his Majesty the Lord
Batru, to bring us the comfortable tidings of the peaceable agreement, betwixt
his Majesty and the Duke of Lorraine, the Articles he presently demonstrated
to the Parliament.

FINIS.

