September 1. Numb. 42.

THE CONTINVATION OF OUR WEEKLY Avisoes, since the 23. of the last, to the
first of this present.

Containing amongst the rest, these particulars following.

A patheticall Speech made by the King of Sweden to his Commanders and
Captains, upon occasion of some misdemeanors committed by the Soldiers.

The confirmation of the burning of the Walsteyn and Bavarian Magazen at
Fryenstadt, together with the defeat given unto some Imperial Regiments at the
same time.

The taking of great Glogaw and Breslaw, with other Towns in Silesia, by the
mixed forces of the Swedes, Saxons and Brandenburgers.

The preparation of the King of Sweden by (command of a general Fast
throughout the whole Army, and in the City of Norimberg) to go upon some great
design, most of his Forces being come to him.

Something concerning France, and the troubles there.

LONDON. Printed by I. D. for Nathaniel Butter and Nicholas Bourne 1632.

The Continuation of our Weekly NEWS. The Extract of an Oration of his
Majesty of Sweden, made in the presence of his chiefest Peers, Earls, Lords,
Warlike Commanders, and other Officers, on the 10. of August. 1632. near the
City of Norimbergh.
HIS Royal Majesty of Sweden caused all his Commanders and Officers from the
highest to the lowest to come before him, and made an Oration unto them of an
hour long, concerning the pillaging and robbing, and some insolences
committed by his Soldiers: which his said Majesty laboring to suppress,
used in this his Oration such motives and arguments, that his earnest and
eloquent expression forced tears from the eyes of many of his chief
Commanders. The Contents whereof you have in this Extract.

You Peers, Earls, and Lords, Ye are partly of those, who have showed
themselves unfaithful and disloyal to your own Country, and do help to
ruinate the same. You Generals, Lieutenant-Generalls, (and all you the rest
inferior Officers) I have ever held and esteemed you for upright and stout
Cavalliers, and I do witness for you, that upon occasion offered, you have in
fighting given such demonstration of your valor, as that I have therewithal
rested satisfied.

But when I do behold you present here before me, and do consider of, and
call to mind your stealing, robbing, and pillaging, and that ye also do
participate, and are guilty of those insolences, and observe no discipline,
nor do no justice, all my hairs do stand an end. Is not this a doleful case
and lamentable, and odious in the sight of God, that one Christian and joint
religious, one friend another, yea one brother shall pillage and ransacke
another, and spoil, and ruinate, and undo another: the Devils in hell do
show more love, and are more trusty one to another, then you Christians are
among your selves.

My heart fails me, and my bowels yearne within me, when I do hear that
the Swedisb Soldiers are more insolent then those of the enemy: when indeed
not Swedes, but the Germans commit the insolences: had I known that ye had
been of such an humor, and had borne no more affection to your own native
Country, and that you would have done no better service for the same, nor
showed more fidelity: I had never so much as sadled an horse for your sakes,
much less ever have adventured my Kingdom, my life and goods, and with mine
own person have adventured so many stout and valorous men for your welfare:
but I would rather since I perceive that you aff^ct and desire it, have
suffered you to remain plunged in the greatest and most miserable servitude
and slaverie. Ye know full well, that I do not easily or slightly deny any of
you any reasonable request, and my God knows, that I never intend^d any other
thing, but (by his blessed assistance) to restore every man to their own, and
their own to them: and for the remainder, especially what I obtain in
Franconia and Bavaria, to distribute and impart among you, and to leave none of
you unrecompensed for your faithful service: but your accursed and divellish
robbing and stealing does hinder and keep me back in all my Christian
intentions. Can you not consider what praise and fame posterity will leave you
in future histories? what a burden you will lay on your own consciences? and
what judgments and punishments you draw upon your selves, your posterity, the
whole Country, and those that shall succeed you? Oh that you do not consider,
what an account you are to yield up at that great and dreadful day of
account. I would rather have remained within mine own Kingdom, than I would
longer behold such base insolences. Perchance you may say, you want moneys;
but when I have the means to satisfy both you, and the whole Army, and you
by pillaging, robbing, and stealing deprive me of those means, I beseech you
than where is the fault? What do I receive of all your prey? just nothing. I
do protest before God, and it is truth, that of all this war I have not so
much enriched my self as the worth of a pair of boots; and I profess
withal, that I would rather ride without boots, than any ways in the least
measure to enrich my self by the loss and prejudice of other poor men. I
will make it appear to you, and to those that desire therein to be satisfied,
that I have had made over unto me since I came out of mine own Kingdom, at
32. several times, above 40. tun of Gold, which I have spent for your good,
and the restoration of those that are united with me in the true Religion. I
confess I might herein be silent, but the consideration of the great loss
that I have sustained of so many brave Worthies and Cavalleres, whose virtues
indeed were beyond estimation, constrained me to speak what I do; and truly
I valued them beyond all my wealth. And for your parts what have you
contributed? I desire nothing at your hands but only this, that you deprive
and rob not others of their goods, but leave unto every man his own.

This Oration which was in part penned by many, took up diverse sheets of
paper. This is but only the extract and part of it.

After the Oration ended, his Majesty made strict prohibition, and added
thereunto a commination, that he would spare none hence-forward, Peer, nor
Earl, General, nor Commander. And in case they should mutiny, he with his
Swedes and Finlanders would undertake so to rattle them, that the very shivers
should fly about. Which prohibition was no sooner proclaimed with the sound of
trumpets, but he caused a Lieutenant to be hanged for commiting some of the
aforesaid insolences.

When as a certain Pesant or Countryman came and made complaint to his
Majesty of some Soldiers who had robbed him of a Cow; his Majesty himself
in person rod along with him to find out the parties: when he showed his
Majesty where the Cow was notwithstanding the Captain and Lieutenant excused
the party, he caused him to be brought to the Provost, and delivered up into
the hands of Justice; But there was earnest intercession made for him by the
Commanders and Captains unto his Majesty, who with compassion spoke thus unto
the Delinquent: My son, it is better that I should punish you, than that for
your mis-deedes the wrath of God and his Judgments should fall upon me, and
thee, and all of us.

From Norimberg the 2. of August, 1632.
Concerning my doleful estate I doubt not but all the world is therewith
acquainted, In these 4. weeks we have received no letters from Overland nor
Augsburg: The Enemy is round about us with two great Armies, and is enquartered
about Steyn, and Eyba, and the same River a mile from this City, and as far
from the Army. We can daily see the Enemy swerve to and from our Steeple. The
skirmishes continue daily, and many Spies are brought prisoners hither: which
Spies are pub^ikely examined, by which means we know all the Enemies designs
and enterprises. Yesterday was brought prisoner here the General
Quarter-Maister of Wallensteyn, who had the bed-role or Catalogue about him of
Wallensteyns and the Duke of Bavarias whole Army; he is daily served at Table
with 6. silver dishes of good cheer, and 2. bottels of wine; he and his do
all complain of extreme hunger and want in their Armies.

His Majesty of Sweden shows himself wondrous courteous and loving toward all
the Citizens here, and remains exceeding courageous. His Army is very well
fortified, insomuch, that it is impossible for any enemy to raise the same, or
almost to oppose him; notwithstanding his Army alone is none of the greatest.

The Swedes do daily defeat some of the Enemies Convoyes: and although I
confess indeed by reason of these troubles and turmoiles our trading cease,
yet God be praised: we are exceeding well provided of all things. It does
very much animate and comfort us, that his Majesty is so chearie and tender of
us, and does so courageously protect us, and establishes decent and good order
overall.

Another from Norimberg of later date, wherein is declared the whole present
estate of both Armies.
Walsteyn and the Duke of Bauaria do now only strive and endeavor to
intercept and cut off all victuals provision and convoyes from his Majesty of
Sweden, as yet remaining within his Fortifications before Norimbergh. Wherefore
the better to accomplish his ends, the said Wallensteyn by force has taken a
strong Castle Liechtenaw not far from Anspach and 4. miles fom Norimbergh
which Fort otherwise, is under the power of the Norimbergers. The King to
revenge himself and to be even with and requite and serve his enemy with the
same sauce did inquire and found out where the store or Magazen of corn was
reserved for Wallersteyn and the Duke of Bauaria to wit at ^ryenstaat) which is
a City in the upper Palatinate situated in a very moorish place, five miles
from Norimbergh, and 2. from Newmarch which also is in the superior Palatinate.
Wherefore with 1000. Muskets, and some troops of horse, in the night they went
to Karnbergh, two miles distance from the town of Fryenstadt, and from thence
he sent a certain Colonel farther) namely to Fryenstadt. Who assisted with
his soldiers, and having hung some Patars at the gate of the City broke them
open, entered, and puts some to the sword. He there burnt a great multitude of
Corn, which was enough to supply Wallensteyns Army for two months together.
Among other victuals, there was 70000. pounds of bread; the Swedish brought
with them 400. Bullockes, and 500. Horses to Norimberg. In their return the
Commander, a Colonel of Wallensteyns Army, with 3. Regiments comes toward
the King, whose number of Soldiers did not exceed Wallensteyns Colonels
number, to wit Spaar. The Kings Majesty with his forces behaved himself so
valorous and strong* that many Ensigns were taken by them, and 400. of Spaars
forces were slain, and an hundred Officers or more, beside the Commander Spaar
himself were taken prisoners. The King lost 40. men, and one Captain, with
two Officers.

Before the King came to Fryenstadt, a certain Major was sent before (as it is
the manner of war) to spy out the ways and devices of the Enemy. This Major
by chance and vnawarres fell into the hands of the aforesaid Spaar, and was
taken prisoner. Spaar presently questions with him, and asks him where is the
King? the Major answers, he is hard by* what Army is he provided withal? he
answers, with some Troops of horse; has he no Musketeers? said Spaar: no,
answers the other; then certainly it is the King said Spaar, and he shall
presently be in my hands: but it was not long after ere Spaar found the
contrary by woeful experience, for he fell into the Ditch, which he had
dug for another.

Moreover because his Majesty for the maintaining of such huge and great armies
has need of great store of moneys he has for a certain time borrowed
480000. Ryxdollers of the Citizens of Norembergh, to the end that he may give
content in part to the soldiers, who otherwise (we know) are not so ready to
fight, but these moneys being distributed amongst the soldiers of his Majesty
they are all of them exceedingly animated and forward to fight upon all
occasions. For other necessaries the Kings Armies are supplied from the City
Norembergh, out of the Magazine, as Bread, Powder, shot, great O^dnance and the
like necessaries. At Oxfurt (which is an Imperial City) distant 6. miles from
Norimbergh, there is a conjunction made of these Armies, to wit that of the
Duke of Weymar, the Chancellor Oxensterne, the Landgraue of Hessen, and six
Regiments of Saxons, the number of those Armies being all joined in one, do
make above 36000. men.

The City before mentioned Freynstadt, with another chief place named
Holnsteyn were formerly by the gift of the Duke of Bauaria conferred upon Mons:
Tilly, for they are places of great note, and strength, and great revenues, to
the end that those charges raised might be sufficient means for Tilly to
establish and reserve his Authority but not only Tilly but also the Duke of
Bauaria himself, are stripped and deprived of them. For they belonged not to
them, but by right are due, to the Prince Elector Palatine.

From Polonia it is written hither, that the Coronation of the King is deferred
until the 17. day of September.

It is believed that the eldest son of the defunct King will be chosen. All
the Evangelical and Protestants in Polonia, are on that side, because he has
promised unto them, all free exercise of Religion, and a new Donatiue, and a
confirmation of all their ancient privileges.

From Swaben the 5. of August.
The Duke Barnard of Wymar after the taking of Schongau, and Landsb^rgh, has
also by assault taken Fiesen, there put 300. men to the sword: 1100. with their
officers, among them the Earl of Hoogen ^m^, Earl DE'arch^, brother in law to
Duke Altringer, the Lord of Dieringsteyn, and the Lieuftenant general Waky,
have yielded themselves prisoners with all their Colors. Hereupon the Duke of
Ernbergh, has also taken the 3. sconces and so with the Army they are returned
to Donawert, but by order which came yesterday are recalled back.

This day 2. Regiments of Wurtenburgh march to Vlms. The Catholic council is
at Ausburgh arrested still, but as yet there have no bells been rung.

The City Heylbrun is fortified daily, Schillingsfurst is burnt down, and
Kreysheym is ransacked and pillaged.

From Dresden the 13. of August.
The assembly and general meeting of the Senators and deputies of the Nobility
at Warson in Polonia is ended and another day of meeting is prescribed in
September the 17. for the choice of a new King, which general Diet, will last
(according to ancient custom) six weeks. The common opinion is, that the
eldest son Vladislaus without the competition of any other will obtain the
Crown. The Protestants are much bent that way, but the Papists have much
opposed the same. The Papists did also oppose and hinder that liberty which the
Protestants expected to have been granted them, in the late assembly, and now
they must content themselves with a larger certainty.

Concerning the war in Muscouia, it seems that all is there again appeased.
Only in Polonia there is great fear of an invasion by the Tartarians, but
there is good order and provision made to prevent that.

From Kitzingen the 15. dito.
God be thanked all is well with our Army. Yesterday Duke Bernard of Weymar
arrived here, whose troops as also the troops of Generell Bannier, which were
left at Rottingen, are this day expected here; then shall our general
rendevous be held, and our forces shall be advanced against our Enemies. God
grant us good success, we do daily take many prisoners who most of them
betake themselves into the Kings services, they do exceedingly complain of
want and great need in their Armies. The old soldiers of the Enemiee, run
away, and the new ones are altogether unskilled. They are constrained to fetch
their provision and forage 7. miles about, and indeed we are herein to
observe the finger and powerful working of the Almighty. First the good
success which it has pleased God to afford unto Duke Bernard Weymar,
insomuch that many chief soldiers, are come into his service, and many of the
chief Commanders are taken prisoners. Secondly observe, that those of
Duderstadt, (which place is not only well fortified by the Imperialists,) are
strongly beset to wit with 350. of Bru^res Regiment, 300. of Vorstenburgs
Regiment, 250. new leauied soldiers, 300. of Reynaclers forces, 400. Horsemen
under the Commander Gol^z, who also was assisted by diverse Boores of
Eischfield, notwitstanding all this they freely yileded up themselves, and
2000. old soldiers also left their service, and are come over to us, by reason
whereof the officers being at our mercy, were feign to yield themselves into
our hands. We have obtained some Cornets, 12. pieces of Ordnance, and great
store of provision. Add unto this the great advantage we have gotten by our
leuies, and Musterplace at Eichsfeild. Thirdly we consider the great victory
it has pleased almightly God to afford unto his Majesty of Sweden, at
Freystadt, where was the Magazine for provision of Walsteyns Corn, and Bread,
etc. where 28. cornet of horse, and 500. Musketeers being in all about 300.
men were slain and utterly defeated.

From Leypsich 15. Dito.
It is certain, that our Brandenburger, and Swedish forces, in all 30000.
strong have again taken great Glogan in Salesia, and taken the Commander
Golizen, prisoner with some companies of horse and foot which they have all of
them disarmed. Part of which Army after this happy defeat, are marching to
Glatz in Bohemia. In the mean time the Crabats, with 1000. horse are fallen
into this Dukedom, and have taken the City Bishopsweerd^, by assault and the
City Stolpe, and pillaged and burnt down the same. Hereupon the Prince Elector
with all speed commanded some thousands of soldiers thither to stop their
course.

Now instantly we do receive tidings from Dresden, that Lignitz, and the Lord
thereof are agreed with the Swedes, and have taken in a Swedish Garrison. Other
Lords, and Cities, as also Breslau, have done the like, In Glogau, in Silesia
our soldiers have obtained very good booty, and have taken a whole wagon laden
with silver, from the Commander Goltzen aforesaid.

From Altenberg. 18. dito.
Yesterday certain letters were brought hither, which were intercepted, with
Cipher letters, written by the Duke of Bauaria, to Count Papenheym, which
letters are sent to his Majesty of Sweden. We understand that the contents are
to desire Papenheym suddenly to come and join his forces with his. Those that
carried these letters are apprehended and brought to Salfridt.

From Franconia the 19. Dito.
Concerning, and for the last happy victory which it has pleased Almighty God
to afford his May: of Sweden. There has both in the Army as also in the City
of Noremberg, been openly and publikly thanksgiving been made, which has not
a little dismayed the Enemy, to wit, Walsteyn, and the Duke of Bauaria. Those
forces of Rhyneland, and Hessens forces, as also Duke Saxon Wymars, all in one
Army, upon Monday and tuesday last passed over the bridge, at Kitzingen, to
Newstadt by Aisch, and Winshey. At this Rendevous are met together 36. thousand
of able warlick men. 14. thousand of Banniers men are also of a certain to
join this day with our Army at Vffenheym, it is for certain that when they
shall be all come together the Army will consist of above 50. thou^and able
men. This Army is ere long to be joined to his Majesty of Sweden Army before
Norimberg who is entrenched there with 25000. men. These are all of good
courage, and God be thanked want nothing. But have victuals enough, only
there is some scarsity of Forage. Doubtless ere long there must come a great
alteration: Our soldiers are very greedy of a battle.

From Elsatia the 19.
The fresh Army at this present is at Tryer, it seems that they have there
sustained some loss, whereupon the said place is besieged and with Canon
furiously played upon. There are more French coming tow^rds them, for their
vaunt-guard is already come near unto Metz; which does again of new perplexe
and terrify Loraine, but they are marching toward the Mosell, and it seems
will not molest or trouble us in those quarters. The Imperial troops are
scattered here about.

From the Maynstream the 22. of August.
Some few days ago certain troops came down from the Rhyne-stream to
Nieustadt by the Heart, and commanded to Lindau and those quarters, some troops
of horse also were lately set over the Rhyne at Worms, to what end none of us
a^ yet can tell.

Letters from Berlin do confirm what formerly we heard, namely that the City
great Glogaw was taken by force, and the Castle with agreement by the
Brandenburger and Saxon forces. In the fury of taking the City a great part of
the City was burnt, they have sent and presented unto tho Duke of Saxony six
Cornets and ten Ensigns.

The Diet in Polonia is deferred until the 17. of September next.
Bethlehem-Gabors widow, who is now agreed at last with Ragotzye has commanded
20000. men to Polonia to be revenged in this interregnum.

From Hassia we are certified, that General Bouditz with the Hessen forces is
gone to Westphalia whither he is to march from thence we shall Learn in time.

From Cullin the 23. of August.
Letters from Soest and those places dated 21. Ditto, do aver that the Swedes
our enemies were passed the river beyond Weser, and were marching toward or
near unto Soest, where 19. troops of horse were already passed and do keep
and command Dormondt, according to the common rumor they are six Regiments of
horse and 85. Companies of foot. In their march they make terrible ruins and
do much harm. It is supposed that they are marching toward the Rhyne. In
sum, I am sure we suffer, and those that did invite Papenheym and call him
down do draw the second Army and party upon us, and as we do guess down to
the Provinces, and are the cause of the loss beyond Wezar.

According to Letters from Wirtzburg dated the 19. Ditto, the Chauncellor
Oxenstern, Saxon Weymar, and the Landtgraue of Hessen have past muster at
Kitzingen of above 36000. men, and the day following General Bannier was to
join with them his Army of 14000. more. The King is yet before Norimberg, when
all these forces shall be joined together guess you what we may expect. The
defeat which the Swedes have lately given to our forces continues and is
confirmed, and daily skirmishes are made wherein the Swedes do still get the
better. The forces of the Elector of Saxon and Brandenburg are in Silesia and
have there taken great Glaga^, Breslaw, and Sagan and other places. In sum
all goes not very well.

Copy of a Letter from Wesell August 24.
Now instantly is arrived an express Messenger, who brought letters from
Colonel Melander to the Governor of this City Wesel, Rees, and others to his
Excellence, which Letters to the Prince we have already posted forward, the
said Post does certify us by word of mouth that 17. Swedish Cornets of horse
passed on the 21. of this Month by Soetenare and We^rne, very able men, which
17. troops were followed by General Bandits with 16. Regiments of foot and
3000. men more of horse, these in their passage have taken Paterborne, they
march along now toward the Rhyne and to Wesel. It seems that there is some
worthy enterprise in hand, God give a blessing to their proceedings.

From Arnheym the 24.
At Cullin are diverse Commissioners, who do leuy forces publicly for the
States General of the united Provinces.

The Bishop of Cullin has sent the Lord Foul as Ambassador to the Prince of
Orange to excuse him concerning the General Papenheyms passing over the Rhyne.

We understand that at Berck and Dusseldorf new preparation is made for some
forces to pass over. Now whither it be for General Budaitz or others we know
not, yet some suppose it is for those forces which Papenheym left behind him
in the Country of Berg, others think it is for Papenheyms return, who is
sent for back again by General Walstein in all speed.

In Artoys and Henegaw people fly apace for fear of the French forces which
daily are augmented, Monsieur De Hautery is gone thither to the aforesaid
forces in the behalf of Count Henry de Bergh.

At Bruxels are 5. great Low Country Lords taken in hold.

From Aken the 25. of August.
Yesterday the Magistrates in Mastricht prepared a very great Banquet for the
Prince of Orange to receive and welcome him into that City, the works are
slighted, and by all likelihood his Excellence will not rest so but proceed
further.

From Maseycke the 26. Dito,
The dead body of the Earl of Hanaw, and an English Colonel were brought by
this City in a Wagon, and presently with a Pont were conuayed over to Ruremond.

Count Papenheym after he was broke up, on the 21. of this Month toward Weser,
returned again into the quarter of Graue-Maurice, and at this present is at
Meelsen and about Sittert in the vi^lages, he is under the Doctors and
Chirurgions hands to be cured of his hurt which was very dangerous.

Don Cordua also lies still as yet but to small purpose, for the Bird is flowne
away, and their prey is gone.

London, August 24.
We hear from the Leaguer by a Merchant of good note which is come over who
heard the Prince of Orange himself speak it, that seeing they of Cullin did
suffer Papenheym to pass by them. If the Lords the States would not revenge
it, that then out of his own means he would do it, although he left himself
never a penny. The reason is because the States have showed themselves Neutrall
unto Cullin and they so perfidious to the States in suffering the enemy to
pass.

It is reported that Walestine has sent to the King of Sweden several
messengers, summoning him to a battle, but the King, deferred to fight with
him, till he was better fitted for him, yet still Wall stine required a
Battle: alleging that he the rather desired to fight with him, because he
held him to be the great Captain of the Christian World, and that if he were
overcome by the greatest Captain, it could be no dishonor to him: But if he
did overcome him, then the greater glory, would be his, that he had prevailed
against the greatest Captain of the Christian World, and it is reported, that
the day appointed by them both for the battle, is, the 31. of this our August
1632.

From Norimbergh, the 8. of August.
The King of Sweden, is still about this City, and all his other forces are
joined together. The Enemy Walsteyn, and Bauaria, are not above a Dutch mile
from him: By all likelihood it cannot be long before there happen a bloody
encounter. Yesterday both in this City, and the Kings Army, (as we did lately
give thanks publicly, for the victory about Freynsladt, so) we had a day of
Fasting, and Praying, for his Majesty's future good success. And this day, his
Majesty has distributed the moneys amongst his soldiers, which moneys he
borrowed of the Citizens of Norimberg, and Franckford, for a year, with 6. per
cent. interest. So that the soldiers being they have received pay, are the
more animated: to what they must ere long undertake. There are also diverse
other collections made for the King of Swedens forces. I trust that now the
King is so well provided and has gotten all his forces together he will
shortly adventure upon the Enemy, and indeed they must fight, for the victuals
begins to fall very short, insomuch, that some are ready to dye for hunger. And
in the Enemies Camp, is far greater want then in the Kings Army. We in the
City want no Corn, only we have not Mills enough to grind the same.

FINIS.

