April 28. Numb. 20.

THE CONTINVATION OF OUR FOREIGN Avisoes, since the 24. Ditto. Containing many
very remarkable passages concerning Germany, Italy, France, the Low Countries,
etc. As namely, The Popes denial to furnish the Emperor with money.
Discontents betwixt the Emperor, and the Prince of Transylvania. A more
particular relation of the King of Swedens routing of General Tilly near
Ausburgh. His Majesty's further proceedings since then, and of his taking in of
these Towns Ginsburgh, Lawingen, Hoogstadt, Dillingen, Grundelingen,
Windelingen, Elching, Kirberg, Oberendorfe. A pretty passage betwixt the King
of Sweden and one of Tillies Sentinels. The restoring of the Protestant
Religion at Donawert, and the rendering of diverse Cities and Towns in Bavaria,
to His Majesty of Sweden.
With many other particulars from diverse other places.

LONDON. Printed for Nath: Butter and Nicolas Bourne. 1632.

The Continuation of our Weekly NEWS.
From Rome the 26. of March 1632.
HEre in this City of late was very great disquiet and discontent, by reason
that the Cardinal Borgia in the behalf of his Imperial Majesty, and the King
of Spain, was very earnest with the Pope, that he would be pleased to furnish
them with moneys, and yield them all possible assistance in these dangerous,
and troublesome times. Which the Pope refused to do: and because of the
Cardinals too too great importunity, commanded him to forsake the City, and
not abide there any longer. True it was said he, he knew some good way and
means to make a settled peace, but to furnish moneys he could not.

In Italy many Princes do endeavor both by their purse and otherwise to
assist the Emperor as much as in them lies. But those of Savoy, Mantua, and
Venice will not be seen in this business.

From Vienna the 4. of April.
The Duke of Freedland at the earnest desire of his Imperial Majesty, has
proffered himself to be General one month longer. It is reported, he has
commanded 30000. men to march toward General Tilly, As likewise 8000. men
march from the Country of Saltsburgh, who are commanded to Ingolstad.

There is again of late great difference risen with Ragotzi, and the report
is, that he has besieged Gaskon. It seems because the Governor of that City
had the former year some intelligence with the Palatine of Hungaria; the said
Palatine of a certain has written to the Emperor, and certified him that
Ragotzi with many thousands of Soldiers will fall into Hungary.

From Prague the 6. of April.
We are now assured and do perceive that the Imperialists do from all parts
draw their forces together, doubtless they have a great aim at this City, or
at some of the Electorall Countries.

A few days ago it was published by sound of the drum in all the three
Cities of Prague, that no Catholics upon any alarm shall dare to show
themselves upon the streets, or in their windows upon pain of extreme
punishment. But the Evangellicall, and Protestants who do heartily wish well
to our cause, are contrariwise commanded to be in Arms, and to appear upon
the Horse-market, in or at the small side-ring. By all likelihood and
appearance we may daily expect the enemy here, for he often shows himself
very strong. Diverse of late have been imprisoned, because letters were found
about them, whereby it did appear that they had held some correspondencie with
the enemy.

An Extract of a letter from Ausburgh the 7. of April.
The disarming of the Protestant and Evangelicall Citizens was yesterday put in
execution. The same time many wounded and fugitive Soldiers came from
Donawert, hither, the Country people likewise in all parts fly, and many come
for shelter hither. But alas here is but small safety. Fot the Swedish Forces
of many Horse are already arrived in this place. His Majesty himself with the
foot-forces follow near at hand with the Ordnance, etc. And without any
question they aim at this City, which causes all the chief Citizens
especially those that are Roman Catholics, to fly and depart from hence.
Many great Lords hereabouts have forsaken their Lord-shipps and inheritance,
and are fled into. Tyroll. Also two Companies more of Bavarian Forces were sent
into this City, but we can easily perceive that they have no courage to fight.

From Ratisbone the 10. Ditto.
Here pass many Forces by toward Ingolstadt to General Tillye, who has an
Army of 30000. men, The Commander Gallas also is marched toward him with
1500. Horse. The Duke of Bavaria as General of all the Circles, has required
us to receive some of his Forces into this City, but it was refused. He would
very feign be Master of this Bridge, which he shall not obtain, for we do
very strongly guard the same with our Soldiers. The aforesaid Duke causes
all Bridges to be taken and thrown down.

Upon Monday last here passed by many thousands of Soldiers, but altogether
unable and unfit for service.

On the other side of the Donaw are also many Forces passed to Ingolstadt, most
of them came out of Bohemia, more follow them. These in their march did pillage
all houses and places of any worth or note.

The Chauncellor of Bavaria is come from Ambergh into this City with the
Bishop of Bambergh, with many Abbots Priests, and Spiritual persons. Count
Wolffe of Mansfield is in all speed passed through this City to Vienna.

From Norimberg the 7. of April.
You have formerly heard at large of the taking of the City Donawert by his
Majesty of Sweden, and the manner of that expedition; wherefore I will not any
further trouble you with that relation. Since that time, it has pleased
Almighty God in like manner prosperously to bless the said King. He has
taken Dillingen, Lawingen, and diverse others places. The Imperialists forsook
also diverse places, and brought the keys of their Cities to his Majesty. Now
he is marching toward Ausburgh and Munchen. Whence the Elector of Bavaria is
fled with all the Clergy, and at this present is with the General Tilly, who
lies with his Army about and at Ingolstadt and Newburg near the Donaw. The
said Duke of Bavaria has sent diverse Ambassadors to his Majesty of Sweden,
but none of them could obtain any audience.

His Majesty has speedily commanded the General Horn with 2000. horse, and
some thousands of foot-^orces into Lower Bavaria. Almost all the Cities, yea
Munchen it self are resolved to agree with his Majesty upon the best terms
they can conclude upon. We do daily see thousands of spiritual persons fly
from all parts, and many of the Bavarian Army also daily take their heels and
away.

From Donawerdt, the 13 Ditto.
The five Swedish Regiments which passed through here to Nieuburgh, are
returned back, not having dispatched what they went about, because 500.
Bavarian soldiers were brought into that City. In the mean time they and
others have sought their advantage else where, and with Collonell Sperrutter
have taken Lichtenau and Papenheym, and have blocked up Wiltzburgh. His
Majesty of Sweden has laid a Bridge over the Donaw near unto this City, the
better to convay the Ordnance and all other necessaries over the River. The
General Tilly has commanded 8. Regiments to Munchen. Our soldiers do daily
ride forth upon some exploit or other, and no longer since then yesterday, they
brought in hither two Ensigns, and many prisoners. The Commander Snedewyn is
placed Governor in this City with 8000. men.

From Augsburgh the 14. Ditto.
We do here understand, that both Armies of the King of Sweden and Tilly, are
within three or four miles from each other, not far from this place, near
unto the River Lech. The General with the Commander Altringer was yesterday
here within this City, and took order for all things, caused also some works
to be made. They have commanded the Commander Breda to increase this Garrison
with 600. horse and 400. foot. But I cannot see how this City shall long hold
out, and be free from the King of Sweden, who doubtless will very shortly be
master not only of this City, but many other.

Out of Saxony, the 6. of April.
Whereas there is advertisement given to our Prince Elector, that the
Imperialists do daily prepare themselves to assault both himself, and the
Marquis of Brandenburgh, with two several Armies, His Highness has commanded
all soldiers in these Countries to be mustered and in readiness at the found of
the Drum, also given them pay to encourage them, has also augmented and
reinforced the Regiments of foot with 3000. men. The two new Regiments of
horse, under the Commander Kaleksteyn and Vizedum, are also complete, and have
taken the oath of fidelity to our Prince Elector, which Duke of Saxony has now
at this present a complete Army ready, consisting of 9000. horse, and 28000.
foot, besides the troops defensive, which now he takes along with him into
the field.

A Copy of a Letter written from the Army of his Majesty of Sweden, at
Northeym, between the Donaw, and the Lech, the 14. Ditto.
We are here in the field, the General Tylly has ensconced himself at Rain,
two leagues from us, he has broken off the bridge and (as he thinks)
sufficiently guarded and ensured the River of Lech on the other side with
retrenchments and radouts. Howeuer, It seems that there is no approchment to
be made without spilling a great deal of blood. The Kings Majesty therefore
desiring to avoid this bloudshedding, endeavors to meet with him another way,
and has caused men to labor strenuously about the bridge which he causes to
be laid over the Lech, so that yesterday and to day they have wrought without
intermission, and so they continue: doublesse within these two days the same
will be ready for our men to march over. Yesterday very early his Majesty
went himself to view the enemies works and in what posture he might be, and
seeing a Tillian Soldier that was then Sentinel; His Majesty called to him,
saying: Good morrow Monsieur, where is old Tilly? The Sentinel gave answer;
Good morrow to you, Tilly is at Rain in his quarter: and further he asked His
Majesty, saying: Comradoe where is the King? The King made again answer: He
is now in his Quarter, what do you else desire to know of him? The Sentinel
answered again: Does the King give quarter? The King replied: Yes, I assure
you; come but over to us, You shall have good quarter. Thus the King having past
about and viewed all he did desire, he came back again to his quarter, where
he made relation of his entertaining of this Sentinel unto diverse Princes and
Gentlemen. God be blessed that by his assistance we have obtained unto our
power and possession the whole Bishopric of Augsburghs on this side of the
aforementioned river, all the command of the Donaw, from Vlm downward even unto
Donaweerdt for the space and length of 12. Leagues. Beside the chief Cities
and passages. As namely among others these famous and strong Cities. The strong
City and Castle Ginsburgh, Lawingen, Hoogstadt, Dillingen, Grundelingen,
Windelingen, Elchingh, Kirbergh, Oberendorf, and many places more of good hold
and moment. In all which places we found for our turn abundance of very
excellent good provision and all things befitting our occasions, especially,
we found there great store of corn and good grains. But we found very small
quantity of wine, it seems they cherished their fainting hearts themselves
withal before their doleful departure.

We do daily obtain great store of good booty, but we cannot sell them, for
they will yield us but little money or none at all, a good fair Horse may be
bought for four Rix-dollers, and an Ox for three Gilders or two Rix-dollers,
a Cow for own florince, and a Hog for a very small vallue, Poulterie, and
Geese and the like bare no price, bedding, linen, cloth, copper-worke, and
pewter is of no estimation at all neither any manner of household stuff. Money is
that which is here looked after. And in the Palatinate they are in the very same
case. From Vlm and Lawingen and Hoogstadt bread and victuals are brought into
our Army in very great abundance over the river of Donaw, and all things are
God be thanked very cheap. And If we will complain, it must be of plenty
otherwise there is no cause. Yesterday in the afternoon a trumpeter was
brought blindfolded into his Majesty's: quarter and in like manner conducted
away, we understand that his message was to require free passage for the
French Ambassador who now is with the Duke of Bavaria to treat with his
Majesty concerning very weighty matters. And it is supposed that the enemies
would again entreat for a while another cessation of Arm, which I dare
presume will never be consented unto by his Majesty of Sweden.

From Lower Saxony the 15. Dito.
Papenheym by force of Canon has constrained Eymbeck to come to agreement, he
is now marched to Hanouer, Hildesheym, and Goselaer. He has already mastered
diverse places within the Bishoppricke of Hildesheym, but not being able to hold
them, has again abandoned the same. Duderstadt and Gottingen are exceedingly
straightned: It is supposed that Papenheym intends to fall into Saxony through
the Bishoppricke of Halberstadt. Two miles from Hanoner at Paterdorp the said
General has defeated six Cornets of horse, and some troops of foot of the
Army of Lunenburgh. And taken the Lieutenant general Worms prisoner. Most of
the foot forces saved themselves in Hanouer.

Three regiments as that of Tarsch Sohefman, and Formeer are come into the
Bishoppricke of Magdenburgh, through Quedelenburgh, to assist the Duke of
Saxony.

From Hassia the 15. Dito.
Papenheim has almost incorporated the whole Bishoppricke of Paderborn, and
expelled from thence all our forces. But I doubt not but the case will soon
be altered, for our Landgraue is now bestirring himself and is coming to
untie this knot, he has already begun well, for he has taken Volckmersen,
and also besieged Warburg.

From Hamburgh the 17. Dito.
Because tidings is brought that Papenheym is not above four leagues from
Lunenburgh, all the Swedish troops meet together and do intend to join
forces. Duke Francis Charses, the 13. day of this Month with both his
Regiments passed over the Elbe to the said Duke. Those troops which are in
Pomerania, Mecklenburgh, and some from Stoad will also adjoyne with him and
only leave that City blocqued.

From Franckford the 19. April.
Letters from Norimbergh, dated the 16. of this Moneth-certifie that the King
of Sweden has sent his field Marshall to Bambergh and Forsheym, whither the
Marquis George should alsomarch to besiedge the same place.

Some Spanish forces (as it is reported) are passed over the River Mosel and as
letters do mention, have taken Traerbach and Limmeren. The Rhyne-grave finding
himself too weak retired back, and to strengthen himself lightens some
forces out of Dentz and other Garrisons.

Now presently we have received tidings that the King of Sweden with his Army
is passed over the River Lech, the troops were passing over at noone the 15.
of this Month, until the next day in the afternoon late, they marched to
Tierhaubten by the river Altha. We cannot yet certify you whither he will
pass that River or no. It is more probable that he will first march to
Ausburg, and labor to get the same into his possession The General Tilly is
broke up from Ra^i, and durst pot keep there any longer but has forsaken that
quarter, being advertised of his Majesty's coming, which quarter the Swedish
have now taken. We shall now soon learn whither General Tilly will give
battle to the King. It is supposed that he cannot avoid, for the King is at the
very back of him, so that a few days will resolve this doubt. At Kerpen were
lately mustered 8500. horse which shall suddenly march toward the River Mosel.

From Bergen op-Zoom the 19. dito.
In Sealand this last week was brought in a prize of 440. Chests of Sugar.

Upon the 16. day of this Month of April, all our soldiers were mustered, and
they were caused to take a new Oath. Doubtless his Excellence will now ere
long go to field.

From Amsterdam the 17. dito.
His Majesty of France causes some troops of horse, and some Regiments of
foot to be levied at Luyck, and there is great confluxe, so that he cannot want
men. The Drum beats also for the Emperor, but men have no heart to serve on
that side.

His Majesty is daily expected at Versailes. The feast of the great Popish
Iubilye has been lately celebrated in France, and his Majesty himself with
the Queen have both been in Procession at Saint German. Monsieur De la Force
is yet about Metz. Upon the frontiers of Germany. Duke De Rohan is in the
Grisons Country to ensure the passage there into Italy. The Alliance of France
with the King of Sweden is very firm, and the French will neither trust the
Spanish or Imperialists. Moreover daily great forces are levied for the French
King, and many troops sent into Picardy.

Count John of Nassau. Count De Sante Lazar with 19. Companies of horse, have
convoyd the Colonel Balanzon into Breda with a Regiment of Burgunders, this is
a very strong Regiment. The aforenamed 19. Companies marched from Breda to the
country of Luyck, so forward to march to Mastricht, being convoyd with some
countrymen, who are two or three thousand strong. Which country people seeing
them much wearied were very willing to assist them, but with this condition,
that they should content themselves with such reasonable provision as they
should be able to furnish them withal, of hay, Corn, Bread, Beer, Oats,
Victuals, etc. This they seemed to take contentedly and for very reasonable
satisfaction. The Country people dreamt of no harm, neither did they so much
as entertain any evil suspicion. But these vndisciplin'd soldiers, were
imagining mischief all this while, insomuch they did but lay in wait for a
seasonable opportunity, to execute their bloody intentions. For at the last
when they saw their time, they fell upon these poor honest harmless country
people, and made a bloody massacre amongst them, slew at least 300. of them,
and wounded many more of them. Hereupon they sent some certain Committees to
Bruxells to make complaint of this miserable and wrongful slaughter. And being
all the fault was laid upon Count De Sanct Lazar, we do understand that he is
fled and has betaken himself into a Cloister in Lovain.

The last week past there was sent a great sum of money from the Hage, to
Dort, some suppose it to be for the payment of the soldiers, others are of
opinion that the same is to be employed about some other use. But the time
will decide the question.

The Count of Swarzenburgh. Ambassador of the Prince Elector of Brandenburgh is
departed, from the Hage, and again returned toward Germany.

At Br^xells commissions are granted for the leuying of 60 troops of horse for
the Emperor. But the question is where they will be had, and how they can be
spared.

His Excellence for the ensuring of the City Grane, has caused two seonces to
be built there, one above and another below the City.

The Secretary of John de la Gova, who was sometime Governor of the Castle of
Antwerpe, was beheaded the 2. of April. First, he was accused that he had two
wives, thereupon he was apprehended, and afterward his Counting house and
writings being searched into, it was found out, that there was some private and
Clandestine correspondency between the Hollanders and him, which struck the
fatal blow.

The true and perfect Relation concerning the maine passage, now expected, and
lately happened between the King of Swedens and the Imperial Army. Notified
by a Letter written from the King of Sweden his Army, then encamped about
Overendorp, near the River Lech. Which Letter was dated the 16. of April.
1632.
IT has pleased Almighty God this second time to show himself favorable
toward his Church, and to work a great work for us. For the passage over the
River of Lech could not possibly be passed over, without very great difficulty.
The reason is because General Tilly with his whole Army lay on the other side.

This River is not very broad, but runs very swiftly and is very hardly
passed over. His Maj. of Sweden being acquainted with the same River, had
discryed and taken notice of some place where the River does circumvent and
encompasse some ground, as it were in form of an Island. His Maj. of Sweden
did entrench this whole Circle, where two days since he caused batteries to be
built and raised, and with a retrenchment drew the same to one Line, right
before the Island his May. caused the Bridge to be laid, and sent some men on
the other side with piles there to be fastened. Where also they raised a half
Moon. Whereupon at several places the Alarm was struck up, and the troops
began to march; but whereas yesterday, early in the morning there did rise a
very foggy mist, the enemy knew not whither to betake himself, nor whereabouts
aim at his adversary. Being in this strait he was constrained in his
judgment, to place six Regiments of his forces, into the Wood near at hand,
where also he raised some batteries against us, and the whole day next ensuing,
did play upon us with some reasonable earnestness; in the mean time our
forces slept not, but with some ready payment answered them. Insomuch that
notwithstanding they took the Wood for their shelter, in the upshot a great
many dead Corpse were left behind them.

Yesterday in the Evening, our Army did perceive that Tilly drew back and
retired all his Baggage, and he himself in the night fled and went his ways
with all his Troops. This morning very early, his May. hastened over the
bridge (which yesterday was ready in good convenient time) first 300. and
afterward 500. horse more, which ^ought back suddenly many prisoners. These
Prisoners ^oe certainly and confidently relate, that Tilly himself was shot in
one of his thighs or legs, and that Altringer was shot on the head, and Merodi
shot dead. The Duke of Bavaria was himself in person with this Army.

Another from the same place the same Dito.
When his Royal May. caused the bridge to be laid over the River Lech, he at
the same time also caused 62. pieces of Ordnance to be planted upon several
batteries, from the which, he caused the same Ordnance to play continually. And
notwithstanding the enemy did oppose himself with 4. great Ordnance, and
discharged very freely upon us, nevertheless we lost no more but one Carpenter
and one Gunner. Our horsemen did very earnestly pursue their fugitive enemies;
insomuch, that they left behind them abundance of munition and other
commodities. Now Bavaria must look to it, for it is like to suffer.

From Lech-housen, half a League from Augsburgh, the 18. of April.
This day about five of the Clock, his Maj. of Sweden a^rived hereabouts with
his whole Army, he has already two Bridges, and one Sconce, and now the
Ordnance are intentively placed against Augsburg. Those within the City, did
very hotly discharge but to no purpose.

The Bavarians have already been constrained to forsake and quite relinquish
Nieuburg and Rain, where the Swedish found some pieces of Ordnance, and great
store of good munition. The said Bavarians have also abandoned Dunckenspil and
Nordlingen with great perplexity.

From Franckford the 22. of April.
We have received certain intelligence, and full and firm confirmation, by
posted Messengers, speedily sent to the Queen of Sweden, that since the late
passage over the Lech, the General and Field-Marshall Horn does continually
pursue the fugitive General Tilly, and that near unto the City Aichia, above
3000. were laid dead upon the very place, and 1500. taken Prisoners. Upon which
bloody place the Emperialists, and the Generals forces left behind them 6.
great pieces of Ordnance, and great store of Munition: His Majesty of Sweden
having beleaguered or besieged A^gsburgh with 20000. and also sent 10000. to
Munchen, diverse Cities and places durst no longer stand out, but brought their
City keys, and delivered them up to the said Kings Majesty. Yea they came from
12. and 15. leagues off, round about, to make a treatible composition with his
Majesty, being weary willing to contribute whatsoever might be reasonably
imposed upon them.

Aichia, Thierhaubten, Hohnweert, Papenhoven, and diverse other places, have
yielded up themselves very willingly and freely to his Majesty of Sweden.

The General Tilly himself is fled to the City Saeldentall; where he hopes to
re-assemble and gather together his scattered troops. Hereof we shall shortly
have more certainty.

Through this City and diverse other places, from several parts, many forces
pass toward Mentz; where the King of Sweden his Chancellor Oxenstiern, does
assemble together 20000. men, to cross and encounter the Spanish forces about
the River Mosell.

The Field-Marshall Arnheym is now suddenly marched with his whole complete
Army, from Saxony to Bohemia: whom God speed.

From Mentz the 13. of April.
I do not doubt but you have understood the disarming of the Protestants at
Augsburgh, and therefore I will not tell it you again, but only I will show
you what observations I make in particular about that business.

On the 2. of April, by a Proclamation it was forbidden in Augsburgh, that
none of the Inhabitants there should come abroad out of their houses: And it
was then signified by the Magistrate unto a principal protestant there, that
General Ossa had order to come with his Army thither, unless the vncatholike
Burgers (who easily might yield to long for, the King of Sweden) would freely
and willingly deliver up all their arms, that so a reasonable Garrison might
be assured of them. Now there was then already above 1800. foot and some 600.
horse in garrison enquartered in the suburbs, and commanded by Count Otto Henry
Fugger, which Count had given his word to the Magistrate in the name of the
Duke of Bavaria that the garrison should not be increased; But his word was
kept as are all other promises, made by great Officers of the Imperialists and
Catholic league.

Howsoever the Protestants what by threatenings of the coming of Ossa, with an
Army; what by fair promises that their Garrison should not be increased; were
enduced and forced, to deliver up all their arms, which were fecthed house by
house, by some forty Musquitiers accompanied with a wagon, a Clerk and an
Officer that were expressly appointed for several streets.

Now whilst the Protestants delivered up their arms with much coffeehouse
and displeasure, and some with strange protestations and wishes to get them by
some or other way back again; There came news unto the Catholic Magistrate,
that there was appointed and coming from the Duke of Bauaria a new Governor
for that City, whereby all the Papists received as much displeasure as the
protestants had at their disarming. This gave occasion to both parties to
complain; and as it were to condole and join together. Howbeit since that
time, there came daily in more troops, who being enquartered and lodged in the
Protestants houses, made the Papists to be bold again and pretend to hear of
great wonders that Tilly shall do against the King of Sweden.

Especially there arrived one Colonel Breda, who has the absolute command in
the said City, which to satisfy more, he presently caused many men to work
in several parts, which work goes on as well as their Engineers do order it.

And now we receive news, that the King having made a bridge over the Lech in
spite and in the sight of the great Tillian Army and killed an infinite
number by his Canon (which continually did play upon the said enemies works,
camp and especially into a little wood, wherein lay many troops, expecting to
make some exploit, against some Swedes that went over in boats) and enforced
Tilly to dislodge without any noise, from these parts, and to withdraw himself
with more have then ever did Gustavus Hoorn out of Bambergh. The King sent some
of his Army toward Augsburgh, which he followed himself the next day; whilst
some other forces of his, waited on Tilly, who having forsaken Newburgh, is
gone toward Ingolstat, And so the King (if the letters I receive say true)
arrived himself on the 18. of this Month near Augsburgh, where his presence
could not appear without some present exploit: which was, that his men
instantly took two forts and the Bridge at Lechausen withal.

FINIS.

