An Hower-glasse of Indian News.

woodcut of ship

AN Hour Glass of Indian News.

OR A true and tragical discourse, showing the most lamentable miseries, and
distressed Calami ties endured by 67 Englishmen, which were sent for a supply
to the planting in Guiana in the year. 1605.

Who not finding the said place, were for want of victual, left ashore in
Saint Lucia, an Island of Caniballs, or Men-eaters in the West-Indyes, under
the Conduct of Captain Sen-Iohns, of all which said number; only a 11. are
supposed to be still living whereof 4. are lately returned into England.

Written by John Nicholl, one of the aforesaid Company.

Homo es? humani nila te alienum puta. LONDON Printed for Nathaniell Butter,
and are to be sold at his Shop near Saint Austens Gate. 1607.

To the right Worshipful Sir Thomas Smith of London Knight, governor of the
worshipful company of Merchants of London, trading the East Indies.
THe fortunate company of most Writers, profess themselves (as it seems in
their Dedications) to have such choice of Patrones, that at length there proves
but one, which out of their many reasons of choice they will make choice of. It
fares not so with me (right Worshipful) who find reasons weak to induce me,
but necessity strong to enforce me to crave your Patronage: Unless this be a
reason, that from you alone I can hope for, both that countenance to warrant
me, and that courteousnes, not to discountenance me, that judgment to find,
and yet that gentleness to forgive; being as none of those that are Intus caeci
foris oculati, so neither of those that are wise at home, and fools abroad:
acquainted, and delighted to be acquainted with foreign matters, knowing that
though they be foreign yet they be humane, and that it is nothing else, Res
humanas negligere: then Humanitatem ipsam, naturamque humanam exucre. Which if
it be a reason, it is all, and yet it is such an one as is borrowed from you,
breaths by you, and dies in your dislike. The case then standing (R.
Worshipful) that I am forced being a stranger, to betake my self to such a
one, to whose knowledge and experience, a Country is but a City, and the
whole world a Country, and therefore with whom the stranger is no stranger: I
most humbly request your Worcester. that it be not any way offensive to you, which
was every way necessary to me. For be it from any to imagine, that I sought
hereby to add any thing to your Ocean: But who thinks this, thinks not a
miss, that I hoped the relation of a miserable and lamentable voyage, would so
much more move you then many others, by how better you apprehend such things
then many others.

Such therefore as it is I have, and such as I have, I give, and in most
humble and hearty manner, offer to be viewed then, when you give your serious
eyes leave to play. Thus beseeching God to send his continual, and perpetual
blessings upon you and all yours, I humbly take my leave.

Yours humble in all duty: John Nicholl.

To the Reader
COurteous Reader, albeit I might be indifferent how thou censure my doings
herein, forasmuch as I have the thousand strong of my conscience to witness
with me, that I published this pamphlet with no worse intention then with the
very best namely to make known unto the world the greatness and goodness of
God, miraculously showed unto us: yet if it would please thee to think the
best, thou should add unto my joy, without any detraction from thy self,
nay by showing thy self to have bonum animum, thou should persuade me that
thou have bonam mentem, for bona men's, bonus animus, a good mind, a good
thought. Wherefore let me entreat thee to be one hour in thy life so idle as
to abide the running out of this Houre-glasse. Many things we felt which here
are not to be found, by reason that the desperateness of our case delivered
them to neglect, and neglect to oblivion. This that is here is the just
account of a perfect memory, tending not to discourage any from attempting the
like, but rather to encourage with the munition of providence, because
Praemonitus, praemunitus, forewarned, well armed. Thus requesting you that my
wants may be supplied in thy gentleness: adding then strength to thy
goodness, when thou meetest with my weakness, I bid the heartily farewell.

Thine to the best of his power: John Nicholl.

VIS nondum natus, vis viuere mortuus olim?
Tempora temporibus iunge aliena tuis.
Vis paruus magnus fieri, vinctusque solutus?
Tu loca vicinis iunge remota locis.
Non vita est, vitas qua vitat vita alienas:
Libera men's non est sequitur quae corpus vt vmbra
Pars vitae, Indorum vita remota, mea est,
Quo men's it libro rapta (Nichole) tu^.
I. C.

Dear bought, far sought, they say will Ladies please
They pleased, good manners will that meaner be:
Fear no repulse, O news from Indian seat!
For man he is not, is not mannerly.
H. S.

A True and Tragical Discourse, showing the most lamentable miseries, and
distressed calamities, endured by 67. English men, which were sent for a
supply to the planting in Guiana, in the year 1605.
TO make a long and tedious discourse of that which may be uttered in few
words, expe^ ^ce teaches, does rather move a loathing in the Reader, then any
way procure a liking either in reader or hearer: in which respect I have rather
desired briefly to deliver a plain truth, which of it self to the wise and
discreet is ever most acceptable, then with filed phrases, or eloquent terms
(which indeed in me are wanting) to add any thing more then is most true,
neither to represent, or lay open to the view of the world, ought more then
what my self with my associates have had as woeful experience, as ever (in my
judgment) had any creatures living under the Canopie of Heaven: only thus much
I think it not impertinent to deliver, for the better explanation of that
which follows, I make no question, but that the greater sort of people, which
either have travailed themselves, had conversation with trauaylers, or employed
themselves to much reading, are not ignorant that in the maine of America, in
that part thereof which is vulgarly called The west India, amongst many other
large Teritories and Dominions, is the great and mighty Kingdom of Guiana,
situated near about the middle of the said continent, or somewhat more
southerly, it being near under yt Equinoctial line, the Souther most part
thereof, and extending it self to about some 5. or 6. degrees of North
Latitude, being bordered on the South-west with Perue, on the South with
Amazonis, on the North with Mexico, and on the East with the Ocean Sea.

The said Country of Guiana was first discovered or made known to our
English Nation, as far as I can learn, about the year of our Lord 1594. at
the charge and direction principally of Sir Walter Rawleigh: the same again
seconded by himself the year following: afterward again by Captain Keymish
and oth^^^, at the charges of the said Sir Walter Rawleigh it being reputed to
be the chiefest place for gold Mines in all the West India: but the
prosecution thereof being left off for a time, by what occasion I know not, it
so happened that in the year of our Lord 1602, Captain Charles Leigh made a
voyage thither, for the discovery thereof, and finding a fit place for
habitation, determined to procure the planting of a Colonie there in the River
Wiapica, which said determination at his return being put in practice, with
the furtherance and special charge of the worshipful Knight Sir Olive Leigh,
certain men were sent thither, there to inhabit under the conduct of the
aforesaid Captain Charles Leigh, who remained there about a year and a half,
where he with many of his company dyed. For a supply unto which company,
was another company sent, in the year 1605. at the charges of the said Sir
Olive Leigh, and certain other adventurers* of which company my self was
one, all under the conduct and leading of Captain Sen-Iohns, who being
embarked in the Olive Branch of Sir Olive Leigh, whereof was captain and
master under God, captain Catlin and Arthur Chambers.

Being thus ready, do set sail the twelfth of April one thousand six
hundred and five, nothing happening worth note, till we came as high as the
North Cape, where an English Bark ouertaking us, four of our Gentlemen, by
reason of their sickness were desirous to return home again, so that
getting their passage for Lisbone, they took their leave of us, whose names
were, Master Rogers, Master Catlin, Master Sanders, and another whose name I
do not now remember. So we continued our course to the Canaries, and so to
Cape Blancko in Barbary, and from thence to the I Will of Mayo: in which time of
our voyage it fell out as often it happens in such actions, that our company
being divided, (as being some seamen, and the rest land-men, who are for the
most part many times of contrary natures) there was some heart-burning and
malice one against another, which rested not only in the common sort, but
rather and most chiefly in our captains, whose haughty minds not brooking
contradiction on either side, had like to have grown to a dangerous
distention, had it not been appeased by the diligent persuasions of some other
of the company, whose plausible spirits were more addicted to unity and
peace, then any way liking of such dangerous and indirect courses, they well
fore-knowing that civil discord have been the overthrow of mighty
kingdoms, and great commonweals, and therefore well might have been the
utter subversion of our so weak and slenderly governed company. But all
parties being now (as it seemed) to the outward view quieted, we went a shore
upon the said I Will of. Mayo to take in fresh water and s^lt, where we found 5.
Portugals, which had bin robbed by the French, and there set a shore, where
having stayed five days hunting of Goats, and refreshing of our men, we
departed to saint Iago, where we landed the five Portugals, in reward of which
kindness of ours, the Inhabitants took three of our men, and kept them as
prisoners while they sent seven leagues into the Country to know the
Governors pleasure, and at night sent them aboard again, having taken
certain commodities from them, which they had to buy some of their fruits.

From thence (having weyed our Anchor) with a merry gale we sailed toward
our desired place to the country of Guiana: but missing of our expectation,
here began the first scene of our ensuing miseries: for whether it was our
Masters want of knowledge that we fell not with the prefixed place, or that the
current which our master alleged to be the reason, that setting very strongly
to the North-wards, put us so far short thereof, or whither (as of all others
that is most certain) it pleased God in that place at that time, and in such a
manner, to let us feel some part of his heavy displeasure, conceived against
us for our times formerly misspent: so as I say the ending of our hopes was the
beginning of our miseries: for plying to and again, wandering as it were in a
wilderness of woe, betwixt hope and despair, the time passed away and with
the time our victuals, the only hop^ of our health exceedingly wasted:
thereupon our allowance was greatly shortened, and with the same and other
occurrencee our men's minds very much distracted, which bred amongst us many
fearful and dangerous mutinies. And as one misery comes still in the neck
of another, so fared it with us: for with our want of victuals, we being near
unto the Equinoctial, and the Sun in that part of the Zodiac which was near
unto our Zenith, it was so exceeding hot, that with the vehemency thereof many
of our men fell marvelous weak, and some of them died, namely our Carpenters
mate John Brown, our Cook, and Robert Pain, and many others were is weak,
that they were not able to come above the hatches. This extremity caused us
(though against our stomachs) to entreat the master to bring us to the nearest
shore he could. And so having been seventeen weeks at sea, in stead of our
hopeful expectations of attaining to a pleasant, rich and golden Counteey, and
the comfortable company of our friends and Contrymen, there as we supposed
then resident, we were brought to an Island in the West India somewhat distant
from the maine, called Santa Lucia, having about twelve degrees of North
latitude, inhabited only with a company of most cruel Caniballs and
man-eaters, where we had no sooner anchored, but the Carebyes came in their
Periagoes or Boats aboard us with great store of Tobacco, Plantons, Potatoes,
Pines, Sugar Canes, and diverse other fruits, with Hens, Chickens, Turtles, and
Guauas: for all which we contented and pleased them well. These Carrebyes at
their first coming in our sight, did seem most strange and ugly, by reason
they are all naked, with long black hair hanging down their shoulders, their
bodies all painted with red, and from their ears to their eyes, they do make
three strokes with red, which makes them look like devils or Anticke faces,
wherein they take a great pride.

The next morning we went a shore with all our weak men, where there was six
or seven houses planted by a pleasant fresh water River, which Captain
Sen-iohns bought for a Hatchet of an Indian Captain called Anthony, who could
speak a little Spanish, and he told us he had been a slave to the Spaniard in
the I Will of Margareta: so he and al his company went to another town some
three miles of.

Whilst our sick men were a shore refreshi^g themselves, our Master would
have departed, and have left them to shift among the Carrebyes, but Captain
Sen-Iohns, and the chief of our company would not consent thereto. And seeing
it was in vain all of us for to venture home in the Ship with that small
allowance, we were willing to come a shore, and there to live until it should
please God to send some means to bring us a way: upon that condition they
should deliver unto us one great piece, and every man his Musket and weapons,
and half the munition in the ship, with all our Chests and commodities
whatsoever, which he would not grant, before we had subscribed to a certain
Writing which he wrote to excuse himself at his return into England: so we
received four little Barrels of powder, and ten round Bullets for the great
Piece, which when we brought a shore did much fear the Indians, for they
asked us if we brought it to kill them. But to please their humors, we told
them it was to kill the Spaniards, and then they came and helped us a shore
with her, and with all our Chestes, of their own accord.

Now after they had delivered all things a shore out of the Boat, we thought it
good to stay her, and to keep her for our own use, for we did not know what
need we might have of such a commodity afterward: so we sent the sailers
aboard in an Indian Boat, only three would not go but would stay with us: so
we were in all left a shore threescore and seven in the Isle of Saint Lucca.

At night when we were all sitting together at supper about a great fire, which
they could well perceue from the ship when it was dark: and as it should seem
in revenge of their Boat, before they departed they purposed to let us know
they were not well pleased with the action, they shot a great piece at us with
a single Bullet, but as it pleased God it fell down by the side of our house,
and missed us, which if it had come amongst us we sitting so thick, it could
not have chosen but have been the death of many of us.

This made Captain Sen-Iohns discharge our piece at them, without intent to
hurt them, but fairly ouershot them: for he might have sunk them, and would if
they had shot once more: then presently they weyed Anchor and departed.

The next morning Captain Sen-Iohns went in the Boat, with fifteen more in
his company, to trade with Anthonio his father for Rone cloth, which he had
saved at sea great store: but when we came there, contrary to our expectation,
we found our ship there trading with them, who had incensed the Indians sore
against us, telling them that we were had people, and would take all they had
from them, and would cut their throats.

And as we towed along the shore, they discharged half a dozen piece of
Ordenance, and a volly of small shot at us, but there great shot ouershot us,
and light upon the rocks, and scarred the Indians a shore mightily, and their
small shot light short without harming us. Their decermination was to drive
us from our Boat, or else to have sunk her, for their great shot came so
thick that we were forced to leap a shore into the Woods: then they manned
their Periago, and came to take our Boat away, which we perceiving entered her
again, and escaped all their malice: so we returned home again safe, and
they departed toward Saint Vincent, the eighteenth or ninteenth of August, 1605.

After the departure of our ship we remained in peaceable manner amongst the
Indians, daily trading with them for all manner of victual, as Plantons,
Potatoes, Penas, Papaians, Pumpins, Gallobashoes, Pappes, Mammies, Guiauas,
with diverse other fruits, and Tobacco abundance, all very pleasant to eat.
Also they brought Turtles, Guanas Hens and Chickens, Woodcocks and Snipes, with
some Pellicans.

As for the Turtles, we our selves did use every night by courses to send out
six to catch them, which is easily done, by reason that every night they use
to come a shore, and lay their eggs in the sand, and by the heat of the Sun they
are hatched. At their coming out of the water they do make as broad a tract as
a Cart with their sins, by which means we are led to the place where they
do sit, and so we turn them on their backs, which being done, they can do
nothing but so lie till they be dead. The meat of them does eat like unto
Veale, and I have seen taken out of one of them to the number of six or
seven hundred eggs, which we do fry with the fat or oil of the Turtle,
and also with Cassada we did make exceeding good White-pots and Puddings,
putting the Eggs and Oil into it. Also the Guana is proportioned like a
Serpent, more then an ell long, with four short feet. In eating it is like a
Connie, and has in his belly to the number of five and twenty or thirty
Eggs.

This Cassada is a root of a tree, whose iuce is poison: but being squeassed,
the flower does make an excellent kind of bread, and will keep long.

The Indians did marvel much at our manner of dressing our meat, and they
would be familier, and would dine with us very often, but by no means we
could not make them eat salt: for they use to eat all their meat seasoned
with Ginnie Pepper: their women came very seldom unto us, for they are very
jealous over them. Once or twice there came some women with them, unto whom
we gave shirts to cover their nakedness, whereof they seemed proud: Their
ancient women are very ugly, by reason of their side breasts, which does lie
like empty bags: but those which have not given suck, are well proportioned
and proper.

Also we had a Net, with the which we would get at one draught as many fish of
diverse sorts, as would serve all our company a day.

A little before our arrival, three Spanish ships were cast away, and much of
the goods these Indians had saved with their Boats, and hid it in the Woods,
they had so much Roan cloth, that all their Periagoes had sails thereof. They
also had great store of stuff, Sirge, and Spanish woollen cloth, cloakes and
apparel: insomuch that if we had had a Bark of forty tuns burden, we could
have laden her home with such commodities as would have made a saving voyage.
All which we could have bought for hatchets, knives, beads, fish-hookes, and
thimbles, with other trifles.

Thus for the space of five or six Weeks, we went not much abroad, but cut
down the Woods about our houses every day, and mounted our great Piece upon
broad Tables, which we our selves had sawne, least the Carrebyes should at
any time assault us.

Soon after this, there came onother Captain from Saint Vincent, called
Augraumart, which was brother to Anthonio, who was offended with him for
selling the houses unto us: for the which cause Anthonio bid us kill him, and
told us he purposed to bring twelve Periagoes laden with Carrebyes to kill
us, but we found this Augraumart very kind unto us, and was willing to do,
or tell us any thing we desired him, for he taught us to make a Grater, which
he made of small sharp flint stones beaten into a broad board to grate our
Cassada on, whereof we made our bread, and he told us, that Anthonio would
cut our throats, and therefore bid us kill him. This made us doubtful which
to trust to.

We had certain Articles drawn, which were to be observed, wherein Captain
Nicholas Sen-Iohns was Captain: his brother Alexander Lieutenant, Miles Pet,
and Philip Glascock were commanders for the appoynting of our Watch: John
Rogers was our interpreter for the Spanish tongue, and was to buy and bargain
with the Indians for all the company, both for commodities and victuals,
Master Garret, Master Tench, Francis Brace, and my self, were appointed to
order the domestical matters.

Carebie signifies in their language, A valiant man.
All the occasions yt we made whereby the Carrebyes should fall out with us, was
that one of our company did sell a sword unto Captain Anthonio, which was
contrary to the Articles we had set down, for none was (upon pain of severe
punishment) to sell either Sword, Dagger, or Hedge-bill: which when we knew,
Alexander Sen-Iohns with a dozen more went to his house, and found him in his
bed, which they call an Hamaco, with a little fire under him because hs was not
well, and the Sword standing by him, which young Sen-Iohns took and brought
forth to us. This drove him into a great rage against us, for never after that
would he be familiar with us.

The Carrebyes did wear for an ornament upon the small of their naked aims a
foure-square plate, which master Brown a Gold-finer told Captain Sen-Iohns
had three parts of it Gold, who asked the Carrebyes where they got it? who
presently pointed us to a great Mountain on the North-west part of the Island,
whose top we might see from the place where we dwelt: but Anthonio said
there was none. These contrary tales made us suspect some villainy, and that
it was but a policy to draw some of our company thither, whereby they might
the better deal with us: for at home they d^rst not attempt any thing against
us, both for fear of our great Piece, and also we would not suffer them to
bring their bows and arrows within our Centinell. Yet our Captain would not
be content till we consented that he should go to the Mountain, and took
with him all sorts of commodities to bargain with the Indians for Cloth, and
he took old Brown the Gold-finer, and his son George Brown, John Rogers,
Master Looking, the three sailers, whose names were, John Fleming, Thomas
Butler, Owen a Welchman, James Garret, and one Joseph and Christopher, two
Grocers, and one Master Euans, with diverse more, to the number of sixteen.

And upon A Monday they all embarked in the Boat taking eight days victual
with them, promising to return betwixt that and the next Monday, leaving his
brother Miles Pet, Philip Glascock, M. Garret, M. Tench, and my self, to rule
at home. Upon Tuesday and Wednesday the Indians did not come unto us with
victuals as they had wo^t, which made us after suspect that they were at the
slaughter of our men at the Mount: and upon Wednesday, my self with 3. more
went to Anthonios house, where we found a great number of women, but not
passing half a score men, making great preparation of victuals: some baking of
Cassada, others roasting and boiling of great fishes and Turtles. I offered to
buy some of them, but they refused and would not, neither would they look of
any commodity we had, which made us much marvel: for before that time they
never denied us: so we departed, and by the way we light of a narrow path
wherein we traveled a little, and all along the way did grow abundance of
Guiaua trees, whose fruit is as big as an Apple, and very pleasant to eat:
the green ones are wholesome for the bloody flixe.

We had not trauayled a Mile, but we entered down by a Thicket into a most
pleasant Garden of Potatoes, which drove us into great admiration to behold
the manner of it, for it was made round like a Bower, encompassed with a green
Bank, so equally, that made us think some Christians had made it for a
strength to save them from the Indians: and upon the top thereof did grow a
company of the most tallest Trees that ever I beheld, which did naturally
grow so near one to another, and so thick from the root to the top, that
we could not perceive the sky through them. But following the path, we
perceived it to pass through a narrow cut in the bank, where we traueyled
two or three miles further, passing through many goodly Gardens, wherein was
abundance of Cassada, Potatoes, Tobacco, Cotten-wool-trees, and Guiaua trees,
in diverse places as we trauayled we did marvel to see the huge and great
trees that were there: for most of them were five or six fathoms about, and
fearing that we should be benighted, we returned the same way again, with
as much green Tobacco, Potatoes, and Cassada, as we could carry, which did
much content our men at home: for the Indians had not brought any victuals in
three days before.

At night six of our men went to seek for Turtles, and found two very great
ones, but could not bring them home. For when they had turned them on their
backs, it began to rain, thunder, and lighten so extremely, that they had
much a do to get home themselves, and so it continued all night, with the
most horriblest thunderclaps that ever I heard, with lightning and rain as
light as day, which caused us to awake, and after prayers to fit all night by
great Fires, drinking of Tobacc, with extraordinary mirth amongst our
selves, little foreseeing the danger that befell to us the next day.

Early the next Morning, we went to bring home our Turtles, and there we
found a great number of Carrebyes on the shore, and three or four Boats by
them, roasting of land Crabbes, for what purpose they were so gathered
together we know not, but least we should suspect them of any bad intent
toward us, they willed us to eat with them, and brought home our Turtles to
our houses.

All that fore-noone we kept good watch, for there was very many which came
both by Sea and land. and Augraumart and his father came with a great number of
Indians, and brought in his hand a quarter of a Turtle, and a hundred Eggs,
and gave them to young Sen-Iohns, and told him, that if he would go to his
Brother Anthonius house, he should have great store of victuals, and that
he should see his wife, and the more to persuade us to go, he promised that
we should have Hamacas for to sleep in, which is the beds they use.

Their Women does make them of Cotton that grows naturallye on the Trees,
wereof they have abundance. We many times made s^te unto them for their
Hamacas, because they would be a means to save us from the Stings of
curtain. Flor called a Musketo, the which would so torment us with their pay
loved stings, and cause us to swell as though we had the Leprosy, for they
would sting through three payr^ of Stockings, but they were not willing till
now on the sudden that we should have any. And because they were so kind to
us, we took them all into our houses, and were very merrye and pleasant with
them, and gave them Aqua vitae which they delighted much in.

But Master Tench (who had wont to be a curious corrector of us in our
merr^ments) did show himself so extraordinary pleasant, that he fell a
singing of Catches with the Carrebyes, and caused them in drink carouses of
Aqua vitae and water.

If we had been determined to have killed them, we might have done it at that
time with small danger, we had a hundredth and above of them within out houses
without either dowe or Arrows. And when some of our company, made such a
motion as to put them to the Sword (for some of us was half and more jealous
of them, that they had done some mischief to our captain, by reason one of
our company did say, that he heard an Indian say, that the Captain of the
English had his hand cut off at the Mount) but this was not regarded, but
was imputed that he had misconstrued the Carrobyes language. Master Tench was
against it, saying: God would not be pleased with such a bloody Act, against
such harmless people, and therefore willed us not to do it without they gave
the first occasion, wherein he wronged himself and us all, in seeking to save
the lives of them, who within three hours after most cruellye murdered him.

Before Dinner they all departed, but Augraumart and his father, who dined with
us. And presently after dinner, eighteen was chosen to go to Anthonios house
with Augraumart and his father, who had neither bow nor arrow: only his
father had a Brasell sword.

This they did least we should suspect their treachery. But we not fearing
any treason, because we had been often times well used there before, went on
boldly,

And some of our company thought that the very fight of our Pieces was
sufficient to terrify them, for attempting any villainy against us. And
therefore did not ^egarde either to charge them, or to light our match.

In this careless and secure manner we trauayled through a little neck of
land which runs far into the Sea, and then we entered upon the sand, which
was so extreme hot with the reflection of the Sun that we were not able to
travail apace, being laden with our Pieces.

But Master Alexander had put off his Doublet, and gave his Boy his Piece, and
went jesting and playing arm in arm with the two Carrebyes a good space
before us, until we came to a point of Land a quarter of a mile from Anthonios
house, and then he called us to come forward, but he being light and cool,
did keep a great way before us still. And when he least suspected danger,
Augraum^^t made as though he would embrace him, And suddenlye clasping hold
with one hand on his Rapyer, and the other on his Dagger, and his Father with a
great Brussell Sword, struck him down before we could come at him, but he
recovered again.

Then came the Arrows so thick out of the wood, that we could not get our
match in the Cock for pulling the Arrows out of our bodies: so amongst us all
was but five or six pieces discharged, which when the Indians saw give fire,
they did fall flat on the ground, shouting and crying with a most hellish
noise, naming us by our names when they hit us.

Then we retired back to a point of land, thinking there to have fitted our
pieces, and to have given them a volley of shot, But there came another Ambush
on our backs, and round about us, insomuch that we were enforced to forsake
our pieces, and betake us to our swords, which did much encourage them, for
when they see we could not hurt them with our pieces, they would come so near
us, as though they purposed to make choice in what place to hit us, of some
they shot in the faces, others through the Shoulders, and of others, they would
nail their feet and the ground together.

Master Budge and Robert Shaw ran into the sea, and there were both drowned
and killed with Arrows, Master Tench had a little Bucklet, with the which be
did save himself a long time, but at the last an Arrowe passed through both
his legs, that he could not go, and stooping to pull it out, they killed him,
and if any of us offered to run at one or two of them, they would run
away, and of a sudden twenty or thirty would enclose us, and still shoot
Arrows in them til they were down, and then would they with a great Brassell
sword beat them to death, and after would rifle them: Master Kettleby did
behave himself very gallantlye, for he did not respect what arrows he
received in his body, so he could but reach one stroke at a Carrebye, but
they were too nimble for us in regard they were naked.

Yet nevertheless, we run through them all, thinking that if we had
escaped that ambush, there had been no more to trouble us, but as I was a
pulling Arrows out of his body, to the number of twenty at the least, there
came the third ambush out of the woods from whence came an Arrowe and hit him
in the Breast, which he perceived would be his death, for he could not stand
but as I hold him, but I was forced to let him go, and shift to save my self.

Then I over took young Sen-Iohns his body almost full of Arrows, of which I
pulled out a number, But what for the blood that run from him, and the
extreme heat he was in by his running, he was not able to overtake the re^t
of our company that was before.

And still the Carrebyes did gather ground upon us, and the Arrows came
thick on every side.

Then he willed me to entreat them stay, and when I had overtaken one, I
caused him to stay, which he was unwilling to do, for he told me his Sword
would not come forth of the Scabberd, so I took hold of the Hilts, and
betwixt us both pulled it out, but before we had made an end, these cruel
and bloodye Carrebyes had encompassed young Sen-Iohns yet (to my grief) I did
stand and behold his end, who before he fell did make them run like so many
Curres from a Lion: for look which way he ran, they all fled before him: his
body was so laden with Arrows, that he fell to the ground: and upon one hand
and knees, he did keep them from him with his Sword, so much he scorned so
basely to dye at their hands.

We two were then the only marks they aimed at: for having rifled young
Seniohus, they pursued us very hotly, which caused us make haste to four of
our fellows, who were entered into a narrow path, which leads through the
woods, from the sands to the Houses where we dwelt: but there was in the path
an other Ambush, which drove them back to the sands again: and when they saw
us so hardly chased, they entered the path with us again.

The one side of the path was a high Mountain, the other went down a low
Valley. The first four took up the Mountayn, by which means, they were a
fair mark for them to hitte, who dropped down one after another.

All this time, neither Harry which was M. Stokeleys man (a Merchant now in
Bucklersbery) nor my self was shot: but as we thought desperately to run
through them in the narrow path, there came an Arrowe and pierced quite
through his head, of the which he fell suddenly, and I ran to lift him up, but
he was dead without speaking one word to me at all.

Then came there two Arrows and hitte me in the back, the one directly
against my heart, the other through my shoulder blade: so (with my sword in my
hand) I ran upon them desperately, thinking (before I had died) to have been the
death of some of them. And in my running, I saw Captain Anthony, with an Arrow
in his Bow drawn against me, who stood until I came very near him (for he
purposes to have sped me with that shot) which when I see come. I thought to
put it by with my sword, but it light on my hand, and passed through the handle
of my sword, and nailed both together: but I continued running at him still;
and before he could nocke another, I made him and all the rest turn their
backs, and run into the sands again: which opportunity when I espied, I leapt
into the wood, down to the valley, where I found a great Lake: And hearing
them, with great showts and cry, which they use in sign of triumph and
victory, pursue me still, I leapt into the Lake, with my sword nailed to my
hand, and two arrows in my back, and by the help of God swamme over, but
with much adoo: for the further side was shallow water, but I waded in mud up
to the waste, which had almost spent me.

Now when I was over, I conuayd my self into the thickest parts of ye wood,
making all the haste I could, to give my fellows, which were at home, warning,
lest the Indians should set on them unawares: and in my going, I came into a
path, and sought for a great tree, to see, if by the aim of the Island, I could
perceive which way our houses stood. Then suddenly I heard a great noise, which
made me stand behind a tree, and there I saw two or three Indians go by me,
which I imagined were going to set on the^ at home: but it pleased God I got
home, and gave warning before their coming: so Miles Pet charged our great
Piece, and al our men were in redines for their coming. Then presently, they
all came in sight upon the sands, whom we sent away (by shooting of our great
Piece) and came no more in 3. days: in which time, we fortified our selves
with our Chests: And upon Monday morning (before we had made an end of prayer)
there came to the number of 13. or 14. C. Indians (both by sea and land,) and
there beset us round, making a noise with their Horns, and made most horrible
cries, which they no use, the more to terryfle their enemies: and we did
answer them again with the like cries, deuyding our selves into 4 parts,
according as we had made our Forts of our Chests, placing five in every Forte,
and three to the great Piece, where Miles Pett, my self and another was. Then
they shot their Arrows among us as thick as hayle, and lest they should
follow in upon us and make use of those Arrows again, we gathered them all
together, and made great fires with them before their faces, and many times
they purposed to rush in upon us by multitudes, and to have beaten us down
with their Brazell Swoordes: But our great Piece was so mounted, that very
readyly we could turn it which way we pleased, and look which way their
greatest company went, we let her fly amongst them. So perceiving that they
could not prevail against us, they put Cotton wool upon the end of their
Arrows, and put fire on them and shot at our Houses which were made on long
Canes or Reeds, and suddenly took fire by reason of the heat of the day, and
burned down to the ground, fastening on our Chests which were our Forts, and
burned all down to the ground, the extreme heat of the flame did make our men
forsake their Forts, and retire behind the great Piece, to the Seaside, which
encouraged the Carrabies mightily. M. William Kettleby lay close unseen of the
Indians upon the sand, and with a long Piece he would reach the^ 12. score
paces, and galled them much: otherwise, they would have come on the backs of
us by Sea, but he shot their Boats through and through, and scard them for
entering that way. Now, when al our men were fled behind the great Piece, only
Philip Glascocke and Richard Garrat stood behind the smoke, and marked where
they purposed to enter, and each of them discharged half a score times at
them: At last, Philip Glascocke received an Arrowe in his head, and Richard
Garrat one in his Breast, and two in his back. And when the Indians saw that
all were fled but them two, they purposed to enter through the smoke upon us:
but in the entering, he gave a warning to Miles Pett to turn the Piece against
the smoke: which presently we did, and let fly amongst them and drove them
all back, with most lamentable skrikes and cries: no doubt but that shot was
the death of many of them: for she was charged with stones. Then they blew
their great Horns, and all rety^ed back to their Boats, without shooting one
Arrowe at us.

After that our house was burned and all our Chests, which before were our
Fort, we fortified our selves with the remnants of the stakes, and thatch which
we saved from burning, setting it in the ground slepewise, covering it with
Sand and Earth, which saved us ever after from their Arrows.

In all these extreme dangers and imminent Calamities which all this while we
endured, let the Christian Reader judge in what a perplexed state we were
plu^ged, seeing still one misery to follow another, and each misery far
exceeding the former: As first, our danger at Sea to be famished: then a
comfortless remedy against Famishment, to be let in a far remote and
unknown place, amongst a cruel, barbarous and inhumane people, without hope
of ever having any means to recover the sight of our native and dear country
and friends* Then the loss of our Captain (and others) which before (in all
extremity) was still some comfort unto us: And now (lastly) these lamentable
stratagems of the massacre of our fellows and friends, therein seeing as in a
Glass, the utter ruin and Butcherly murdering of our own selves, being we
made most assured account to drink of the same Cup: But this was the least
of our fears, and not the greatest of our miseries: For being now for a time
rid of our bloudthirsty Which departed in their Periagos.
enemies, our provision of victuals being al wasted, spent and spoiled, and
having no means to get any more, it would have moved the heart of the
cruellest Tirant in the world to compassion. But in the midst of all this
vnendurable misery, it pleased God (contrary to our expectation, in some sort)
to relieve us even by our enemies: For when all the rest were out of sight, one
Periago returned very well provided of victual, and three or four came on
land, with as much as they were able to carry of Cassada, Potatos and Plantons,
and cried unto us to exchange with the^, first holding up their Bows, and
after laying them on the ground again in sign of peace: which we perceiving,
sent out three likewise to bargain without weapons, carrying Knives, Beads and
other trifles: Which being done, they departed, and we returned, giving praise
to God (thus miraculously) for to feed us, for we had no means of our selves
to get any.

Then, the Net (with the which we had wont get as much fish of all sorts as
would suffice us all for a day) the Indians took from us.

Thus for the space of 6. or 7. days, every day fighting for the space of
three or four hours, and then our victual began to fail again, which
caused us to hold out a Flag of truce: which the Indians perceiving, came in
peaceable manner unto us, Then one Francis Brace (by mean of his French tongue)
made them understand that our desire was to give them all that we had, if they
would let us have a Periago to carry us away, which one Captain Antonio
willingly consented unto, and the next day after brought her, drawing her
ashore within the compass of our Fortes, we giving them, of Hatchets, Knives
and Beads until they were contented: And to please them the more, we gave them
every one a Shouell or a Spade, and so they departed.

And then we went all to work, some to make the Sail, which we made of very
good Roane-cloath, and some to make the Mast: and every one did labor all that
he could, to be ready against night: for Antonio told us, that his Brother
Angrauemart would come the next day from S. Vincent with twelve Perriagos, all
laden with men and Arrows: whose words we always found true, for he could not
dissemble.

And we concluded, rather then we would stay and dye so miserably at the
Carrabies hands, who thirsted for nothing but to eat our flesh, and drink our
blood, as they had done with many other of our fellows, we promised unto the
LORD (who had all this time fought for us,) to betake our selves unto his
mercy, and doubted not but that he would guide us safely to some Christian
Harbor.

And upon the xxvi. of September. 1605. at one a clock after midnight, we
embarked all xix. in that little Vessel or Boat which the Indians had made
all of one tree, she was not so broad as a Wherry, but it was almost as long
again: Our Roapes for our Sail were our Garters, and our Yard, a Lance: She
had a little Rother or Helm, but not one of our company had skyll how to use
it, neither had we Compass to direct us, but sailing by the Sun in the day,
and by the Stars in the night, keeping always betwixt South-west and West:
for we imagined, the maine Land of the West Indies lay so.

The Victuals that we had, were not sufficient to serve that company three
days: for we had not above twenty Biskets, three Cassada Cakes, a dosen
Plantons, and some thirty Potatos: and of Water, some four or five Gallons,
and a little Barrel half full of Rice, which Master Garrard had given him to
serve in the Country of Guyana, if we had gotten thither.

And as it pleased the Lord, he had saved it, until this our great necessity
for the preservation of our lives: for all our other victual was gone in two
days, our water in three days, and then Richard Garrard gave to every two of
us a Porindish of his Rice twice a day, which we washed in salt water and so
eat it rawt. Thus we continued at Sea, seeking for land for the space of
ten days, where we endured one great tempest, although to our great peril,
looking always when we should be swallowed up in the huge waves, the storm
continewing for the space of four and twenty hours, both boisterous for
wind and rain (for all the Sea was in a white foome) which was unto us in the
midst of our danger, a great comfort: for we saved the rain water and druncke
it gladly, thanking God for that good refreshing: who likewise sent the very
fowls of yt air to leede us, for they being weary of their flight, would rest
them on the side of our boat, so that we took them and dried them in the
Sun, with a little Gunpowder and eat them. Our boat was so near the water,
that every wave came over her reddie to sink her, but that four of us did
nothing but laue it out again by courses. To speak of the misery we endured
there, it is impossible; for I cannot express it.

Upon the tenth day after our coming forth of S. Lucea, being the fifth of
October, one Thomas Morgane died, not being able to live of that small
allowance. And at twelve a clock at noone we threw him ouer-boord: and
within an hour after, it pleased God to glad us with a joyful sight of the
land: then we boisted up our sail, fell to row with all the force we could,
making to the nearest place, imagining all dangers were past.

But the wind being calm, we were benighted before we could come at it, and
so wanting the light of the day, we were upon the Rocks before we were
aware: and by reason that the breach of the wave was so great and violent, we
could not hold her off, but (forceably) ran against the Rocks, and there
split our Boat to the very midst, and all our men turned out, I only
holding the Helm, thinking the next Wave would heave her over the Rocks, not
knowing her to be split.

But the Breach was so great, that it turned me under, putting me in great
danger to be grated to pieces with her weight above me against the great
Rocks: And at the last, we all recovered our selves, some sitting upon great
Rocks, others on the roots of great Trees, thynking there to save our selves
till the morning: And I finding a long Poale which fell out of our Beat, took
it and asked if any would venture to the shore with me: which Francis Brace
perceiving, took the other-ende: So we two waded to the Land, and then the
rest all followed, and some brought Perrywinckles in their hands, and broke
them out of the shelles and did eat them raw: then every one cried out for
fresh Water. So William Pickes and my self went to seek for water: but we had
not gone half an hour, but we came to our Fellows again, without finding
of any Water to comfort us withal. So, the place where we landed, proved to
be a broken Island encompassed with the Sea, about a league from the Main.

As soon as it was Day, we ^igged pit^es in the ground for fresh water, but
could find none that was to be drunk: some went to the Boat to save such
commodyties, as were left vndriuen away with the Sea: Others found
Perrywinckles on the Rocks, which was all the victual we had to eat: but
our stomachs were so weak, we could not eat above two or three a day. Thus
not knowing what course to take to save our lives from famine, one Miles Pet,
William Pickes, and my self went and haled the Boat out of the rocks to the
shore, which was split to the very midst, and so far with our swords we cut
off, and put in a head in the midst, and fastened it with our Daggers, Knives,
and Bodkins, stopping all the leakes with our shirtes.

So five of our company ventered in her to the maine land, their names were
Miles Pett, William Kettlebie, William Pickes, Francis Brace, and William
Butcher, leaving Richard Garrard, Philip Glascocke, John Coxford and my self
with the rest in this hungry and desolate Island. And at last it pleased God to
bring them to the maine land: they haled their Boat along the shore,
crossing many great rivers, wherein they were pursued by diverse devouring
Serpents of the Sea, as the Alligortos, who are of such force, that they will
pull a horse under water and devour him, and will travel more then two leagues
from the water to seek their prays: And also that greedy Sharke, who has
three ranks of teeth set like a saw, and will bite off a man's thigh at one
snatch.

Yet God preserved them miraculously: And when they were like to give over
traveling, being in despair for ever to find any Spaniards for to succor
them with food, God pitying their estates, guided them to a place where they
found a great Earthen pot full of wheat flower, which they boiled with fresh
water, A pot of flower set in a Cave by some Indian.
and satisfied their hungry appetites with thanks to God for the same. And
within two days after, they met with three Spaniards, and with half a dozen
Indians and Negros, traveling from Carraccas to Coro, driving horses and Mules
laden with Merchandise.

Who seeing their weakness for want of victual, unloaded their beasts to feed
on the grass, whilst they fed our hungry men with plenty of their good
cheer, showing them great courtesy, suffering them to ^ide, and went
themselves afoote two or three days, till they came to a town of civil
Indians, called Tocoya, where they stayed to refresh them.

And there they let the Spaniards know in what miserable case they left us in a
desolate Island, where we endured the greatest misery that ever men did and
live: for we continued fifteen days, having no kind of meat but
Periwinckles or Whelkes, Tobacco, and Saltwater, which did nothing at all
nourish us: yet it took away the desire of hunger, and saved us from eating
one another.

In that fifteen days five of our company pined to death for hunger: Their
names were John Perkins, Edward Green, Jerome Swash, Thomas Stubs, and an old
man called John. Tobacco was the chief food I found to do me good, and did
preserve my life, and those which could take it down, did keep strongest, but
those which could not take it at all, died first.

By noting one or two of our men to die, we knew when any of us drew near
our death, which was, first they would swell very big, and after, fall to the
very bones, and then wanting natural strength in their backs to hold up their
heads, it would fall down and droupe in there bosoms, and within twelve
hours after they would die.

At the 15. days end.
Francis Brace, having more strength then the rest, guided the three Spaniards
to the Island where we were, we little expecting it, for we thought they had
been kilde, either by wild beasts or Saluages, and we had given over looking
for comfort, but every one particularly desiring God, yt himself might not be
the last man of dying: which conceit was worse then death it self unto us. But
his return did add much comfort unto us in that dis^esse: for they brought us
victual, which when we had eat had almost killed us, by reason of the
weakness of our stomachs, being so far spent, that we could not digest
it, although we did eat it very sparingly.

The next day the Spaniards carried us to the maine land, where we had horses
brought us, and the goods we had, they took it all for the King of Spaines
use, and then they conuaied us to Tocoya, where we which were weak remained
for fifteen days, and those which were strong went to Coro, fifty leagues
from Tocoya.

At the 15. days end, one of the three Spaniards, whose name was Signior Carow
Vallo, came for us with horses, who showed himself as careful to us, as if
we had been his own Countrymen and friends, and in 5. days brought us to
Coro to our fellows, where we were brought before the Governor, and by a
Flemming which could speak a little English, which had been prisoner there
sixteen years, we were examined of the cause of our coming on that coast, who
excused us very well, for he knew, that if we confessed whither we were
determined to go meaning Guiana, they would either have put us to death, or
condemned us to the Galleys to row. But ^e told them, that we never purposed
to come into the West Indies, but that we were by misfortune and tempest driven
on that coast, and told them of all the miseries and dangers we had endured and
escaped, which drove them into great admiration, saying we were devils and not
men. And the Fleming told us, the fathers of their churches said, that if we
had been good Christians, we deserved to be canonized for Saints: but in
regard we were Lutherans, it was more by the devils means, then by the
providence of God we escaped those dangers.

So all the chief of the Town being there, every man was desirous to take one
of us, who did not use us like prisoners, but were as careful of us as of
their own children, not suffering us to want any thing that was necessary for
the procuring of our health.

My self being extreme sick of the Callienturo, one Captain Peroso, who
married his daughter with whom I dwelt (whose name was Francisco Lopus) having
good skill in Physic, came daily to my chamber, and there let me blood,
purged, and dieted me, giving his daughter in charge not to let me want any
thing, by whose courteous and tender usage, it pleased God to restore me to my
health and strength again. There in Coro two of us died, who was Thomas
Fletcher, (he was servant to a silk man at the sign of the Angel in
Cheapside) and one Foulke Jones a shoemaker.

In Coro eleven of us remained alive, being all that was left of three score
and seven, for the space of five months, every day going to one another when
we pleased, and often riding into the Country, where the Indians took great
delight in our company: for at our coming they would provide all kind of
delicious fruits, which were in most abundance in that country, and kill
Dear, and wild Porks for us, and would bring us Apes, Munckyes, Parrats, and
any thing that they thought we delighted in.

The Country there about Coro does yield abundance of Sugar, Honey, Ginger and
Pitch: Also, they have very good Wheat growing there, but their Bread is
altogether made of Maiz, of yt which they have great plenty: for they reap
four times a year. This Maiz, they do make it with the juice of Suger-Canes,
which makes it an excellent kind of Bread, and it will keep long as Biscuit.
Also they make their drink of this Maiz and of Potatos, which is very strong
and sweet, for the Indians will quickly be druncke therewith.

Whilst we were there, a Spanyard rode into the Country to a place of his
(with his Brother) to make Tobacco, where he had many Indians dwelling: one of
his chief Indians (which used to be famyliar with him) took a new Hatchet
(which his Master had brought with him) and asked his Master what it cost, and
suddenly cloue his head therewith, which his brother perceiving, ran for his
Rapier, thinking to revenge it: but ye Indian women had stolen it a way before,
and so they kyld him also with their Bows and Arrows, and three or four
Negros which seemed to resist them: And thereupon he fled to the Mountayns,
gathering a great company unto him, promysing them, that if they would aid him
against the Spaniards in Coro, he would give them their Wives and daughters in
marriage: But before they put it in practice, Captayn Peroso, by a polycie,
took him feasting amongst his fellows and women, and took thirty with him,
and brought all to Coro, where they were to suffer death with great torments,
to terrify the rest, not to do the like: And of some, they cut off their
thumbs, and cut the sinews of their two fore-fingers, whereby they wanted the
benefit of shooting.

Our entertainment was such, that we could not desire to part from them, to
come into our own country, without offending them: For there being a Frigate
at Coro, ready to go for Carthagena, four of us made entreaty for passage,
which was Philip Glascocke, Richard Garrard, William Pickes and my self, all
the rest being in the Country upon pleasure, some in one place and some in
another, and when the Ship was ready to depart, our Signiours persuaded the
Governor not to let us go, without he had a Letter from the Viceroy, that we
might pass in safety into Spain, and so for England: and then he showed them
a Letter, that it was at our own choice, whether we would go or tarry: yet
because they were loath to part with us, they willed the Fathers of their
churches to tell us, that if we would stay, we should be as themselves, and
they would wyllingly bestow their Daughters and their goods upon us.

Also they told us, that now England and Spayn were all one in Religion, and
that our Savior Christ came in a Vision upon the Cross, and appeared before
our Kings Majesty, and told him that he was in an error, and bid him turn,
and be as the Catholics are, for they are good Christians: and how at the
sight thereof, three of our chief Bishops were struck into a trance for
the space of three days, and after they recovered again, they preached that
they should all repent and become Catholics: adding further, that the King
had sent to the Pope, to send learned men into England, to teach their Doctrine
aright, which we well perceived, was only the suggestion of their Popish
Priests, thereby to have made us hearken to there Doctrine: yet notwithstanding
all their allurements on both sides, our desire was for our own Country: And
so, three procured means for to go.

But William Pickes, by means the Governor said, that four was too many to
venture in the Ship, was staide.

So, about the last of April, Philip Glascocke, Richard Garrard, and my self,
took our leaves to depart, leaving all, with whom we dwelt, very sorry: who
gave us great store of provision for our passage, and wept, as though they had
parted from their own brethren and Children.

They were very loath to let us go to Carthagena, for fear we should be put
into the Gallyes. And the Governor of Coro himself, wrote unto the chief men
of Carthagena, in our commendations. As to Don Pedro de Bars, who was his
son in Law, but it took small effect: for as soon as we arrived there
(which was the sixth of May, within four days after, we were committed to
Prison for Spies by the Tenientie: The x. of May we were committed. 1066.
for the Governor was dead, not three days before we came: yet we carried one
Letter from Coro, written by Signior Gesper Sansious, in our behalf, to Signior
Antonio Ca^bero, who proved a special friend to us: for we had not be^ an
hour in prison, but he came to us and comforted us, and bid us not to fear,
for we should not want any thing wherein he could pleasure us: so he went to the
Tenientie, and proffered 3. of his Negros to set us at liberty: and if we made
an escape, he should have those Negros for his own use.

The woorst of these Negros was worth 300. Duccates: but he would not, neither
would he allow us any Victualles.

But this Canbero sent us every day at noone one very good meals meat.

Also, there were three Englishmen, who served as Marryners in the King of
Spaynes Galliounes of Plate, who after that they were at Sea, were by a very
great tempest of weather driven back again to Carthagena, in great danger to
be suncke: for she had twelve foot water within her: some of them escaped to
the Hauanna, and five of their most richest Gallionus were in the Shoaldes
betwixt Carthagena and the Hauanna lost: these three English men did allow us
twelve pence a day, so long as we remained in prison.

Every Saturday, the Tenientie does sit upon matters concerning the Prisoners,
with his Alcaldes or Justices.

This Tenientie commanded, that we should be sent to the Gallyes. Then one
Alcalde who was always found a favorer of English men, his name was Signior
Francisco Lopus de Moralis, called for our Examination, which when he had
perused, he told him that he could not with Justice commit us. Who answered
again, Then let them remain in prison, until the Galliouns come from Spain
for the Treasure.

Then, within two Months after, a Deputy Governor was chosen, Who was
Prisoner also.
unto whom a Portyngall (who was our great friend in the prison) framed a
Petition, which was delivered by John Frengham our Countryman. Whose Answer
was to him, that if we could procure any Spaniards to bail us for our forth
coming, we should be at liberty.

Which grant, Signiour Francisco Lopus and Antonio Cambero had no sooner heard
of, but they entered in Bond of a thousand Duccates for our foorth-comming.

The cause, why Francisco Lopus did this for us, was because Captain Drake,
when he took Carthagena, did save all his fathers goods, and his life withal.

And at our delivery, the Tenientie told us, that although by order of Law,
they could justly have put us to death: Yet seeing God had so myraculously saved
us, and that we had endured so many miseries to save our lives, and that only
we came to them for succor and relief, they were content to set us at
liberty.

Then Francisco Lopus brought us a discharge from the Governor to the Iayler
for our delivery out of prison, and brought us all three to his own house,
where was provided for every of us a several bed, for the country is so hot,
we cannot lie but one in a bed. Our entertainment was great, and all our
services in plate, with great variety of meats, and all the most delicious
Indians fruits whatsoever, and yet he thought we never fared well, without
he sent us one extraordinary dish or other from his own table. Also many
Gallants resorted to his house to play at Cards, who would show themselves
very liberal unto us at their winning.

There we continued in great pleasure, until the Galliouns were ready to go
for Spain with the treasure.

The City of Carthagena is a place of great force, for by Land, you can not
come to it, but one way, which is strongly guarded: it is (almost) encompassed
with the Sea: It has four Castles, two at the entrance of the Harbor, and
one within, where Chains are drawn acrosse the water. The fourth is within
the City, where their Court of guarde is kept, of 500. Soldiers: and it has
four Churches.

The day before we embarked, Aug. 25
there came two more of our company from Coro, which was Miles Pet and Richard
Farne. Francisco Lopus procured us passage in three several Ships: Philip
Glascocke, Miles Pet and Richard Farne in the Ship, called St. Bartholomew:
Richard Garrard, in La Madre de Deos: my self in La Santa Cruse. So we were a
month in sailing to the Hauanna, which is near three hundred Leagues from
Carthagena. Sep. 20.


In the Hauanna, we lived al ashore with eighteen pence a day for our diet.

It is a place of great strength, for it has I. great Castle built upon the
Rocks at ye entrance of the Harbor, and another within on the other side,
which command all the Town and Harbor: And the three within the town, where
Don Pedro de Valdes was Governor, which was Prisoner in the Tower 1588.

There they victualled the Flat, and watered and repaired their ships, and
because they had no victual to serve all the Fleet, they left two ships
there, the out whereof was that wherein our three men were placed, called the
S. Bartholomew: the other the S. Vincent. And about the tenth of October, we
departed for Spain by the Bermouthos, and shot the Gulf of Florida in eight
days against the wind, and so w^^ were nine weeks in sailing betwixt the
Hauanna, and the coast of Spain: the tempest and storms we had were
wonderful great, in so much that all the Fleet were dispersed, and not above
two ships did hold company together, which put them in great fear, lest they
should have met with the Flemings, who might with three good ships have taken
all their treasure with small ado: for every little Caruill did put them in
fear, thinking her to be a man of war.

And within three days before we came in sight of Spain, we ouertooke one of
the company, which had been long wanting. And the Master of the Santa Cruse,
wherein I was, thinking to welcome her with a peale of Ordinance, went himself
without the ports to charge a piece, and suddenly fell into the Sea, and before
we could bring the ship assayes, he was drowned.

And upon the fiftenth of December we came against the bar of Saint Lucas,
but could not enter, because the wind was contrary. Then came the Galleys out
of Cales, and towed us into Cales, where they vnloded the treasure. This made
well for us which were prisoners: for they were so busy with the Plate, that
they never regarded us: for when the Captain and Soldiers were gone with it,
we went ashore to Cales without controulment: And when I thought to have been
secure, the Captain, with whom I came home by chance, met me in the street,
and called me to him, and said, that I did know how that I was delivered unto
him as prisoner, and willed me to come to him in Saint Lucas, and there he
would seek a discharge for me. And I promised him that I would come: but
afterward I feared that he would have delivered me to the Justice; and so not
daring to trust him, I never came in his fight more, but sought all means for
my passage, which I found harder to get, then when I was in the Indies: for our
own Cou^trimen would answer us, that they would not in danger themselves, to
take us, without we had a discharge from the Spaniards.

Whose uncomfortable speeches did much dismay us: so we remained in Cales, in
Saint Lucas, and in Civil, without any hope of passage, one month and more,
at the charge of John Frendgeham, William Gourdon, Ioh Dane, who was chief
Trumpeter of the Spanish Fleet, and John Painter, a Musician: And at the last,
(despayring of passage) M. Garrard got passage for Sandwitch: And my self made
moan to Master Barwicke, Master of a little Ship of Wells in Norfolk,
called, The George, who at the first word, granted me passage. So on the
second day of February, 1606. he landed me safely at ye Downs, in Kent,
giving me two shillings to bring me to London.

FINIS.

