August. 3. Numb. 38.

ADVICE GIVEN UNTO THE STATES OF of the Low Countries, obedient and faithful
to his Majesty of Spain, upon occasion of the Letters written by Count Henry
Vanden Bergh the 18. day of June 1632. to her Highness the Archdutchesse, and
the Estates in those Dominions.

As also unto the declaration made by him concerning his discontent received,
being all fully answered and found to be unjust and unreasonable.

If the Reader please to compare them together, you shall find Henry of the
Bergh his Letters and Declaration, Printed in our Aviso of June, the 30. Numb.
31. and July 6. Numb. 32.

Translated out of the French Copy.

LONDON, Printed by B. A. and T. F. for Nathaniel Butter, and Nicholas Bourne.
1632.

SIRS,
THere is nothing that makes men more commendable before the face of Heaven and
Earth, in comparison of true fidelity toward God and their Prince. It is a
Primitive virtue which is borne with us, and ought not to die but with us
without prejudice or wrong to any foreign Nations, it may be averred with
preeminence of honor, that there is not any place or Nation, where the Divine
worship is more religiously observed, the Churches better maintained and
served, the Clergy more exemplary, the Nobility more pious, the people more
devout and observant in religious duties, than in those Provinces of the
Low Countries which are subject and obedient to his Majesty. M^ tru^
Their Temples are in reputation, and in effect to be numbered, and esteemed
amongst the fairest, and most adorned and beautified of all Christendom, and
the Doctrine of their Prelates in singular esteem with the Church of Rome. As
concerning the fidelity due unto their Prince, N^ do^
the same is immovable and constant, and has been so acknowledged and tried
by the continuance and prosecution of many succeeding years, yea such, that
maugre all the power, devices, and stratagems of the enemy, and discontented
brains, the same will still subsist in integrity and true obedience.

We are under a King the best that ever bore Crown in many ages, the most
pious, and best affectioned unto his sul stitutes and such as are in authority
under him. At this day when Piety and Religion are so lively opposed and set?
upon in his Person and States by impiety and heresy, when God and our Prince
are both assaulted at once, while every man is now putting to his helping hand
in the Ship until the tempest be overpast, you will not (I assure my self)
wonder if among a multitude and infinite number of good men, you shall find one
wicked faithless servant, who turns his back to his Master, and kissing him
betrays him, wonder not I say, if among so many faithful ones you meet with
one who under pretense of a Patriot and faithful supporter of the Countries,
opens a way to easement.

Our enemies are so much the more dangerous, by how much more they do flatter
us. And as the promise of liberty of conscience is nothing else but an
Introduction of heresy: So is the other of public liberty tendered by the
hand of a disloyal one, nothing else but a deceitful bayte to replunge our
Provinces into the fore-passed calamities, out of which the mercy of the
Omnipotent has delivered and brought us forth. Our sweetness (GOD be
blessed) is not mixed with any bitterness, our Sacrifices are not intertu^bed
or troubled, our lives pass along in tranquillity, and under the manifold
blessings of Heaven, under the example and government of a Princess most
devout and debonayre, and hope and expectation of a young Prince of Royal
race. What is there now wanting to the height of our happiness, but the
accomplishment of a Peace, which cannot be withheld from us, if we make but
some trial and proof worthy of our zeal and good will? We can do much, if
we have but the will: only let us have this care, that the want of courage
turn not to our reproach and shame, since that our domesticke enemies are
discryed and brought to light, those without shall be inferior to us. Our
domesticke enemies are such, who under color and pretense of raising up the
public liberty, labor and endeavor to destroy it by inovation, and bury the
same in their own ambitious engrossing. And who having no other Religion but
that of their ambition and of their own interest, do nevertheless make
profession of being very good Catholics.

The worst cause that ever was in the world wanted not some pretense or other.
There is nothing so like unto an Angel of light as a Demon or Devil, nothing
does so counterfeyte, and appear like unto the truth as falsehood and a lie.
You have (my Lords) seen the ridiculous pretenses of Count Henry de Bergh in
those Letters which he has sent to her highness, to the States of the
Country, and the declaration which he made to solicit the fidelity of
soldiers and men of honor. You have seen I say, his foundation without
foundation, upon the which he grounds his perverse intentions. But the dislike
and distaste which you have taken against his proceedings has been such, and
your loyalty and fidelity so commendable, that even to convince his felony, you
have (with an extraordinary affection, and love to the good of the Country)
contributed unto the Prince far greater aid and help than formerly you had
done. Moreover it is necessary that besides you, the world be satisfied, which
oftentimes does judge by the outward appearance, not knowing the truth of
things, and that the same may see the truth discovered, lest men be abused by
the cunning slights and pretenses where withal he hides the grossness and
baseness of his treason. He begins his letter written to her highness with
insupportable and boldness without measure, presenting most traytour-like
bread in one hand, and a flinty stone in the other. He exposes his wicked
designs with all submission. Never I am sure, was there any rebellion declared
with more shamelessness and impudency. After this his feigned Ceremony and
complement, he complains, that the Soldiers were withdrawn from his
government, to the end that they might make him be the cause of their
destruction. It is lawful for a man to make his complaint but not perfidious.
That which he says is not truth, and the Letters of the Marquise De Sancte
Croes do testify as much for he required no men from him, but only beacuse
he judged that the enemy would attempt nothing on that side, leaving all to his
own choice and desiring him to see the Bridge well guarded and provided before
Venlo, to suffer the troops to pass over safely which should be seat to
relieve the same. And put the case, that which he affirms were true, if he
had been well minded, and his intention good, he ought to have defended her
government to the last man, and have kept himself in the City of Gelder which
is a strong place, (as he had promised by Letters to her highness, and
allowing that Venlo was able to be held) and therein have imitated the
generosity of his Brother Count Frederick, who in the year 1597. defended
himself within the City Lingen, even to the extremity, with only three
Companies of foot and one of Horse. But this, two days before the enemy did
come before Venlo, called the Magistrates and told them, that the city would
soon be besieged, and to take away the courage from the Citizens demonstrated
unto them the small appearance and hope he had of defending the same. Wherefore
he excused himself from protecting of them, nay and besides this being
Governor of that Province, said he had other places to guard and look to,
nevertheless he presently made have unto the City Gelder, from whence he
departed presently accompanied only with one servant, or Companion, and
betook himself to Liege, there to put in execution the perfidiousnesse which
he had plodded a long time.

As for his service of forty years, which he mentions: It Is true, in the
beginning they were considerable, and of some worth when his brother (whose
death he does allege) did animate him by their good and valerous examples.
But ever since, from the year 1606 that he defended the City Groll with
expectation of relief by the Marquise Spinola who came time enough to rescue
him, his services have not been so remarkable nor of such moment, and
moreover they have been recompensed an hundred fold with dignities and titles,
gifts, and honorable charges, and excessive sums of Money.

As for the ill government of the Countries, and the progress of our enemies,
that proceeds from nothing else but from the manifold treacheries, and the to
too much confidence and trust which our Princes have in his person, having with
a fatherly and favorable affection which they bare unto their servants,
endured a long time his discontentments, and greevances, which in time by
little and little, and more and more are still degenerated unto this action the
most base and ignoble that ever could be returned with reproach unto a
reasonable Soul, manifested in these two branches, ing^atitude, and revolt.

One of the first testimonies of his disloyal and evil will which he
cunningly concealed, was observed at Bergen on Zoom in the year 1622. for then
and here having received command reiterated by her Highness, to conduct the
Marquise Spinola with all diligence unto the Army which he than had on the
Rhyne, he made a thousand excuses to prolong the time, and stay him or keep
him back until the want of relief caused us to raise the siege. And it was
told the Marquise than, (who was in travail with impatiency, during this
delay) by the Lieutenant of the Artillery, Wyngart by name, that he would loose
his head, if Count Henry de Bergh (whom he had known by long experience) did
arrive, before the occasion should be let slip.

He thought to have played the same prancke two years after, in like manuer to
divert the siege of Breda, making profer of an enterprise upon Ravensteyn,
afterward upon the Grave, and lastly upon the Castle of Genepe. The cunning
Letters which after his subtle manner he wrote full of excuses, have
sufficiently discovered what was his design. They are printed at large, in the
history of the siege of Breda, composed and set forth by Father Hermanus Hugo.

The confidence which her Highness had ever since in his fidelity for the
releeuing of Groll. In the year 1627. was the cause why we lost that City.
For being there was a difference risen between two Masters of the Camp, for
the vantguard, being of different Nations, he instead that he should have rid
them out of the Field, and done as it befitted him for his Majesty's service,
he counsels the one not to yield to the other, by that means in the mean
time, to prevent them both from defeating a Convoy which eased and refreshed
the Enemy, for want of which Convoy the Enemy must of necessity have raised
the siege. He was put to his excuse, and (...) quitted because his authority
was not great enough for the deciding the preeminence of Nations, But let us
see, if he has better be haued himself when he had received more authority.
The City named Shortogenbosch, was besieged by the Prince of Orange in the
year of our Lord 1629. We than praised God, because the Enemy was fallen
before a City which was able to defend it self and hold out until releife
should come. Her Highness at that time used so much diligence, that in few
days we had a most flourishing Army on Foot and able to make a strong
assault. There was only question made, who should command the same, the
Marquis Spinola than being absent. In the end this was the resolution that
Count Henry de Bergh should have the honor, and to this end he was sent for
by her Highness. No sooner was he come to Bruxels, but he began to propound
an hundred difficulties one after another, and frame excuses, to the end that
the Enemy might gain the more time to fortify themselves. In these
extremicies, and by reason of the confidence which we had in him, and partly
by reason of his experience nothing was denied him which he demanded. Many
days passed in these entermedlings, but in the end he goes to Field, and was
by the way (so great have he made) from the 3. of June to the 27. and than he
found that the besieged had not yet lost one Inch of ground of all their
outworkes, although the quarters of the Enemy were in good reasonable defense.
The advice of the most part of the Colonels was to open Trench against trench,
and weary out the enemy in such sort, that he should not be able to disquiet
the besieged, and so expect until the Autumn should be past, and than the
waters would cause him to depart of his own accord, or at the leastwise be
constrained to forsake some quarter or other, by which means we might have a
way opened to bring in Munition, and soldiers and necessaries, as much as
should be required for the deliverance of the City. Count Henry cannot approve
this enterprise, indeed he made trial of some others, in those places which
were most fortified, and contented himself with this conclusion, that the
Enemies trenches were not possible to be entered. Having therefore intended a
diuersion of his Army he leaves the siege, and sends to hazard the passage of
the Yssel, by Lucas Cayro, who having passed happily, he followed him, and
ioynes the Imperial Army with theirs, which Army was come for our aid and
relief. And what does he than? he begins to treat with the Burgomaisters of
Cities, only to replenish his own Coffers, and famish the fairest and
compleatest Army which had been seen in a long time, in stead of demanding up
those places where there were neither soldiers nor munition, and which
doubtless would have surrendered at the very sight of a stock of a tree, or the
smallest and simplest stroke which could have been made at them.

You shall observe, if you please, an excusable perfidiousnesse. When Lucas
Cayro had passed the Yssell. Contrary to the opinion of Count Henry, and that
the terror of an explioct so newly put in practice, and not foreseeene had
astonished all Holland. The Prince of Orange having assembled the whole
Council, and propounded unto them what had so lately and unexpectedly
happened, put into deliberation whether the siege should be raised yea or no.
The advice and opinion of all the Council, and each of them was, that the
Veluwee being thus occupied and possessed unexpectedly, the Cities of Arnheym,
Amersfort, Doesburgh, Wageningen, Rhenen, and other near adjoining places
about the Veluwee would be taken without any resistance at all, and that the
gain and profit which they should make of Shertogenbosch could not
countervaile nor recompense the least of all those losses, which they should
suffer elsewhere, if their enemy were permitted to ceaze upon the very heart
of the Country. The Prince of Orange did very much commend the advice of these
Counselors, and said, that verily some course must be taken, if that which
they objected must needs fall out so, but he could assure them to the
contrary, and that the event would prove otherwise. And from whom I pray, could
he have this knowledge and assurance but from Count Henry De Bergh, who in
effect never made so much as any show of demanding up any City. Who within his
own view permitted the City Desburgh to be revictualled, and that was the
cause that some poor Hollanders were executed being Catholics, because they
had declared and manifested the intelligence which he had received from them
privately. In a word Shertogenb^^ch was not releiued, and in effect nothing
could be expected on his part since he had engaged himself by promise to his
sisters not to reseue the same.

What water can wash him clear from the loss of Wesel, which was taken from
us at the same time? seeing that as soon as ever he heard of the news, he
kept himself shut up in his Chamber for 24. hours together, for fear least
he should be required to send help to recover the same City; and when as
Count John of Nassau having entreated him to furnish him with men, to regaine
that place, before the open breach where the Enemy entered, was made up, he
refused it. The Governor of Diden has spoken it to Count John of Nassau with
his own mouth that if he had come to releive the City of Wesell any time
within five days after the same was taken he might have entered without any
difficulty. If Count Henry had been an honest man, we had finished our war
that year, and the Catholic Religion, (with which cloak he hides his
baseness, and the blackness of his Hypocrisy) had never suffered so much as
the same has done ever since.

What wonders has he wrought? where are the great exploicts of his Conquests?
Let this also moreover be spoken for the great services which he alleges in
General. He himself has oftentimes avouched, that he never has received
wound or hurt in the Kings service (notwithstanding that some Histories and
report would have made him believe that he was once hurt in the leg or thigh,
in a skirmish near unto Ruremond in the year 1598.) which he attributed to a
Mandegloire, or little figure or shape of a man, which he ordinarily carried
in a small box, very durty and foul, which he has showed to more than one
person.

Indeed his services are well known, if ever any man's were; he entered very
poor into the service of our Princes, and now at this instant he is so rich
that he possesses millions. From a particular Horseman, and meanest of his
house, he was advanced to the greatest offices which any servant of his
Majesty could aspire unto. And therefore he has great reason to say, that the
Nobility is not in that esteem as they ought to be; seeing that the Honors,
Offices, and Dignities are so ill bestowed; and that he alone does possess
that, which a dozen others better deserving than himself would esteem
themselves happy to enjoy. God be thanked there are none that are unprovided,
and not one who has just cause to complain.

Are they not far engaged and employed in the house, and service of their
Sovereign? Do not they hold the most part of the Governments? Who do
possess the principal Offices, and Ecclesiastical Dignities but those of the
Low-Countryes? If the Spanish, whom Count Henry vpbraides to be the sole
Governors have any part in the Government, and charge, it is for to expose
their lives for our preservation, and proceeds from the great care which the
King has for our protection. Which this new reformator qualifies with the name
of Domination, intending thereby to make the same odious.

Those of the Country in particular, and those of other nations, who
unanimously live in service here, and brotherly one with another, have their
part in the chiefest charges and offices as well as the Spaniards. The Marquis
Spinola has bad the Generalship both by Sea and Land; and at this present the
Generalship both of the Cavallery and Artillerye, are not possessed by the
Spanish. We have seen those of these Countries reciprocally in the Councels
of Spain, and the managing of the most important matters: And we have such
still at this present. Our discontented Count Henry contradicts himself, he
does not remember that in his letter full of sedition which he wrote unto the
Stat^^ of these Countries, he confesses that he was called upon by the King,
to be employed in great affairs.

The Nobility than is not in so small esteem as he would make the world
believe, and his complaints are altogether without ground and foundation full
of contradictions, seeing that he himself has been honored with the command
of being General of the Army, when the Spanish, and other Nations have been
excluded therefrom. It is he himself that has lost some of the Nobility. The
Prince of Chimay, and the Baron De Belvoire, who have been displeased at their
very death, seeing the King betrayed by his Monopolies, will one day acouse and
reproach him before the throne of God, of the loss of twenty thousand good
men, which he caused to languish in Misery, to the end he might use the Kings
Enemies gently, who did contribute great sums of money to satisfy his
Avarice. The Father Hermanus Hugo, did in the Army reproach him at the very
point of death, and could not survive the public Calamity.

Count Frederick his Brother shall accuse him in like manner and lay as much to
his charge, for being so slack and remiss, and lo^sing all occasion of
releeuing the most Catholic City of Shertogenbosch, which that Generous
Cavallier has formerly delivered (in the year 1604) from the siege of Grave
Maurice, who had blocqued up the same. Let therefore Count Henry blame his own
insatiable covetousness for disorder, and attribute the ill government to
himself, without the which we might at this day rejoice in a most happy and
honorable peace, assuredly even such a peace which good subjects ought to wish
unto their Prince for the reputation of his Crown.

As for the Commission of Master of the Field General, which he says was
conferred upon him two years ago, by her Highness in the name of the Kings
Majesty, and which he is now resolved to exercise and execute for the service
of the Countries, the preservation of the Privilidges, and the upholding of the
H. Catholic, Apostolical and Roman Church. You may thereby see unto what a
degree, and height of impudency the audaciousnesse of this Traitor is come? How
does he pay and recompense our good and virtuous Princess with ingratitude?
How does he accuse her of Conniuance saying, that he knows that she wishes
that the affairs went better? And as it were acknowledging the goods deeds,
and supreme honors which he has received from her extreme goodness and
bounty, he has so much boldness and audacity to take her for a prote trix of
his mischief, and so does declare himself openly to be guilty, as now he is
proclaimed. To be guilty of crimen laesae Maiestatis in the highest degree,
and capital Enemy of the public rest, and therefore consequently fallen
away, and deprived of all his Honors, offices, Dignities, and interest which
he hitherto has had in his Majesty's service.

In the year 1484. the Count de Rom^nt did by the like practice bare Arms
against the Archduke Maximilian his Lord, and attributing in like manner to
himself the title of Captain General of the Prince Philip his son, he
wrote in this sort to the States general assembled in the City of Bruxels, his
answer given him was this. That they did not acknowledge him for such, but an
Enemy of the Prince and of the state.

As for the Countries, in the name of God let him leave them in peace, for
there is no need of forging any innovation, we need no broiles nor Traitor to
trouble our tranquillity. The flock would be in good case under the claws of
the Wolf, if our Religion had no better Protector. Oh had but this black
soul as much capacity, and ability as he has hatred and malice, we should
soon see a strange Religion, and such Laws, that Saturue and ^up^ter would
not be brought in but for them only. I cannot conceive how a man that has no
Religion at all: who has falsified his Faith, and who in the year 1621. when
he went before Iulliers, by Testament written by his own hand, which he left
to his sister Anne, did ordain to be bu^yed or enterred in a profane place
nearer unto his sisters, will not only cloak and cover himself with a veil
of Religion, but also counterfeite himself to be a protector of the
Catholic, Apostolical, and Romish.

You deceive your self Monsieur Count Henry, you must not send your
manifestations and declarations into your Government of Geldria, hereof your
Conscience is to well known there, the City of Stefenswert, which you have
made neutrall to serve for a retreat unto the Enemies of the King, and to the
Heretics, and where you have brought the Ministers to poison the people and
instruct your Sisters Anne, and Charloite, these shall testify of your
carriages, and your secret behavior. Do not you remember that sometimes by
chance and through forgetfullnesse you left a little haereticall prayer book
in high dutch on a seat in the Iesuitish Church at Ruremond. Which book you
called your Haureman? you have written to Priests and other persons well
qualified, and of diverse Nations, that your sisters were christianly deceased,
and that their souls were very happy. In the mean while you know, that they
gave up the ghost in the Arms of such Ministers which you had procured them.
We know more of your news than you do think for.

He ends his letter with the retreat which he had made into the City of Liege
for the advancement of his desseyns. Wherein his subtiltye ill compacted
together is failing; for the Deputes of the Prince and States of Liege, not
willing to prejudice any way to so good neighborhood, have disclaimed his
action by a decree. ^une the 23. the contents whereof are these. A declaration
published to show that his letters and his declaration have bee^e published
without any knowledge of theirs or participation, and consent, and that they
intend in no wise to entermeddle with any affairs of the said Count Henry.
Nay, for their better Justification, they have obliged him by a writing of his
own hand the 25. day of June. That they would have it manifested. That as he
had published the said letters without having given notice or asked permission
of his H^ of Liege, or the Deputes of his states, and how that he intended not
by those publications to attempt any thing against their right, nor envolue
their affairs into his actions.

This retreat of his has been intended along time, not for the service of the
Countries nor Religion; but plotted and combined with our Enemies. And if it
were not, so how could he have had time enough to treat with the King and
Princes which in the end of his Letter to the States he affirms, to be
inclined to contribute their forces for the execution of his designs? But
there are other sufficient proofs: and it is not of a day or two that his
treason has bin ^eproched unto him, and hit in his teeth by the brother of the
husband of the bastard daughter, we shall speak of that in his due place, it
is sufficient for this point to manifest what is most true, that before ever
the Prince of Orange came to field to march to Venlo, he had been to confer
with him in Holland, and did so within a mile from the City, in the Castle of
Holtmullen, where also was the Earl of Culenbergh, his brother in Law, and
that before that time he had caused five Barrels of Silver to be convayed to
Meseycke, there to buy the necessary provision for the siege of Mastricht,
under a color that they were the Prince of Orange his moneys destined by him
at the retreat of Count of Horn, engaged the Prince of Liege. See there, these
be the good and charitable Offices, which this dissembling Patriot intends to
practice for the good of the Countries. The letter which he sent to the States,
was almost of the same tenure and contents as that written to her Highness: we
will only examine these things which are of note and moment. He says that he
had given advice that the place of the enemies meeting or rendevons should be
at Moock nearest of all to his Government. He would speak according to
knowledge concerning the place, and not without reason, but he might know
since it was he that had called the enemy thither. But is absolutely false that
he gave them any advertizement or notice at all, but only at the very instant
when the enemy arrived.

He proposes his natural affection unto the good of the Countries. He is a
stranger, revengefull, full of ill will and malice, who intends and labors to
make a private discontent and grudge a public cause, he stomachs the Marquise
De Leganes, who has been indeed raised in these Countries to be a Patriot,
him he accuses imprudently, and unadvisedly of such business which he was
never acquainted withal, the said Marquise at that time not being interessed
in the matter. If he think himself wronged in any thing, it is lawful for
him to right himself by an ordinary course, But not to commit such a
looseness, and to play the little Tyrant. What have these Countries to do
with his particular quarrels and heart-burning? If his courage had had edges
sharp enough, and wings swift enough for honor, and that he thought himself
so grievously offended, as he speaks of: as oftentimes as he has had
occasion to see the Ma^quise Nay more, as often as he has seen him, who has
hindered him from demanding him satisfaction? As for the Spanish Nation which
he complains do wish his death, and that they shot at his Picture, which
hangs near the Steenport, he has exceeding great wrong, for if it be true,
that the Spaniards be such as he speaks of, they had all of them long since
been made away, and he who for the present serves for Counselor, has
oftentimes inculcated the means to destroy them, and said that therein he
went in the Kings service; But his Oracles sounded always so little profitable
to the King, that no trust might be given to his persuasions: It has proved
better, to go a milder way to work, and to strive to redress whatsoever was
amiss by gifts, and employments, than to practice any such extremity, which
the world would never have judged worthy to be executed, if the proof had not
been drawn, as now it is by his own declaration.

It is very pretty that he complains of the Spanish, because they shot at his
Picture: his spies would have much a do to bring sufficient witness for the
proof thereof, although (to be true and plain) he that betrays his Prince
deserves othergesse punishment than he that only exercises his treason
against his picture. It was he, the felon, who so lately on the 27. of June was
so ras^ and impudent as might lie in the City of Bruxels, by the patricidious
hands of his wicked adhaerents caused attempt to be made against the sacred
Image of the King his Lord and good Master, by that means to endeavor to
begin by that execrable fact the first exployts of his rebellion. But the
contrary of which they intended is happened, and the wicked projects of these
imps prevayled not, for two days after the States of Braband not being able
any longer to endure the indignity of this abomination, of their own proper
motion, came personally in public audience, to the great edification of all
that were present, and presented themselves before the Princess, and there
renewed solemnly the Oath of fidelity and allegiance to the King their Prince,
and Natural Lord, and to her Highness, declaring that they were ready to take
the same Oath to the Prince of Spain.

As for those Offices and charges which he says, are not conferred upon any
bat Spaniards. I must here needs repeat, that he himself at their conclusion,
had the principal of all, but he has very ill discharged himself, and I
must say that his ingratitude has neither bounds nor limits. Wicked servant as
he is, he never served but by interest, and never Prince was more liberal to
any man, than our Princess have been to him. Never did he march forth with
the Armies but in the upshot he obtained some sums of moneys for his
particular, and ever received more than any Spaniard, or Lord of the Country,
besides those secret gratuities and benefits which he obtained under hand,
whereof he never made any account but applied them to his private gain and
profit. He knows well enough how punctually he caused all reareges to be paid
him down before ever he would set one foot on the way to the Palatinate. In a
word for that estate and substance which now he has, he is more obliged than
any man in the world for it, and to that King against whom he now takes up
Arms.

From a mean Soldier he was made a Captain of Horse, afterward Master of the
Camp, he was trusted with the City of Oldenzel; afterward with Groll, and at
last he had the Government of the Province of Geldres, which than was one of
the best and fairest Province of all the Countries, he has also had the
general Government of the Cavallery, and the Generalship of the Artillery, he
has commanded the whole Army, and always with retention of the wages of all
places and charge which formerly he exercised; to be short, In the year 1629.
he was by her Highness in the name of the King made General Master of the
Camp of the whole Army of his Majesty. Whereunto could his ambition aspire
higher unless it were to Tyranny which he now affects at this present? Our
enemies themselves with whom he has held correspondency and wrought his
mischievous practices a long time have been astonished many times, that so
many recompenses should prodigally be lavished and wasted upon one who was so
undeserving and demeriting. Last of all, which is more, when the Earl of
Stryrum entered into Gueldres with the Enemies troops, seeing the County of
Montfort, which is worth more in reueneus than twenty thousand Florins, and
which the King had given to Count Henry de Bergh, with many other Towns and
villages of the Country of Stefens were, he could not withhold nor abstain
from saying, that he marvailed much how the King could find in his heart to
bestow so much upon one of a contrary party. Adding withal, that if he should
have served the States of Holland, an hundred years, he would not have been
requited with such an honorable reward.

As for his Expression. That he invites us to accept of one of his passions,
and to take another course under the government of her Highness. We thank
him for his good will, and to thank God that he has been pleased to
discover unto us and Enemy, who could so closely and covertly hatch and plot
our ruin and destruction, if he had but so much aid and conduct, as he is
full of evil motions and intentions. Our wise Princess has no need of such a
Tutor, to dissipate and scatter abroad the Patrimony of the King her Nephew.
And desolate and ruinate a Country so well governed, which for many years
together has cost his Majesty all the ri^hes of Spain and the Indyes, and
the blood of so many thousand Spaniards spilt for the safety and preservation
of the same and for the Catholic Faith and Religion.

There remains yet his Declaration, which is nothing else but a manifestation
of his discontent, and a profer of entertainment unto those that will be his
followers.

It is very well known that he bath moneys and good store of Coin, if he
had no more but what he has gotten by the Passeports which he continually
sold without ceasing, whilst the licencyes were shut, and the traffic and
commerce, prohibited and interdicted with the rebellious Provinces. It is also
well known that he has received many gifts and presents from Princes and those
people that were near adjoining neighbors unto his Government. No, these
things we are no more ignorant of, than we are of the moneys which he still
has in his hands, for which pence of silver he treacherously sold his
Master; but his insatiable covetousness would never suffer him to use his
riches liberally toward those which were honest and good men. There is not one
soldier that knows him, who does not also know the small account which he
makes of them, and who does not remember how euilly he has always entreated
them in his government, cutting off from them the commodities, which in other
places the Country people did not deny them, to extort most exo^bitant
contributions for his own particular; so that certainly you may believe (my
Lords) that the soldiers will give no more credency to his declaration than
your honors have done to his letters.

You have witnessed the condemnation which you have made, your good zeal
toward Religion, your sincere affection to the Princess, and your duties in
the behalf of the Countries. Religion shall ever be obliged unto you, the
King shall ever acknowledge your loyaltye and accept of your fidelity, the
Princess does highly esteem and commend, yea rejoice in your affection
toward her, she embraces them, and gives you hearty thanks. And the
Countries shall see their own preservation by your meane^. Do so much more
for the public good, that henceforward all those that audaciously and
presumptuously shall dare to take part and adioyne themselves to this new
Tyrant, or protect his cause so unjust and detestable, may be reputed and
accounted as favorers, and complotters of his Rebellion.

As for the rest that concerns the plots practices and diuises of our Enemies
remember the cost and charges of the time past, that all the Inventions of
liberty of conscience which now he pretends, have not been invented for any
other end but merely to ruin the beautiful foundation of our Religion, to
establish an hundred other new ones, and to corrupt the tenderness of our
Children by the pernicious examples, and introduction of heresy. These are the
ways and cunning windings which our enemies go and walk in. These are the
enchanted kindnesses which they present unto us. Should we have a heart to
receive such impoysoned gifts, which are proffered us by the hand of an enemy?
Who should then furnish and provide us with Prelates and Priests, and persons
necessary for our Ceremonies, for the comfort and consolation of our Souls,
the ease and peace of our Consciences? When our Prelates shall be deceased,
whence should we have new ones bred amongst us? What Aposto^icall Bulls would
authorize them? Who would set them in possession, when our enemies hold this
for a maxim and foundation, not to acknowledge the Romish Church. And last of
all what assured treaty and contract could we make with our victorious enemies,
and their cautions which at this day do trouble whole Europe, and leave not
one corner of the World where the Catholics are not persecuted either by
effect, or apprehension in the expectation of the progress of Arms, and by
the fu^our of the Heretic.

FINIS.

