A true Report of all the special Passages of note lately happened in the I Will
of Roe, betwixt the Lord Duke of Buckingham his Grace, General for the King of
England, and Monsieur Thorax, Governor of the Fort in the said I Will, as also
betwixt the Duke and the French King, likewise the present state of the
Rochellers, and of the Kings Army lying before it

Numb. 40.

The Continuation of our weekly News from the 24. of October to the 2. of
November.

Containing amongst the rest these special particulars following.

Unto which is added News from Germany, France, and diverse parts of
Christendom.

The warlike proceedings of the Imperialists, and Danish.

The Treaty of Peace betwixt Poland and Sweden.

The Emperors Journey toward Prage.

Besides diverse other matters of moment.

Printed by Authority.

LONDON Printed for Nathaniell Butter, 1627.

A true Report of all the passages in the I Will of Ree, twixt the Duke of
Buckingham his Grace, and Monsieur Thorax, Governor of the Fort, as also
betwixt the Duke, and the French King, and of the state of the Rochellers, and
the Kings forces lying before it, together with other matters of moment lately
happened there. As it was on Sunday last being the 25. of October, related at
White Hall, by a Dutchman that came from thence.
ABout twelve days since it pleased his Excellency the Duke of Buckingham to
dispatch a Dutchman with Letters to his Majesty concerning the present state
of our Army, lying now in the I Will of Ree, and before the Fort or Cittadell
there, who says, that about three days before his coming away, Sir William
Bourchier arrived at the I Will with certain ships furnished with money and
victuals, safe and well, which gave great comfort to his Excellency, having
long expected to hear from England, in so much that before his arrival our
Army was in great distress for want of provision and of victuals, and other
necessaries, that it was a great question whether they should continue there
any longer, or rather give over the further prosecution of the action, in
regard of those many extremities that they were brought unto, having been of a
long time not supplied from England, whereupon my Lord taking into
consideration, the great dishonor that would redound to the Nation; said that
he would for his part adventure himself to the uttermost perils Fortune could
object against him, rather then he would give over so noble a design, and did
thereupon exhort all his followers and Soldiers to a constant perseverance in
the action, maugre all the difficulties that might ensue saying that he would
participate of the greatest dangers with themenest of his followers, before he
would suffer the dishonor that would accrue upon the declining of such an
action, and further said he would rather commit himself and his whole Army
to the releeuing of the Town of Rochell before he would return into England
with dishonor, or without the accomplishing of the business for which he came
thither.

For the state of the Fort (notwithstanding some small relief they lately had
obtained) is such that in the judgment of man, it cannot hold out many days,
for since they have received some relief, there has come forth daily by
twenties more or less, poor hunger-starued people, which does demonstrate the
state of the rest, having had (as they report) only a poor pittance of Bread
and Water, for a month or five weeks together, insomuch, that the number in
the Fort which they have remaining for defense, is come from two thousand and
odd to five hundred, and that of late about two days before the coming away
of this Messenger, a Dutchman coming out of the Fort, and did deliver to my
Lord Duke the strength of the Fort, and where they were best provided for
defense, what places were weakest, and not able to defend the least assault,
should be made against them. For in reason, if we consider the compass of the
Fort) being about a mile) the besieged with that number of men cannot mayntaine
each work, with enterchange of fresh men, as the necessity of the siege will
require, by which you may gather that they cannot long subsist. Besides my Lord
has taken and does possess, two of the principal out-workes of the Enemy,
by which they are able to dismount the greatest part of their Ordinance, and in
short time to command some other of their best works, and to give law unto
them in their own tro^ches.

Upon which consideration, together with other information received, my Lord
called a Council, and did thereupon resolve to assail them in places of best
advantage, which was to be put in execution immediately upon the coming away
of this Messenger, not doubting (as this Messenger reports) of a happy Issue,
and that the Fort before this is in the possession of the English.

For the further hope of relief which they may expect from the Main, my Lord
has taken such care, and has from Rochell received diverse flat bottom
Boats, which are so linked and chainted together by art, that now it is
impossible that any succor should be brought in, in the night, as formerly
has been; now, whereas some may object against my Lords care in suffering the
Fort thus at several times to be relieved, I answer, that it is not possible,
neither could the wit of man prevent the same, if they will venture at all
times, and hazard themselves, but that some of many may escape in, with some
small provision, unless we could guard the shore with a sufficient number of
Boats as well night, as day, to prevent which they have now made a Barracado;
as aforesaid.

The French King did lately send a Messenger to my Lord to require a fair
quarter to be observed by his Excellency, and did promise the like should be
observed on his part, whereunto my Lord sent him this answer, that for his part
he would observe all far quarters with his Majesty by land; but by water, he
desired him to pardon him, and said, that by water it might disaduanhim, and
therefore would keep no other quarters then he had done hitherto, and which by
the Law of Arms he might justify with his Honor.

The French King lying with his Army before Rochell is very sick, and does
suffer much in his Army by several casualties: the new Fort which he has
lately erected, is much demolished, and diverse works belonging to it taken by
the R^chellers, besides those of Rochell are building another Fort against it,
which will be a great annoyance to the Kings Army.

The Duke of Rohan is marching to the aid of Rochell with 7000. Foot and 500.
Horse well provided and resolute Soldiers. In Lorraine, a Bishop of that
Dukedom has in readiness 15000. men, which as it is said, are provided, and
have a purpose to fall upon some parts of the French Kings Dominions, and that
the quarrel should be the House of Austria's, besides some other Princes are
preparing to invade him likewise, which will give the French King his hands
full.

My L. Duke and his whole Army are courageous and in good estate, he has
received lately five companies from Rochell of brave resolute fellows, and
has sent into Rochell all his sick and hurt men, where they are well relieved
of all necessaries.

The Rochellers have wholly declared themselves for the King of England, as by
the Articles which are agreed upon by my L. Duke and them does appear, his
Excellency has sent word to his Majesty, that if it please him to send him
bread, he will deserve it, but if he will add unto it somewhat more he will
drink his health; by which you may see his invincible courage, zeal and
affection to his Countries Honor, which I pray God to prosper.

Since this Messenger came, one Master Griffin, a Gentleman belonging to his
Excellency, arrived in London on Sunday night (who being longer at sea) yet
was dispatched away before this Dutchman 12. days, and does confirm what this
Messenger brought, only it was his misfortune to arrive after him, being crossed
by contrary winds, and the Bark in which he came in being cast away, and
only himself and his fellow-passengers were saved by the mercy of God,
together with those packets and other matters of worth, which they had in the
said Bark, were saved from shipwreck, and can relate not much more then the
former Messenger.

From Rome the 18. of September.
ON Satturday last, past a Spanish Post through this City going to the Viceroy
of the Kingdom of Naples with an order of the King of Spain, that he should
send many Ships and Galleys into Spain, to be employed against the English.

From Venice the 24. of September.
They write from Rauenna, that the hail has done there great hurt to the
Corn, Vines, and Cattle.

About fourteen days ago was here a great tempest with much rain. The Duke
of Sauoy has sent many Soldiers toward Asti, to raise there some Sconces.

From Vienna the 28. of September.
The Imperial Proclamations are here strictly executed against the
Protestants, whose Preachers begin to depart. The Emperor is doing the like
both in Styria, Carenthia, and Crain. The Protestants which have here yet been
suffered, are compelled to depart from hence, upon pain of the forfeiture of
all their lands and goods, (...)

THE Continuation of our Weekly News from the 24 of October to the 2 of
November.
From Jtaly, Germany, Poland, Swethland, France, the Low Countries, and diverse
other places.
From Rome the 25 of September.
ON Wednesday last, past an extraordinary Post, of the Merchants of Genoa
through this City, being sent toward Naples by them, seeing that the King of
Spain has transported unto them his Custom of Silk which he has in the
Kingdom of Naples, to get thereby the money which he owes unto them.

Here is little news, seeing that all the Soldiers which were in these parts
leauied, are gone into Germany, to serve the Emperor, except them which are
laid in garrison.

From Vienna the 29 of September.
On the 26 of this Month is his Imperial Majesty with the Empress, the King
of Hungary, and both his daughters, besides many of his Courtiers, gone from
hence toward Prage. The Prince his youngest Son, and the Archduke Leopoldus
tarry here.

His Imperial Majesty and all them which are gone with him, are to day to
keep at Nicholas burg in the house of the Cardinal of Didrichstein the feast
of Saint Michael.

The Duke Julius Frederick of Wirtenburg is here daily expected. But it is
thought that seeing that the Emperor is departed that he will rest himself
here some days, and go afterward to the Emperor.

To day is expired the time which was prefixed to the Protestant Preachers for
their departure. But seeing that the raine-water, and otherwaters which have
drowned the Land, have much spoiled the highways, that they cannot well be
used, they have at their request obtained leave to tarry in this Land some few
weeks to dispose in the interim of their affairs, and means. They are to
forsake this land before expiration of three weeks, upon pain to be severely
punished.

It is here rumored by many, but believed by very few, that there a peace
concluded betwixt the Emperor and the great Signior for the space of 25.
years.

Herewith I send the Imperial Proclamation which has in this Court by the
Clergy been obtained, and been printed, and affixed two days ago, and
likewise been sent to diverse other places, by which is commanded that the
Preachers, and Schoolmasters which are Protestants shall forsake the Land of
Over-Ens within a certain time which is prefixed, and that the exercise of
their religion shall never any more there be suffered.

From Breslaw the 1 of October.
To day is the Company of Captain Swank discharged which was leauied for this
City, so that we have now no more then three Companies to entertain.

We have news from Thorn that there is not as yet a peace concluded betwixt
the Kings of Polon and Sweden.

It continues not that the Army of Sweden has been overthrown by the
Poloniuns as they did formerly write from Dansick: But it is certaien that
there have been many slain of each side, and that both parties retreated
again to their works, and intrenchments.

The Ambassadors, and Commissioners meet yet daily, and it is reported that the
Swedish propound very hard conditions of peace, namely, that the King of Poland
should resign for ever for him and his heirs the title and claim which he
has or pretends to the Kingdom of Sweden: That the King of Poland should
give to the King of Sweden 80 tons of gold for the payment of his soldiers,
and warlike expenses: As likewise that the King of Poland should suffer him to
enjoy for the space of ten years all the places which he has taken in
Prussia, and after the expiration of them, he should restore them again to
the Crown of Poland, besides diverse other difficult points unto which the King
of Poland will not agree.

On Saturday last here was one beheaded before the Town house, because he
killed a Coachman.

To day is here published a Proclamation of the Emperor by which he causes all
the lands and goods to be confiscated of them which went to serve Count
Mansfield in the late wars.

They write from Neus that no Protestants are suffered there to marry, unless
they embrace the Romish Religion. But if they will not do it, they may sell
their lands, and goods, and depart thence.

From Venice the 1. of October.
They write from Millaine that all the soldiers of the Lord of Pappenheim are
marched through Veltolina into Germany, and that they of the Count of Solms
are shortly to follow them. The Colonel Piccolomini is likewise past through
Chur, with 40 horse to follow them.

We have news from Genoa, that there is a peace concluded betwixt the Duke of
Sauoy, and the said Signeurie, and that although the said Signeurie has
discharged six Companies of Italians, that they take nevertheless Germans
into their service in lieu of them.

We learn from France that the Duke of Momorancy is gathering great forces
against the Protestants of France, and that he is appointed to besiege the
Town of Nimis, in which the Duke of Rohan is in person: As likewise that they
make there great warlike preparations by water against the English. Moreover
that the English have slain, and thrown ouerboard many French men and
soldiers that were bound for the Island of St. Martin.

From Dansicke the 7. of September.
On the 24 of August after dinner time went the Duke of Holstein into the field
to look out for a convenient place to inquarter his ledger (which is separated
from that of the Polonians) to whom are likewise joined the Forces of the two
Commanders named Dohnhof^r.

On the 29 of August about the evening came the King of Poland with many men of
note, and his Courtiers, and followers into this City, and was with great state
and pomp fetched into it by our Citizens; and well entertained afterward by
our Magistrates.

The day before were the Ambassadors of the States General of the United
Provinces of the Low-Counties which labor very earnestly to make peace betwixt
Poland and Sweden) gone toward the Polon^an General of the Field.

On the first of September went the King of Poland to see and to view our
walls, and all our sconces, and works round about this City, and especially the
new raised sconce, which the soldiers call commonly Schenke-sconce, by reason
of the strength of it: and at the same time there were 44 pieces of ordnance
discharged, besides many muskets both by water and land. The King liking these
works exceedingly well, rejoiced much at it, and commended much to his Lords
the endeavors and faithfulness of the Dansickers, saying that they had well
labored, and were his loyal servants, and that they had not done as they of
Elbingen, and others.

On the second of September went the King of Poland with the Prince his son,
and diverse great Lords, besides our Burgemasters, and some of our Aldermen,
early in the morning toward the Fort which is called Weichselmundt, and when
they had viewed there all things very well, our Magistrates did feast very
stately both the King and his followers, and about the evening there were many
pieces of ordnance discharged both in the 12 Ships which lay thereabout, and in
the Sconces. And it happened that about the same time, that a Galley of the
King of Poland being put to Sea to try whether it could well sail, it
encountered with a Swedish ship, and had a pretty combat both with it, and 3
other for a little while, which were afterward cruelly battered by our
ordnance which lay in a sconce near which the Swedish followed the said Gally.
The said King having seen this sport with contentment, returned the same
evening again to the said City, and departed from thence on the 4 of this
month, three Posts being sent to him, and went directly toward his Army.

In the week which is last past were the Ambassadors together, and the
Polonians were to propound some articles of peace betwixt Poland and Sweden.

From Brunswicke the 2 of October.
We have nor as yet any other news from the Deputations day which is appointed
to be kept at Mulhowsen, but that diverse Ambassadors as of the Emperor,
Electors, Princes, and States of the Empire, are gone thitherward.

They of Wolfenbuttel although they are very close imblocked, sally
nevertheless daily forth, and slew few days ago many Imperial soldiers and
husbandmen that would stop the water which runs to the said Town.

The Town of Newburg, or the Governor of it, namely the Colonel Limbach has
offered to surrender it upon certain conditions to the Duke of Lunnenburg, and
amongst the rest, that the Emperor should grant a general pardon to them that
are in it. But if that be refused, he will blow up the said Town, and ruin
all that is therein.

From Verden the 8 of October.
Both the Imperial and Danish soldiers make themselves daily stronger and
stronger in this Bishopric. The Danish having raised a strong sconce at
Borcht to maintain themselves there, they have fired the Town of Verden, and
burned it quite to the ground.

From Newburg we hear no news, seeing that the said Town being now very
strictly besieged, the Posts which come from Cullen have altered their passage,
and traveled by the way of Newstadt: But it is thought that it shall be
surrendered if the Governor of it can obtain a pardon of the Emperor, seeing
that he has had it twice before.

The Imperialists make great warlike preparations to beat the Danish quite out
of the Bishopric of Bremen of which we shall shortly hear more.

From Stoade the 7 of October.
This Town is replenished with Danish Soldiers, but they are in great fear,
seeing that the Imperialists strengthen themselves daily in those parts.

Our Bishop who is now at Lubecke, as likewise the Imperial Ambassadors which
are yet at Hamburg, exhort the States of these Lands that they will remember
the oath which they have made to the Emperor.

The Danish lie yet entrenched near Crimpen, and Lukestadt, and we have not
heard that there has lately any thing of moment been done by the Imperialists
or Danish.

From Pinnenberg the 10 of October.
We have not as yet learned any certainty how it stands with Rensburg, and
with the Imperial Camp, but we expect it daily.

The General Tilly is gone from Lawenburg toward Winsen, which is a Castle of
the Duke of Lunnenburg.

FINIS.

