October 15. 1622.

Nouo. 1.

A RELATION OF THE LATE OCCVRRENTS WHICH have happened in Christendom,
especially at Rome, Venice, Spain, France, and the upper Germany.

WITH Several Letters of the particular late Business which has happened in
France, before the Conclusion of Peace was made.

Together With the Articles agreed upon betwixt the Kings Commissioners on the
one part, and the Duke de Rohan on the other part, in behalf of the
Protestants.

LONDON, Printed by B.A. for Nathaniel Butter, and Nicholas Bourne. 1622.

THE COPY OF NEWS TRANSLATED out of the High Dutch.
From Rome the 27 of September. 1622.
IN the Kingdom of Naples the Spanish Commissioners are leauying again 6000.
foot and 2000. horse, which shall be sent to Millane.

The great Duke of Florence offers to fell unto the King of Spain the fealty
of the Princedome of Piumbino for 300000. Crowns, at the same rate as he would
have left it to the late Emperor.

The Prince Philiberto Viceroy of Sicilia, has commanded 10. soldiers to be
hanged, and four to be condemned to the Galleys, because they had stolen
2500. double Crowns.

At Naples are likewise certain Bakers condemned to the Galleys, in regard
they mingled their Bread with Bran, and made it too little, so that it wanted
weight. And two companies of Spaniards which are mustred lately, shall sail
shortly to Messina. The Moon of Venice which is to sail homeward, is laden
and almost ready to depart. The Benchers or Bankekeepers Spinelli and Fornelli
are broken for certain thousand Crowns.

The Bishop of Spalato, who has been in England, is still at Antwerpe, being
returned to the Romish church: there are given unto him five thousand crowns to
make his journey to Rome, to receive there his absolution.

From Lions the 28. of September.
Our King is as yet here, but is (as many guess) shortly to go to Auignion,
and to tarry there this next Winter, unless there be an agreement made betwixt
him and the Protestants.

The Constable has labored very hard to the same effect, and it was thought
for the space of many days, that the peace was firmly concluded, and to
cer^^fie his Majesty of it, there were sent two Posts with all speed, out they
broke suddenly off. His M^^^stie continues still the siege of Mompellier,
where the Ordenance without cessatio^ are discharged against the city. It is
confirmed that those of Mompellier (...) ^lmost quite defeated the regiment of
Monsieur (...).

Monsieur Desdiguieres Constable of France, was commanded by the King to
besiege the town of Priua^; but he was presently countermanded, and charged to
come to the Camp before Mompelier; whereupon it is expected he will exhort his
Majesty again to an agreement with the Protestants.

From Venice the 23. of September.
From Schweitz we hear, that those of Zurich and Berne, besides the Grisons,
strengthen themselves and make all warre-like preparation to oppose themselves
against ten thousand foot and five hundred horse of the Archduke Leopoldus, he
expects five thousand foot more coming from the Emperor. The Baron of
Batteuilles forces which were sent into the valley of Prettigaw, are for the
most part defeated, and those which escaped relate that in the Grauebundts all
things are very dear. In the Interim is the Collonell Baldiron mightily urging
the Castellein of Millane, desiring him to send his forces toward Clean, to
break and dissolve the troops of the enemies; and to effect the same with
more ease or facility, he has surprised Engadin, and afterward gotten Chur
by agreement.

The Galleyes of Pisserta have taken an Hollandish Ship, with diverse
Merchandises. The Pirates of Thunis thinking likewise to surprise a Ship of
Genua, the men within the same betook themselves to a small Ship, and saved
themselves after they had fired their great Ship, to frustrate them of their
expected prey or booty.

From Madrid.
After the Count de Villamediana (who was of the House of Taxis, and
Postmaster General) was slain in the great street, by one which hurt him in
his breast, and escaped unknown; the Count d'O^olo got his Office presently,
and took the possession of the County of Villamediana. But there is one
Lampeo Taxis, which likewise pretends to be his Heir, and will sue the other.

The 23. Passato the Popes Nuncio called by his surname de Sangre, took his
leave of the King of Spain, and the new Nuncio Maximo had his first audience
of the said King. The Duke d'Alba is shortly to go to Naples, and the Count of
Monterei is to make his first entry here very speedily. The Seignior
Constantino Pinelli, who from the State of Genua was last sent Ambassador to
the Emperor, is deceased at Madril.

From Vienna the 21. of September.
The 15. of this Month is the Marquess William of Baden departed from hence,
to be installed in the upper Marquisat and the County of Spanheim: to which
effect, he has gotten Imperial Letters.

Upon the 19. of this Month, the Emperor and the Empress being to take Coach
to ride to Ebersdorff, there came the Count of Thurn (who lately stole out of
his Prison in Morauia) and falling before the Emperor upon his knees, desired
mercy and pardon, and obtained the same instantly at his Majesty's hand, and a
promise to get also the Key of his Majesty's Chamber wholly.

The same day, about nine a clock in the morning, was Powell Gould, who was
condemned before, brought from the Red Tower, unto a Scaffold made of purpose,
being conducted betwixt two Jesuits, having the Night before confessed
himself to be a Catholic. When he had said his Prayers, they retired; and
the Officer having cut off his right hand, beheaded him: his body was buried
afterward, but his head and hand were fastened upon Poles, and set upon the
walls of the City, without the Red Tower, direct against the New Tower: his
Confession is kept very secret.

From Prage the 27. of September.
It continues still, that the Fort of Glatz is for the most part burnt, and
that the Imperialls have gotten the River from the Garrison within the same:
Wherefore we are in great hope to get it speedily. Within three mile from
Glatz, there are arrived 14000. Cossacks at a Town called Falkenstein, and did
send presently two of the chiefest men amongst them, to the Count Quete (who is
the principal Commander over the Forces before Glatz) to know whether he had
need of them: and notwithstanding he refused their aid, and that the Archduke
Charles of Neuse likewise long before desired them to return to their own
Country; they will perforce enter into the Empire, and assist the Emperor: In
regard of which resolution, there are appointed two Bohemian Lords, to consider
in what manner, and what way, they may be most fittest conducted.

Last Friday there happened here a Fire in the Horse-Market, whereby are burnt
four Houses, seven Men, and two Horses.

The execution of the Bohemian Lords depends much of these Points, and shall be
executed.

1. Those that were present, when some of the Council were cast out of the
Windows. 2. Those which have consented to the Confederation against the
Emperor and the House of Austrin. 3. Those which have been at the reiection of
the Emperor and the Archduke. 4. Those which have been present at the Election
Friderici. 5. Those which marched in Arms against Vienna.
From Brussels the 1. of October.
Count Henry of the Berg is drawing with his Forces toward the Kempen in
Brabant: Don Gonzales is to join with him, to hinder the invasion of the
Hollanders, which have threatened these Lands with Fire and Sword, and will
likewise pierce certain Dikes, to drown our Land in several places; but we
hope to meet with them. Mansfield strengthens himself daily. We look here
every hour for the arrival of the Count of Swartzenburg, who is speedily to
return to Vienna. But seeing that Heidelberg is taken, and Manheim besieged,
the Treaty is broken off, and the English Ambassador is three days ago
departed.

From Antwerpe the 3. of October.
To day we are advertised, that the Marquess Spinola is broke up from his
Camp before Berghen up Zome with his whole Army, having fired before all his
Quarters. He lies not far from hence, and expects the coming of his
Enemies.

On Saturday last arrived in the Camp Count Henry of the Berg with 43. Cornet
of Horse, Don Cordua with 33. and to day the Count of Anholt with 31, besides a
great number of Foot, and certain 100. Wagons, with baggage, in such manner,
that the Marquess Spinola has now 200. Troops of Horse, and it is very like,
that there will be a Battle soon fought betwixt him and the Hollanders. What
will follow, you shall hereafter hear.

From Sutart in the Dukedom of Gulick, the 22. of September.
Here is no great matter of news, and in Germany they are almost all quiet.
But yesterday there passed by the Imperial City of Aekon 30. troops of
Horse, and betwixt 3. and 4000. Foot, which came from the Palatinate, to seek
their pay (as they say) in the Land of Luyck, seeing the Bishop of Luyck did
promise at their Levy to entertain them for eight months, and they had at
the same time received but one months pay. Others say, that they are to assist
Spinola.

From Collen the 6. of October.
It is rumored, that the Duke Christian of Brunswick will Winter his Camp in
Westphalia, and that the Canons at Halberstadt have already deposed the
Chancellor, in regard of the Triumviros appointed by the Governor, and
exhorted the subjects to stick to the Bishopric.

Hitherto out of the High Dutch Relation.
A Relation of certain particular matters that happened at Mompellier and other
places, before the treaty of peace was concluded betwixt the King and the
Protestants.
From France.
T The last winds since Michaelmas, have not been so fearful to many ships
at Sea, as to the Spanish fleet going to conuoy the West India Navy, whereof
many of them have bin driven back again, as far as to the coasts of
England. The ships of Burdeux which have bin shattered in harbor, the Galleys
and Navy of Marseiles, which have been driven from Rochel to Breast in
Brittanny. The ships in Plimmouth, which have almost sunk in fair harbor,
and the ships which attend Subiss to waft him over into his country. As this
business of France is to me in recounting the truth, and laying open the
affairs and affrightings of the country, because the controversy lies
between a high exalted Majesty, and humbled subjects, whose shoulders yet lie
under the pressure of displeasure, and the threatenings of a great and mighty
Monarch. But because I began with a Simile from the Sea, and application of
rough winds, I will keep this slender Bark close to the shore, as well to
avoid the tempestuous waves in the channel, as the gusts from the land, and
rocks and shelues in some unknown coasts; and so I hope you shall have
nothing unbefitting the Majesty of a Christian king, nor unjustifiable in the
report of an honest relation. You have heard then that his Majesty has
proceeded so far as the siege of Mompelier, where he not only left some of
his Nobility, namely, Memorancy, Mompensier, the Duke of Angolesmes son, and
others, but most part of his army, whereby he was not only disappointed in his
proiects, but very willing to cast up another account of advice, and
examination of particulars, how to settle the affairs of his kingdom, and
keep his honor integrate and vnmaimed, wherein without controversy
Lesdesguiers the new Constable has not only bin a great means of
pacification of his Majesty's displeasure, but the maine motive to oppose
against that bloody doctrine of the Jesuits, who teach that nothing is so
acceptable to divine Majesty, and mother Church, as slaughtering of heretics,
and extirpation of Protestants, whom they now character with the terms of
Caluinists, Hugenots, Lutherans, Berneses, and diverse others; wherein I am, I
protest so charitable, that some Nobles and Gentiles perform their outrages,
as Paul did his persecutions, in magno inscittae bello, and as for others, they
exceed the very heathen, who were weary of sacrificing human blood to Mars,
Saturn, Diomedes, Pallas, and Berecinthia: so that you shall read how Samos,
Argos, Thebes, Taurica and Sicilia in those days began to suspect themselves,
that they were not in the right, as long as the religion consisted of murder,
and the death of innocents. But because I would not be tedious discourse, which
the Reader expects to be triuiall, and must pass through common hands as
customary news, you shall now only have a Bill of Items, without any summa
totalis, which I refer to your own accounts, and Arithmeticall skill.

1. Then they say, that the king being willing to hear Lesdesguiers the new
Constable in his propositions for peace, left him to capitulate with the Duke
de Rohan, about Mompellier, and having argued the matter with sufficient
arguments, returned to Court very welcome to his Majesty: but was there
opposed by the Cardinal de la Roch foucalt, a very incendiary for the troubles,
and Monsieur Commartin, to whom the great Seal was given, a great enemy of the
Protestants.

2. That the Queen is fallen sick of the small pocks at Lions, which
questionless will draw his Majesty for the most part thither, whereas he
determined to remain Chasteaubeau: so that there is great hope, that the former
treaties of peace will come to a good period, and receive some easy
inductions, considering his Majesty's army before Mompellier has not been
only shaken and dissipated, but is likely to fall a sunder with wants,
diseases, loss of men, failing of money, and slacknesse of their provision:
the besieged resolved to maintain the cause, and oppose against any threatening
or violence.

3. That two thousand fresh soldiers are newly entered into Mompelier,
conducted or conuoyed by 2000. more, who brought them safely to the very gates
of the city, passing and repassing without interception. For they returned
quietly to Seuens, and were passed over the river, before the Duke of Angolesme
came, who was marching to disappoint them, with the regathered forces of the
kings army: but as it should seem they had dispatched their business before
he came, and so it is apparent, the town is not so hard besieged as it was,
nor so likely to be endamnified, and yet the army of Champaine is marching
thither, and may of the kings forces recalled again.

4. That the Marquess of Mountbrun has made a brave salley lately out of
Nismes; and defeated the conuoy, which was to conduct the Popes Legate to
Auignion, but as I take it you have heard of this before, only I make mention
of it again, because by certain Bulls, Indulgences, and letters which diverse men
of quality brought, and are all taken and broken up, it is manifested that his
Holiness enforces and urges the war, and will by no means allow of any
treaty of accord, without renouncing of religion: so that if a peace come (as a
blessing) it must come unlooked for, but the safest way is to look sor no
safety, according to the Poet:

Vna salus nobis nullam sperare salutem. 5. That another son of the Duke
Angolesme called Count d'Allen is dead in Perenas of a relapse of his former
sickness: that Monsieur de Count de Schomberge, and Canaples are troubled with
the purples, a disease of danger and faintnes and that Monsieur de Plans and
Arbault kept their beds, as not well at ease and discontented.

6. That the Duke of Guise expected the great Gallion of Malta, of twelve
hundred tun, and another of his own of 900. before his embarking, but he is
gone without them, having received diverse petitions of Pirates to offer him
their service, which he has sent to his Majesty: but all is referred to his
returning back, notwithstanding the former shiops are come to Burdeux, and so
appointed to attend the great Navy before Rochell.

7. That the Duke de Hespernon, Monsieur de Cadinet his son, Count Soisons,
and all of that Army are retired from Rochel, as despairing of the success in
those parts: besides, many Protestants of Poytiers seem to deplore the
miserable estates of their Brethren, and write many Apologies and
Iustifications for them; crying out against the Cardinals and Bishops, That as
it was in the days of the Prophets, when the Kings and Princes were contented
to hear the Word of God, and bear with their Inuections against Sin, and
the Impieties of the Time; the High Priests were then the only Enemies of the
Prophets, and Persecuters of such searchers of the unswept corners of their
Lives and Doctrines: so was the condition of dilacerated France, when the King
began to look with the eyes of compassion upon his People, and the Nobles to
remember, how their own Affairs never thriued, since the Reformed Churches
fell from the Bishop of Rome, and were therefore depraved and persecuted by the
Catholic League: then still stepped up one Cardinal or Jesuit, and were
never quiet, till all France was in an uproar; and what the whole World could
not do against an united Kingdom, they taught their own hands to effect, by
butchering one another.

8. That the Rochellers had thriued in many Voyages at Sea, and the Kings Navy
was mightily dispersed from watching their Haven: but when they understood how
their neighbors the Hollanders had escaped the Tempest, and threatening of so
potent an Adversary, they not only praised God, but manifested their joy by
apparent signs, as if it had been their own cause.

From Rome the 23. of September. 1622.
Last Saturday is the Persian Ambassador gone to the Emperor, after he had
taken his leave from the Pope, who bestowed upon him 1000. Gold Gilders of 4.
English shillings a piece: He is to treat with the Emperor touching the War
against Turkey, whereunto the King has given him charge to exhort all Christian
Princes and States.

Tbe French Ambassador solicites the Pope very hard to make the Bishoprike of
the Metropolitan Church of Paris an Arch-Bishopricke. The late King Henry the
Fourth bestowed in his life time 1000. Crowns yearly to the same Church.

Letters from Millaine make mention, that 3000. Grisons were upon the Frontiers
of the Lower Engaden, the City of Zurich and Berne, are to send 7000. men to
their aid, a Don who is lately come out of Spain, relates in Veltolin, that
the King of Spain has taken the same into his protection, whereby is like to
arise Discention betwixt France and Spain.

At the Diete at Lindaw, arrived 3. Ambassadors of the Grisons, 7. of the
Switzers, 1. French, 2. Spanish, and one of the Archduke Leopoldus, to treat
about a Peace.

At Constantinople the Plague continues still very hot; The Bashaw of Cayro is
risen against the great Turk.

From Vienna the 20. of September.
The Imperial Harbengers are commanded in all have to go toward Regenspurg,
so that there is no doubt more of his Majesty's journey to the same place, but
there is not as yet appointed a certain day for his departure.

The 9. day the Count of Lichtensteyn received the golden Fleece, and gave
thereupon a stately banquet. It is here reported that the Marquess of
Iagerensdorpe is with a great number of Hungarians marching toward Silesia:
but we do not believe it, seeing we had lately news, that the before said
Marquess was at great Wardeyn, and the Count of Thurne at Landaw, besides
other, which were all in sundry place^ of the Turkish Dominion, and that
Iagerensdorp leauied great store of horse and foot, to what intention we
cannot learn.

Here grows every thing dearer and dearer, and we are likely to want Wine, and
that only in regard of the course coin, which is shortly by proclamation to
be set at a lower rate or value.

From the Hage the 14. of October.
The Marquess Spinola in the name of the Archdutches, has obtained a great
reputation for the payment and entertainment of his Soldiers: yet some wants
knock at their doors, or other discontentments, for 1500. Italians horse and
foot are newly come from him to the service of the States, who have appointed
them to quarter in the Town of Genuet in Gerdersad, which when Spinola heard,
he bandited them all, setting a sum of money upon their heads according to
their degrees, but the particulars I refer till more convenient time.

Another Letter from a person of credit at Paris.
Loving Friend I have received your late Letter whereby you desire me to write
unto you what happens daily in those parts, and especially those things
which lately are past about Mompelier with all their necessary circumstances.
Beginning at the first, I will let you know that the Marquise of M^mbrun
(being of the Reformed Religion) has taken but few days ago, the Popes
Nuncio with diverse Cardinals, and Cash-keepers, at Port Bodoyn, (betwixt
Avignon and Nismes in Languedoc) from whence they intended to go to the French
King with diverse rich Presents, besides their memories and Instructions: Their
Plates, Jewels and money, together are valued above 200000. Crowns, and are
made good booty for the Protestant Soldiers. Concerning the Siege of
Monpelier, the French King has had within these few Weeks two great
overthrows, The first happened in this manner, those of the City of Mompelier
to show their Obedience unto the King, promised free passage unto his Forces,
whereupon he sent presently two Regiments to the City aforesaid, whereof the
one being entered into the same began to nestle themselves, the Magistrate
espying their intention, desired them to pass through, according to the
agreement and Promise made, but they answered that they had no such Commission.
Whereupon the Magistrate perceiving that they were not well dealt withal,
Commanded presently the Gates to be shut, and at the same time the second
Regiment was approaching, and killed some of the Court of Guard before the
Gates could be closed: and gave likewise directions that the Alarm should be
rung, Whereupon the Soldiers and Citizens came forth in general with their
Armor and Arms, and defeated the Regiment aforesaid, within the space of few
hours. But the Kings Forces without hearing the noise of Shot, hoped that
their Forces had ransackt the City, and began the Scale thereupon of one of the
Outworks of the same, but they were bravely repulsed and many of them slain by
the Ordnance as otherwise. Amongst the Chief, were killed outright, The Duke
of Fransacq, Son of the Count of St. Paull. The Duke d'Alluyne. The Count of
Allain, Son to the Count of Avergne. The Count of Rochefort, Son to the
Duke of Monbason, Governor of Paris. The Marquis of Beuveron, Governor of
Falaise. The Marshall of Themines. The Marquis de la Valette, the Son of the
Duke of Espernon. Monsieur de Canysij, Governor of St. Lo: The Son of
Monsieur d' Allicourt, Gonernour of Lions. The Son of Monsieur d' Montigny,
Governor of Diepe. The Son of the Count of Chainbert. The Marquis of
Cauillac d' Avergne.

Amongst those which were hurt, the Duke of Memorancy Admiral of France, is
since enred: What will become of the rest, namely the Duke d' Alboeuf, the
Marshall de Brande, the Marshall of Vitrie, and the Caualier Vendosme, the time
will reveal it.

The second loss happened in this manner, The Duke de Roban on a morning came
with 3000. Horse, and set upon the Kings Camp, and was presently assisted by
those of Nismes, which likewise fell upon the same Quarter, where Monsieur
Sammet lay with his Regiment of Picardian Foot, which presently was defeated
and destroyed, Salleying the City also at the same instant upon them: Monsieur
Sammet himself was slain, besides 3000. of his men and the whole Quarter
quite beaten up. The Protestants nailed 10. Pieces of the Camp, and those of
Mompelier conuayed 4. other into their City, to the great rejoicing and
comfort of the Protestants.

The News of the late peace given to the poor Protestants in France, as it
was welcome to those that first received intelligence of it on Friday last
here in England, so, for that we know the certainty and the particular
Conditions are generally desired, we here give you the Articles themselves:
which though they be or seem to be very disaduantageous to the Protestants,
yet they show thus much; that they did not resist all this while with any will
of Rebellion against their Sovereign, but would rather at first have yielded
up their Towns whole and vndemolished, then thus rased and leuelled with the
Earth. Again, that they had rather expect a freedom of Conscience, and a
cance^lling of the Edicts against them, and so rely for the continuance of the
Peace upon the Kings Royal word and Caution, then put themselves upon a
desperate Service, wherein they were sure to waste their Estates and Bodies.
Thus after a serious Consultation of the great Counselors about the Peace, and
the loss of many Nobles at Montpelier, which though it much incensed the King,
it weakened him as much, and either party being well wearyed, these Articles were
propounded and accepted which we here give you, until the Conditions be at
large sent over, which are shortly here expected.

1 Rochell and Montabon, shall still keep up their Fortifications, for the
security of those of the Religion. 2 The Fortifications of Chasteau d'Vsez and
Nismes, shall be raiced and rendered into the Obedience of the King. 3 The
Fortifications of Montpelier, shall be raced and the Ditches filled up: And 3.
Regiments shall stay there in Garrison, until this be done. 4 The
Fortifications of Milleaud, shall be raiced and the place rendered up to the
Obedience of the King. 5 Monsieur de Rohan shall still continue Governor of
Nismes, Montpelier and Milleaud, but to keep no power of men in Garrison in
them. And all other places and Towns are to be rendered to the Obedience of the
King. 6 There are 4000. men and 6. Pieces of Canon left under the Command of
Monsieur de Montmorency, which are to stay in Languedoc to reduce that Province
also, to the Kings Obedience. 7 All the Edicts shall be well kept and observed.
From Antwerpe the 18. of October.
THE Marquess Spinola has as yet done nothing, lying still with his Army in
and about a Town called Brecht, some 15. miles distant from hence, being as is
reported 40. thousand strong: they are put to a great strait for want of
provision, in regard that all the Country almost here abouts in maintaining
so great an Army, is drawn dry. The Prince of Orange lies at and about Lillo,
looking one upon another, watching their advantage: As for Count Mansfield,
with his forces are marched up toward the Rhine, to relieve Papen Muts or
Priests Cap, being very strongly besieged by the Enemies. This place is of
great importance to the States, in regard whereof Mansfield was no sooner
marched up, but presently Spinola sent Grave Henricke Vandenbergh with strong
forces after him, to hinder the raising of the siege, so that if they meet, we
shall shortly hear of more blows.

FINIS.

