January 12. Numb. 6.

THE CONTINVATION OF OUR VVEEKELY AVISOES, since the 2. Ditto to the 12. of the
same.

Containing amongst diverse other things these particulars following; The
arrival of the Queen of Sweden at the City of Wittenburg, where a few hours
after came a messenger from the King of Sweden, that presented her with these
particulars following. An Image of the Child Jesus of pure gold, another of
silver, and the head of pure gold; and another Image of S. Martin of pure gold;
all which amongst other he had taken, being ornaments of Popish Churches. The
present state of Tillyes Army, and how they are disposed, also what misery
they are in. The rendering of the City of Mentz, and Oppenheym, with the taking
of that Castle by assault, with the Articles of agreement upon the former
rendering. The cruel and barbarous behavior of the Spanisp toward all the
Towns which they do forsake before they depart away from them. The King of
Sweden has lately taken in the Palatinate these Towns; Oppenheym, Crutznatk,
Bagrag, ^adenburg, Slakenburg, and all the Bergstraight; and is now at Mentz,
where his Majesty keeps his Royal Court.


LONDON. Printed for Nath: Butter and Nicolas Bourne, 1632.

The Continuation of our Weekly NEWS.
From Sallie in Barbary the 15, of November, 1631.
IT is fifteen years ago, since the Peace was broke between France and Us;
the cause of that breach was by reason that a certain Frenchman, a renegado
or revolted Christian had stolen out of the Library of the King of Maroco among
other Books all Saint Augustines Works, written with that holy Fathers own
hand, which were bound up so costly with pearls and precious stone, that they
were valued at the worth of millions of Florens. This renegado convayed those
Books into Spain, where they are reserved until this day. But now there is a
treaty in hand to re-establish the former Peace between the French and Us. To
this end by the command of his King the Cardinal Richelieu has sent two
Deputies, who have already concluded a good Peace between the Moors and the
French.

From Dusseldorf the 2. of December.
From Rhynberck are departed ten Companies of foot, most of them being
Wallons, they march now toward Trier or the Palatinate. And it is supposed,
that fifteen Cornets of horse, and 10000. more of foot shall shortly follow.

From Wittenbergh the 21. of December.
A few days since the Queen of Sweden arrived here about nine of the clock in
the evening, and was well received. A few hours after, arrived a messenger
from the King, with many costly presents sent to the Queen, which presents
were Church-ornaments which his Majesty has obtained for booty, among other
things, an Image of the child Jesus of pure gold. And two other Images, one
the Salvator of silver, and the head of fine pure gold. Another of St. Martin
of pure gold. And many other the like toys. Which were seen of all men that
would. These images were garnished with Diamonds and costly Stones.

The Swedish have taken Rohenfeld, and slain about 800. men there.
Freydenburgh, in the Wetteran is also taken by them. Eger in Bohemia is also
taken by five Companies of Saxonians with the help of the Citizens.

The great overthrow of the Commander Dieffenback and Gotzens Army by the
Saxonians, under the Commander Arnheym is now certainly confirmed.

From Norimberg the 22. of December.
General Tilly with the Commander Altringer a few days since passed by here,
from Swabach to Gigitserhof with all their forces, thorough the wood, as also
Papenheyms forces, their march continued at least six hours in passing by. We
made after them at least with fifty Canon shot from this City. They marched
to Roodt, where the General lay still two nights; from thence he departed to
Donaweerdt, to treat with Bavaria. He has parted his Army into three parts,
with one part the Commander Altringer is marched into Bohemia, the other into
Swaben, and with the third the General is to remain in Bavaria. He has brave
Cavallery, but very poor and impotent foote-forces. In their March from
Ansbach to Guntsbach, they left behind them in the streets and ways above
1500. sick and dead Sou^diers. The Commander Murtha at this present is still
at Loef, Harsburgh, and the adjoining Villages: at Loef he has shut up two of
the Gates, intends to winter there. But as soon as the Swedish relief shall
be come hither (which daily is expected) he will have no great stomach to
remain there long, but to depart with his forces both from thence and other
places. The Magistrates of this City are now very well affected to the King of
Sweden, and will in no wise hearken to the Emperor, they cause great search to
be made continually. Some of those which held correspondency with the Emperor
are held close prisoners, and some others were rackt, so that the very next day
they dyed.

Near unto Hasfurt many new levied forces for the Emperor assemble together,
which shall be mustered in the Bishopric of Bambergh.

From the Lower Palatinate 23. Ditto.
It is written that the 17. of this month the strong Sconce by Oppenheym was
yielded to his Majesty of Sweden by agreement. Which Sconce being taken, his
Majesty caused the City and Castle to be furiously assaulted, which were
taken by force. Those of the City had Quarter, but those in the Castle were
all slain. But hereof we must expect more certainty, there being come other
Letters that say, Oppenheym was surrendered upon composition. The convenient
passage over the Rhyne was discovered and made known to his Majesty by a
certain Shipper of Worms, nam^^ Hild, who in the night time brought down
from Worms two great Ponts, and many small Boats down the Rhyne, with which
vessels he undertook to transport his Majesty's Army over the Rhyne at
Stockstadt. His Majesty himself went over in the first Pont, who with small
resistance landed his foot Forces, which kept the Horsemen of the Emperor play
so long till his Majesty's horse were also landed. Which caused them presently
to retire, Gernsheym (where 350. men were in garrison) yielded presently to the
King of Sweden. The strong hold called Steyn, the Spanish also left, but they
first fired the same. The Lorrain forces left Worms in like manner, where they
did great harm with pillaging. The whole Berghstra^e is now in the King of
Swedens power, only Starckenburgh excepted. Also Laudenbergh is the Kings, who
very quietly and willingly surrendered.

From Mentz 22. Ditto.
The 19. of this month, the Spanish fired all the Ships that were before
this City, amongst which also was the great Ship of the Elector. After this,
all the Commanders and Officers caused their Wagons and horses to be in
readiness and sadled, and so they were kept ready twentie-foure hours
together, desiring to depart and to be gone before the coming of his Majesty's
Army, for they durst not stay till then. They pillaged many houses, and killed
most inhumanely many of the Citizens, at least 19. or 20. Whereupon the
Citizens taking their recourse to the Commanders made an earnest Complaint to
them, as namely, to Wigdenhorst, and the Commander Waldeck, who labored to
appease the Soldiers, and suppress their insolences and misdemeanors, but
the Soldiers were so far from listening to their admonitions, that they
laughed them to scorn, and rayled at them with all manner of base terms.

From Franckford the 24. Ditto.
After his Majesty had taken Oppenheym and many other places in the
Palatinate, he marched to Mentz, which City yesterday was yielded up to the
said King. The Spanish which were in that City have pillaged many houses of
the same, and abused the Citizens extremely, left the same, and so betook
themselves to Franckendale and other places.

It is thought that Franckendale by this time is taken, for we have heard great
shooting. There lay a strong Garrison in Franckendale of 7000. men, and of them
were 5000. Spaniards. We understand that the Dutch have betaken themselves
into his Majesty's service.

The Landt-Grave of Hessen is yet on this side of the Rhyne, in the Rhynegaw,
even near Bingen, so that now his Majesty has shut up the Rhyne, both above
and below. At this present the Swedish march to Creutznach.

After that the Magistracy and Council of this City had taken the oath of
fidelity to his Majesty of Sweden. His Majesty gave unto every of the chief
Magistrates a golden Chain, with a piece of Gold, wherein was engraven his
Majesty's Image, and to the Aldermen and inferior Magistrates he gave a Golden
Cup. Strong levy is made for the Landt-graue of Hessen, the Bishopric of
Fulda and Paterborn: there are already thirty Companies complete, and at
Cassel twelve Companies more of foot and six Cornets of horse, which very
speedily are to march forth.

Yesterday here were mustered 1200. new levied Soldiers and divided into 6.
Companies.

Over-wesell, Bobert and Coblentz are beset with Spanish forces. The Castles in
the Mountains are again well furnished with provision.

The Landtgraue of Hessen has taken the Castle Erenfels, and the Blockhouse
over against Bingen.

Another the 25. Ditto.
After his Majesty had taken Oppenheym, the garrison in Worms fled; those of
Mentz in like manner after they had most wickedly behaved themselves among the
Citizens. The Garrisons that fled from Mentz were pursued by some Swedish
forces, and are utterly defeated: the Swedish in the said exploit obtained a
very great booty. It is now without all question that his Majesty has taken
Mentz, some report that his Majesty is in Frankendale also, of which I shall
better certify you hereafter.

From Cullen the 28. Ditto.
The Regiment levied at Luyck under Colonel Lambay was mustered before this
City in the presence of our Elector the Commander Pappenheym and the Earl of
Ysenburg. The Regiment of Newhousen shall march with them into Westphalia. The
two other Regiments of Horse, as that of Westerholt and Westphalia are in the
Bishopric of Munster. It is supposed that they will labor with this Army to
beset and guard the River Weser.

Graef Heudricke Vanden bergh is with his Lady arrived at Dusseldorf, to visit
the Duke of Newburgh, and congratulate his marriage.

Here is great inquiry made for a great dwelling house for some great Lord, it
is thought for the Archbishop of Mentz.

From Paris the 28. December.
It is certain that his Majesty perceiving that the Governor of Millan did
by all subtilties and divices levy forces underhand and made a secret
preparation for war: and did labor to divert and seduce the Allies of his
Majesty; as namely the Grizons, Switzers, Valtoliners, some with gifts and
moneys, other with threats, by that means at the beginning of the Spring to
fall into those Countries, and so endanger Montferat and Mantua;) has sent
thereupon his forces which came from those parts back again. And besides this
has sent the Duke de Rohan as General into the Valtolin, both with men and
moneys, there to ensure all places with good Garrisons, and to fortify some
other which he has already done. So that all the Frontiers as well of Mylan as
Germany are very well kept with Switzers and French. Marshall Thorax is gone
into the Citadell of Cassall at the Kings injunction with 600. French; and he
makes great preparation against the next Spring. Whereas his Majesty now has
left the Kingdom, here is great care taken in his Majesty's abscence to further
all affairs and resolve upon matters left in trust by the King.

Another from the same place.
The Duke of Lorraine is again returned to Nancy, where he is bedridden with
sickness; his Troops in Germany are lately dispersed, and his Lieutenant
Gene^all Prince of Palsburg is lately deceased, as it is written, but the truth
hereof we must expect.

The Kings Majesty was lately at Verdun, from thence went to Mentz, he has
sent from Paris for his Scepter, Royal robes and ornaments, etc. so that it is
very probable that he will not very soon return again into France: he has
chosen in his absence for his Lieutenant General the Lord Count de Soyson.

The Pope has written very earnestly to his Majesty, and exhorted him very
pathetically, as being the eldest son of the Catholic Church, to employ his
levied Army against the Heretics in Germany.

The Marshall Vetre will within few days depart hence to Valtoline.

From Amsterdam the 3. of January.
The King of Bohemia we understand will in few days go up toward the
Palatinate with certain thousands of horse and foot. The Paltz-graue of
Lweibzrick is this week arrived in the Hage, what his intent is we cannot yet
learn.

From Wimpsen the 10. of December.
I have not of long written unto you, because we dare not write, it being
dangerous every where about us. Howsoever I thought good to hazard this little
letter, to tell you, that the Imperialists have not lost their presumption as
yet. There are many Garrisons in the Towns along the River of Tanber, so
that the war may well hold out a while thereabouts.

The Town of Bambeg, and the strong Town of Forcheim hold out both likewise,
there lying strong Garrisons in the same of the Emperors forces, who do now
hinder that Bishop, to do what else he would do, so that by calling in those
defenders, he has put himself under their guardianship like a child, and will
be undone worse by them then if he had fulfilled the Treaty he first began
with the King of Sweden, whose forces have spoiled all his Country, so that
when the Imperialists shall have spent their provisions, they will without any
strokes forsake the said places. I can tell you no certain news out of
Bohemia, for some say and write one thing, some another. But as for Mentz, that
is taken, and the Town and University there have rendered themselves upon
composition to the King, paying (as I am informed) in ready money 80000.
Ryxdollers. I understand also, that the Spaniards, yt were the reputed
defenders thereof, before they ran away from thence, played many Spanish tricks,
robbing some rich Burgers, and not sparing the Canons and Church men, and
committing many insolences and violences, but especially (as it is written)
they poisoned the principal fountain there* whereby a mortality was
occasioned, that there dyed daily about 30. or 40. Burgers and soldiers. But
these offending defenders will shortly receive the payment due unto them. The
King found exceeding great store of warlike amunitions in that Town,
especially of powder and shot, etc.

Extract of a Letter written from Bonne the 30. of December.
I Am assured by Letters, that Tilly has been with the Duke of Bavaria at
Munden, and it is confirmed that he is both incapable and unwilling to continue
in his charge of General, so that now it is believed, he will put in execution
his resolution long since taken, to make himself a Monk.

The Duke of Bavaria is now at Donawert, with the Deputies o^ the three
Ecclesiastical Electors, to consult about their affairs And it is said that
the said Electors are shortly to meet i^ person at Co^len, which is easy for
them, for our Prince is already there, and the two others he of Mentz and of
T^rie, are not far off.

The King of Sweden his Forces have brought all the Bergstrat under his power,
they have lately taken both Ladenburg and Starkenburg.

It is confirmed that the Swedish and Saxonionian Army have met with the
Imperial Army in Bohemia, and have had a bloody fight, but the victory fell to
the Swedish and Saxons: And that thereupon Arnheym went presently before
Limpurg, and besieging the same in one or two days, took the same by force.
That whole Kingdom (we understand) is against the Emperor, except Pilsen and
Budwise.

Concerning the passage of so great a consequence called the Guldens^^ig, I
believe there will be a great quarrel about it, for the Imperialists go
thither to take the same, and I understand that the Count of Thurus is also
come thither.

Out of another Letter from Dusseldorf of the same date.
NOw we have received assured news by several l^tters, that Wismar has been
surrendered on the 24. of December, unto Duke John Albert of Meckelburg, (who,
as you know, is the younger brother) according to an agreement made betwixt him
and Colonel Gram, who did command within that City. Thus there are now more
forces to be spared for other service of the King of Sweden. As for Magdenburgh
it is now in extremity. For we are assured that General Bannier has utterly
defeated a Convoy of Magdenburg consisting of 600. their best men, who were
appointed to fetch wood, whereof the besiedged have great need.

You know that the Infanta has had an Ambassador at Collen; offering to that
City and Elector assistance of Soldiers, and to persuade them to accept the
same, the said Elector of Collen should have had the command over the troops
which the Spaniard would have sent and paid. But the Town had no mind to have
such defenders, whose great and enormous actions but lately performed at Mentz,
Worms, and other places, are yet so fresh, that the memory thereof hindered the
Council at Collen to forget themselves so much, as to take them on, etc.

From Bonne the 20. of December.
I send you here the capitulations made at Oppenheim upon which that town was
taken before Mentz, and do here the Castle there was taken by assault and all
the Spaniards put to the sword, I wish those that have been here had all been
there.

Don Philip de Sylva (we do understand) is retired into Frankendal, and there
is news, that some of his troops marching thither have also been intercepted
and cut in pieces. Nay there is more yet for you. Monsieur Mezicres, who lay
within Mentz, and whose soldiers have so well defended that town, that no
town, that has any wise man in it, will ever receive the Spaniards for its
defenders, marching or rather flying out of Mentz, has also been met by some
Swedes, and lost all that were with him, he himself escaping by the courage of
his heels.

Soon after some Swedish troops came to Creuznach and took the same place,
the Spaniards, forgetting their gravity bring their enemies from one place to
another.

We understand that Mentz was surrendered to the King of Sweden upon the same
conditions as was Oppenheim, whereby that King has now all the passages of the
river of Maine in his power.

The Capitulation or agreement concluded and agreed upon betwixt the King of
Sweden on the one part, and the Governor of Oppenheim on the other part, about
the surrendering of the said town and Fort, on the 7. of December 1631. For the
Town.
1. THe garrison is to depart the very same night out of the Fort with their
bag and Baggage, colors flying, drum beating, matches lighted and their
bandeliers filled etc.

2. They are to have assurance not to be molested on their way, either by the
Kings forces, nor by the Landgrave of Hessens troops, nor others.

3. A Captain shall be given them for Hostage, (as likewise they shall leave
one of these) And thirs shall be conveyed by 1000. Musketeers, who shall
conduct them that same night to a village distant half a league from thence,
and the next morning they shall be conveyed further upon the borders of the
Maine.

4. His Majesty of Sweden is to furnish them during their march, with victuals
etc.

For his Royal Majesty.
1. All those that shall be found in the Fort, are to take their way toward
Bingen.

2. They are first to pass over the river of Maine and afterward the Rhine.

3. From thence they shall not go to Mentz, but to any other place where there
is a Spanish garrison.

4. They shall leave all their Ordnance behind them, and carry none away.

5. They shall not pillage nor do harm to any town, Village, nor any
soldiers that serve his Majesty, during their march.

Extract of a Letter from Collen, the 25. of December.
WE do learn by some Letters, that the Duke of Friedland will come again
upon the stage, and that he has at last accepted, to be General for the
Emperor in Bohemia and in his hereditary dominions for a certain time.

We do also understand, that the Swedes have taken the Imperial town of
Frieburg, and that the Spaniards have forsaken Baccarach and all other places
along the Rhine, So that if the King of Sweden should take Coblents, we cannot
see, who can hinder him to take both Bonne and this City of Collen, And indeed
I have heard from the mouth of a Chief Minister of our Elector here. That his
Prince is in great perplexity, and says, that he cannot imagine whether in the
world he could fly for his safety. The French King, in whom consists all his
hope being far from him, and he will not trust himself into the Spaniards
hands.

Koningstein, being a Castle upon a high hill and esteemed impregnable, has
been taken by the Landgrave of Hessen, you know of what a great consequence
that Castle is, commanding all the Country about. There has been found great
store of provision, and above 60. pieces of brass Ordnance. I do hear that
the said Landgrave lost one of his younger brothers there, who was shot. But
howsoever he has done a noble and great service by taking so strong a place.

Spire is also treating with the King of Sweden, and will receive Garrison as
well as Worms. We do now receive news, that some of the Swedish horse
commanded by a Rhinegrave, have defeated Colonel Fust, who commanded many
forces in the Palatinate, both for the Duke of Bavaria and the Spaniard, and
has taken from them five Cornets, which he has sent to the King of Sweden to
Mentz, where his Majesty keeps his Camp royal.

Out of another Letter.
The Magistrate of Collen has assuredly sent some Deputies unto the King of
Sweden to make some agreement with him, whereof you shall shortly, hear more.

The Duke of Lorraine Pfaltsburgh is come home again, and has brought the
corpse of his Brother in law with him, who dyed lately in Germany: So all the
fruits, which that Duke has gotten by his assistance given to the Emperor,
seems to be Repentance.

What the French King intends to do, is not known, but it is well presumed.
That the Ecclesiastical Electors and the Duke of Bavaria (who all seem to
forsake the house of Austria and consequently the Spaniards) have their only
trust and hope upon that King, either to help them against the King of Sweden,
or to be a means for their neutrality with him, whereof time will shortly
show the effects.

Out of a Letter from Collen the 30. of December.
I Forgot in my last to tell you, how we are not ashamed here to acknowledge
our poverty and need of money, as you see by this printed brief or
proclamation, published here the contents whereof abstracted say thus much.

Ferdinand by the Grace of God Archbishop of Collen and Elector, Bishop of
Paderborne, Liege and Munster, Administrator of Hildesheim, Berehtsgad and
Stabull, Palatine of the Rhine, Duke of upper and lower Bavaria, Westphalia,
Angaria, and Bouillo^, Marquis of Franchimont, etc. Greeting. Whereas our
saving Catholic Religion is fallen into extreme danger and necessity in our
dear Country the Holy Roman Empire at these troublesome times of war, so
that following the ^ouncell of some wise and godly persons and the example of
the people of Israel (who did deliver up most cheerfully and liberally their
private treasure and the very gold rings of their fingers for the building and
setting up of the Tabernacle of the Alliance and of the Temple) we have thought
good for the preservation of the said Catholic Religion and of the most
ancient Church-grants, to make a public and free collection and contribution
within this our Archbishopricke: Therefore we do hereby fatherly pray and
exhort all good and godly Patriokes and Countrymen, to take to heart the said
extreme need and necessity, and that every one would put forth and open his
hand according to his ability, and testify, how much he does prefer to all
worldly goods both the honor of God of his most blessed mother Mary, and all
loving Saints, and the conservation of our Roman Catholic Religion, and the
most ancient and excellent Church-grants. And to the end that every one may be
sure of the fruits of his benevolent and liberal contribution and of the
profitable expenses and employment thereof, we have to that end caused to be
set here in the Carthusian Cloister within this City of ^ollen a Chist, with
two Keys, whereof the one is delivered to the hand of the Prior, and the other
unto Godfrid Damiam, Oeconomus of our Seminary here, so that none without the
other, is to open the same, but both together are upon our special gracious
order to take out and employ the collected moneys: But for the better bringing
in and co^lecting of the same, we have graciously appointed our beloved the
pious Father Wig and Spar, Guardian of the order of Saint Francis ac
Observantia in our City of Bonne, and some other fathers of his order, who
have to the same end a white book, where they are to write in every man's Name,
and the sum of his bounty and liberality. And that this our godly intent
might be known to all, and rightly understood; we do hereby strictly charge
and command all and every our Curates and Vicars, to represent from the pulpit
with more circumstances this great and urgent necessity and danger unto our
people, and to read withal these our Letters Patents, exhorting and persuading
most zealously and effectually all good Catholic persons, to bestow a
bountiful and su^ficient contribution, and to set these our Letters at every
Church door, etc. In witness whereof, we have confirmed the same by our hand
and Electorall Seal.

Given at Collen the 34. of December, 1631.

Although there was in the beginning thought by this contribution to rai^e a
great sum of money, yet men seeing h^^ strangely affairs go and change daily,
they are now very backward, thinking it better to spare their moneys for the
contribution which they fear will fall upon them to save themselves and their
goods from their enemies, then by hastening in this subsidy, to cast
themselves to a double loss.

FINJS.

