CORANTE, OR, NEWS FROM Italy, Germany, Hungary, Spain and France. 1621.
From Rome the 21. of August. 1621.
THere is advice from Naples, that certain Ambassadors of Messina are arrived
there and from thence are to go into Spain, to congratulate the king and to
give him a present of 150000. crowns, as also that in Naples a contention
falling out between the Spaniards and Neopolitans, there were many on both
sides slain and wounded, so that if the Cardinal the Vice Roy had not stepped
in amongst them, there would have been a great slaughter.

The Popes galleyes are gone to Gaeta and Messina, but the gally Saint Peter
stays at Gaeta.

On tuesday Prince Philibert with 15. gallyes sailed along by Ciuita Vechia
toward Sicilia.

Here by commandment of the Pope there are costly swaddling bands, mantles, and
other blankets made, they are embroidered with gold silver, and other costly
works, to present unto the queen of Spain against shel is brought to bed of
her first child, amounting to the vallew of 10000. crowns.

From (...) of August. 162^.
BY letters of the 21. from Genua it is certified, that Petro de Liena is
arrived there with two gallyes from Spain, and that the rest stay still at
Vado. The next day the General followed him, and in a ship richly laden went
from Genua to Spain, and passing by Nizza refused to pay the Tole, whereupon
certain vessels were sent out against them, and ouertaking the^ in the
Province Sea, took them and brought them to Nizza from Grieckisckwisenburg. It
is certified that the bridges that are made over the river Donaw by the Turks,
are now ready, and that the Turk has left an army of 50000. men by Cameniz to
defend the bridges, after whom there followed 15000. wagons laden with
victuals and munition for the Army, in the mean time the Turks sent 10000.
Turks to forage the country, who being met with all by 15000. Polonians
fought together, the Polanders at last having the victory.

From Vienna the 25 of August. 1621.
AFter the Hungarians had burnt and destroyed about 200. castles, villages, and
market towns, and spoiled a great quantity of corn standing upon the ground,
they went back again and planted a siege before Presburge, and upon the 19.
20 21. and 22. of August shot fiercely against it, and still continue their
battery; the Emperors soldiers defend themselves valiantly therein,
notwithstanding that they are shut up therein, and are determined to fight as
long as any of them are alive, if they be not forced to yield for want of aid
and provision of victuals.

There are 8000. men of Morauia, Bohemia and many soldiers of Sylesia gathered
together in Marble, that are to go withal speed to relieve Presburge.

On this side the river Donaw the Budianers in great numbers overrun and
ransacke the country, doing great hurt by burning and spoiling the same, and
have come within four miles of this town, and burnt the country: whereupon
the poor people in great fear run away, and by that means the corn in the
country is all spoiled. The Earl of Colalto, has commission to defend
Newstadt, and to let the^, from making incursio^. After that the Emperorhad
proclaimed a general pardon in Morauia, and the prisoners set at liberty,
they began to defend themselves, and are determined to defend their country
from further invasions. There are more men exspected to come hither from Inn.
Captain Becker, that had bin 3. weeks prisoner with the Hungarians is now
released and come hither.

The Ducket is yet 3. Florins and a half, and the R^^ Dollor 3. Florin^ and
20. Crutzers. The gold Doller 2. Florins, which sort of money shall be raised to
4. 3. and 2. and a half.

The Duke of Saxons, and the English Ambassadors are yet here.

The Earl of Colalto, 8 days since, meeting with the Hungarians that came to
Newstadt, and there in the suburbs took certain children and carried them
prisoners, whereof some of them were Turks.

The Budianers with who^ there are 6000. Turks joined are gone with their army
toward the borders of the Steirmarke.

From Presburge the 21. of August. 1621.
THe 16. 17. and 18. of this month the enemy planted his siege in Hohemery
winegardens, on both sides about this town, in such manner that all the ground
is covered with the^ which done upon the 19. 20. 21. they began to batter the
town and presently entered the suburbs, and began to ensconce themselves
against the town, against whom our soldiers are not idle, and ceased not 3.
days together to shoot out of the town and castle against them, and they in
like manner against us, whereby many are slain on both sides: the last night
the enemy brought his great ordinance to the Scha^dtorfer street, and planted a
great piece over against St. Michaels tower, to batter the bulwark and sconce,
but to little end, for that not only the walls in that place are very strong,
but also the uttermost Bulwark, for that they cannot speedily make any bretch,
and as soon as any hurt is done, presently it is repaired and tamperd up
again. The Soldiers within are fully resolved to defend themselves to the
last man, and hope that the Emperor will aid them both with men and other
provision.

Another from thence of the 24. of August.
THe enemy batters the town both day and night, and has already shot 1500.
shot against it, and do assail the Tower and Bulwark of Saint Michael,
shooting bullets of 15. 18 and 20. pound and more, and they of the Castle and
Tower shoot continually at them, we are in good hope that the enemy within few
days will leave off his enter-prise, for we expect the Emperors force this
day or to morrow.

From Prague the 26. of August. 1621.
THe 20. of this Month early in the morning, about 9. of the clock. The Judges
of Ellenbogen and of Stoltz. D: Friderick van Carspadt and D: Luken, with other
Prisoners here, were received in an open Wagon, being conveyed by certain
horsemen to purglitz. There to stay till further resolution come from the
Emperor, what shall be done with the rest that are Prisoners time will reveal.

We are certified from Tabor, that they within still defend themselves
valiantly, yesterday it is reported that Baltazars Soldiers had lost another
assault, and two days past there were 1500. weigh of Powder sent from hence
thither. Colonel Paradise that was wounded with a shot before Tabor, is come
hither to be healed, and the Surgions are determined to cut out the Bullet that
lies between his Nose and his Eyes. Tabor is not like to give over without
great force and loss of many men, for that if our men should enter upon the
walls, yet they within are so strongly insconst, lodged and entrenched, that
they are not to be gotten out.

Yesterday the last Marshall or State-law was holden in the Kleinseytner-place,
wherein above 500. common soldiers, and some Commanders, that had left the
Walstein Regiment, had their names set upon the Gallows

From the Hage the 30. of August. 1621.
THis day the Earl of Schwarkenberge sat long in Counsel with the general
States, as it is thought about the affairs of Gulicke. Two or three days,
since there came a Gentleman from the Marquess of Iagerinsdorf hither, and had
audience of the general States, it is thought he is come to require some money.
On Tuesday the Arminians in Rotterdame began a new stir, having called
secretly one of their Preachers into the town to preach, which being known,
and the Soldiers having stayed him. They thought to have taken him from them
by force, and killed a Soldier with a Hammer, whereupon the Soldiers
discharged their Pieces at the Arminians, and killed five of them, and took
twenty of them prisoners, which the rest seeing, got home to their houses, and
some of them for that cause threatening the the maiestrates, there are
Commissioners by order from the provincial Court sent out, to examine the
cause, and find out the beginners of that matter.

From Amsterdame the 31. of August. 1621.
Between Saturday and Sunday in the night the Arminians sought to preach
here, but being discovered, the four Burgamasters of the town, with the
burgers watch, entered the place where they were, and took the Preacher who
before had been banished from thence, and taking the names of the greatest
part of the company that were present, they shall be fined for their labor.

From Wesell the first of September. 1621.
MAarques Spinola lies not far from hence, with his Army on the other side of
the Rhine, al things are prepared for the shipbridge there are above 1800.
Wagons with Munition in his Camp, and 16. great Pieces of Ordinance, grave
Henrick van den birge, is gone back with 7000 foot, and 500. Horse, whether
he or the other will go, as yet it is not known and Don Lewis de velasco,
lies at Burige not far from hence, and daily the Colonels and Captains come
hither. So for that the Marquess of Ansbach, and grave, John van Nassaw are
here, therefore the Marquess is expected here about 8. of the clock.
Therefore all our Soldiers are ready in arms, it is said that the States,
Forces, are about Elterberge, between Kings-Sconce and Emerick, where they
also make a Bridge over the Rhine, we daily expect something to be done.

From Brussels the 2. of September. 1621.
THe Infanta 3. days together has sat in open audience, and two days since
the Earl Vratislaus van Furstenberge, the Emperors Ambassador had audience,
who to morrow is to go from hence toward Spain.

In France the Duke D' Main, upon the 19. of August, besiegd the strong town
of Mountabon, there are many great Pieces of Ordinance in it, but not above
1000. foot, and 200 horse, and about 3000 burgers.

From Coulen then 5. of Septeptember.
Grave Henrick van den berge, has taken the house called Reed in the
Palatinate, for that as the Lord of Oldenberge, with some of his servants,
being owner thereof, rode thither (it being kept by a company of the States
soldiers) he was taken by grave Henricks soldiers, and carried to Gladback,
where he was so dealt withal, that he was content to yield the house to Grave
Henrick, and to that end wrote to the Captain to yield it unto him. Marquess
Spinola lies yet at Reinberge, and for that all things are prepared ready for
the Bridge before Wesell, we shall shortly see what will be done.

London Printed for N. B. September the 24. 1621. Out of the Hie Dutch Copy
printed at Franckford.


