July 25.

Numb. 35.

THE CONTINVATION OF OUR WEEKLY Avisoes, since the 19. of this present.

Certain late and very remarkable passages twixt the Pope, and the Ambassadors
of the Emperor and King of Spain, concerning the excommunication of the King
of Sweden and his adherents.

A Resolute and very Religious speech of the King of Sweden, upon occasion of a
danger escaped.

The Last and certainest passages of Maestricht, in manner of a diurnall, by
which you may guest of the event of that siedge.

The names of certain English and French Commanders lately hurt and slain
before Maestricht.

A Proclamation of the King of Spain against Count Henry of Vandenberg, one of
the Revolted Lords of that State.

Conditions proffered by the Emperor to draw the Duke of Saxon to his side:
Ineffectiue.

Besides diverse other particulars of Note.

LONDON. Printed by I. D. for Nathaniel Butter and Nicholas Bourne 1632.

The Continuation of our Weekly NEWS.
From Rome the 2. of June, 1632.
ON Monday last the Cardinal of Strigonia, parted from hence homeward with
little or no satisfaction; The Pope never used nor acknowledged him as an
Imperial Ambassador, and after his first audience, his Holiness would never
have him heard in the Consistory, and to that end he never did call the same
together; so that at last, the said Cardinal being out of hope to have any
public audience more, and having spent all his moneys, resolved (being
enforced so to do) to return home again, without any order for the desired
moneys for his Imperial Majesty. For although there was sent some order for
60000. Crowns unto the Nuncio Grimaldi, yet was there such care used, that the
said money is not yet paid, and is not like to be paid so soon.

Before the said Cardinal parted, he did remonstrate by a writing the wrong
his Holiness had done unto him in several points, especially in not having
him approved and used as an Imperial Ambassador, which dignity other Cardinals
in time past have enjoyed. Thereupon the Pope said if the like has been
granted in times past, now We have reasons to the contrary, which move us to
grant that honor neither to you, nor to any other. True it is, We have given
way and leave to the Cardinal de Richelieu to be a General of an Army, but
he does exercise that charge for the public good of Christendom, of France,
and of the French King, which reasons neither you nor Cardinal Borgia can
pretend.

The Pope has caused a Bull to be prepared, (though not yet published)
whereby he does anatematize and excommunicate all that take Arms against the
Catholic Religion. And this the Pope has done to rid himself of the
importunity of the Austrian faction; The which nevertheless does still urge
him to excommunicate the King of Sweden, that afterward no Catholics would
follow and serve him. Yea they say (though most impertinently) the Pope should
not only excommunicate those that war against the Catholic Religion, but
also those that war against the house of Au^stria, because who warreth
against the same (say they) does war against the foundation and ground of the
said Catholic Religion; so as do the Kings of France and of Sweden: the one
publicly and directly, and the other by his money and assistance; without the
which encouragement, the King of Sweden would never have come forth out of his
North-Corner, and have over-runne all Germany.

At this proposition the Pope did but laugh, saying: We that are the head of
the Catholic Religion, do take care for the defense thereof, to preserve the
same without harm. And to excommunicate and curse the King of Sweden, we do
see no reason, his war tending not to the destruction of the Catholic
Religion, but only to perform what he has published by his Manifest about
two years since: and we see, he has taken innumerable Towns and Cities,
where the Catholics have all kind and loving usage, and no hostility at all.
Oh! that the Austrian Armies had done the like in the Catholics towns they
have taken, where they have accomplished such cruelties and impieties, as never
were heard of amongst the Swedish Army: Mantoua is a fresh example of the
piety of the Austrian Army, which house you call the ground of the Catholic
Religion: there has been committed such cruelties against all ages and sexes,
such dishonor and wickedness against the women, even those that were
consecrated to God; such impiety against God and his Saments, and all in such
an excess of abomination, that the like the King of Sweden can never think
nor dream of, against whom you do so storm, etc.

On the latter end of the last week, the Ambassador Borgia received his royal
Patent or Commission, to remain yet three years Ambassador for Spain:
whereat the Pope was exceedingly displeased. Saturday last was the day he
desired to have audience, but the Pope sent him word, that he should not come
before him as Ambassador. And indeed the Pope has now oftentimes said, We
will not that Cardinals be Ambassadors of Princes (Lais) without our express
order and license, etc.

True it is, that they playing on another string, do in some sort move the
Pope, when they tell him, that the King of Sweden has desired of the Switzers
the passage into Italy, and that his Forces draw near to the borders thereof.
But on the other side, the Most Christian King does assure his Holiness for
the King of Sweden, and does promise him all safety and friendship from that
part. But because every man's death is uncertain, and man's will changeable, His
Holiness therefore will take such resolution for the Papal Sea, and for the
safety of his person, as he shall think sit, and has given order, that
Orivetto a City in the middle of Toscany, and almost inaccessible, the old
Papal Palace (where in former troubles the Popes were wont to retire
themselves) should be again prepared.

Cardinal Vbaldine, who had been the maker of Cardinal Borgia his protest,
has been driven out of Rome, and confined unto Zagarola, belonging to
Cardinal Ludovisio, where both out of grief and fear, the poor man has
since lost his wit: The Pope having told him before he went out of Rome, We
have so much against you, that we might cause your head to be laid before your
feet, if we shall do justice, etc. But indeed the Pope is naturally not
vindicatiue, else there would have been cut off diverse heads before this. More
I dare at this time not tell you.

Farewell.
A Speech made by his Majesty of Sweden unto those of his Court before
Ingolstadt, upon occasion of his deliverance from a Canon-shot.
The death which so unhappily happened to the Marquis of Baden, (whose death I
am extremely grieved at, for those rare virtues which were in him, not unfit
to be published to the world) and that thundering bullet, the fatal instrument
of his decease, do advertise me and put me in mind that I am mortal, and
subject to the same accidents the very poorest and meanest of my Soldiers are
subject unto. It is a general Law from which my Crown, my birth, my victories
are not able to rescue and exempt me. There remains nothing else therefore,
but that I must resign my self to the providence of the Almighty, who, if it
please him to call me out of this world, heneverthelesse, will not abandon and
leave a cause so just as that which I have undertaken for the re-establishment
of the Germane liberties. He will doubtless raise up some other more wise,
more courageous and valiant then my self, who shall put a period unto this
war. I know that the good success which it pleased God to afford me in my
enprises, has made some to be envious, who labor to persuade the simple, that
I endeavor nothing more then mine own gain, and the robbing and spoiling of
others. But I call to witness in this case the Princes who were thus spoiled,
which I have again established in their own right and estates; the Creditors
of which I have borrowed such extraordinary sums at Franckford, and else
where; and the great dangers which I do expose my self daily unto: whether I
have left mine own Kingdom, and the dearest I have in the world to any other
end, and with other intention, but only to destroy the tyranny of the house of
Austria, and to obtain a profound and settled peace unto all. This discourse
was broken off by the joyful acclamations of the hearers, and promise of
assistance, all of them with many tears entreating his Majesty to be more
careful in time to come of his own preservation, and to continue his first
resolution, as they for their parts will continue their fidelity.

Extract of a Letter written from the Army before Maestricht, the 17. of July,
wherein are contained those things of Note which have lately passed.
I have in my letter dated the 28. of June acquainted you with several
passages, concerning both the arrival of the enemy, and the onset which he
gave without, as also those within the City but nevertheless: not daring to
attempt any thing against the Quarter of his Excellency, perchance because
they perceived the same to be to strong for them, on the 29. day they began to
march downward toward the Mase until some 3. or 4. hours march from the Lord
of Berode his Quarter, and behind a Nuns Cloister by the Mase encamping their
Army, the next day being the 30. they began to ensure and strengthen themselves
with one retreachment, and to cast up or raise two batteryes by the dyke, the
better to pass over the Mase under the favor of their Cannon.

On the first of July yet being busied about this work, and taking care to
provide all things readily, shalloupes and boats, and Canons on the battery.
The 2. day of July the next morning they began to put their design in
practice, and transported 250. German soldiers with spades and mattocks in
boats and shallops, and so landed on the other side. But his Excellency
having the night before established good order and well guarded the dyke, both
with horse and foot and also planted some Ordnance, and he himself being at
hand, had upon this place caused the regiment of the Duke of Sandall to keep
watch, commanded by the Lieutenant Colonel Marquis De Thiau who having
suffered the enemy to land, and the boats being gone back again to fetch
over more men he with his forces which were upon the dike fell upon them
that were landed with great strength and fury, and in despite of the enemies
Canon and Muskets which played continually, they slew most of the enemies
forces, and many were drowned all of them went to the pot except only 103.
prisoners, which they brought with them into the Princes Quarter, among these
prisoners were diverse which last year were taken by Bergen in the great
defeat. This expedition happened not without some loss of our men, by reason
of the Canon, and Musket shot. Among the rest inferior officers voluntaryes
and common soldiers, we lost Captain Foullion who received three wounds of
Musket shot and at the last after the victory in the retreat having brought
of his men on the other side had his shoulder taken of with a Canon bullet.
Also was slain the Marquis De Thiau whose death is much bewailed of many, for
many ra^e virtues and qualities that appeared in him, his place of Lieutenant
Colonel is bestowed upon Major Buad, and the Majorship; to Captain
Verneuille.

The next day being the third of July, the Kings forces did again attempt to
come over, but somewhat lower; but our horse understanding so much, and they
fearing least too many of our forces were upon the Dyke, durst not come over,
but with the boats returned back unto their former place. The same time were
by 25. of our Horsemen brought 13. prisoners, and many horse, among them was
one Wagoner, and one that was in commission for the obtaining of victuals, this
man had about him 500. Rix-Dollars, to buy victuals in the Villages for the
enemy, this proved good booty for our Soldiers.

Upon the 4. ditto some of our horse took and brought prisoners 106. Boores,
16. or 17. Carts, and 60. Horses; all these Boores, Carts, and horses were well
laden with bread, beer, chief, and other provant, to victual the enemies
Camp. There was a greater Convoy then this behind, but our Horsemen were too
weak and durst not assault them.

Here are diverse other imprisoned, who daily when some of our men are taken on
the other side, are released.

As concerning our approaches, we in time having brought our works even to the
Counter-Scharp of the City Moat; The enemy did begin to raise a Travers against
our outermost work, by this means to hinder our progress, which Travers
inform of an half Moon being very hinderfull and prejudicial to our
proceedings, we endeavored to possess the same by force; when this exploit
was to be effected, the English had the watch that night in the approches,
under the command of the Earl of Oxford, being the Regiment of my Lord Vere.
The Earl for the exploit had commanded 40. English, all Gentlemen of very good
descent and quality, being voluntaries; These very courageously assisted with
some other Officers and common Soldiers, took in this half Moon two
several times most manfully: but the enemy with all his might coming against
them, under favor of their Canon, they took the same again, and caused the
English to forsake it, with the loss of five of the said voluntary Gentlemen,
7. fouldiers, and 7. laborers, with another English Captain, and 23. or 24.
soldiers more were hurt and sore maimed. Sir Simon Harcourt Knight was shot
through the face and hurt with a Granado. Captain Rockwood is also dangerously
hurt and run through the arm. The Lieutenant of the Lieutenant Colonel
Herbert, was shot quite through the body. Those one the other side went not
shot-free, and perchance have more of them slain then were on our side, for we
know of some which we saw lying stark dead.

Yesterday also was shot in a batterye in the English approches, the Lieutenant
Colonel Leueston in the head, and a few days before Colonel Pagnam in the
cheek, but we trust that they will escape both of them well cured of their
wounds.

The Enemy in three days has made but few shottes out of Maestricht, we know
not what may be the reason, except he has all the while been removing of his
Ordnance on another side: we shall ere long be certified, perchance they wanted
something.

Our fire-workers day and night do throw grenades into the Town, which do
great mischief.

The Spanish in the mean time with their Army are near unto the Mase. It is
thought they will build a Sconce there, but we know no certainety, our best
hope is that want of victuals will drive him thence.

Antwerp the 18. of July 1632.
As for news it is certain that Count William of Nassau yesterday has taken
from us our strong Fort which we had in the polthen of Naemen not very far
from Hulst where he has found or taken from us eleven great pieces of
Ordnance, amongst them were two double Canons, and great store of mansvelders
or small pieces usually so called, the soldiers were permitted to depart with
their weapons, as soon as this Fort was delivered or taken by the enemy, they
did cut the dikes and drowned the enemies polther, and the polther of Naemen,
and put all under water, and very like it is that they will do so with all the
dikes till before this Town of Antwerp, even before the paslage on the Franders
side, the which they may very well do for men can send them so that this City
is molested on both sides, on the Brabant side it is like a sea to the very
gates of Antwerp, and now we fear the other side as much.

As for Mastricht those of the Town defend themselves very valiantly, so that
it is supposed that it will hold out yet this Month, and as for releiuing of
it there is little news, for our Army can get no victuals, neither cau they
get over the Mafe, so that it is generally supposed that Mastric^t will be
lost, and that chiefly for want of victuals, and if our Army were over the
River of Mase, their victuals would be more scanty for them And as for forcing
the Prince of Oranges Camp there is no means, and it is judged by men of
understanding to be a thing impossible the Prince his Camp, being defended
with three or trible works against our Army, the Prince of Orange used no
great force against the Town: The besieged have great store of powder and they
shoot continually and defend themselves courageously, it is a hard Nut to
crack for the Prince of Orange, for he loses there a great number of men.

Those of Callen have taken truce with the Swedes for six weeks, and in
Germany all things prospers for the Emperor, the General Freidland has taken
all Bohemia, and aduances toward the Swodes who has retired himself before
Norimbergh where he entrenches himself and makes himself strong with his
ordnance, he sends for all his troops from all pa^ts to come to him Gustavus
Hoorn his Field Ma^shall is gone out of the Palatinate to him it is like to be
a General Field Battle but the Emperials and Freadlanders have the greater
number because it is supposed that the Duke of Saxon is agreed with the
Emperor for it is said that the Emperor has caused Proclamation to be made
by the sound of Drum and Trumpet that no Hostility or hurt shall be done to
any of the subjects of the Duke of Saxon upon pain of death. the Duke of Saxon
has in his Army as some say 40000. men. And the Duke of Freedland 60000. men
it is supposed they both will join there forces together and come upon the
Sweden to overcome him if they can. But the truth of these things are
uncertain.

From Sitert 18. July 1632. in the afternoon.
My last unto you was the 16. I have been since again in the Army before
Mastricht, and I came this morning from thence I write you that which I my
self have seen.

Notwithstanding they have used great force upon the half Moon at the
Winberger Gate and we have had it in often; the besieged out of the time of
Truce which they had on the dicke have ever taken it from us again and beaten
us out of it. And again one the fifteenth hereof they blew up a Mjine at the
same Gate against the English to their great advantage and one Friday being the
sixteenth between three and four of the clock in the afternoon and other
against the French and thereupon about 400. strong they sallyed out getting the
Fort of them, and well three rodds of their approchings which they held that
day and night following and defended it manfully. During the fight his
Excellency stood in the quarter of Grave Hendr^k with 30. horse and I was by
him upon the Hill. The fight lasted till late in the night and in the interim a
great bullet came out of the City which flew between the Horses Legs without
hurting any body.

The charging of muskets lasted all night until that finally the French being
Chaffed in their blood on the 17. put the besieged to flight into the half
moon which by the seconding of the English they took in, fighting man fully,
the Enemy de^ended them^elues stoutly, that I believe there was slain 400. on
both sides they knocked one the other down with their muske^s for want of
powder and because they could not charge them fast enough this morning our men
remained masters of the h^lfe Moon and of the counterverse on the dicke from
whence the besieged have very much hindered the approches.

Fifty Soldiers of the Garrison of L^wburgh have taken in the Castle of
Erckenteell for from thenc^ to hinder the Carriage of the victuals to the
Army. And they had already sunck two flat bottomed boats: wherefore his
Excellency sent thither the Duke of Boul^on with seven Companies of Horse some
Footmen and two pieces of Ordnance who got the same without discharging one
shot of Ordnance and have taken prisoner the Commander of the Castle. It Is a
p^^c^ of importance and situate upon a Rock.

This day there was a woman brought before the Prince who came out of the City
having letters to Don Cordua also a Spaniard of the Regiment of Alonsa carrying
letters to the Governor of Gulicke It Is all kept secret. Also yesterday a
Citizen came out of the Town whom his Excellency caused to be strictly
examined and amongst other things he should have said that there was great
discord between the soldiers and the Citizens and that certainly they wanted
powder which we find to be so because they shoot but seldom.

Don Cordua lies with his Army yet in the place where he lay first he cannot
come out: The Prince has also intercepted Letters from the Infa^ta to
Parenhyem. All the works of the Army are many, and larger and stronger then
before Hertogen Bush.

Conditions offered by Wallstein to the Elector of Saxony since the Truce of
the 5. of June sent by Colonel Sparr.
1 The Elector should cast with himself those domages done in his own
countries of Saxony by the wars about Leipsich, and set those against the
spoils that himsel^^ had lately made in Bohemia.

2. The Elector shall pay 2. Months means unto Walsteyns Army.

3. The Elector shall freely give over those Bishoprics Church Lands, and
Cloisters.

4. The Elector shall endeavor to get the King of Sweden out of Germany: For
which the Emperor will engage himself to grant free exercise of the
Enangelicall Religion throughout Bohemia.

These Articles being sent to the Elector he never accepted of them. And so
there was noe agreement made, neither is there yet any news come, that the
Elector should forsake the King of Sweden.

A Proclamation by the King of Spain concerning the revolt of Count Henry
Vanden Bergh.
Philip by the Grace of God. King of Castill, of Leon, Arragon, both the
Sicells, of Jerusalem, Portugal, Navarre, etc.

As soon as our Sergeant at Arms, upon the request and on the behalf of our
beloved and faithful Counselor and Protector general did remonstrate to us,
that it is notified and known unto all men how many several ways Count Henry
De Bergh is obliged unto us, not only being our subject and vassal, but
moreover having received at our liberal hands many extraordinary favors,
benefits and many rewards besides all the payments due unto him upon agreement
as well by standing means, as money of the Army coming in yearly in great
sums, being moreover honored with honorable and Principal titles: such as
Counselor of our Counsel of state, Governor and Captain general of our
Dukedom and Country of Gelder, Master of the Camp. And general of our Army,
and before that, General of the Cauallary or horse, and other dignities. The
least of all which did oblige him to a firm and constant fidelitye to his
Prince, and which is more, his own oath which he took when first he was
enstalled into these foresaid dignityes. But he casting by and slighting all
this, and forgetting his duty and obedience due unto us from him; he has
greatly enterprised and attempted against us and our service, and the rest and
welfare of our state and Countries. Being so far transported with his evil
and pernicious plots and machinations, that on the 18. of the last Month he
published printed bills and caused them to be scattered and dispersed into many
places as well without as within our dominions, that all soldiers of what
quality or nations (the Spanish only excepted) should be acceptable and
welcome unto him: exhorting and inciting them to rank themselves and shelter
under him, and be led by his command, making unto them many fair and plausible
proffers, by that means to draw them to mutiny and rebellion, from their own
colors under the which they are Militant for our service. Pretending himself
to be Master of our Camp and General of the Army, but in effect doing that
which is altogether contrary, having also the same day written to most of the
Magistrates of the Cities in those parts letters signed with his own hand
conformable and agreeable to the other letters which he published or caused to
be published and dispersed, which also he caused to be Printed and scattered
abroad, and sent to the Prelates, Nobles, Cities and Provinces of the
Low Countries, laboring by that means to dispose them to a general revolt
against us, and by seditious propositions, as far dissonant from the truth as
from reason. Nay and which is most of all, wrote a letter (also afterward
printed) to the Princess Jsabell Clara Eugenia, by the grace of God Infanta of
Spain our very good Aunt, full of abusiue and deceitful inventions tricks,
and devices, pretending, and willing to make her believe (against all truth)
and persuade her that all his actions had no other end or scope but only her
service, and the good and tranquillity of those Countries. Of which letters
having by his Chamberlain dispersed a great number of Coppies, and afterward
understanding that his said Chamberlain was taken prisoner by an oshcer of our
country of Braband, he wrote unto the said officer the 24. day of the same
Month a Letter particularly written signed, and sealed with his own hand and
seal containing an evident and manifest affirmation of the aforesaid letters,
to be his, and that he had sent them by his said servant or Chamberlain, and
over and above this added many threats against our O^hcer that in case he did
not let him free and let him escape, ^e would do thus and thus to him. All
these things being to manifest declaring his euili designs against his own
Prince unto whom is obliged by so many t^es, and that he had conceived
abundance of poisonous mischief in his heart, which he does but expect
opportune occasion and put in execution. To which end he had found it very
convenient to serve his turn ^ith this present occasion, to wit the present
siege which our rebels have durst to lay unto our city of ^a^^ric^^. which by
all likelihood they durst never have done, nor presumed to attempt, had they
not been well assured that the said Count Hen^y would second the^, but were
animated by the ways and treatie^ and correspondencie which they must needs
have ^e^d with him or his. And being that this is not tolerable in a country
of Justice, but all these actions or crimes of Felonies and treason in the
highest degree and attempts of mutiny, rebellion, sedition, revolt, and
perturbation of the public rest and peace of these our Dominions, wherefore
showing unto him for the discharge of his duty and office, and the charge
given unto him by the Princess our worthy Aunt to appear before us, and our
trusty and well-beloved the President and rest of our Privy Counsel they having
also charged him (to w^t our said Counselor, and Proctor general) to do
good and upright Justice in this present cause, and being thereunto authorized
so far as is requisite, requesting also most humbly, that all such provision
for Justice to be executed against Count Henry, as shall be found meritoriously
due unto such foul and enormious crimes as his are, with clauses of
authorization. Thus it is therefore, that all these things considered, we will
and command by these presents, at the request of our said Counselor and
Proctor general, that with such aid and assistance as you shall sind fitting
and convenient, you do take and apprehend the body of Count Henry Vanbergh
wheresoener, and at what time soever you shall be able, to take and apprehend
him within our Countries and Dominions, and that you do carry or conduct him
under good and sure guard into the prisons of our said Counsel, to be brought
before the aforesaid President and Lords of our couusell to answer to Law, and
receive punishment and Judgment for the said crimes, according to the same,
and as shall be found meet and convenient in such a case, and if so be that
you cannot take him, you shall adiourn him, and call him by edict and open
publication, upon pain of perpetual banishment and confifcation of goods, to
appear in person within three fifteen days. The first fourthnight you shall
assign him for the first day. the 2. for the second day. And the third for a
3, day and last peremtory day. Without any longer expectation, before our
Counsel there to answer to such things as shall be objected and read against
him, or aleaged by our P^octor general about the above mentioned causes and
crimes and other matters which he more amply out of his own charge shall
propound and declare. And so proceed farther and see things ordered as reason
shall require, signifying unto him that if he appear not the first second and
3. summon there shall be proceeded against him in his absence as as shall be
fit to be done in such a case. Certifying unto the same our Counsel
sufficiently what is to be done. Which counsel of ours we command, and
charge, that unto the parties (they being heard) they shall do and administer
good and speedy right Reason and Justice as in such a case is necessary and
convenient, and that in case of default and contempt of the said Couut Henry
they shall proceed unto the declaration of the said banishment, and the said
confiscation, or otherwise as they shall find fit to be done and proceeded in
the like case. In the proceeding of the confiscation you shall note, and set
down under your hands, by a good and true Inventarye, all and whatsoever goods
shall be found to be belonging unto the said Count Henry Van Bergh, and
commit the keeping and tuition of them unto such sufficient men as shall be
able to Answer and give account of them, and the remainder of them when need
shall require, and they thereunto called. And for the performance of all this
we give you full power, Authority, and special commandment. And we do
farther will charge and command. All our officers, and subjects, that therein
they do obey you, and attend you diligently, affording unto you, counsel, aid
and assistance, harbor and prison (if need be) they shall also afford, when
by you it is required. For thus it pleases us.

And because (as we understand) that the said Count Henry is retired, and has
absented himself out of our Countries, we therefore will that in that case
the adiournement and summons which shall be made by public Proclamation and
edict, shall be proclaimed at the Court and City of Bruxels, and the house of
assembly for our Counsel, as also in the City of Namur, as being the nearest
places unto his last place of residence, causing the Copy thereof to be affixed
upon the gates of our great Counsel, and of the Court of Bruxels, as also the
City of Namur, as also Coppies shall be affixed upon the doors of the chiefest
Churches of the said Cities, to the end that he may not plead or pretend
ignorance, but rather may be of such effect and validity in the publication as
if it had been done to the person of the said Count Henry, to which end we do
authorize the said edict and publication by these present.

Given at our City of Malines the 15, day of July, in the year of grace 1632
and in the 12. year of our reign. These letters were sealed with the broad
Seal By the king to the Counsel Signed De Rinevelt,

FINIS.

