June 23. Numb. 29.

THE CONTINVATION OF OUR FOREIGN Avisoes, since the 16. of this present.

The continuance of the troubles at Constantinople.

The differences in Polonia, about the choice of a new King.

The Articles between the Ki^^ of Sweden and the Duke of Bavaria.

A Letter of the French Kings, relating the troubles betwixt his Majesty and
the Duke of Loraine.

Some Low Country passages about the present state of the Wars there.

The Rendition of Prague to the Empero^^ (...) ^onditions.

Some late passages of the King of Sweden in ^^varia.

Also, The pursuit of the Spanish by the Swedish in the Palatinate.

LONDON. Printed for Nathaniel Butter and Nicolas Bourne. 1632.

The Continuation of our Weekly NEWS.
From Constantinople the 10. of April 1632.
THe Lord Paul Strasburg, Ambassador from the King of Sweden, to the Prince of
Transylvania, yesterday arrived here. The said Ambassador did refuse to be
received publicly with pomp and state, after the common custom and manner of
entertaining of such persons. The reason was, because he had left a great
number of his followers in Transylvania. I suppose that the end of his coming
into these parts, was concerning the Princess; who is sister to the King of
Swedens Queen, and Bethlem Gabors widow. And furthermore, to condescend to the
request and desire of the Prince of Transylvania.

The boisterous humors of the military sort, and especially the Spahies; cannot
as yet be pacified, nor the differences allayd. They commit many insolences,
without any respect to Magistrates, superiors, or great ones Nay not so much as
bearing respect to the great Turk himself, much less to the Visiers. Their
insolent pride is come to that height, that there is no other hope left but
only the ruin of the whole Turkish Empire, or at leastwise of their persons.
The Astrologians have prognosticated a terrible bloud-shedding in this City,
and all matters indeed do seem to dispose themselves and bend to such a
woeful effect. I do palpably perceive that our State is far more dangerous,
than the same was even at the deposing and killing of Sultan Osman. The Emperor
or great Turk and all his Ministers and Council, are without council and at
their wits end. Yesterday the Zebesies (those are they that govern and keep
the Munition and Ordnance) did massacre publicly one of their Survasies or
Captains: and which is most strange, even at that time when the Turks do
keep their Ramedan, or fasting month; at which time they do usually abhor
and abstain from all manner of wicked insolences, especially from
bloud-shedding. It is to be feared, that after their Bairam, a fearful bloody
tragedy will follow. The Lord of mercy, preserve and keep us, and all
innocent ones, from their cruel and bloody intentions.

From Dantzich the 4. of May, 1632.
Those of Polonia have so long disputed of the succession of their King, that
at the last they have found a reason of resolving the succession by his death.
The said Kings death befell at Warsaw on the 29th day of April last, he dyed
of an Apoplexy, which indeed he was struck withal six days before. His
death fell out very unseasonably: for Polonia being now envelopped and fallen
into wars with Muscovia, which certainly will cause the States of that
Kingdom to hasten the choice of a new King; which election is deferred until
the second Sunday after Whitsuntyde. In the mean while the Archbishop of
Guesnen governes the whole Kingdom for the time being. Among the chiefest
Competitors for this Crown, the King of Sweden is by all men supposed to be
the most likely: next to him the Prince Vlad^slaus, eldest son to the late
deceased King; then the Prince Casimirus hi^ brother by the Fathers side, and
the Archduke Leopoldus. But because the last of these is not esteemed
fortunate and successful in his designs of War, the Election is rather
ascribed to the strength and power of the first, or favor of the second. The
rather because their States have recalled him from the great charge which was
laid upon him, being General of the Army against the Muscovites, as soon as
ever they perceived his Father drawing to an end, they having established and
sent into his room, the Prince Razevill.

From Madrid the 25th. of May, 1632.
We do hear that the King of Spain receives but small content at Barcelone.
They are a very headstrong people, very hardly to be persuaded. The Deputies
have already had some bickering with Count Olivarez, who being entered into
discourse with them upon some matter belonging to the Voyage; they perceiving
that he spoke of moneys, answered him, that they would account with the King
himself, and not with him.

The Infant Carles has taken possession of the charge of Generalissimo of the
Seas, which was provided for him six months ago. The Ceremony was, that he
went to Sea some ten leagues, with some Gallyes and Gallions, and then came
back and made his entry into Barcelonia, in state and quality of
Generalissimo. Unto this great Charge was that given also unto him, of being
Vicar General of the King, which great place does subject unto him, all the
Viceroyes and Governors of that Country.

Lately there was almost raised a great tumult at Lisbon, betwixt the Soldiers
of the Garrison and the Inhabitants of that City. Which troublesome
Difference, Don Frederick de Toledo could no otherwise appease, but by the
imprisoning of some of the Soldiers. Although the hurt and wrong done, was not
very great. But the insolences of those people will increase, if they be not
timely suppressed. It is said that here the Deputies are accorded and agreed to
yield unto the King two millions and an half; in case and on condition, that
he will be pleased to recall the new imposition upon Salt. But the King before
he will condescend unto that, he will press them to maintain 30000. foot,
and 6000. horse.

Brussels the 12. of June.
I promised you at your last departure to give you notice of the particular
passages of these parts; which I will now accordingly perform, beginning from
the day that the Hollanders invanded this Land. Upon Wednesday being the second
of June, the Prince of Orange came into that part of Gilderland, which was
subject to the King of Spain: and dividing his Army, laid siege both unto
Venlo and Ruremond: and because he might the easier win the people to yield
up those Towns without effusion of blood; he sent unto them conditions of
peace, consisting of 18. Articles, which were so easy and favorable in their
behalfes, as their own hearts could desire. Amongst which Articles one was;
That they should enjoy free exercise of Religion, without any diminution of
such rents, as appertained to the Clergy; or molestation of those Religious
Orders which were within those Towns. The Citizens having thoroughly
considered upon these points, and finding the number of their Soldiers not
sufficient to withstand any violent assault; thought best to accept of them.

Whereupon, those of Venlo delivered up their Town unto the Prince of Orange,
upon Friday June 4. and those of Ruremond, the Sunday following. It is said,
that at the celebration of the Sacrament, the Prince gave order upon pain of
death, that the Soldiers should not molest nor deride the Catholics in the
time of their public Procession. This is a thing which gave the people no
small contentment: and which will not a little advance the Hollanders in their
after conquests, if they continue firm in this resolution.

We have news, that Grave Ernest of Nassau, was slain before Ruremond with a
Musket Shot, as he was alighting off his horse.

The Prince of Orange having placed strong Guards in the aforesaid Towns;
continued on his march forwards, and has since taken in a strong Castle, with
two other wall^d Towns and (as it is reported) is now come before Maestricht,
where Grave John de Nassau is ready to entertain them with Canon-shot, having
lodged the last week 4000. men within the Town, for the better securing of
the place.

It is said, that the Spanish Forces are hasting out of the Palatinate, and
that the people of Liege do refuse their passage thorough their Country,
because of certain wrongs they have lately received by the Spaniards. As for
Grave Henry Vanden Berg, he has retired himself unto the City of Liege
since the loss of his government; for all the Duchy of Gelderland is now
conquered by the Hollanders, the Town of Gelders only excepted.

Whilst these things were thus in acting, the Hollanders (who for more surety
fished with two hooks) put in execution an other enterprise of no less
important consideration. For upon Monday last (being the seventh of this
month) they came up the River of Antwerp with a great Fleet of ships, boats,
and pontous, and disbarking their men about t^n of the clock in the night, not
far from a Fort called in Dutch, Creutz-Sconce, or Cross Sconce; before it
was morning they had so well entrenched themselves, that so soon that the day
appeared, they mounted their Canon, and began to batter the Fort; continuing
the battery all the day following, (in which time they made two violent
assaults, though both times repulsed) and upon Wednesday, the Soldiers of the
Fort (finding no succor coming, and their Captain being slain) delivered it
to the Hollanders by accord, who now are in possession of it.

Some two hours after the deliverie of this place, Don C^rlos de Coloma
(having no notice thereof) marched out of Antwerpe with some six thousand men
of foot, and certain Troops of horse, with eight Canon to succor it: but
finding at his approach that the Fort was taken, he bestowed some shot of
Artillery against it, and after he had skirmished a while with the Enemy,
seeing no hope (as then) to dislodge them, he made his retreat, giving order to
the Cavallery to march over the water into Flaunders.

Thus have you heard what has passed in this Country within the space of
eight days, all these disasters have befallen this Land through want of
Soldiers to defend it. There was about some two months since a goodly Army,
ready at a days warning, to march into the field, but it was dispersed, part
being sent to the reconquest of the Palatinate, others to the succor of the
Emperor, and a third part into Lorraine, in Monsieurs (the French Kings
Brother) behalf. All I can add to this former discourse is, that there is a
general fear possessing the hearts of the Inhabitants, as if they were
already in the Enemies clutches.

We do hear that some two days since the Cardinal de Cueua ran hazard to
be slain, as he was getting into his Coach, by a drunken Burger, who assaulted
and reviled him.

From Metz the 6. of June. 1632.
Concerning the affairs between the King of Sweden and the Duke of Bavaria we
have as yet received no other certainty, but only that the said Duke is yet
considering of the Articles which were mediated by the French King, and
proffered by the King of Sweden, which were these that follow.

1. That the said Duke of Bavaria should depart from, and renounce and break
off from the League with the House of Austria.

2. That he should so dispose of his Troops and Compnyes, and entertain the
same, that they should not assist nor increase the Emperors forces, nor the
King of Spaines, nor those of the Catholic League.

3. That he should give and permit the King of Swedens Forces a free passage
thorough his Countries: and for assurance thereof, give some strong place into
their keeping, as, namely, that of Ingelstadt, or the like.

4. That he should contribute a certain sum of monyes toward the maintenance
of his War.

5. That all places shall be restored mutually that have been taken from the
one or the other, during these troubles in Germany.

Which Articles indeed are very favorable and tolerable, and able to
accommodate all. Neither can they any way seem harsh to any one who shall
consider the Country of the same Duke now lying open as a prey unto the King
of Swedens Army. And that at this present he has no revenues at all.

A Copy of a Letter written from the field-Armie of the King of Sweden, near
unto Altzeybrugh dated the 5. of June.
Whereas our Army two days ago did march toward the Army of the Enemy, and
assault the same, not far from a Cloister near unto Steynbach in a Valley. We
with our Canon have continued playing upon the enemy, and many of our Troops
have skirmished with some of theirs. But the Enemy perceiving, that we were
stronger then he supposed, he retired at his leisure, and sent before him all
his baggage and the most part of his Ordnance, and his foot-forces after them
and with his Cavallery and some Companies of foot, which were left behind, kept
us in action, to the end that his baggage and Ordnance might be ensured and
conveyed. In this his retreat our Forces did follow the Enemy close at their
heels: and moreover two of the Rhyne-Graues companies of Horse encountered
with four Spanish Troops, and routed them utterly, insomuch that they fled
into a wood, where they were pursued by our Troops. But by reason that the
foot-forces of the Enemy shot so furiously upon them, they were constrained to
retire in some disorder. Whereupon 4. other Companies of the Regiment of
Hornech were commanded to succor those two retyring Troops: But they without
expecting the approach of them resumed the retreat and so fell upon part of the
Front of their Army, that they caused such a confusion amongst the wagons with
baggage, that they were compelled to retire for shelter to Altzey. The Enemy
durst not so much as follow our retyring Troops, nor the other 4. Companies of
Hornechs Regiment, but continually seemed to fly from our advancing Army. In
fine the Enemy left behind them 40. Wagons with baggage and provision, and
three Cornets. And by the highways where they passed, do lie d^ad many
Spanish Soldiers and horses which were cut off with our Canon which made a
very great slaughter amongst them.

From Lan the 9. of June,
The French King parting from Amiens on the second of this Month went that
night to Corbie, where the Cardinal Duke of Richilieu fell distempered of a
fever, which made him to lie still two days, but with so happy a success,
that being let blood twice during that time, he recovered his health.

On the third day his Majesty went from Corbie, and dined at Chaune, where the
Duke that is Governor of Amient forgot nothing in his wonted magnificence, to
acknowledge the pleasing continuation of the great favors he receives from
the King his gracious Master, who that night went to Nesle. The Queen came the
very same day to sup at Chaune, and from thence to lie at Han.

The fourth, both the King and Queen came to La Friar.

The fifth, the Cardinal Duke of Richilieu parting from Corbie, where he left
the Marquise De Seurdis to command, where the Marquise the Saint Chaumont did
before, and from thence he came at night to Chaune, where he was very well
received, being accompanied by the Cardinals De la Valette, De Lion, and the
Marshall de Shomberg.

The sixth, the said Lords dined there, and with them also the Popes Nuncio,
the Count Dronin Ambassador of Sauoy, the Signior Mazarin sent thither from the
Pope, and the Marquise De Ville sent from Lorraine: All which came after from
thence to lie at Magny, a house of pleasure belonging to the Duke De Chaune:
The next Morning they went to La Friar,

The seventh, the King and Queen parted from thence, and came that night to
Laon.

The eight, the Cardinal Duke came thither also from La Friar, and met with
his Majesty, who parted this 9. of June from hence for Rheyns, taking his way
by our Lady de Liesse,

Our Army being commanded by the Marshals de la Force and Deffiat, and
consisting of twenty thousand foot and four^ thousand horse, is lately entered
into the Country of Trier, where they expect five Regiments of foot, and
1500, horses more, there they do observe what the Duke D^elb^uf and Don
Cordoua intend to do.

From the Swedish Camp the 14. of June.
The Lord Chancellor Oxenstern having received advertisement, that the Spanish
Army (both horse and foot) commanded by the Count of Embden, and Don Philippe
de Silua did intend to part and march from Spire toward the Mosel, and there
the said Army, carrying along five pieces of Ordnance did break up on the 21.
of May, old style. He presently took resolution to follow and march likewise
with the Swedish forces he had in those parts, and upon any occasion to offer
battle unto the enemy. And therefore on the 23. of May he parted with
Palatino Christian from Mentz, and marched that day toward Altzem, there they
lodged their Army in the field before the Town. The next morning advise being
brought that the Spanish Army did lodge but two leagues from thence at a market
Town called Gelheym, they would by no means neglect that occasion, but
presently resolved to march directly thither, and to assault the enemy. To which
end the Rhine-graue with some forces went before, and the rest of the Army did
presently follow. As Soon as the Spaniards heard and saw our forces coming,
he dispatched away all his baggage, and in a valley which makes a reasonable
large plain field and lies before a wood, he put the whole Army in
battle-array. The Rhine-graue (who, as it is well known, does fear no number)
encouraging his troops, suddenly and courageously charged the said Army, and
set so violently on the same, that he put them into a confusion and disorder,
the whole Army retyring and saving it self in the said wood, and leaving to
the Rhine grave three Cornets and a great many of soldiers slain behind,
being still followed both by the Swedish horse and the foot also, who in the
mean time was come to the feast, though somewhat late, by reason of the many
hills they had to pass the night the^ coming on, gave leisure to the Spaniards
to think upon their safety, and to march away, and the Swedish took up their
lodgings also near, and in the said wood. The Spanish Army having gotten
sufficient notice of the arrival of their enemies Army, and having no mind to
fight, under the covert of the night marched forward: and on the 25. (which was
the next day) the Swedish Army began again to march likewise. But although the
Swedish Cauallery did now and then overtake some Spaniards and slew them, yet
the Spanish Army got ground of them, by the advantage of the hills, to shun
their danger and to save themselves.

Howsoever, we did still follow them as far as La^tereck, so that the said
Spanish Army was never at rest, being forced to march day and night: Therefore
seeing our resolution, and that we came still upon their heels, they at last
took another resolution, and to make their journey somewhat easier, they burnt
most part of their carriage and baggage upon the way, and left a great part
thereof (which they hoped to save and carry with them) afterward behind. And
the prisoners (whereof we took a great number) do assure us, that the said
Spanish Generals did never think the Swedes would dare to follow them: but
afterward, when they found the contrary, their hopes were in a continual
fear and discontent. And so the continual marching, troubles, want of leisure
of victuals, and of rest, and our often falling upon some of their troops,
they have suffered very great loss both in their baggage, and people, so that
they have little to boast off, what they have gotten in that afflicted Country:
the lower Palatinate.

At Lautereck the Swedish forces were suffered to rest and refresh themselves.
And from hence back again to the very place of our first meeting, the ways
lie strewed full of dead bodies, Spaniards, Italians, Wal^^ones and others,
whereof besides such as were slain, many died of weariness and ^^l^nesse.

From Bonne the 15. of June.
Walstein (otherwise Duke of Fridland) is now again upon the Scaffold to act a
part in our German Tragedy; and for a beginning he has taken again Prague
upon composition, the Saxon forces that lay in the same being sent and conuoyed
to Leutmeritz where the Elector of Saxon his Army is.

The King of Sweden is suddenly parted from Augsburg toward Memmingen, it is
thought he intends to find out and beat General Ossa, if this he will tarry
for him, and have the honor to come to handy blows with such a victorious and
glorious King. The said Ossa has taken Biberach, a place of no strength. Mean
while there is a good Army in Bauaria to wait on that Duke if it shall need.

The Duke of Wirtemberg, having been with the King of Sweden at Augsburg, does
now make some leauies.

There is a Secretary of the said King sent to Strasburg, but the Magistrates
there seems still to be desirous to remain neutrall, that at the last they
may be swallowed up by him that shall be victorious.

From Lipsich the 27. of June, still. vet.
Another Letter from Lypsich write thus. Our Duke of Saxonyes Garrison in
Prague upon the approach of the Jmperiall Army capitulated, and upon terms
rendered the City. The said Garrison went to the Dukes Army at L^^t-meritz,
Loutmeritz, we go on sleepily, I dare write no more.

The Copy of a Letter written by the French King to the Duke of Montbazon
Peer and great Hunter of France, Governor and Lieutenant General for the the
I Will of France, translated out of the French printed Copy.
Cousin:
AS my care and scope has e^e^ been, to procure rest and safety to my
Subjects, never having ^eglected (as ^ll men know) any occasion, nor spared any
pains, but exposed mine own person in ^ll parts where I could any way advance
and promote the public Pe^ce and tranq^ility and direct all things to the e^se
and comfort of my people: So on the other side, I cannot receive any greater,
or more sensible displeasure, than to find that that which I have hitherto done
with so good an intention has not been able to produce the effect, which I so
earnestly desire. And that which vexes me yet more is, that this mischief is
occasioned even from those who are obliged unto me, for many considerations, to
contribute by all means possible, unto my contentons, to contribute by all
means possible, unto my contentment, and the good of my Estate.

There is no man ignorant of the fair and loving carriage which I have showed
unto my Brother the Duke of Orleans and his followers, and that knows not
likewise, how ill they have requited it, and the ill designs which my said
Brother by their pernicious advice, has made appear these last five or six
years upon all occasions; and then when he has seen me employed in affairs,
as important as necessary, as well within as without my Kingdom. Against
which, being desirous to provide by those courses that are most fit to impeach
them, I thought I had the last year taken from him one of the most powerful
means of troubling the state, in separating from his interest, the Duke of
Loraine, who diverse times before, had furthered his departure out of my
Kingdom: at which time I did show an extraordinary favor to the said Duke, in
contenting my self with his faithful promises, and the consignement of one of
his places. Whereas, being as I was in his Country, and having there a
powerful Army, I could then have easily deprived him of all the places he had,
seeing that then he wanted forces to defend them, and this I was not only
unwilling to do my self, but I can boldly affirm, that I hindered others that
had th^n the power and will to have done it.

In consequence of this favor having understood that the said Duke instead of
a religious performance of his faith and word (whereto I had sufficiently
obliged him) continued his first Intelligences, I have omitted no course within
my power that might divert him from them, but have been so far from gayning
ought thereby; but on the contrary, the said Duke not content to hold on his
former practices against my Estate, but has solicited and encouraged all
those, whom he held capable of his ill resolutions, even to the sending of
diverse Messages unto the Emperor, for the altering of his good intentions, and
soliciting the Spaniard to furnish my Brother, to bandy against me, who am his
King and Sovereign, as he himself meant to have done on his part.

To this effect, he has increased the number of his soldiers, and made diverse
extraordinary levyes, seducing even those of mine own Army without giving me
any satisfaction for the same. And the better to attain his ends, he has
fortified and furnished his Places, without any other cause, than the ill will
he has borne unto this Estate. And moreoouer, has redoubled his cunning plots
and practices, I avow that I could hardly have believed, that the Duke had
borne me so much ill will, had not diverse Letters written by his Father and
Sister alighted into my hands, which Letters not only import, that he was
ready to assist my Brother with his Arms, but moreover invited him seriously
to consider how he may gain my Crown which they say in express terms cannot
choose but quickly fall into his hands.

The which being joined with diverse other particular Int^lligences, which I
have; among others; some which I have gotten out of diverse Letters written by
the Lord Pay-Laurens, unto the Princess Pfaltsburg, whereby he does assure her
of certain dessignes of very great importance, which he says will prove
infallable. I could do no less than set my self in a course of defense
against so much ill will whereof to my great grief, I am most certainly
informed.

I did believe, that having provided for the safety of some places where mine
enemies might have laid their foundation (as you have understood by my former
Letters) and that I being so powerfully armed, and consequently in such a
State, as they might very well judge that all their enterprises would not
possibly take effect; they would have left their ill affectioned intentions,
and particularly above the rest, the said Duke of Loraine unto whom I did m^ke
known, that my forces were in Germany, to prevent the ruin of the Elector of
Triers, and to protect the Catholic Religion and Electors Catholic, as indeed
I would have done the year before, had not these wicked devices and evil
practices hindered and prevented me. But when I see my self thus quite
frustrated of all my hopes, and seeing that it is so far unlikely that I am
able to divert the said Duke from all his unjust designs, that to the contrary
(which was a maine means to draw me from that good intention which I had to
prevent the ruin of mine Allye, the said Elector, and so likewise the ruin of
all other Catholic Electors, by the same way which I had proposed for the
former) to the breach of the Treaty of Vic. which did oblige him to have no
correspondencie with my Brother, he did entice him to come with arms and
forces into my Dominions, where he was no sooner entered, but he began to make
open war and hostility, cutting in pieces and defeating a whole Company of
Carabins, which the Marshall Deffiat caused to pass thorough without any
suspicion; notwithstanding the said Duke was obliged to yield free passage to
my troops and forces. Whence you see it followed, that my Brother entered with
a strong armed hand into my Kingdom.

All these reasons before mentioned, have constrained me to fall into his
Dominions and jurisdiction, to make him sensible of my indignation, and feel
the punishment of his wicked infidelity, and to support the welfare of my
Realm and by these troubles of his Dominions, to present the evil intended
against mine.

I have been very willing to acquaint you with all the aforesaid passages, to
the end that you might make all my loving and faithful Subjects of France;
within the bounds and limits of your charge, partakers thereof. I am persuaded
they will have the same hope which I have concerning the success of our Army,
that by the Grace and assistance of the Almighty the same shall be no less
happy than in these former years, since the cause is so just and necessary.
Just, in as much as this war of mine is caused not only by a Prince who has
neglected no means for the troubling of State, with the breach of his faith
and word; but moreover a Prince who being my Vassal, by reason of some part of
his estate, has voluntarily plunged himself into a notorious Felony. Again,
I say necessary, because if I should not prevent by force of Arms the evils
plotted against my State, I should at last find a heap of troubles
overwhelming the same. Of which State and Kingdom of mine, I do so desire the
rest and tranquillity, and entire conservation; that I protest the greatest
displeasure which I feel in this world is, that I am not able to effect that
design which I have ever intended for the tranquillity of the same, and to
comfort and make my Subjects happy with a long and durable Peace, which by
Gods assistance I do promise to bring to pass. I beseech him (my Cousin) to
have you into his Sacred protection.

Written at Sancte Menehoud the 17. day of June, 1632. LOWIS, De Lomenie.
This Copy was printed in the French Tongue with permission and signed,

MOREAV. Le Telli^r.



FINIS.

