July. 16.

Numb. 9.

The Continuation of the most remarkable occurrences of News, since the 4 of
June, until this present. 1630.

Containing, amongst diverse others, these particulars.

The preparation and landing of the King of Sweden in Germany, with a mighty
Army, against the Emperor: Together with a List of his whole Army, Horse and
Foot.

A late skirmish and overthrow given by the States forces, to Count John of
Nassaw, himself being taken prisoner, being sore hurt: Together with diverse
men of note near Wesel.

News of the arrival of the two Spanish Plate Fleets at the Hauanua, with the
Gargazin of their lading and riches.

The great jealousy of the Emperor, of the Turks coming into Hungary, with
the great cruelty of the said Turks, used against certain Merchants of
HUNGARY.

The arrival of diverse Dutch Ships, richly laden, both from East Indies, and
from Farnambuco

Together with many other particulars, both from Italy, Sauoy, France, and the
Low Countries.

LONDON, Printed for Nicholas Bourne, dwelling at the South entrance of the
Royal Exchange. 1630.

Continuation of the weekly News.
From Venice the 24 of May, 1630.
THe War in Italy increases daily, and waxes hotter, the French do
strongly fortify the Incorporated Cities in Sauoy, and have taken another
town of great importance, and now are marching toward Cassall, to relieve
that. The Spanish on the other side, do fortify themselves by the Piedmont
Sea; with Sconces, retrenchments and men, and lie round about Cassall, with
above 20000 men, with Shot, Canons, and Ammunition, under the Command of
Colonel Pianso, they have assaulted the little Sconce before Cassall, with
6000 men but were beaten back twice manfully and courageously by the French.
Insomuch that they were compelled to retire, with the loss of the said
Colonel Piause and 800 more.

The Duke of Mantua and the Imperialists lie overthwart against each other in
battle, and they do daily skirmish with each other. His Majesty of France
will by no means yield to any agreement, but strives to accomplish his design
and purpose. The Marquis Spinola demands great sums of moneys from the King
of Spain, pretending that he means to perform some notable exploit. In Millan
die daily about 80 or 100 persons, and in diverse other Cities. All fruits and
lands are quite ruinated, insomuch that a great dearth may be expected.

In shutting up of this Letter, comes tidings that the French have brought
great supply and relief into Cassall. The P^rats of Thunis and A^giers, have
done exceeding great harm upon the Coast of Sicile, and have taken diverse
ships, and have strained a very great and richly laden ship.

From Rome the 25 of May. 1630.
We understand from Spain, that there was great joy lately at Court,
concerning the birth of some young Prince. And that Letters ar^ come from Don
Frederico, which mention, that the Fleet is happily come into the Hauana. And
they did hope that the same Fleet would safely arrive in Spain about the end
of this same month.

From Venice the 24 of May.
From Millan, we learn that the Dutch are arrived in the same Command of the
which already, 7000 foot, and 800 horse are under the Command of those of
Mantua, being marched thither. The rest are laid in Montserat. The General
Piccolomeni is to conduct them thither 12000 foot more, and 3000 horse.

Now newly comes tidings that the French have taken the head town Chambery,
with agreement. And that Mounsieur Bassampier has also besieged some place of
importance. It is coniectured, and is also very probable that all Sauoy will
fall under the obedience of the French King.

From Venice the 31 of May.
We hear from Piedmont, that being his Majesty of France had well beset the
City of Chambery, he himself with all his forces is proceeded farther into
Sauoy, so to approach with maine force into Italy. The Spanish do begin to
break up apace, and to forsake Cassall, some going toward Millan, others
toward Sauoy, to hinder the passage with greater force. The forces of the Duke
of Mantua and his Seignorie, happened into a hot skirmish with the
Imperialists, who with some 20000 strong, did strive to lodge in the Dukedom
of Mantua. In this skirmish, many were slain on both sides. Howsoever, they
hindered the Imperialists in their intention, who were constrained to seek
other Quarters, where they begin to entrench themselves, by reason the
Cardinal comes down with such a strong Army. The plague increases
exceedingly among the soldiers, as well in field as in the town. The Marquis
Spinola is about to furnish another Army, which under the protection of the
Emperor, he intends to bring against this Seigniory. To this end are come
diverse sums of ready money from the King of Spain into Genua, with promise
of five millions more, as soon as the silver or Plate-Fleete shall be arrived.

From Verona the 3 of June.
From Millan is written that the Marquis Spinola is departed toward Frasineto,
to undertake the siege of Cassall on the Netherland manner. He has already
brought thither 40 pieces of Ordnance, amongst them 24 Culuerins, with many
Grenades and Fireworkes.

The Spanish have made a strong assault on the outward Works of the same City,
and driven the French unto the very gates of the City. In which bickering, many
Spaniards were slain, especially those of the Regiment of Schauwenborgh. At
this present, they have made a Battery before the City, and do begin to
shoot. The Commander Gallas has placed himself, with 6000 Musketeers, and
1500 horsemen, between this City and Mantua, to deprive those of Mantua of
their Prouiand and Ammunition which they convey, which the Seignorie of Venice
will strive to hinder.

The Imperialists have taken Valesio, Villa Franca, and all the towns
Cauttatto, in the which the Venetians have lost at least 2000 men Their
General Sagreto was compelled with his Artillery and men to retire. All this
while the Imperialists do much wrong, and waste the Country with burning, for
you may see one fire continually kindled after another.

In the last encounter before Goyto, the Imperialists took from the Venetians,
25 Ancients, and 4 Cornets which shall be presented to the Duke of Friedland,
by the Commander Picolomeni.

From Italy the 8 of June.
The reason why the Duke of Sauoy sent the Abbot de la Scaglia into Spain, was
to assure the King of Spain, concerning his constancy and fidelity as also to
give him thanks for the great assistance and succor which he had afforded
him in these late occurrences.

From Geneua it is reported that the Prince Thomas has retired himself out of
Sauoy, from Chambergh to Montmelian. Yielding unto those of Chambergh, and
other Cities which are not tenable, free consent to accommodate themselves with
France, as they shall see fitting But not to change their affections and love
against the house of Sauoy.

From Vienna the 5 of June.
Since his Imperial Majesty departed hence, there is but little happened,
only we understand from Hungary that the Turks do assemble very strong; it is
feared that the Turk will attempt something against Hungary. Whereupon the
City Magistrates here have caused the Bridge with all necessaries to be
repaired. Also in Hungary is command given for the amending of the Frontiers,
and fortification of the same.

By reason that about Lowen, some 20 Turks which went out a breebooting, and
robbing, were slain and found dead; The Turks have again in great Company
assembled together and fallen upon the Merchants of Lowen returning homeward,
and killed three hundred of them.

From Prague the 18 of June.
All is at peace and quiet here. Only here are certain Companies of Crabates
expected here, who shall by the Deputies Commissarie^ be inducted here.

In Hungary also are leuyed certain hundred horse, to what end is not yet
known.

From Silecia the 10 of June.
We do understand that the King of Sweden will fall into these parts with 8000
horse, and five Regiments of foot. The Oderstream wheresoever Bridges are, is
to that end fortified with Sconces, and from Breslau thither is every day sent
great store of Prouiand. The dearth continues still, insomuch that many dye of
hunger.

From Halle. 8 dicto.
The Emperialists which have hitherto layn in Olderburland, Coburgh Wymeren,
Swatzenburg and other quarters, are now broken up, they bend their course and
march toward the Bridge of Dassow, there to hinder the coming of the Swedish.

From Lowen Saxonis 6 June.
Diverse of the Emperors forces are expected into Pomeren, which should descend
from Maeghdenberg, the Bishopric of Halberstadt. They are already upon the
march, and ready to beset the places, near and about the Sea. The Duke of
Friedland is passed through Neurenborch to Meningen, and through Elue to the
Army, to affront the French Army.

The Prince Elector Saxon, is as yet at rest, and keeps himself still,
causes no forces to be raised. He will try whether he can prevail by
Messengers with the Emperor, concerning the moneys which are disbursed.

Now we here from all parts, of the coming of the King of Sweden, and that the
same King is present in Pruysen in his own person, and conueyes his men
through Breslau into Pomeren. The troops of foot daily embarked, and to this
end many ships are stayed in diverse Havens of Pruysen, which land the soldiers
in Pomeren. His Majesty is daily expected in Straelsondt; and he^ h^th well
provided all his Towns and Cities. The Commander Torquato, will have the
passages of Gartes and Grissenhagen by force. Notwithstanding the Duke of
Pomeren, and the heads of the Country oppose him. Yet nevertheless they shall
be feign to suffer it. The same Torquato keeps his Rendenouz about Stargart.
Within few days there marched certain of his Companies with 4 pieces of
Ordnance toward Grissenhagen.

They now write from Statin, that the Commander Torquato is there. And the
Council has at his request for certain hours been together.

From Hamburgh, The King of Denmark has given charge, for all ships and
goods, in that City in Norway, and in his whole Kingdom to be slayed and
arrested.

From Bremen
Here passed a Cauallier from Stocholin, who did relate that the King of Sweden
is marching with this Army here described 20 Regiment Dutch foot. 47 Companies
Dutch horse. 9 Regiment Funnis foot. 4 Regiment Scotch. 17 Regiments Swedish
foot 3000 Funnis horse.


The Rhyngraf shall for a certain time Command in Sweden. And also Charels,
Charelsome, Wrangell. The King himself is going toward Straelsondt in person.

From Hamburgh.
The whole Company here is enjoined by the Magistrates, by all means to deny
the King of Denmark the Toll which at Gheluckstadt he requires of the sh^ps.
To this end they have prepared 30 warlike ships, well mounted with Ordnance,
and all kind of provision, intending to encounter with the Kings ships, which
are now in the River Elue. It is likely that here will grow hot wars. This
City causes daily men to be leuyed. And the King of Denmark makes no less
preparations.

Now comes tidings that the King of Denmark is departed from Gheluckstadt to
Coppenhagen, because the King of Sweden had enquartered certain thousands of
his men in Schoonen. Which is a great easement to us, for in the mean space we
may the better clear the Elfstroom.

From Wesell the 12 of June.
The Spanish are now busied at Berk to lay the Bridge, for defense of the same,
they had brought six great pieces of Ordnance, with the which they shot so
strongly, that those of Rocroodt durst attempt nothing. The Citizens at Berk
are much afraid of a pillaging, by reason the soldiers get no pay. They lie 30
and 40 in one house. About the 3 and 4 of this month, was a Bridge laid over
the Lip. Over the which the States did send a Conuoy of 500 soldiers, and 200
horse to Dusburgh, there to pay Grave Willems men. The speech goes that they
are now all in the service of the States.

The works of Buricke are now almost all in defense. The Spanish have taken
two of our soldiers which kept the watch without Burick, and have carried them
away captive.

From Gosh 17 of June.
The Governor of Orsie, urges our neutrall Cities still, for the pay of his
soldiers. Moreover, John of Nassaw comes with his Army, and in the name of the
Emperor will lodge his forces within our towns. Notwithstanding we have
safe-gard from the Emperor himself. Also have we received writing from the
Lords the States that we should not receive him Hereupon we have sent with all
speed a Messenger to the Jnfante, namely the D^ane of Iant. What he will
obtain with her at Bruxels, we must expect tidings of. Both our Dukes are now
agreed concerning their difficulties. The Duke of Nieuburgh is at Dusseldorpe,
and is shortly to depart to the Hage.

From Antwerp 29 June.
This day is arrived a Courier with Letters from Licbona, which mention, that
there are ships preparing, Port a Port, and throughout the whole Kingdom, for
the service of the King.

In Spain is a certain ship arrived from Don Frederico, from Havana,
reporting that he is there with the Fleet, consisting of 70 ^aile, which are
come from Cartagena, and are expected in Spain in June.

From Calis Malis is gone to Sea and set sail, the ordi^ary F^eet of Terra
firma. Of 12 Gallions, and two sw^f^ pinnaces. The Fleet of Noua Spania should
follow also this month, and return again in November, Letters certify from
Madril that as soon as Don Frederico shall be arr^ued, he shall again depart
for the Brasiles. To this end Spain shall set forth 80 Ships, and the Dunkers,
Portugals and Biscayers 40. Concerning which we shall in time be made acquanted.

In Portugal does still continue great alteration, and they are much perplexed
for the loss of Farnambuco, the more by reason of a certain Bark is arrived
from Pacina, with Letters from the Governor Albunckerken, Who does still
contain himself in the open Country. These letters make known, that if so
be the King does not with all possible speed send over a great Army and
strength it will be impossible ever to incorporate the R^c^^ff. The rather
because there are now by the States raised such fortifications as never before
has bin heard of, or seen in those Countries.

The last day of September, 1629. nine ships did set sail from Jattatra in the
East Indies; Of which 7 are lately sately arrived in these parts of the
Low Countries. Two in Zeeland three in Texell, two in the Mase* The eighth was
burnt with all the goods in her, on this side of the Line, but all the men
saved except one. The ninth is still expected.

These be the 7 ships with their names.
The ship Hollandia, Vtricht, L^yden Frederick. Hendricke, The Seahorse, and
the Arms of Delft, and Dort.

Here follows a List or Cargasoon of the lading of the seven forenamed ships,
with the other named Rotterdam, which came since.
8889 6 Bags of Pepper from diverse quarters 3 Picol Pepper. 549758 pound of
Cloves. 287881 pounds of Nutmegs. 84 Catti Banda male Nutmegs. 136883 pounds of
Mace in 1199 Sockels. 380^7 Catti China silk. 155108 pounds of Persian silk
in 910 Bales. 179330 pounds Indigo Beana in 817 fardels 817. 49900 pound Indigo
of Coromandell, in 346 packes. 62801 pound Cotton Yarne. 65360 pound Cinnamont.
329052 pound Sapon wood. 16380 pound China root from Canton. 50 Picol Sandell
wood. 7 Picol Pelaga. 25 Picol Cubks. 24 Packs of linen from Coromardel 3825
pieces of Gainy linen in 180 packes. 7071 pieces of Salampouris in 22 packs.
949 pieces, parcals in 4 packs. 3279 pieces Betilles of 24 Asta, in 18 packs.
200 pieces fine Chelis in 2 packs 2000 pieces white Mouris in 20 packs. 389844
pound refined Saltpeeter. from Duratte. 484551 pound Coromadel Saltpeeter,
60000 l. unrefined 9 Catti of Musk, in 4 leaden boxes. 14 pieces of Beezer
stone. 41 pieces of Diamonts, waying 158 Carat.
Lading of another ship the Galliasse.
407895 pound Priaman Pepper, in 6120 bags. 130225 pound Saltpeeter refined,
from Coromandell. 1027 pieces Salampouris bleached, in 10 packes. 1142 pieces
of Parcais, in 6 packs. 400 pieces Mouris bleached, in 4 packs. 200 Picol Sapon
wood, in 462 pieces.
From Civil in Spain is written, that a Baunke is arrived there from Noua
Hispania, which came from Saint John de Luce, the second of March; brings
tidings that the Fleet of Noua Spania, lay ready there to come to Hauana,
according to the order and appointment of Don Frederico De Toledo: who then was
in Cartagena with his Armado, lading of silver, and both these Fleets are
expected in June Others are of opinion they will not be here until October.

Relation of the gold and silver, with the several Merchandises, as they have
been Registered; and are said to be in the Fleet of Noua Hispania, under the
command of General Don Hieronimo, comes translated out of the Spanish.
9500 Pieces of Eight in silver for his Majesty, One Million 7500 for
particulars pieces of Eight. Two Millions. 7000 pieces of eight. 4986 fine
green Arrobes. 3850 Arrobes course green. 167775 pound of Anill. 800 pound of
silk. 60000 of dressed and undressed Hydes 168 Aroben wool. 25 Quintals of
Salsaparill. 251 pieces of several costly and precious Commodities 3278
Quintals of Brasil-wood 38^9 Q^^ntal^ of Campethe-wood. 4000 Arobes of Sugar.
59 Pypes Pu^go de Chalopa. 22 bags of Canan Fistola. 4 Last of holy wood.
All these Merchandises are esteemed to one Million and two hundred thousand
pieces of eight. In all amount to four Millions.

There arrived at Amsterdam, lately the swift Pinnace called the Raven. And in
Tezell the ship Leyden, out of the Fleet of Admiral P^ter. Which parted from
him the 22 of the last monn. They relate that he will yet a while cross the sea
in those Flemish lands. He parted from S. Marta in Januares, where he took the
town and the Castle, which was kept but with a few men and Ordnance he took
the town without any resistance; but the Castle discharged three times; and
after three hours siege yielded. After the Admiral had kept the same eight
days he was forced to leave the same through want of victuals, and by reason
of other inconueniencies. The City was ransomed by the Inhabitants for 5500
pieces of eight for fear the same should be burned. Yet he took with him
Wine Tobaco Hydes, Campechewood, a silver Cross, and other commodities which
he found there. The Inhabitants had conveyed the richest goods up into the
Country. And what they could not carry with them they burned* One Bark which
the Admiral took at Ouana, he burned before his departure from Saint Marta.
In all this turmoyle, he lost but one man, and had another hurt.

Grave Henry vanden Berck shall have command over the whole Army of the King of
Spain, as he had the year last past.

From Paris it is written, that in the Army of the Cardinal Richelieu, there
is a very great mortality. It is presumed, that thither has secretly been sent
some poisoned bread. A Baker at Suz^ was burnt therefore for having a h^nd in
the like business.

His Majesty is come to Dion, where 150 Citizens and one Procter, did submit
themselves to him, and craved pardon. And their pardon was granted them on
condition, that the Church steeple by Saint Nicholas, should be quite raised
to the ground, for a memorial of their Rebellion.

The 29 of June last past, we brought into Flushin three prizes richly laden
with Hides, Sugar, Tobaco, and other costly commodities belonging to some
particular owners.

The eight day of June the courageous and manly Captain Bartholomeus
^^ctergen, set sail from Dir Gou, to Conuoy some Merchants ships. The next day
being the ninth, he espied before day four Dunkerkers. He made up toward them
with his ships, and stroke his maine sail and made in amongst them; he fought
courageously with the Admiral, and another lusty ship, and they shot at each
other with Canon and Musket. In the mean time the other two Dunkerks ran in
amongst the Merchants ships and took two of them, which by reason of the
calm, the Captain could not hinder them from. And also he fighting with the
other two. And every Dunkerker having one prize, were constrained to let them
go. They had set men upon them, but took the flight, one of them sitting fast
upon a shelfe.

Copy of a Letter written in Middleborow, the 8 July.
SIr,
since my last, I heard nothing from you concerning news. We understand, that
those of Wesel, having a project upon a certain place near Rhynberk, did
m^rch out, the 6 of this month, to perform their enterprise, the Count John
of Nassaw General of the Emperors Army, having intelligence of it, went also
out, and hid himself with great troops, and when ours were come almost to the
appointed place, the said Count John with his troops did beset these of Wesel.
Now although ours saw that the Enemy were stronger then they yet rather then to
be killed or taken prisoners, they resolved to make a battle against them,
which Mounsiour Isselsteyn, Commander of the troops of Wesel did condescend,
and did skirmish a great while with the Enemy, caused not only them to retire,
but killed also a great many of the Enemies officers, and took prisoner,
amongst others, the said Count John of Nassaw, whom they deadly wounded,
brought into Wesel. The particulars of which, as far as we have received
them, or can understand at this present, hereafter follow.

A Relation of a skirmish or battle happened between the forces of the High
and Mighty Lords the States, under the Conduct of the Lord Ritmaster
Isselsteyn, on the one part, and his Highness, Count John of Nassaw, on the
other part. July the 6. 1630.
FRom Wesel is written, the 8 of July, as follows. That on the 6 of the same
month, the Lord Ritmaster Isselsteyn, having with him not above 250 horsemen,
and about one thousand of foot, marched out of Wesel, toward a Quarter, lying
over the Greft, which was beset with fix Companies of Soldiers. And although
they were entrenched, ours caused them to retire back to the Sconce of
Rossenroy, near to that Quarter where they were left. But our coming near
the place called Locht-graue, they met with Count John of Nassaw, having with
him 6 troops of horse, which were about 600 strong, and about 14 or 1500 of
foot. Though ours were but strong about 250 of horse, 1000 of foot, and
therefore not seeing any relief but to battle with them, or to be killed, they
fell to it manfully, and by Gods grace, have gotten the victory and destroyed
their troops, with the loss of may Officers of the Enemy, amongst which were
slain, the Ritmaster, Oftenberck, and Gingnart, deadly hurt. And Count John of
Nassaw also deadly wounded, brought into Wesel. Ou^ foot Soldiers did not
battle at that time, because the Enemies were too strong and got fresh relief
from Rhynberck.

The names of the Enemies Officers, amongst which the Ritmaster, Oftenberck was
flame, and Captain Gaignart deadly wounded.

Captain Gaignart of Gerignart, in Garrison at Rhynberck. Captain
Offenbercke, in Garrison at Brugge. Cornet de Maledo, at Straelen. Captain
Idronimo van Dalen, Emperialist. Lieuftenant Bias, Emperialist. Don Diego de
Mexia, his Company, and Commander as Lieutenant General over these troops.
The Publisher to the Reader.
SInce the former particulars, we are tru^^ informed that his Majesty of Sweden
was met in ^^e Swound, with two Fleets of six or seuenscore sail, and that he
is since landed at Stalesunt with a Royal Army, and it is hoped will be the
restorer of the liberties of the poor distressed Princes of Germany. Of what
consequence it will be to the French King and his designs in Jtaly wise and
inteligent men understand* This year 1630, is like to produce more action in
Christendom then was this hundred years; and more News is like to come to
our hands* If we. may receive better encouragement then we have done, for we
have lost by our publication, both our labor and a great deal of money this
ten months, which was the cause we published scarce one a month; It being
most men's desire to hear of action, which seldom falls out in the Winter. We
presume we shall now fit their humor, with action enough every week if their
purses be as ready to pay as we shall be ready to publish, the greatest
talkers of News (as the Paul's walkers) are the poorest buyers. Farewell.

July the 16. 1630.
FINIS.

