The Ninth of September. 1622.

COUNT MANSFIELDS PROCEEDINGS SINCE THE LAST BATTLE, WITH THE Great
Misfortune which has lately happened to the Duke of Brunswicke.

With the Great Victory obtained by the Protestants in France, by those of the
Town of Mompeliers against the Kings Forces, who sought to take the Town by
Treachery, but were most of them put to the Sword.

Also Relating another Skirmish, which happened between Count Mansfield and
D^n Cordua in the Province of Henego, with the great Sea Fight between some of
the Hollanders bound for the West Indies meeting with the Spaniards.

Likewise a new and Great Slaughter made upon Spinola his Forces before Bergen
up Zome, by those of the Town: with the coming Down of Bethlem Gabors
Brother, and the Marquis of Iagersdorp into Silesia, to Invade the Country.

Lastly, the Taking in of the City of Spiers by the Bauarians, with their
Blocking up of Heidelburgh, Frankendale, and Mainhem, in the Palatinate.

Likewise the last Proceedings in the most Parts of Christendom.

LONDON Printed by E. A. for Nicholas Bourne and Thomas Archer, and are to be
sold at their Shops, at the Royal Exchange and Popes head Palace. 1622.

From Spain the 6. of August.
THE French Ambassador is returned from Madrill into France back again, but
the King of Spain will not desist from those Articles which about a Twelve
month he agreed upon with the Inhabitants of Veltolina. The said King has
made the Venetian General, General of all the Horse, and adorned Don Diego
Piementelli, with the title and Dignity of a Marquis, quitting him 12000.
Crowns which he did owe to the Exchequer, and moreover charge that 25000.
Crowns should be paid unto him in ready money. He has likewise given Order
that the Gallyes which are in Sicilia, shall go to rescue Mamorra.

At Naples were arrived 4. Gallyes with Soldiers, (which are to go to
Millain) and 15. Chests with Silver to be coined there.

The great Master or Commander of Malta, has consented at the entreaty of the
Viceroy of Sicilia, that his Gallyes shall accompany those of the King of
Spain.

From Venice the 5. of August.
All Commotions being ceased in Turkey, the Great Signeur went the 7. of July
for the first time after his reestablishment to the Church at C^nstatinople,
and was accompanied by diverse great Officers, Commanders, and Soldiers.

The Polonian Ambassador is looked for every day at his Court, being already
arrived upon the Frontiers of Turkey.

The Tartarians having made an inrode in Polonia, the Cossacks do the like in
the Turkish Dominions, and are assisted by diverse Bashawes fled unto them since
the Murder of Osman the late Great Signeur.

Here comes news that the Hollanders have met 20. Spanish Ships near the
River that flows by St. Lucas, and setting upon them they sunk 6. the rest
was taken, saving some few that made an escape.

The 3. Companies which did lie at the other side of the River Goo, are to
Conduct the Count of Monteri to Barcelona, being Shipped in the Gallyes of
Doria.

The Colonel Baldirou perceiving that the Granbunters would besiege the Fort
of St. Maria, retired himself to Cleue, taking with him, his best moueables
and a Company of Foot, and seeing that the Citizens opposed themselves against
him, he caused 4. of them to be hanged.

From Odenburgh the 3. of August.
The Empress being Crowned Queen of Hungary, they have gone on in the Diet or
Parliament with the remainder points and Articles to make an end of the same:
and first of all concerning the receiving of Germane Garrisons into the
Frontiers places, the Knights and Burgesses would give no way to the same,
notwithstanding the great persuasions of the Nobility and Clergy, which used
all means and devises to effect the same. Nevertheless the Emperor desirous
to have an end of this point, caused them to meet again, and handled so the
matter, that the Knights and Burgesses, being ouermatched by the Nobility and
Clergy, gave likewise their consent unto the same. But Bethlem Gabors Agent
protested against the same, and the Committees of Cashaw went home much
discontented.

Touching Religion, no alteration shall be made before the next Hungarian
Parliament, where shall be resolved likewise who shall be Judge when the one
party shall complain to be wronged of the other: The Catholics will not
leave the decision to the Palatine, nor the Protestants to the Emperor.

At Vienna is great prepration made against the arrival of his Majesty and the
Empress.

Here is news that the Brother of Bethlem Gabor, and the Count of Thurne, are
marching toward Silesia with 30000. men to invade it.

From Vienna the 3. of August.
To day arrived here a Post coming from Odenburg, (being sent to the Elector
of Saxony, and the now ruling Duke of Brunswicke) reporting that the Hungarian
Dyete was happily ended, notwithstanding the great difficulty made by the
Hungarians touching the receiving of Germane Commanders, and Soldiers into
their Forts and Strong holds, in such manner that they drew their Swords in
the Parliament one against another, though in the absence of the Emperor.

But that nevertheless the matter was ended by most Voices, and agreed in this
manner; That the Fortes and Strongholdes should be beset with Germane
Captains and Ensigns, but Hungarian Lieutenants, the Soldiers being half of
the one Nation and half of the other. Whereupon seeing that all is Concluded
according to his Majesty's desire and expectation, we hope to see both
Majesty's here, within the space of 5. days at the furthest.

From Vienna the 5. of August.
At this instant we receive News, that the Hungarians have condiscended to
the taking in of Germane Garrisons, and diverse other points, having the
Palatine of Hungary taken great pains to the same effect. And the Lord
Esterhasi is made a General in Hungary.

From Vienna the 10. of August.
The Hungarian Parliament is finished, we shall soon have at large the
Articles, and points agreed upon, and it is certain that they have promised to
admit Germane Garrison, and principally when the Enemy is at hand: as likewise
that the Crown shall be kept at Presburgh as well by Germans as Hungarians,
being of the one Nation as many as of the other. And there are diverse Hungarian
Lords gone thither of late, seeing diverse things are yet not fully finished.
The Emperor is likewise departed, and arrived at Newstadt, to Morrow we look
for his coming here, from whence he shall take his Journey to meet at the
Regensbergh upon the Electorall days, where they are altogether to meet,
except the Bishop of Triere.

From Prague the 6. of August.
Yesterday the Duke of Lichtenstain (as Deputy or Viceroy of Bohemia) gave
order that all Generals, Colonels, and Captains, should keep their Soldiers
in a readiness until further command. It is thought that the Imperialists will
set upon Glatz with all their power and strength; we have certain news that
yet of late 150. Soldiers are gotten in Glatz.

Those of Klingenbergh being destitute of Prouand, have been forced to
surrender the Town, and agreed with their Enemies that they should depart with
their Baggage and goods, which they did and were but 120. strong. But the
Imperialists having tied the Commanders hands and feet, they did send him
hither.

The Count of Hollocke has gotten his pardon from the Emperor. And it is
thought that the Prince of Anholt will likewise speed.

The Electorall day is prolonged until the First of October next ensuing.

The Trumpetter who was the 2. day of this Month, sent by the Emperor to Glatz,
coming from thence reported that the Young Count of Thurne, and all his
Gentlemen about him were decked with Hungarian apparel, to what intent he could
as yet not learn.

The 4. of this month we have seen here a great number of Storkes upon the
Mountain of St. Lawrence: and the next day were many dead fishes, driving with
their bellies upwards in the River Moldaw. And we hold these things here for
strange and ominous.

From Breslaw the 7. of August.
The Bishop of Neus intending this next week, to march toward Glatz, did
begin to muster his forces, but having received certain aduises, he has
deferred his design until better opportunity. Those of Glatz make yet daily
diverse sallies and excursions, bringing into the Town all what they can get,
providing themselves of all necessaries, keeping their Watches a league distant
from the Town.

The Citizens at Neus are disarmed, by command of the Bishop to keep them
under.

From Niewenburg in Saxony the 10. of August.
We have here certain news, that the Town of Glatz holds still for the King
of Bohemia, and is speedily to be succored and rescued by the Marquess of
Iagerensdorp, who is at hand with diverse Turks, Tartarians, and Hungarians,
besides the forces of the old Count of Thurn.

From Lintz the 13. of August.
Few days ago were here mustered 700. Horse of the Regiment of Colonel
Herbersteyn, which are to ride to the upper Palatinate.

From Franckfort the 14. of August.
In those parts the ways are very dangerous, which has caused the Princes,
Lords, and Imperial Cities to leauie and maintain at common charges certain
horse and foot, to cleanse them of such robbers, murders, and vagabonds, as
assault the Passengers and Travelers.

They write from Frankendale, that the Imperialists have lately taken Spiers,
and having beset the Town with 2000. men, they changed the Magistrate,
removing the old. The City of Worms feared the like alteration, as likewise
that the goods saved there from the Palatinate, should be confiscated.

The Imperialists lie in the lands of the Duke of Wirtenberg, and the Marquess
of Thourlath, endammaging mightily the said Countries.

We understand that Leopoldus is to come in the Palatinate in the name of the
Emperor. Likewise it is reported, that Colonel Obertront is deceased at
Heydelbergh, his horse are dismissed.

We are advised that the Spanish forces are departed from the Palatinate. But
the forces of the Archduke Leopoldus and Monsieur Tilly are about L^msheim,
Praughheym, Ea^lebach, and other near unto the same. Thursday last they took
Spiers, to day they set upon Garmersheym. Heydelbergh, Frankendale, and
Manheim, are strongly beset. Last Thursday was the Hospital at Worms set on
fire by the Crabatz, which are of the Emperors side.

The Colonel Kniphawsen having left this City not past two days, there was
sent one from the Emperor to charge him further: but understanding his
departure, he returned presently back.

From Spiers the 16. of August.
The 9. of this Month is the Bauarian Army marched up from Lymen, with five
pieces of Ordnance, every one being drawn by twelve horse, and crossing the
River at Lulsheym, they sat down in our Territory, the next day came
Monsieur Tilly in this City, but he returned the same day in his quarter. The
same day in the morning arrived there likewise the Bishop of this City, and
the Archduke Leopoldus came there in the after noone about two of the clock.

The eleventh of this month, the said Army went to besiege Germishem which
they got at last, the fourteenth by Assault, having before received great
damage by the Ordinance and shot of the Town, they slew all what they met;
and at last granted quarter to the rest.

From Franckfort the eighteenth of August: It is certain that in the Lands of
Brunswick, there are gathered great forces, and are to meet at Halberstadt, to
what purpose is not divulged.

The Duke of Wirtenbergh, the Marquis of Thouclach and diverse other Princes are
leavying soldiers likewise; having diverse Commanders of the Prince Palatine,
the Counts of Mansfield, and the Bishop of Halberstadt in their countries. The
Bishop of Mentz is at this present at Spessert, to recreate himself with
hunting.

From Hanaw the eighteenth of August. The Spanish forces having left the
Palatinate, to follow the Count of Mansfield; Leopoldus came presently, thither
from Alsatia, bringing diverse Crabatz with him: who lie now almost all at
Spiers, the tenth of this Month he went to besiege Germersheym being assisted
by the Bavarians, and got the same the fourth day. His Garrison left within
Spiers committed daily great outrages. The Citizens stand in fear to be
pillaged, as has happened to these of St. Lambert, and other places more. What
the Spaniards have spared, these are likely to destroy and consume, having
already fired certain Villages.

From Heidelbergh the 15. of August. The Emperors Army, since it came before
this City, has continually taken great pains to block, to inblocke the
same. And now very lately they have likewise taken a course to block up
Mainheim and Franckendale, for they have Worms and all the Towns hereabouts,
so that no provision can come to any of these Towns, by which we do verily
imagine that they do mean to starve these Towns, and so take them without
besieging them at all.

From Collen the eighteenth of August. Those that have besieged the Fort
Papenmutz, espying that they do no good with their Ordinance, shooting from
the side of Berghs land, then to spend their Bullets and Gunpowder, spare now
the same, until their Sconse will be ready at this side, which will be to
morrow. Of late a Citizen of this Town, advancing himself upon the Battery
called, look in the Cap, or kyke in the mutz, was shot by the Ordinance of
the Fort and brought hither dead.

But few days ago, there was a Soldier sent with letters out of the Fort
Papenmutz, but being taken by the Enemies which are near the Fort, he was
hanged before daylight at a tree to afray the other. We live here daily in
great grief and misery, many die sudde^ly amongst us, before we can perceive
that they are sick, other are infected with the plague, which invades and
assaults us mightily: Some are grown mad, being bitten by the dogs, that
had eaten the dead carcasses landed there at the shore, as we wrote the last
time at large.

From Middlebourgh the twentieth of August. At Ostend being two men of War,
ready to set forth at Sea, our men that lay with their Ships before the Town
attended upon them, and Captain Kleuter of Amsterdam, gave charge to Captain
Jacob Volkertson Vinck, to wait upon them with his Pinnace in the night time
about the Geule, to discover their coming forth, and as soon as they advanced
to the Sea, he gave warning to the rest with fyring, and other signs.
Whereupon our men cutting presently off their ropes, sailed on, and met them
betwixt Ostende and Blankenbergh, and charged them with their Ordinance; But
the enemies perceiving that they could not come from the wall, did their best
endeavor to return back again to Ostende, but our men followed them so
close that they were enforced to cast themselves on the shore near the Shelfe
about the Guele, where men of the States joined their Ships in the form of a
half a Moon, made them quite unserviceable by their Ordinance, shooting
against, from three a clock in the morning, until three of the clock in the
afternoon. The City did send diverse boats with men to them, because the
Ships should not be taken, and did likewise play with their Ordinance upon our
Ships. But the foresaid two Ships and the boats have been in such manner
dealt withal, that 164. of them are slain, 90. hurt: On our side we have lost
sour men, having some few hurt.

Notwithstanding the Galleys of Malta, and of the French King are arrived at
Rochell, they nevertheless make many excursions both by water and by land, and
have taken lately, diverse Ships laden with corn: And having taken by land,
the Messenger or post of Bordeaux accompanied with twenty persons, they offer
to pay 10000. Crowns, for their ransom. The Kings Armies are yet before
Rochell, Mompelliers, and Montaulban.

From Berghen up Zoom, we understand that the enemies on a sudden have
surprised three half Moons, but our men beat them presently out of them, the
enemy lost in this service 600. men, and States 100. They assault the
out-workes most about the Bosh gate, where they come many times so near one
another, that they are within the reach of a Pike.

Last Satterday arrived there two Companies about four of the Clock in the
afternoon, and were that same evening yet employed in a hott service, and the
one being Switzers, mowed at that time bravely with their two handed Swords,
amongst the enemies. In this Skirmish were five hundred men slain of the
enemies, and fifteen only of ours. The dead are not yet buried, neither of
this, nor the last Skirmish, it is true, that there was made a cessation of
Arms for an hour to the same purpose, but the City espying that the
Spaniards came toward their trenches in great troops, shot amongst them, so
that those that were not slain, were glad to retire to their own Camp.

There are of late landed twenty Companies, so that the City is now of all
necessaries provided, and in no danger, by the grace of God.

The enemy having raised two Batteries, to endammage by the Ordinance, the
Ships and Boats coming and going, the City has dismounted twice or thrice
his Ordinance upon the same, so that he rests now with the same.

Letters from Riga in Lithuania make mention, that the King of Poland, and the
King of Sweden, are by the means of their several Ambassadors treating about
a Peace in their Tents in the field. But they were at the beginning very likely
to break off, in regard that the Polonian Ambassador, the Kingly Dignity of
the King of Sweden: And having at last given him his due respect, they have had
diverse meetings, and it is very likely that there will be a Peace concluded.

They write from Genua, that the Duke of Savoy is arrived near their
Territory with great Forces: which caused them to have an eye upon him, and to
look to themselves.

At Bredaw are expected diverse horse, and to the same purpose are their Stables
prepared and made ready: And in Berghen op Zoom, and other places thereabout,
are likewise great store of Forces to be sent, to what effect God knows.

From Paris the 27. of August. And now for Mansfield, and the Bishop that is
with him. It is certain, that the Duke of Bulloyne sent for him, and that he
came to Loraine from the place where he was in four days, which is one
hundred mile. The Duke of Loraine could make but 8000. to resist him, so he was
forced to compound with him, to give him Corn and money, nevertheless, he
burned and spoiled a great many of his Messages, so the Duke de Bulloynes plot
was discovered, for he had promised to deliver into Mansfeilds hands three
Towns in France, whereof Saus in Burgon was one of the three, so he marched
down toward Sedan, to the Duke of Bulloyne. The King hearing of this, sent
away from his Army Duke Denawers, Duke de Angulame, Duke de Lonigewen, to
level Forces for to respite him with all speed; and as he marched he came to a
City which is called Munson, which is upon the border of France, but not in
France. And then the the Duke de Naweres and Mansfield came to a parley, so
that the Duke brought him to the City with him, and placed his Army close
under the Walls, and was feign to furnish his Army with bread and victualles,
so he told the Duke that both he and his Army were at the Kings service, in
giving him four hundred thousand Crowns, and a yearly pension, and showed
him seven Letters which the Duke de Bulloyne had written to him. This the Duke
writ to the King: in the mean time, the French levelled great Armies, both of
foot and horse. And the Duke entertained him, until the Kings answer came,
which was done with great discretion, for the Kings Armies are now with the
three Dukes in bringing to a head; in two days they are in several places
thirty five thousand, and Mansfeild is twelve thousand Foot, and eight
thousand Horse: he told the Duke, that there is five thousand of the eight
thousand Horsemen, the best in Christendom.

The Bishop perceiving that Mansfeild would make his own peace, and leave
him, there grew a Mutiny in the Army: and the Bishop would have left
Mansfield, and have gone to the Duke of Bulloyne, but the Duke Denaweres,
pacified them both.

This I think was to color their intent, so in the end the Kings answer
came, which was this; He would neither of his service, nor his Army, nor give
him any money, so the Duke Denaweres and he parted, and he went away without
doing any harm, so Mansfeild went and conferred with the Duke of Bulloyne, in
the fields in their Coaches, and each of them had three hundred men; what the
Conference was we know not, neither can we tell what Mansfeild will do yet.
But he has burned and spoiled in Loraine, and upon the borders of France,
sixty Villages and Castles, and he is very rich in robbing the Churches of
their Chalises and Crosses, and Images, and he has five thousand Women or
Whores in his Camp. The Duke de Bulloine so soon as he heard that Mansfeild
was come into Loraine, levelled all the moneys that was due to the King for
this year, and five years to come, in all parts round about him, and forced
them to make shift to pay him, and those that would not, nor could not pay so
suddenly, he hanged them, and killed and hanged five of the Kings own
servants, that were there to receive the Kings Rents. And now of late he has
furnished Mansfield with Powder and other things, and has bought all the Corn
he can, and brought it into Sedan; We shall know within these six days, what
they will do, Mansfeild cannot go back again, for the Emperors Army lies
in wait for him, and if he come into France, neither he nor any of his Army
will ever return back again. The Queen is going to Molenes, where the
Queen mother is at the hot bathe. News is here that duke de Soulte was stayed
and put in prison, and from thence both Queens go to Lions, for there the
kings meets them. Then here is none left here but Monsieur the Kings brother.

From Munpilliard in France, it is reported that the Prince of Condie, coming
before the same, sent into the City a Cardinal, with 3. other noblemen, to
treat for a Peace, and in the mean time set upon the Out-workes of the said
city, and took in one of the half Moons thereof, which the town
perceiving, told the aforesaid noble men of their treachery, and willed them to
depart the city before the Sun was two hours hie, all which the noble men
did perform, but they were no sooner out of the City, and come to their own
Forces, but the town sent out forces, which took in again the aforesaid
half Moon, and slew the Cardinal, and above 300. men of note And of the
Nobility were slain, the Duke de Benf, cousin to the King, the Duke de
Fronsac, son to the Count of S. Paul, cousin to the King, the Duke de Ensarx,
cousin to the King, the count d'Alanx, son to the count d'Ouergne, the Cardinal
de la Valette, the son of the Duke d'Espernon, the Marquis d'Alu, son to
Monsieur de Souddy, the Marquis de Benleron, governor de falaise, Monsieur de
Candsy, governor of S. Lo, Monsieur de Vandosme, Knight, the son of Monsieur
d'Alincourt, governor de Lions, the son of Monsieur de Montigny, governor de
Diepe, the eldest and youngest sons of the count de Schoubergne, the count de
Rochefort son of Monsieur de Munthason governor of Paris, the Marischall de
brandes, brother to Monsieur de Luines, the Marischall de Vitay, Monsieur de
Montmoreincy, Admiral of France, hurt in two places with a Pyke, etc. After
this fight the Commanders in the City were safely returned back to their Camp.

From Rochel.
Your news from Rochel, touching sinking of the Kings Gallyes, is not true:
for there arrived the last Week a Bark at Barstable from Rochel, which was
not above eight days homeward; and they report, the Kings ships are in the
River of Breast Andbrenager, and so vigilantly watched by 60. sail of
Rochellers, that they cannot join; insomuch, that doubtless the Rochellers
will be Masters of the Sea this Winter, whereby all other the French Kings
subjects will be exceedingly disturbed in their Trade, and the Rochellers will
be much increased and strengthened, which happily may procure peace the sooner
unto the Protestants throughout the Kingdom.

The Copy of a Letter sent from Breda, since the Arrival of Count Mansfield,
relating the particulars of the late Battle, being fought on the 29. of
August: With his Proceedings since.
AFter Mansfield was arrived at Iambloies, Don Cordua with most of the Country
Bores, got to a Town called Leymon, by which Mansfield must of necessity
pass, and so was constrained to encounter him: The opposition that came
against Mansfield and the Duke of Brunswick, was for certain between 30. or
40000. Bores and Soldiers together, who had so strongly entrenched themselves,
and placed their Ordenance, before Mansfields coming, that to pass through
them, was very dangerous; which of necessity they must do, before they could
get any passage toward Breda. It is most credible, that Mansfields horsemen,
after they had encompassed Gonzales de Cordua's Forces, did so valiantly behave
themselves, that on a sudden they were put to a great rout: so that Count
Mansfield, by means of certain companies of his horsemen, surprised their
Ordenance from the Bores, the which they kept courageously for the space of two
hours, in this time they were employed upon the enemies, they having not
wherewith to defend themselves: so that by the means of losing their
Ordenance, they were slain in great multitudes. Yet notwithstanding, the
multitudes of Bores were so great, being thrust forward by Don Cordua's old
soldiers, that they gathered a head, and obtained their Ordenance once again.
But before they were wholly recovered, the enemy lost above 1000. men. Being
animated on both sides, the Battle at this time continued very fierce, wherein
the Duke of Brunswicke behaved himself most valiantly, insomuch that he
received a shot in the left Arm, near unto the Wrest; and notwithstanding
this misfortune, he would not leave the Field, but fought still courageously
at least the space of four hours; in which time he met with Gonzales de
Cordua in person: whereupon the Duke (it seems) not respecting his wounded
Arm, courageously made two shots at him with his Pistol, and it is thought
one of them took effect, for here is news come, that he is slain. This is
certain, he is at this time missing, and not to be found; but the truth of
this you shall shortly hear. The Duke of Brunswicke still pressed further among
his enemies, prosecuting the Bores, who swarmed about him in great multitudes,
that in the end the Duke lost his Standard, and received another shot in the
middle of his Arm, and yet would not leave the Field for a good while after,
as it seems not regarding the two Wounds he had received on his left Arm;
which the whole Field, as well enemies as friends, admired to see his worthy
to be praised valor. A little before the Battle was ended, he was
constrained to leave the Field, in regard of the Wounds he received on his
Arm, the loss of which is and ought to be lamented for by all true
Protestants. After this, he was conveyed out of the Army, in a Horse-Litter
made of Reeds, to some secure place for his safety; but going with great
have, he unfortunately fell down upon the foresaid Arm, part whereof being
cut off; which did so inflame the Wound, that he was enforced once again to
have it cut off a little below the elbow. As for Count Mansfield, he still
continued the maine Battle, until three a clock in the afternoon; about
which time, Mansfields horsemen played the Devil amongst the Bores, as
themselves reported after the Battle. These aforesaid horsemen put the Bores
to rout, and beat them back amain, and recovered the Ordenance from them; and
indeed, was the chiefest cause that Count Mansfield remained Master of the
Field, as you shall presently understand. These horsemen having obtained the
Ordenance from the Bores, put them into such a fear, that they became wholly
disordered: which advantage the Mansfeldaans espying, fell upon them, and flew
a great number of them, most of them being Bores, and continually put forwards
by the old Soldiers. By which means, Count Mansfield obtaining the best,
constrained Don Cordua to sound a retreat. Nay further, it is certified, that
if some of Count Mansfields horsemen had taken an opportunity, which
fortunately was proffered them, they had utterly overthrown and discomfited
Don Cordua's Forces; which, when he mustered about Lier, consisted of two
thousand horse and eight thousand foot, the most whereof, were old and well
experienced Soldiers. In this fight it is most credibly reported, that Count
Mansfield has slain very near a thousand of the enemies, amongst whom, was
slain a great Commander, Don Francisco Geuana. He has likewise taken most of
his Ordnance, all his Munition and Treasure, besides two Wagons of Plate, all
which are safely arrived in Breda. Here all the Treasure was divided amongst
Mansfields and Brunswicks soldiers. Likewise Count Mansfield has burned and
spoiled most part of the Country in his passage through it, as also the corn
on the field. Here it is certified, that Count Mansfield lost not in this
Battle above 1000. men, but he lost above 2000. but not all cut off by the
Sword, as you shall hear. The Battle being ended, Count Mansfield with his
Forces departed toward Breda: but before his arrival there, he lost 1200.
the occasion of whose deaths, were the inhabitants dwelling in those parts; who
understanding that Count Mansfield was master of the field, and that he
afterward intended to march with his Forces toward the Magistrates or Governor
of every Town thereabouts; gave private command, that Springs or Ditches of
Water which lay in their passage toward Breda, should be infected with strong
poison, and by this denillish invention they lost within the compass of twelve
days above 1200, men, only with drinking their poisoned waters, so that every
day they lost 100.: it seems by this that Mansfield lost more me^ by 200, that
were poisoned, then he had cut off by the sword in the battle. Before they were
at Breda, the Prince of Orange sent to refresh his army 30000. loaves, besides
other provision, which was welcome to the soldiers: after they were arrived,
the town welcomed them royally, shooting off all their Ordnance, making
Bonefires, ringing of Bells, warlicke Instruments, and good provision for the
common soldiers, withal the entertainment they were able to make them. After
they were well refreshed, Count Mansfield trained them in good discipline of
war almost every day: he has brought with him 6000. of the best horse in
Christendom, and 4000. footmen; besides a great number wearied and sick men,
which come daily to him in great numbers. I believe you had a false report was
spread all over these countries, that Count Mansfield had sent 3000. men to
meet with Don Cordua, which losing their way, were cut off by the Bishop of
Luckes forces; but for certain, there is no such matter, for Count Mansfield
never sent out a man to meet with Don Cordua, before Don Cordua himself met
with him. It is certainly reported that Count Mansfield had a skirmish with Don
Cordua before his entrance into Henego, in which Don Cerdua had the worst; but
afterward having that great supply of the Bores of that country, did make a
very great opposition against Count Mansfield, in which was slain above 1000.
men on both sides. At Mansfields first coming into the Province of Henego, the
Bores of the country understanding of his coming, had carried away all their
provision, that for the space of four or sieve days Count Mansfields forces
found no more to feed upon then what the trees did afford them, which bred a
great weakness in his whole army: but shortly after they found very good
pasture in that fruitful Dukedom of Brabant; nay I do absolutely think it to
be the fruitfullest and richest in all the seventeen. It is further certified,
that the Prince of Orange has gathered in a readiness 4000. the brauest horse
those Provinces can yield, to join with Mansfields horse. Moreover there are
to be brought to the Grave of Lipstat 2000. more, al which makes 12000. horse,
which has seldom been seen in the States jurisdictions. Further it is
thought his Excellency has ready in several places, betwixt 30. and 40000.
foot: here is now great likelihood of bloody wars in this country, for that
Don Cordus likewise receives greater helps from the Palatinate, and that the
Duke of Bauaria is coming down to aid Don Cordua with great forces. Here it
is at this present reported, that Gonzales de Corduas forces are arrived at
Antwerp and there remains, for that it is greatly feared amongst them, that
the Prince of Orange will besiege the same, having so many forces in a
readiness. Here it is thought the chief rendez-vous of the States war will
be in and about Breda, both to draw the enemies forces from greatly offending
others, and defense of their own, knowing that a war maintained in the
enemies country, is very preualent to weary, or overcome. And it is thought,
though that Mansfield will plant his army betwixt Antwerp and Bergen up Zome, to
imbarre all provisions from Spinolas army, Count Mansfield has left the one
half of his foot with the Duke de Boulloign, as also his munition: the Duke
of Brunswicke is certainly more grieved for the loss of his Standerd, then for
the loss of his arm. Some soldiers coming hither, bring news that certain
letters are written by the Duchess of Brabant to Spinola, wherein are
disclosed diverse secrets of strange plots against the States and other Princes,
to the States great advantage. This day the Duke of Brunswicke, the Prince of
Orange, and Count Mansfield being in the great Hall of the town, the Duke
showed himself with a merry countenance, and seems prettily amended, and past
danger at the cutting off his arm, beseeching God that he might recover of his
wound, to be revenged of his enemies.

Count Mansfields forces that remained here, have three several times taken
and spoiled great store of wagons with victuals that was carrying to Spinolas
camp before Bergen; and also has slain their conuoyes, so that no victuals
can be brought to relieve the soldiers which are in great want: what hereafter
will follow, you shall weekly hear.

From Zeland the 4. of September.
It is certainly reported that some four days past Spinola made a violent
Assault upon Bergen up Zome, but he was repulsed with the loss of 600. men,

Also Spinolas soldiers, by reason of the small and bad pay, scarcity of
victuals, and that all things in their camp are very dear, which eauseth them
daily to run away, as many as can find any opportunity, ariuing continually
at Dort, Middleberg, and in other places else, where they think themselves to
be freest.

It is also certainly affirmed by diverse letters from Holland and Zeland, that
all the towns have consented to make up 16000. of the Burgers to go and lie
in the frontier towns: whereby if occasion serve, the old and sufficient
soldiers may ioyn themselves with the Prince of Orange.

It is further reported, that Spinola having intelligence that Count Mansfield
was overthrown, did for joy thereof give order that there should be Bonesires
made in his Camp, and all his Ordnance discharged against the town, which did
put the town into great amazement: but not long after the town had order from
his Excellency for to make Bonefires, and to show some joy for the coming of
Mansfield safely to Bredaw, which those in Spinolas leaguer perceiving fire,
were also put into great amazement, and some of the boldest spirits of them did
attempt to draw near to the town, to view the occasion of the fire in the
town: which the town perceiving, made way for the enemy to come to their own
destruction, for they were all slain, but the number uncertain. It is also
reported, that the Duke of Bauaria is coming down to aid Don Cordua, but with
what number we know not.

FINIS.

