September. 2.

Numb. 37.

THE CONTINVATION of our foreign Avisoes, from the 20. of the last Month to
this present.

CONTAINING, The confirmation of the News published the 20th of August,
concerning the several Encounters betwixt the King of Sweden and General
Tilly, with the Three days welcome given him, upon his project of Nayling the
K. of Swedens Ordnance.

An Apology of the King of Swedens (formerly published in the Dutch) not unfit
to give satisfaction to the world, concerning his not releeving of the City
Magdenburgh, wherein you shall find a brief Relation of the Kings proceeding
ever since he began the War in Germany.

The landing of the L. General, the Marquis HAMILTON at Stralsunt, with all
his men sound and well.

LONDON. Printed for Nath: Butter and Nicholas Bourne. 1631.

To the Impartial Reader.
IN our last Avisoes the 20. of August (which was divided into 2. parts) we
printed several passages of the late good success and Victories of the King
of Sweden against Monsieur Tilly, as we received them from foreign parts,
which was published by us without addition or subtraction, and might have given
some credit to the same, and deserved a more favorable construction from the
most malevolently affected, yet from some it could receive no better
approbation, than that all was lies, and that the King of Sweden was killed, or
taken Prisoner, and his Army utterly defeated, as at this hour some shame not
impudently to maintain both here, and beyond sea at Antwerp, Bruxels, and
elsewhere. Wherefore we do now publish (as we have received them from
better hands a confirmation of the Truth thereof with some circumstances not in
our former, and against which, let the most barking curre open his mouth and
say as formerly. God grant him the multiplication of the like victories and
good success until all his Enemies be vanquished, and a general Peace settled
in all the parts of Germany,

Amen.
The Continuation of our Foreign News.
From Stetin the last of July, Stilo vet.
THe King of Sweden having defeated the Imperial regiments, I wrote of in my
last, retired again and satisfied his Camp the best he could, for he knew
Tilly would not long tarry but come and visit him. But before Tilly came on
himself he had sent certain spies, and sent word to some other he had in the
Kings army, to do him such service as he thought would assure him of the total
victory over the King. They therefore having undertaken to nail the Ordnance
of the Kings Camp, at least toward that part where Tilly had especially
commanded it, and by that means make the same quite useless for the King when
he should most have need of it, one of those spies or traitors feeling some
remorse in his conscience, discovered the plot to the King and was cause that
the other were apprehended. Now Tilly hoping things were performed according to
his pleasure, began to discharge his great Ordnance against the Kings
quarter, and having spent above 60. shots, yet he did no harm thereby, except
that one shot carried away the head from the shoulders of a gentleman that
having served Tilly had but a few days before been taken prisoner, and an
arm from another soldier. For the King having put things in order did endure
all without making one shot in answer, whereby Tilly was the more assured in
his hope and resolution, and therefore he sent on some of his troops to
attempt the Kings trenches, where they found no great resistance, which Tilly
seeing, he supposed he should quickly force and take all that quarter, and to
that end advanced and pressed on with his army, when on a sudden the Kings
ordnance played at once amongst the same, and with chain shot and what other
shot else was thought fittest to destruction, made a great butchery of Tillies
army; And the King at the same instant sent forth Baudis with three regiments
of Horse, who set so rudely into Tillies Currasseers, that he slew a great many
and turned them to flight; And it is supposed, that if the King had seconded
him with the rest of his army, he would have defeated all his enemies, and few
would have escaped. Thus Tilly having sped no better in this his revenge, then
his Vantgard had done before him, made his retreat, which was not much unlike
unto a running away, leaving a number of his men prisoners and more slain
behind him.

Upon the 28. of July, my Lord Marquis Hamilton arrived with all his fleet
joyfully at Stralsunt, and all his men were in good health. From thence he
dispatched presently a gentleman to the King, and we shall now daily hear of
his marching further and of his exploits, which God do prosper.

Out of another Letter the 2. of August.
The plague bginnes to be very furious in Silesia, but yet notwithstanding the
Emperor has given order to make an army there also against the King of
Sweden, which shall consist of 15000. men, and the said army is already very
strong, and has this great while besiedged the Swedes in Crossen, but have as
yet done them no harm. The King of Sweden has sent for his forces that were
in Silesia to come to him, and thereby it is supposed, that the said King and
Tilly, who is somewhat retired back, until his army be reinforced again, will
not part, before they give one another a bloody battle. And at the City of
Hall, all the water of the ditches about the town was of late turned all into
blood, and has been seen by many hundred men of good sort who do aver the
same. Besides this on the last day of July last in the afternoon, there
happened in these Countries an exceeding great storm, and especially along the
Elbe and about Magdenburgh, where it was so great, that the violence of the
wind had certainly carried both Tilly himself with his tent and pavillion,
standing not very far from Werben, away into the Elbe, had he not been
rescued and saved by his attendants and Soldiers.

From Dessaw the 9. of August.
Tilly being much displeased at the loss of the Cavalry which were defeated by
the King of Sweden on the 27th. of July, did breath nothing but revenge against
Sweden, and therefore having advanceed with his maine army toward the King of
Sweden, he had several enterprises and gave many onsets and assaults against
the Kings Camp, which was well fortified and provided, as that King is
accustomed to do wheresoever he does encampe himself. Tilly seeing he could
not do any great matter against him by force, did use also some other plots,
to bereave the King of the use of his ordnance, Whereby the King did mightily
annoy him, and having some secret inteligence with some soldiers that served
the King, he corrupted them to nail the said ordnance against St. James day,
which day Tilly intended to assault the Kings Camp. But one of those soldiers
or Traitors discovered the matter unto the King, who keeping it secret, gave
order for that days work, on which Tilly began to play with his great
Ordnance discharging about 80. shots, during which time no answer nor shot was
made from the Kings Camp. Therefore Tilly sent some of his horse to skirmish,
who came under the Kings ordnance, but yet were not shot at except by some
musketeers, which the King suffered now and then to give fire against them;
Tilly seeing no ordnance play against him, supposed that indeed the Kings
ordnance had been nailed, and thereupon gave a furious assault upon the Camp.
Then the King caused his ordnance on a sudden to play through the midst of
the Imperialists. And soon after he made a fally with his horse and some of
his Infantery, and forced the Imperialists to withdraw into their own
quarters. The two next days one after another Tilly tried again his fortune
against the King of Sweden, but he was always so well received, that at last
his men had no more mind to come on, but retiring were by the Swedish forces
that followed them, especially by the Swedish dragoners so overhastened, that
many lost their lives, and left behind them a great number of their Wagons,
baggage and pieces of ordnance. Tilly retired into Magdenburgh, and what he
will now do is not known; he sends for forces to join with him, which daily
come marching from several places. The King does the like; Some think Tilly
will make an attempt about the river of Havel, but long he cannot subsist, for
the King has his provisions and victuals coming to him without any let,
where Tilly has none but what is brought very far down from Germany to his
army, where there is already such a dearth, that a loaf of bread costs a
Florin of gold, which is a french crown; whereby it is thought Tilly must
either go back again or tarrying but a while longer, suffer extremity.

From Prage the 4. of August Still nouo.
It is certain that the King of Sweden has defeated on the 17. of July last
at night, four whole Imperial Regiments, slaying a great number, and among
the same Collonell Bernstein, for whom there is here made great lamentation,
but more especially by his Sister, because he was the last of his family.
Montecuculy we do hear was not present, being then in Silesia; But his
regiment was wholly defeated, and particularly three Companies thereof were all
slain so that not one man thereof escaped. There escaped some few with such a
swiftness, that they left all they had behind, running away in their shirts,
as they came out of their beds. We cannot know the truth of all particulars,
but some of them confess, they lost at the least about ten Cornets and four
Ensigns, and withal all their baggage. Since that accident there comes news
of some other encounter and fighting between Tilly and Sweden. But we can
seldom understand the certainty of things here, where all is related as the
Imperialists will have it: But we perceive so much by their looks and
behaviors, that their last news are not so good as they do like and wish it.

Mean while the army that the Emperor has in Silesia, having not done any
thing yet worthy of relation is now to be augmented, and to that end there are
sent out of Bohemia, 5000. men, gathered in this kingdom and in Moravia. And
there are 5000. Hungarians and Crabats to follow and join with the said army,
which is commanded by general ^ieffe^bach, who shall bring the same also
against the King of Sweden.

From Francfort the 28. of July. Still. vet.
The army of the Landgrave of Hessen Cassell, does lay great imposition and
desire a constant contribution from the Bishopric of Hirshfield, using them as
the Imperialists and League did and do use all other Protestants: But whether
this will hold, (unless the King of Sweden come deeper into Germany) or not,
is uncertain. The Popish Clergy and especially the Abbot of Fulda are fled
from the said Hirshfield and have carried away all their Ornaments and
Churchstuffe unto Hamelburgh. The Imperial forces commanded by the Count
Firstenberg do now march toward the forenamed Bishopric.

From Heusdon August the 10. 1631.
There was a fellow in the fashion of a Merchant which coming upon the
Longstreet, inquired after and hired a Bush to carry certain Trunkes for
Holland, and having agreed for the fraught, he gave special charge and
enjoined the Shipmaster (by reason of the great charge he had in his Trunkes)
to make up close to the Convoy and the Ammunition Ships of the States lying
before Heusdon, at that time there lay about 80. Ships in the River. The said
Bush accordingly made up amongst the States ships of Ammunition and was not
suspected, till in the night of a sudden there was a noise and a great crack
given which was the blowing up of the said Bush, being amongst the whole Fleet
of the States; if the granaded Fireworks and other devises in the Trunkes had
dilated its force abroad, as it wrought and flew altogether upward, it had
endangered the whole Navy of the States lying in the River before Huesdon and
the town of Huesdon it self, besides the less of all the Ammunition and
Provision for the Army which lay in these ships. The Merchant fled but the
Shipmaster was laid hold on and clapped in prison: there was in the Bush only
one little boy killed.

From Flushing the 24. of August.
News from Antwerp, that the Ammunition and Fireworkes were unladen in the
night between wednesday and thursday, which gives hope that their enterprise
is broken, which God grant.

From Paris the 12. of August.
The D. D'espernon Governor of Guyen, the Count of Grandmont Governor of
Bearn and of Bayonne. The Count of Rochefoucant Governor of Poitou; have
declared themselves, for Monsieur the Kings brother: There is likewise some
trouble in these events: whither the K. sends the Marshall of Vitry.

The King has given all Monsier his brothers governments to the Marshall of
Castill.

From Paris the 18. of August.
Since my arrival at Paris I have not learned any thing worthy to be written,
saving the discovery of a treason upon the town of Orange: Those which have
plotted it, do what they can to plaster their perfidie, and to keep the
Prince of Orange from getting any knowledge thereof. The Son of Besme who
killed the Admiral of Chastillon the year of Christ 1572. has bin beheaded
by his own solicitation. The Duchess of Tremoville is extremely sick, and
was yesterday reco^mended to the prayer of the reformed Church at Charenton.

The King has made a declaration against Monsieur his brother, the Qu. his
Mother, and all those which follow their party.

THE TRVE COPY OF of a brief and true Demonstration, why his Majesty of
SWEDEN could in no wise rescue and deliver the City Magdenburgh.
WHEREIN The Reader may not only be acquainted with those solid Reasons
which do excuse and discharge his Majesty from all false imputations laid to
his Majesty's charge concerning Magdenburgh. But also he shall receive great
light of most of his Majesty's proceedings this last year past, and the
distress and extremity his Majesty has maded thorough and what comfortable
success the Lord has affoorded him, notwithstanding his manifold obstacles
and oppositions.

IT is an apparent and naked truth. That the Burgamasters, council, and
Citizens of the City Ma^^e^burgh could in no wise be drawn and persuaded to
disburse a reasonable sum of money, (upon good assurance) for the advancement
of the levying and raising of forces, for his Majesty of Sweden, tending to the
relief and deliverance of the said distressed itty in particular, and
reducement of the common Germain Liberties and Privileges, in general. Much
less would they any wise consent and permit, the least quarter or billetting
to his Majesty and his grace the Administrators of Magdenburgh, their conjoined
forces; till at the last, by reason of the enemies blocking of them up, this
last siedge, they were compelled thereunto.

Which was the cause, that both the horse and foot-forces neither might, nor
would aggregate, in such a complete number, and so opportunely as both they
could have done, and was requisite, insomuch that the enemy gained conueniency
and opportunity to block up, and besiedge the said City, by the means whereof
his May. was of necessity constrained somewhat to desist, and his intention
aiming at the general and public good, was thereby withdrawn, and
exceedingly hindered.

But to the end, that all men may fully be acquainted with the causes which
moved his May. to this resolution to assemble a convenient and reasonable army
in that place before mentioned. We must know; that even than, where his Princely
grace the Administrator of Magdenburgh, in the end of July in the year past
1630. came into the City, the whole Bishopric of Magdenburg was very
destitute of Imperial troops, and furnished with very weak garrison. So that
his Princely grace wanted no thing except the aforesaid moneys for the raising
of soldiers; which if upon earnest request, and soliciting of the said City
Magdenburgh he could have obtained, in a very short space he might very easily
have raised and assembled together certain thousands of men, and by that
means have prevented and put by the siedge, which Papenheym has then begun
with very few forces, yea he might than have diverted the whole State of that
war, have withdrawn all warlike provision and necessaries from the enemy, and
assembled his forces even within the City. He might also have built an
inexpugnable fort or Tower, and have constituted Sedem Belli, to second, and
defend all the adjacent places against the unspeakable Tyranny, and perceiving
impositions of his adversary. And here we omit to speak of all other important
and many consequences of war. Especially, this is to be regarded, that this
City by this means might so long have bin preserved until his May. of Sweden
had quite expelled and ruinated all the Emp. forces in Pomerania, and upon the
river Oder. Howsoever, the common people of this City are in this matter very
excusable, who by reason of the potent favorites and traitors which the enemy
had drawn to him in that City, were not able to proceed with a courageous and
manly resolution. Which may sufficiently appear by the woeful and lamentable
ruin of the said City, which the treacherous Machination of those traitors of
their own Country, brought upon the same, and is merely to be imputed unto
them, for in all this they have prevailed.

But notwithstanding all this, it may easily appear, and by those Cities
themselves be made manifest, what vigilant care and diligence his May. has
taken, and bestirred himself for the obtaining of the said moneys by exchange
from the City Hamburgh and Lubeck, and transported the same to Magdenbu^gh,
because they, by reason of the Situation of that place had not opportunity and
could not furnish such means, notwithstanding it could be proved easily, that
it was not so impossible for them as their excuse would make it. So that this
fault in the very first beginning is not to be ascribed to his May. nor his
Princely grace the Administrator of Magdenburgh. But to those traitors and
founders of mischief on the one, and to their consorts and adherents, who
furnished the enemy with munition, provision etc. on the other side.

And although that his May. since that time has made over great sums of
money for the maintenance of the soldiers, and also has transported much
provision and all warlike necessaries to Magdenburgh, and promised the said
City his Kingly aid and deliverance, at several times. Nevertheless those
that are acquainted and skilled in Pollitick and warlike affairs, do know
that those kind of promises are regulated according to conveniencie, and
according to the po^sibility of men, and the state of things. And are not to be
taken so absurdly, as if the Kings majesty of necessity must for satisfaction
of his promise made, endanger and hazard the common welfare, the deliverance of
so many hundred thousand souls and consequently his whole royal State, his
Kingdom and Country, or rather ruinate and utterly undo the whole work
begun, and leave all in a desperate state and Condition. Whereas at the first
this City might easily have bin helped with the least supply. And yet
furthermore we do show and declare, that his May. notwithstanding them above
mentioned reasons has used and reached forth his best and extreme endeavor,
to relieve and deliver this City, but has bin hindered and prevented, and
kept back by such obstacles and hindrances, as were impossible for him to
shun. Which being demonstrated we are fully persuaded that no man being
unpartiall, and void of passion, and in his right senses and temper, will any
longer in this point accuse and impute any cause unto his Majesty.

It is well known, not only to the whole Empire but throughout the whole
Christian world, that an huge Imperial army being enquartered in the two
Dukedomes of Pomerania and Mechlenburgh, had than already cut off the passage
from the East-sea to Magdenburgh, which great army in Champagne (especially in
horse forces) did far exceed the army of his Majesty of Sweden, which was the
cause that it proved impossible for his Majesty with his weak Army to strike
thorough so puissant an Army, being enquartered in so strong a passage, and
pass quite thorough his Enemies the length of forty Dutch miles, unless first
he had confirmed himself in some place, and had some footing in that strange
Country.

It is also sufficiently known, that notwithstanding his Majesty used all
possible means, labored as soon as possible might be to advance his
chiefest Troops, and induct them into those parts. Nevertheless, it was in
the month November, 1630. before these forces arrived.

Which, when he had received and reduced into his army under him the whole
cold Winter, aiming especially to attain to the deliverance of the said City
Magdenburgh. It is to be doubted, whether or no, any man in so rigid and
sharp a Winter, and in the midst of so many inconveniences, and passing
thorough so many obstacles, has ever effected so much and in so short a space.
For by means of this his Majesty's incomparable labor in this hard time, it
pleased Almighty God, (from whom proce^ds all ^i^tory) to deliver up into the
hands of his Majesty with admirable victory, those two mighty passages of Gartz
and Griffenhagen. Which if his Majesty had not obtained, it had bin impossible
for him, and very unadvisedly done, to have proceed^d any farther, unless his
Majesty contrary to all rules and Instructions of war, and contrary to reason
and politic prudencie, would have hazarded and endangered the common welfare
and his own state, and ruinated them both

Now by reason of this admirable victory which it pleased Almighty God to
afford his Majesty, he obtained so much advantage of his Enemy, that he might
easily have fallen upon the very head of him, and utterly ruinated all his
forces, and consequently (by Gods assistance,) without great hinderance, or
loss have delivered the said City Magdenburgh. If his Majesty, could but have
obtained the passage and thoroughfare, through the strong and mighty fortress
Custrin, which he sought and required of the commander Krachten, who then
commanded there, with earnest entreaty and supplication, upon good assurance.

Hereupon did follow very great inconveniences. His Majesty through want of
victuals and furniture, was constrained to let his enemy escape and retire to
Lantsbergh.

His Royal Army also by reason hereof happened into several dangers and
extreamities. The Catholic blood-thirsty Enemy by this means was not
ruinated, who otherwise was brought into a remediless confusion. Neither could
his Majesty wholly purge the River Elue, and all the Country between the Elue
and the Eest-sea, from these bloody and cruel Enemies. Much less could his
Majesty relieve and second the rest of the Evangelicall Princes with a
victorious hand. Who now are extremely in danger to loose all spiritual and
temporal liberties and privileges.

All these inconveniences did hence proceed, because his Majesty could not
obtain the aforesaid passage of Custrin from the Commander Krachten.

If any one object here, that his Majesty ought to have conducted and brought
his Army into his Enemies face the General T^lly, and rouzed him up with his
Army. We have already showed, that his Majesty's army, was exceedingly
wea^ied, and that whole winter grievously weakened. And by reason of the
refusal of the passage of Custrin, not only debilitated but decreased, and
therefore not capable and sufficient to oppose so great a power as Tilly than
had. Neither did his Maj. hold it expedient and commendable, to proceed
desperately and to hazard the whole matter in a dangerous fight. Which if it
had not well succeeded, as apparently it might not, the good City Magdenburgh
had fared never the better.

When Tilly was retired out of Pomerania and Mechlenburgh, than was the City
Magdenburgh assaulted with the greatest and extremest power, so that it is in
no wise to be imputed to his Majesty that the said City was not delivered.
Concerning the time whilst this siedge did continue, it is not unknown that
the Emperors army being strong before both of horse and foot, and having taken
those aforesaid passages by the Oder, did refortifie themselves and add unto
their forces 12000. and came into a perfect state and posture, in the Nieumarck,
O^kermarek, especially at Francfort, Lantsb^r^h, and the Country of
Steynbergh, and the Province of Crosses. Moreover the General Tilly with many
thousands both foot and horse being enquartered on this side of the Elve and
Mockeren, was very vigilant, and did duly attend all occasions. Insomuch that
it was not plausible for his Maj. to leave such an Army as was before mentioned
behind his back, and meeting the General Tilly by that means, to thrust
himself between the door and the hindge, Inter Malleum and incunem.

Notwithstanding all this, his Majest. of Sweden to show and manifest his
Christian resolution, and good intention for the restoring and recovering of
the German liberties and privileges of the Protestant Churches, and for the
discharging of his Majesty's Conscience, and for his reputation, with a
Heroicke courage did assault the very heart of the whole Imperial Army within
the City Francfort, than being at least 700^. strong. Where, with extraordinary
victory (which it pleased God in respect of his Christian intention to afford
him) he defeated, overcame, and utterly ruinated them, so that now he had no
such cause more to fear his enemy behind him. Howsoever this is to be
considered, that in a very short space 6000. men were again recollected
together, under the Co^mander Schouwenburgh at great Glogau in Silesia, which
6000. men by all likelihood, by reason of the confluxe of many forces from
Silefia, Mehren, Bohemia, and Hungaria, might have been exceedingly augmented.

Notwithstanding, but disregarding all this, as also that General Tilly could
easily adjoyne his forces to the rest, transporting them over the Elve by
means of the Bridge laid near unto Magdenburgh, his Maj. did so much respect,
and tender the good City Magdenburgh, that not fearing the great danger after
good deliberation, himself in person, with his whole Army marched to Berlyn,
there to obtain the strong fort Spandau, to the end that his Maj. in time of
necessity might have a sure retreat. Which having obtained, his Maj. proceeded
forward on the way to Potzdam, hoping that whereas the saving of the City
Magdenburgh did so deeply concern the Prince ^lector of Saxony, that his
Princely Excellence would assist him with some troops and certain pieces of
Ordnance, munition, powder, shot etc. for the furthering of this great and
heavy enterprise of relieving the City Magdenburgh, or at leastwise, affoording
him a free passage and thorough-fare over the Dassaw-bridge, by which means
his Majesty might have received all manner of necessaries from Meyssen, and
more conveniently have passed along the River near unto the City intended.
Therefore his Maj. did to this end send several messengers, with diverse moving
and extreme patheticall letters. The chiefest whereof were basely kept back
above 14. days.

Lastly, when now the time of delivery was approaching and necessity required
no longer delay; and therefore his Majesty had brought up his Army to undertake
the maine business, and now or never to effect some notable thing for the
common good. The Elector of Saxony frustrated his expectation, and flatly
denied him all his former requests, appealing to his duty and devotion which
they vowed, and the obligation wherewith they were obliged to his Imperial
Majesty.

As concerning the Marquis of Brandenburgh, his Excellence (notwithstanding his
Majesty might have depended upon his assistance) did not deliver or at
leastwise could not deliver, unto his Majesty, those necessaries of victuals
and shipping in such time and measure as was expected and requisite. But rather
had a respect and did appeal to the example and resolution of the Prince
Elector of S^xony.

In sum, the Duke of Saxony, and the Marquis of Brandenburgh, have both of
them so managed the business and carried themselves, that his Majesty could not
perceive whither they were friends or enemies

Wherefore the p^emisses being granted, all his Majesty's chief Commanders
have been ^ound to confess, and all experienced in matters of War cannot
deny it. That if his Majesty had ma^ched forward without being assured of
provision from Saxony; That such a tired and unwilling Army, (though Tilly had
been alone in his Posture) through want of su^tenance, and heat of weather
and faintness, of necessity most part of the same had p^o^ved fugitive, part
of the same famished, and the Arm, it self entirely destroyed.

Hereupon his Majesty not many da^es after, being informed concerning the
Lamentable destrustion of the ^ayd City, was constrained to retre^t not without
great g^iefe and sorrow of heart, and by reason of such an important
alteration, casu^e his proceeding by other means, and ^^enter volen^e, of
necessity proceed by such means, which would seem very difficult unto the
ignorant and unskilful. But the nature of War, and the common necessity does
require far more difficulty.

All which being balanced, and unpartially perpended, by all those that are
skilled in Warlike and Politic affairs, the same will serve for a sufficient
discharge of his Majesty both before God and all the world. Especially, since
hee^e it does appear, that his Majesty has used his uttermost power and
endeavor.

FINIS.

