September. 9.

Numb. 23.

A CONTINVATION OF THE FORMER NEWS.

Three great Invasions already attempted: the one by Bethlem Gabor, who with
the Turks is already come down beyond the River Donaw: the other by the Count
of Thurne, having the command of the Marquis of Iaggendorps Forces, has now
entered into Selesia: the last by the Tartars upon Polonia, which has driven
them all to amazement.

With the present estate of the Siege of Breda, and in what manner Spinola has
beleager'd the town.

Likewise the resolution of the College of Electors, concerning the succession
of the Palatinate; as also the late commotion newly happened in Rome; with the
arrest of the Emperors Ambassador in Turkey, and diverse other occurrents.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Archer, and Benjamin Fisher: and are to be sold in
Popes head Alley, over against the Sign of the Horse-Shoo, and in Paternoster
Row at the Sign of the Talbot.

A CONTINVATION OF THE WEEKLY NEWS.
From Vienna the 7 of August.
Upon the tiding which the Post of Brussels brought here of the Treaty which
is now in France apppointed; there were here diverse speeches, rumors, and
conjectures spread abroad of the designs of the King of France; and the order
which was already given before to some Colonels to march toward Alsatia, was
also again renewed by the Imperial Council. And the Colonel Schauwenberg who
lay with his Regiment at Eger upon the Frontiers of Bohemia, marched presently
with it toward Alsatia, and there were also yet two other Regiments, and some
horse appointed to follow him with all speed they could make.

The Duke of Bauaria having conferred at Norenberg, with the Electors of Mentz
and Saxony, they sent the Emperor word of the resolution by them taken;
namely, that they desired that a meeting might be appointed, at which the
Electors might only appear for to treat about some particular points
concerning themselves, as to provide that the Emperor might not any more
hereafter dispose of the Estates and Lands of any Elector, without the consent
of the whole College: And to consult also, and to conclude, who shall have
right to succeed the Duke of Bauaria after his decease in the Electorate,
intending to exclude the Prince Palatine and his issue for ever.

The General meeting which was appointed in Morauia is now ended, and the
States of the Land have agreed to pay within the space of six months 250000
Florins (each of them is worth three shillings Sterling) upon condition that
they of the Country shall have an absolute pardon, and be discharged of the
Soldiers which are in it.

Although the Basha of Buda has again made an invasion upon our frontiers,
there are nevertheless yet many that think the Great Seigneur will break the
Peace betwixt the Emperor and him.

The Cossacks have not as yet received the money which is promised unto them
for a part of their pay, and are therefore continuing their excesses and
insolences.

The money is not yet ready which the Archduke Charles is to have to travel
withal.

From Vienna August 14.
It continues still, that the Turks having made themselves very strong about
Offen, invaded Lowentz, and did there great hurt both by fire and sword. There
is now great doubt made of the Peace betwixt The Emperor and the Great
Seigneur: for Bethlem Gabor sent hither an Ambassador with a Letter written in
the name of the Great Seigneur to him (Bethlem Gabor) by which he desired to
know whether, if occasion should be offered, he would take part with him, or
the Emperor. Whereupon Bethlem Gabor the Prince of Transiluania, desires to
know of the Emperor how and in what manner he may assure his own Estate, and
in what fashion he will protect him, what aid, and how soon he will be ready
to send it unto him: and protested moreover, that in case of denial of such
aid as is required, the Emperor should have no reason to blame him, if to
preserve his lands and subjects he turned to the other side.

The Tartars have done great hurt in Polen, and defeated many Polonians: and
the King of Polen has sent for the Cossackes which are in these lands, but
they will not depart before they be paid. Whereby it appears, that it is not
true that (as some reported) the Polonians should have defeated the Tartars
which made the late invasion in Polonia.

From Vienna Aug. 14.
The Elector of Bauaria having made at Nurenberg his oath (as an Elector)
before the Elector of Mentz, who is Chancellor of the Empire, the Land-graue of
Darmstadt was presently sent to the Elector of Brandenberg, for to learn his
mind concerning the resolutions that have been taken at Schlensingen, which
are thought to agree with them of the Elector of Saxony. And it is now almost
generally believed that the endeavors which Monseur Marescot has used in
Germany, for there establishing of several Princes of Germany, are not likely
to take any good effect.

It is here also even now rumored, that the Regiment of the Colonel
Schauwenbach is to be staid at the instance of the Archduke Leopaldus, who
stands at this time in greater fear of the oppression of the imperial
Soldiers, then of the threatenings of the French. He resigned lately his
Bishopric of Passaw in the favor of his Brother the Archduke Charles, who
has received the Deeds of it: and it is held for certain, that he himself is
to marry with the widow of the late Duke of Vrbin.

The dismissing of the Cossacks is not so much deferred for want of money, as
by reason of the imminent troubles in the Empire, and the other neighboring
lands. And the Turks even themselves have made lately an invasion as far as
Lowentz. And although Bethlem Gabor protests that he has had no hand in the
late stirrings of the Turks, having but few days ago sent an Ambassador to
such effect to the Emperor, who is yet here, and has promised in his name,
that he on his side will keep the Treaty of agreement, and desires that the
Emperor will show him this favor, that he may send some persons into the Empire
to find out a Lady or Princess fit to match with him. Nevertheless, seeing
that here are come aduices, that he makes great warlike preparations, and that
it is to be mistrusted, that under color of friendship and confidence he
will work new commotions, the Emperor to prevent mischief, has sent a
Letter to the Pope to desire him that by the interposition of his authority,
he will be pleased to effect so much, that the King of France, the Venetians,
and the Duke of Sauoy join not their forces with them of the Protestants.

And it is here rumored, that if the Peace be once broken with France, that
8000 or 10000 Cossacks shall be sent thitherwards to waste and spoil the
Country.

From Vienna, August 16.
The tiding is confirmed again of the great warlike preparations which Bethlem
Gabor has made, having mustred after the general Meeting of Hungary was ended
30000 men, many Turks and Tartars being amongst them, and all furnished with
their arms, and ready to march: He has likewise 12 great pieces of brass,
besides great store of other ordnance, and (as they say) gives it out that the
Emperor has not kept the Agreement made betwixt them, and that he is therefore
not bound to keep it any longer. The Count of Thurne gathers likewise a
strong army, with intention to come into Silesia. But his Imperial Majesty
having gotten notice of his design, has provided all the frontier places and
passages with all manner of necessaries to hinder his intended enterprise.

The Cossacks which were going homeward, are again called back by a Post,
and there are yet some 12000 other that were upon the Frontiers of Silesia,
lately taken in the Emperors service to resist Bethlem Gabor.

The Count of Monte-Negro has likewise gotten order again to go again with
his Regiments into Hungary.

They go here daily on with their pretended reformation, and many of the
principal Citizens have already gotten warning that they must within the space
of three months either forsake the City, or turn to the Catholic Roman
Religion: whereupon many of them have sent already out of this City a great
part of their best moueables. There are likewise many Schools of the
Protestants shut. And seeing that many Iourny-men have lately upon those
proceedings left the Town, the handi-crafts men of it stand in great need of
them.

From Vienna, August 22.
The Regiments of the Dukes of Saxony and Holstein are to be mustred, and shall
thereupon receive six months of their pay.

His Imperial Majesty has lately given order for the leauying of 4000 horse,
which are to go into Germany, for fear of Count Mansfield and his supporters.
We have here tidings that the Lord Curtz the Emperors Ambassador is arested by
the Turkish Bashw of Offen, who will keep him until such time as the 36000
Rixdallers which the Imperialls took a while ago from the Turks be restored
back again.

The Lord of Lambach writ with a Letter dated at Cremitz the 11 of this month:
That three Bashaws, and diverse other of the chiefest Turks were with great
forces come over the River of Donaw, and that they having done great hurt by
robbing and pillaging, had moreover taken some twenty Villages which are lying
about the towns which stand on the Hills of Hungary, and desire likewise to
have all the other, and seem to have taken a resolution to surprise Newhensel,
from whence they have already taken great store of beasts and cattle that was
in the neighboring Villages. And seeing that Bethlem Gaber has great
correspondencie with the Turks, there are many towns which the Emperor kept
yet on the Mountains of Hungary, that yielded to Bethlem Gabor.

Whereupon the Lord of Lambach has written to the Emperor, desiring him to
send with all speed that be made, great aid both of men and all other manner of
provision.

Although there was lately a resolution taken to dismiss the Cossackes upon
the receiving of the payment which is to be made unto them, there is now given
order that they shall not depart seeing the Emperor stands now in need of
their service.

The Count of Monte-Negro is within the space of few days to go toward
Olmits in Moravia, to gather there an Imperial army to conduct the same into
Hungary.

From Prage, August 10.
Within the space of this month was there a Burger of this City, who fired on
purpose a house in the new City of Prage, and threw himself thereupon into the
river of Moldaw. And happening the 4 of this month that some Fishermen took
his body, the Magistrate caused it to be quartered by the hangman, who buried
it afterward.

This tenth day of August got the Burgers of the aforementioned new City,
warning, or rather insinuation that they had lost their right of Burgership,
which they gat some six years ago, seeing they would not embrace the
Catholic Roman religion, and that the day of Saint James, which was prefixed
unto them, was already past. Whereupon their traffickes and trades are
forbidden to them all, and their shops shut up, except five, the masters of
them being turned to the Roman Religion.

In all these three Cities of Prage are the Burgers now daily urged by the
Imperial Commissioners to pay such moneys are demanded for the general
pardon which the Emperor has granted unto them. And even within these two
days, there were about some fifty persons brought as prisoners to the
Townhouse, where they gave to understand, that they had no moneys, nor could
borrow any, and that they were willing therefore to yield their houses and
goods. But how they shall speed the time will show.

To day there was given order, that both the private and public schools of
the Protestants should be pulled down or rather shut up, and even at the same
time there were patents granted to cause the Protestants to depart.

It is here very confidently reported that the Church of S. Stephen which
stands in the new City shall be demolished, besides some 300 houses more to
build a Castle there.

The Dutch Church of the Protestants in the small City shall be given to some
Monckes called Carmelites amongst which Pater Dominicus who was at the battle
before Prage shall be one. And there are shortly yet some patents to be
dispersed to dismiss all such Protestant preachers as tarry yet in some other
towns of Bohemia.

From Prage, Aug. 17.
The tyding continues still of the shutting up of the shops in the new City,
and it is generally thought, that the like will likewise be done in the two
other cities of Prage.

The 13 of this Month were here in the City again some three houses fired
with the loss of one woman besides great store of moueables.

From Prage, August 19.
Few days past a Post whom the Archduke Charles sent through this City to the
General the Count of Monte-Negro, to give notice of the great danger that
Silesia is in by reason of the imminent invasions of the Turks and Tartars,
and desired him therefore to come with all his forces in Silesia.

But as we understood before, he had order of his Imperial Majesty to go
toward Morauia, and Hungary. It is certain that the Regiment of Lichtensteyn
is there already arrived; and, as it is rumoured, the Forces which lay about
Eger, are likewise to go thitherwards.

The seventeenth of this month was here a Provost of a Regiment, hencht, by
reason that he took with some horsemen forty thousand Florins which were sent
to pay the Regiment of the Count Colaldo: the horse escaped with the money, but
he was hencht in his rich apparel within this City.

We have tidings out of Polonia that the Tartars have been a hundred leagues
far in the same Land, whereunto they could never attain before, since it was
a Kingdom: that they did there great hurt, having taken great store of Cattle,
thirty thousand horse, and above twenty thousand Christian souls, which
persons they have presented to Bethlem Gabor.

We hear now again that the last Order which the Count of Schauwenberg got,
is called back again, and that he with all speed is to go with his Regiment
toward Alsatia.

They write out of Austria, that Bethlem Gabor has summoned the fifth man in
his Dominions to come in Arms.

There comes tidings out of Silesia that the Cossacks which lay in Morauia,
have gathered themselves about Troppan, and intrencht there all their forces,
doing great hurt to the Country. And it is rumoured, that they are resolved to
send the chief transgressors amongst themselves into Polonia (seeing that they
were the occasion of their banishment) upon hope that they shall obtain
thereby a general Pardon for the remainder. We understand also likewise that
many hundredth of them are already without Pasport or leave gone homewards.

They write out of the upper Hungary, that seeing it has not rained in
Tartaria, within the space of two years, that there is great want and misery;
and that thereupon some 400000 men, women, and children, have joined themselves
together, with a resolution to seek another land. And as they write thence,
some of them have tried their fortune in Polonia, to the great damage of that
Kingdom.

We have hear tidings out of Austria, that both many horse and foot come to
Bethlem Gabor to serve him. Nevertheless he shows as yet no actions of
hostility to the Emperor; and as some report he is to send to Venice both the
forces which he has leauied in Polonia, and them which are come to him out of
Germany. Our General the Marquis of Monte-Negro is within the space of few
days to go toward Olmuts in Morauia, to form and gather there an Imperial
Army, to suppress perhaps as well the insolency of the Cossacks, as to
prevent the invasion of the Turks and Tartars: for it is rumoured that they
have cast an eye upon Newehensel, with an intention to surprise it. And have
already taken thence great store of beasts and cattle.

From Rome, the 10 of August.
Besides diverse other cares which are here taken to defend this City from the
Plague, there are some soldiers sent to the mouth of Tyber where this River
runs into the Sea, to stop all such ships as come out of Sicilia, seeing
that there dye many of this infection, and especially at Trapano and Palermo,
And they which come thence say that there was lastly a great commotion at
Palermo, which happened by reason that a Spaniard would not suffer a certain
Lady to enter into the Lazaretto. Whereupon some Italians fell foul with the
Spaniards: In which fray there were some seven of the Inhabitants and twelve of
the Spaniards slain, and many hurt, for the whole City was almost all in
Arms, and if the Cardinal of Doria had not stayed this tumult by his
presence, there would have been done a great deal more mischief. There are
yet some 10000 persons more sick, and there dye almost a hundred persons every
day.

The French Ambassador had on Thursday last audience by the Pope, and treated
very long with him about the affairs of the Grisons, and Veltolina.

From Venice, the 16 of August.
We understand by Letters from Constantinople that the Great Seigneur has
sent a great Army toward Aleppo to recover Babylon again, which the King of
Persia, has fortified (since he took it) and strengthened it both with men
and munition.

They write likewise thence, that the Bashaw of Arzirum is gone with 30000 men
toward Caramania.

We have here tyding from Alexandria, that the Pirates have taken four French
ships in the Port of the same City.

By several Letters from Millan we learn that there was come tyding with a
Post that came from Madril that the King of Spain has lately chosen 24
Captains to leauie soldiers in several parts of Spain seeing that many
foraine Princes, and especially the King of France, make great leauies.

From Franckfort the 25 of August.
On Friday last crossed the Colonel Cordenbach (who is of the Army of the
General Tilly) with his Regiment, and 5 Cornets of Horse, the River of Maine
by the means of a bridge which was laid betwixt Franckfort and Hanaw.

And to day there are yet two other Regiments to pass the same, namely, one of
horse under the Lord Herbersdorf, and the other of foot under the Colonel
Smith. They are to march straight on toward the River of Neckar, and have
Commission to inquarter themselves in the Marquisate of Durlach.

Some ill willers of Bethlem writ that the Turks have begun the war again
upon the Emperor, and that they have already made a great spoil, and done
great hurt in Styria, which is one of the Patrimoniall lands of the House of
Austria: and they report likewise, that Bethlem Gabor will shortly begin with
the Emperor on another side, but time will reveal the truth and try the
certainty of their predictions. It is as yet not known when the Diet or the
Electorall meeting shall begin.

We have here gotten advise of the agreement made betwixt the Kings of
Denmark and Sweden.

Here is also much talk of the leauyings which are made both in France, and in
the State of Venice.

From Lisbon in Portingaell, the 6 of August.
We have here gotten certain tyding by a Barque that came from Brasil of the
taking of the Bay which the Hollanders took by maine force the 10 of May last
past, with some 32 ships, out of which they landed some soldiers behind a
Mountain, and went thereupon with the ships toward the town, and got it very
fpedily. They made presently thereupon a Proclamation that all the Indians
might tarry in their Villages without any danger or molestation of them. They
went afterward by land to surprise yet another place, and it is though that if
they can get the same, that they will presently be master of all Brasil.

From Brasil, the 24 of August.
The last week were some Wagons with money sent both to the Marquis Spinola,
and Count Henry Vanden-berg, besides two whole and four demi Canons. It is now
generally thought that the Marquis Spinola will now be in earnest, and do his
best endeavor to make a great exploit for the preservation of his reputation,
and this is the rather believed, seeing that the Marquis Spinola made his Will
before his departure and caused moreover his Picture to be drawn according to
the life.

The plague begins to kindle at Antwerpe, and many Burgers of it retire
therefore both to this, and other Towns.

They write from Madril that there was in the last month of July, some falling
out betwixt his Excellency Mons: Lorenzo Noro, and the Ambassador of the
Emperor the Lord Francis Christopher Keuanhiller, Count of Frankenberg, being
both in the Antecamera or privy Chamber of the King of Spain, but the matter
was presently taken up by the intermedling of many Knights and Gentlemen that
were there present.

Even the same day was there a Frenchman of Rochel in one of the Churches of
Madrill named Saint Philippo, who took at the time of the Elevation, the
Sacrament out of the hands of the Priest and crummeling it in pieces threw it
on the ground.

At the same instant was there liknwise a Spaniard in the Church of Saint
Barbara of the same town, who took likewife the Host at the Elevation out of
the hands of the Priest, but when he had kissed it, he lay it again upon the
Altar without doing an thing else with it. Then they were both presently taken
by the Inquisition, which condemned afterward the French man to be burned as
was with great speed done, and sent the Spaniard (as a mad man) to Toledo, to
be kept there in prison during all the days of his life. By reason of these
strange accidents, were afterward several dai^s of fasting and prayer kept in
many Cloisters of Toledo.

From Amsterdam, the 25 of August.
They write from Arnhem with Letters of the 18. of this month, that the 150
Wagons which were sent from Rees toward Huesden lay there still expecting
further order from the States, or the Prince of Orange.

The English which came lately over are daily in several places armed, and
when the new apparel shall be made for the common soldiers, it is thought that
many Companies of them shall be sent toward Rees where the Count Henry of
Nassaw is.

There were some few days ago about 6000 Boers mustered in the valey, being
armed with Caliuers, lope-staues, and harches, to defend the river of Isel
against the freebooters which were used to come now and then over it. And it is
certain that about Bronkhorst where Count Henry of the Berg crossed last winter
the same River, the States are raising of a strong sconce.

From Cullen, the 28 of August.
The Marquis Spinola lies still with his Camp before Breda, and is there
making many sconces and trenches.

We have here gotten tyding from Nimmegen that the Count Henry of the Berg,
having besieged the 16 of this month, the small town of Gennep, beset it with
the Regiment of Colonel Isensburg: they of the Castle shoot very fiercely upon
the town, and behave themselves very bravely.

Count Henry of Nassam is come to Nimmegen with his forces he had at Rees.

From Antwerpe, the 28 of August.
We have here gotten certain tyding, that the Marquis Spinola has besieged
Breda round about, so that nothing can any more be brought into the town; as
likewise how that Count Henry Vandenberg is to come with his Army to aid
Spinola, who has now lately sent toward Lire for more Ordnance and warlike
provision which he has there, but time will show the issue.

From Winox-bergen in Flanders, the 9 of September.
On last Saturday when I was at Brussels, arrived there the Prince of Polen, who
was met without the town by all the Lords and Gallants that were there at the
same time, besides many Citizens that went in armor under their several
colors to conduct him to the City, and to honor him the more, the Ordnance
was also placed on the walls of the town, and discharged at his ariuall. He
has in his Company 300 brave Noblemen, Knights, and Gentlemen, many of them
being Princes, Dukes, Counts, and Barons. He is lodged in the Palace of the
Infanta, and lies in the same quarter in which the Archduke Albertus himself
lay when he was alive.

There has been already great triumph, mirth and honor shown unto him. He
stays there but a while, seeing that (as the rumor is spread abroad) he is to
go toward Spain to woo the Infanta.

Breda is besieged round about that nothing can enter but by maine force, the
Marquis Spinola intrencheth himself very strongly, and his Excellency the
Prince of Orange was yet within these 8 days at the Hage, but had in a
readiness 2000 Wagons, and many boats, and it is since rumored, that he is
marched toward Gorkum with an Army of 20000 men. But what he intends to do
we cannot learn as yet.

On Wednesday last were at Brussels yet some new Patents or Commissions granted
to leauie some 1000 men of which 1000 are to be Burgonions, and the rest
Wallons and Flemmings, or other Low-Country-men.

They of the Castle of Gennep hold still out, and defend themselves very
bravely and valiantly.

The last Letters which came out of Spain, have again confirmed the taking of
the Bay called Todos Los Santos, which makes the Hollanders to say that all
the Saints are become Geus or Protestants.

The King of Spain (as they say here) has armed at Lisbon some 25 Galeons,
and other ships, with an intention to send them with some thousands of
soldiers to recover the Bay again. But the Hollanders will be ready for them,
in sending another Fleeet to succor the first. But there are many which hold
that the King of Spain shall hardly at this instant be able to get either
Mariners or soldiers enough to make such an enterprise.

Two men of War chased lately a Dunkercker and drove him upon the sands by
Blanckenberg not far from Ostend, took seven or eight of the men, and the
rest saved thmselues a shore, and fired the ship thereupon.

FINIS.

