Corante, or weekly news from Italy, Germany, Hungary, Poland, Bohemia,
France and the Low Countries.
From Rome the 6. of September. 1621.
FRom Ferrara, we are certified that not long since, the River of Adie, over
flowed the banks, and not only there, but in the land of Verona, drowned 18.
Villages, for which cause Cardinal Serra. Legate resident in Ferrara, has
taken good order, and specially has staid a Ship with Torn, in the Haven of
Gero, to supply the said Province therewith.

From Naples they write, that upon the 21. of August, Philibert Prince of Sauoy
arrived there with 22. Galleys, and was honorably received therein by the
Viceroy, and Gentlemen of the Town, and lodged in the Castle, that Marquess
Centrerione, a Genouesian, was also come thither with 2. Galleys, to meet the
Prince: where being in the Castle of Ouo, he had a quarrel with 2. Spanish
soldiers, to whem he gave two blows on the ear, for the which he was
committed to Prison, and by the Prince presently condemned to dye, but by the
Viceroy and the Marquis De S. Croce his life was begged, but yet condemned to
be eight years Prisoner, to pay 10. thousand Crowns for a fine, and his 2.
Galleys to serve 2. years in the Spanish Army, at his own cost and charges.

From Messina, we hears that between the sauldiers in the Tuscane and
Neopolitane Galleys there rose a great controversy, whereby they fought
together, and many stain on both sides, but at last by the General, Presennet
they were appeased.

From Venice the 13. of September. 1621.
FRom Constantinople it is written, that there is both a great plague and
dearth in that City, that in the black Sea, the Turks Galleys had taken 6.
Ships with Cossockers, and made them all slaves, among them one was a Turk,
that has revealed many secrets touching the Polish Army. That the great Turk
has paid his Soldiers 3. millions of Gold: That the Vaywodo of Walachia is
with the Turk, and that Radul Vaywode of Moldauia, is strangled by the Turks
commandment, being charged to have had intelligence with the King of Polonia.

At Genua there is a Ship arrived, with 52 Chests of silver, and there are 3.
more daily expected to come thither.

From Milan, it is certified that there is 54. thousand crowns, sent from
thence to Valtolina, to pay the soldiers, and for that the Grisons since their
last enterprise out of Cleue, have attempted nothing else. The rest of the
Marshall Amunitian is stayed. From Spain it is certified by Augustino
Centrerione, and Francis Serra, there is 300. thousand crowns, assigned to be
paid for the Netherlands.

From Chur in Switzerland, the 16 of September. 1621.
MOunsier Montallon, the French Ambassador, perceiving that the confederated
quarters would no longer be delayed of, but would with 10. thousand men march
unto Valtolina to aid their confederates, he protested against them, and told
them that if they would take that enterprise in hand without the consent of his
king, it would be cause of great hurt and trouble unto them, but
notwithstanding, seeing that the French king did not help them, nor yet would
suffer them to be help, the country people were so much incenced, that they
said, that seeing the French King persecuted those of the Religion in his own
Country, he was no better to be trusted then the Spaniards, end that the
Spanish enmyty was much more benefit unto them then the French; and therefore
there was 1000. men sent out of Boetgow, and 1000. men out of the Bunter, which
went part into Munster, and some into Valtolina Valley, and they intend by all
the means they can use to bring these countries again under their obedience,
and there is a principal Covent Lord come thither from Valtolina, who says,
that this war is not religious, but a country war, and that the Spaniards,
under the pretense of making peace, by the French aid would bring the
confederate towns and parts under his yoke: As also that the oppressions done
by the Spaniards, unto those of Valtolina are so great, as they are
insupportable, and therefore that he came away, and that the Confederaies had
need to look well unto themselves, as having Committies for them, that mean
them little good. They intend daily to set upon the enemy, therefore Leopaldus
forces that are not paid, are discontented, and for that in Milain, there is 2.
millions of gold come, there must be something done, but yet the confederated
frontiers are well fortified with Garrisons, where the first exploit must be
done: for the country people are all fully agreed, with body, lives and goods,
to join together, and have sworn no longer to refrain from arms, and that
if their neighbors will not willingly let them have prouant and other things,
they will have it by force.

From Vienna the 15. of September. 1621.
EIght days past the Hungarians thought suddenly to have fallen upon our force
in Schut, but were prevented, and were made to retire with loss of 500. of
their men, and many taken; and on the other side, the Hungarians have taken
diverse of our Wagons, that went out for Forage, and for that all our forces
now lie by Presburge, and in Shut. The Budianer Hungarians and Turks come
again upon us, and run in every place, and once again have burnt 20.
Villages, and still go forward, having carried away 2000. people, great and
small, prisoners with them, besides great store of Cattle, and other things
without any hinderance. What pity is it in this City, wherein there are so
many horse and footmen reaready armed, and send no men out to rescue them,
whereby many poor might be relieved, in respect that the Hungarians are but
mean people, and not well armed, and yet are not resisted, it is strangely
discourst on here: the hurt they have done will not be repaired with the value
of 100 thousand Florens, therefore the common people are desperate, and neither
spare friend nor foe, so also 2. days since Bethlem Gabors Hungarians have
made a road into Marauia, and spoiled all the Country, therefore Colonel
Walstein with his forces has left the Marckt, and is forced to go to
Niclaesburge: to conclude, they have shut up the passages.

In the mean time there is a treaty of peace in Hand-holden, at Rauensburge,
in the Marckt and Committies, to that end on both fides come thither. The
English Ambassador has his dispatch of the Emperor, and has had a great
reward, but is referred to be at the Electorall meeting. The Duke of Saxen in
the Emperors name is to be president for him at that meeting, and the Arch
Duke Charles rides thither: the Arch Duke Leopoldus is daily expected here. The
Budianers lie 20. thousand strong by New sidler Sea, his greatest forces are
Turks, he has a strange countenance, all Coure and other places are burned,
and cannot be built up again.

From Breslaw, the 9. of September. 1621.
THe Silecian forces are now all gone toward the Frontiers of Morauia, and for
that the Saxon forces have begun to besiedge Glats, yesterday, and the day
before all the Wagoners and Carmen are staid, to carry Ordnance and Munition
out of this town thither, by this means the Marquess with his Hungarian and
Turkish aid will be drawn hither.

From Bergstrate, the 21. of September. 1621.
Drums are daily sounded to take up a regiment of Soldiers, to serve under
the Colonels Latschaden and Mosburke. They shall muster at Laudenburge, or
Neckethausten, and Soldiers are come the there already.

Yesterday an English Ambassador came hither from Creutsnach, through the
Bergstrate, to go to Vianna, and went through the Spanish army, with 2.
cornets of Horsemen, over the Ship bridge at Stein, to the Palsgraues army.

Don Cordoua, intends to hold his Winter leaguer between Stein and Hedleberg,
in the Bergs trate. The Earl of Douerlach has sent some Soldiers into the
Palatine league, and although there was an intent that there should be some
forces laid about Strasburge, whereby the Palatine could not come upward: at a
meeting holden at Hagenaw it was agreeed, that every place should defend their
passages as well as they could.

From Amberg the 22. of September. 1621.
We understand the Earl of Mansfield is broken up with all his forces, and
gone into Bauaria, to set upon the Bauarian army that lies before Came, and has
lest 4. companies of the country people in the Scouts, as also Mounsier Rilly,
and many more.

Advice comes now, that the Duke of Bauaria has ginen two assaults to Came,
with the loss of 400. of his men. The Garrison in the Town hold out bravely,
but it is said, that the Duke (with loss of many men on both sides) should
have taken it. The Lantgraue is brought Prisoner hither, and this day is
carried to Hoburgh.

From Ambergh the 16. of September. 1621.
News coming hither, that by a Bauarian Post, that certain thousand Bauarian
Soldiers were come to the Langraue of Leichtenburg, to lie in prefermen,
Wareberg and Schindthutten, to shut the passage that way from Mansfield. The
said Earl of Mansfield entered up on Warebergh and Schindthutten, and has
ransackt them, and for that, the Bauarian Soldiers got through Scauandorf to
Prefennet, the Earl of Mansfield upon Sunday, sent Colonel Linstaw with 4000.
foot and horsemen, and some great Pieces to Prefennet, and for that they would
not issue out to fight, yesterday with his great Ordnance and Fire-workes, he
overcame them. The Lantgraue himself being taken, was kept Prisoner in his
Castle: and for that is certified for truth, that the Duke of Bauaria has
broken up his Camp before Stranbingen, and with all his forces is gone back
to Cain, and has taken Artischwang, 2. miles scom thence, but the Earl of
Mansfield has not only sent 4. companies of footmen to Came, but determines
also to break up his Camp and go thither, in the mean time leaving the
Sconses strongly Garrisoned, and daily he expects great store of horse and
footmen to come to him, under the command of the young Duke of Brumswicke, and
a Duke of Saxon. Mounsier Tilly also will break up. It stands but hardly here
with the upper Palatinate, ^ for that the Subjects thereof, by reasons they are
daily so much pild and pold, and were much oppressed by the Earl of Mansfields
Soldiers, specially his Horsemen, they are much discontented, and are of
opinion that they shall be better protected and defended, or at least receive
less damage then they do.

From Amsterdam the 16. of September. 1621.
Our Sea army that went out five Moueths past, from these Provinces, is come
home again, and the Vice Admiral is already landed here.

Here there are 2. Ships laden with Prouant and Victuals, which with the
first are to go to the King of Swethens army before Riga.

The Palsgraue is yet at Emmericke, and often visits the Prince of Orange.
The horse and footmen lie yet about the Villages between Rees and Emmerich, it
is said that by reason of the continual Rain that has fallen, the Country
all over is full of Water, whereby the Wagons cannot, and it is feared that
Spinola will take and fortify Goth, Calcar, and Cleue, and other places, in
the mean time, the Country on both sides of the Rhine is spoiled.

From the Hage the 13. of September. 1621.
THe States of Holland daily come hither to assemble together, touching their
Marshall affairs, and there shall be a great sum of money, more levied.

For that the Spaniards had some enterprise in hand, touching Sluice, there are
two great Ships of war, appointed to go thither, to keep the haven there.

From Heydelburgh, the 24. of September. 1621.
DOn Cordoua approached near to the Palatine Army, and they have both made
show to be ready to encounter, but General Veer, finding himself to be too
weak, retired toward Manheim, in the mean time the Lord Digby is daily
expected here.

And out of Bergstrate it is certified, upon the 25. of this Month, that the
last night the Spaniards have taken Bentheim, Happenzeim, the Castle of
Starbenburge, and all Bergstraet.

FRom Denmark out of the Sound, it is said that there were 4000. Soldiers
come there out of England, to go to serve the King of Poland, but the King
would not suffer them to pass, it is also advised, that the King of Swethland
has won the Town of Riga in Leefland.

From Rees and Emmericke it is written, that the Prince of Orange had laid
down his Ship bridge at Griet, on the which the 30. of September, a great
number of Ritters and Wagons went over the Rhin to Cleueland side, to what end
it is not known, but only that they go for forage.

In the mean time, there are many Soldiers taken up which are to go with the
young Duke of Brunswicke upwards into German to the Palatinate.

From Amsterdam, the 19. of September. 1621.
THe Spaniards are yet not far from Ardenburge, Isendich and Cadsant, with
diverse Instruments for War. There are soute Companies sent from Middleburgh,
and two from Flushing to Sluice, and they in Isendich, have cut through certain
ditches, and made the Land full of water, whereby men cannot come at them.

Yesterday there came a Ship hither, from Cape Verde laden with Elephants
teeth, and other wares, and three Ships from Greeneland reasonably well laden.

Printed at London for N. B. according to the Dutch copy, the 6. of October.
1621.


