The 13. of August 1622.

THE POST OF THE PRINCE, WHICH ADVISES US THE TAKING OF STEEN BERGH.

AND The Besieging of Berghen up Zoom, with all the Circumstances of the
Parleyes, Assaults, Sallies, and all what is done until this time, as well by
the Spanish Camp, as the States Garrisons.

And Relates all the late News of Europe.

And principally all the late Proceedings of the Prince PALATINE, the Count
MANSFELD, the Duke of BRVNSVVICK, and the Marquis of BADEN; Besides, all the
late War like actions in Switzerland; the G^ysons; and Low Countries.

LONDON, Printed by I. D. for Nicholas Bourne and Thomas Archer, and are to be
sold at their shops at the Exchange, and in Pope's Head Palace. 1622.

THE POST OF THE PRINCE, which advises us, the taking of Steen-Bergh, and the
besieging of Berghen up Zoom.
SOme few days ago the Marquis Spinola sent certain Companies toward
Mastricht to cross there the River of the May, as if they should have marched
toward the Rhine, keeping nevertheless the greatest parts of his forces in
Brabant, as if they were to follow the other but that was not his intent.

Satterday, Sunday, and Monday, there was given order to go toward Maeseyck,
only to deceive the forces of the States.

The rest past by Brey, and Peer, whereupon followed the Garrisons of Bilzen,
Hasselt, Herck, Hall, Die, Sichenen, Arschot, Loven, Beringen, and Geell to
the Hooghe-Straets, where those of Liere, Mechesten, and Antwerpe met likewise,
which all joined, made a great Army, and was provided with Artillery,
Gunpowder, Lead, and certain Boats upon Wagons with all necessary
provisions, for an enterprise In the mean time the Marquis with some few horse
posted to Wesell, as if he would have joined with Count Henry of the Bergh,
but he returned presently.

The Prince of Orange understanding this gave command that the States horse in
Brabant, should ride to Bommelerwaert, and Nimwegen, little thinking what was
the scope of the enemies. Whereupon certain troops of horse of the Garrison of
Berghen up zoom, being arrived at Breda, Justinius of Nassaw Governor of Breda,
having had some intelligence of the desseing of Spinola, persuaded them to
return back, and told them that he was sure that Spinola had an enterprise
upon Berghen up Zoom.

The Leaders after a little deliberation, condescended all presently to his
advise, notwithstanding the command of the Prince of Orange. As soon as they
were returned in their Garrison, they understood, that the Spanish Forces,
twelve thousand strong, marched toward the Castle of Wowe: And upon the 18. of
July, these of Steen berghen perceived that their Town was to be besieged,
being unawares, and unprovided of many things necessary to sustain a siege,
seeing it is a place of no great importance. Monsieur Borwater Governor of the
place, being a brave Soldier, was much discontented with this News, seeing he
wanted both men and Munition, having but one piece of Ordinance in the Town,
and that unserviceable, laid before the Hospital without the appurtenances. It
is certain, that the Prince of Orange few days before the siege, sent thither
a Gunner, and had given charge to a Commissioner to convay thither five or six
Cannons, but whatsoever the cause is, it was not performed: And the Women of
the Town much discontented with the said Commissioner, would have cast him the
aforesaid Monday (being the 18. of July) into the water; the said day about
noone is the enemy come so near to the Town, that their voices might be heard
by the Garrison, and turned presently their Ordinance, and discharged the same
against the Town, not having made any Battery.

And having made a reasonable big breach in the walls with sixty Cannon
shot, the Inhabitants began to look heavy, the rather because they had not
heard of late the noise of such Heath Crickets. A few hours before, went a
great number of women and children, crying and lamenting, out of the Town;
which was certainly a pitiful spectacle to behold.

What concerns the cries and laments heard by me, as well of those that were
within as without Tertolen, the C'limder and the Plaet. I will not speak of,
they carry away all what they will not loose.

I could more lively Relate how they cry and lament, and wring their hands
together, the one, for her husband, the other, for her child, leaping in and
out the boats (saying) that they will remain, where flesh and blood is lost,
goods are not remembered in such cases. In those places where these things
happen, there is no disputing whether they be Papists, Protestants, or
Arminians, but must jointly resist the invasion of the enemies.

On thursday the 19. of July did the enemies send a Trumpet to the Town, to
ask whether they would Parley. That otherwise, his Forces standing ready in
Battle array, should assault the town where the breach was made. Declaring
moreover, that they would not depart from thence before they had brought the
Town under the obedience of the King of Spain.

The valiant Governor Borwater, with two Captains, and the Gentlemen of their
Companies, and some of the Magistrates of the place, resolved to keep the
Town, until the last man, for the States. But they requested the Trumpet,
that he would try whether the enemies would condescend to a cessation of Arms
for few hours only; whereupon, he returned presently to Don Lewis de V^^yco,
and the Governor of Antwerpe.

In the mean time, they sent some to look whether they could not see
(standing upon the Steeple) any Ships coming with aid. But afterward,
seeing that the enemy divided his Forces in three several Troops, to assault
the town in diverse places, and that they were not able to defend the same,
seeing it had no Countrescarps, or Bulwarks, but only certain round Towers
of no strength. And likewise in consideration of the lamentations of women and
Citizens which had any thing to loose, they could not resolve almost what to
do. And to speak the truth, there was no other issue to be expected, then
that the Soldiers, and armed Citizens, should be slain, as also all the
rest, and all their goods pillaged, and made havoc off.

At the same instant, the Trumpet being returned, told them that the enemy
would not grant them as much as the space of an hour. But if they would
surrender the Town, they should have good conditions, and be well used,
otherwise they must do as the cause should require.

The Governor was unwilling to yield, but most Voices carried away, and agreed
upon these following Conditions and Articles.

1. That all the Soldiers with their Arms and Armor, besides Baggage should
depart, and be conducted with a safe Convoy.

2. That the Townsmen should pay two thousand Gilders (which is 200.li.
Sterling) to the Soldiers, to hinder their pillaging.

3. That all the Townsmen after the aforesaid money is paid, shall have
liberty to depart with their goods where they list.

4. That those that would remain there, and live according to their Laws,
Customs, and Ceremonies, they might, and should be used as other Inhabitants
of the obeysant Cities and Towns of Brabant.

Upon these conditions is the Town surrendered the aforesaid Monday before
noone being the 19. of July. The Governor had likewise leave to convay his
goods away. Within the Town were two Companies, an old and a new, both of
Alekmar, and behaved themselves very valiantly.

At their departure there was a woman that philipping upon her thumb, told to
some of the Soldiers, now you must forth and our friends shall come in.

This Town was beset with 9. Companies, and one Captain Det (who did lie in
former time upon the Castle of Wowe, and is very skillful in pillaging,
wherefore the Country peoof the Climder, Stryen, and the Plaet may look to
themselves, seeing at the Land side he has but a barren Heath) made Governor
of the same.

At the Haven not far from the Town, is the Enemy raising a Fort compelling
both Citizens and Soldiers to labor at it.

They have likewise put their boats to the water, which they have gotten
thither by wag gons, intending to trouble the Navigation betwixt Holland and
Sealand. But our Mariners and Sailors will be very glad to meet with them.

As soon as the enemy had his garrison planted in the Town, he sent his
forces toward Berghen up Zoom, but 2. Leagues from thence, the horse were
conducted by Don Lewis de Velasco, and the foot by the Governor of Antwerpe,
marching so in all have to the said City, and being arrived there, planted
their Ordinance not far off, thinking to speed as they did at
Steene-berghen, having notice that the Horse in garrison were abroad.

And toward the Evening they thought to surprise the horne-workes, or the
great outworkes near Saint Quirin; But the Governor Rhyhoven did hid himself
in the said outworks commanding the Ordinance and all things necessary to be
made ready against their approach. which being perceived, the Ordinance was
presently displayed against them, and our foot went to meet them, crying,
kill, kill, kill, and after the sound of the Trumpet, our horse likewise set
upon the Enemies, pursuing them in such manner unto their Cannon, that a great
slaughter was made amongst them, and if the garrison had been well seconded
and refreshed, they would have carried it away, or otherwise nailed the same to
make it vnserviseable: at our retreat the horse of the enemy prepared
themselves to set upon our garrison, but our Ordinance planted upon the walls,
caused both men and horses to cut capers in the air whereby there rose such an
Alarm with crying and lamenting amongst them, that it seemed that every one
was hurt that came near, them. In such manner they have been twice or thrice
resconcerned, and if they like it well they may come again

But they disliking much this danse, retired presently a quarter of a mile,
they took their men which were slain along with them and rancked them in the
sand, saying these fear no more the Flamencos. In the mean time those of the
city spare no charges to fortify themselves, having pierced likewise the Bear
of the new work near the Haven.

The Prince of Orange as soon as he was informed of these passages, sent
thither on Thursday the valiant Colonel the Lord of Fama with a 100. small
ships laden with armed Soldiers, The next day, the Count John of Nassaw,
sailed likewise with 100. small Ships to the said City, besides these, there
are many ships and men arrived from Zealand, in such manner that the water
seemed to be covered with Ships and Boats.

Out of his Camp he dispatched likewise certain troops of horse (which took
their way by Huesden, Gertruyen, Bergh, Oo^terhrut, and Breda) to endamage the
Enemy before Berghen aforesaid. To day we are advised that there be above 5000.
soldiers in Berghen up Zoom, and that the Enemy has lost 400.

The 19. of July, there was brought in a Prise at Rotterdam, with 800. Chests
of Sugar.

The taking in of the Town of Goch, in the land of Cleue, by the Marquis
SPINOLA.
ANno 1622. the 26.27. and 28. of July, is the Marquis Spinola accompanied with
Count Henry of the Bergh, and some Forces, marched from Wezell toward the East
side of the Rhine downward, as if he would have attempted something against
Doesburgh, Zutphen, or Deventer.

The Prince of Orange well knowing his Stratagems, looked about as well as he
could. But Spinola having chosen a fit time for himself, stayed all Passengers
at that instant, and drew instantly out of the next Cities and Towns of
Cleue, a good part of the Garrisons with him, and set with the same upon Goch.
And having with his Ordinance beaten the Tyles from the houses, so that they
fell in the Street, which causing the Townsmen to run more to their Cellers
then Walls, he got the Town by composition the 28. of July, seeing the
Garrison was but 300 men strong, and not able to resist with their willing
hearts, his violences and Forces.

From Rome, Last Sunday the Post (that was sent by the Archduke Leopoldus unto
the Pope requesting his Holiness that whereas he had certain Soldiers in pay
in Germany, under the Command of Don Pedro Alderbrandino, it would please him
to turn them over into his service) has been dispacht with this answer,
that the Archduke must sue for the same purpose unto the Emperor.

Last Wednesday, the Ambassador of the King of Spain, did present a horse,
and a Letter of Exchange of 7000. Crowns for the feude or fealty of the
Kingdom of Naples, which were accepted by the Procurator of the Exchequer;
with the accustomed and usual protestation.

We hear from Naples, that the Galleons with Soldiers lately sailed toward
Spain are to be employed against the Pirates: And that out of the said
Kingdoms 400000. Crowns, and from Sicilia 150000. Crowns should be made over
by Letters of Exchange in the Low Countries, toward the charges of the war.

From Messina, they write that the Galleys of Tosca^^ were arrived at Reggio,
having fought with 15. Vessels of the Pirates, and had made 250. of them slaves,
and gotten 8. pieces of Ordinance from them, and one Ship laden with Oil,
besides 100000. Crowns for acomposition or ransom to save their lives.

From Venice, July 8. from Turine they advise that the Duke of Savoy, rayseth
many forces in France, and other countries, having sent diverse Inginers to
fortify his Fortresses of Asti, Vercelli, and Saint Germane and other places.
Morcover he has supplied the garrisons of Asti, and Vercelli, with 400.
Soldiers. And that Aldeibgera has an army in readiness upon the confines of
Savoy, for his Highness service.

Letters from Milane relate, that 100. carts from thence were sent with
munition to the Veltolinas to provide the soldiers withal, seeing that great
forces are to be sent thither against the Grisons. Thesouldiers which came with
the Knight Plecch^ from Alsatia are sent toward Bormio. The Spaniards which
have layne in Cleue are marched up toward Millane, having left there only the
Count Serbellione with his regiment. And here are leauied with all speed 11.
trouppes of horse.

Last Thusday is the Knight Simon Contarini chosen by this Signorie Ambassador
for Constantinopele to congratulate the great Signor, who has given two
millons of gold to his Ianissaries, and increased their pension 3. aspers a day.

From Brinoten the 10. day the Confederates have besieged Guttenborg and
discharge their ordinance against the same, doing those of the Town the like:
besides they have made a sconse near Vleschenberg directly against the Town
to endammage the same, as likewise invaded Mantasan, and assaulted the enemies
in two assunder places, which causes great fear and dearth in Tirol.

The Confederates at Baden have under hand and seal reniewed their
confederation with the Graubuntens, whereupon they care now little for Leopoldus
and other enemies. Likewise the 5. Catholic Cantons have promised free passage
to the Reformed, upon condition that they shall bring certificates or passeports
from their Magistrates or Commanders. And they themselfes have advised the
Protestants to make no agreement with their enemies, but to go on with their
enterprises, and to cleanse the country quit of them. When they have taken
Engadin, they intended to besiege Veltkercken; they get daily great assistance
of men, munition, and ordinance, from the Bunoters.

From Prague the 12. of July. The 7. of this month is the Count of
Hoghensoller (being Ambasser. of the Emp.) traveled toward Dresden unto the
Duke and Elector of Saxony) and to other places of the Empire.

Yesterday the Commissioners went all this City over, to visit the arms of the
Protestants, and left them only their rapers and daggers, after they had
enrolled them in their books, to what purpose, we hnow not yet.

From Frankendall the 12. day Count Mansfield and Duke Christian of Brunswick
are marched toward Luthenborch with an army of 1100. horse and 25000. foot:
and taking every where great contributions, and we hear that they have
gotten 300000. Ryxdallers in Alsatia only: and we look what both the
Imperial armies will attempt. It is thought that they will pass over at
Shrock and march from thence to Newstadt and Germersheim.

All the forces by the Prince Palatine left in the Palatinate lie in garrison,
the horse only excepted of Obertrout and Meganck which keep about the
Mountain. There is a strong garrison in this Town, being two trouppes of horse
amongst them, we are likewise very well provided with all kind of ordinance.

The Fort commenced by the Schaperie of this Town is made already defensible,
and the workmen continue daily to work at it. They say here that our Prince
is gone toward Sedan, where the Duke of Boullion keeps his Court.

From Francfort the 21. Iulij, It is certain that the Imperialists are retired
from Heydelbergh. The English Ambassador labors hard to obtain a truce, or
a cessatio^ of arms.

Here is rumored that the Spanish forces will lay an other bridge at Stein to
pass over the Rhine. The mean time are the Spanish and Bauarian forces at
Worms transported over the Rhyne with boats, but their baggage shall be carried
over the bridge at Vppenheim; and is like they will besidge Franckendall.

The Count of Anboult marching with his forces toward Alsatia did seiourn 3.
days ago at Kerken two leagues but distant from Tourlach, what his intention
is we know not:

The Landtgraue Lodewick of Darmstad is retired upon his fort Russesheim, where
he intends to abide for a time. Otherwise we hear but little of the soldiers,
but that they sometime with half Companies go pilladging, and in such manner
was lately ransackt and pillaged the Castle of Offenback belonging to the
Count of Isenburgh.

The Spanish army lies at this present at Lempertheym, and there comes news
that the Bauarians have fired Khonow, besides 9. villages.

From Collen the 23 day, we hold for certain that the fort of Papenmuts or
Priests cap shall be besieged this night, seeing that yesterday many soldiers
upwards coming from Dusseldorp and at Lulsdorp were certain hundred arrived
already, and besides other preparations; there is sent a small man of war to
continue at Lulsdorp. And we have understood afterward by the Country people,
that the Batteries are made ready and the ordinance planted against the Fort.

From Emmerick, His Excellentie has commanded a bridge to be casted over the
river Wild, and the ordinance and munition to be landed, whereof some was
conveyed away by wagons so that by all likelyhoode it seems that he will
attempt something either against Groll or Oldenseel.

From Algiers we understand that the plague there as likewise at Thunis, in
such a manner continued that there died about 500. a day.

The Corn is grown now better cheap in Italy.

The Ostendeners are almost all beset in diverse parts by the men of war of
the States.

Count Henry of the Berghe is marched up toward the river of the Mase with
some 5. or 6000. men: having yet left many at Wesel and Berck. The Prince of
Orange was yet at Emerie where he having gotten great store of wagons, gave
charge the ordinance and munition to be carried away according to his
direction, whereby it is easelie to be gessed that he has some enterprise in
hand.

Those of Lotharingia stand in great fear of Mansfield, seeing he will take
his passage through the Country, and have written unto Spignola for aid, and
that without the same they shall be compelled to suffer him in their Territory.

From Lipsich they write, that the the 6. of July the Lady of the Elector of
Saxony is brought to bed of a young Son, that there are now 5. Dukes alive
of his line. The Godfathers are the Duke of Mechelburg, the Duke Lunenburg of
Zel, two Dukes of Gomeren, and the Ladys mother is the young Dukes Godmother.

The enemies fortify daily their camp before Berghen op Zoom, and having made
their Quarters and entrenched themselves, they go now to make batteries, and
seek to approach nearer the City by trenches, but the garrison plays
bravely with the ordinance upon them, which being most made of sand, are many
times spoiled and shot down by the ordinance of the City and many of his
soldiers shot to death; so that they begin to perceive that this will be an
other Ostende and that they shall be put to it very hardly and dangerously,
besides all provision and prouande is amongst them a great deal deerer then it
is in the City, seeing they must get it by land, which causes diverse to run
away. Within the City and the outwarkes is great store of good soldiers and
brave Commanders, as likewise Ingeners, Miners, and Pioniers; besides all other
things necessary for their maintenance and defense. And all the forts in the
Land of Tertolen be likewise well provided.

We understand that the enemy has sent some more Artillery, ammonution, and
other prouission accompanied with a strong convey, being forced to do this
continually if he will continue the siege; these of the city go sometimes
abroad to try their fortunes, and took this week certain carts with
provision, besides diverse horse and prisoners.

It is reported for certain that the Marquis Spignloa is arrived at Antwerpe,
intending his journey very speedely toward his camp before Berghen up Zoom.

Those of Breda have lately taken away all the brewe kettles that were in the
Villages thereabout because the enemies should not use them, and it is reported
that they must pay in their camp 8. stuyuers for a kanne of beer.

Those of Groll have made an excursion this week, unto Deuenter, and took
diverse cattle from thence with them.

FINIS.

