CORANTE, OR, NEVVES FROM Italy, Germany, Hungaria, Bohemia, Spain and
Dutchland. 1621.
From Rome the 2 of July 1621.
FRom Naples they write, that the Italian Galleys were gone to Liuerno again,
and have taken three Turkish Ships in the Leuant Seas, there are Soldiers
daily taken up for Millane.

This week by the Popes Commission, there are 20000. crowns made over into
Germany, toward the paying of 30000. Footmen, which are taken up there for the
Apostolical Sea.

From Venice the 6. of July 1621.
Letters from Millane certify, that the 4. Companies of Horsemen, which
conuayed the money that was to pay the Soldiers in Tirol, stayed in Valtolina,
to fortify the same: it is said that those of Valtolina have sent unto the
Emperor, and to the Archbishop Leopoldus, to yield themselves under their
Protection, that so they may be freed from the Spanish war.

From Constantinople it is written, that the great Turk is gone feom
Adranapolie, and marches forward toward Poland.

On Sunday at night, certain men with Ships well appointed, set upon the
Ship called the Toro Negro, that lay richly laden to sail to Constantinople,
and having slain the Massaro, and cast him over board, and taken certain
Balls laden with cloth of gold, silk, and some Chests of Rials of Plate,
they set fire on the Ship, whereby the great Gally called Balby, that lay not
far from it, was also fired, and much spoiled: there are five men taken that
were Actors therein.

From Vianna the 10. of July 1621.
The Emperor has put off his journey to Prague, because other matters are
fallen out here. The Earl Palatine in Hungaria is dead, which will be an
occasion of much alteration. Bethlem Gabor lies with his Forces by Fileck, and
there has by a wile, upon security gotten Colonel Basinacke to come forth,
to treat with him, who being come, 400. Turks that were with Bethlem,
enclosed him round about, and slew 300. of his men; besides Stephen Palsy that
is sore wounded, and got hardly away, and Bethlem begins now again to present
all those that hold with the Emperor.

Newheusel is now strongly battered, Bucquoy has made many Sconses about it,
and cast up two Mounts, and they within set open the Grammergate, and thereat
issue out and in, and do much hurt to the Emperors Soldiers: This day there
is more preparation for Sconses sent thither from hence.

From Zurich the 12. of July 1621.
In Bundten there is no peace to be hoped for, by reason that the Spanish
forces daily wax stronger, and the Archduke Leopoldus still takes up more men,
whereupon the Lords of three Bundten quarters have written to Zurich, Bern, and
Saint Galen, for 4000. men, to defend their frontiers, and their dangerous
ways, being resolved with 16000. men to match toward their Enemies, and to
set on them.

From Breslaw the 6. of July 1621.
The Marquis of Iagersdorp has overcome the whole Bishopric of Newzs, and
other places, Towns, and Castles also, and has disarmed all the Inhabitants
of the Towns, without any exception of Religion, and has arrested the Bishops
of News Colonel, his principal Counsel and spiritual administrators and
other persons, and committed them prisoners, and takes oath of fidelity in the
King of Bohemiaes name, and calls himself the said Kings General in Silesia,
he strengthens his Army daily, and with 12000. of his best Soldiers, runs
into Glats in Bohemia, and has taken some Bohemian Catholic Lords, and
brought them prisoners into Glats, which it is thought shall be dealt with all,
as they were in Prague, for that many Lords in Silesia are much grieved thereat.

The young Earl of Thurn has taken some places in the principality of Tessen,
and wholly ransackt them, and is joined again with the Marquis, to whom also
1500. Morauian Horsemen are joined.

It is said that the Princes and States have taken up 9000. men, all poor
Pesants, and have made a Catholic Lord of Brinten, their General.

From Vianna the 14 of July 1621.
From Newheusell it is certified, that the Emperors Army is besieged by the
Hungarians, in such manner, that they cannot go half a mile out of it, and
the Lord Carel van Harruch came hither yesterday, with a conuoy of 2000.
Horsemen sent from Bucquoy, he is to go back again this night, with the Lord
Gundacker of Lichtenstein. It is certain that Bethlem is 50000. strong, as it
is thought to go into Morauia, and 20000. are to go to Newheusell.

Bethlems Soldiers have taken Beszniaki and Balsy by Fellecke, and slain 900.
of the Emperors Soldiers, and it is here very dangerous for the Towns upon
the hills. Also (for that they dealt so cruelly with the Budianers) 1200 of
Bethlems forces have set upon the Earl of Colaldo, and have given him an
overthrow, wherein the Duke of Saxon and 80. of his Horsemen are slain, and
have taken all the booty that they got from the Budianers from them again.

The Emperor is somewhat sickly, and yesterday he sent the Letters of
assignation of the Marquisate of Lonsuits, with his confirmation thereunto, to
the Duke Eelector of Saxon: This day an English Ambassador arrived here.

From Lints the 16 of July 1621.
Yesterday there came a Post hither from Vianna, and stayed not above an hour,
he carried Letters also to the Duke of Bauaria, to send some aid, for that
Bucquoy perceiving himself to be to weak before Newheusell, he is gone with
his Army back again to Brugh, and that the Hungarians have a great enterprise
in hand.

The 13. of this month, the Lords that are arrested were examined one after
the other, and it is said that more shall be committed, and we are sworn to be
obedient to the Duke of Bauaria.

From Bergstrate the 18. of July. 1621.
On Thursday Colonel Ouertrout with his horsemen in Aldenwaldt, shall be
quartered in Merckebach Fehret, and other places.

This day, the Bishop of Wuttenberch sent to the Prince to Darmestradt, by his
own Post, to let him know within 8. days whether he intended to aid the
Palatinate and the Bohemians, and also that he would send for his Regiment out
of the Bauarian Army, and if not, that the Earl of Mansfield would enter into
the field, and put all that Country to fire and sword.

The morrow the Marquis of Darmestadt will march forward, his carriage is all
gone.

From Bamberch the 13. of July 1621.
The 7. of this month, there came a Trumpeter hither with Letters to the
Prince, and to Don Cappitel, to certify him, that if the Prince does not
presently recall his Soldiers out of the Bohemian Territories, that then he
will persecute and invade our Country with fire and sword, whereupon Don
Descant presently rode to the Prince to Wurtzburch, to show him the Letter, and
on Sunday last came hither again, and the same day dispatched the Trumpeter
away, with what resolution, it is not yet known, only that all the horsemen
are sent for to come hither, as also that the rest of the forces are all in a
readiness, and stayed for further Commission. This Country is in a great fear,
and they have sent 6. Gentlemen to the Earl of Mansfield in the Palatinate, to
know his meaning, there is also Post sent to Vianna and Monchem.

The Copy of the Earl of Mansfields Letter sent to Don Descant to Bamberch.
Our salutation, honorable, valiant, and worthy good friends. How the
Bishopric of Wur^zburch forces, and those of Bauaria have hitherto behaved
themselves in Bohemia, is sufficiently known, and therefore I need not to
speak more thereof, as also that we hither to have done nothing, as likewise
that you have not in any sort meddled with the Bohemian matters, but rather (as
it is fit) have stayed from proceeding therein. But for that the said
Wurtenberch Soldiers, have been found to do the contrary, and will by power
to us given from the King of Bohemia, our most gracious Lord, have had
sufficient cause to be revenged on his Majesty's enemies, as also on their
ayders and abetters, and to give the same measure unto them, that they have
given unto others. We thought it convenient to send this Trumpeter unto you,
hereby to certify and desire you that you would willingly send for your
Regiment of Soldiers out of Bohemia, and withdraw them from thence, as also to
refrain from that strange and cruel proceedings (whereunto you are only
incited by the Emperor) and wholly to leave them, which if you do, as we doubt
not but you will, you shall find us to be your good friend, and if not you
shall find the contrary, for that as I am a true Knight, we will not refrain
from persecuting all yours, and the whole Chapters subjects, and lands, with
fire and sword. Which we desire you to think upon, and to take good order
therein, and to send us your resolute answer touching our Letter by this
bearer. Given in Weittenhousen the 14. of July 1621. Stilo nouo, our desire is,
that you would impart this also to the Chapter in Wurtenburch, that we in that
case may be held excuscable. If any thing happen otherwise:

Your honors good friend Ernst Earl of Mansfield.


From Ausburgh the 19 of July 1621.
In Bauaria they take up the sixth man throughout all the Country, and there are
26000, men to come to Straubing, where the Duke will make a general Muster,
the Ordinance and Ammunition is sent thither from Munchem, and the Bakers and
Brewers must send Beer and Bread after the Army, for that because the Earl
of Mansfield has sent a threatening Letter by a Trumpeter to Bamberch; The
Bishop thereof has sent it to the Duke of Bauaria, and thereupon he is gone
with all his Court and forces from Mouchem, and the Prince also is to send all
his forces in the said Bishopric and the rest, from Bambergh on this side the
Palatinate, and the Emperors Armies under the conduct of Monseur de Tilly, lie
on the Bohemian frontiers about 2. Dutch miles from the Earl of Mansfield, who
is very strong, we shall shortly he are some news.

For that the Turk is entered with so strong an Army into the field, the King
of Poland also assembleth all his Forces, and the Soldiers march already from
Meluingh, that have at least 160. Dutch miles to go before they come to the
place of mustering. The King of Poland is very courageous and resolute to go
against the Turk.

The war now begins on all sides to have some appearance on the King of Spain,
and the Archdukes Governor of Brabanter side against those of the United
Provinces, for out of all the frontier Towns they go abroad to seek
adventures. They of Hertoghen bush with certain Horsemen, made toward the Town
of Grave, where they took two Burgers, which they of the Grave understanding,
presently sent forth certain Horsemen, who followed hem so fast, that before
they got into Hertogen bush they did trouble them, and setting upon them, took
both the Burgers from them, and brought six of their Horsemen prisoner, with
them to the Grave.

There are 4 Ships of war in Ostend that are prepared to put to Sea, to take
Merchants ships if they can, but Captain Moy Lambert with eleven Ships of the
United Provinces men of war, lie to watch their coming forth.

The Archduke Albertus dead body lies openly to be seen, and many men are
gone thit^^^^o see it.

Two Ships richly laden with Indian wares came hither into the united Provinces
upon the 18th. of July, whereof the Mauence has in her, 9369. Picols and 55.
cases of priemsche P^pper, 176073. pounds of Clones, 271 sackes of Mace, 11398
c^ses of Sinamon, 704. caracts of Diamonds. And the arms of Horn had in her,
3064. Picols, and 81. and. cases of Pepper, 10000. pounds of Clones, 150 cases
of Benjamin of the best sort, 320 packes of Indigo, 183. packes of China
linen, 9. great cases of white China silk, 1. case of Taffaties, 463..
caracts of Diamonds.

The West Indian affairs go bravely forward, and they only attend Saylors to
put into them, that they may put to Sea, to revenge the blood of their friends
which has been spilt so tyranously by the Spaniards, that were so cruelly
brought unto their ends by them, and those that they threw ouer-bord, thinking
to drown them, who notwithstanding were so strong by Gods help, that being in
the Sea they unbound one the others hands, and swam on shore, but being taken
there by the Spaniards, they were presently hanged.

Imprinted by Broyer Johnson Corantere to his Excellency, the 2. of August.
1621.


