CORANT OR WEEKLY NEVVES, FROM Italy, Germany, Hungaria, Polonia, Bohemia,
France, and the Low Countries.
From Vianna the 14. of September. 1621.
FRom the King of Pole the Emperor received letters the last Tuesday, the
Captain that brought them reports that the Turk has received 4.
overthrows: in the first encounter he lost 40000. in the second 14000. in the
third 9000. in the last 4000.

From Vienna the 14. of September. 1621.
Bethlem Gabor has raised his siege and fortified himself about a Dutch mile
from this City, purposing then to offer the Emperor Battle: who has now
gathered all his forces into one Body: Every day we hear of hundreds and
sometimes thousands slain, which are only light skirmishes to flesh them
against the maine encounter.

Budianus in the mean while standing in awe of no body: Colalto who attended
him with 8000. being called to the Camp, plays the fury, and with his 5000.
Horse does more endamage the Emperials, then the whole Army of the Bethlemists:
yesterday to outbraue the Emperor he passed by the walls of this City toward
Bauaria, burning all before him as he went, his errand to carry Recaudo from
Bethlem to the Duke, and to give him notice that he purposes to visit him
shortly, the which (if so disposed he may easily do) there being no
possibility of opposing him before he come to the Bauarian Army, which is 300.
miles from hence.

From Breslaw the 4. of September. 1621.
In this Country the Silesian soldiers have a good time, are secure, have
what they will, take whatsoever they can get against men's wills, consume the
Country and the Towns, and yet will be paid at the full. Which is a special
punishment of God laid upon this Country.

From Chur in Zwitzerland the 30. of August. 1621.
Madalon the extraordinary French Ambassador, had made promise to the leaguers,
to show them his Commission from the King upon the 31. of this month, yet
prolonged it off 8 days more, and then assured them without further delay to
show it unto them, Which they will hardly trust, considering that the enemy,
the longer the more time had to strengthen himself. As upon the 25. of this
month, there came 30. Companies of Spaniards, and 18. Companies of Neopolitanes
from Millain, and that daily 30. Drums still sounded to take up Soldiers, which
is to late in the year to send to the Emperor, and therefore those Soldiers
should be employed in the places nearest there abouts. Therefore they made him
answer, if that after the said 8. days respite so required, he should seek
for a longer prologation, that without further speaking unto him, they would
give him the contract back again, and would proceed with their resolution.
Whereupon ye said Ambssador has distributed 26000. francks pension, and the
people of the there Bunten are so well pacified and agree together, as in 17.
years before they never were more. They of Zuenicke and Bearne also have
promised them their aid, and the Bund^naers have put 2400. musketeers that lay
in nether Engadien for their security, in the places bording upon the frontiers
of the Archduke Leopoldus Country.

From Vien the 18. of September. 1621.
From the fronters of Caniseche, there is news, that the Budiane with aid
from the Turk has taken the Fort of Kementh again, and is determined also to
take the Town and Castle of Gius again, and does great hurt and damage by
ransacking and burning, without resistance about Newstadt, and it is feared
that they will attempt something upon the suburbs. There are many poor people
that go here abouts to beg, And to conclude, the necesity and misery is so
great here amongst our people, as also among the enemies where they lie, that
it is unspeakable, and the Gretzer way or passage is so dangerous, that no man
dares look abroad.

From Vienna the 9. of September. 1621.
Bethlem Gabor is now at Schindow, where he stays for 20000. Turks to come
unto him, the Marquis of Iagerensdorp is with his Dutch forces, and ten
Thousand Hungarians gone over Wittenbergh to Morauia, also the Budianer, the
longer does the more great hurt, to whom the Bassa of Natolia with 12000. Turks
is coming to aid him. And as news now coms, he has taken the Town and
Castle of Guns by force.

From Prague the 9. of September. 1621.
There is no news here, this day the 2. Companies of Ritters have received a
month and a half pay, and are this day gone toward Morauia, because it is
feared that the Hungarians, will enter into it again, and it is not certainly
known, whether Don Balthazar has left his siege before Tabor or not.

From Spiers the 14. of September. 1621.
Last Friday, General Veere sent a Trumpet to the Bishop of Spiers, with a
Letter to this effect, that forasmuch as don Cordoua was entered further into
the Palatinate, and had taken the Castle of Stein, and had used great tyranny
against the Subjects, and Churchmen, and that he was certified, that he had bin
the motioner thereof, and moved Don Cordoua thereunto, as also that he had
helped to maintain the Bauarian army with money, be thought good to advertise
the said Bishop, not only to forbear sending money to the Catholic league, as
also without delay specially to send the Spaniards again out of his
Territories, and if not, he would deal in like manner with the Country and
people, specially with the Priests, as Don Cordona has done in the Palatinats,
which is a matter to breed war. Whereupon the Bishop sent a friendly answer and
excuse, in this manner; that although he were by the said General esteemed to
be an enemy, and that by him his poor Subjects in the Market were ransackt and
spoiled, yet it was no furtherance nor good unto him to have the innocent poor
people in the Palatinate, for a revenge thereof to be assailed, whereunto he
said, that he neither gave counsel nor was any furtherer unto the same, and
much less had means to divert the Spanish soldiers.

The universal defense shall be taken in hand, and with all speed put in
effect, to the which end, the Duke of Lorains ambassador is now with the Bishop
at Odenheim, and to that end there are Letters of advise sent to the neighbor
Towns and States.

From Bergstrate the 15. of September. 1621.
In the Palatinate, every one be he rich or poor, free or not, within 3.
months must pay 18. Florins for the payment of the Soldiers, but it is said
that the Towns will not pay it, before they have their Lord.

The Ship bridge made by the Spaniards by Stein, i^ ready, and yesterday
Wattenheim was burnt by the Spaniards. They of the Palatinate to the contrary
lie still, it is thought the Spaniards now with their whole forces, will
ouerrun all Bergstrate, and run almost to the gates of Heidelbergh, and it is
to be feared (if no aid comes) that all the lower Palatinate will be lost, for
that there are no more but 3. Towns to be won in it, viz. Heydelbergh,
Franckendall and Manheim.

They of Bensheim in Bergstraet have sought for help of other Towns, which is
promised them, and the said Town has taken the keys from the Soldiers, and
will assure the Town themselves.

From Ambergh the 16. of September. 1621.
For that they of Lichtenbergh, in Werenbergh, and Schimthutten in the said
passage have sundry times showed themselves to be enemies, to the Earl of
Mansfield, upon the last Friday he sent certain Horse and Footmen with some
pieces of great Ordinance, thetherward, to take the said passage, and to put
garrison into it, and on Sunday at night secretly sent 4. Companies of Soldiers
to Camp, and quartered them there.

The last Friday, there came 500. Bauarian soldiers to Freimt, whereupon on
Sunday last the Earl of Mansfield sent 4000. foot, and 8. Companies of
Ritters, thetherward to assail them, but they refusing to yield up the place,
he began to batter it, and yesterday took it, wherein the Bauarians with the
most part of the Burgers were slain, and the Town and Castle wholly ransackt,
wherein there was great store of goods, that was brought thither by those that
fled, after that the suburbs were burnt.

From the Palatinate the 17. of September. 1621.
Don Hermancos de Cordoua lies still with his forces by Rem Turckheim, and
General Veere with a part of his forces, horse and footmen, lies at Birstadt,
and in the Bergh street way, to hinder the Spaniards from ransacking and
winning abroad: what will follow thereof, time will reveal.

From Berghstrate the 18. of September 1621.
The town of Bensheim is somoned by the Spaniards to yield it self, and they
have required 3. days truce, which being past, yet we hear of no attempt,
they within the Town have 1600. well mounted Ritters, and daily fortify
themselves, and have gotten some great Ordinance and munition: It is thought
that they in Berghstrate will stand upon their defense.

It is said that there is a new levy of Soldiers made for the King of Bohemia,
and that there shall be 6000. foot, and 1000. horsemen more taken up for him.

From France we understand, that the King with his Army lies still before
Mountalbon, and battreth the town with 45. pieces of Canon, but they within
valiantly resist him, so it is apparent that the town will hold out as long
as possibly it can.

Touching the besieging of Gulicke, there is nothing to the purpose done, only
that the Spaniards begin to make 3. Bulwarks before it, 2. of them being
almost ready, but yet so far from the town, that they seem to be made
rather for the defense of their Army, and a letting of the Garrison from
issuing out upon them, then overcome the town, so that it is thought that the
said town shall only be Bulwarked about.

Letters from Brigges certify, that there past at least 12000, selected
Soldiers, horse and footmen, by that town: with all kind of preparation, as
Scopes, Spades Baskets, Scuts, etc. Men supposing here, that they will do some
wondrous thing.

The Ditches in Flanders being cut through, the waters runs up into the Country
all about Gant and Bruges, the water lies in the Land, whereby their
necessities is great thereabouts.

From the Prince of Orange his Army.
Here there are Commissions given out, for Christian Prince of Anholt, to levy
1500. horsemen, and he has 3. months time limmited unto him to go into the
Palatinate: he also shall have with him 5000. footmen, he has already a great
number together with him, there goes Adolph Plasman, Yonker Haesten, Mons.
Quaet, Westerholt and others: It is said that the King will send with him 500.
horse, and the Prince of Orange 500. horse more.

The 20. of this month, Marquis Spinola past over the Bridge with 20. or 22.
Coronets of horsemen, toward our Army, but attempted nothing, but went back
again to Disfort house, where the poor Country men (yet neutrals) that were
gone thither to save themselves, with their Cattle and other goods, were
pittifilly spoiled.

The Prince causes the Cloister Schellendorp, between Rees and Bislicke,
close by the Haven masters, to be Entrenched, and have sent for great store of
Lathes and Pallisadoes.

The 2, young Kings, and the young Princes, being 5. in number, that were sent
out of East India to the Prince of Orange, and the East India Company here in
these Countries, to be brought up in Learning, by common advise of the Company,
are sent to the Latin school in Amersfort, and upon the 24. of the month of
August entered therein.

From Montabon it is written that Duke de Main, did entreat the King, that no
mercy might be showed to this Town, but that all might be put to the Sword.

The Gunpowder in his quarter was set on fire, by them out of the Town,
shooting wild fire amongst it.

The Duke de Rohan has 8000. men ready, and is within one days Journey, going
to aid the Town against the King.

The Citizens of Montalbon have hanged up 6. traitors, that sought to betray
the Town to the King, whose heads were cut off, and set upon poles, for a
terror to others, one of them being Sergeant mayor of the Town whose name was
Savage, who betrayed the Town of Neracke before to the King.

There is a Post come to Paris from Spain, that is gone to Flanders, who
says, that the King of Spain will be in Flanders in his own person, before
winter.

It is written from Paris, by a Gentleman that saw it, that there was a
wonderful strange apparition seen in the air upon Sunday night the 2. of
September last, the whole sky seemed like the form of a Tent, out of the which
there issued certain forces, fighting one with another, afterward the whole
Element seemed to be on fire, In the end, the said forces were reduced into a
round circle, not much unlike the besieging of a Town.

London Printed for N. B October the 2. 1621. Out of the Hie Dutch Copy.


