The new tidings out of Italy are not yet com.
Out of Weenen, the 6 November.
THe French Ambassador has caused the Earl of Dampier to be buried stately
at Presburg. In the mean while has Bethlem Gabor cited all the Hungerish
States, to com together at Presburg the 5. of this present, to discourse about
the Crovvning and other causes concerning the same Kingdom.

The Hungatians continue with roveing against these Lands. In like manner
those of Moravia, which are fallen upon the Cosackes yester night by Hofleyn,
set them on fire, and slain many dead, the rest will revenge the same.

Here is certain nevves com, that the Crabats, as also the Lord Budean, are
sallen unto Betlem Gabor.

The Emperor sends the Earl of Altheim, as Ambassador to Crackovv in Polen,
to appear upon the same meeting-day.

Now comes tidings, that Betlem Gabor is at Thurna, there do gather to gether
great store of States.

The Emper. Maj. has appointed here a meeting-day upon the 1. of December.
thereupon should appear the 4. Proclaimed States. The appointed taxing shall
bring up a great some of money.

Out of Prage, the 5 of November.
Three days agone are passed by, 2. mile from this City 6000. Hungarians
(chosen out Soldiers) under the General Rediserens, which are gone to our
Head-camp, and the Enemy lies yet near unto ours by Rackonits, though the
cry goes, that the enemy caused all his might to com together, to com this
vvayes against Prage, if that comes to pass, it shall not run of without
blows, the which might be revealed with in fevv days.

It continues, that in the Satser Crais are gathered together 10000
Contrie-men, most high-dutch-men, against Meissen, and no Bohemians, they will
help the King, to drive the enemy out of the Land. In like manner some certain
1000 Contrie-men rebel in the Lentmaritscher Crais, but it is feared that those
Countrie-men are starred up, through practice of the Adversary, that the
enemy in the mean while might com to Prage. We understand, that Bucquoy
has not been in the Camp, but by the Duke of Saxen some certain days,
therefore we are to look to our selves, for fear of Treachery. And it is
thought that the Emperor will leave Austria to the Hungorians, and see to
effect his intention only upon Praghe.

Out of Ceulen, the 21. November.
Writing from Marpurg in Hessen, that the Earl of the same Land, does cause
the foresaid City to be strongly fortified, there on do work many 100 men
daily, and there is mustered in the Earleship Zigenheym not long since 1.
Government of foote-men, and 6. Cornets of horsemen, the foote-men are sent
to Marpurg and Rijnfels. But the horsemen are lodged in the Villages about the
City, and thereafter are also mustered the Duke of Saxen Lauvvenburgs
Government in Tries-Zigenheym, now further where they shallbe laid and used,
is yet unknown. The fames Brothers Government, there quarter is laid by
Cassel, the Soldiers which are taken on about Hamburg, Lubeck, in the
Dukeship of Holsteen, and Meckelenburg, should also be mustered about Cassel,
and be used where need shall require.

Since the last we cannot enquire, that there is any thing of any importance
passed betwixt the Matquis Spinola and the United Princes. We understand that
the foresaid Spinola vvil lay his Soldiers in Garnisson with the first, and
deal them unto diverse places, on part to Oppenheym, Altzey, Ingelheym and
Cruitsnach, the other part at Summeren and Bacharacht, the speech goes that
there shall be laid with in Ments a good Company in Garnisson.

The Bishop at Halberstadt, Duke Christiaen at Bruynsvvyck, does cause to be
taken on 2000 Musquetters, to send to the United Princes.

Here is tidings, that betvveen the King of Bohemia and the Emperors folk
has been a great Battle about Prage, but because there is different vvriting
and speaking thereuppon, so cannot for this time any certainety thereof be
written, but must wait for the next Post. As also of the City Pilsen,
which the Earl of Mansvelt (so the speech goes) should have delivered into
the Emperors hands.

From Cadan in Bohemia, 4 mile from Raconits, the 12. November.
From Solts is certain advise that the Emperors folk have made them selves
with all their might out of their Camp, and taken their way to wards
Praghe, like as they wear then com to the long mile, but as the King
understand such, he is broken up with his armey, and com to the long mile
beforen the enemy, where they have had a very strong Battelle and on both
sides more then 6000 men slain, though most on the Kings side, also has the
enemy gotten of the King some pieces of Ordenuaunce and vvaggens with
amunitie, so that the King must retire back to Praghe, and the enemy to the
Weissenberg, there he lies yet and roves from thence to the Leut Maritscher
Crais unto Brix, has taken in, Trebnits, Pielan and Dux, also laid folk upon
Leutmarischer Slainer, and Launer passages, that the Passage upon Prage is
wholy taken away, and this day is com here in a certain Person that brings
tydinghs unto our Magistrate, that betwixt Sonnevveid and Patronit, where the
enemy has lien are found some certain 1000 dead Bodies, and on the other side
there King lay also some certain 1000. dead bodies, what is com to pass
betwixt both we shall shortly hear.

Out of Amberghe, in the Vpper-Pallatine, the 17. dito.
Here has been a great cry, that the Duke of Beyeren should have taken in
Praghe, and beaten our King out of the field, but is not certain, for the
Carle of Solms writes out of Waltsaxsen of the 14 of this present, that the
Duke of Beyeren was broken up with his camp very still, and marched in all have
to Prage, though they had left some 100 men which lay in their quarter soom
hours, which made fires there in, that on vvoulde not have thought but that
the whole Armay had layen there still, but as ours understood that they
vveregon follovved they them presently, though the Beyerens vverd com to
Weissenberge before but the 8 of this present have ours set upon the Beyerens
by force, and fought the whole day together, that on both sides are slain
about 8000 men, and very many should be hurt. Our King, with the Lord General
the Earl of Hohenlo, also the whole army are with in Prage, and the Duke of
Beyeren upon the Weyssenbergh and Stern; we hoope that they shall shortly be
driven from thence. What further is done betwixt them, we look for every
hour to enquire further thereof and it seems none can com from Prage, because
the passages are every where shut.

Out of Ceulen, the 24 of November.
Letters out of Neurenburghe of the 20 of this present, make mention, that they
had advise from the Borders of Bohemia, that there had been a very great
Battle by Prage, betvveen the King and the Duke of Beyeren, and many 1000.
slain on both sides, but that the Duke of Beyeren should have any folk with
in Prage, is yet uncertain, there upon under the Merchants with in
Neurenberge are laid many 100. Florins that the Emperor, nor the Duke of
Beyeren have no folk with in Prage. The cause that here comes no certainty
thereof, is this; That all passages are so beset, and so dangerous to travail,
that it is to wondered at, and not enough to be vvritte^ of, what roveing,
spoiling and killing is done daily upon all vvayes.

Upon the Schanse Priests cap is strongly buileed, and buy daily much vvood
lime and stone, to make houses there upon, and so provide them selves for the
whole vvinter. And are not long since in the night 500 Soldiers passed by
Dure out of Gulik, so the speech goes, there meaning should be to build a
nievv Schantse by Flammersheym, to take away the passage from the Marquis
Spinola.

Imprinted at Amsterdam by George Veseler, Ao. 1620. The 2. of December.

And are to be soulde by Petrus Keerius, dwelling in the Calverstreete, in the
uncertain time.


