Nouem. 7. 1622.

Numb. 6.

A Coranto. RELATING DIVERSE PARTICVLARS CONCERNING THE NEWS OVT OF JTALY,
Spain, Turkey, Persia, Bohemia, Sweden, Poland, Austria, the Pallatinates, the
Grisons, and diverse places of the Higher and Lower GERMANY.

Printed for Nathaniel Butter, Nicholas Bourne, and William Shefford, 1622.

A RELATION OF THIS Weeks news out of Jtaly, Spain, Turkey, Persia, Bohemia,
and Sweden, Poland, Austria, the Pallatinate, the Hague, and other places of
High and Low GERMANY.
From Rome, October. 1. 1622.
FOr the advancement of the Roman Faith, to be preached amongst the Heathen;
there are already one thousand five hundred Crowns of yearly pension, laid up
in several places, for the maintenance of those, who will undertake to be the
Apostles, and go to convert the unbelieving Gentiles.

Last Tuesday, the Cardinal Fianardi, dyed of a burning Fever; he has given
great Legacies to his Brethren and friends.

The Cardinal Ludouisie has purchased the Dukedom of Zaragola, of the Duke
of that Place; for 800000. Crowns.

From Rome, October. 7.
The Archbishop of Spalato, who since his coming out of England, has resyded
at Antwerpe, has long since submitted himself to the Holy, Catholic, and
Roman Mother Church. And therefore, there are five thousand Crowns made over
to him, to defray the charges of his journey to Rome; the Bills of exchange for
the taking up the money, are with him a good while before this, and he well
onwards on his Journey, that he may receive his absolution from the Popes
holiness: He hopes well: for whereas before his coming into England, he had
great suits in the Court of Rome, nine years together; and the Pope, who was
his mortal enemy, was also to be his Judge; he made use of England, as of a
Whoode, to keep his head from a storm; but since by the Popes death, the
storm is over; he comes now abroad again into the sunshine; for his
Holiness that now is Bishop of Rome, was sometimes his Schoole-fellow. It is
reported, that he has made very good use of England.

From Rome, the same Date.
The Bacchieri, (or Banckers) Spinola and Forali, are broken, for some
thousands of Crowns.

From Naples, October. 3.
The Galleyes of Prince Philibert, and those of Biserta are still out at Sea;
the Turkish Pirates, and the Christians, daily lie in wait one for another.

From Venice, October. 5.
The Collonell Obertrawt, a native of the Pallatinate, having lain some time at
Zuriche, is come hither to offer his service to this State, either to go back
to aid the Grisons, or to be employed elsewhere.

From Madrill, in Spain, October. 8.
In the end of September, here dyed that great man of State, who still
entertained and dispatched so many businesses, Don Balthazar de Zuniga: he was
a great man, and Uncle to the Favorite, the Count de Oliuarez. Here will be
great miss of him, for his many good services: he it was, who was the chief
Commissioner for our King, in the treaty between the French Ambassador, and
the Deputies of the Grisons, about the Valtoline, which he concluded to the
great benefit of his Country.

From Madrill the same day.
Here is an order given out of his Majesty's command, for a great and general
contribution, to be taken by the poll; that is, every one must give a piece of
eight Reals (which is four shillings English) toward the wars in Holland,
and the charges which his Majesty has been at, for the Valtoline, and his
great Navy, lately set to sea, two or three several ways.

From Rome, October. 11.
The Viceroy of Naples has laid a new Imposition upon the Corn and Fruits:
which would amount to 80000. Crowns a year; which should be a treasury to
allay any sudden commotions, and to supply the King of Spaines present want of
new Coin: but for that those that were appointed to be the Collectors, have
refused such a thankelesse office, the Viceroy has sent Post into Spain, to
know the Kings resolution therein.

From Madrill.
We hear for certain, that the Count de Gondomar, late Ambassador in
England, shall return thither again the next Spring, but whether as ordinary
or extraordinary, is not yet known.

The same is confirmed by his own Letters in Enggland, as some Catholics say.

From Prague Septem. 29.
The Archisynagoga, or Governor of the Jewish Synagogue, who is called
Basseri, is lately come from Vienna, and arrived here, where he is received of
his Nation with great honor. For he having kept the Jews true to his
Imperial Majesty, all the time of these Bohemian troubles (the Jews better
affecting the Catholic Religion, then the reformed,) and having largely
contributed to the wars of the Emperor: his Majesty has now rewarded him
with a Chain of Gold, weighing one hundred Ducats, and with his own picture
to hang about his neck, with many other Imperial gifts, and many favors also
and new privileges to his Nation, both for their personal quiet, and the
freer exercise of their Religion. He coming near to this City with five
Coaches in his train, was met upon the way with diverse Jews, both on Horse
and Foot, who conducted him, with great triumph, (after their fashion) into
the Town, lodging him in their City. He was apparrelled after the Hungarian
fashion: His Cloak was of read Velvet, his Sword and Spurs gilded, and he
ware the aforesaid Chain about his neck, with the Emperors picture hanging
at it.

From Prague, Septem. 27.
The execution of the Bohemian Lords, is now better known to be made, for
these reasons; and these men have been, and are to be executed: First, those
that were present when the other Catholic Lords were thrown out at the
window, as they sat in Council together, about the putting out of the
Emperor, from being King of Bohemia. Secondly, all those that can be found, to
have been of confederacy with those that conspired against his Imperial
Majesty, and the House of Austria. Thirdly, those that were present at the
reiection of Ferdinand the Emperor. Fourthly, those that were present at the
election of the Elector Frederick Count Pallatine.

Fifthly, all those that served in the Camp before Vienna, when that it was
blockt up by the Count Mansfield, or afterward, either under the Prince of
Anholt, the Count Hollocke; or under any other his Imperial Majesty's Enemies
and Traitors: What the Issue of this will be, time will show.

By this last Article, many of the Inferior sort of Gentlemen, and the
Artificers also, are like to be brought in question, who were Soldiers against
the Emperor at his own doors, and there is much murmuring.

From Vienna, October. 5.
The Count of Schellenburgh; who is a Month since returned out of Turkey,
(seeing that the great Turk has revealed the conspirators against the
Emperor, who solicited him to aid them; many of whose names are to be seen
at their own Letters, which the great Turk also sent: He has submitted
himself and asked pardon of his Majesty: but was nevertheless committed to
prison, till he has revealed the rest of them that authorized him, to go
into Turkey, as their Ambassador. Whereupon every man almost fears himself at
Prague.

From Franckford, October. 14.
Here is arrived a Bauarian Commissioner in the name of his Imperial Majesty,
and his highness of Bauaria; his request is; That the Burgomaster of our
city, would permit him to leauy certain soldiers in our town and
thereabouts, for the Emperors service. And that they might likewise be
maintained at the charge of the Citizens, and be billetted in their houses
until the general muster. But the Burgomaster has excused himself, from
granting either of these requests. By this we see that the Emperor has some
other emploiment for them, for Monsieur Tilly thinks himself strong enough in
the Palatinate; and those that besieged Glatz, have long since and often
refused the aides of some thousands of Cossacks, who offered them their service.

From Franckford, October. 16.
Although it was written long since that those Cossaks and Crabats which were
rambled together about Oppenheim, and had passed the Rhine, being of horse and
foot about 7000. besides many women and children, were to go toward Silesia,
and had already passed on through the Landtgraue of Hessens and Darmstadts
countries, and so to the forest of Oldenwaeldt, where they were to go forwards
(as we then heard) yet it is since known that to the great grief of the
country thereabouts, they are there still staid: and for that the Princes of
the Empire are loath to have so many rude fellows, pass through their
countries, and for that the Emperor finds by experience of others of their
Nation, who went before, how he is like to be troubled with them: it is said
that they are to be sent into the low Countries; for that the Spanish army
has had there no good success, and is also much weakened in Brabant. Of which
last part of the news, it is said that the Prince, Archbishop Elector of
Cullen, had this word also sent to Hanaw, (where he then lay about October, in
his journey toward the Diet of Regenspurg) that these Cossacks were very
likely to be sent into Brabant, to reenforce the Spanish companies, which are
far more in the List then they are in the Polle.

From Prague, October. 11.
Those Cossacks which before made toward Silesia, having made great spoil in
that country are now fallen back again, with an intent (as it is thought) to
thrust themselves into the Principality of Glogau.

From Ladenburg in the Palatinate, October. 14.
The two brothers the Counts of Wiedt, are at great dissension, and daily
way-lay one another, so that all the passages hereabouts, are very dangerous to
pass; and especially for those merchants who staid late at Franckford Mart,
and are to travel this way.

From Mentz. October. 15.
There is likely to be very good Rhenish wine this Vintage which is now
begun; but it will be very scant, and exceeding dear.

Out of the Palatinate.
From hence we hear the same things confirmed which we wrote in our former
book printed November 5. concerning Manheim and Franckendale; which we will
not here repeat, for that we will not abuse you, by selling you one thing
twice.

From Cullen, October. 21.
The plague continues here very hot, for all the cold weather, there die 800,
a week in this city, besides those which die in the towns and villages
hereabouts.

From Stockholme in Sweden, September. 17.
The long wars between the Kings of Poland and Sweden, are for the present
ceased: for there is a truce taken for 10. months, of which the King of Sweden
having before written to his friends, is since this, safely returned to his
Castle of Stockholme.

From Danske, September. 30.
The King of Poland desired to have the Parel Church, where the Lutheranes
preached before, at his own disposing, purposing to place a Covent of Friars
in it. Their Council have met about it, and are to give an answer within 8.
days.

From Switz, October. 7.
The Archduke Leopoldus having since the Diet of Lindaw, lien very sick at
Rusach, begins now to recover.

From the Hage.
It was here somewhiles since reported, that the Duke Christian of Brunswicke
(he that has been that noble Champion and companion in arms with Count
Mansfield) with his mother the old Duchess of Brunswick, have been in the end
of this summer about leauying some forces for the King of Bohemiaes service.
But since we hear that there is a more general agreement, of the Northern
Protestant kings and Princes of Germany; and that the Kings of Denmark and
Sweden, the Duke Elector of Saxony, and the Marquess Elector of Brandenburgh,
the Duke of Brunswick, the Landtgraue of Hessen, and diverse others of their
Religion, are about to leauy a common army to reestate the Prince Elector
Palatine in his countries again: seeing that no foreign arms can do it so
conveniently; and besides the example so much concerns the liberty of
Germany, and the estates of the Princes of the Empire, that they begin to
think it is not safe for them to suffer a strange soldier to be brought into
Germany, which is contrary to the laws of the Empire in general, and
dangerous to the Princes in particular. The Marquess of Badens cause also, who
for taking part with the King of Bohemiah, is deprived of his upper Marquisate
by the Emperors judgment: is also taken into consideration.

From Amsterdam, October. 31.
It is here reported for certain; That the Prince the Duke of Brunswick, who
kept his Court at Wolfenbettle in the Land of Brunswick, is lately dead: So
that he dying without issue; the Dukedom is fallen to our Noble young Soldier,
Christian of Brunswick; who has by this gotten a Dukedom, after the loss of
his arm.

From Constantinople, September. 8.
The new Grand Signior Sultan Mustapha, prepares mightily for his intended
wars against the Persians, and they also, do all that they can to be ready
for him: The Turk has still (for the most part) been thus much before hand
with the Persian; that he has marched with his Armies to visit him in his
own Country, about Tauris or some other place. If any thing hinder this
Expedition, that he goes not now also home to him; it is for that there is a
great conspiracy of diverse Bashawes against their Emperor, there being an
hundred thousand men (as it is said) ready pressed by them against their
Sovereign. Thus Persia and Turkey (who bear the Sun and the Moon in their
Banners) are as like now as ever, to eclipse one another glory. Some say that
this present Sultan has been persuaded, to go visit the Tomb of their
Prophet Mahomet, at Meccha: and that he knows not handsomely how to return
to Constantinople, but that his simplicity is by the great Bashawes and
Beglerbegs made use of; that while they may rule all at home, he is sent a
Pilgrimage, Meccha being to him little better than an holy prison.

From Brussels, October. 7.
Her Highness the Archduchesse Infanta, with the rest of her Council,
considering the dishonor which hereby redounded to the Spanish party, that
after the ill success of the Army before Bergen up Zoome, so many soldiers,
even of the natural Spaniards and Italians, should run from their Colors, and
go serve the States her enemies, or else go for their own Countries; thought
good for the punishment of those, and the terror of others, that should dare to
attempt such an escape; to proscribe some fifteen of them by name, the Copy
of which proscription here follows, translated out of Low Dutch.

Isabella Clara Eugenia, by the Grace of God, Infanta of Spain, etc.

Whereas we understand that Stephano Prena Sergeant of a Band: Joan Paulo
Serin, Sergeant: Vasalo Sericho, Corporal: Damiano de Michele: Damiano
Lorenzo: Bartholomeo de Bastiano: Lucio San Piero: Bartholomeo Albano: Iosepho
Brocola: Siluio Romano: Vincentio Brilia: Nicolao Lombardo: Iacobo Lorano:
Giouanni Piolan, and Dominico de Valentin; are run over to the Enemy, and
have treated with them upon matters of treason, against the service of his
Majesty: We therefore declare and pronounce them to be Traitors; and do give
withal charge to all the Subjects of his Majesty, and to the Soldiers of his
Camp, to hold and take them for such; and that they do all their best
endeavor to kill them and deprive them of their lives. And whosoever shall so
do, in what place soever he can atchieue it, and shall have slain any of
them; shall give notice thereof to the Auditour general; who shall give order,
that a thousand Philips Dollars shall be paid unto him for such his service:
and moreover, if he be a Soldier, we will adnance him, and bestow the command
of a Footcompany upon him, of those of his own Nation. Declaring moreover,
that if any of them shall kill or make away one another, over and above the
foresaid recompense, We will pardon him his offense. And to the end that this
may come to the knowledge of every one of them, we have directed Peter
Puteanus, Counceller and Auditor general of the Camp, that he shall cause
this our commandment to be published in this Court, and in such other places,
where it shall seem most expedient.

Given at Bruxels the seventh of October 1622. Signed. A. Isabella.
By her Highness order, Matheo de Vrquina.
Imprinted at Bruxels, by Hubrecht Anthoon, sworn Booke-Printer of the Court,
1622.



The Copy of this Proclamation, the Hollanders have also gotten and Imprinted;
prefixing also a long Discourse, the Sum whereof is this. That this device
was taken for no other end, then by naming but fifteen only, to make the
Boores of their own Country believe, that there were no more that came away:
whereas the Iournals of Berghen affirm, that they came running by ten,
twenty, thirty or more at a time, out of the Camp, into the Town.

From Middleborough, October. 22.
NOt long before the Camp of the Prince of Orange brake up from Rossendale,
the Marquess Spinola sent a Trumpet to the Prince, with the Rittmaster,
(Captain of a horse troop) Abremon, to treat about keeping fair quarter on
both sides; whereas before there had been some violent disorders committed on
both parties, against the Law of Arms. Whereupon 15. committees were appointed
for each side, who met together at a village called Calmpthout between Bergen
up Zoome, and Antwerpe: on our side, there went among others, the Baron of
Sterkenburgh, and the noble Drossard Brochum. At first they could not well
agree, so that they were ready to depart: but at last the matter was brought to
this point, That an Earl being taken Prisoner should pay for his ransom
10000. Gilders, a Campemaster 1000. a Captain 600. a Leifetenant 150. an
Ancient, Sergeant, horseman and foot soldier, each accordingly to his pay.
Thus was it concluded at Calmpthout, October 16. 1622. and with this the
Committees returned to their Quarters.

From Amsterdam, October 27.
THE Spanish Forces lie still about the villages of Brabant, and some of them
have been seen about Venlo in Gelderland, which pass there over the bridge,
and it was said that more should follow them, but we have heard no more of
them, or that they intended any thing else, then to reenforce their Garrisons,
and especially to strengthen the town of Goch.

From Rossendale, October 19.
THE 15. of this month, there went some horsemen from hence, who fell upon a
Convoy of the enemies, consisting of 3. troop of horse, whereof they killed
one of the Captains, whose dead body with 27. prisoners they brought away with
them, the which day there went out a party of 80. of our horsemen to Herentall,
and passed through 180. of the enemies horse, and took 80. of them prisoners,
and brought away 33. of them, the rest ransomed themselves. There was the best
horse of Grobbendonces troop, called the Gens, taken, they have gotten 162.
Gilders by the sale of these horses.

The 17. day there were there sold 58. of the Enemies horse, with saddles,
bridles, and pistols, which were brought from little Brabant. These exploits
we give you upon the credit of their own Low Dutch news.

From Bergen up Zoome.
THE Count Mansfields Soldiers have caught the bootehalers which were sent out
by the Constable of Hertochen Bosche.

Our Soldiers have been nere the town of Liar, and have taken good prize and
prisoners, and amongst the rest, there was one old cruel man, called
Schapaetien, who had before caused many of our soldiers to be shot to death
when they were taken prisoners: this fellow was by our men served likewise. And
these things the Hollanders tell of the actions of their own men, but impart
nothing that should make for the honor of any of Spinolaes, of whose doings,
they suffer us to know little.

The order and raising of the Prince of Orenges Camp from Rossendale.
THE order of the Rising was this; There being many ships and boats in a
readiness to attend: There was first shipped the greatest pieces of Cannon, and
his Excellency with the small pieces of Cannon and some falconets marched
toward Oudenbergh, many hundreds of ships being there in a readiness, where
one part of our foot went aboard. In the mean time our horse stood ranged in
battle array, until the foot were shipped. After this, his Excellency being
accompanied with many Noblemen, Lords, Rittmasters, Captains and other
Cavalliers, marched to Breda: where having put all things in order, the most
part of our Cavalliery with his Excellency, and Prince Henry Van Nassaw, and
Count Ernestus of Nassaw, besides many other Noblemen and brave Warriors, with
the soldiers of Count Mansfield, were by his Excellency sent higher upwards,
and their Rendezvous was at St. Grauenwert, from whence it was thought, that
the horse might well and safely march, as far as into the Bishopric of
Cullen, and keep house there so ratime

The Camp rose upon Friday, and the Wednesday after, the Prince of Orange
returned to the Hagh, being bravely received by the four companyes of
Townsmen. This intelligence although it came something late to our hands, yet
we here give you it, for that it is a good orderly one, and relates many
particulars.

From Amsterdam, October 31.
THe Horsemen of the States one day amongst the rest, brought in a booty valued
at 6000. pound sterling: which made many of their fingers itch, to be doing
with the Spaniards also: But his Excellency says; that he will beat them well
enough, with lying still.

The King of Bohemia is safe returned to the Hagh, and the Duke of Brunswicke,
and Count Mansfield, took up Soldiers for Westphalia. The States also take up
Soldiers, for all it is toward winter.

From Berghen and Middleberough.
THe Marquess of Baden was arrived at the Hagh, before his Excellency came
thither; and so likewise was the King of Bohemia, and the Count Mansfield,
having consulted with the King of Bohemia, about some important business, and
knowing that his Soldiers were already marched upwards, took his leave of his
Majesty and the Queen, and went with all speed, together with the Marquess of
Baden, to the place where his Soldiers lay: and understanding of some
disorders committed by some of them, he punished them with the Strappado, and
other bodily punishments. He is since this marched upwards.

From Rossendale, October 23.
AFter all this, the Lords the States looking as well to the business of the
Spanish Fleet, as they have done to their Land Army, have taken up all the
ships (Merchants and others) that are fit to bear Ordnance, for their service.
And for the speeding of their fleet which they have put out to sea, they write
from Amsterdam, October. 31. That the ships of Holland have lately fought with 5.
Spanish Carricks, (being of those that went to Argire,) and beat them.

In London also the news is from Plimmoth, that in the end of October, The
Hollanders having 50. sail of ships about these Seas, have lately fought with
some of the Spanish Fleet; and with their shot so racked through one galleon,
that she being no longer able to live at Sea, put into harbor at Plimmouth,
which she had much ado to recover without sincking: and what work the rest of
the two Feets made one with another, we have not yet heard off.

From Amsterdam, October, 20.
WE hear also from sundry places, That the Hollanders have taken away the
Barrels and other Seamarkes, that the Spanish Fleet may have no direction to
find their havens, if they should offer to fall in with any of their coasts.

But now for the maintenance of this Land Army and great Fleet at Sea, they
have taken the same course, that the King of Spain has done in his dominions,
That is, they have laid a general Taxation by the polle: for man, woman and
child is to give a Gilder (that is 2. shillings English,) and the 500 penny
besides of his goods: so that he that is worth 500. pound, is to give 20
shillings toward the wars, which will amount to an inestimable sum of money,
for women, children, servants and all must pay it. Yea the very poor that
receive Alms also, for whom the Collectors must pay it, as it is said.

From Middlebrough, October. 26.
THE 20. of this month, there happened a most lamentable accident, by shipping
one Oxehead, and two Firkins of Gunpowder, and yet no certainty can be had how
it took fire: but so it is, that the fire taking it, as it lay upon the keye
side, ready to be carried a shipboard: It gave such a crack: that on both
sides of the haven, almost all the tyles of the houses, and the
glasse-windowes, were shaken down, and many things within the houses also,
thrown down and broken. Besides all this, some men, women and chlidren were
blown up into the air; so that in some places far and near from thence,
was found here an Arm, and there a Leg, here one head, and there another, and
in other places, hands, feet, Arms, Hearts, Gutts, Livers, and other parts of
men's bodies; and by it a man burnt to death. In fine, this was such a
lamentable spectacle to behold, and so fearful, that it cannot be well
expressed, It is a memorable warning to every man that is to deal with this
damnable Gun powder, to look to it well and warily.

Doctor Conradus Vorstius, a subtle Logician and Philosopher, one of the
Fathers and broachers of Arminianisme, being Professor of Divinity in the
school of Steinfurt, is lately deceased at Connighen.

FJNJS.

