CORANTE, OR, NEVVES FROM Italy, Germany, Hungaria, Polonia, France, and
Dutchland. 1621.
From Rome the 8. of July 1621.
THis week commandment is made to all the Cardinals, being together
Consistory, upon pain of excommunication, and to be punished in their bodies
and purses, to call in and prohibit all Printed and written Collections of the
Declarations, Decisions, and Interpretations of the Council of Trent, therein
comprehended also the Decisions of S. Prospero Farinacio, Printed for the same
matter.

The Letters of Naples mentioned, that a Register of all the parcels of money,
which the Duke of Ossana, during his government in the banks of St. Iacomo had
laid up, was by a Post sent to Spain.

The Viceroy is resolved to raise a new Toll upon the fruits, whereby the
City may pay the debts they are owing to the Cauallery and Foote-men, the
Battaglioni for keeping the Sea havens of the same Realm.

From Vianna the 28. of July 1621.
The last Letters from Vianna do declare, that the old Coun^ Thorn with 4000.
men, and all other things necessary, is arrived without any hinderance within
New h^usell, from whence since, he has made a great Sally into the Camp, and
has killed a great number of the Imperial, continuing to this present to do
the like day after day, bringing back with him, both Horses, Chariots, and
Soldiers into the said Fort. The other Hungarians likewise making daily
excursons round about the said Town, do much indamma^e it. The mean while
the Imperiallest joining together, do defend themselves the best they can,
having not had yet any means to batter the said Fort with the Cannon, albeit
they are very near 1200. strong.

The Hungarians have also taken 6. Ships laden with wines and victuals for the
Emperors Army, in the which now at last are arrived, the Commissaries or
Muster-Masters with pay for their Soldiers.

From Newheusell the 24. of July 1621.
Bethlem Gabor being in the field with 80000. Hungarians and Turks, has
according (as the common report went) driven the Imperiallest from Newheusell,
whereupon the Count Bucquoy, who was shot thorough the arm with a Musket,
retired himself 3. miles from thence, and his people died of diverse diseases.
The Emperor is rather to go toward Lints, then toward Prague, and there is
again great flying out of Hung^ria and Creasta, for that the people there are
put into great fears.

From Breslaw the 30. of July 1621.
In Silesta the Emperors affairs stand but upon bad terms, by reason that
the rude and bloody Execution at Prague, had brought the Country into a new
distrust and desperation, and therefore they held secret correspondence with
the King Frederick and Count Mansfield.

From Lynts in Morauia the 25. of July 1621.
After that the Baron Helmart George was carried prisoner to Lynts, Preaching
was forbidden, which had been continued in the Countries about Vianna, for
that there was confiscations made, and the Preachers expulsed.

In the interim was examined at Lynts the Lord Deptarenburgh, late Colonel of
the said Country, and afterward was led prisoner unto the Castle, the chief
Preacher of the said Country, and all his goods were seized on, without
declaring the cause, and then being arrived all the Imperial Friars, and it
being told them that the Emperor had discharged them of their Oaths, and that
thereupon they should take a new Oath to the Duke of Bauaria, that the States
of the Country should come thither the 14. of that instant.

From Prague the 26. of July 1621.
From Prague it is reported, that the Garrison of Marquis Iagendorpe at Plarz
did sally forth and defeated near Konningsgretz some new Companies of the
Emperor.

At Prague they had of late set at liberty the rest of the prisoners being
Counselors and Burgesses, except some which were yet to continue prisoners,
for that the Imperial Commissaries having dispatched their Commission there,
were to go to Mora^ia, for to perform the like execution upon the Lords that
were prisoners there.

Those of Tabor as yet hold out, expecting daily aid, because all passages are
shut up against them: the Marquis of Iagendorpe as yet having in all have
raised more forces, and having brought them under new Ensigns and Coronets,
and caused them to take their Oath to the King Frederick, his people are
retired again from Risenburgh to Glats, the mean while the young Count Thorn
is entered into the Dukedom of Teschen and Troppen, with 4000. Soldiers, and
is Master of the chiefest passages there, the Princes and States of Silesia,
there leuying new Forces there for the defense of their Country, and to send
to the frontiers of Poland.

From Amberg the 29. of July 1621.
The 2. Armies of Bauaria and Mansfield daily approach, the Count causing his
new Fort near Weithansen to be well fortified, and to accomodate his way
through the Wood to Bohemia, many think that he resolves to march with his
Army forthright to Prague. The mean^ while his people make diverse excursions
upon the Bauarians, bringing good booties, and causes his whole Army to
reproach more nearer unto the Woods of Bohemia. The troops of Weymer have done
great spoil under the Countries of the Langraue of Lutzenburgh, and when
certain Coronets of the Bauarian Horsemen approached to take notice of the
said Fort of Mansfield, they were not only chased away, but pursued into
Bohemia, and about 300. slain in the way, those of Count Mansfields returning
with certain Prisoners of store of Cattle, In the Army of the said Count
Mansfield was expected to come 3000. Soldiers from the Prince of Weymer.

From Ausburgh the 30. of July. 1621.
Also it is written from Ausburgh, that the Duke of Bauaria bad caused to come
to his Army the Horse-troopes of his Country, the Cloisters of Ausburgh are
also to send the Horses they promised, the said Army consists of 14000.
Foot, 3000. Horse, lies near the Bishop of Archstat, and had they not come
an hour to late, otherwise they had overthrown the 700. Mansfieldian horse,
which had done there so much hurt, and afterward returned to Amburgh they are
now resolved to go with his Army to the high Palatinat to do some exploits.

From Cullen the 27. of July. 1621.
They have already transported their Artillary and Chancery of the Town and
Castle of Cleeues to Emmeric^e for the more safety.

From Antwerpe the 1. of August. 1621.
Having intelligence from Antwerp that there are come from Genua, 45000. l. for
the payment of the Soldiers, the King will also send every month unto the last
of December, to the end the Soldiers want not then pay, in the mean time they
make also provision for the year to come.

From France the 2 of August. 1621.
Furthermore I heard from France that the King has changed the Magistrate and
has cashered all those of the pretended Religion, and ^ot in their place great
Papists being about to do thy same throughout all France.

These days past the Directors which are appointed for the erecting of the
affairs of the West India Company have caused to be published that all those
which desire to put in stock into the said Company there should declarr and
specify the sum and their particular names the said Directors would keep
their Session here at Amsterdam, and else where until the last day of
November next coming, and they have already good sums toward the same.

From the Hage the 3. of August. 1621.
Since my last Letter the States and his Excellency have published all their
Frontiers as well by Land as by Sea, may freely make excurstions upon the
Spaniard and his adherents, and that notwithstanding they keep good watch as
they do, and ours do daily get good booties.

The Elector of Brandenburgh does also now leuy forces both here and in the
Country of Cleeueland, viz. Two regiments of Foot, and certain Horse.

From Brussels the 4. of August. 1621.
Spinola's Soldiers especially the Italians do fly away more and more for
want of pay, so they come daily hither for a Pass and some small money for
their voyage.

From Brabant we here that Spinola through melancholy is fallen sick, for
that his hopes and affairs answered not his expectation, because at this
instant there must be a new supply of 10. or 12000. sent to the Emperor.

From Amsterdam the 4. of August. 1621.
At Amsterdam and in Zealand, are lately arrived 2. Ships from the East Indyes
richly laden, esteemed worth 24. Tonnes of Gold, there being also arrived a
Ship from Genua with 400. l. weight of Gold besides other Marchandizes.

A particular Letter from Vienna certifying the Death of Bucquoy the 28. of
July, 1621.
THe General Count Bucquoy, being ^one with many of his best Captains and
400. men. to view the Fortress of Newheusell to see if be could get any
advantage on them, was by the Hungarians surprised and enclosed before he could
be rescued, and at last (his Horse being shot under him, and having defended
himself valiantly with his Pistol and Sword, till he was wounded in 16.
places of his body) was there slain with some of big chiefest Officers and
about a 100. of his Soldiers and amongst them an Italian Prince Torquat Conte,
with some others chiefest of the Nobility, were taken Prisoners His dead body
is carried away by ours and thus this valiant Captain lost his life and dyed
courageously, being much complained. The 14 companies of Horse, that came to
his outset, were by 3000. Hungarians set and driven back, whereby he could not
be rescued. At this time the Lord Rudolph van Diepenbach has the commaundment,
but the Wallons will not be ruled by him, and thereupon the chief Commander of
Staadien is yesterday departed hence with money, and many Posts are sent forth
again, perhaps to procure another General. The speech goes that the Archduke
Leopoldus should take upon him the general Government if peace may be
concluded in Vettolina.

The Army is after this retired back, and gone to Presburgh, The Emperors
Majesty after this loss has sent to Merauia a general pardon for those that
were in Prisons.


From Collen the 28. of July 1621.
Some few days past, there came to Collen a holy Italian Friar of the
Woldoenders order of the Cormelites, whom the common people judges to be a
Prophet, because that he had foretold the victory of the Emperor against the
King of Bohemia, and obtained it by his foruent prayers. He is here received
with so great deustion, that it is almost impossible to relate it, because that
thorough the great press of people, he could not get with his Horse-litter
through the streets of the City, whereupon some rubbed their Beads to his
garments, others cut some small pieces at his holy Cowle, and he that might
kiss his hand, esteemed himself most happy. In summa, all those that were
creeple, deaf, blind, dumb, and diseased, came running to him, who in time
may yet be cured. Our Elector, having knowledge of his arrival, came suddenly
to him, who with great intreatings got the staff of the holy man.

Imprinted at the Hage by Adrian Clarke, the 10. of August. 1621.


