CORANTE, OR, NEVVES FROM Italy, Germany, Hungary, Poland, Bohemia and
France. 1621.
From Venice the 1. of July 1621.
HEre the longer the more, preparation is made for wars.

There was a Commission sent to Naples, and from thence to be sent to Millane,
which is a bad token that Valtolina shall be restored.

It is written from Turnio, that the Duke thereof has mustred all his
Horsemen, and the greatest part of his Foote-men at Miraflores, and has sent
them to Cutri and Zenda, to what intent it is not known.

Letters from Genouo certify that in the Sea by Corsica: There are 8. Turkish
Ships that do great hurt, and from Bergamo it is written, That the
Prouediteur Contarini has sent men into Martinengo, whether most of the
Commanders, besides 6000. Foot and 2000. Horsemen are already come, it is
thought they will fortify Romano, or some other places upon the frontiers.

To Millane there are 500. crowns come by Letters of Exchange, and there are
4. Companies of Soldiers sent to Valtelnia.

The Duke of Sauoy has committed the government wholly to his son, and only
reserved the ordering of the wars unto himself.

From Vianna the 29 of June 1621.
The 18. of this month, this Emperors Majesty with a great household train
rod to Sell, and in the morning betimes, before he departed, the Denmark
Ambassadors took their leaves, and went from hence, but have done nothing in
the Palsgraues behalf.

The General Bucquoy lies still before Newheusel, and makes strong sconces
about it: Those of Diepenbach have cut down the Milles, and those that are
besieged expect 8000. men to relieve them, they issue out daily. Bethlem Gabor
is yet at Cascow, staying for the Turkish help.

The Earl of Colalde is yet with his Army at Regnitz upon the Budianers
Country There is Hongarian help come unto them, and thereby they encountered
together, and fought, in which fight there are many on both sides slain, the
certainety whereof is daily expected.

The 19. of this month, the Lord Helmhert Georg, was carried prisoner from
hence, to the Duke of B^uaria, and there are also 9. persons of good quality
chosen here out of 16. men to be examined, and are committed prisoners.

The news continues, that the Marquis of Iagersdorp has the Princely Castle
of Neusz, and has taken the three Princely Officers and the Counsel into his
security, that there are men taken up openly in Neusz for Bethlem Gabor, and
there is a thousand Ritters, and 1000. Muskatieres already entertained, and
that the Colonel Lohuysen has brought 30 thousand Ducats from Bethlem to
Neusz, to take up more Soldiers.

From Vianna the 30 of June 1621.
From Comorra Letters of the 19. certify, that Bucquoy, Maximilian van
Lichtensteyn, and the Lord Diepenbach, with 40. Horsemen went out of the Camp
before Newheusel, and were by the Hongarians that lay in the Woods set upon and
enclosed on all sides, so that none of them could escape away but he was
taken, so that of them there is 18 of the principallest persons slain, and
those in Newheusel do great hurt unto our side.

From Prague the 29 of June 1620.
After the Emperors Commissioners had examined the prisoners here, this
rigorous sentence was pronounced against them, and sent unto the Emperor.

A Register of the imprisoned Directors and others Sentence publicly
proclaimed in Prague the 19. of June, 1621.
1. Chief Landhoof Master.
William Poppel of Lobkowitz condemned to forfait life, honor, and goods, and
to be beheaded, but by grace showed him by the Emperor, he is condemned to
perpetual imprisonment.

2 Paul Ritschen condemned as before, Chief Chancellor
but favored also as before.

3 Ioachim Andreas Schlick condemned to have his right hand cut off, to be
quartered, Burggraue of Carlesteyn.
and his quarters hanged in four places in the Streets, his head to be set
upon the Bridge Tower, but grace being showed him, he is to have his right
hand and his head cut off, and set upon the Tower.

4 Wentzel van Budowith condemned to have his right hand, and his head to be
cut off, and quartered, his quarters to hang in the Streets, but grace being
showed him, he is to have his head cut off, and set upon the Tower, and his
goods confiscate.

5 Christopher Harrand condemned to lose his life and goods, and to be
beheaded. President of the Bohemian Chamber. Chief Secretary of the land.
Under Chamber- r lain. Old Burgraue of Carlestone


6 Casoer Capler, a man of 80 years old, condemned to lose life and good, to
have his head cut off, and his body quartered, but grace being given him, he
must only have his head cut off, and set upon the Tower.

7 Procop Dihowfetzky, condemned to lose life and goods, to have his head cut
off, and set on the Tower.

8 Bobuflaw Michalowitzsch, to forfait life and goods, with the Sword to have
his head cut off, and his body quartered: but grace offered his head only to
be cut off, and set on the Tower.

9 Frederick Buchlau, to have his head cut off, his body quartered, and to be
hanged in the Streets, but grace offered him, he is to have his head only cut
off, and set on the Tower, and his goods confiscate.

10 Otto van Loss, quartered alive, and his body hanged up, his head set on the
Tower, but grace showed, his head only is to be cut off, and set upon the
Tower, and his goods confiscate.

11 Hans Westrowetz, to be executed with the Sword, and his goods confiscate,
but grace offered, he is condemned to perpetual imprisonment.

12 Felix Wentzel, Pieto Petzschky, body and goods lost, to be beheaded, but
grace offered, the execution is suspended.

13 Dionisius Escherin, Castle Hoffman body and goods forfaited, his two first
fingers and his head to be cut off, and cast down into the Castle ditch, but
grace offered, his head shall be cut off, and his goods confiscate.

14 Wolfgang Haslawer sent to Raab in the frontier house.

15 Wilhelm Coningh Clunisby life and goods lost, to have his head cut off, but
his wife shall have the goods that she brought restored unto her.

16 Valentin Cochan goods forfaited, his head cut off, and set on the Tower.

17 Theodorus Sixts goods forfaited, but he is to remain in prison.

18 Tobias Steffegh, to have his head cut off, and set on the Tower, his goods
confiscate.

19 Christoph Keber as aforesaid.

20 Johan Schultheitz van Katenbergh, beheaded, and set upon the Tower, his
goods confiscate.

21 Maximiliaen Hoshalig primas van Satz, as aforesaid.

22 John Iessenius Doctor his tongue cut out, quartered alive, but grace given
him, he is first to have his tongue cut out, then his head cut off, and his
body quartered, and the quarters hanged before the gallows gate, and his head
set upon the Tower.

23 George Hauenschilt, beheaded, the right hand cut off, and both set upon the
Tower, his goods confiscate.

24 Leander Ruppel, as aforesaid, but grace offered his head is pardoned, and
his hand is to be naild in the counsel House of the old Town.

25 Hans Kuttenaver, to be hanged by a cord out of the window in the counsel
House of the old Town, his goods confiscated.

26 Simon Ruszschizky, as aforesaid.

27 Nathanael Wodinantzky, hanged on the gallows, his goods confiscate.

28 George Sabiota, banished for ever out of the land, but grace offered the
execution is stayed and he rem^^nes prisoner.

29 Melchior Tunprecht, banished out of the land, but grace offered, he is to
lie a year in Irons, and to be sent to Raab.

30 Wentzel Washarky, his goods lost, and his head cut off.

31 Paul Pritzka, condemned to be prisoner a year.

32 Nicholas Altzstatter Raetsdiener, his tongue cut off, and naild upon the
gallows, and after sent to be kept in Irons at Raab, but grace offered, his
tongue to be nailed upon the gallows, an hour long, and then to be sent
perpetual prisoner to Raab.

33 D Borbanus his goods forfeited, and his head cut off, but grace offered he
continewes perpetual prisoner.

34 Gasper Casler, his goods lost, he must be hanged out of the counsel House
in the new Town, but upon grace it is referred to a further time, and he must
remain prisoner.

35 Elias Rossin the elder, his goods confiscate, and his head to be cut off,
but grace offered, he shall stand in person till further Commission.

36 Hendrich Bock, shall be hanged out at the counsel House in the new Town,
his goods confiscate, but is stayed in person till further order taken.

37 Lucas Carbam behead, his goods confiscate.

38 Elias Kalzaver beheaded, his goods confiscate.

39 Joseph Cubin. whipped and banished for ever.

40 Hans Sirela and whipped and banished for ever.

41 Nieen Heeren Dienaer whipped and banished for ever.

42 George Setzitzky, beheaded, his goods confiscate.

43 Michael Wedman, as aforesaid.

44 Simon Wakatsch, as aforesaid.

45 John Cammaret banished a year out of the land.

The Lords, Princes, and States of Silecia having paid and discharged their
Soldiers: The Marquis of Iagersdorp has entertained the most part of them in
his service, he has besieged Neusz and other Bishops Towns as also the
Earldom of Glatz, and after that entered into Behemia with ten thousand men,
with whom also four thousand peasants have joined, upon Coning-Greetzer
Creitz: and now they are in Smirsisky borders; and has already taken some
Towns as Reisenberch, Castlitz and others where the Colonel of S^xon, with his
seven company of Ritters, and the Valstenie Soldiers are appointed to meet
with the Margraue and to resist him, whose Soldiers run over all the
Country, and kill all they meet: whereupon it is feared that the Earl of
Mansfield will join with the said Marquis.

Colonel Frenck is suffered to enter into Tabor upon condition, whereunto he is
bound, to defend the same to the last man; and therefore Don Balthazar does
little, having lost a great many men before it already.

Here there is great grief and sorrow made because of the (...) Execution,
and six women are already dead of grief, for their husbands Execution.

At Brin and Olmitz in Morauia; there shall also 20. principal persons be
execrated: to morrow the Scaffolds shall be pulled down again in the old Town.

From Welis the 2. of July, 1621.
The Lord Helmhaert George, is brought into Lintz, where also other Lords are
attached, and other lands Heren of the principalest persons, are noted and set
down of what religion they are; for that upon the 9. of July: the feoffment of
the whole Country, over the Eus shall be made to the Duke of Bauaria,
whereupon there is nothing to be expected but a whole reformation.

From Lintz the 2. of July, 1621.
The 21. of this month, the Lord Eras^nus of Starrenberch, as also the next
day, after the former Laner. Hofman Sigismund, Lodowicke van Palheim, was
brought prisoner, as also Here Helmaert George, who is the richest Lord in
these Countries, also brought prisoner hither; as also Here Christophel Bucher,
and others also shall follow, and the Duke of Bauaria has taken a note of the
Imperial Officers in the land, that upon the 29. of this month, there shall
be at his enfeoffment, upon pain of 28000 Florins, and then he will leave
this Country.

From Weidhuysen the 9 of July, 1621.
Here in the Villages bordering upon the Bohemian frontiers the Earl of
Mansfields army is freely quartered: The enemy daily shows himself out of
our sconses, that gave many blind Alarums, until they fall to it earnestly.

Yesterday the Prince of Wiimaren with 1400. foot and 6. Cornets of horse came
to us, and there is yet a fair sconse by our men, made upon the frontiers of
Bohemia against the enemy, and every Soldier that works there on, has 3.
Batsers given them besides meat and drink, when the sconse is ready, we shall
see what will be done; specially when all our men are come together, as already
again there are 7. Cornets of horsemen with whom Captain Paap at Ambergh,
being ordained to join; there enterprise is ^yet secret, the Soldiers are put
in good comfort, but have no money, the want of that makes the time long.

There is news out of Constantinople: That the great Turk, is marched forward,
and has caused a great sum of money, to be carried with him in his Army, in
Sultanes and Asperi, about 400 Tons of gold, he has with him 300. great
pieces of Ordinances, and a great Army.

O^t of Polonia it is written, that the great Turks Army marches forward,
and that he has already sent 80. pieces of great Ordinances over the River of
Donau; it is said that he means not, to invade Poland, but rather to enter
into Hungaria.

By letters of the first of July, from Roane it is certified, that there is an
agreement made by between the King and those of the Religion; that the Town of
S. John de Angely, should yield unto the King, upon condition that the
Soldiers should go out with bag and baggage, and matches burning, that the
governor Subise, should be made governor of Samue: Peter Armout a Jesuit
confessor to the King, has absented himself from the Army, and is gone from
it.

At Stockeholm there is a rickes day to be holden, where the King of Swethland,
will be present: what will ensue thereof, we know not.

Printed at Amstelredam by Broer Ionson, Corranter to his Excellency, the 20.
of July.


