News from the Low Countries, or a Courant out of Bohemia, Poland, Germany,
etc.
From Crakow in Poland. July 4.
THe Polonians have begun to war with the Turks, and the new General
Kotkwits is gone with the whole army to Podolia: the report goes, that they
have had an hot skirmish with the Turks.

The 24 of July we had here a general Assembly, who made a new taxation.

From Caschaw. Iul 6.
At Nustermts two mile from hence, Bethlem Gabor with the Turks and Tartarians
fell upon those Hungarians which belong to the Emperor, and made a great
slaughter of them. Posniak Thomas lost 400 men, and Steven Palfi which led 700
Husars, and 300 footmen was with his Ensigne-bearer run thorough with a lance
of his Husars, there escaped but 200. and of his footmen a very few. In like
manner Howetferent which commanded 700 free booters, came off with no more then
200. the rest being all slain, and Nicholas Bele^ which with three cornets of
horsemen went to help Bucquoy: was taken and brought to Newheusell, and of
three cornets of horse, there escaped but 25.

And now Bethlem Gabor marching forward with a great power of Turks and
Tartars, many Towns, as the Berghstats and Villek, are yielded up unto him.

From Weenen. Iul 17.
This evening Bucquoys body shall be brought hither, many of his principal
Officers and Gentlemen were slain with him and taken, and great spoils go^en
by the enemy. Maximilian of Luhtensteene and Dieffenbach is in his place till
another General be appointed.

His Majesty has sent unto Munchen in Bauaria and other places, to get aid
wherewith to reenforce his army. As often as those of Newheusell do take any
Spaniards and Italians, they sell them unto the Turks, but they let the Dutch
men have quarter.

From Prague. Iul 16.
The Duke of Luhtensteene presented 4000 men unto the use of his Imperial
Majesty: here is great want of armor in this place. It is credily reported
that the Grave van Mansvelt is above 20000 strong, and that folk do daily
repair unto him.

From Winterhuysen. Iul 18.
In the last victory that we had over the Bauarians, we burnt the town of
Sitigfur, and chased the Bauarians: but the 16 of this month the enemy got
upon a certain hill about half a mile from hence, whereupon the Geall
Mansfield with 20 cornets of horsemen and five regiments of foot marched
thither to join full battle with him; but the enemy that they might not join
battle, stopped the passages: but about eight of the clock the musketeers met
and skirmished till the evening. The enemy being put to the worse, lost great
spoils and many men, among whom was the Commander Baur, with many other
Captains and horsemen.

The Lord General has encamped near unto the Schans: men repair unto him
very fast every day: the Princes are shortly to come together to make an
agreement about some things. Monsieur Tilli is come half way and so is the
Grave of Solms too. The enemy sent a Trumpetter unto us to request a truce for
four weeks, but the Lord General granted it for four days, and so it
remains.

From Frankeford Iul 24.
It is certified unto us from Weenen that the Count Bucouoy with 80 horsemen,
amongst whom were many of his most principal officers going to take a view of
a certain Schans near unto Newheusell, was environed by the Hungarians who
slew him and most of his men: his body being thrust thorough with a lance, was
carried into his camp.

Thereupon they of Newheusell set upon the Emperors Legher with all their
might, and slew about two thousand men.

And Bethlem Gabors men being upon the frontiers of Morauia, burnt the town of
Olmits.

Moreover, that the Emperor had sent a general pardon into Morauia, whereupon
all the prisoners were set a liberty again.

It is further signified unto us out of Silesia, that the Marc-graue of
lagheren dorpe is sixteen thousand strong, at the charges of the Clergy, and
has besieged certain towns in Bohemia to keep the country in awe.

The truce in the Palatinate continues till the fourth of August, in the mean
time the countrymen are very much oppressed by the Spanish garrisons, who will
not suffer them to mow their corn without giving them much money, whereby the
fruits of the earth are spoiled, and the countrymen run away.

The Spaniards do fortify themselves exceedingly: many Dutch Lords being
joined unto them, which do make great preparation for war; what the issue
will be, the time will manifest. The soldiers in the Palatinate are for the
most part marched to the Earl of Mansfield, who lies by Withensell, having a
very great army.

From Eger. July 20.
On Friday last the body of the Lord Baur which was slain by Mansfield in the
fight before mentioned, was brought hither from the Bauarian Legher, and
embalmed, and from hence was by a conuoy of 30 horsemen sent toward
Wietsburgh: but about a mile from hence they were set upon by two cornets of
Mansfields horsemen and a hundred musketeers, who brought them unto Waltsaxen
with a good booty also. Here are skirmishings almost every day between
Mansfields men and the Bauarians who are always put to the worse.

From Colen. Iul 27.
The ship of war which lately sailed by, lies not far from the Schans of
Papen-Muts, for what purpose she lies there, is yet vnvnknowne.

Here both parties begin to set upon each other, for not long since two
Capisaines with certain horsemen were taken: and the repo^t goes, that the
Governors have received commandment to join battle with the enemy, and to
slay him or take him captive.

All things are quiet in these quarters, men know not yet whether there shall
be peace or war, but it will be known within few days, and then the corn
shall be brought out of the fields with as much speed as may be.

The Governor Pithen of Gulick has written to Grave Hendrick vanden Berg to
retain his horsemen, to the end that his soldiers of horse and foot might
have the freer passage, which if he does, no man sustaining hurt or damage, he
will do the like for Grave Hendricks horsemen.

We understand from Brussels that the Infanta is not gone into the Cloister,
but is detained by Pater Dominico: the Marquis would have that she should
remain in government till the 17 Provinces are given to the dowry, whereby
they might govern and hold the land in good peace and unity, as they were
left by the Arch Duke. Therefore there is a post sent into Spain for to know
the Kings resolution. Some do think that Don Carlo his Majesty's brother
shall be sent to take the government.

They say that those of Rochell have taken or spoiled 50 French ships; and that
the General of the Popes Galleys has taken a Turkish Pirates ship, and made
35 Turks slaves.

It is further signified from Venice that three men were lately taken and
executed, which attempted to fire the ships in the harbor.

Printed at Amsterdam by Ioris Veseler. August. 9. anno Dom. 1621.


