THE TRVE RELATION OF THAT WORTHY SEA FIGHT, WHICH two of the East Jndia
Ships, had with 4. Portingals, of great force and burden, in the Persian
Gulf.

WITH THE LAMENTABLE Death of Captain Andrew Shilling.

WITH OTHER MEMORABLE ACCIDENTS, IN THAT Voyage.

Printed this 2. of July.

LONDON Printed by I. D. for Nathaniel Newbery and William Sheffard, and are to
be sold in Pope's Head Alley. 1622.

-- Tibi crescit omne
Et quod occasus videt, and quod ortus,
Parce venturis, tibi mors paramur,
Sis licet sequis, properamus ipsi:
Prima quae vitam dedit hora, carpsit:
Seneca in Hercul: fuerent.
THE LAMENTABLE DEATH OF CAPTAIN Andrew Shilling, who was slain by the
Portingals, in the Persian Gulf.
I Will neither talk of the Roman glory, nor the Roman Virtues, which made
that glory so translucent to the lookers on; but how? by commemoration of
hystory, and publication of their worthiness to the world, which was apparent
in nothing more, then the rewarding of well deserving men, or remembering them
to posterity by some relation, or other; thus at this day is the Common Wealth
of Venice, famosed for observing the rules of Ahashuerosh, in keeping the
custom of attention to his own Chronicles, and then making a stop at
Mordechaies saving his life, asking what had been done to the man of so great
deserving, and when answer was made nothing (oh blessed be those times,
wherein Princes will demand such questions, and Courtiers be so honest to tell
the truth) you know what followed? and my heart leaps for joy to see the
Emperor so gracious: From hence other Commonwealths have, or should have such
Registers, as a man by Alphabet may find out the memorable actions of others
employed in their Countries service, or such Antiquaries as shall expose the
Noble Achieuments of heroijck spirits in what kind so ever. As for their
interposition? that would have none, but men of Honor, and great Captains
nominated, I am sodden in my question, how came they to be so Honorable? but
from humbled Ancestors, and poor beginnings? and all from the advancement and
donation of Maiestick Princes?

Oh God? he, that saw the Danow, and the vast mouth of Hister, gaping upon the
black Sea: he that looked upon Nilus seven gates opening themselves upon the
Mediterranean Sea: He that follows the Rhine in his triple division, and
braving the Ocean with his streams, and also saw the weak swellings under the
Alps, or trickling drops come out of the Hills, would wonder at the progress
of these Rivers, and stand amazed to conceive, that such poor springs should
increase to such huge streams: thus fares it with men of good deserving, the
more mean, and obscure, the more glory and honor to make their virtue extend
so far, as true notice and memory of their actions, or to stepp out of the
common tract of drudging and despised poverty, to take braver steps toward
renown, and riches.

Therefore I embrace Master Hacklife for his voyages: the Travelers of our
time for their iournals: the Chronologers for their inventories: the writers of
Story, for their records of memorable men, and all the lovers of their Country
for attempting some exploit, or other without insulting, or ostentation: and
yet remarkable to future ages: yea I protest, I thank him: that set out the
discourses of the Jacob and Exchange of Bristow, with their Masters and Sailors
who performed wonders, ere they could bring the ships into England: and all
others, that are so touched with truth and desire not to let pass worthy
accidents, that they will publish honest discourses, which shall afford
example, or precept to idle sluggish men to be rowsed up, and take more
cheerful courses to do themselves, and country good.

I could name many things of wonder, and other men of worth: but that I
determine no such heaps, nor to raise a poor Pamphlet, to such an height,
that Envies fingers shall attempt to pull it down to rubbish, or raging feet
presume to trample it to dirt: I will now only speak of a man, of whom I am
acquainted with nothing but his valor, and skill in his profession, yea I am
so impartial, that not knowing any friend, or kindred belonging unto him, I
will yet out of mere affection to virtue, and desire to work upon the
governors of Factories, importune them to remember the living with reward, and
the dead by recompencing their widows, and children; and entreat others to
endeavor the immitation of well deservers, and make use of Themistocles
schollership, who was so inflamed with the Trophes of Miltiades, that he never
desisted, till he had got the reputation of a great Captain.

This Andrew Shilling, of whom I would speak, and am affrayd I shall not
speak sufficiently, came from all the degrees of Navall employment to be
master of a ship, yea, of many ships, till at last in the time of Sir Thomas
Glover, whom master Clarke brought over with his Lady to Constantinople, he
arrived there himself with a ship called the Angel, which he commanded, as
master Tiler did the Dragon. There was also master Bradshaw at Aleppo,
Captain King at Xante, and many other well deserving men at Scio, Smirna, and
all the ports of the Levant and Arches. But Shilling (without impeachment of the
credit of others (was so liked and looked upon with the judicious eyes of the
East India Company, that they employed him thither, and he employed himself so
well, and so honestly, that he dispatched his business, and came with Sir
Thomas Roe (who had been Ambassador to the great Mogull) into England. But
see, what it is to thrive? the Merchants mooving in their proper elements for
obtaining of wealth, and having had some passages of discontentments with
former Captains, thought it not befitting to be further molested, and
therefore once again made choice of master Shilling to go another voyage, to
which (after his accounts were rendered) he so addressed himself, that he
scarce tarried 6 weeks, but undertook the business. And in a ship, called the
London, was appointed Admiral of that Fleet; the Vice Admiral was the Heart:
There were also two other ships in the company, the Eagle and the Roe-buck, all
of great burden, and daringly able to encounter with a far greater number.

Thus shall honest men be employed, and virtue can not be poor, so that
whether it was their judgment, and good husbandry, or his wisdom and care to
take hold of opportunities fore-top, he thought his time well bestowed in
growing rich, and they thought their choice very happy to make him rich, and
so upon reciprocal agreement, he took the Seas for Zarret in the East Indies
in the next ships, that were ready after Sir Thomas Roe came into England: and
after many changes, and variety of Accidents, boisterous Seas, and mounting
billows, fearful storms, and some wants, he attained the desired harbor,
had not an undesired mischance flung him down into the harbor of death: For
he perished in the Sea by slaughter, which was the more lamentable, because by
his valor and directions his Company were victors, and both brought their
ships to take in their lading at other places, and brought them without loss
into England; but that they counted the loss of Shilling to exceed half the
benefit in their best fraighted ship: but how this came to pass? if you will
give me leave to write out a worthy man's Letter, I will not leave you, till you
understand as much as my self.

After a long and tedious passage by the Islands, watring places, and Cape, we
discovered diverse ships, some for the West, some for the South, and many, both
Flemmings and others for their Country: those which were remote we never
attended, such as came within kenning had friendly salutations, and many times
when we encountered with some friends, extraordinary gusts, and foggy mists did
divide us, which being usual, and the common effect of long iourneyes, we
neither wondered at the same, nor tarried for further encombrances: but came in
convenient time to S. Laurence, and from thence keeping the common road, we
arrived happily at Zaretta, and yet I cannot call it so, because of some
disastrous mischief which happened unto us, and although it was a common thing
to encounter with daily mischances, from tempests, enemies, and Pirates, which
were all as easily passed over, as suddenly came upon us: yet at this time our
loss and grief was the greater, because we had not only a wealthy ship in our
possession, but a valiant Captain to manage our affairs, both which we lost
to our great discomforts, when the malignity of time was overcome with
industry, and our enemies departed from us beaten and discomfited.

Know then, that we have not had long trade in Persia, till of late sending
every year a ship, we acquainted our selves with the inhabitants of Iasques in
the Persian Gulf, and so proceeded with them in orderly traffic, both to
their satisfaction, and enriching our Merchants, which when the Portingalis
understood, they contrived by all possible means to intercept our iorneyes,
which they performed both by secret plots, and conspiracy, and open force, and
defiances. Concerning the plots they inferred many things against us to the
people, and kindled a kind of reciprocal jealousy between us: they enticed
us ashore, under color of viewing stuffs, and commodities, and then surprised
us, taking many prisoners by diverse sleights, and using us unkindly, when they
had us under subjection. Concerning their force and power, they always had
five or six great Gallions, and ships of war belonging to Spain, and
employed for the security of these places, and at this instant, had four well
appointed ships in readiness, who lay watching for our Merchant, as a Hawke
houering over the prey, and so resolved to take it, whosoever it was: all which
was considered of us in our passage, so that when we were within 40, or 50.
leagues of Zarret a Council of war was called, and Andrew Shilling being our
Admiral, and Commander of our small Fleet, concluded to send the Heart being
Vice Admiral, and the Eagle to Iasques in Persia, and so according to our
ceremonies, they took their leave of us, before we came to Zarret, and we
went directly to harbor, where we might have been welcomed with all the
comforts of friendly greetings, had not the Merchants understood, what we had
done, but apprehensiue of the danger, they would not suffer us to land, but
sent us presently after the other to assist them: for they knew, they should
be fought with all, if not over-set: it was not our turns to dispute, nor had
we any other part to play but obedience, and so we put to Sea again, taking a
course to follow our ships.

But we had not been two days under sail, before we encountered a Portingall
of 300. tun, which at first made good semblance of opposition, till wearied
with our shot, and beaten with a broad side, she yielded her self, and we
took possession of her: her Merchandise was but Raisons, and Dates, and forty
two Arabian horses: yet were they worth store of money, and might have made us
a saving journey.

This shipp we carried along with us thus fraighted, and sailed a fortnight
without any impeachment, or adventure, till at last by Gods eternal
providence, we met our two ships returning home again to Zarret, as not able
to encounter with the Portingals, whose strength and preparation they reported
extraordinary: But the truth is, they were very rich themselves, and loath to
loose al by any misadventure, which they might escape, and not wilfully run
into: and yet I must confess, they had many motives to fight with them, and
daring hearts to the encounter: For all their great burden, and preparation,
well? they did not? but returned (as I said) and met us at Sea, discoursing at
large of the matter, and describing the manner of the Enemies watches, and how
bravely and warlike they were appointed: When Andrew Shilling had heard them
out, and apprehended the utmost peril, he resolved to try his Fortune, and
set upon them, proiecting, that if the worst came, the Portingall ship formerly
taken, should be fiered, and thrust to them, which when some interposed, as
pitying the loss of so many brave horses, he as bravely replied, how do they
then in the wars, when they are compelled to kill their prisoners in cold
blood, and therefore think neither of scruple, or nicety, but let us follow
the business, we take in hand.

Thus we concluded to fight, and so befitting our selves, approached them on the
harbor of Iasques on a satterday, being about the 17. of December 1620 and
within eight days of Christmas: and so without more ado we came up with them,
and to them, but the wind being contrary, we could not fight with them in
harbor, nor they durst not stir as we imagined, whereupon we desisted for
that time, and woond our selves away, as if we meant not to fight at all, which
questionles did much animate them, and made them suppose, that our former
desisting and recoyling arose out of suspicion of their greatness, and power;
For the next day being Sunday, they came out of the road, and in a braving and
daring manner invited us to an encounter, which we entertained with many Navall
ceremonies, and putting out our colors of defiance, with the adorning our
ships to answer their proportion of Gallantnesse, we made a brave show, as if
we meant to intertaine death and slaughter with mirth and iollitie.

In a word, the Drums and Trumpets summon us, and we went cheerfully to the
business: Our fight began at eight of the clock in the morning, and continued
to night, when the darkness took either pity upon us, or by way of opposition
stomached our light: For many times we made fire works, and shot flaming
arrows into their ships, we also threw burning balls, and sent cases full of
stones, which killed their men without mercy: we also shot off their Admiralls
rudder, that they were enforest to come to Anchor, and repair their losses,
which as it should seem were very great, and so the fight continued fearfully
between us.

In a word, such was the terror and dangerous encounter, that although Captain
Shilling our Admiral with all the good words, and better actions, which
belonged to a principal commander, still comforted us, and as far as men
might conjecture, warranted our prevailing at this time: yet Captain Best his
son, whom they call General in the East Indies, taking hold of our first
determination to set fire on the Portingall in our possession, with the horses,
put it presently in practice, when there was neither reason nor cause, and when
he was furthest from all peril, and mischief: as we thought we had indeed
fitted and appointed her to fire, but how? in case of necessity, which as yet
came not upon us, nor was there any likelihood more then the chance of
encounters, and fortune of war to desparire of prevailing. Well; he took out
as many things as he thought convenient, leaving most part of the Dates and
Raisons in her, and leaving us in kind of confusion to see so many goodly
horses perish in the raging Sea, and so to all our griefs she was fired, and
thrust up to strike amongst the Portingalls, with supposition either to destroy
them, or dissipate them: But alas all was in vain, for either the business was
ill managed, or the Wind slacked her course, or something or other was amiss;
for she went not forward, but perished in her flames and combustion before us
all, effecting no more good, then a general casting up the account of the
Accident, whereunto life is subject, and a particular examination of our own
estates, which might be subject to the same inconveniences. But to go forward.

I must needs confess that if it had pleased the Captain, seeing he was so
resolved, he might have come nearer and thrust her up more closer upon them to
their prejudice, and firing indeed; but failing, and thus disappointed, our
fight continued longer, and (as I said) the very night took pity upon us,
and divided us, in which darkness they went away into harbor, and being
wonderfully torn with our shot, and dismembered with cross bars, thought it
best to repair their ships again, and provide more men to set upon us afresh.
The truth is, we let them alone, and gave way to their good husbandry,
anchoring our selves in harbor, and preparing to go about our marchandice,
and set forward our traffic. But on a sudden, within 3. or 4. days
unexpected, they came out of the road, and braved us again, which when our
Captain Shilling perceived, we also perceived in him, (which we never did
before) very fignes of discontent, as if they were presagers of some mischief
to follow; For though the valiant man was undaunted, yet as it happens in such
cases of suspicion, anger, and revenge, he thus vented out his grief, as a
Complainant against the malignitie of time, and over-sights of encounters.

I see (quoth he (that in all expeditions opportunity is not to be neglected,
but she takes it in scorn, that when she opens her lap, we refuse her
bounty and kindness: so that if we had followed our fortune last day, and not
suffered these men to have breathed in the meditation of revenge, and gone
foreward in their reparations, we had ended the business: but now they have not
only got new breath, but new courages, and will return upon us with greater
fury and mischief: Besides there are several virtues, which are unseasonable
in their practice, such as we call pity, commiseration, and patience, all
good for nothing in these warlike trials, and among pollitick and cruel
adversaries, but to draw on heavier burdens, and make us subject to fearful
inconveniences; wherefore if I live, I will never be guilty of this error
again, and if I dye, I leave it to you all as a principle, never to slack you
hand, if you find the enemy staggering, never to give over, till you have made
a fair Composition, or dispatched the business. But come? seeing we must fight,
let us do it courageously? that these Portingals (with many presidents of
former times) may confess, they have met with Englishmen.

After this brief and pithy complaint, we prepared our selves, and on
Childermas day our Admiral came and anchored by their sides, whom the
Vice Admiral followed, and did the like: the other two ships being smaller,
and of weaker sail, the wind smaly helping them, could not come foreward, and
so we were compelled with the London, and the Heart to make a trial with all the
4. great Portingals, which we did in such a manner, that I protest (if I might
escape vain glory or partiality) never was such a fight so well begun, nor
better continued; for we tore them all to pieces, and killed so many men, that
they could scarce get away from us, nor had escaped perishing all, if mischance
had not checked our forwardnes, and moderated our insulting with the greatest
loss, that we thought we could receive; for in the midst of the conflict,
while we were wrapped in smoke, and sweating in blood, a cross shot crossed us
all, and slew our Captain: yea he perished in the midst of our triumphs, when
we had but six men slain, and very few to speak of, hurt.

Andrew Shilling perished, when we by his valor prospred, and thought to have
gone clear away with the Victory. Andrew Shilling perished to our
disconsolation, and abatement of joy when we thought of nothing but prevailing:
but Wisdom was at last predominant, and in remediles cases we cast up another
account of reclaiming our selves, and tempring the sorrow, so that we were once
again divided, and the Portingalls most gladly and cunningly departed from us,
and when they were out of sight we gave God the praise for our deliverance, and
divided the sorrow for our Captains loss amongst us, not a man but bemoaned
his death; not a man but participated with his virtues; not a man but was the
better for his instructions; not a man but wondered at his experience and skill
in Navigation; not a man but lamented his untimely death; not a man but
extolled his timely worthiness, and so with one consent, he was buried with
all the Ceremonies of a General, and cast out of sight for fear of troubling
us further, and raising new ecstasies to no purpose.

This second encounter was more formidable then the first, and continued
longer, but ended (thanks be to God) as you have heard to our small detriment
at this time, whereby we went forward in our business, and were well-commed to
Iasques in Persia to advance our traffic. But how many were slain of our
enemies we know not, only we know, their ships were made unserviceable for the
present, and report (when we were settled in harbor) assured us, that they lost
370. Portingalls, besides Moors and Negroes, of whom they make no account, as
being their slaves, and so subject to all baseness, prostitution, and
carelessness.

I could enlarge this Letter with many occurrences in our Voyage, both tending
to navigatio^ and discourse, but when our good ship called the Heart comes
into England, there are those in her, that will truly and heartily tell you,
all you desire, and more then I am acquainted with: only I can assure you, our
trade thriues, and we have 1200. tun of lading ready at Zarret, but the
Portingals grow stronger, and stronger, and prepare themselves to intercept our
ships both in the way of revenge, for their former losses, and out of
covetuousnes and glory to enrich themselves, and perform some worthy exploit
upon us; for they hear of our preparation, and know of our riches, which has
made them (as I said) prepare a greater Fleet, and makes us assured, there is
nothing to be expected but encounters and slaughters, blood and death, happen
when it will and to whom it shall.

This Letter was written from Swallo Road, near Zarret the 20. of November,
1621. and brought into England with the last ships, that came in the beginning
of June, to the comforting of many sad hearts, and recovering the staggering
opinion of the East Indiaes companies thriuing, from whence I protest I have
extracted nothing but the truth, and if I by way of illustration or
amplificatio^, there are some things added in the praise of the man: Oh, let
virtue have this passage amongst you, that it is a glory to all Commonwealths,
neither to obscure her, as she is of a durable essence and existence, nor to be
forgetful of her servants, as they are worthy of commemoration, and well
deserving in their several places, wherein God has bestowed them.

FINIS.

