CORANT OR WEEKLY NEVVES, from Italy, Germany, Hungaria, Polonia, Bohemia,
France, and the Low Countries.
From Rome the 17. of September 1621.
FRom Room it is certainly Reported that Cardinal Bellermine, after he had
received the Comunion and the Popes Benediction died,

From Vienna the 22. of September. 1721.
The Spanish Ambassador is come hither again with the Earl of Colalto From
Presburg and the differences between the outlandish and German Generals are
agreed upon, but until this day noe Imperial General has been yet named.

The 21. of this month to the ordained meeting at Rauensburg on the Maerke, is
deputed for Commissary, the Cardinal Dieterichsteyn, the Archbishop Basman,
the Lord Breuner, and the Earl of Meggan: on the Hungarians side both the
Earls of Thurso and 2. principal Lords of the Country, who should have met
together this day but because of the contagion, which there much increases, it
is not yet begun

The Archduke Charles is yetheere he has caused great quantity of Wynes and
other provision to be transported to the Landiorney in Silesia whether the said
Archduke is daily to march: where also the Elector of Saxon in his own person
should appare. and it is here published that all provision of Vittels should
he transported hither, and to other strong places and Towns

From Newmarck the 30 of Septem.
At this instant, the Earl of Mansfield who is broken up from Ambergh, is here
expected with three Coronets of Horse, and more men shall follow after him,
whereupon Women and Children fly from hence with their best goods, and there is
great sighing and lamenting, amongst the poor people in the Mentz Country.

From Francfort the 30. of September.
We hold it here, that Franckendal is as much as besiedged, because the
Spaniards (by reason of the Generals retyring) is master of the most part of
the Bergh street: All the Towns and Boroughes (except the Castle Sarckenburgh)
having yielded themselves unto them.

From Thorn in Prussia.
It is reported, that the City of Kigain Lysland is taken in by the King of
Swethland, because that after having sustained and repulsed 4 assaults, and
they without preparing for the Fifth assault before the City gates, those that
were within, the City in many places being set on fire, sought to parley and
thus peelded the City with composition.

From Vienna the 18. of September 1621.
Some letters from Vienna relate, that the Emperors army begins again to
increase and grow stronger, and that by the Land Towns is much soli^^ted, for
a truce or cellation of Arms, that at the other side Budiani with his men did
yet continue to do much spoil had already made himself Master of D^oskere^
under Newsradt, Menling, Entensv^^y, and almost of that whole Country,
ransacking (...) the very gates of Vienna, where it is feared that he shall
take in his power the River of Douaw, and thereby shut up the passage both by
land and water, whereby the Imperial army might come to endure great distress.

The Duke of Bauaria has not only upper Austria in pawn, but has also has
taken the Salthandel in upper Austria into his possession.

The Marquis of Iagensdorp, is entered in Morania, and there keeps house very
disorderly.

The Elector^ll Saxonians, have besieged Glatz in Silesia: which City as it is
written is well provided with men and munition.

The Marquis has menaced those of Breslaw very rigorously, because they let
the Saxonians have of their munition.

There was news that the King of Polonia was broken up to withstand the Turk,
who with 300. thousand men was come to the frontiers of his Land.

From Vienna, the 22. of September 1621.
Bethlem Gabor has not been seen in his army this 14. days, but has been
at Ofen, where some thousands of Turks are arrived, whom he brings to his
Leager.

The Marquis of Iagersdorp with his Army, and also the Carle of Thurne, who
commands over the Germans, are gone to Morauia, where he has aloeady burned
to the ground above 12. Villages and Boroughs, and has caused some hundreths
of persons to be slain, and put to death.

Bethlem himself being now revived, has sent word once again to those of
Presburgh, that he will shortly visit tham once more with fire and Sword.

The Commander Diepenbach is yesterday come hither with the Imperial
Field-campe under Presburgh, and our Army shall break up from thence and is to
go to the Marckfelt over a Shipbridge (which is laid over the river at Thoben)
toward Morauia to binder the bad intention of Iagersdorp because that he with
Mansfield is thought to have a pernicious enterprise in hand against the
Imperial Majesty.

The Budiani has as yet strongly continued with burning and ransacking in
Austria and Stiria, and now their comes news that within 8. days time he
has burnt to the ground obout 80. Towns and Villages, and carried away and put
to death many thousands of souls. Also news are brought by the Post, who has
brought hither the ransom for the prisoners here, of a dangerous and hurtful
intended infall of the Budiani, who being strong more then 20000. men all
Turks and Hungarians, is resolved to put fire in the Suburbs of this City.

The reconciliation of the Palatine with the Emperors Majesty is here in good
terms, because that his Majesty has written to all the Electors, to hear and
understand their advice, they are all inclined to pardon, so that it is hoped
that within a short time a Cessation of arms shall be effected.

Moreover the Plague begins here much to increase, and besides all things
are here very dear, one pound of Flesh, that here before has cost 14.
pence, is now sold for 5. Cruytsers, and many wonderful fokens and visions are
daily seen in the Element.

From Pague the 23. of September 1621.
Some few days ago, there is carried again an other great Piece of Canon out
of this City storehouse to Tabor, and although those of Tabor perceive the
resolute consiancy of the besiegers, and that daily more and more men resort to
them, for all that they are the more scornful, and the more make a scoffing
of it, because that they have received comfort from Mansfield of their onset by
him at the first. And news comes from Silessa, that the Soldiers of that
Country have taken the City of Glatz by composition, but what the conditions
are is as yet unknown.

We had here advice yesterday that the Earl of Mansfield was agreed with the
Duke of Bauaria, namely that he should pay to him the said Earl 300 thousand
Florins, but to his Soldiers 3. months wages, and whosoever would be content
to serve again, that he should go to Hungaria also to void and pull down
all the Sconces and fortresses about the Palatinate, likewise the said Duke
should procure pardon for Mansfield by the Emperors Majesty, upon condition
that all his life time he should not serve nor bear Arms against the house of
Austria, Bauaria, nor Spain, and that in recompense thereof he should be made
an Earl of the Empire, with other conditions more, whereupon he with his whole
army is retired, taking his journey toward Ambergh.

From the Bergstrate the 28. of Sept. 1621.
The Spaniards have begun the 26. hereof to shoot upon the Town of
Franckendal, but because that those within defended themselves valiantly, they
the last night retired from thence, and went to Keysers Lautexen, what their
they shall effect we shall hear. At this instant great burning has been seen
in diuere places about the same territories.

From the upper Palatinate the 28. of Sept. 1621.
We are here in these Countries in a miserable state, because that the Earl
of Mansfield will not accept the agreement with the Duke of Bauaria, also
because the said Mansfield has understood, that the Magistrates at Ambergh
with the Nobility and City, have yielded themselves to the devotion of the Duke
of Bauaria, the said Earl is marched forward, has spoiled, ransacked and
burnt, the fair Market town Hantpach, and Slicht, and killed many poor
subjects, has also besieged Vilseek, and now he swarmeth with the most part of
his Horsemen round about Ambergh, those of the City have shut their Gates,
refusing to let him come in, wherefore the Earl has sworn, that within two
days he would enter the Town, which is feared shall not be without bloodshed.
And there is such flying, and retiring in all the Country that it cannot be
written, In the mean time the Bauarians have taken Camb, where he lost 800
men. Neuenkirk, Waltmunchen, Prug, Blegensteyn, Kemer, Grasermeer, Waldeck, and
other places, where he caused the Inhabitants to do him homage, likewise he
has summoned Newenmarckt, but Mansfield has put garrisons therein.

From the upper Palatinate the 29. of Sept. 1621.
This day in the forenoone is the Earl of Mansfield arrived here at
Newenmarckt, with 6. Companies of Horse, the Soldiers lie here and there
dispersed, what they intend on both sides to do, is not yet known.

From the Palatinate the 2. of October 1621.
The 30. of September the Spaniards took in Lamsheym, our Horsemen are all gone
to their quarters at Seckenheym, Neckerhausen, and Edingen, they distrust to be
able to resist the Spanish forces, they are not strong enough both on Foot and
Horsemen. To day a 1000. Soldiers are trained at Neckerhausen, The Spaniards
keep themselves at Franckendal, it is thought that they will march to Newstat.

The 30. of September, she horsemen of Ouertrout, have ransacked the suburbs
of Weinheim, they will likewise ransacke the Town it self, because that they
have yielded themselves to the Spaniards.

At Heydelburgh they make before Newenheym a land partition, and a Bulwark,
whereupon great pieces of Ordenance may be planted. On the other side they have
taken down the tower called Trots Keyser, and filled it with earth, and pieces
of Canon shall be set upon it.

From the Berghstreet the 1. of October, 1621.
Before Franckendal 600. Spanish soldiers were slain in one assault, it is
thought they will retire from thence.

From Cullen the 5. of October 1621.
Three days past, those of Gulicke being 7000. men strong, sallyed out with
Thomas Viller his horsemen, and took in a Sconce by Lintsenich on this side of
the Roer, wherein some of the Spanish soldiers were slain, and so with their
Lieutenant were taken prisoners and brought into Gulicke, who the next day were
all released again, the said Leiutenant remaining surety for their ransom.

These of Gulick have made a Sconce on the Roerbridge, through which they can
fall out, they have also these days past shot furiously out of it, to hinder
the Spaniards from making their fortifications, whereouer some were killed. In
the mean time the gates of Gulick stand yet open, and the Cattle goes yet out
to pasture, and the women and Children of the Soldiers in Gulick, are yet
suffered to come in the town, And thus the Town and fortresses is yet well
provided of all necessaries.

From France is the Death of Duke of Main confirmed, being besides him many
Noble and Gentlemen slain, with some odd hundreths of soldiers. And moreover
the contagious disease is great in the Kings leager, if he will their continue
it is much doubted of. It is likewise reported that the Duke of Rohan is near,
with some thousands of men ready and near to relieve the siege from Montaubon.

The Duke of Rohan has with him 20000. men, and has sent word to the King,
that he will not come to any agreement, before all the affairs of France be
first pacified, and by fault thereof, that he will resist him to the uttermost,
although he should be forced to avoid the Kingdom.

We hear from Rees, that they work yet hard on the new Forts over the Rhine,
that right over the Town of Emmerick another Fort should he made, otherwise no
mutation of things was done, nor also of the Spanish side, it seems that by
reason of the long raining weather at this time, no further enterprises shall
be under taken.

London Printed for N.B. October the 11. 1621. Out of the Low Dutch Copy.


