Corante, or weekly news from Italy, Germany, Hungary, Poland, Bohemia,
France and the Low Countries.
From Vienna the 2. of September. 1621.
FRrom Vienna is written the 2. hereof, that 1000 of the Emperors soldiers
horse and loote, were sent out of his army with 500. wagons to the Hoye to
fetch in forage, and having laden their wagons with hay, corn, and oats,
were set upon by the Hungers: who though they ensconced themselves within their
wagons, and stoutly defend them, yet in the end, the Hungars overcame and five
them, set fire on the wagons, took many prisoners and few escaped.

The garrison in Presburge are 5000. strong who defend the town valiantly
having sallied out upon Bethlems army, and set upon those that lay ensconced in
the suburbs, beat and slew 200. of them and nailed up four pieces of artillery
being not able to carry them away, yet finding themselves too weak to stay,
having lost many of their company were glad to retire. The like attempt they
made yesterday upon the sconce of Bethlems at my, but with the loss of many of
the Neapolitans were forced to retire. In the mean time the Budian Hungers rob
and ransack the country even within two miles of this city Vienna, all over
between that and Newstad, where they have burnt down to the ground 20. of the
Emperors special villages and dorpes, killed many of the people, driving away
the cattle with them, very pitiful to behold. So as in these quarters no body
tarryeth in any parishes or hamlets, and there is no safe passing to Newstad
and Stermarke: unto these proceedings there is none to oppose, which makes
this city to be pestered with beggars and poor people where many starve with
hunger, whereby appears the wrath of God to be over these countries.

From Vienna the 4. of September.
FRom Vienna is also written, that many people going to S. Mary cloister to be
shriuen, the Hungars fell upon and slew them. And present news is come, that
Bethlem having formerly left Iagerens-dorfein his stead in the army, was risen
and marched to meet with the Spaniards, appointed out of Morauia to march to
the Schat, and meeting them set upon them all. The Emperor has also sent 10.
ensigns of country people to the town of Lintz to guard the country about
Ense (formarly morgaged to Bauaria by the Emperor) from the invasion of the
Hungers.

From Prague the 2. of September.
FRom Prague is written of the second hereof that the Burgers in all the three
towns of Prague are warned to appear at the town hall, where every one
(especially the companies) that they out of the stocks, and every Burger to
his uttermost power and ability to take care to be well provided of store of
victuals, to the end least by this sorrowful war we fall into great
necessity, the rather by reason of the continuance of the robberies and
ransackings upon the passages. As also but the other day certain wagons with
merchanoise within a mile of this city were taken and spoiled. Wherefore it is
thought meet to have 1000. horsemen leuyed to serve there at the charge of
Burgers. It is also written from Prague the town of Tabor in Bohemia (so long
besiegd by Baltazar) having prevailed nothing, will leave it, the most of the
country people being run away, having lost many of his small army in the last
assault.

From Vienna the 3. of September.
FRom Vienna is also written that the coin is raised by public proclamation,
to wit, the ducket valued at 5. Florens, the gold crown at 4. Florens and ten
crutzets, the gold doller at 3. Florens and 40 trutzers, the Philips doller at
3. Florins, and 30. crutzers, the Rex doller at 3. Florins and 15. c^utzars,
and the golden Doller at 2. Florins and 50 crutzers.

From Weydhausin the 6. of September.
FRom the towns of Ambergh in the upper Paits 3. Weydhaysin is little written,
only that Man's fields with 8. pieces of ordinance sent him, shot out of his
sconce, has spoils and mard 4. pieces of the Bauers artillery, whereupon they
have left of shooting, and in setting their watch without stroke of drum or
triumphing as they were wont, no marvel for in both armies they die many of
the bloody flixe: there Sentinels on both fides watch so near on to the other,
as they talk to one another; the Bauars soldiers shrink away daily, and
there is exspectation of the 2. Colonels Bawr and Smith and their two regiments
in a while remove (to Mansfield) having great want of victuals and water.
There is some attempt to bedon ere long, for there are several Ambassadors come
fyom Blethlem Gabor, Prince Maurice and other Potentates to Mansfield.

The Emperor has written to the city of Nuremburge commanding them upon a
great penalty to suffer no victuals to pass to Mansfields army, whereupon
Mansfield has taken order to make price of all Nuremburgers, so as no man
dares look out of the gates, as also they can send no goods to Frankford-being
already diverse wagons taken with goods coming to Nuremburge.

From Wesell the 8. of September,
THe Marquess Spinola at his coming to Wesell, thought here and there to
work wonders, but the coming of the illustrious Prince of Orange, whose eye
pries so narrowly into his prodeedings, as he knows not where to begin, and
therefore has sent most of his army to Guylicke, where he will be as well
looked unto as he was at Wesell, and will find Gulicke furnished with famous
experienced soldiers; and so far as we it perceive, the army he has there
is not sufficient wholly to besiege it, but if he can get it with threatenings to
hang them if he get it, as he got the castle of Reed by Gulicke by like
threateinge: but captain Ditford the commander thereof is taken and brought
to the Princes army, and there lost his head by sentence of the Court of war,
his Lieftenant and Ancient are in prison.

The town of Gulick is besieged upon on side by the grave Vandenbergh, but 2.
gates of the town ar^ free to go in and out without let. They have made a sally
out upon the enemy, and skirmished with them, which the Spaniard had a sower
taste of, wherein the town lost a Lieftenant Colonel. The town plyeth the
enemy with their artillery, but they come near with their frenches, and
exspect out of Flanders from diverse parts more forces.

From Breslaw the 2. of September.
FRom the town of Breslaw is written, that the Lords and States of Silecia
contune their leauying of soldiers to resist Bethlem Gabor and Iagerensdorse.
From who^ they have received threatening letters, that if they conform not
themselves to the devotion of King Frederick, they are to exspect them with
fire and sword, which resolution is yet unknown is the people. There comes
daily more people into the land, and already march toward the town of Glotse
to besiege it wherein Iagerensdorpe ^ft 800. soldiers and a years provision of
vict^^^, and otherwise so well provided, as they fear not the siege of twenty
thousand men: likewise it is written that in Silecia daily are seen wonderful
signs in the ^yre.

From Vienna the 7. of September.
FRom Vienna it is written that the bridge which the Turks caused to be made
over the river of Danube is finished, and that he has sent his whole a^my to a
place in Poland, but left behind to guard the bridge 50000. and there follows
him 15000. carts or wagons with munition and victuals for the maine army,
besides he has appodnted 10000. Turks and Tartars to ransacke the coun^^y,
with whom the Cassock Polaks being 15000 ^et, where between them was a great
conflict, but the Polacks got the victory.

From Zurich in Switzerland the 1. of September.
FRom Zurich in Zwitzerland is written, that they with their confederate
Grisons and Bunte^^s are marched toward Veltolin to set upon the Spaniards and
their confederats: it is also written from Geneua that the French King
threatens that town as others of ye religion to prosecute them and that the
Duke Leopaldus soldiers have taken in Eugedin, the vilage and castle Rauin,
and driven away 400. sheeps: also there marches daily many soldiers of
Loraine to the duke of Bauare.

Also it is written out of Switzorland, from the town of Cleuen, those of the
religion in that town having appointed ten days fast and prayers, the
Spaniard had a secret parpose to fall upon them in their Churches with horse
and foot, which being discovered to them by a Signal, put themselves in arms,
issued out, and meeting them, fought and five 140. of them, among whom was a
Neopolitane Captain brought dead to Cleuen, and about him found in writing
their whole conspiracy.

From D^nswicke in Denmark the 30. of August.
FRom Danswicke the letters mention, that there advice out of Holand is, that
the Turk with his whole army is entered 18-miles into Poland very strongly,
which causes great fear in that country and thereupon they put them in arms
man for man and the kings son with an army of 100000. appointed to attend
him. The head town Rig^ in Lie^^and is hardly besiged by the king of Sweden,
in such sort as they will be forced to yield. It is soyd also that the Emperor
of Muscoui^ is also in arms to besiege the town of Smalenske, taking
advantage of the Polonians present necessity of his forces against the Turk,
that he cannot raise them.

From Gulicke the 10. of September.
IN Spinolas army is great want of forage, whereby how longer the dearer, and
little money to pay, which cause his soldiers to run away. And out of Spain it
is said that the Council there have concluded to send into the Netherlands a
choice Nobleman to assist the Infanta in the government. We understand from the
Princes army that a Se^^ant of the enemies army was come away, who has related
that he was practiced withal to have set on fire all the ships in the Waell at
Amsterdam, which he refusing, another by nane, Ammerathgin has with other his
confederates under taken it

And touching the enemies attempt upon Isendick and those quarters near sluice,
and repulsed by Gods hand, it is hoped it will proceed no further, the rather
for that they failed in their first purpose, and all places with soldiers are
better provided, whereunto the States of Holand have endeavored to pruent the
enemy by sending certain companies of Burgers to Sluice to strengthen that and
the rest, that where 200 were before, is now added 300. more together with many
lusty martiners. who labor in cutting of walls to let in water to ouerflow the
low grounds. The eenemy is said to be at present between Haste gras skonce and
Sluice, where he would attempt to get into the I Will of Cadlant if he could to
straiten Sluice, but by the coming of the aforesaid supplies, and the care of
the Prince of Orange in granting out of every company in the army a certain
number which he has sent, is hoped will suffice to frustrate the enemies
purpose.

From Bergstrate the 12. of September.
OUt of the Pallitynatis written of the 10. hereof, that the B. of Spier leuieth
soldiers in Lorain to defend his country from the Palts; and general Vere is
with his flying army horse and foot gone to Bristat and Bergstrad, to lie
there to attend the Spaniards issuing out of the Castle of Stein. The Spanish
army lies enquartered about Rein Turkseym, against hom Collonell Ney with his
horsemen accompanied with the garrison of Frankendall and Norhem, which is
reasonable strong. The Bores lie about Nachem in great number, who if they come
into ^eld, there is exspected some conflict.

From Paris the 14. of September.
BY letters it is certified from Paris that they of Mountabon have slain of
the kings forces 16. Marquesses and Earls, and about 300. other Commanders,
the Duke de Marquess his brother and his kinsman are flaine, the next man to
his own person was beaten to pieces with a shot of great ordinance. It is
thought there has bin near 4000. men ^aine on the kings side in this assault,
whereupon they are so encouraged by their ancient Captain Mounsieur de la
Force that they caused to be set upon the gates, La Roy Sans foy, la velle sans
plure: which is to say, a faithless king, and fearelesse subjects.

Printed at London for N. B. according to the Dutch copy, the 30. of September.
1621.


