MORE NEVVES From the PALATINATE; AND MORE COMFORT To every true Christian,
that either favors the cause of Religion, or wishes well to the KING of
BOHEMIA'S proceedings.

According to faithful and honest Letters, sent over since the beginning of
March, and now published for the satisfaction of every true English heart.

A Jove surgit op^^. MDCXXII.

More News from the Palatinate, etc.
THe history of the Jewish captivity is so remarkable, that it affords many
observations to the Church of God, and is like the Balm of Gilead unto
festring wounds, or curing salues unto sore eyes: For for the times of their
humiliation they were derided of all nations, their credit lay like water spilt
out of a bowl never to be gathered up again; the Heathen had no word for
their Temple, but down with it, down with it, nor for the walls of the City,
but let them be pulled to rubbish, the crown of the Priesthood was tumbled into
the dirt, and Nehemiah with the Princes were mocked to scorn, when they
attempted to reedifie Jerusalem and to recover their reputation. And has it
not fared thus with Count Palatine, whose inuesture with his ever memorable and
heroike Queen was for the time glorious, and the manner acceptable, till the
supportation of his greatness fell from him, and Prague it self stood
tottering in her firmness, proving like an Egyptian reed not to be trusted
unto, yea the Princes of the Union were exanimated, and gave way unto the
irresistable power (as it seemed) of the adversary: then was nothing heard of
but the loss of his crown and dignity, the surprising of his Country and
inheritance, the pursuit of his enemies, the clamors of the Papists, the
derision of the Jesuits, and Priests, the exclamation of the Bishops, the
attempts of Saxony, and Bauaria, with all the formidable preparation, that the
Emperor and house of Austria could make against him.

But now comes the comfort and cure, Jerusalem is reedified, the people
restored, the Temple erected, the wall builded, the Princes sent home again,
the Law read, the Sacrifice exalted, the Priesthood magnified, and a work is
done of admiration: for the God of breath and spirits blew gentle calmes upon
the violent heat of their persecutions, and slacked the burnings of their
outrageous fires: and why may it not be thus with the Palatinate? or, if you
will, the King of Bohemias proceedings? he has hitherto had Nemesis in tergo,
and according to the proverb every place has been a Seians horse unto him,
for in hope of restitution, and a peaceable end, he has found no rest, but
one wave of turbulency following another: Spinola and his army enters on the
West: Bavaria and his forces comes upon the East, and the whole Country is
trampled upon with the cruel feet of his enemies: but now Rota fortunae in
gyro, and through Gods mercy the veil of despair is taken away, and a new
face of chearefulnes appears. For the Princes of Germany are ashamed of their
former retraction, and some Catholic Bishops begin to suspect a further
incrochment and tyranny, and so promish fair to set upright the flourishing
liberty of their Cities, which can not be done, except the Palatine be
restored, the wars ended, and strangers kept from usurping the plenty of
their Country.

As for the Bishop of Strasburgh, brother to the Emperor, Count Mansfeild has
already abated his strength, and in a manner dismounted him from riding away
with the triumph of prevailing, yea, he has affrighted Leopaldus himself, and
thrust up all his enemies into Towns of Garrisons, so that what with the
malignity of the time of the year, and weather, and the fear of his
Greatness, being 30000. strong: here is nothing talked of, but Treatises of
pacificationwith him, and martages for atonement. For the Bishop of Spires
Country is wholly in his power, except one Fort, and every place he comes to
either compoundeth for his friendship, or associates her self unto him: yea,
he is grown so strong, and so well appointed, that there are messages (I dare
not name them Embasses) sent unto him on all sides, namely, from France,
Venice, Hage, Loraine, and peradventure England her self, and that worthily
too. For if ever Hanniball was commended for Discipline, and good order in his
confused Army, consisting of so many several Nations, this man has augmented
his reputation for his Martial government one way, and his noble Spirit,
commixed with mansuetude, and commiseration another way: so that his very
enemies can lay no imputation upon him, more then amazement, what course this
brave built Bark will take in this turbulent Ocean of defiances, when all the
Princes of Europe stand thus watching one another proceedings. And thus much
for Count Mansfeild, and the King of Bohemias hopes to see once again the
scattered limbs of Pelops gathered together and the broken bones of his Fortune
well set again, made strong and stronger, like broken bones indeed, that prove
the better for their first fraction, being well cured by a cunning Surgeon.

The elder Duke of Brunswick, as it should seem, is not dead: For by reason of
the Bishop of Hauerstaffs letters, the younger Duke of Brunswick has played the
Soldier all this Winter, and taken in 8. or 9. Towns of the Bishops of Ments
and Cullen, and although since February Count Harry Vanderbergh is gone up
against him, since he took Gulick, and a Colonel of Bauaries, and another of
Don Gonzales, being in all 12000. foot, and 2000. Horse, are likewise marched
to intercept his forwardness: yet has he proved very fortunate in his
expeditions, and kept his ground in despite of the proudest wrastlers. But we
say here, that these two last Colonells named, are retired back again, as
taking their first journey upon a rumor, that there were 8000. English coming
into the Country, and hoping of good passage by the Duke of Brunswicks means,
whom these Bauarians meant to intercept. But this rumor ran her self quickly
out of breath. For by the first of March, letters of credit came, that not a
Drumm was beaten in England to such a purpose, whereupon they returned back
again to their Generals, for fear of Count Mansfeilds coming upon them, and
surprising them vnawarres.

Whilst Count Mansfeild thus proceeded, and had his affairs carried in a sweet
passage boat of success, the Protestant Princes loath to be behind hand with
him in correspondency, seeing the great ayds which came in, and the many Forces
promised, engaged themselves likewise to his assistance, namely, the Marquess
of Baben, the Duke of Wittenbergh, the Marquess of Aensburch, and the
Lanssgraue of Hess, who every one prepared 10000. men for the Spring, and made
tender of their service accordingly, so that if performances follow, and this
fair shadow of good words have but an equal body of substance, and auayleable
actions, the Summer fields may be filled with an Army of a 100000. men, which
though it sound too harshly in the ears of Soldiers, who know, what 40000.
armed men can do, and seem ridiculous to Polliticians, who presently demand
after the money to pay them: yet is it certain, that these Princes and Lords
of Countries have made their tongues pronounce the judgment, as for the
consent of the heart, and the many contingents, which may happen disastrously,
these are wrapped up in the closet house of Heaven, and being arcana coeli, it
is not for polluted hands to reach at them, no more then for us to know,
whether Bethlem Gabor will go on, as he has done, to hold the Emperor play in
those quarters, which if he do, then let equal men judge (for all there is a
report, that there are 8000. men come out of Italy to Leopaldus) whether the
Emperor can be any way so strong, as the Princes, I might better say, his
Excellency Count Mansfeild. For without controversy, he is now such a spirit
raisd that I believe will hardly be coniured down again by such forces, as
the Emperor can either spare, or provide so soon. But the Summer is the time
that Armies go into the fields, and so till that time, we will suspend all
predictions, and anticipations.

The fast letters from Vienna report diverse things, both of the Emperors
pretended marriage, and of the Turks making peace with Poland; but especially,
concerning the contracts with the Hungarians, which has spent most part of the
Winter in their Treaties, and is indeed suspected not to have any good
success, because Bethelem Gabor will not conclude it without the Emperor of
Turks consent, to whom he is Tributary; and the Turk will not consent,
because he pretends that the Emperor has broken with him, and set upon his
friends in his absence, or not kept promise in sending his Ambassador to the
Sacraporta, as has bin the custom, and so to attend him in his wars. Thus
instead of reconciliation, is he rather threatened, and for any thing we hear,
the Prince of Transiluania affects the restitution of the King of Bohemia, and
will prosecute his recovery as far as he can, or is able. But which way
soever it chance, Dulce Bellum inexpertis, and the war has not only made
scarres in the face of this pleasant Country, but filled it with wrinckles,
which have taken in so much soil, and dirt, and sweat, that I am affrayd the
running water of peace will hardly wash it clean again in good time, and it
will scarce recover her pristinat glory in many years. But of all other things
most lamentable, the Church of God has suffered deuastation, and the backs
and sides of Religion have been lashed with cruel stripes, and the tormentors
hand has gone over them and over them again: For Idolatry has made the walls
of those Churches weep, where God has been truly worshipped, and not the
name of an Image heard in many years. The pulpits have been trampled in with
those obscoene feet, whose masters have trod up on the graves of poor deceased
Christians, and by the name of Heretics, thought them only worthy to be
receptacles for their ordure, making their Chapels a very Stews: the houses
which have lodged their garrisons, have been filled with their strumpets, who
have made the hearts of the owners sad again, with their filthy prostitution,
abominable Masses, songs of ribaldry, inuectiues against Christ and his Gospel,
and many other fearful impieties of superstition and blasphemy: yea all
places have been replenished like the groves and alrars of the heathen, with
mixtures of incense and sacrifice, which I know, stinck worse then the smell of
a dunghill in the nostrils of our sanctifier, and great God, so that I make no
question, he will one day take his own cause in hand, and deliver us from this
usurpation and intrusion, so that for this point I end with the Motto, Dies
dabit, quod dies negat.

I will not dispute neither of the prerogative of Conquerors, nor condition of
the conquered, of the riches of Emperors, nor the power of Princes, of the
treasure of Kings, nor abundant wealth of Monarchs of the necessity of the
Soldiers, who must either live upon their prey, salary, or spoil, or the
inconveniences of a garrison in a Country ouer-watched with many disastrous
accidents. But this I am sure of, that those soldiers which Spinola left
behind him, are not only wasted with many malignant circumstances, but wearied
and tormented for want of pay and entertainment: Insomuch that Don Gonsales de
Cordira the Spanish General laid a new imposition upon that part of the
Palatinate under his jurisdiction of a 100000 dollers, which amounts to
20000. lib. sterling, whereabout the people were miserably handled: For
although they pleaded the deuastation of their Country, and the many wrestings
from them the blessings which God had imparted after great toil, labor, and
endurances: yet nothing served the turn but present money, and the Captains
had much ado to pacify the Soldiers before the tax was gathered, and the
imposition raised.

By this time, it is the midst of February, and therefore it is time to tell
you, what a hard Winter we have had, and what strange sights we have seen.
The Palatinate has been subject to such frost and snow, that the Rhene has
been frozen 7. or 8. weeks together, and since it began to thaw, which was the
5. of February, we have had dry and close weather, yet fair and srosty
mornings: then grew it close and misty again 2. or 3. days, afterward it
waxed warm but not long: then the mornings brought us small rain till ten of
the clock, but the 14. and 15. were very wet, by reason of which uncertainty
of weather many proiects were disappointed, and diverse excursions being made,
the Soldiers returned without effecting their purposes: yet did General Vere
ouerslip no opportunity, which either served to annoy the enemy, or relieve
his friends, he visited the sconces and garrisons, and supplied their wants as
he could, he made new ramparts at Hidelburg, leaving therein Sir Garret Herbert
as I take it with 2. Companies of English: but the maine government was under a
dutch Colonel, he fortified Franckendale, and the sconces on the passages, he
watched Mainhem and lay therein himself: he reveiwed all other places, which
stood in need of his care, and diligence, and so much for weather, now to our
sights and apparitions.

The 5. of this present February, about one of the clock, there appeared very
plainly 3. full colored Raine-bowes, one bending from south south-east toward
the north: the other opposite to it from southwest northward, the third was
called Iris Verticalis, whose Center was the Sun it self: there were also 3.
more dimmer and not so well colored, compassing the Sun as it were, but yet
of distance some degrees: The night following were many flashings of the air
of lightning, and as it happens in such cases some there were, that saw armed
men fighting, and some that heard the classhings of armor, and some, that said
plainly these things were not customary, but portended tumultuary convulsions
on all sides: I confess I remembered the Star 1618. and made a Catalogue of
many accidents, which have happened since, and although we were not much amazed
at these things, because there was no preventing of that which God had
appointed: yet it made us make this use, to pray to God to divert his judgment
from us, and continue his mercy toward us, as for coniecturing the worst,
which was war, blood, and trouble, who could not apprehend as much, without
whispering of prophesies, or calculating natiuities, or affrighting any
fearful man, when all Europe was in Arms, and the Princes of the earth stood
gasing at one another Fortunes.

By this time Count Mansfeild had sent to Loraine, and had likewise answer from
the Duke, which some will have to this purpose, That for his own part he was
willing to give way for his passage, whether he meant to go to Artoies, or
France: But the King of France would by no means consent thereunto, which
whether it were pleasing to his Excellency or no, I will not dispute: this I am
sure, that it made his own Soldiers talk at random, that he meant to divert
the war from the Palatinate, and either draw it into France, or Flanders. As
for the hope of rendition, he would not meddle with other Princes designs, but
in a manner he warranted the King of Bohemia a better recompense then the
rendition of his Country, or peradventure the Crown of Bohemia it self,
whereupon reciprocal letters have passed between them, and no doubt there
shall no enterprise be set on foot, but by direction of a Council of war
from the King of Bohemia, and the Prince of Orange, and so running to one
another with sweet conueiance, Count Mansfeild shall be (as it were) the
Cesterne to entertain the water coming from these Springs: For although the
King of Bohemia lies now quiet at the Hage, yet no question is his spirit
working in other places, and time will perfect that, which we now imagine is an
imperfect Chaos of confusion, and so much for the business as it hangs in
suspense, and cannot yet make even the skoales of mischief and misfortune, as
we profanely abuse that term, and Character.

I understand by many messengers, that your Corantos in England are so
translated, and obsequious to the Dutch Coppies, that they never mention any
exployt of the English, nor vouchsafe to attribute the glory of any enterprise
unto them, as forgetting Captain Boroghs, at the siege of Franckendale, and
diverse valiant Gentilmen in other places, nay, they scarce mention General
Vere himself, who is worthy of all memory, for his constant resolution, and
noble courage in these wants and endurances: For although some Polliticians
have given it out, that Spinola might as well have run all over the Country,
as do that he did, yea, taken Heidelberg it self, if he had kept his Army
together, and therefore that which was left undone, must be imputed to his
commiseration, or peradventure, directio^s from higher powers: yet will not I
give way to such opinion, but answer plainly and honestly, that by that time
the English had fortified the places, and hunted the enemy with set Batalions,
it was not so easy to climb trenches and ramparts, and come over the heads of
Pikes, or stop the mouths of Cannons: Witness the interception of Bauaria
himself, who ambitiously swallowing the whole Palatinate, as a gift of the
Emperor, came forward a pace with proud steps to straddle over it like a
Colossus, and thought at once to inuest himself with her robe and Coronet: but
GOD be thanked, it is yet undone, and if ever a Proverb was verified, we may
well say by him; Multa cadunt inter Calicem, supremaque labra.

But to my first purpose, seeing the Dutch will tell you no Stories of the
English, I will tell you one of the Dutch.

Upon the last of January, when the Frost began to break, a certain Dutch
Captain, full of presumptuous words, and ostentous braggs, resolved to
perform some exployt upon Steine a Castle, which stood in the midst of woods
and waters, and for which Don Gonzalis first brake the Truce, the 20. of August
last: whereupon as well acquainted with the passages, and all the secrets of
the place, he undertook this enterprise with a 100. men, and came accordingly
thither by four a clock in the morning, nor did he this temerariously to the
outward show, but had good searches and scout-masters before to understand the
strength of the place (besides his own knowledge of the situation) the number
of the Guard, and the order of the Sentinells, with all other things
appertaining to a surprise. But see the misfortune! as soon as ever the
Sentinel had discharged his Musket, he quickly fell from his resolution, as a
man distracted, and very basely cried out, We are discovered, A retreat, a
retreat; and when the Soldiers answered again, there was yet no danger, nor
could be any in the prosecution, he rode in amongst them, and beat them back
most cowardly, as if 10000. enemies had come toward them: yet for all this,
when he and his company had thus run away, at the same time a Dutch
Lieutenant, with less then fifty men, surprised, and cut off the whole Court
of Guard in the Sconse before the Castle, took many prisoners, and made the
rest secure themselves with in the walls, from whence they played apace, but did
not hurt above one man: but by reason they wanted their Patars, and that the
Captain and his company were gone so far off, they could not enter the gates,
nor sap the walls, but made a brave Retreat indeed, and came safely to their
Rendezuous. But the Captain in stead of rendering an account to my Lord
General of his actions, ran away for shame, and was no more seen in public
among the Soldiers; yet had the Lieutenant thanks, and a gratuitie, according
to the worthiness of his deserving.

This I thought good to set down as a taste of such bitter pills, we are many
times constrained to swallow, as either the Dutch prove unruly, or out of
suspicion of ouer-mastring, cast up an untoward account of their own weakness:
Thus lost we this opportunity of the lasting frost, considering the place was
of importance, and now must be contented: For in open weather the Castle is in
a manner impregnable, as standing (as I said) in such a fastness of wood, and
water.

Whiles the affairs of the Palatinate cheered our hearts with the expectation
of good deliverance from all our troubles, news came for certain, that the
Emperor was married, and the Pope had sent the Empress an hallowed rose of
gold, with other relics, which she received very graciously at the hands of
Seigneur Perospi his Nuntio.

Although the frost and snow was very great, yet it is said, that the
Neopolitans, and other Italian soldiers taking advantage of certain
contracts, and articles between the Grizons, and the Spanish garrisons, have
adventured through the passages, and with the loss of 800. men by the asperity
of wether, presented a body of 800. to Leopaldus, who thereupon attempted both
to recover Elsas Saueren, and his Country, which were spoiled a new for breach
of their faith to Count Mansfeild, and to send a defiance to his Excellency,
who for all the report of the Catholic greatness, smiled at the bravado, as
resolving upon other manner of business, then fighting of a battle in a country
where nothing was to be gotten.

About the 15. of February, a great fire happened at Landenburgh, as you go to
Heidelburgh, which not only burnt down the two great gates, but consumed many
rooms and chambers, yea diverse soldiers, that had the watch of the Tower, and
guard of the place: yet was the mischeife imputed to the watch, and the Country
much affrighted came in to complain to the Governor of the offenders.

Report is still busy amongst us, and to comfort us in our wants and distress
in the Palatinate, assures that all the Countries round about, namely Spires,
Elsos, Strasburgh, and all the bishoprics in general, are ready to starve,
and have not sufficient viands for their own inhabitants, whereupon Count
Mansfield has written to the Duke of Wittenbergh, for passage through his
country, so that it is supposed, he either intends for Bavaria or Vienna,
unless he play the lap wing, who commonly flies furthest from her nest, and so
may he give notice of one thing, and yet pretend another.

Much about this time his Excellency Count Mansfield understanding that the
Bavarian Regiment was under the command of Montaigne, and lay quartred upon the
neckar in the ampt mosbegg, sent to the town of Hagenaw for a new composition,
and so had 30000. Florens by way of a tax or new leauie: thus does he both
increase and enrich himself, yet is not his determination known, what he will
do with his great army, more then that (as they say) he writ letters of
comfort to Heidelburg, and General Vere at Mainhem, whose horse went out the
same day upon an expedition, and took many wagons laden with provision, and
diverse prisoners, who were ransomed after the manners of soldiers: they went out
to releive Landenburgg and other towns in the enemies possession, for they
were subject to hunger and cold, and there perished of the inhabitants very
near 600.

After Grave Hendrick Van being with the garrisons of Gulick, had passed the
Rhene, as was supposed, to join with the Bavarians and Spaniards that were
coming into Hassia: the Duke Christian of Brunswick, stored Pater borne and
many towns with soldiers, and resolved to encounter them, which way so ever
they came or went, but as they had done once before, some occasion divided them
all, for they never met; but for any thing I hear, they were glad of good
shelter in this cold and unseasonable weather.

There are other things, of which I could write, but I am sure you dare not
publish: For such is the nature of rumor, that a little truth begets many
absurdities, like a Ball of snow, which by often rolling grows bigger and
bigger; and therefore I desist at this time, till better occasion present
better matter unto me, which, I am sure, is now in the womb, and longs for a
birth and fair deliverance. The sum of all is, that God (as he has done)
will maintain the cause of his Church; and Religion (as she has done) will
show her own splendour, in despite of clouds and opposition, like the Sun,
that may be a while obscured, but at last opens the vapors, and comes like
a Bride out of her chamber. As for man, though there is no quarrel so
justifiable as the defense of the Gospel, and propagation of the same, if yet
there be mixtures of private revenge, envy, ambition, desire of renown,
covetousness, and that which we call heroike valor in the ampliation of
territories; it will taint the good cause, like dead flies in boxes of
ointments, and God will have no such mixtures, as collateral corruption to be
shadowed under the defense of his Truth: therefore I make no question of a
recovery in the Palatinate, because I see apparently so many good souls and
dispositions both grieved at the cessation of the public Ministry in many
places, and vexed again at the impiety of Papisticall Priests, who dare bring
the pattern of the Altar of Damascus into the temple of God. And as for their
objection, that maintain, that the Soldiers of Count Mansfeilds Armies, and
the rest of the Princes, which pretend the defense of the King of BOHEMIA's
cause, are either most of them Papists, or of no Religion: and yet forage, and
spoil the Countries of Catholic Bishops, and such Lords, as know no other but
the obedience of the Popes Supremacy. I answer plainly and honestly: What of
that? God will bring his purpose this way about: Though Nabuchadnezzar be an
hypocrite, yet for the time shall his Idol be trampled to dust, and be no more
worshipped: Though Cyrus be a Heathen, yet God calls him his servant, and he
shall send the people to re-edifie Jerusalem, and the vessels of Gold back
again to adorn the Temple: And though Papists maintain their absurd
opinions, yet shall they be made instruments of Gods glory, and even destroy
one another, till either they be converted, or effectuate that work, which he
sets them about: In which expectation we remain at this hour, and
exhilerate our selves, that the business in hand is in so good a forwardness.

FINIS.

