March 14.

Numb. 23.

The Continuation of our Weekly News, from the 18. of February to this 14. of
March.

Containing, amongst other things, these particulars following:

The good success of the King of Sweden in the Land of Meckelburgh, with the
names of the Towns he has lately taken.

With diverse particulars concerning Monsieur Tilly his preparation and strength
to oppose the said King of Sweden.

The French Kings Letter to the Court Parliament of Normandy, concerning the
restraint of the Queen Mother, and other of the Nobility of France.

Jn French and English.

LONDON: Printed for Nath. Butter, and Nicholas Bourne. 1631.

Continuation of the weekly News.
From Berlin, the 3. of February.
THe last great and sudden Frost, has been cause that the King of Sweden gave
over the siege intended against Landsberg: And having given order for the
fortifying of such places as he has taken, and left good Garrisons every
where, finding no more Imperial troops to drive out of Pomerania he went back
with his Army, and having past the River of Oder, entered into the Dukedom of
Meckelburgh, where coming unlooked for amongst the Imperialists, (that lie
here and there enquartered, and ^ive upon the Inhabitants, as their masters,
having a better resolution to eat and drink than to fight) he awakened them
with his warlike Music of thundering Ordnance and Muskets, most unpleasing to
them, and there made himself master of diverse good places and Towns; as,
Friedland, Brvndenberg, and Malchin all the Imperialists that are able to
escape, flying away as fast as they can leaving every where their booties and
goods, which they have these many years robbed, behind them, unto their
victorious enemies.

As for Tilly, he having written to the States of Silesia, requiring them to
receive into their Country such Imperial forces as he would send thither, to
be enquartered there, and entertained by contribution until winter should be
past, (promising the number should not exceed 7000. men) and amplifying his
Letters with many kind words; and complaints of the wants and miseries of the
said Imperial forces that came out of Pomerania, and other parts thereabouts,
to move the said States to compassion; he received for all that, for all
answer, a round denial, grounded upon impossibility, the people in that
Country being scarce able to live with those forces that are already lying upon
them and whereof they did hope and expect to be freed very shortly, lest all
might come to a general rebellion.

Tilly himself has appointed his general Rendez-vous for the Imperial
Forces at Dessaw, and has sent some troops to Franckfort on the Oder: But
there is small store of victuals and munition to be found for them; and
therefore great coffeehouse amongst them.

Out of the Countries of Franconia, Suevia, and those parts, there are now
marching many Imperial troops toward Pomerania, and from Lindaw there are
sent that way 60. Wagons with Munition. But those Imperial. Soldiers, having
lived at ease, without any discipline, are very unwilling to march, where they
shall be no longer commanders over the poor people, and therefore they run
away where they can escape. The Commanders and Officers themselves seem to
have no great pleasure to go; where they will be forced to use rather their
Weapons against the Enemy, than hitherto they have done amongst those that
could not withstand. I cannot express in words, how rigorously it is proceeded
against those Nobles and Gentlemen of Franconia, who either themselves or by
some friends, brothers or fathers, have in time past served against the House
of Austria: Their Lands, houses, and goods being daily taken from them, by such
as come either with Commission or Letters of the Emperor, that bestowed the
same on them. So that whole Families, their wives and children, are driven out,
to seek where to live, being not suffered to take the least thing with them.
The Lord comfort them, and all his distressed people.

Extract of a Letter from Francfort, the 12. of February.
THere is as yet no certainty, whether or no the Countries of Gulick and
Berghen shall be freed from the Troops that lie there enquartered. The
Paltsgrave of Newburgh is still at Bruxels, soliciting the Archdutchesse to
give order for withdrawing the Spanish and Imperial forces out of those
Countries. But Count John of Nassaw, who commands the Imperialists there (the
same that was so long prisoner at Wesell) continues in his resolution not to
march with his forces from thence, unless he receive express Commandment from
the Emperor. Mean while the Countries suffer pitifully, and are altogether
ruinated.

The thirteen Cantons of Switzerland have been assembled at Baden, where they
have been a good while busied, to advise how to make an agreement betwixt
those of Zurick and the Bishop of Costance, and the Abbot of S. Gall, who both
do demand the restitution of some Ecclesiastical goods and Churches from
those of Zurick and Berne. But all that consultation came to nothing. The
Protestants there have resolved and united themselves so, that they will give
no way to the pretenses of those Romanists, notwithstanding the injuries and
scornful words, which daily the Papists Priests utter, both publicly and
privately, and not without threatenings against them.

The Protestant Princes and States, which remain yet breathing in Germany, are
now together at Leipsick, at which Town the Elector of Saxen arrived on the 4.
of February last, with a Train consisting of 700. horses. And on the same day
there arrived also in person the Elector of Brandenburg, accompanied with 250.
horses. The Duke of Deuxponts, (a Prince Palatine that in time past was
Administrator at Heydelberg) being diverted by other occasions from coming
himself, has given his power and Commission to the Landgrave of Hessen. All
the Protestant Imperial Cities have sent their Deputies thither; and the
Circle of Suevia likewise, as also the Nobility of Franconia. The two Dukes of
Meckelburg, (notwithstanding that they are proscribed by the Emperor, and that
the Duke of Friedland has long since taken their Country) having been
invited thither by the Elector of Saxen, are also there. So that now there is
great expectation every where, what will be by them resolved and concluded.

Extract out of another Letter of the 15. of February.
THe King of Sweden past on the 4. of February, stilo novo, over the Bridge at
Stett^n, with an Army consisting of about sixteen thousand men, horse and
foot, and entered into the Dukedom of Meckelburg, where (as we receive good
information) he has taken many places of consequence, especially Matchin, and
is come before Gustrow, which was the Princely seat of the Dukes of Meckelburg,
and has, since the taking of the said Country by Walstein (otherwise Duke of
Friedland, to whom the Emperor gave that whole Dukedom) been by him, both
much fortified and much adorned, by many excellent Artificers, expressly sent
thither; as Painters, Gardners, Architects, etc. The said Duke of Friedland
intending to have there his Princely Court and residence.

The King of Sweden has left (besides the Garrisons of such places as he has
taken in Pomerania) behind him in the March of Brandenburg, an Army of 9000
men. And Tilly (not knowing what that King intended when he went back from
before Landsberg) gave order for the fortifying of a place called Beskou, and
sent many troops toward Franckfort on the Oder; which troops do there, and
in all those parts where now they are, commit such insolences, that it cannot
be written: They destroy and spoil all; and although there is but small, or in
some places no provision of victuals at all; yet whatsoever they find, it they
are not able to consume the same, or if it is not worth the carrying away, they
do spoil, burn, or otherwise make it useless.

The City of Strasburg having, upon the summons which the Imperial
Commissioners made, for the restitution of some Churches and Church Lands,
refused to obey, must now already suffer the said Commissioners in three of
their Villages, where the Ministers and Schoolmasters are commanded to avoid
these places: their Schools and Churches are taken, and the Imperial Arms
(the Black Eagle) put upon the doors. How the people, or rather the
Magistrate will digest this, time will teach us.

The City of Franckfort (on the Maine) is also in danger, for having refused
to receive some Jesuits that came thither by the Commission, they brought with
them from the Duke of Baveere, and the Electors of Maints.

We expect with great longing, what the Protestants will resolve at Leipsick,
where the first proposition was ma^e on the 10. of Febr. but it is so secret,
that I can tell you nothing more, but that we rather fear their fear, than
hope for any generous designs.

Extract of another Letter of the 25. of February.
IT is certain that the King of Sweden has taken the good Town of
New-Brandenburgh, where there lay a Garrison of Imper alists, commanded by
Colonel Marezan, who yielded the said Town by composition, and went out
(delivering the same to that brave King) with six hundred Soldiers, with
promise not to serve against the said King these three months.

The nowes of this reddition being brought to Treptow, (another good Town in
the Dukedom of Meckelberg, and also kept by an Imperial Garrison) the
Imperialists therein fearing to get not so good a condition, fled presently,
and so left the Town for the King, who being speedily advertised thereof,
took the same also on the same day.

And we understand that besides these Towns, he has since taken Malchin,
Malchow, Dammin, Garbaw, and other places: So that he is already master of all
the Dukedom of Meckelburg, save only four (but principal good) Towns;
being Wismar, Rostock, Butzow, and Damitz, which is a strong place, and lies
upon the River of Elbe. What he intends now to do, whether to besiege one of
those Towns, or to go toward Magdenburg, time must teach us: for his
intentions are kept in his own breast.

As for Tilly, we understand that he had gathered together eight thousand
Imperialists, with whom he marched toward Brandenburg, to hinder the said
Kings coming toward Magdenburg.

The Assembly of the Protestants began at Leipsick, and the first proposition
has been made, but it is kept as yet so secret, that we cannot hear what it
consists of.

It is written from thence, that amongst other Ambassadors and Deputies, there
has been admitted an Ambassador that came from the King of Sweden, and
another (whom they call Monsieur de L'isle) from the French King. But it is
much marvelled at, that the Cite of Hamburg has not sent any Deputy thither,
seeing Norimberg, Franckfort, and diverse other such Cities (who are now in
greater danger than Hamburg, and have been warned by diverse Electors, and
commanded by the Imperial Commiss oners, not to send any Deputy thither) have
notwithstanding sent their Deputies with full power and Commission.

Concerning the Countries of Gulick. Cleve, and Berghen, etc. It is now
certainly believed, that they shall be freed from all the troops that lie
therein, both of the Spaniards, Imperialists, and the States: Her Highnesle the
Infanta having published a Decree at Bruxels, bearing date the 19 of February
last, whereby she signifies, That upon their stance of the Duke of Newburg,
Her Highness does grant unto the Innabitants to raze and break down all
Fortifications that of late have been made in the said lands of Gulicke,
Cleve, Bergh, Marcke, Ravenspergh and Ravenstein, except only the three places
that are reserved. And concerning the withdrawing of all Forces and Soldiers
in the said Countries, That she had given order, that without sail, they all
should be drawn out of their Garrisons on the fifth day of March, stilo novo,
and shall be carried quite out of the said Countries, (although the said new
fortifications should not yet be razed) and carry with them only their
provisions and Munitions that belong unto them, leaving behind what they found
when they arrived: So that the Countries shall hereafter remain free and
neutrall; It being understood that the States shall likewise withdraw all their
Forces out of the said Countries, etc. Whether this has been performed, we
shall shortly hear.

LETTRE DV ROY, etc.
MONSIEUR de Frainuille,
I'auois occasion d'esperer apres tant depeines and de travaux que i'ay
supportez pour le bien and repos de cet Estat, que i'en r'emporterois le fruict
que ie m'estois promis: Mais comme i'ay este sur le poinct de jouir de ces
advantages, and fair ressenter a mes peuples le soulagement que ie leur ay
tousiours voulu procurer: Aucuns factieux ennemis de la tranquilite public,
ayans par leurs artifices esloigne d'aupres de moy mon Friar le Duc d'Orleans,
and en suitte aigry l'esprit de la Royne Madame ma Mere contre mon Cousin le
Cardinal de Richelieu, de tell sort qu'aucune consideration public ny
particuliere ne la peu ramener, quelque instance ou suplication que i'y aye
employee, Recognoissant combien elle estoit preoccupee par de mauuais conseilz,
I'ay estime a propos afin de l'esloinger de ceux qui artificieusement les luy
pouuoient suggerer, qu'elle s'arrestast pour quelque temps en ma ville de
Compeigne, attendant que son esprit se puisse adoucir: and mettre en estat de
concourir auec la sincerite quelle a faict par le pass au Conseilz que i'auray
a prendre a l'aduenir pour le bien de mon Estat: ainsi que vous verrez plus
particulierement par la Lettre que i'escris a ma Cour de Parliament, sur
laquelle me remettant ie n'adiouteray icy aucre chose si ce n'est pour vous
recommander de fair part de cette occasion a ceux de mes seruiteurs que vous
iugerez a propos. Sur ce ie pry Dieu qu'il vous dyt Monsieur de Frainuille en
sa saint guard.

Escrit a Compeigne le 23. Iour de Feurier, 1631. Sign, LOVIS.
Et plus bas, PHELYPEAVX.
Et seellee d'vn cachet en cire rouge.
Et a la superscription, A Monsieur de Frainuille, Conseiller enmon Conseil
d'estat, and Premier President en ^na Cour de Parliament de Rouen.
DE PAR LE ROY.
NOs AMEZ and feaulx,
Comme nous croyons auoir subject d'esperer que tant de trauaux que nous auons
depuis quelques annees continuellement suportez pour le bien de cet Estat, que
Dieu a soubmis a nostre conduitte, seroient approuuez and secondez par tous
ceux qui sont aupres de nous, Nous auons este bien estonnez lors qu'apres auoir
abbattu la rebellion de Rochelle, and de toutes les Villes qui luy ad'heroient,
Restably la Religion Catholic en toutes les Provinces de nostre Royaume,
secouru par deux fois noz alliez en Italy, and r'emporte des advantages qui
nous mettent en estat de ne deuoir porter envy a nos predecesseurs, Quelques
divisions domestiques qui ont este meditees par de mauuis Espritz de quelques
particuliers, pendant que nous estions du tout occupez aux grandes affairs
don't on a veu le succes. Nous ont empesche de jouir de la tranquilite que nous
deuions nous promettre auecraison; and de procurer dans icelle le soulagement
que nous desirions a nos subjetz, Recognoissant ce mal, qui nous a este
d'aurant plus sensible qu'il nous prive pour le present du fruict de nos soings
and de nos peins, qui n'ont autre fin que la descharge de nostre peuple que
nous auons tousiours eu en l'Esprit comme le but de toutes nos actions, Nous
n'auons rien cublie de tout ce qui nous a este possible pour y apporter remede;
Et par ce qu'on auoit aigry la Royne nostre tres-honoree Dame and Mere, contre
nostre tres-cher and bien ame Cousin le Cardinal de Richelieu, Il ny a
instance que nous n'ayons faicte, priere ny suplication que nous n'ayons
employee, n'y consideration public and particuliere que nous n'ayons mise en
auant pour adoucir son Esprit; Nostre dict Cousin recognoissant ce qu'il luy
doit par toutes sorts de considerations, a faict tont ce qu'il a peu por sa
satisfaction, se soubmettant auec toute l'humilite possible and tous les
respectz imaginables a tells loix quelle auroit agreeable de luy prescrire; Ce
que nous luy aurions offert plusieurs fois de nostre propre bouche, La
reverence qu'il a pour elle, la mesme port jusques a ce poinct, de nous
suplier and presser diuerses fois de trouuer bon qu'il se retirast du manime^t
de nos affairs; Ce que l'vtilite de ses services passez and l'interest de
nostre auctorite ne nous a pas seulement permis de penser a luy accorder. Nous
n'auons d'autre part rien obmis pour contenter l'Esprit de nostre tres-cher and
tres-ame Friar le Duc d'Orleans, jusques a donner a ceux qui ont le principal
pouuoir aupres de luy (selon son desir) plus de biens que l'estat de nos
finances ne pouuoit porter, Et des honneurs au dela de ce qu'ils deuoient
raisonnableme^t se promettre; Mais tout cela n'a pas empesche qu'ils ne l'ayent
faict sortir de la Cour, estimans qu'vne person de sa naissance estant
esloignee de nous, au mesme temps que la Royne nostre dicte Dame and Mere y
demeureroit, tesmoigna^t du mescontentement, Il seroit difficile que nous
peussions quelque adresse qu'on y peust apporter conduire nos affairs aux
bonnes fins que nous nous proposons pour la prosperity de ce Royaume, sa
grandeur, and le bien de nos subjects, Veu principallement les affairs que
nous auons encore au dehors. Pour ceste raison estant apres vne longue patience
venu en ceste ville de Compiegne, a fin que la Royne, bien intentionnee de
soy-mesme, esloignee par ce moyen beaucoup de mauuais Espritz, conspirast plus
facilement avec nous, aux moyens justes and raisonnables pour arresterle course
des factions qui se formoyent en nostre Estat, Ce don't nous l'auons faict
suplier par de nos principaux ministres, sans quelle ayt voulu v entendre. NOVS
AVONS en fin a nostre grand regret este contrainct de tenter vne remede plus
puissant a ce mal, que nous auons jusques a present esprouue si rebelle aux
plus benigns que nous y auons apportez, Et recongnoissan^ qu'aucuns des
autheurs de ces divisions continuoient a les entretenir, Nous n'auons peu
euiter d'en esloigner quelques vns de nostre Cour, n'y mesme quoy qu'auec vne
indicible peine de nous separer pour quelque temps d'elle, pendant lequel son
Esprit puisse s'adoucir and se remettre en estat de concourir auec la sincerite
quelle a faict par le pass aux Conceilz que nous auons a prendre a l'aduenir
pour garantirce Royaume des maux qui le menecent, lors qu'il deuoit recueillir
le fruit de nos labeurs: Nous esperons que la bonte de son naturel ramenera son
esprit, and la reunira bien tossed a nous: Nous le demandons a Dieu de tout
nostre Coeur, and qu'il benisse les bonnes intentions que nous auons pour cet
Estat, ainsi qu'il a faict par le pass.

Done a Compiegne, le 23. jour de Feburier, 1631. Sign, LOVIS.
Et plus bas, PHELYPEAVX.
Et seelle d'vn cachet encire rouge.
Et a la superscription, Anos amez and feaulx Conseillers, les Gens tenans
nostre Cour de Parliament de Rouen.
The French King his Letters, etc.
Monsieur de Freinuille:
WE had well hoped, that after so great labors and pains which we have
undergone for the good and quiet of this State, we should have received such
fruit as we promised our self. But so it is, that being upon the point of
enjoying these benefits, and ready to let our people feel the ease and comfort
which we have always studied to procure them: Some factious enemies of the
public peace, having by their sleights estranged our Brother the Duke of
Orleans from us, and consequently exasperated the spirit of the Queen our
Mother against our Coufin the Cardinal de Richelieu, in such sort that no
considerations, either public or private, notwithstanding all entreaties and
supplications we have used, could any whit move her. And well understanding
how deeply she was prepossest with ill counsels, we have thought it fit (to the
end she may be sequestered from such as cunningly might suggest them unto her)
that she abide for a while in our Town of Compiegne, until such time as her
spirit be lenified, and so well settled, that she concur (with the sincerity
which heretofore she has used) to such Counsels as we shall undertake
hereafter, for the good of our State. As you shall see more particularly by our
Letters written to our Court of Parliament, unto which referring our self, we
will add nothing here further, but only to will you that you impart this
business to such of our Servants as you shall think fittest. And so we pray
God have you in his keeping.

Written at Compeigne, Febr. 23. 1631. Signed, LEWIS.
And underneath, PHELYPEAVX.

The Superscription, To Monsieur Freinuille, one of our Counselors of State,
and Chief President in our Court of Parliament at Rouen.
To the Court of Parliament, etc.
By the King.
Trusty and welbeloved:
We supposed we had cause to hope that those many travels, which for certain
years together we have continually undergone, for the good of this State,
which God has committed to our charge, should have been well liked and
seconded by all them that are about us: Notwithstanding we marvel much, that
having brought down the Rebellion of Rochell, and all other the Towns her
adherents; re-established the Catholic Religion in all Provinces of our
Realm, as also twice helped our Allies in Italy, and returned with such
advantages as have put us in so good plight, that we need not envy any of our
predecessors: That now certain domestical dissentions, plotted by the
mischievous spirits of some particular men, whilst we were altogether busied in
those important affairs whereof we have seen the success; should hinder us
from enjoying that tranquillity, which with good reason we might expect, and
from procuring thereby that good to our Subjects which we desire. Understanding
well this mischief, which is so much the more sensible unto us, in that for
the present it deprives us of the fruit of all our care and pains, which have
never any other ends but the ease of our people, which we have continually in
our heart, as the principal scope of all our designs. We have forgot nothing
which has been possible on our part to give remedy thereto. And because they
have exasperated the Queen our most honored Lady and Mother, against our
dear and welbeloved Cousin the Cardinal of Richelieu: There remains no
entreaty which we have not made, nor prayer nor supplication which we have not
used, nor any consideration public nor private, which we have not set before
her, to assuage her spirit: Our said Cousin likewise acknowledging his duty to
her in all manner of respects, has done whatever he could to satisfy her,
submitting himself with all possible humility and all imaginable respects, to
such Laws as she her self should be pleased to prescribe him; which we have
likewise many times offered with our own mouth: This reverence which he has
ever had toward her notwithstanding, she has diverse times prayed and pressed
us, that we would think it good to remove him from the mannaging of our
affairs, which the utility of his past services, and the interest of our
Authority would not so much as permit us to think of condescending unto. On
the other side, we have omitted nothing to give content to our most dear and
welbeloved Brother the Duke of Orleans: insomuch that we have granted unto
them of principal rank and place about him, (according to his own desire)
more means than the state of our Revenue could well bear: And of honors
likewise, beyond that which with reason they could expect. Notwithstanding all
these, they have persuaded him to leave the Court: Adjudging that a Personage
of his birth and quality being departed from us, and at such time as the Queen
our said Lady and Mother abode there not without testimony of discontent; it
would be very hard for us (do what we can) to bring our affairs to good
issue, which we propose for the prosperity and honor of this Kingdom, and
the good of our Subjects; especially, considering the Designs which we have
yet abroad. For which cause, after long patience, being arrived at this our
Town of Compeigne, to the end that the Queen (who of her self is
wel-disposed) being by this means sequestered from many bad spirits, may the
better concur with us, by all just and reasonable means, to stop the course of
Factions which arise in our State: which thing we have often prayed her by our
principal Servants: notwithstanding she would not hearken thereto. We have
therefore, to our great grief, at last been constrained to assay a more
powerful remedy for this mischief, which we have found hitherto so
refractorie to the most gentle Cures we could apply. And understanding that
certain of the Authors of these divisions do yet continue to cherish them, we
could not choose but sequester some of them from our Court, and to separate our
self for a while, though with pain unspeakeable, from the Queen our dear
Mother, until such time as her spirit be lenified, and she brought to concur,
with such sincerity as she has hertofore done, to those Designs which we are
to undertake hereafter, for the security of this Kingdom from those mischiefs
that threaten it now, at such time as it ought to reap the fruits of our
labors: We hope that the goodness of her nature will shortly reduce her spirit,
and reunite it unto us: Which we beg of Almighty God with all our heart, and
that he will bless the good intentions which we have for this State, as he
hitherto has done.

Dated at Compeigne, Februar. 23. 1631. Signed LEWIS.
And underneath, PHELYPEAVX.

Superscribed, To our trusty and wel-beloved Councillors, the members of our
Court of Parliament at Rouen.
FINIS.
June, 2^

Numb. 31.

THE CONTINVATION of our weekly Nevves from Forr^ine parts. ^^ntay^^^^ amongst
diverse matters these Particulars following.

The preparation of the Duke of Saxony and all the Protestant Princes, and
their unanimous joining with the King of Sweden, for the recovery and
preservation of their Liberties, against the unjust persecution of the Emperor.

The great Preparation of the King of SWEDEN for the performance of some great
Design about the River Elve.

The Emperors denunciation of grievous Punishment against the City
Newrembergh and all that shall partake with them, by reason they continue in
the raising Forces contrary to the Emperors Command, to which end the Emperor
has given charge to the D. of Bavaria to oppose them with all his power.

Two thundering Ploclamations of the Emperors, against all the Protestant
Princes of the late Diet at Lypsich, and all those which Join with them.

The Malicious inhumane Cruelty offered to the Dead bodies of those which were
Martyred at the taking of M^^denburgh, and Tillies causing of Te Deum to be
sung for his Bloody massacring of the innocent Protestants.

The late proceeding (...) both sides in the Low Countries.

LONDON. Printed for Nath: Butter and Nicholas Bourne. 1631.

THE CONTINVATION OF our Weekly News.
From Venice the 24. of May. 1631.
COncerning the Peace now, there is no farther question made, since there are
no more forces leavied. And besides this, the Governor of Mylan has
faithfully promised within the space of one Month, to establish a General
reformation.

The Messenger which is returned from his Emperial Maj. Certify, that
notwithstanding his Maj. did not well like and approve of the agreement made at
Cherasco, concerning the Switzers at Suza, and Avigliano. Nevertheless, he is
now willing to stand to, and ratify the same: to the end, that Jtalie might
subsist in Peace and tranquillity, and all these broils and distractions, may
be allayed and have a quiet end. And furthermore, that remainder of those
Spanish forces in Jtalie, may be brought together, and march toward the
lower-Palatinate, there to be enquartered. For all the Forces out of those
parts are departed, and are at this present employed, some of them against the
King of Sweden, and the rest are marched into the Netherlands, and are employed
against the States.

From Overlandt the 26. of May.
The troops of Soldiers which late came out of Italy, remain yet in full
essence, and are daily strengthened and augmented. It seems that whereas
formerly, the resolution was to bring them down toward the Donon, the same no^
is altered; those Forces shall be employed against the League, contracted by
the Protestant Princes and Peers at Leypsich. Especially, for the defense of
the smaller Towns, as Memming and the like. Which at this present are in great
danger, and extremely threatened, if so be they would not yield themselves to
that League, and receive some of the Protestant forces, that then they shall
presently be attached. Hereupon the Imperialists do not only expect the rest
of their forces, but also certain thousands more of Spanish and Italians to
aid and assist them. Wherefore men in these parts are much troubled and
perplexed, and take great care how to dispose of all their troops, and where
they shall become, and how they shall be billetted and enquartered. His Maj.
the Emperor, has forewarned us in these parts, not only to provide for the
enquartering of those Spanish and Italian Forces, which are to come, and are
now upon the march, but also to find quarter for 25000. other forces, which
shall be newly raised.

From Vlm the 25 of May.
The Imperial Forces from Jtalie being 8000. strong are yet hereabouts, they
inform us that certain thousands more Spanish Forces are shortly to follow
them.

They intend to block up Memmimgen, and will again reduce the same under
contribution, and bring it under the Emperors Jurisdiction. And for the
ensuring of the same, they will lay in some Troops for Garrison there. And
doubtless as those of Memmimgen speed, we must look for the same, and not to
fare better than our neighbors. Wherefore we of this City, the better to
defend and guard our selves, we have caused all the trees to be hewn down,
which stood before the Helbergate of this City. The Duke of Wirtenbergh with
his forces, lies upon the frontiers.

From Berlyn the 27. of May.
The foot Forces of the King of Sweden at this present are at Posedan. And his
Cavallerie is between the Dessaw Sconce, and Posedan. It seems as we by all
circumstances can gather, and conjecture, that his Majesty intends not to
enquarter long in these parts. But do rather think that he will undertake
some siedge or other. For his Majesty to that end has caused many boards and
other necessaries to be shipped. And forth of every Regiment he has taken 400.
horse, for to convey the Ordnance, munition, and other Sconce provision. The
Lord Feeld-Marshall conducts an Army of 1000. men, which he does daily enforce
and augment, and levies very strongly to that end. The Forces which were in
Pomerania, are now on the march.

From Franfort Oder the 29. of May.
All things here (God be praised) are in good being, and great and vigilant
care is taken for this City: great pains daily is taken about the
fortifications of the same. Within this Week were brought into this City, so
many horses of the Imperialists, as made up 5. Companies complete. These horses
were taken grafing near unto great Glogan. The Queens Majesty of Sweden sent
hither lately two Camels richly Laden, to his Maj. with enformation, that God
willing she does intend shortly to arrive at Wolgast or at Straelzondt her
self in person. Yesterday here marched by 3. Regiments toward Crossend and
farther into Silesia.

About Statyn great forces are raised, and the King of Sweden-causes an Army to
be assembled to assault the Imperialists which are at Melchim. There are daily
and hourly expected 2000. men from Colbergh to march hither, and also 6000.
from Rugen. When these shall be arrived, his Maj. resolves with violence
vehemently to assault Gripswolde, and afterward to conduct an Army into
Mechelenbergh.

From Leypsich the 31. of May.
The Prince Elector of Saxony, as also, the Marq. of Brandenbrugh, with their
Dukedomes and all their adherents, and Confederates, have yielded and betaken
themselves freely unto the defense and protection of his Maj. of Sweden. The
passage of Wirtenbergh is now also granted unto his Maj. At this present here
at Leipscich are Ambassadors of the King of England, the King of Sweden, the
Prince Elector of Saxony, and of the Marquis of Brandenburgh. And certain it
is that throughout the whole Dukedom of Saxony, the Drum beats, and forces
levied openly for his Majesty of Sweden.

The Merchants here must contribute to his Princely Excellence of Saxony, 6000.
and the rest of the Citizens of Leipsich, 2000. Florins: and besides this sum,
a general contribution will be raised throughout the whole Dukedom.

Magd^nburgh by the reason of the late miserable and hideous disaster happened
there, is reduced to an heap of stones, being qiute and utterly ruinated.
There are not left standing above 60. or 70. houses about the Walls, and here
and there an house at the corner of a Street.

His Majesty of Sweden causes a Ship-Bridge to be laid over the River of Elve,
at Anger^^^^t.

From Leypsich the first of June.
Last Thursday the Prince Elector of Saxony, departed hence to Torgau, to
muster, the new levied forces there, which are certain thousands strong, he
will return from thence hither again. He has more Patents to levy other
forces, both horse and foot.

The report here is very strong, that the General Tilly has sent a Legate to
our Prince Elector: to acquaint him, that very shortly he does intend to come
himself in person, to confer with his Princely Excellence; declaring
farther, that he had obtained good means for the contracting of a Peace; which
then he would propound unto him. And that he had full authority and Commission
from his Emp. Maj. which Tilly has consented unto.

Within Wirtenbergh at this present, are 1500. Soldiers, which were levied for
the Duke of Saxony, In their Ensign they bare this Motto.

Through Gods Almighty hand,
We do defend our Land.
In other Ensigns which belong to the Forces of the Protestant Princes is
comprised this.

Not without cause, do We maintain this Caus^. The General Tilly causes all
the Ordnance (which he obtained in Magde^burgh) to be convayed to Groingen, and
has also given charge and strickt command to two o^ three hundred Boores or
Countrymen, to cast all those Soldiers which were taken Prisoners in the said
City Magdenburgh, with the Carcasses of the poor Massacred people, into the
river Eive. But his own Soldiers which were slaie in that expedition, he
yielded extraordinary honorable burial. He has caused the said Prisoners to
be strictly examined, to know what is become of their treasure, and where they
have hid the same The General does at this present strike a bridge over the
River Elve, to march with an army against the King of Sweden.

The army of the King of Sweden is pitched about Brandenburgh, Ratenan, Nawen,
Tremmen, Spandan, and those quarters. The Duke of Saxony, the Marq. of
Brandenburgh, and more of the United and Confederate Princes, have given
themselves under the Protection of his Majesty of Sweden, and have yielded unto
him the passage near unto Wir^^^bergh.

The report is very strong here, that the King of Sweden does intend to revenge
the intolerable usage of the Imperialists at Magdenburgh, he has some notable
exployt in hand, wherefore he has newly laid a Bridge over the River Elve,
near unto Angermunde.

His Emp. Maj. has denounced Banishment, and sorely threatened the City
Neurenbergh, because they continue leavying of forces his Majesty therefore
has delivered the same City to the Duke of Bavaria, and strongly charged the
said Duke to persecute those that are belonging unto Neurenburgh with fire and
sword: as also all those that adhere unto them. But they regard not these
threatenings, but do proceed strongly with their raising of men. And not only
at Neurenburgh, but throughout the whole Jurisdictions of all the Protestant
Princes.

His Majesty of Sweden has arrested and stayed certain Merchants at Spancan,
who were journeying toward Hamburgh, and required of them fifty thousand
Ryxdollers, which they were constrained to pay, because they had in their
company an Imperial Commissarie, who had betaken himself into this Company,
to be sheltered and so to pass for a Merchant, who otherwise in former time
was run from his Majesty of Swedens service, unto the Emperor but now is in
hold.

From Magdenburgh the 28. of May.
All the dead Carcasses are now almost convayed out of this City, which have
sorely pestered and annoyed us hitherto, and above 2500. Citizens, which were
slain in the fury and burnt, are cast into the River Elve. There were many of
them so dissigured with the fire, that it was impossible any way to discern
them who they were. Yesterday here was sung for Joy of the taking of this
City. To Deum Laudamus, and the Ordnance of the City, three times discharged.
The General Tilly is at this present here, and is lodged in the 6. Shop-houses
with his Concomitants.

From Brandenburgh the first of June.
The whole Marck even unto the river Elue, is now quite freed from the
Imperialists. Yesterday Doctor Stollman arrived here, who was taken prisoner at
the loosing of M^^denburgh with his Son. He escaped with his Son whilst
the fire was so exceeding great in the Emperors Army near unto Magdenburgh,
but was constrained to swim through the River Elue, but now is here with his
Majesty of Sweden. Into this Army come daily some Magdenburgers or other which
formerly were imprisoned but now are ransomed. Yesterday were attached the
Hamburger goods which were brought from Leypsich between Ferberlin and
Spandon. A certain Commissarie of the Emperor named Potau thought to have
passed along currantly with their Marchandizes, but both he and they were stayed
and brought to Spandou

The Hamb^rgers for the releasing of their Commodities have proferred the Kings
Majesty 80000 Ryxedollers. At W^^g^^st are arrived 5000. men which came out of
Swede^, and more forces are thence expected daily. Besides these, 15000 men are
also expected from Mulcouia.

From Franckfort-Oder the 2. dit^.
Yesterday were brought in hither 5. Companies of Horse, which our forces took
from the Imperialists near unto great G^ogau, having defeated the Men. Hence
are gone 3. Companies out of this City, as also diverse out of other Cities to
releeve Crossen, which the Imperialists seem to aim at. Here in this City
are still abundance of men and amongst the rest 800. sick Soldiers. His
Majesty of Sweden has shipped above 100. pieces of Ordnance at the Haukll. Some
light pieces which may be drawn with one, and two horses. He intends
doubtless some notable enterprise. For in his march he ioynes to every
Regiment 10. Pieces of Ordnance.

From Isleven, the 30. o^ May.
The 1^. of this Month, the Imperial Army near unto Magdenburgh, happened on
fire in three several places: which fire did much harm amongst them. But by
their loss some fared the better. For Doctor S^^^man the Swedish Chancellor,
escaped from his imprisonment who was imprisoned with the Bishop of
Halverstad^. This Doctor, and his son, and two Gentlemen, Servants to the
Marshall Falckenburgh, and one Captain Cresse, escaped, and are safely arrived
at Brandenburgh. There were 400 Children of tender years within Magdenburgh;
kept two days long in the Cathedral Church, which missed their Parents and
knew not what was become of them, these poor children in two days space, eat
no victuals, insomuch that some of them were famished.

The Imperial Mandat or Decree published against the conclusion and resolution
lately taken by the Protestant Electors, Princes and States, assembled at
Leipsick.
FErdinand, etc. To all and every our and the holy Empires Electors, Princes,
spiritual and temporal Prelates, Earls, Barons, Lords, Knights, Marshalls,
Captains, Majors, Bailiffs, Judges, Counselors, Citizens, Communalties, and
to all and every our and the Empires Subjects: But more particularly to all
Commanders, Colonels, Captains both of horse and foot, Ensigns, Lievtenants,
and to all other Officers, and generally to all Soldiers both foot and horse,
of what nation, dignity and condition soever, and in what scrvice (out of our
Armies) soever they are or may be, unto whom these our Patents and
Commandments, or a true copy thereof (which we will have believed and obeyed
as the Original it self) shall appear, We hereby do signify, Whereas by
Letters dated the fourth of April last the Elector and Duke of Saxen has given
us notice of a conclusion made by the Electors, States, Counselors,
Ambassadors, Deputies, and Commissioners of such Protestants as were absent,
lately assembled at Leipsick, the strangeness whereof has much moved and
filled with displeasure our Imperial heart, since that the said Electors,
Princes and States have agreed and bound themselves, quite contrary to our
admonitions sent before to the said electour of Saxen, under pretext of an
order of Execution of the Circles, to make a dangerous preparation of War;
and, without any signification of their number and designs, make now already
(as from diverse parts we are advertised) in several Circles, and particularly
in our Imperial Cities great levies: And whereas it is easy to presume, that
at this perilous constitution of the Empire, where the King of Sweden is
entered as an enemy and having already taken whole Pomerany, a part of the Mark
of Brandenburg, and some places Mecke^burg, will daily proceed, and incite
other foreign forces to do much: Where the rebellious Town of Magdenburg is
not yet brought to obedience, and where many old dangers do yet appear; such
a dangerous beginning and intent would tend to hinder (and as it were to
bereave us of) all means to maintain the Wars, now so requisite for the
defense and necessity of the holy Empire and States thereof; it would further
and advantage the power of the enemies; cause yet a greater confusion, troubles
and evils, and withal a far greater mistrust and hatred amongst this Nation:
Yea (unless it be with all speed withstood) it would bring into the whole
Roman Empire of the German Nation (our dear Country) a new unquenchable fire
whereby the same (which these 800 years has most sweetly flourished) would
now at once be consumed to ashes and wholly overthrown. Therefore we knowing
that our duty requires that, as Roman Emperor we do prevent all such
threatening evils, and that such agreements and unions are not to be made nor
suffered without the knowledge, consent and pleasure of the Roman Emperor, who
we are, but that they are quite contrary unto the Laws, orders and
constitutions of the Empire, and the dehortations and admonitions made by us
being prohibited under great and grievous punishments, so that we intend by no
means to suffer the same. We do hereby admonish, will and command you and
every of you, and our express will, pleasure and commandment is, that you do
not give nor permit any place of Rendez-vous unto my troops or soldiers, that
are, may or might be levied on the behalf of the said agreement and conclusion
made at Leipsick; Neither grant any of them passage or pass whatsoever, but
rather where any shall be met or found, that you beat, destroy, disperse and
kill them, as you will answer the contrary at your perils of the punishments
expressed in the constitutions of the Empire. And most earnestly we do require
and command you the Colonels, I is vtenants Captains, Ensigns Commanders, and
all other Officers both of horse and foot, and all soldiers of what name,
condition and quality soever they are or may be, that already are received and
entered, or shall yet enter into service of the said preparation and agreement
made at Leipsick, against our knowledge, will and pleasure, and against our
deho^tations, and the Laws and Rights of the Empire; and more particularly all
those that in any way are subject unto us and the holy Empire upon pain and
perils comprehended in the said Imperial constitutions, and upon pain to lose
all the privileges, favors, rights, lands, possessions, and also all rights
of Companies, Cities and birth; And such others as are not subject to us nor
the Empire, upon pain of death, when and wheresoever they shall be
apprehended. We most earnestly and expressly command, to give over and forsake
all such service, and in time to come never to return or enter into the same
without our knowledge and permission, under what pretext or color soever they
be required or may be induced: And that you make no excuse of your stay by
reason of the oath you may or might be sworn and bound by, since the same in
this constitution of time is without force I and we do hereby and by virtue of
our Imperial power discharge and free you of: And if there should be found
some amongst you the said Colonels, Captains, Ensigns, and other Officers and
common soldiers of horse or foot, that have entered into any service either at
home in their own Country, or abroad amongst the troops of strangers, they
and every of them, that in obedience to this our Imperial commandment do or
shall return from that their service unto our troops, there to serve us and
the Empire, and bring their attestations from our Officers, shall have a
general and special pardon, and be received again into our Imperial grace.
And we will and command withal you the said Electors, Princes and States,
lately thus arrived at Leipsick, not to charge or lay upon your vassals,
tenants inhabitants, burgers and subjects (in all and every your Countries,
Dominions, Cities, and also all Imperial Towns and Dominions) any
contribution, tax or subsidy for and on the behalf of your said levies
intended and made against our will and contrary to the constitutions of the
Empire; Commanding withal, if any such imposition and contribution is or
should be required, all you the vassals, tenants, burgers, inhabitants and
subjects aforesaid upon the like and before mentioned pain and upon peril to
lose all privileges, rights, and freedoms above ment^oned, not to pay or to
deliver the said contribution, but rather ^o remain constant and faithful in
those duties you owe to us, as Roman Emperor and Supreme head of the hol^
R^oma^ Empire, and also to show all favor and furtherance to him that brings
this our Imperial and express commandment, that the same may without any let
or molestation be hung up and published, according to your duty and according
to our resolution and gracious and constant intention, that we will not suffer
you nor any of you, the Electors, Princes and all others, upon your obedience
and duty you shall show herein, to be troubled or grieved, either by us or
others, against the peace of the Religion and Policy. And hereof you are not to
fail, but dutifully to obey as you tender our pleasure, and will avoid the
punishments and real execution of the foresaid pain. And this is our express
will and pleasure.

Given at Vienna the fourteenth day of May, 1631.
Extract of several fresh Letters written out of Germany.
THe cruelty used by the Imperialists at the taking of Magdenburg (the like no
History has nor could ever make mention of) had indeed troubled many
Protestants in Germany, especially the Elector of Saxen found himself much
perplexed upon the news thereof, when he likewise was much troubled and urged
by an Imperial Ambassador and many other Messengers and letters, both from
the Emperor and other Catholic Electors and Princes. Howsoever seeing by the
example of Magdenburg what he and others of his Profession and Religion have to
look for at their enemies hands and promises, and considering the Imperial
Mandates and Proclamations, published (like a thunder) against the conclusion
lately taken by him and other Protestant Princes and States assembled at
Leipsick; and hearing withal of the doubt and fear diverse made of his
constancy in the said resolution, he both gave order for the greater speed in
the levying of his own forces and sent also several Messengers to other
Protestant Princes, States and Imperial Cities, with ample letters, whereby he
does not only assure them of his constancy and proceeding in the performance
of their resolution, But exhorts them also, to make greater haste and to take
more care than some of them did hitherto to prepare and defend themselves,
representing the great necessity and danger, their enemies extraordinary
arming, threatenings and executions would else bring them into. These letters of
his have very much rejoiced and strengthened all the good party, especially
Norimberg, Strasburg and other good Towns, the most part whereof are already
well provided and armed. But Memming lying some what aside and feeling already
those Imperial forces as came and yet daily come out of Jtaly (which amount to
some six or seven thousand thereabouts) near them, they fear (as being
nearest to the danger) the execution might begin at their Town, howbeit they
have as yet and do still refuse any further contribution and admittance of an
Imperial Garrison, where formerly they were subject unto.

The Elector of Saxen has laid 10. or 12. thousand men upon his frontiers and
makes great preparation.

Tilly marches with an army of 25000. men up into Germany, either into the
Dukedom of Wimar, as some think, or else toward the Country of Hessen (as is
most likely) there to defeat the forces of the Circle of the Rhine, who have
there their Rendezvous, and part whereof have lately defeated some of those
Imperial tsoops that Tilly had sent to hinder their said Reudezvous.

The King of Sweden (having firmed a royal Camp, since the Elector of Saxen
did not grant him for his surety and retreat the Town of Wittenberg to put
his Garrison into, nor passage through his Country) expects more forces out
of Prussia and from other parts; mean while he has an army in Silesia to
which he has sent some troops for reinforcing and the better to oppose them
all against the Jmperialists that intend to besiege Crossen.

Some of his Caualrie met lately with five Companies of Crabates that came out
of Magdenburg laden with very rich booty they made there, which five Companies
were all defeated, and left all their riches (as if they had expressly fetched
the same) unto the Swedish troops.

The like good fortune befell lately to the Garrison of Wesell, who met with a
convoy that carried much money toward the Spanish Camp, which convoy being
also beaten left all the money behind them in their enemies hands.

From Arnhem the 11 of June.
Our soldiers of Wesell and the near adjoining Garrisons 160 strong, have
defeated a Convoy which was going from Culin to Antwerp, they were conducted by
those of Rhynberk and Orsoy, and were set upon by our men near about Deuren.
In which exploit our soldiers obtained great booty 150000 Rixdo^lers in specie,
much Silk and other rich commodity, swherewith diverse Carts were laden. The
rest of the booty besides the ready Coin does amount to the sum of 250000
Rixdollers, this booty they brought into Wesell last Sunday in the vening and
60 or 70 serviceable horses, and 2 Ensigns. The spanish soldiers fled all of
them, only the waggoners, and some other laboring men opposed our men, and
killed 3 or 4 of them, but there was no means for them to prevail.

The Governor, Chancellor, and Council of the Province of Geldria, and the
Earldome of Zutphen have prescribed a general day of meeting, the 17 of June
at Nimmegen, where the whole country is to appear.

The 12. of June from the Army of his Excellence the Prince of Orange.
Whereas his Excel the Prince of Orange, had pitched Army at the side of the
River Ley before the City Bridges the 3 of month, each one thought that his
Excellence was of intention to approach and besiege the said City. But now it
appears probably that his Excel. was not so minded, for he did not entrench
himself there, but lay with his Army in the field only. In the mean while
certain Committees were sent out of the said City in the name of the 4 parts
of Flanders to treat with his Excelle^ce concerning the contribution which was
behind and had long time been unpayd, insomuch that they gave security for
entire payment of 10 years contribution. Whereupon his Excel with his whole
Army departed, and the very same night took his resting place at Maldegom,
where we passed the 5 of June over the river Lieve toward Walichem and from
thence toward Eckelo, and Caprick, and the 7 of ^une returned back with our
whole army at Watervliet, where his Excel. instantly caused retrenchments to
be cast up all along the Holland Dike, for the better ensuring of his army, so
that ^n case the spanish forces (which as we understood had continually
followed us) had come upon us, then had we taken the said Dike for our defense.

The 8 of June the provision of his Excel, was embarked, and his horse
troops, being commanded presently as soon as they should be landed to march
toward Berg^nop Zoome. Yesterday were all the Land, forces shipped, and all the
wagons put aboard. The sirelockes in the mean time stood in battle array, and
held the watch until all things were safely embarked. Thus with the whole
train of our army we marched from Ysenayck to Ramm^kens, and so downwards,
sailing many hundred ships together, and so forsook the Flemish coasts,
which country in this our expedition we have wholly brought under contribution
until the very City Geudt. His Excellence in this expedition had a very
vigilant regard over his whole army and a special care that all things might
be carried very orderly insomuch that he caused many of his soldiers to be
hanged for their misdemeanors and insolences committed against the
inhabitants of the Country: But the like care was not taken on the other side,
for many of our soldiers which did straggle somewhat out of their limits had by
them their Noses and Ears cut off. Three soldiers wives with a child of 8
years were taken by the Flemish and hanged.

The same day that we came to Watervliet, the spanish that night arrived at
Caprick, but did not show themselves any nearer unto us So that in this
enterprise, we have not met with our enemy to any purpose, and have found no
resistance worthy of relation. Only we were informed that the enemy brought
his whole army together, therewith intending to cut off all passages from our
army and hinder the victuals from coming to us. What shall follow hereafter
in time we shall acquaint you.

From Dort 13. of June.
The army of his Excellence the Prince of Orange is returned again out of
Flaunders into these parts. Before this City are many ships laden with
Ordnance, Munition, provision and all warlike necessaries: Most of the h^rsemen
were landed at Geertruydenbergh, and presently hasted thence to Oosterh^ut,
Gilsen and other villages about Breda. The foot forces sail all of them toward
the high and lower Swalwe, and Geertruydenbergh, whether these also will land
there the time will manifest. In the mean while here and in diverse other
places many thousands of loaves are baked for the army.

The country people in the country of Hensden and Altena, fly with all their
goods and movables from their country habitations into the Cities. Their
Excellencies the States have prohibited preaching among the Catholics in the
Villages and Towns belonging to S'hertogenbosch, so that all the Churches are
shut up continually.

We have intelligence from Antwerpe with the last letters, that in the
beginning of May the fleet of 25 ships at Lisbona is set sail, among these are
15 Gallioons with 4000, some suppose they are gone toward Calis Mal^^ join
themselves to the Castilian armado, others are (...) that they are bound for
Cabo-verde, there to expect (...) rest, and so to pass forward to Brasill.

His Majesty of France is at S. Germani, a^^ the Queen Mother is arrived at
Paris with her whole family or household: But his Majesty had rather that she
had remained at Moulins: Her guard is now less than it has been neither is
she so strongly warded as formerly. The kings brother is still a^ Nancie, The
Lord President Legneux is much condemned, for not counselling his Majesty's
brother for the best in these differences, The king has charged the Parliament
to call Marshall Marilack in question, which might easily endanger his life, by
reason that he has committed gross faults in Champa^gne, as also in Italy,
in warlike affairs.

The^^ goes a strong report, that new wars is very like to ensue between
the Pope, and the great Duke of Moscovy, concerning the succession in Vrbinaet.

Notwithstanding the Commander Pinsen his ransom is ready, nevertheless he
is not yet at liberty. Count Henry vanden Bergh questioning one day with him,
what he thought the Prince of Orange his enterprise might be, he answered him
merrily, His Excellence is wise enough to conceal that from me, knowing that I
cannot keep counsel. The said count Henry is yet at Venlo with 3 or 4 hundred
Mariners, it is thought that he will attempt something or other.

FINIS.

