June, 25.

Numb. 31.

THE CONTINVATION of our weekly News from Foreign parts, Containing amongst
diverse matters these Particulars following.

The preparation of the Duke of Saxony and all the Protestant Princes, and
their unanimous joining with the King of Sweden, for the recovery and
preservation of their Liberties, against the unjust persecution of the
Emperor. The great Preparation of the King of SWEDEN for the performance of
some great Design about the River Elve. The Emperors denunciation of grievous
Punishment against the City Newrembergh and all that shall partake with them,
by reason they continue in the raising Forces contrary to the Emperors
Command, to which end the Emperor has given charge to the D. of Bavaria to
oppose them with all his power. Two thundering Ploclamations of the Emperors,
against all the Protestant Princes of the late Diet at Lypsich, and all those
which Join with them. The Malicious inhumane Cruelty offered to the Dead
bodies of those which were Martyred at the taking of Magdenburgh, and T^llies
causing of Te Deum to be sung for his Bloody massacring of the innocent
Protestants. The late proceeding on both sides in the Low Countries.
LONDON. Printed for Nath: Butter and Nicholas Bourne. 1631.

THE CONTINVATION OF our Weekly News.
From Venice the 24. of May. 1631.
COncerning the Peace now, there is no farther question made, since there are
no more forces leavied. And besides this, the Governor of Mylan has
faithfully promised within the space of one Month, to establish a General
reformation.

The Messenger which is returned from his Emperial Maj. Certify, that
notwithstanding his Maj. did not well like and approve of the agreement made at
Cherasco, concerning the Switzers at Suza, and Avigliano. Nevertheless, he is
now willing to stand to, and ratify the same: to the end, that Italy might
subsist in Peace and tranquillity, and all these broils and distractions, may
be allayed and have a quiet end. And furthermore, that remainder of those
Spanish forces in Jtalie, may be brought together, and march toward the
lower-Palatinate, there to be enquartered. For all the Forces out of those
parts are departed, and are at this present employed, some of them against the
King of Sweden, and the rest are marched into the Netherlands, and are employed
against the States.

From Overlandt the 26. of May.
The troops of Soldiers which late came out of Italy, remain yet in full
essence, and are daily strengthened and augmented. It seems that whereas
formerly, there solution was to bring them down toward the Donou, the same no^
is altered; those Forces shall be employed against the League, contracted by
the Protestant Princes and Peers at Leypsich. Especially, for the defense of
the smaller Towns, as Memming and the like. Which at this present are in great
danger, and extremely threatened, if so be they would not yield themselves to
that League, and receive some of the Protestant forces, that then they shall
presently be attached. Hereupon the Imperialists do not only expect the rest
of their forces, but also certain thousands more of Spanish and Italians to
aid and assist them. Wherefore men in these parts are much troubled and
perplexed, and take great care how to dispose of all their troops, and where
they shall become, and how they shall be billetted and enquartered. His Maj.
the Emperor, has forewarned us in these parts, not only to provide for the
enquartering of those Spanish and Italian Forces, which are to come, and are
now upon the march, but also to find quarter for 25000. other forces, which
shall be newly raised.

From Vlm the 25 of May.
The Imperial Forces from Jtalie being 8000. strong are yet hereabouts, they
inform us that certain thousands more Spanish Forces are shortly to follow
them.

They intend to block up Memmimgen, and will again reduce the same under
contribution, and bring it under the Emperors Jurisdiction. And for the
ensuring of the same, they will lay in some Troops for Garrison there. And
doubtless as those of Memmimgen speed, we must look for the same, and not to
fare better than our neighbors. Wherefore we of this City, the better to
defend and guard our selves, we have caused all the trees to be hewn down,
which stood before the Helbergate of this City. The Duke of Wirtenbergh with
his forces, lies upon the frontiers.

From Berlyn the 27. of May.
The foot Forces of the King of Sweden at this present are at Posedan. And his
Cavallerie is between the Dessaw Sconce, and Posedan. It seems as we by all
circumstances can gather, and conjecture, that his Majesty intends not to
enquarter long in these parts. But do rather think that he will undertake
some siedge or other. For his Majesty to that end has caused many boards and
other necessaries to be shipped. And forth of every Regiment he has taken 400.
horse, for to convey the Ordnance, munition, and other Sconce provision. The
Lord Feeld-Marshall conducts an Army of 1000. men, which he does daily enforce
and augment, and levies very strongly to that end. The Forces which were in
Pomerania, are now on the march.

From Franfort Oder the 29. of May.
All things here (God be praised) are in good being, and great and vigilant
care is taken for this City: great pains daily is taken about the
fortifications of the same. Within this Week were brought into this City, so
many horses of the Imperialists, as made up 5. Companies complete. These horses
were taken grafing near unto great Glogan. The Queens Majesty of S^eaen sent
hither lately two Camels richly Laden, to his Maj. with enformation, that God
willing she does intend shortly to arrive at Wolgast or at Straelzondt her
self in person. Yesterday here marched by 3. Regiments toward Crossend and
farther into Silesia.

About Statyn great forces are raised, and the King of Sweden causes an Army to
be assembled to assault the Imperialists which are at Melchim. There are daily
and hourly expected 2000. men from Colbergh to march hither, and also 6000.
from Rugen. When these shall be arrived, his Maj. resolves with violence
vehemently to assault Gripswolde, and afterward to conduct an Army into
Mechelenbergh.

From Leypsich the 31. of May.
The Prince Elector of Saxony, as also, the Marq. of Brandenbrugh, with their
Dukedomes and all their adherents, and Confederates, have yielded and betaken
themselves freely unto the defense and protection of his Maj. of Sweden. The
passage of Wirtenbergh is now also granted unto his Maj. At this present here
at Leipseich are Ambassadors of the King of England, the King of Sweden, the
Prince Elector of Saxony, and of the Marquis of Brandenburgh. And certain it
is that throughout the whole Dukedom of Saxony, the Drum beats, and forces
levied openly for his Majesty of Sweden.

The Merchants here must contribute to his Princely Excellence of Saxony, 6000.
and the rest of the Citizens of Leipsich, 2000. Florins: and besides this sum,
a general contribution will be raised throughout the whole Dukedom.

Magdonburgh by the reason of the late miserable and hideous disaster happened
there, is reduced to an heap of stones, being quite and utterly ruinated.
There are not left standing above 60. or 70. houses about the Walls, and here
and there an house at the corner of a Street.

His Majesty of Sweden causes a Ship-Bridge to be laid over the River of Elve,
at Angermundt.

From Leypsich the first of June.
Last Thursday the Prince Elector of Saxony, departed hence to ^orgau, to
muster, the new levied forces there, which are certain thousands strong, he
will return from thence hither again. He has more Patents to levy other
forces, both horse and foot.

The report here is very strong, that the General Tilly has sent a Legate to
our Prince Elector: to acquaint him, that very shortly he does intend to come
himself in person, to confer with his Princely Excellence; declaring
farther, that he had obtained good means for the contracting of a Peace; which
then he would propound unto him. And that he had full authority and Commission
from his Emp. Maj. which Tilly has consented unto.

Within Wirtenbergh at this present, are 1500. Soldiers, which were levied for
the Duke of Saxony, In their Ensign they bare this Motto.

Through Gods Almighty hand,
We do defend our Land.
In other Ensigns which belong to the Forces of the Protestant Princes is
comprised this.

Not without cause, do We maintain this Cause. The General Tilly causes all
the Ordnance (which he obtained in Magde^burgh) to be convayed to Groingen, and
has also given charge and strickt command to two or three hundred Boores or
Countrymen, to cast all those Soldiers which were taken Prisoners in the said
City Magdenburgh, with the Carcasses of the poor Massacred people, into the
river Eive. But his own Soldiers which were slain in that expedition, he
yielded extraordinary honorable burial. He has caused the said Prisoners to
be strictly examined, to know what is become of their treasure, and where they
have hid the same The General does at this present strike a bridge over the
River Elve, to march with an army against the King of S^eden.

The army of the King of Sweden is pitched about Brandenburgh, Ratenau, Nawen,
Tremmen, Spandan, and those quarters. The Duke of Saxony, the Marq. of
Brandenburgh, and more of the United and Confederate Princes, have given
themselves under the Protection of his Majesty of Sweden, and have yielded unto
him the passage near unto Wirtenbergh.

The report is very strong here, that the King of Sweden does intend to revenge
the intolerable usage of the Imperialists at Magdenburgh, he has some notable
exployt in hand, wherefore he has newly laid a Bridge over the River Elve,
near unto Angermunde.

His Emp. Maj. has denounced Banishment, and sorely threatened the City
Neurezbergh, because they continue leavying of forces his Majesty therefore
has delivered the same City to the Duke of Bavaria, and strongly charged the
said Duke to persecute those that are belonging unto Neurenburgh with fire and
sword: as also all those that adhere unto them. But they regard not these
threatenings, but do proceed strongly with their raising of men. And not only
at Neurenburgh, but throughout the whole Jurisdictions of all the Protestant
Princes.

His Majesty of Sweden has arrested and stayed certain Merchants at Spandau,
who were journeying toward Hamburgh, and required of them fifty thousand
Ryxdollers, which they were constrained to pay, because they had in their
company an Imperial Commissarie, who had betaken himself into this Company,
to be sheltered and so to pass for a Merchant, who otherwise in former time
was run from his Majesty of Swedens service, unto the Emperor but now is in
hold.

From Magdenburgh the 28. of May.
All the dead Carcasses are now almost convayed out of this City, which have
sorely pestered and annoyed us hitherto, and above 2500. Citizens, which were
slain in the fury and burnt, are cast into the River Elve. There were many of
them so disfigured with the fire, that it was impossible any way to discern
them who they were. Yesterday here was sung for Joy of the taking of this
City. Te Deum Laudamus, and the Ordnance of the City, three times discharged.
The General Tilly is at this present here, and is lodged in the 6. Shop-houses
with his Concomitants.

From Brandenburgh the first of June.
The whole Marck even unto the river Elue, is now quite freed from the
Imperialists. Yesterday Doctor Stollman arrived here, who was taken prisoner at
the loosing of Mandenburgh with his Son. He escaped with his Son whilst
the fire was so exceeding great in the Emperors Army near unto Magdenburgh,
but was constrained to swim through the River Elue, but now is here with his
Majesty of Sweden. Into this Army come daily some Magdenburgers or other which
formerly were imprisoned but now are ransomed. Yesterday were attached the
Hamburger goods which were brought from Leypsich between Ferberlin and
Spandou. A certain Commissarie of the Emperor named Potau thought to have
passed along currantly with their Marchandizes, but both he and they were stayed
and brought to Spandou

The Hamb^rgers for the releasing of their Commodities have proferred the Kings
Majesty 80000 Ryxedollers. At W^^g^^st are arrived 5000. men which came out of
Swede^, and more forces are thence expected daily. Besides these, 15000 men are
also expected from Muscouia.

From Franckfort-Oder the 2. dito.
Yesterday were brought in hither 5. Companies of Horse, which our forces took
from the Imperialists near unto great Gloga^, having defeated the Men. Hence
are gone 3. Companies cut of this City, as also diverse out of other Cities to
releeve Crossen, which the Imperialists seem to aim at. Here in this City
are still abundance of men and amongst the rest 800. sick Soldiers. His
Majesty of Sweden has shipped above 100. pieces of Ordnance at the Haukll. Some
light pieces which may be drawn with one, and two horses. He intends
doubtless some notable enterprise. For in his march he ioynes to every
Regiment 10. Pieces of Ordnance.

From Isleven, the 30. of May.
The 13. of this Month, the Imperial Army near unto Magdenburgh, happened on
fire in three several places: which fire did much harm amongst them. But by
their loss some fared the better. For Doctor S^ollman the Swedish Chancellor,
escaped from his imprisonment who was imprisoned with the Bishop of
Halverstad^. This Doctor, and his son, and two Gentlemen, Servants to the
Marshall Falckenburgh, and one Captain Cresse, escaped, and are safely arrived
at Brandenburgh. There were 400 Children of tender years within Magdenburgh;
kept two days long in the Cathedral Church, which missed their Parents and
knew not what was become of them, these poor children in two days space, eat
no victuals, insomuch that some of them were famished.

The Imperial Mandat or Decree published against the conclusion and resolution
lately taken by the Protestant Electors, Princes and States, assembled at
Leipsick.
FErdinand, etc. To all and every our and the holy Empires Electors, Princes,
spiritual and temporal Prelates, Earls, Barons, Lords, Knights, Marshalls,
Captains, Majors, Bailiffs, Judges, Counselors, Citizens, Communalties, and
to all and every our and the Empires Subjects: But more particularly to all
Commanders, Colonels, Captains both of horse and foot, Ensigns, Lievtenants,
and to all other Officers, and generally to all Soldiers both foot and horse,
of what nation, dignity and condition soever, and in what service (out of our
Armies) soever they are or may be, unto whom these our Patents and
Commandments, or a true copy thereof (which we will have believed and obeyed
as the Original it self) shall appear, We hereby do signify, Whereas by
Letters dated the fourth of April last the Elector and Duke of Saxen has given
us notice of a conclusion made by the Electors, States, Counselors,
Ambassadors, Deputies, and Commissioners of such Protestants as were absent,
lately assembled at Leipsick, the strangeness whereof has much moved and
filled with displeasure our Imperial heart, since that the said Electors,
Princes and States have agreed and bound themselves, quite contrary to our
admonitions sent before to the said electour of Saxen, under pretext of an
order of Execution of the Circles, to make a dangerous preparation of War;
and, without any signification of their number and designs, make now already
(as from diverse parts we are advertised) in several Circles, and particularly
in our Imperial Cities great levies: And whereas it is easy to presume, that
at this perilous constitution of the Empire, where the King of Sweden is
entered as an enemy, and having already taken whole Pomerany, a part of the
Mark of Brandenburg, and some places Mecke^burg, will daily proceed, and
incite other foreign forces to do much: Where the rebellious Town of
Magdenburg is not yet brought to obedience, and where many old dangers do yet
appear; such a dangerous beginning and intent would tend to hinder (and as it
were to bereave us of) all means to maintain the Wars, now so requisite for
the defense and necessity of the holy Empire and States thereof; it would
further and advantage the power of the enemies; cause yet a greater confusion,
troubles and evils, and withal a far greater mistrust and hatred amongst
this Nation: Yea (unless it be with all speed withstood) it would bring into
the whole Roman Empire of the German Nation (our dear Country) a new
unquenchable fire whereby the same (which these 800 years has most sweetly
flourished) would now at once be consumed to ashes and wholly overthrown.
Therefore we knowing that our duty requires that, as Roman Emperor we do
prevent all such threatening evils, and that such agreements and unions are not
to be made nor suffered without the knowledge, consent and pleasure of the
Roman Emperor, who we are, but that they are quite contrary unto the Laws,
orders and constitutions of the Empire, and the dehortations and admonitions
made by us being prohibited under great and grievous punishments, so that we
intend by no means to suffer the same. We do hereby admonish, will and
command you and every of you, and our express will, pleasure and commandment
is, that you do not give nor permit any place of Rendez-vous unto my troops
or soldiers, that are, may or might be levied on the behalf of the said
agreement and conclusion made at Leipsick; Neither grant any of them passage or
pass whatsoever, but rather where any shall be met or found, that you beat,
destroy, disperse and kill them, as you will answer the contrary at your perils
of the punishments expressed in the constitutions of the Empire. And most
earnestly we do require and command you the Colonels, Lievtenants Captains,
Ensigns Commanders, and all other Officers both of horse and foot, and all
soldiers of what name, condition and quality soever they are or may be, that
already are received and entered, or shall yet enter into service of the said
preparation and agreement made at Leipsick, against our knowledge, will and
pleasure, and against our deho^tations, and the Laws and Rights of the Empire;
and more particularly all those that in any way are subject unto us and the
holy Empire upon pain and perils comprehended in the said Imperial
constitutions, and upon pain to lose all the privileges, favors, rights,
lands, possessions, and also all rights of Companies, Cities and birth; And
such others as are not subject to us nor the Empire, upon pain of death, when
and wheresoever they shall be apprehended. We most earnestly and expressly
command, to give over and forsake all such service, and in time to come never
to return or enter into the same without our knowledge and permission, under
what pretext or color soever they be required or may be induced: And that you
make no excuse of your stay by reason of the oath you may or might be sworn
and bound by, since the same in this constitution of time is without force I
and we do hereby and by virtue of our Imperial power discharge and free you
of: And if there should be found some amongst you the said Colonels, Captains,
Ensigns, and other Officers and common soldiers of horse or foot, that have
entered into any service either at home in their own Country, or abroad
amongst the troops of strangers, they and every of them, that in obedience to
this our Imperial commandment do or shall return from that their service
unto our troops, there to serve us and the Empire, and bring their
attestations from our Officers, shall have a general and special pardon, and
be received again into our Imperial grace. And we will and command withal
you the said Electors, Princes and States, lately thus arrived at Leipsick, not
to charge or lay upon your vassals, tenants, inhabitants, burgers and subjects
(in all and every your Countries, Dominions, Cities, and also all Imperial
Towns and Dominions) any contribution, tax or subsidy for and on the behalf
of your said levies intended and made against our will and contrary to the
constitutions of the Empire; Commanding withal, if any such imposition and
contribution is or should be required, all you the vassals, tenants, burgers,
inhabitants and subjects aforesaid upon the like and before mentioned pain and
upon peril to lose all privileges, rights, and freedoms abovementioned, not
to pay or to deliver the said contribution, but rather to remain constant and
faithful in those duties you owe to us, as Roman Emperor and Supreme head of
the hol^ Roman Empire, and also to show all favor and furtherance to him that
b^ingeth this our Imperial and express commandment, that the same may
without any let or molestation be hung up and published, according to your
duty and according to our resolution and gracious and constant intention, that
we will not suffer you nor any of you, the Electors, Princes and all others,
upon your obedience and duty you shall show herein, to be troubled or grieved,
either by us or others, against the peace of the Religion and Policy. And
hereof you are not to fail, but dutifully to obey as you tender our pleasure,
and will avoid the punishments and real execution of the foresaid pain. And
this is our express will and pleasure.

Given at Vienna the fourteenth day of May, 1631.
Extract of several fresh Letters written out of Germany.
THe cruelty used by the Imperialists at the taking of Magdenburg (the like no
History has nor could ever make mention of) had indeed troubled many
Protestants in Germany, especially the Elector of Saxen found himself much
perplexed upon the news thereof, when he likewise was much troubled and urged
by an Imperial Ambassador and many other Messengers and letters, both from
the Emperor and other Catholic Electors and Princes. Howsoever seeing by the
example of Magdenburg what he and others of his Profession and Religion have to
look for at their enemies hands and promises, and considering the Imperial
Mandates and Proclamations, published (like a thunder) against the conclusion
lately taken by him and other Protestant Princes and States assembled at
Leipsick; and hearing withal of the doubt and fear diverse made of his
constancy in the said resolution, he both gave order for the greater speed in
the levying of his own forces and sent also several Messengers to other
Protestant Princes, States and Imperial Cities, with ample letters, whereby he
does not only assure them of his constancy and proceeding in the performance
of their resolution, But exhorts them also, to make greater haste and to take
more care than some of them did hitherto to prepare and defend themselves,
representing the great necessity and danger, their enemies extraordinary
arming, threatenings and executions would else bring them into. These letters of
his have very much rejoiced and strengthened all the good party, especially
Norimberg, Strasburg and other good Towns, the most part whereof are already
well provided and armed. But Memming lying some what aside and feeling already
those Imperial forces as came and yet daily come out of Italy (which amount to
some six or seven thousand thereabouts) near them, they fear (as being
nearest to the danger) the execution might begin at their Town, howbeit they
have as yet and do still refuse any further contribution and admittance of an
Imperial Garrison, where formerly they were subject unto.

The Elector of Saxen has laid 10. or 12. thousand men upon his frontiers and
makes great preparation.

Tilly marches with an army of 25000. men up into Germany, either into the
Dukedom of Wimar, as some think, or else toward the Country of Hessen (as is
most likely) there to defeat the forces of the Circle of the Rhine, who have
there their Rendezvous, and part whereof have lately defeated some of those
Imperial tsoops that Tilly had sent to hinder their said Rendezvous.

The King of Sweden (having firmed a royal Camp, since the Elector of Saxen
did not grant him for his surety and retreat the Town of Wittenberg to put
his Garrison into, nor passage through his Country) expects more forces out
of Prussia and from other parts; mean while he has an army in Silesia to
which he has sent some troops for reinforcing and the better to oppose them
all against the Jmperialists that intend to besiege Crossen.

Some of his Caualrie met lately with five Companies of Crabates that came out
of Magdenburg laden with very rich booty they made there, which five Companies
were all defeated, and left all their riches (as if they had expressly fetched
the same) unto the Swedish troops.

The like good fortune befell lately to the Garrison of Wesell, who met with a
convoy that carried much money toward the Spanish Camp, which convoy being
also beaten left all the money behind them in their enemies hands.

From Arnhem the 11. of June.
Our soldiers of Wesell and the near adjoining Garrisons 160 strong, have
defeated a Convoy which was going from Culin to Antwerp, they were conducted by
those of Rhynberk and Orsoy, and were set upon by our men near about Deuren.
In which exploit our soldiers obtained great booty 150000 Rixdollers in specie,
much Silk and other rich commodity, swherewith diverse Carts were laden. The
rest of the booty besides the ready Coin does amount to the sum of 250000
Rixdollers, this booty they brought into Wesell last Sunday in the vening and
60 or 70 serviceable horses, and 2 Ensigns. The spanish soldiers fled all of
them, only the waggoners, and some other laboring men opposed our men, and
killed 3 or 4 of them, but there was no means for them to prevail.

The Governor, Chancellor, and Council of the Province of Geldria, and the
Earldome of Zutphen have prescribed a general day of meeting, the 17 of June
at Nimmegen, where the whole country is to appear.

The 12. of June from the Army of his Excellence the Prince of Orange.
Whereas his Excel the Prince of Orange, had pitched Army at the side of the
River Ley before the City Bridges the 3 of month, each one thought that his
Excellence was of intention to approach and besiege the said City. But now it
appears probably that his Excel* was not so minded, for he did not entrench
himself there, but lay with his Army in the field only. In the mean while
certain Committees were sent out of the said City in the name of the 4 parts
of Flanders to treat with his Excelle^ce concerning the Contribution which was
behind and had long time been unpayd, insomuch that they gave security for
entire payment of 10 years contribution. Whereupon his Excel with his whole
Army departed, and the very same night took his resting place at Maldegom,
where we passed the 5 of June over the river Lieve toward Walichem, and from
thence toward Eckelo, and Caprick, and the 7 of sune returned back with our
whole army at Watervliet, where his Excel. instantly caused retrenchments to
be cast up all along the Holland Dike, for the better ensuring of his army, so
that in case the spanish forces (which as we understood had continually
followed us) had come upon us, then had we taken the said Dike for our defense.

The 8 of June the provision of his Excel. was embarked, and his horse
troops, being commanded presently as soon as they should be landed to march
toward Bergen op Zoome. Yesterday were all the Landforces shipped, and all the
wagons put aboard. The firelockes in the mean time stood in battle array, and
held the watch until all things were safely embarked. Thus with the whole
train of our army we marched from Ysendyck to Rammekens, and so downwards,
sailing many hundred ships together, and so forsook the Flemish coasts,
which country in this our expedition we have wholly brought under contribution
until the very City Geudt. His Excellence in this expedition had a very
vigilant regard over his whole army, and a special care that all things might
be carried very orderly, insomuch that he caused many of his soldiers to be
hanged for their misdemeanors and insolences committed against the
inhabitants of the Country: But the like care was not taken on the other side,
for many of our soldiers which did straggle somewhat out of their limits had by
them their Noses and Ears cut off: Three soldiers wives with a child of 8
years were taken by the Flemish and hanged.

The same day that we came to Watervliet, the spanish that night arrived at
Caprick, but did not show themselves any nearer unto us. So that in this
enterprise, we have not met with our enemy to any purpose, and have found no
resistance worthy of relation. Only we were informed that the enemy brought
his whole army together, therewith intending to cut off all passages from our
army and hinder the victuals from coming to us. What shall follow hereafter
in time we shall acquaint you.

From Dort 13. of June.
The army of his Excellence the Prince of Orange is returned again out of
Flaunders into these parts. Before this City are many ships laden with
Ordnance, Munition, provision, and all warlike necessaries: Most of the
horsemen were landed at Geertruydenbergh, and presently hasted thence to
Oosterhout, Gilsen and other villages about Breda. The foot forces sail all of
them toward the high and lower Swalwe, and Geertruydenbergh, whether these also
will land there the time will manifest. In the mean while here and in diverse
other places many thousands of loaves are baked for the army.

The country people in the country of Heusden and Altena, fly with all their
goods and movables from their country habitations into the Cities. Their
Excellencies the States have prohibited preaching among the Catholics in the
Villages and Towns belonging to S'hertogenbosch, so that all the Churches are
shut up continually.

We have intelligence from Antwerpe with the last letters, that in the
beginning of May the fleet of 25 ships at Lisbona is set sail, among these are
15 Gallioons with 4000, some suppose they are gone toward Calis Malis (...)
join themselves to the Castilian armado, others are o^ ^^inion that they are
bound for Cabo-verde, there to expect (...) rest, and so to pass forward to
Brasill.

His Majesty of France is at S. Germani, and the Queen Mother is arrived at
Paris with her whole family or household: But his Majesty had rather that she
had remained at Moulins: Her guard is now less than it has been neither is
she so strongly warded as formerly. The kings brother is still a^ Nancie, The
Lord President Legneux is much condemned, for not counselling his Majesty's
brother for the best in these differences, The king has charged the Parliament
to call Marshall Marilack in question, which might easily endanger his life, by
reason that he has committed gross faults in Champ^gne, as also in Italy, in
warlike affairs.

The^^ goes a strong report, that new wars is very like to ensue ^etweene
the Pope, and the great Duke of Moscovy, concerning the succession in Vrbinaet.

Norwithstanding the Commander Pinsen his ransom is ready, nevertheless he
is not yet at liberty. Count Henry vanden Bergh questioning one day with him,
what he thought the Prince of Orange his enterprise might be, he answered him
merrily, His Excellence is wise enough to conceal that from me, knowing that I
cannot keep counsel. The said count Henry is yet at Venlo with 3 or 4 hundred
Mariners, it is thought that he will attempt something or other.

FINIS.

