The Continuation of our Weekly NEWS.
From Rome, the 1. of May.
WHen the Cardinal of Strigonia understood he should not be admitted to have
audience of the Pope as Imperial Ambassador, he did desire, that he might be
heard by what Title soever. Thus his Holiness gave him audience, and his
speech and complaints did last almost two hours, where the Pope was so
troubled and wearied withal, that the Ambassador of Toscany, coming in after
that the said Cardinal of Strigonia was gone, found the Pope so displeased,
that he could not treat about any business, but only entertained the Pope
with some other discourses, to make him merry again. And the Pope himself
(confessing to be overwearied about the Cardinals propositions) departed
afterward out of Rome, retyring himself into the Country, upon the
Patrimoniall land, leaving strict order, that none should come thither for any
negotiation. He went away on Wednesday morning, and will not return till the
twentieth of this Month of May.

Four Gentlemen of this City of Rome, being chosen by the Council of the
Campidoglio, have been with the Pope, to beseech him, not to yield to the
demands made for Spain and Austria, concerning the treasure of the Castle.
Whereupon the Pope with admirable eloquence (wherein indeed he does excel)
made a fair speech in answer, representing with an exaggeration the favors
formerly showed to the said house of Austria and Spain, in giving them sums of
moneys amounting to many Millions, and there he broke forth in tears, saying:
Pro gratiarum action and for a recompense, We find now there is laid wait
for our life; Our life is sought for in our own house; And should We now give
to them the sustenance, the bowels, the blood of this City? Let it never be
said. They would have us thus stripped and naked, afterward to invade Rome,
and to commit against us, against you (My Lords) against your wives, against
your children, against your blood, against the Churches, against God himself,
those cruelties and that wickedness, which an hundred years agone, were
committed in Rome. The fore-sayd Roman Gentlemen being dismissed, went forth
full of complaints and hatred against the said house.

You cannot believe with what a general joy and applause here is received the
news of the falling of the King of Sweden into Bavaria, whereof I will not tell
you more at this time, for fear you do take it as if I did write it out of
passion, although I can assure you, that that Duke is here thought to have
been the chiefest cause of the miseries in Germany, and that his exorbitant
ambition has deserved far greater punishment, then he can receive, though he
should be used ten times worse then those, whom without cause he most unjustly
and cruelly has persecuted and robbed, etc.

An extract of a Letter written at Warshaw, the 5. of April, 1632.
Concerning the war with Muscovia, it is thought it cannot be shunned.
Therefore there are ten thousand men to march toward the limits, to observe
what the Russians intend to do, and (if it be possible) to make some longer
truce, or finding the contrary, to send quickly word thereof hither to the
Court. In which case, there shall be more forces sent thitherwards, and the
Prince also is then to carry some troops, (some speak of 12000. men) and
join with the former, and so withstand the said Muscovits: And according as
the enemy shall be found strong, so those of Littaw shall then help
accordingly. And to this end both the Polonians and Lithuanians have granted a
Subsidy of two pobores, whereof two are to be paid presently, and two about
Michaelmas next.

As for the children of our late Queen, the States of Poland, have taken so
good an order that they are now sufficiently provided for, to the great
contentment of the King. For Prince John Albert, who is an Ecclesiastical
person, he is to have the Bishopric of Cracow: And although there was no
mention or expression made of the other Churchman, to wit, of the Bishop of
Neis: Yet nevertheless it is supposed, he shall have that of Ermband, which
the second Prince has hitherto possessed. And as for the two politic Princes,
named, Casimerus and Alexander, and likewise the Princess their Sister,
amongst them the goods both moueables and immoueables, as Chivaza, Galbe,
Strasburg and what else she did injoye both in Poland and in Lithuania, shall
be divided; according as his Majesty shall think best to give order for. At
this free offer of the States the King has taken much content, and to show
himself thankful for such an unexpected bounty and liberality, he has both
thanked them and surrendered some revenues, which before were accounted amongst
the due rents, to return after his death unto the States of the Kingdom: and
the said lands are granted unto the said princes with condition, that after
their death they do return to the possession of certain noblemen.

By this means the Prince Ratziville, is come again into great favor of the
old King, because he took great pains to have the said Princes all well
provided, according to right and reason (as he said) seeing the King their
father neglecting and loonsig his own hereditary dominions came so freely and
contented himself with the Elective kingdom. As for the matter of Coins and
the money so much complained of, it is referred to the next Parliament, and
remains mean while in the old estate.

And concerning the point of Inter-regnum and government if the King should be
too sick or dye, it has also been delayed and left to some other Parliament.
Because many of the Burgesses had no instruction about that affair, and others
did conceive, that his Majesty did intend to put the government into the
hands of his son Casimer, and so to procure him the succession to the Crown
whereunto there is no likelihood the States will ever give their consent. The
rest of what was done, you will find in the printed conclusion of this
parliament, which to make an end, spent three days, by reason that the good
old King was not able to fit so long.

Extract out of an other letter, dated at Warshaw the 29. of April 1632.
Since my last which was of the 5. of this month, our King fell again very
sick, and because he often did rcover, we had no great fear he should as yet
die: but it was Gods pleasure to take him away on this very day, which is the
29. of April: I cannot tell you at this time other particularities about his
death, for I have my self been not well these many days, and therefore been
absent from Court. I will therefore only tell you, that although there was
hitherto no doubt, but the States would without any great consultation or
consideration make choice of the eldest Prince Vladislaus to make him King of
Poland. Yet nevertheless I am at this very instant informed from a very good
hand, that the Archduke Leopold (the Emperors brother) has (during the
sickness of our late King) made himself a great party, who intends to stand
for him to make him King: There are also others that aim another way: I pray
God to keep us from dissension among our selves; and I hope yet, that our
Prince (against whom there can be no exception at all) shall be our King, and
so we shall remain in quietness whereof (God willing) I will give you an
account by my next.

Contents of a Letter written from Constantinople the 28. of March, 1632.
relating the present state there.
Here is now again an indifferent calm, and the boisterous tempest is somewhat
ceased through the death of the Tefterdar, who was taken hold on the 21. of
this mounth and the day following had half his head struck off, and
afterward tied by the legs and drawn up and hanged on the tree before the
gate of the Palace of the Vizeer where the Ianizary Aga was hanged. Which
caused great joy and acclamation among the people, not only the Military, but
all Nations and sorts of people, of what rank soever, dwelling within this
City. The consultation and plot was concluded and agreeed upon by the great
Turk or Emperor, and the three lately murdered persons, namely thus;
presently upon the tidings of the death of the deposed Vizeer, also to dispatch
and make away the now reigning Rogieb Bassha. The Tefterdar Vizeer, the Ianizar
Aga, Captain Bassha or Admiral of the Sea, and to make the Chamberlain Muza
Quilebij, Ianizar Aga. And afterward by the assistance (or at least permission)
of the other Ianizaries, (whom they thought generally to corrupt with great
gifts and briberies) to massacre all the Syphahies, by that means to confirm
the authority of the Emperor, or great Turk, and re-establish the same.

It is received for a general opinion, that the Vizeer, who first broached
this business and plotted this mischief, is fallen in great distaste and
disgrace with the great Turk or Emp: however it does not yet burst forth or
appear; but in the mean time there is a vigilant eye over him. And that his
Imperial Majesty when time shall serve (to wit, as soon as the Syphahies
shall be destroyed) will make the world sensible of his resentment and
affection of the said plot, which he cannot but take to heart, and will
plenarily take his opportune revenge: Although the afore-sayd Vizeer is one of
the best and ablest men, which this Empire has produced this long time, and
(quod rarum est) is generally beloved and affected of all Nations and all
people.

Two days ago about six thousand Ianizaries, which are termed Symenj, were
sent with their Commanders to Moussul, to help to keep and defend the same
City; as also the Frontiers against the inroad of the Persians, because the
Military is again retired back-

News from Germany, viz: Franckford, and Augsburg, the 28 of May, 1632.
The King of Sweden with the King of Bohemia are at this present at Munchen in
Bavaria. The Ambassador of France is mediating of a peace, in the behalf of
the Duke of Bavaria: which is thought will be accomplished, with great favor
of the King of Sweden, who has divided his Army in two parts, so that we do
expect speedily some strange effects.

It is incredible of the inestimable wealth that the King has found in the
said City of Munchen, and especially in the Jesuits Church, with Images made
by Brouse that famous Artist, and the manufactures of silver work of diverse
kinds. In fine, there is not any Church in the world, that is more richer or
costlier, it is counted the second Esquriall. The King has found in this City
the best and fairest Ordnance that ever man beheld.

From Antwerp the 5. of June.
Our Forces march on the Spanish Iashon Piano, with lead in their shoes. The
Marquis de Sante Croes, has his Rendevous at Thienen in Brabant. We hear that
Grave Ernest Van Nassaw is arrived in the Isle of Wolcheren, or Zealand, with
certain hundreds of ships and boats, with about 8. or 9000 men, and that he
has some design upon Flaunders. Which causes our Soldiers to remain there,
otherwise they should have come unto the Marquis de Saint Croes, his Ledger at
Theinen. This Saint Croes thought to have relieved Venlo, but now he may spare
his labor.

From Rome the 21. of April.
The Viceroy of Napels has by a printed Proclamation made known to all the
inhabitants throughout that whole Kingdom, the great necessity and want that
now the house of Austria and Spain do suffer, by reason of the wars in
Germany and opposition of the Hollanders, and to this end has admonished all
those that are of any ability to raise each of them one horseman, or otherwise
to contribute and pay 30. Ducates toward the maintenance of the great wars
now in hand. And did also declare in the publication, that his May: of Spain
himself in person will this summer betake himself in the field with a mighty
Army. To which end he has required his own Kingdom of Spain to maintain
30000. foot, and 6000. horse, which now are suddenly to be levied.

From Lions the 24 of April.
In France the leuy continues yet very strongly both for forces of horse and
of foot. And not withstanding this great preparation, we know not whither his
May: dissigne is tending. The Duke of Loranie does also continue his leuies,
who is said to be gone with the Duchess of Psal^zburg toward Bruxels, it is
supposed that there will a match be contracted between her and the French
Kings Brother: Although that journey is not believed

The Spanyard is said to be at this present very desirous and earnest to
contract a peace with the Hollanders.

The said King of Spain does require great contribution from the Spirituality,
and does impose taxations upon them for the maintaining of these wars against
the King of Sweden. And has required these of the Kingdom of Arragonia,
Catalania and Valentia, to contribute largely toward his present occasions, as
being the most able and richest of his Dominions, but it is said, they have
utterly refused the same. And caused his May: to understand, that they would be
very glad, If they hear and perceive that he did not so much trouble himself
with the present affairs in Germany.

From the Swedish Army the 24 of April near unto Buxtehoede.
The 19. of this month we are come hither under the command of the Field
Marshall Todt. In three days we marched 24. leagues and the 4. day we
marched according to the same progress, and are come at Hornburgh within a
mile of Buxtchoed. The enemy purposed to assault us and to cut us off from our
Foot forces, which are enqvartered every where here about. Gonerall Mayor
Lohhausen behaved himself manfully against his enemy. When Papenheym once
would have fallen upon us, Lohhausen with some Citizens and Soldi^rs was absent
for a while. But they continuing shooting, we with our Caualery made toward
them, but nothing was effected to any purpose, by reason that our Foot forces,
were not near at hand, nevertheless the enemy was glad to retreat, admiring
that our Cauallery was so strong.

From Hildersheym the 4. of May.
The Field-marshall Todt of his own accord retired back and left Pappenheym
with 3. Regiments in Stoad. the Field-marshall with his Army lay before Stoad
ready for battle until he understood that Pappenheym would come forth he
retired. And divided his Army into three parts. The middlemost part marched
forward: the other two parts were kept on the two sides somewhat out of the
way. Now when Benninghausen with three Regiments went against these Swedish
forces, which marched on forward. The other two parts of the field-marshall
Todt his Army came against Benninghausen toward Stoad, fell upon the body of
his troops and defeated them, brought Benninghausen prisoner to Euxtehoed, and
utterly overthrew 14. of their companies, and brought the 14. Ensigns to Zell.
Now the fieldmarshall Toda is again before Stoad with many forces and
Pappenheym himself is within the City where he is coupt up.

From Hamburgh the 5. of May.
Duke Francis Charles of Saxon Lawenburgh is come with his troops in the
Country of Lunenburg and in Bardwycke, and made all things in a good plight
there, and has all things fitly prepared for war, he for certain days
together caused Sermons to be preached in all Churches, and prayers to be made,
and afterward held a general Muster of all his forces. Many of the Bishops,
chief Lords and Prelates welcomed him into those parts, and saluted and
wished him joy, after he had left good orderthere he brok up with two Regiments
of horse and foot, and is come near unto Buxtehoed where he has joined
forces with the field-marshall Todt, where they keep very good order and
discipline, and cause daily prayers to be made twice, Morning and Evening
throughout their whole Army, they do also hold consultation how they may
possibly surprise and assault the Enemy. Pappenh^ym is newly fallen out of the
City Stoad at two Gates, and has skirmished along while with our forces. Our
field-marshall and the rest did resist them so manfully, that their Gates of
Stoad grew so narrow for the Imperialists that they could not all get in but
many stayed behind who will not relate unto their fellows how they speed.

From Venice the 7. of May.
Here has been an extraordinary Ambassador from the Emperor who has
received answer, that they intend well to the house of Austria, and that they
will further the Spanish proceedings in Jtaly, as far as should ley in their
power, but of late they had been at such extraordinary expenses that they
could not make large contributions toward the maintenance of war, but they
would afford the Emperor, and King of Spain the passage from the Adriaticke
Sea, and help them with their own shipping.

From Constantinople we understand, that the lanizaries proceed still with
their turbulent and violent tumult and discord. Many have been murdered by
their means, and this manner of doing continues still. It is a question
whether the Gran Signior be alive or dead. If this tempest be not calmed by
some speedy qualification, it is like to have a fearful effect.

From Vlm the 9. of May.
Upon Monday last the Governor of this City defeated some Imperial troops,
and has taken from them four Ensigns.

From Mosburg the 10. of May.
Both the Kings Majesty's are now in the midst of Bauaria, they have taken
Landshut and also the passage to Mosburgh over the River Yz^r, so that now they
have a direct free way toward Ratisbon or Regensburg.

From Augsburg the 12. of May.
This day the King of Sweden breaks up with his Army from Landshut, but
whether he tends we cannot yet know. The Deputies of Munchen cannot agree about
the conditions, but his Majesty of Sweden will doubtless decide the question,
for they are at his will and power. The whole Bishopric of F^esingen is
freely yielded up to his Majesty and paid him contribution. Hereupon some
Boores in Swaben being 10000. strong have assembled themselves together, they
have taken again Leutkirch and Wengen, they have with them some pieces of
Ordnance. But some of our forces which are already sent against them will soon
cool their courage,

This week the aforementioned Boores did overcome and surprise 50. Swedish
soldiers. Crabates, between Shrobenhousen and Sticha. These Boores when they
had mastered them, did cut off their ears and noses, chopped off their hands and
feet, and put out their eyes* and so left them, these deuilish Boores do
great mischief of the like nature. As soon as the King of Sweden was
advertised of the cruel insolences of those Boores* he was much displeased,
and so much the more, because he saw that his soldiers would not put it up* but
presently cried revenge and fired their villages, insomuch that in one day
there were seen two hundred several fires blazing at once.

From Vlm the 12. of May.
About Bregenty and those parts, the Catholic Boores assembled together,
being some thousands of them they have taken Wangen and Rauensburgh, and
therein slain all the Swedish Soldiers. Thereupon the Swedish General has
yesterday brought all the Swedish troops together, and is fully resolved,
since the Boores have not kept the agreement formerly made, to destroy them all
with fire and sword; and whereas the Swedish did understand, that the Commander
Harancourt was on the march from Alsatia with some thousands of men to adioyne
his forces to those of the Duke of Bauaria, they presently sent for more foot
forces from Ausburg and those parts, and some Crabates also, with intention to
meet with them. And now comes tidings, that the Swedish have surprised some of
the Boores near unto Weingarten, and slain two hundred of them, and put the
rest to flight. How the other shall speed we shall ere long acquaint you.

The Bauarian forces have lately murdered some of the Swedish Saue-guards,
wherefore the Bauarians must not look for quarter when they shall come to fall
into the Swedish hands.

From Cassell the 14. of May.
We had hoped to divert Pappenheyms proceeding by the means of the inroad
into the Bishopric of Collen, but it has not taken the same effect,
nevertheless the marching of our soldiers thither has not been altogether
fruitless, for our Prince the Landgraue of Hessen has taken Briel by strength
of Arms, and brought all the soldiers of that Garrison with their Colors into
this City.

From Donaweert the 5. of May.
We understand from the Royal Army of Sweden, that his Majesty of Sweden
himself in person is now come before Munchen: and since they seem not to
accept of his May: Articles of agreement, it is thought the King will give that
City as a prey to his soldiers, for it is at his d^uotion.

Three of the Kings Regiments were lately sent forth toward Ratisbone, to
observe how things stood there: but part of them fell to pillaging; in the
mean time, 3. Regiments of Bavarians fell out of the City, and surprised some
of the Swedes and slew them, but the other Swedes recollecting their forces
together, fell upon the Bavarians, and defeated some, drove them all back,
being glad, to take their City for refuge.

From Augspurg the 6. of May.
The Swedes are at Landsberg, which they took lately, and found great store of
Ordnance and munition: besides the Ordnance also great and small 18. in number,
they obtained there 100. Wagons with munition.

The Commander Sparrenter has taken Dunckenspiel, and is now aiming at
Ellwang, the Boores thereabout come very strong together, but the Bavarians
doubtless will not long keep that City.

From Frey^ingen the 16. of May.
News at this present we have but little, only that we do now from hence
take our way to Munchen, the City of residence, of the Duke of Bavaria. The
Deputies of that City were yesterday here, but were not admitted to speak
with his Majesty.

From Franckfort the 11. of May.
The Spanish forces are yet in and about Spier, they fortify themselves there.
And notwithstanding that City has yielded them 80000. Ryxdollars for
Contribution, the Citizens nevertheless, are pillaged and abused without any
respect at all. The chief of the City intend to betake themselves to Strasburg.

The City of Worms is daily fortified, they have broken down the Suburbs, all
the Citizens that are able must labor about the Works. In like manner is
Manheym Provided.

The Swedish forces are commanded to the Mozell, to have good regard unto the
Spanish forces. To which end, all the passages are beset.

Yesterday there were brought hither diverse pieces of Ordnance, and are to be
sent from hence to Mentz, which City is also fortified.

Her May: the Queen of Sweden, as yet resides here, the Chancellor Oxenstern is
at Mentz, we do not yet hear that the Spanish do attempt any thing more than
what they have done already.

Now presently we have received tidings, that the Swedes at Zimmern have taken
two Commissaries Prisoners, and one Captain, with diverse Spanish soldiers,
and have brought them to Mentz. Don Gonzales de Cordua is not yet passed over
the River of Mozell.

From Vlm the 2. of May.
Since our Governor here has brought the whole Circle of Swaben under the
King of Swedens contribution he went into the Dukedom of Wirtemberg where he
received from the Administrator 2000. land soldiers. During his absence from
hence we received news that diverse of the Catholics in this Circle,
especially some Abbots and other Churchmen, one Lord Druches of Waldburg and
other Gentlemen, did rebel and gathered both their own and other subjects of
the house of Austria: and that the said troops did much harm and did use
great cruelties against such Swedish soldiers as they did meet withal. But
now we do likewise understand that the Swedish Dragons: that lay in Biberach,
to revenge these perfidious and foul dealings, fell into the Dominions of the
said Lord Druchses, pillaging and burning down diverse Villages and Towns, as
Wurthach, Waldsee, and others.

From Vlm the 9. of May.
The King of Sweden went with his Army from Preisengen toward Munchen, the
Magistrates whereof to save theyt City from pillaging, did offer the King two
hundred thousand Dollars, but the King does not accept of their offer, and is
still marching thitherwards.

We do hear from Ingolstadt, that there do lie three Regiments of Bavarian
soldiers for Garrison in it, which are commanded by young Tilly.

We receive likewise news, that fourteen thousand Boores, that had gathered
themselves about the Town called Winegarten, to refuse the promised
Contribution, and to defend themselves against the Swedes: were no sooner met
with about 3000. Swedish soldiers, but they presently cast away their arms,
and yielded themselves. Their General being a Gentleman called Shwendy was
taken Prisoner, and is to be brought hither.

It is also confirmed, that Colonel Rhelinger, being accompanied with 15
horsemen, met by chance with 50 Crabats, amongst whom he courageously setting,
he slew some, and took thirty of them Prisoners, and the rest saved themselves
by the swiftness of their horses.

This very hour we receive news from a good hand, that Pappenheym has been
quite defeated in lower Saxony, and that he scarce has saved himself with
seven or eight horses.

FINIS.

