CORANT OR WEEKLY NEWS, FROM ITALY, GERMANY, Hungaria, Polonia, Bohemia,
France, and the Low Countries.
From Rome the 21. of September. 1621.
YEsterday Cardinal Bellarmine died, whose body was carried into the Jesuits
Church, and his Exequies this day performed by the Cardinals: he is much
lamented in respect of his great virtue and learning.

The Queen of Spain is yet sick. The Cardinal of Lerma was condemned to be
tortured, and 1000. pieces of gold of 4 crowns the piece, taken from him.

From Venice the 24. of September. 1621.
There are 12000. Nepolitaines sent to Valtolina, and the Switzers and Grisons
have taken the new fortes, and the town of Wormin.

The money that the King of Spain sent to the Emperor, is conuoyed thither by
cerlaine Spanish Soldiers.

The Cardinal of Delphin and the Marquis of Cobren, French Ambassadors, are
come hither, whose request vnts this Signiory is, to permit the Jesuits to
reside here.

The Turk with all his army marches toward Lembergh in Russia, and the
Muscouites begin to invade Poland: whereupon a general muster is made
throughout Poland, and it is said that the young Prince of Poland is gone into
the field with an army of 100000. men.

From Vienna the 29. of September. 1621.
Bethlem Gabor and the Marquis of Iagerensdorp with their army being gone from
Tirnaw, and past over wittenbergh toward the Merke, and there have taken in
two or three places. Therefore our army in the Schut also is as this day to
break up, and is to march under Heimburgh, over the river of Donaw, about the
Mark toward Morig and Godingh, where the treaty of peace shall be handled.
There are Ambassadors come hither from Budiant to seek for peace, whose men
daily do great mischief behind Newstadt, and have burnt and done great hurt
by killing and leading captives away diverse poor people even to Semmeringh
hard by Stiermarke, but for that certain advice is come hither, that the
agreement with Mansfield is sully made, the Hungarians will easily be brought
into subjection, either against their wills, or be compelled thereunto by a hard
condition of peace. Mansfield is legitimated, the bane published against him,
disanulled, and 400000. Floring paid him. The execution against the upper
Palatinate proceeds forward

For that at this present, for certain days together, it has been very
quiet and peaceable here about this town, and that our Soldiers with great
sacks have gone out into the Vine hills, the Townsmen and other Merchants of
the wines in the country were constrained, notwithstanding that the wines are
not yet ripe, to cut them down before the time. The plague and great dearth
begins here also to increase.

Yesterday we had news that Bethlem Gabors forces march toward Morauia, and
have taken Stragnitz, Stagnitz, and another town; and Colonel van Walstein,
that was left there to defend the passage is overcome, and is forced to retire,
and that Budiani with his forces of Hungarians and Turks, is gone to
Odenburgh, which town he threatens to assail.

That the Marquis of Iagherensdorp has written unto the Archduke Carel, and
desired that he would be a means to procure peace to be made within three
weeks, or else that the Turk has determined to aid Bethlem Gabor with 50000.
men, and that 12000. Turks lie ready at Canisa ^aying only for commission:
notwithstanding, news comes this day, that the Marquis of Iagerensdorp with
18000. men is again on the way to Nahot in Silesia, to whom a great number of
Wallouns in the Province of Olmitz and other country people, with many
masterlesse Soldiers, are joined, and that he kills all that he meets withal
that will not yield unto him.

There is news also this day come from Odenburgh, that about 600. of the
Emperors soldiers that went out for forage to Niewsiedel on the Sea, were
met with by the Hungarians, and all slain and put to the sword, only 50. that
escaped.

From Vienna the 30. of September. 1621.
For that the plague still increases in Rauensburgh, the Lords formerly named,
are ridden to Nichelsburgh in Morauia, where the Cardinal of Dieterichstein
lies, to begin the treaty of peace with the Hungarians, and this day the
Archduke Carel is gone from hence to News in his bishopric.

Bethlem Gabor with 15000. men marches over Wittenbergh to the Marquis of
Iagerensdorp, whereupon great have is made of the ship bride at Heimburgh, that
the Emperors army may go aver, and make resistance against Bethlem Gabor, and
the Budiani, who still continue burning and wasting the country.

There are great numbers of red mice here in this country, that dee great hurt
to the Corn on the Land and in the barn.

From Cracow the 15. of September. 1621.
From Wallachia we hear that the Turk and our army lie but a mile one from
the other, and that the Turk is 400000 and our army but 100000. strong, and
yet fear him not, and the King of Poland himself in person, with all the
Lords and Gentlemen of the Country of Podolia is gone by a back way to the
other army in Wallachia, so that speedily we hope for a victory.

The Dutch soldiers die here in great numbers by reason of the air hereabouts.

From Bundten the 25. of September. 1621.
The 3. common confederate cantons are assembled together at Chur, with whom
also the Treasurer of France has been, and there seek to confirm their
confederacy, notwithstanding that the French Treasurer earnestly desired them
first to hear the Spanish Articles, but notwithstanding they proceeded
therein, and concluded that all those that desired to aid and defend their
natine country and to maintain their privileges, they should foyne with them,
and thereupon 12. comunalities are joined with them, and it was presently
concluded, that forthwith, and with all their power and forces they should
join together to invade the enemy, as they already have begun, to fortify
themselves, and daily more forces join with them.

From Chur in Zwitzerland the 25. of Sept. 1621.
It is certified, that for that certain thousand Engedieners are gone to that
town. Guffier the French Ambassador went from thence in great have, fearing to
be taken prisoner.

From Neiwmarke the 2. of October. 1621.
We have a great number of men here, but while the General, the Earl of
Mansfied is here, (...) are secure enough, but God knows what will be done
when he goes hence.

Here in this Country all is spolyed, for Mansfields army with his ordinance is
come hither, where they due much hurt, and for that all the people of 40.
villages, with their wives and children, are fled and gone away, the Soldiers
thresh the corn and spoil all. It is said that the Duke of Bauaria with his
army comes hitherward, in the mean time the treaty continues, and for that the
Earl of Mansfield has his Deputies with the Duke of Bauariaes Deputies at
Came, there are some Deputies there for the Church Ministers of the Palatinate,
but because the treaty seems not to proceed, we know not whither the Earl of
Mansfield will go with his army.

The Soldiers that lay in Came, complain that promise being made unto them,
that they should go freely away with bag and baggage, as they went forth the
Barvarian Carrabines fell upon them, and took all that they had from them, and
slew the Skammersdorp Musketeers, that withstood them.

From Spiers the 5. of October 1621.
All the moueables and handicrastsmen in Germertheim are carried and gone away
from thence.

On Friday the Spaniards marched to Keisers Louteren, and on Sunday after took
it, against the which they shot 11. times with their great ordinance, and will
have the town pay 1000. dollors for every shot, from whence they went to
Turkeheim, and have sent commissioners to Niewstadt, to open the passage (which
before they held shut) unto them.

We hear from Paris, that a great tumult has happened therein, for that
diverse favorites of the Duke de Mayens that was killed before Montaubon being
much griened for the death of that great man, with a great number of Sudents
and other common people, went to Charenton, to be revenged for the same upon
those of the religion, and there met together as they were coming bark, and
that if it had not bin for the Duke of Monbason governor of Paris, and other
Officers of Justice that hindered them, there would have been a great murder
done, but they forcibly kept them back, yet there was about 8. persons slain
on both sides, and 8. taken prisoners: and yet when they were parted, the
people ran to Charenton, and there burnt the Church and the Library. On
Monday after there happened another quarrel between a Combe-maker and his
son, whereby some men were slain, whereupon the Magistrates fearing that if
such things fell out, there would be a general uproar in the town, commanding
the Burgers to look well unto their several wards, which being done, the
trouble ceased. On Tuesday there were two hanged, that were some of the
beginners thereof, and the reupon a Proclamation was made, that no man should
molest those of the religion, as you may read in the said Proclamation.

From Coninxburgh we understand, that the good news touching the King of
Poland, falls out contrary, and we are certified, that there are certain
thousand Polanders slain, that the Prince of Poland is enclosed by the Turks,
as also that the King himself with a great power was gone to relieve him. The
King is gone from Warson to Marlenburgh. It is also reported that the
Tartarians are already about Lublin.

From Riga we understand that upon the 26. of September, the said town upon
agreement made, yielded to the King of Swethland, that has permitted all the
Burgers to possess all that they hane without any hindrance, and whatsoever he
promised to their contentments was performed. That from thence he went to
Cockenhausen with his army, and had commanded the Russians to carry all their
Merchandises to Riga, as they did before, upon pain of further incursion.

From the Prince of Oranges camp, it is written, that there is no great matter
done on either side as yet, but that our men have taken some of the enemis
horses, which by sound of Drum were with their bridles and sadles sold good
cheap, and that the Prince of Orange with diverse Lords, was gone down the
Rhine to Emerick, and there right over against the town upon the Veer, by
certain Engeniers has caused a sconse or fort to be begun, greater then that
which is made over against Rees, which already is very forward.

There are some Lords of Colen come hither into our army, unto the Prince, what
their intent is we know not, it is thought they would have their Nowtraletie
continued, and also about some actions touching Papenmutz, which troubles them
somewhat.

From Gulick, we hear, that they within not long since have made two sallies
out of the town, and have fought courageously together, that our men have
taken one of their sconses and beaten it down; that two of our Captains were
slain, and many horse and footmen on the enemies side.

Last Monday the 11. of this Month, all our horsemen stood together in the
field by Rees, between Millum and Rees in order of Battle, all armed, with
their Captains at the head of each Cornet, and the footmen also each one in
their quarter stood also in arms.

Prince Henerickes quarter by misfortune was set on fire.

London Printed for N. B. October the 22. 1621. Out of the High Dutch Copy.


