A PLAIN EXPOSITION upon the whole thirteenth, fourteenth, fifteenth, and
sixteenth Chapters of the Epistle of Saint PAVL to the ROMANS.

Wherein the Text is diligently and methodically resolved, the sense given, and
many Doctrines thence gathered, are by lively uses applied for the benefit of
Gods Children.

Performed with much variety, and convenient brevity, BY ELNATHAN PARR
Bachelor in Divinity, and Preacher of Gods word.

To which is prefixed an Alphabeticall Table, containing the chief Points and
Doctrines handled in the Book.

PSALM. 122.6. Pray for the peace of Jerusalem.

LONDON, Printed by G. ELD for SAMVEL MAN, dwelling in Paul's Churchyard at the
sign of the Swanne. 1622.

TO THE VERY NOBLE, RELIGIOUS, AND MOST WORTHY, Master Nathaniel Bacon,
ESQVIRE: and The Lady Jane Cornwalleys, his WIFE: Grace and Peace be multiplied
from God the Father, and from our Lord JESUS CHRIST.
SIR;
MAy it please you once again to give me leave to Grace my labors with your
Noble name, which shall be to them, as a Good Light to a Picture.

For thereby shall they appear the more Spectable; and be the more favorably
aspected of the Reader.

I wish that they could reflect, as much brightness upon your Nobleness, as
they receive splendour from it. But as a glass more weakly returns the
irradian Beams; so These.

I do hereby (in what measure I am able) testify my thankfulness for former
Favors, and bear witness to your true Nobleness; who have, not only the
Pictures of the virtues and graces, (rarely done with your own hand) for the
ornament of your house (though many in these days virtutem ne pictam quidem
viderunt) But themselves by a heavenly pencill drawn in the table of your
heart; which do ado^ne your life, and make me to be

Yours addicted, in all respectfull observance, ELNATHAN PARR.

MADAME;
AS is the bounty of the Giver, so in Justice ought to be the Acknowledgment
of the receiver. Your Ladyship was the first aduancer of my studies, and
estate; and so you have continued; which is not the least Ornament of Honor.

Of Due therefore whatsoever I can perform is your Ladyships; then whom I know
none more truly Honorable, for (which is the Crown of Ladies and of all the
daughters of Eve) Chastity; for meekness of Spirit ( an Ornament of price for
all the Daughters of Sara) for Charity etc.

For neither will your excellent modesty suffer, nor this short Epistle suffice
to the relation of your deserved praises.

As we behold the majesty of things sacred with venerable silence and
admiration; see I your incomparable virtues.

I burn this Incense at their Altar: And I wish the world had more such
Ladies; the Church such ornaments; and painful and peaceable Ministers such
Patronesses, as your Ladyship has been to me, who am

Yours addicted, in all respectfull observance, ELNATHAN PARR.

TO THE CHRISTIAN READER, increase of Peace and Love.
NO part of holy Scripture has been so happy in the Expositions of elder and
later Divines, as this prime Epistle of our blessed Apostle.

What need then (thou will say) of thy homespun lucubrations? Why do thou
yet write?

My answer is, (warrantable enough in these times) It is the fashion.

Scribimus indocti doctique -- When Diogenes saw the people of Athens all of
them in busy employments upon occasion of a present danger; he also agitates,
and lively bestirres himself in his Tub, lest in a time so negotious he might
seem to sit still and be idle: So I in this scribbling age.

And yet I hope I shall not move only with Diogenes, but promoue something
among the rest which have taken pains in this kind.

The least star has his light and instuence; and there may be some use of
Goats-haire to the finishing of the Tabernacle.

My aim herein is, first, the glory of God: then, (according to grace given)
to reenforce in these declining times, subjection to Magistrates, love to
neighbors, sobriety toward our selves, and peace and order in our Church, the
two preseruers thereof.

I am assured that the substance of things affirmed are consonant to the
Scriptures, and not without the consent of the soundest Divines ancient and
modern; how rude soever thou find the style and phrase, it being all written
volante calamo.

Whatsoever it is, I beseech God thou may profit by it; which thou shall the
sooner do, if thou bring a mind without prejudice, and not wedded to thy own
will. And I pray thee to commend to the blessing of God, both it, and

Thy true Friend in our common Savior, ELN: PARR.

THE TABLE.
A
ADmonition: after Admonition we must be careful to amend our lives. page
167. Admonition necessary in two respects, 168. the use and end of it. Ibid.
Amendment: that after instruction we should amend. 167 Apparel, an excellent
use of it both in putting on and putting off. 92 Armor: where there is use of
Armor there is fear of danger. 69 Authority, a grievous punishment remaining
to them that resist lawful Authority. 12 Awake, what it is in its proper
sense. 55
B
Begin: a reproof of such as begin well and afterward grow sleepie. 58
Believe: that we must wish our Brethren joy and peace in believing, 262.
Believers stand in need of one another prayers, 306. the love that ought to
be between them, 316. Believers called Saints, 329. what this title
admonishes. Ibid. Blasphemy, what it is, 186. the kinds of it. 187 Body, the
Body is to be served but not its lusts, 97, 98. pretty rules about the care and
carriage of the Body, 98. overmuch care for the Body condemned. 99 Books, God
has three Books. 162 Borrow, whether it be lawful to Borrow, aff: 39. with
a distinction, Ibid. a fruit of sin, and a kind of baseness. Ibid. Bowing,
Bowing of the knee, what it means, 156, 157. Bowing of the knee at the Name of
Jesus, approved. 158 Brownists, a pretty note for their meekness or rather
waywardness. 104
C
Care, to care for the body is not unlawful, 96. overmuch Care condemned, 99.
three things should make us Careful against the day of Judgment. 163 Cenchrea
what, and where it is. 312, 313 Censure, to beware of it. 116, 117. Gods
receiving should be a protection against unjust censure, 118. it is against
right to censure one another, 120. a reason not to censure, 123.152. the
Censure of men's deeds pertain to God, 126. it is a great corruption of nature
to censure others. 150, 151 Chambring, what. 78 Chance, that the Gospel comes
not to any place by chance. 292 Christ, he is all good things to us, 89. how
to use Christ that we may be the better for him, Ibid. we must give our
account to Christ, 162. three excellent uses hereof, Ibid. 163, 164. the end of
Christ's coming in the flesh, 257. it is the top of every man's ambition to
honor Christ, 288. Christ rules amidst his enemies. 327 Church, that we ought
so to govern our houses as that they may worthily be called a Church, 321.
that even among the wicked God has sometimes a Church, 327. two things which
strike at the very heart of the Church. 335 Commend, what it is to commend,
312. that good Christians must be commended to others, 314. we must be wary
whom we commend, Ibid. two faults herein reproved. Ibid. Company, the comfort
of good Company. 295 Concupiscence, it is evil three ways, 94. it is not
fulfilled without a great deal of care and torment. 98, 99 Condemnation, those
are not rashly to be condemned whom God has received to grace, 116. a
conscience not condemning is a great blessing. 225 Conscience, what, 25.
whether the Laws of man may bind the conscience, 26.27. rules to persuade the
conscience of the lawfulness of thing, commanded, 28.29. Conscience a guard of
piety, 30. a good rule or two for an erring conscience, 138. a Conscience not
condemning is a great blessing, 225. Conscience is either a man's best friend or
greatest foe. Ibid. Contention, vide Strife. The contentious like the
Basiliske. 83. like the Salamander, 84. in the Church most odious, 84. a good
rule in asking questions. Ibid. Customs, the diverse acceptance of the word.
35
D
Damnation, how taken. 12 Darkness, how miserable they are that sit in
darkness, 62. what it is, 65. the Analogy between the bodily and spiritual
darkness. 65, 66 Day, how accepted, 59.60. the time of grace called The day,
62. concerning observation of days, 129. whether it be lawful to observe
Holy Days, 136. reasons Ibid. of Holidays called by the names of Saints, 137:
a good rule in the observation of them, Ibid. Holy Days to be observed in the
Lord. 138 Death, a good death follows a good life 142. Christ's death should
teach us obedience. 149.150. Debts, of a double debt. 38. love alone is a
perpetual debt, Ibid. wh^t to do to keep out of debt, 39. three sorts
deserving reproof herein. 40 Deralogue, pretty observations about the dividing
it. 44.45. Decency, what. 216. Deeciue, what it is. 336. Despise, what. 111
Divisions, such as cause divisions contrary to the doctrine of Christ, serve
not Christ, 337. a necessary caveat, 338. he that makes divisions we may be
jealous that he is but sanctified in show. 341 Doubting, how dangerous to do
any good thing doubting, 133. the acceptance of the word doubting. 228, 229.
Drunkenness, what and how vile, 74. it disgraceth the persons and professions
of men, 75. its fearful effects. 76, 77. not possible to be religious and a
drunkard, 78. drunkenness and whoredom seldom sunder, 80. drunkenness
begets strife. 82
E
Eat, four reasons why the Israelites were forbidden to eat certain meats,
107, 108. rules in eating. 177 Edify, what it is to edify. 199. Envy,
contrary to honest walking, 83. it is compared to the Basiliske, Ibid it is to
be abhorred, 85 it is a most just sin, Ibid. an envious man most unhappy,
86. what envy does. Ibid. Epiretus, who, and how described. 322. (...), the
difference between it and (...), a Companion or Fellow. 41 Evil, it is
threefold, 50. Evil in fact three ways, Ibid. ^uill, called the works of
Darkness three ways, 66. evil must be put off with hatred of it, etc. 69
F
Favorite, a pretty History of a Princes favorite suing for an unjust thing. 23
Faith, that we may both have and keep faith, five things are required. 230,
231. Faithful, that all the faithful are under Gods care and protection, 145.
what it should teach us, Ibid. it breeds comfort in distresses, 146. that men
must be faithful in their undertakings, 301. notably applied to all sorts.
304 Feasting, it is lawful, but etc, 75. examples and rules therein. 76 Fruit,
we must bring forth fruit. 303 Fulfill, a twofold fulfilling of the Law. 42
G
Garment, Christ is a Garment two ways, 87. the white Garment signifies three
notable things, 89. a pretty History of the white Garment in Baptism. 93
Glory, how a Minister may glory. 277, 278 Gospel, the blessings of the
Gospel what. 301 Grace, what it teaches us, 68. the Graces of God ought to be
praised in others. 265 Grief, what it is, 180. the weak lie open to Grief
three ways by the liberty used by the strong, Ibid. whether we may grieve our
brother in nothing, 181. of using things indifferent to the grief of our
brother, Ibid. with two cautions, Ibid.
H
Hearers, what they owe to their Preachers. 320 Honesty, diversely accepted, 70.
our care must be that our behavior be honest. 71 Honor, as referred to, or
conferred on Princes, what it signifies, 35, 36. To be in Christ is a great
honor, 326. It is a great honor any way to advance Religion. 332 Household, that
we ought to govern our households so, as that they may worthily be called
Churches. 321
I
Jews, why not to be despised. 260 Ignorance, total ignorance destroys
faith. 109 Illyricum, where it is, 284. how far off Jerusalem. 285
Indifferent: whether and how things indifferent bind the conscience, 24.27, 28.
That for things indifferent there ought to be no breach of charity, nor
separation among Christians, 111.137.138. a notable example hereof, 138. That
things are indifferent two ways, 111. Things indifferent how called by the
ancient, 112. Unity about things indifferent, 113, 114. We must not judge our
brethren for things indifferent, 114. a great sin so to do, 121.126. That a
full persuasion from the word is necessary for the doing or leaving undone
things indifferent, 131. Excellent things concerning things indifferent, 131,
132. In things indifferent we are to propound to our selves the glory of God,
135. Cautions, ibid. A most conscionable Rule for opposers of things
indifferent, 143. A most earnest exhortation to unity about things indifferent,
113, 114. That things indifferent are clean in themselves, but unclean to him
that so esteems them, 177. a good reason hereof, ibid. To use thing
indifferent to the grief of our brother is against charity, 180. two cautions
herein, 181. A reproof of strong and weak in the use of things indifferent,
189. The kingdom of heaven is not of things indifferent, but of things
necessary, 194. the striuers about things indifferent are guilty of three
sins, 195. scandal given and taken for things indifferent, destroys the
work of God, 204. The blame both of Preachers and hearers herein, ibid. a
threefold admonition hence, 205, 206. Indifferent things must be abstained
from for the weak brothers sake, 208. how long we must abstain for the weak
brothers sake, 212. Of the Churches authority in determining the use of things
indifferent, 214, 215. Whether our faith and knowledge in things indifferent be
always to be m^nifested by practice, 222. Joy: that we must wish our brethren
joy in believing. 262 Judging, vid. Censure: there are four things that we man
not judge. 166 Judgment, that there shall be a general judgment, 153. it
appears by many reasons, ibid. it is comfort to the good, but terror to the
bad, 154. that should persuade us to repentance, ibid. Three things should make
us careful against the day of judgment, 163. What to do to avoid horror and
shame at that day. 164.165
K
Kiss, of diverse sorts of kisses, 330. A holy kiss what, ibid. the use of it
in time of old. ibid. how abused in Rome. ibid. Kingdom: the kingdom of God
diuersely accepted. 192. ^^ee: what the bowing of the knee signifies, 156, 157.
The antiquity and lawfulness of the bowing of the knee at the name of Jesus
approved. 158. the end of this ceremony threefold, 159. taken for the worship
of God. ibid. Knowledge, it must go before persuasion, 178. Of their estate
that know evil, and yet do it. ibid.
L
Law, how fulfilled, 42. two false conclusions from this; That love is the
fulfilling of the Law. 51 Liberty: the weak brother lies open to grief three
ways, by the liberty used by the strong, 180. the unfolding of Christian
liberty, 209. Christian liberty what, ibid. three parts thereof, ibid. two
general rules, ib. 210. two moderators of this liberty, 210. We should labor
soundly to understand the doctrine of Christian liberty, 214. not use it
always, 220. a sharp reproof for such as pretending Christian liberty do
notwithstanding abuse the gifts of God to their lusts. 220 Life, what it is to
live or to dye to the Lord, or to a man's self, 141. that we must do both,
not to our selves but to the Lord. ibid. An admonition that our good be not
evil spoken of by our evil lives, 190. Three persons for whom we are to
venture our lives, 320. Hearers owe their lives to their Preachers. ibid.
Light: the best things called light, 63. We are to examine our estates whether
we are in the light or no, 64. The grace of sanctification called light in
three respects. 67 Love: that love is a perpetual debt, 38 40. it is the broad
seal of our faith, 40. Love what, 41. How love is the fulfilling of the Law,
42.52. Gods goodness in that he commands us nothing but to love, 43. Things
done either for fear or shame, and not of love, are nothing worth, ibid. The
Commandments of loving God and our neighbor are both alike in three respects,
46. whether a man may love his neighbor more then himself, ibid. or more then
another, 47. Of self- love that it is twofold, 47. a direction therein, ibid.
of them that love themselves only, ibid. diverse lovers reproved, 48. evil men
are to be loved as sick men, ibid. nothing so useful as love, ibid. Done
does not only do no hurt, but also does good, 49, 51. how faith and love
agree in one, 53. What love is more then other virtues, ibid. that Christ's love
should constrain us to love and obey him, 243. and to love one another, 254.
of the love that ought to be among believers. 316 Lusts: That the body is to be
served but not the lusts of the body, 97.98. Lusts not ^ulfilled without a
great deal of pains. 98.99
M
Magistrates: obedience denied to them by diverse sorts of Schismatickes and
Heretics, 4, 5. comfort for lawful Magistrates, 9. what reverence and
obedience they ought to have, 10. we ought to be thankful for them, 10, 11,
23: they are for the good of the good, 17. they procure the good of their
subjects three ways, 18, 19, 23. two duties of subjects to Magistrates, 20.
Whether a Magistrate may pardon a malefactor deserving to dye by the law of God
or no, aff. 22. Clemency and severity in a Magistrate, when and how necessary,
22, 23. that every soul is bound to be subject to the Magistrate, 25. Six
excellent rules for the obeying Magistrates, 28.29. Tribute to be given
Magistrates. 34 Man: he is two ways the work of God, 203. how turned into a
beast. 289 Mark, what it signifies in the original. 334 Meaning: that good
meanings without grounds from the Word will not serve. 131 Meat: that meat
may be a destruction of our brethren three ways. 184 Mind: what it is to be
like-mined, 249. the members of Christ's Church ought to be so. 250 Ministers,
they ought to preach to the capacity of their weak hearers, 103. their office
not to be contemned, 257. without faith he profits nothing, 258. they must
be diligent, 269, 286. bold, 271. painful, 287 A Minister in the Greek word
what it signifies, 273. they are sacred persons. 274 they are Priests. ibid.
how they may glory, 277, 278. their lives attractiue, 280. how they must
please, 309. they and the people must pray mutually one for another. 310
Miracles, of what use they both were, and are, 281, 282. of popish miracles,
ibid. they prevail not to persuade without the Spirit. 283 Multitude, what
like. 8
N
Narcissus, who. 327 Necessary: that we must not prefer things unnecessary
before thing necessary. 293 Neighbor, who is so, 45, 46. how to love him, and
that two ways, 46. whether a man may love himself more then his neighbor,
ibid. 47. how evil neighbors are to be loved, 48 Night, how accepted, 59, 60,
61. The time of infidelity is dark night. 62
O
Obedience: Popes how to be obeyed, 8, 9 a pretty reason of obedience to them,
9. Obedience that it might be acceptable and perfect, it must be done in love.
43 Offense: what it is, 170. three sorts of offenders of their brethren. 173
Opinion: That different opinions have always been in the Church, 108. that we
ought to warrant our opinions by the Word. 131 Ordain, what it implies. 7
Order, what, 7. without it the Church cannot stand, 217. we must not contemn
it, 218. that we must not put religion either in using or forbearing outward
order. 220
P
Peace: that the peaceable are acceptable to God, 197. that peace must be
preserved, 200. three things necessary there unto, 201 Peace and edification
two maine ends of our actions. ibid. Persuasion: aduertisements to persuade vso
the lawfulness of things commanded, 28.29 what it is to be fully persuaded.
130 Phoebe, who she was. 312 Please: how to be a man- pleaser, 198. Ministers
must please, but with a caveat. 309 Poor: that we must give to the poor. 298
Powers: what, and how taken, 2. diverse kinds, ibid. that God has a special
care of higher Powers. 14 Prayer: we ought to be frequent herein, 262. a fault
so lightly to esteem of public prayers without preaching, 263. the excellency
and power of public Prayer, 308 we should begin all our lawful acts
therewith, 309. against coldness herein, ib. three things moving us thereto.
ibid. Ministers and people should pray mutually one for another. 310 Praise:
that we ought to praise the graces of God in others, 265. the praises of good
men are to be esteemed. 266 Preaching: that the end of preaching and hearing,
is to be sacrificed, 275. it is the power of God to salvation, 281. that every
one ought to be a furtherance thereto, 320, what hearers owe their Preachers.
320 Priest, that both Ministers and Christians are Priests. 274 Princes: that
their persons are sacred, 23. that God has a special care of them, 14. that
they must be honored though they be evil, 36. wherein. ibid. (...), what,
171. more vide Stumblingblocke Punishment: the Magistrate appointed for the
punishment of them that do evil. 21 Purpose: that men's purposes are
ouer-ruled by God. 292 Put on: Christ is to be put on two ways, 87. he that
has put on him has put on all virtue, 89. two putters on of Christ reproved,
90.91. we must labor for it, ibid. reasons of the negligent putting on of
Christ, 92. a notable trial whether we have put him on or no. 95
Q
Questions: a good ruic for asking of Questions, 84. that the weak are not to
be troubled with doubtful Questions. 103
R
Receive, to receive one what. 102.103.253 Regeneration, we ought to manifest
it by the light of our life. 63 Religion, a great honor any way to advance
religion. 332 Repetition, how and when both laudable and lawful. 270, 271
Reproof. Magistrates may be reproved, though not resisted. 13 Resistance, that
grievous punishments remain for them that resist authority, 12. though it be
not to be resisted, yet it is to be reproved. 13 Resurrection, that Christ rose
not for himself, but for us, 148. A threefolde comfort of Christ's
resurrection. 149 Revive, what it is, 147. by it Christ brings us to heaven,
148. a threefold comfort hereof. 149 Riches, they being bestowed upon the
Church will be comfortably accounted for. 332 Righteousness, what. 193 Riot:
what it is to be riotous. 73
S
Sacrament, a good note for a weak receiver. 128 Sacrifice, the end of hearing
and preaching is to be sacrificed, 275. their happiness that are so
sacrificed. ibid. Saints, believers so called, 329 what it admonishes. ibid.
Salutation, its signification both according to the Hebrew and Greek, 317. why
Paul saluted so many, ibid. it ought not to be neglected, 318 two exceptions
hereunto. ibid. and 319 Sanctification, that grace called light in three
respects. 67 (...), what, 171. twofold, ibid it is ant to destroy our brethren,
184. A three^old Admonition inferred the ^on, 185 Scandal given or taken for
things indifferent, destroys the work of God. 204 Scriptures, the word
Scripture what it signifies, 245. they are written for our edification, 246.
they are most excellent in three regards, ibid. against which do err both
Papists and Anabaptists, 246, 247. they are necessary for all men. 247
Separation, that there ought to be no separation for things indifferent. 111
Servant, every believer is Gods servant, 122. a title gloryed in, ibid. what
we must do being Gods servants, 126, 127. the comfort of being so, ibid. a
title of honor. 315 Scrue, what it is to scrue Christ. 336 Sleep, a two fold
sleep. 55, 56 Soul, it is put for the whole man. 3 Strangers, they are to be
received, 315. the reason thereof. 316 Strength, the longer we profess the
Gospel, the stronger in faith we ought to be, 56. strong, how taken, 234.
that the strong must bear with the weak, 235. how. 236 Strife, vid.
Contention. Strife and envy are contrary to honest walking, 83. reasons against
strife. 84 Strive, what it is in the original. 306 Stumbling, a
stumbling-blocke what, 171. three sorts of men that lay stumbling blocks before
their brethren. 173 Subject: no good subjects that refuse to pay Princes their
dues. 36 Subjection, what it signifies, 3. that it must be yielded to civil
government, ibid. the limitation thereof, ibid. it is a debt, and that of
conscience to be paid to Princes in all the parts thereof. 36
T
Thanksgiving, the reasons of Thanks at meat, 138, 139 thanks are to be given
even to the instaments by whose means God bestows them on us 321 examples
hereof. Ibid. T^^e the lare of Grace is no time of sleeping but of waking 57 we
must lay hold on the present time. Ibid. Tribule the paying of tribute is an
acknowledges ^t of our subjection to the Magistrate, 32. excellent things both
of taking and giving tribute, 33. it is to be given even to bad Magistrates,
34. what tribute is. 35 Trusty, how the word is used, 291 Truth, we must be
wise, as well wise to discern as ready to obey the truth. 340 Try, we must
first try before we allow our actions, 226. it is the first thing required to
true virtue. Ibid.
V
Unity, that we should be studious of unity, 151. Unity in truth and
goodness commended, 251. where unity is not, there God is not glorified,
Ibid. the Lords Supper is instituted as a band of unity; but it is made a
fountain of discord. Ib. etc. Uncleanness, what it is in its proper
signification, 175. the reason why so many things were unclean to the Jews.
176 Unregenerate, the state of the unregenerate. 289
W
Walk, a Christian must not be idle, but he must be walking, 71. Walking
implies a going forward. 16 Wantonness, what, with the use thereof. 79 Weak,
that the weak are not to be troubled about doubtful questions, 103. they must
be gently dealt withal by the strong, 104. they ought to be tractable Ibid.
charity must be used toward such as are weak, 105. it is not for the weak
and vnleained to dispute Ibid. diverse reasons why some are so weak, 109. that
the weak are grieved three ways, by the liberty used by the strong, 180. we
ought to have a care of the weak, 182. 235. 242. the weak must be wary of
taking offense at the liberty of their brethren, 185. that in respect of the
weak, how, and how long we must abstain from things indifferent, 208. 212.
weak ones not to be nourished in their we kenesse, 213. that weak Christians
that are docible they are to be gently entreated, 229. how the weak should
carry themselves. 236, 237 Whoredom, helps against it, 81. it begets strife.
82. Will, that a man may will some things contrary to Gods Will without sin,
293. a distinction of Gods Wills, Ibid. that in all our proiects and purposes
we must say, if God will. 294 Works, good and ill works how sometimes taken,
15. ill courses called the works of darkness in three respects. 66
Z
Zeal, when a virtue when a vice. 82
The Scriptures that are expounded by the way.
Chap. verse. page. Matthew. 5. 9. 219 22. 3. 148 22. 39. 46 1 Cor. 6. 2. 161 14.
40. 216 1 Pet. 2. 13. 8 Revel. 20. 12. 162

THE DOCTRINES OF THE Thirteenth Chapter.
Doct. 1 THat all that live under any civil government must yield unto the
governors obedience and subjection. page 3 Doct. 2 That God has appointed and
ordained, and in an excellent order established policies and states. p. 8 Doct.
3 That a grievous punishment remains for them that resist Authority. 12 Doct.
4 That Magistrates are ordained for the good of the good. 17 Doct. 5 That the
Magistrate is appointed for the punishment of them which do evil. 21 Doct. 6
That every soul is bound in conscience to be subject to the Magistrate. 25
Doct. 7 That paying of tribute is an acknowledgement of our subjection to the
Magistrate and his Laws. 32 Doct. 8 That subjection to Magistrates is a debt,
and of conscience to be paid in all the parts thereof. 36 Doct. 9 That Love
alone is a perpetual debt. 38 Doct. 10 That love is a fulfilling of the Law.
43 Doct. 11 That we must love our Neighbors as our selves. 46 Doct. 12 That
the longer we profess the Gospel the more strong in faith and zealous in
godliness we ought to be. 56 Doct. 13 That the time of Infidelity is dark
night, and the time of Grace is the comfortable day. 62 Doct. 14 That the
consideration of our holy calling to the state of Grace ought to teach us to
hate and abhor evil works, and to do the good. 68 Doct. 15 That Christians
must have a special care that their behauiours be honest and such as becomes
the Gospel. 71 Doct. 16 That Drunkenness does disgrace both the persons and
professions of Christians. 75 Doct. 17 That all fedity, obscene and filthy
behavior is contrary to honest walking. 79 Doct. 18 That strife and envy are
contrary to honest walking. 83 Doct. 19 That he that has put on Christ has
put on all virtue. 89 Doct. 20 That the body is not so to be tended for, as
that the lusts thereof should be fulfilled. 95
The Doctrines of the fourteenth Chapter.
Doct. 1 THat those which are w^ake are not to be troubled with doubtful
disputations but friendly to be instructed. 103 Doct. 2 That there has been
always in the Church of God different opinions. 108 Doct. 3 That for things
indifferent there ought to be no breach of charity, or separation among
Christians. 111 Doct. 4 That a Christian ought to be able to warrant his
opinion and particular actions by the word. 131 Doct. 5 That in things
indifferent we are to propound to our selves to glorify God. 135 Doct. 6 That
we must both live and dye to the Lord and not to our selves. 141 Doct. 7 That
they are not rashly to be judged and condemned whom God has received to grace.
116 Doct. 8 That it is against right that one Christian should judge another.
120 Doct. 9 That the censure of men's deeds and behavior belong to God. 126
Doct. 10 That all true believers are in the Lords service and under his care
and protection. 145 Doct. 11 That Christ by dying, rising and reviving,
obtained power over us, to save us and bring us unto Heaven. 148 Doct. 12 That
the consideration of the last judgment should persuade us to our duties, and
to refrain from that that is evil. 152 Doct. 13 That all men must and shall
submit themselves to Christ as to their Judge. 158 Doct. 14 That all must give
account of all matters to our Lord Jesus Christ. 162 Doct. 15 That after
admonition and instruction we must be careful to amend our lives. 167 Doct. 16
That we must not give offen^e one to another. 172 Doct. 17 That things
indifferent are cleave in themselves but unclean to him that so esteems
them. 177 Doct. 18 That to use things indifferent to the grief of our brother
is against charity. 180 Doct. 19 That scandal is apt to destroy our Brother.
184 Doct. 20 That every Christian ought to be careful that he cause not the
Gospel of the Kingdom, and our Christian liberty a part of the same to be
evil spoken of. 188 Doct. 21 That the Kingdom of God is not in things of a
middle nature, but in things which are necessary. 194 Doct. 22 That the just
and peaceable are acceptable to God and approved of men as the true servants of
Christ. 197 Doct. 23 That the Churches peace and mutual edification must
specially be furthered. 200 Doct. 24 That scandal given and taken for things
indifferent, destroy the work of God. 204 Doct. 25 That we must abstain from
things indifferent for the weak brothers sake. 208 Doct. 26 That faith and
knowledge of Christian liberty in things indifferent, is not always to be
manifested by practice. 222 Doct. 27 That a Conscience not condemning is a
great blessing. 225 Doct. 28 That faith and knowledge of Christian liberty in
things indifferent, is necessary is preserve us from sin and condemnation.
22^.
The Doctrines of the fifteenth Chapter.
Doct. THat the stronger must bear with the weak. page 235 Doct. 2 That every
man must seek the good of his neighbor. p. 238 Doct. 3 That Christ in all his
life and death was not indulgent to himself pleasing himself, but he pleased
us. 242 Doct. 4 That the Scriptures were written for our edification in
learning and hope, by patience and comfort. 246 Doct. 5 That the members of the
same Church ought to be like-minded one to another. 250 Doct. 6 That by Christ's
example we are kindly to love one another. 254 Doct. 7 That Christ came in the
flesh to make good the truth of God and to confirm his promise to the Jews
for their salvation. 257 Doct. 8 That the Gentiles are received to the glory of
God by his mercy in Christ Jesus. 260 Doct. 9 That we must wish our brethren
joy and peace in believing. 262 Doct. 10 That we ought to acknowledge and
pr^ise the graces of God in others. 265 Doct. 11 That Ministers must faithfully
and dil^ ently perform their office. 269 Doct. 12 That Ministers by ^reaching
offer up the people an acceptable ^acrifice to God. 273 Doct. 13 That it is
lawful for a Minister when God blesses his l^bours to glory (...) bat
through Jesus Christ. 277 Doct. 14 That Christ furnished his Apostles with
gists of utterance, holy life and miracles, to make the world obedient to the
Gospel 281 Doct. 15 That Ministers of the Word must earnestly labor in the
discharge of their office. 286 Doct. 16 That the purposes and desires of men
are ruled and ouer-ruled by the providence of God. 292 Doct. 17 That we must
contribute to the relief of the poor Saints. 298 Doct. 18 That every man is
faithfully to perform that which he is to undertake. 301 Doct. 19 That
believers stand in need of the prayers of their brethren, and ought to pray
one for another. 306
The Doctrines of the sixteenth Chapter.
Doct. THat we must if occasion require commend good Christians to others. 314
Doct. 2 That to salute our friends present or absent is not to be neglected.
318 Doct. 3 That false teachers and brethren are carefully to be marked and
avoided. 335 Doct. 4 That su h as cause divisions and offenses contrary to the
true doctrine, serve not Christ but their own affections deceiving the simple.
337 Doct. 5 That as we must be ready to obey the truth, so wise to try and
discern what is such. 340 Doct. 6 That God will make his Church and Children
conquer Satan. 343 Doct. 7 That God is specially to be glorified of his Church
in confirming his elect by the Gospel. 349
FINIS.
A PLAIN EXPOSITION UPON THE THIRTEENTH CHAPTER OF THE EPISTLE OF Saint PAVL
to the Romans.
IN the two first verses of the twelfth Chapter, was a General exhortation to
obedience: and at the third verse began particular expressions of the General
in diverse cases; among which, obedience to Magistrates is a principal, and is
handled in this thirteenth Chapter.

There was great necessity of preaching this doctrine in Paul's time: for many
Christians interpreted the Liberty by Christ, to have freed them from
subjection to Government; by reason whereof, diverse cruel persecutions were
raised, and Christianity had gotten a very ill report, it being put into the
ears of Emperors and Princes, that Christianity allowed not of Magistracy.

For some such reason in effect, it is necessary that in these times also, this
Doctrine of obedience to Magistrates should be taught, and the people thoroughly
catechized and punctually instructed therein: which point is so fully handled
here, and with so many reasons confirmed, as in no place the like; for the
which, this Chapter is called Paul Politickes, though other things also be
handled therein.

For it has three parts: The first shows our duty to Magistrates, which is
Subjection. The second, our duty to all men, which is Love: The third, our
duty toward our selves, which is Temperance.

The duty to Magistrates is declared in the first 7. verses.

VERSE 1. Let every soul be subject to the higher Powers: --
IN the latter end of the twelfth Chapter he spoke against Revenge; now lest
any infer^e, therefore not lawful to use the Magistrate in cases of wrong:
Saint Paul seasonably adioynes a commandment to be subject to Magistrates, and
so, not public but private Revenge to be unlawful.

This first part contains two things: first a Precept: secondly, Reasons of
obedience thereunto.

The Precept peremptorily set down in these words; has the Thing, Subjection:
and the Persons, which are two, yielding subjection, Every soul: and to whom
it is to be yielded, which are set down, Powers: and distinguished, Higher
Powers.

To begin with the Exposition of the last words first.

Powers: Not Angels (though the Greek word (...)
may be so construed elsewhere) but Magistrates, nor Ecclesiastical
Magistrates properly, but civil Magistrates, whose is the Sword, and to whom
Tribute is due.

Civil Magistracy is an Ordinance of God for the punishment of evil doers,
and for the praise of them that do well, 1. Pet. 2.14.

He says not, To Emperors, Kings, etc. but Powers, naming the Thing, not the
Persons: because, though the Officer may be wicked, and in regard of his person
be unworthy of respect, yet the Office is to be honored and respected: and the
Power always to be obeyed.

Powers, in the plural, For there are diverse kinds. A Monarchy, an
Aristocratie, a Demoeratie, when one alone, when some of the best, when the
people, or most part rule all things; under which of these soever we live, we
must be subject thereunto.

Higher: (...), which are, (...), in authority, as it is translated 1. Tim.
2.2. that is, high or excellent Authority: For there are Powers from God which
are more mean, and not so general and public, as of Fathers, Masters, etc.
which are not meant in this place.

And not only to the Supreme Magistrate, but unto all Governors sent and
appointed by him, as Saint Peter expounds 1. Pet. 2.13.14.
.

Be subject. The word signifies an orderly subjection; and implies, the
reverence of the heart, respectfull language and gesture, obedience without
resisting, etc. A Subjection willing, and in due manner.

Every soul. Soul for the whole Man by a Synechdoche, he being so called from
his most noble part: The Magistrate has most power over the bodies of their
Subjects; but Soul is named, either by an Hebraisme, or to show the manner of
the obedience required, that it must be ex animo, even from the very soul.

Every soul. No exemption of any who enjoy the benefit of the laws in the
Commonwealth, of which they are members, upon any pretense whatsoever, in
regard of Ecclesiastical calling, or otherwise.

All which live under any civil Government, must unto the Governors yield
obedience and subjection, Matthew. 22.21. Render unto Caesar the things which are
Caesar's, Titus 3.1. Put them in mind to be subject to Principalities and
Powers, and to obey Magistrates, 1 Pet. 2.13, 14.

This obedience is to be limited, in things lawful, contrary to the word of
God.

The Magistrates in the Apostles time were enemies and Persecutors, and yet he
requires subjection to them; Titus is charged to put the people in continual
remembrance of it: much more are we to preach obedience to the godly and
religious Magistrates.

Must Nero be obeyed, and ought not much more King James, a Defender of the
Faith, a Nursing Father of the Church?

The Gospel does in some sort meddle with obedience to the Civil Magistrate.
some sort, as that it is lawful to be a Magistrate, and that he may and ought
to be obeyed; For we must have the testimony of the Word of the lawfulness of
these things.

But to set down laws of civil business, of Contracts, of Successions, of
Conueyance of Lands, of Pleas, of Punishments, of War, etc. in the
Commonwealth; or of the times of meeting for the service of God, or of reading
of the Scriptures, or of Garments or Gestures to be used in the Administration
of holy things etc. in the Church; it belongs not to the Gospel in particular,
to enact; but these things are to be directed by reason, being not contrary
to the Word.

The calling of the Physician or Carpenter, is lawful by the Gospel, and it
requires of them that they should deal conscionably: but what drugges, or
what course of prescribing the one should use in every disease: or what plot,
or tools the other should use in building, the Gospel determines not; but
these are left to the judgment of right reason: So for particulars in Church
or Commonwealth.

Moses had the execution of all government, both Civil and Ecclesiastical
among the Israelites, and performed it in his own person. Iethro his father in
law seeing it, tells him that the thing which he did was not good Exodus 18.17.
, and advises him to a course much more convenient. In giving sentence, and
just determining of Suites, Moses saw more then Iethro; but in the orderly and
more easy proceeding therein both for Moses and the people, Iethro saw more
then Moses by reason and experience.

He which reads the Gospel as a book of State Policy, or a book of
Statutes, abuses it: For the principal scope of the Gospel, is to reveal
the will of God concerning Remission of sins by faith in Christ, and in the
General to exhort to a righteous conversation.

The Brownists therefore and others, are greatly to be blamed, who absurdly
deny and contemn all Canons and Constitutions concerning order, which are not
in so many words set down and commanded in the Gospel: but of this more in
the next Chapter.

Here are to be reproved the Donatists, Authority of Civil Magistrates,
expounding this place only of Ecclesiastical Governors, whom Saint Augustine
confutes Aug. l. 1. cont. epist. Parm. c. 7.
.

Also the Anabaptists, and Libertines, they being so called for urging a
liberty in outward things, who deny the use of a Magistrate, among Christians,
to be lawful, and which in the memory of our Fathers, armed the rude multitude
in Germany against their Magistrates and Princes.

Also the Popish Clergy, who from the highest to the lowest of them, hold
themselves not bound and subject to the Civil Magistrate, but in all criminal
causes appeal to their Ordinary, and are not punishable, unless they be
first degraded, and so delivered to the Secular power.

But the Apostle says, Every soul, and Saint Chrysostom Chrysostom. in locum.
expounds, If thou be an Apostle, an Evangelist, a Prophet, or whatsoever thou
art, thou must be subject; and, these things are commanded to all, both Priests
and Monks, and not only to Seculars.

S. Bernard Ad Henric. Ep. Sen. epist. 42.
also to a Bishop writes of this matter thus: Si omnis anima, and vestra: Quis
vos excepit ab vniuersitate? Si quis tentat excipere, tentat decipere: If every
soul, then yours; who excepted you from this universality? He which
attempteth to except you, attempteth to deceive you.

The priests of the old Testament were subject to their Kings: our blessed
Savior submitted himself. So Paul, Act. 25.10, 11, 12. and yet the Pope
intolerably usurps, and his Bishops, over Emperors and Kings.

The Emperors, Henry the fourth, Henry the fifth, Frederick the first, Otho
the fourth, Frederick the second, and Conradus his son, were deposed by
Popes. And of the Insolency of Bishops contrary to this precept, do our own
Chronicles make mention; as of Becket against Henry the second; Longchamp
against Richard the first; S. Hugh of Lincoln, Sainted for his treason against
King John, and Henry the third his son: This was that good Sir Hugh, whose
day was the seventeenth of November, in whose stead the Coronation of Queen
Elizabeth was placed, at the which the Papists stormed.

The persons of all Clericks are to be subject to the civil Magistrate:
Emperors, Kings, and Princes I confess, have endowed Clergy men with many
Immunities long ago; and in this land statutes have been made for the
privilege of Clergy men Anni. 14. Edw. 3. c. 1. et 1. Rich. 2. c. 3.
, by which privileges they are not exempted from the bond of subjection, but
from certain taxations, or impositions of service: as from warfare, from
watching and warding, and such like. For no King can make void the bond of the
obedience of his subjects, no more then a father can discharge his son, or a
husband his wife.

The Gospel takes not away civil authority but rather stablisheth the same,
Popish, is but half a king, in comparison of a king Protestant, who under
Christ supremely governs over all persons, causes and things within his
dominions, according to the Gospel.

It is necessary for the people to understand that the Gospel constituteth not
new governments, but commands to reverence and obey them that are.

The froward perverseness of some, under a pretense of conscience refusing to
submit unto the reasonable constitutions of authority, has caused the Gospel
to be disgraced as a profession denying obedience to Magistrates; let all be
subject, that we may win due credit to the religion we profess.

VERSE 1. -- For there is no power but of God: the powers that be are ordained
of God.
IN these words is the first reason of the Precept: where we have the Reason:
and the Amplification.

The Reason is taken from the efficient cause, or Author, which is God: All
powers are of God, set down Negatiuely for the more force.

Those things which have God for the Author are to be acknowledged: But God is
the Author of all powers; of Monarchies, Aristocraties, Democraties, and of
those which are subordinate unto them.

They are not of Satan, as Fanaticall spirits have affirmed; neither has man's
reason the honor of this invention; but the very wisdom of God; whereby it
appears, that good laws, and Magistracy are things divine (...). Callimachus.
.

The Amplification is from the manner, how they are of God: they are ordained
of God.

Not by toleration, as sins and sinful men: nor as the punishments of sin,
as famine, the sword, sickness, wild beasts: we may pray against these and
oppose them; but we must pray for the Magistrate 1 Timothy 2.1, 2.
and submit to him: the Magistrate is by divine ordination as a thing
exceedingly beneficial to the state of Mankind.

Ordained: this word implies two things, Invention; and Ratification: God
invented and devised the order, that some should govern, and the rest obey;
and he maintains and vpholds it.

Order is an apt disposition of things equal and unequal: which to be
marshalled together so as thereby they should be accomplished, made perfect and
durable, must needs be a work of Gods singular wisdom. Both the beauty and
safety of the Universe, or whole world, is in order: If we consider the heaven
and earth, the orbs, and spheres, the stars wandering and fixed, the
elements, the faculties of man's soul, the diverse members of the body and their
use and situation, there is a most comely and useful order. So some to be rich,
some poor, some high, some low, some of one quality and aptness, some of
another, and so to be arranged together, that they should mutually respect,
second, and strengthen one another, must needs be from a Divine beginning: and
from hence did the Philosopher affirm that right, law, authority political,
was nothing else but an order between the Citizens (...). Arist.
. So are the three States of our land, the Lords Spiritual, Temporal, and the
Commons, called ordines regni, the orders of the kingdom: So Mat. 8.9.

Ordained, that is ratified, constituted, confirmed, allowed, commanded, or any
other word which you can invent for the being and remaining of Authority and
Government.

As the order and motion of the Heavens is continued by the power of God, so is
Magistracy and Authority. It were impossible that so many heads should be
subject unto One, especially if he be such a one as Nero, if God did not bring
it to pass. For the multitude, is bellua multoru^ capitum, a beast of many
heads, and mobile vulgus, the common people are as wavering, as the sea; so
that he who rules the waves of the sea, does ouerrule the unstable multitude
herein: Hence David says that it is God which subdueth (in order) the people
under him Psa. 144.2. Haroded Heb. (...). Septuag.
. The Devil is such an enemy to Magistracy; and our corrupt nature so contrary
to rule and order, we being also of such diverse, and contrary dispositions;
that if God should not lay David's people flat on the ground before him, he
could never rule them.

God has appointed, ordained, and in excellent order established politics, and
states: Pro. 8.15. By me Kings reign; and princes decree justice. Dan.
4.25.32. The most high rules in the kingdom of men, and gives it to
whomsouer he will, John 19.11.

The Devil says, Luke 4.6. that all the Kingdoms of the world are his, and
that he bestows them and the power of them, as he will.

The Devil is a liar, father of lies, therefore he is soon answered. The
order of the common wealth of the Bees is not from him: much less of
reasonable men.

1 Pet. ordinance of man.

Of man, causally, but subiectiuely, because it is executed by man; or
obiectiuely, because it is about the society of man, or finally, because it is
for the singular good of man.

But some magistrates are wicked, Phocas who killed his Lord Mauritius and so
invaded the Empire. So the Turk, and Pope are tyrants and enemies to the
Gospel: are these of God?

There are three things to be distinguished, power, the manner of obtaining it,
and the use of it: Cons. Toletu^ in loc. Annot. 3.
the power is of God, be he a believer, or an Infidel that has it: but the
use of it, if it be evil, and the coming to it if it be corrupt, is of our
selves and of Satan.

The Pope if he be a Bishop, is to be obeyed where he is a Bishop: the power
is of God: But if he attain the chair by bloodshed, as Damasus the first
Sozom. hist. li. 6. c. 23.
, by compacting with the devil, and doing homage to him, as Siluester the
second Plat. in Sil. 2. Fasciculus temp.
; by subtilty, as Boniface the eight; and by bribery and unlawful suit, as
almost all of them, as histories record; this is of the Devil.

If he be a temporal Prince, the Power is of God, and he is to be obeyed. So
also of the Turk. God by these two taking vengeance on i^olatrous and wicked
Christians.

God gives the Kingdom of Heaven only to the Godly: but earthly kingdoms he
gives as well to the wicked as to the godly. He which gave the Empire to
Augustus a sweet and gracious Prince, gave it to Nero a very monster of men: he
which advanced Constantine to the Imperial seat, who was the most worthy
Emperor that ever yet the world saw: advanced Julian also a most damned
Apostata. For as S. Augustine says, Iniustu^ non est, etc. It is not unjust
that wicked men should receive power over the world, that good men's patience
should be tried, and evil men's wickedness punished. By the power given to the
devil, Job was tried, that he might appear to be righteous; Peter was
tempted, that he might not presume of himself; Paul was buffeted, that he
might not be puffed up; and Judas was condemned that he might hang himself
August. tom. 6.1. de na. boni aduers. Man. ca. 32.
.

The use is both for Magistrates and people.

For Magistrates.

1 Instruction; that they remember that they are men; that they use the
authority for God, which they have reciued from God; that they maintain true
religion, etc. that they must give an account of their government.

2 Comfort: The calling of a Magistrate is full of labor, and danger, so that
the Imperial robes have bin accounted not worth the taking up, for the cares
which are wrapped in them: This is the condition of all, specially of
Protestant Princes, having the Devil, and so many Jesuits and Papists daily
seeking their subversion: But good Kings and Princes may comfort themselves;
for they are ordained by God, and he will protect them, as the experience of
famous Queen Elizabeth, and of our most mighty and gracious Sovereign King
James, do manifestly declare.

For the Subjects and people.

1 That they use all reverence to their Governors: The dignity of a King or
Prince, is a kind of Divinity. They differ not in substance from their
Subjects, but in use, so much, that they are called gods in the Scriptures
Exodus 22.28. Psalm. 82.1.6.
.

We must not think of them, look on them, speak of them, as of mere men,
but as the Deputies, Lieutenants, Vicegerents, and magnificent representations
of the Majesty of Almighty God: honoring them next unto God: and solo Deo
minores: as those who are only less then God: For a King, Sic omnibus mayor
est dum solo vero Deo minor est, is so greater then all, while he is less then
the true God alone, as said Tertullian Tertul. ad Scapulam. paulo post initium.
.

Many take a wretched liberty to tax their Governors; It is meat and drink
to evil Subjects to speak of the faults of their Princes (...). Thuci^ydes.
: but be thou ware, for it is written, Thou shall not revile the gods, nor
curse the Ruler of the people Exodus 22.28.
. Is it fit to say to a King, Thou art wicked? or to Princes, ye are ungodly?
Job. 34.18. It is not fit, but deserves severe punishment. Fear God, and the
King: Pro. 24.21. 1. Pet. 2.17.

2 That they be obedient: He that has commanded us to obey our natural
parents, has commanded us much more to obey our Princes, who are more worthy
fathers. He that forbids murder, forbids disobedience also: from which
disobedience comes all disorder and confusion in Church and Commonwealth.

Many men's consciences stick at some things commanded by the supreme
Magistrates, whose consciences stick not to break the peremptory commandment
of God to obey the Magistrate.

3 That they be thankful for their Governors: They are the Breath of our
nostrils Lam. 4.20.
. As the taking away of the breath is the death of the body, so the taking away
of Governors is the death of the State. David is called the Light of Israel 2 Samuel 21.17.
. So are all good Kings to the Commonwealth, as the Sun is to the world.

Some perhaps may think that to be left to our selves to do that which is
good in our own eyes were best: But as servants and children left to
themselves will soon ruinate the family; so subjects left to themselves will
soon undo the Commonwealth: The State of the Children of Israel was never
worse, then when there was no King in Israel, but every man did what was good
in his own eyes Judge. 21.25.
.

Let us be thankful for our good Laws and Governors, and pray that God may
continue them. Amen.

VERSE 2. Whosoever therefore resists the Power, resists the ordinance of
God: and they that resist, shall receive to themselves damnation.
IN this Verse is a second reason to enforce subjection to higher powers, and
it is taken from the contraries, thus, We may not resist, Therefore we ought
to be subject: for that is to be done whose contrary is to be abhorred.

The Antecedent is proved by two arguments: the first from the quality of the
fault: the second from the greatness of the Punishment.

The quality of the fault is, that he which resists powers, resists the
ordinance of God. The punishment is great, even Damnation.

He which resists: To resist, says one Musculus in loc.
, is not to be subject: and the Greek word (...).
notes such a resisting, as when a man is contrary to the order established;
and this is either by force; as rebels: or without force; as by contumacious
denying of the lawful commandment in things Civil or Ecclesiastical: or by
a cunning cluding, and crafty avoiding of the Law; or by hindering justice from
due execution, by wrong information and false suggestion: For Princes often see
and hear by other men's eyes and ears, and therefore seldom see and hear the
truth: And by this means a good, and wary, and wise Prince is bought and sold;
the subjects abused and wronged without the knowledge, and contrary to the
intention of the Prince, as Ziba abused David and his master also 2 Samuel 16.1:
and seq. and 19.24. and seq.
.

Resists the ordinance of God: Here is another word which is translated to
resist, which signifies to stand against (...).
, whether it be by force of arms, or arguments: It is a military word; and
such Paul uses, that we may understand refusing to obey, to be a greater
sin then we make reckoning of.

And he which resists. Here is the same word with the last: the word
resists is three times used, and every time put in the present tense: but in
the Greek only the first is in the present: the two last in the time past: as
if you should render it; He that resists the power, has resisted the
ordinance of God; and he that has resisted, shall receive damnation. This is
observed by a learned man Caietane.
, who thereby notes that many times when we do not obey Magistrates, we
intend not to resist them; but when we have not obeyed, then it is plain we
have resisted.

Shall receive to himself damnation. He says not, it is like, or it may so
fall out; but peremptorily, He shall receive.

Damnation. Punishment here by the hand of the Magistrate, whose laws he has
broken, and eternal punishment in the world to come, if he repent not.

Receive to himself. They are the cause of their own judgment, and hurt
themselves more then the Magistrate by their disobedience.

A grievous punishment remains for them which resist authority: Pro. 17.11. A
cruel messenger shall be sent against an evil man who seeks rebellion:
Pro. 24.21.22. My son, fear the Lord and the King, and meddle not with them
that are given to change, or are seditious: For their calamity shall rise
suddenly, and who knows the ruin of them both: Ecclesiastes 8.1.2.3.4.5. and
10.20.

Though we must not resist, unlawful commands by doing them: for the power of
a Prince is limited: and if it agree not with the word of God, then has place
that saying: We ought to obey God rather then men.

It was the nefarious voice of Antoninus Bassianus Caracalla, Emperor of Rome,
which he sucked from his mother, Si libet, licet: If it like me it is
lawful. He murdered his brother Geta, and requiring Papinian a famous Lawyer,
to defend his fact, received this answer: It is easier to commit parricide then
to excuse it; for which he, caused him also to be slain. Godly Princes are
contrary to Caracalla, and godly subjects are like to Papinian, rather choosing
to dye, then to do that which is worse then death.

The men of Calecut will do whatsoever their Emperor commands, though it be
to worship the devil, as they say they do: but we must Fear God, and the
King.

Princes may not be resisted, reproved by them which have a calling to do it,
so it be in wisdom and humility; and so that the reproof of the fault no
ways tend to the prejudice of their power.

It is not lawful by any humane or divine law revealed,

Though Saul unjustly and tyrannically persecuted David, yet he never lift up
his hand against him, but honored him alive and dead, as you may read in his
Story: of which Bucanus writes dangerously and erroneously Buca. l. com. loc.
49. de Magistratu. quaest. 77.
.

Our blessed Savior would not suffer Peter to defend him with his sword
against the present authority though it did unjustly.

Peter commands all servants to be subject, not only to good masters, but to
the froward 1 Pet. 2.18.
.

Take heed how thou resistest thy Prince upon any pretense, or take part with
such: and suffer not thy self to be deceived by any thing thou shall read in
any learned man's works which may tend thereunto: and of these especially
beware of a book entitled Vindiciae contra tyrannos, set forth by Stephanus
Iunius Brutus, to the dishonor and disparagement of Kings and Princes.

Abhor Insurrections, rebellion, treason: great is the sin, punishment: as
may appear in the punishment of Corah, Dathan, Abiram: of Absolon, Sheba: of
the Guizes in France: of the Gowries in Scotland: of the popish Priests, and
diverse Iesuited Gentlemen in England, both in Queen Elizabeth's days, and now
in the days of our most gracious King James, whom all, God the ordainer and
defender of Kings, brought to shame and ruin for their treasonable practices.

The persons of Kings and Princes are sacred; The Poet said, and we say,
Sacred Majesty (...). Homer.
. They are the Lords anointed, and God has a special care of them. Great
deliverance gives he to his King Psalm. 18.50.
. It is he that gives salvation to Kings, that delivers David from the
hurtful sword Psalm. 144.10.
.

From a wonderful escape of Titus at the view of the walls of Jerusalem,
Josephus collects, Imperatoru^ pericula Deum curare Joseph. bell. Iud. l. 6. ca.
2.
that God takes care of Princes in their danger.

Aulus Gellius A Gellus Noct. At. l. 5. c. 9.
, also reports of a strange deliverance of King Craesus: He being overcome in
battle, and being followed by a soldier who was ready to have run him through
not knowing he was the King; (...).
a young man the Kings son being borne dumb, suddenly spoke, Man kill not
Craesus; whereupon his life was saved.

Alphonsus King of Arragon would say that the lives and souls of kings were
not subject to the will of private men, but in security under the care and
protection of God.

This may evidently appear in the manifold deliverances of that blessed Saint,
our Noble Queen Elizabeth.

And of this our most gracious King James has been a pregnant example: God
grant he may always so be. Amen.

When the King commands, obey: for if thou refuse, thou fightest against God
himself resisting his ordinance, and so the Lord himself interprets, namely
himself to be opposed, when the commands of Magistrates are not obeyed See
Exodus 16.8.
.

Pretend not conscience, Number 16.11. 1 Samuel 8.7.
or religion for thy refusal: Thy conscience thou say smites thee if thou
submit to orders Ecclesiastical commanded: but for disobeying the Magistrate,
and resisting the ordinance of God, thy conscience smites thee not. Take heed,
this is the way to pluck upon thy self the wrath of God, to thy condemnation.

VERSE 3. For Rulers are not a terror to goed works, but to the evil: will thou then not be afraid of the power? do that which is good, and thou shall
have praise of the same.
4. For he is the Minister of God to thee for good.
THe occasion and order of this Text may be from the latter part of the second
verse, but the Argument is principally to be applied to the precept in the
first verse. So Chrysostom and Calvin.

The Argument is taken from the end for which powers were ordained, which is
the good of mankind, in these two branches: Reward and punishment, the sinews
of government. Thus,

That which is ordained for the singular good of Man, is to be obeyed,
submitted unto, and not resisted.

But Powers or Magistrates were so ordained: For there can be nothing better
then that good men should be rewarded, and evil men punished.

This Argument is first set down, in these words. For Rulers are not a terror
to good works, but to evil: and afterward repeated to the end of the 4. verse.

Rulers. This word is so general that it extends it self to domesticke
governors, but here is to be understood only of them which have the power of
the sword, whether they be supreme, or subordinate.

Are not a terror to good works but to evil. We must fear God and the King:
and authority languisheth where it is not feared: But yet Rulers are not, that
is, ought not to be, a terror: To good works: works for workers, the effect
for the cause; but to ill works, that is, workers, the Apostle so speaking,
because men are to be rewarded or punished according to their works.

Good and ill works. Not so Theologically, as a good work, that is done of
faith of a sincere mind, and for the glory of God; and ill works contrarily,
for the Magistrate cannot judge of this: but ciuilly good or evil, which are
according or contrary to the laws divine, humane, positive, municipall, of
Kingdoms, Cities, and Corporations, whereby the convenient and necessary
discipline of every State is established.

This is repeated in the words following: and the repetition elegantly set
forth by a Rhetorical communication, whereby both parts are declared, first,
that Rulers are not a terror to the good. Secondly, that they are a terror to
the evil.

The first, in these words: Will thou then not be afraid of the power? do that
which is good, and thou shall have praise of the same: verse 4. For he is the
Minister of God to thee for good.

The second, in the words following to the end of the 4. verse.

The first has two parts: A Question and an Answer.

The Question: Will thou then not be afraid of the power? As if Paul called
unto him a fearful and careful subject, who studied so to live, as that he
might not offend the Ruler, nor come within the dint of his sword.

The Answer: Do that which is good, etc. Where we have an advice, exhortation
or praecept, and the reason.

The Advice: Do good: that is, obey and resist not: He means not the
profession of Christianity, for that bred hatred: but such good as was so in
the judgment of the Heathen themselves, which is a civil conversation,
agreeing to the laws of the State wherein we live.

The Reason: And thou shall have praise of the same. The fruit of subjection is
praise: a sweet fruit, and of all exceedingly desired, though it may be
deserved but of a few.

Praise is here largely taken, as Tehillah in the Hebrew, implying not only
immunity of punishment, as a verbal commendation; but a partaking of all
liberties, freedoms, privileges, commodities of a good subject, according to
the laws.

This is confirmed for better assurance and encouragement from the end why
Magistrates were ordained, which is the good of man, as before: He is the
Minister of God to thee for good.

He is the Minister of God. The word which is ordinarily given to Ministers of
the word, is here given to the Ministers of the sword.

There is a great agreement between them: in regard of the Lord whom they
serve, which is one and the same, even the Lord Jesus; and in regard of the
common end of both their Ministeries, which is the good of men.

But there is also great difference, in regard of the object, and the manner:
The civil Magistrate is for the Natural, Moral, Civil and Spiritual good,
by the power of the sword. The Minister of the Word, is for the Spiritual
good; not by Law or force, but by preaching the word, administering the
Sacraments, and execution of Ecclesiastical discipline: unto which also
reaches the power of the Magistrate, not to execute them in his own person,
but to see them executed.

For good. What good? For natural good, that thy life and safety may be
preserved. For Moral, that thou may be brought from vice to virtue: Civil,
that thou may safely enjoy thy possessions, and that society and public
honesty may be defended and maintained: For Spiritual, establishing the true
worship of God, as the keeper of the first Table of the Law.

To thee, even thee which art a Christian also, who of all others, were least
in safety, if there were no Rulers nor Laws.

Magistrates are ordained for the praise and good, of the good and them which
live in order: Prou. 14.35. The Kings favor is toward a wise servant. And
16.13. Righteous lips are the delight of Kings, and they love him that speaks
right. 1 Pet. 2.14. Governors are sent for the praise of them which do well.
Of this David is an example: Psalm. 101.6. Mine eyes shall be upon the faithful
in the Land, etc.

But many live in order and do good, praise, but vexation. How is the
Magistrate then for their good?

It is thus answered by one, Anselmus in locum.
Si bonus, nutritor tuus; si malus, tentator tuus est; Nutrimenta libenter
accipe; sic etiam tentationem vt aurum probere: If he be a good Magistrate he
is thy nourisher; if an ill one, he is thy prouer; take thy nourishment
willingly, and also thy trial, that thou may be proved to be gold. And
thus by another Caietanus in locum,
, when a man doing good is persecuted, this comes to pass, non ex natura
operum, sed ex abusu potestatis. Not of the nature of the works, but by the
abuse of the power.

The Use is for Magistrates and Subjects.

For Magistrates.

1. They are the Ministers of God, therefore let them take heed what they do,
for they judge not for man, but for the Lord, who is with them in the
judgment: let them fear the Lord, and take heed; for there is no iniquity
with the Lord, nor respect of persons, nor taking of gifts: as said King
Iehoshaphat to his Judges 2. Chron. 19.6.7.
; as also our good Iehoshaphat to this purpose admonishes the reverend Judges
before the riding of their Circuits.

2. Let good Magistrates be comforted: many troubles accompany government and
the due execution of Justice, many slaundrous speeches of evil men: but
Magistrates are Gods servants, and he will bear them out, and reward them.

3. Magistrates must remember that they are advanced for the good of subjects,
not for the honor only of their persons and families, nor at all that they
should be licentious without controulment, as Nero, Tiberius, Caligula, etc.
Magistrates differ from the rest of the people, not by Impunity, but by virtue
and equity: and are to respect the vtility of the people, not their lust.

It was the word of Aelius Adrianus, who succeeded Troiane in the Empire of
Rome; Non mihi, sed populo, signifying that which he often was heard to say;
Ita se Rempublicam gesturum, vt seiret rem populi esse non sua^; that is, that
he would so govern the Commonwealth, as knowing it was the wealth of the
people, not his own.

The principal aim of Kings, Princes, and Magistrates must be the good of
them which obey them, and therefore they are called Benefactors (...). Luke
22.25.
: and indeed a good King or Magistrate is a Benefactor, and man's greatest
friend upon earth (...).
.

Now the Magistrate procures the good of subjects three ways.

1. By establishing and maintaining true Religion: A State without the true
Religion, is like a City without walls, or a house without a foundation; and
stories record, infinite evils to have betide Kingdoms for the neglect of true
Religion. Kings are to be nursing Fathers of the Church and of Religion. Such
of old were David, Ezechias, Josias, Constantine, Theodosius; such of late was
our famous Elizabeth, such a one now is (blessed be our God) our most Noble
King James, the tenderest Father of the true Church, and the greatest defender
of the faith upon earth.

2. By hearing the cries of the poor, receiving their petitions, and
redressing their wrongs: So did David, so did Solomon, so does King James: I
think never any King more, never pretending want of leisure, as sometimes
Antipater, in matters of this kind.

3. By seeing to the making of good laws, and their execution: Populi salus
suprema, lex: Law is the chief safety of the people. But what are good laws,
if not duly executed, and without respect of persons: we have good Laws
against drunkenness, and yet for want of due execution, through the negligence
doubtless of inferior magistrates, it daily increases to the great damage of
the Commonwealth.

The not executing of good laws uprightly, is an intolerable injury to the
supreme Magistrate; for from hence is many times the alienation of the subjects
from their Prince. This caused many to depart from Saul to David: 1. Sam. 22.2.
and this was the pretended ground of Absolons rebellion; and this alleged as
the cause of the deposition of Richard the second. Most worthy therefore are
all Judges, Justices, and subordinate Magistrates, of most severe punishment,
which shall through negligence, corruption, favor, hatred, etc. wrong the
Majesty of the supreme Magistrate, the authority of good laws, and the safety
of the common people.

As it is a damned thing for a Physician to be corrupted to destroy his
patient, whom he has undertaken to restore to health; so for a Judge or
Justice, any way to pervert justice, and not duly to execute good laws:
Cambyses caused such a Judge to be slain Herodot. l 5. Valor. Max. l 6. c. 3.
.

For Subjects.

1. To reverence, love, and pray for their Governors, as for the ministers of
God sent for their good.

2. To obey the Laws: unto which here are two motives: First, obedience
brings praise; of thy fellow Citizens; of the Magistrate; of God. Secondly,
such obedience is called doing good: whom then does it better become then such
as glory to be accounted professors of the Gospel?

But in what degree a good work? even in the highest of the second Table, in
which obedience to Magistrates is in the first place commanded; and Saint Paul
wishes Titus to put the people in remembrance that they be subject to
Magistrates, and obedient, and ready to every good work Tit. 3.1.
: as if there were no good works to be expected from him that obeieth not the
Rulers: I wish such seriously and in the fear of God to consider hereof, who
resist and oppose the laws and constitutions of the Magistrate in certain
matters of order in the holy service; both refusing to obey, and making a
slight matter of such disobedience, though it pertain to one of the highest
transgressions of the second Table.

VERSE 4. -- But if thou do that which is evil, be afraid: For he bears not
the sword in vain: For he is the Minister of God, a revenger to execute wrath
upon him that does evil.
IN these words the Apostle, by a like figure as before, shows that
Magistrates are a terror to cuill works: as he has showed the Magistrate to
be amiable to the good, and that they may rejoice in him; so here he makes him
terrible to the wicked, that such as will not do well for the love of virtue,
may by fear of punishment be kept in awe.

Here are two things: a Proposition, He that does ill, has just cause to
fear: a Reason, from his power and authority, He bears not the sword in
vain: and this is set forth by the Author of his power, which is God: He is
the Minister of God: and by the end wherefore he receives such power in regard
of the wicked; To execute vengeance or wrath upon him that does evil.

If thou do that which is evil: Moral evil, or Civil, contrary to the
Decalogue, or particular positive laws and Canons of the Church or
Commonwealth, or place where thou live; which Laws and Canons to be the same
in all places and Countries is not necessary.

He bears not the sword in vain. There is a twofold sword; of the Word, in
the mouth of the Minister, by admonition, suspension, excommunication; and of
justice, in the hand of the Magistrate, which is here meant; and here are two
figures: 1. a Metonymie of the sign for the thing signified; the sword for
authority: Then a Synechdoche; one kind for all coactiue power.

He bears. According to the fashions of Princes, who have certain Officers
going before them carrying the Ensigns of their power. Thus the Romans had
certain Bundels of rods, and axes, carried before their Magistrates, by 12.
Sergeants: and the Kings of England, Scepters, and a Sword.

In vain. He carries not the sword for fashion or for a show, but as having
power of life and death: He may reprove with words, and he has power also to
strike with the sword: Dau. 5.19. Vana sine viribus ira: Authority were but an
idle name, if it were not invested with the power of the sword.

He is the Minister of God: as before.

A revenger to execute wrath, etc. Vengeance is proper to God, and by God
communicated to Magistrates, who otherwise had no power to revenge; neither may
inferiors execute private revenge.

Wrath. The wrath of God: or punishment; so called, signifying all manner of
castigation, as mulcts, sines, imprisonment, banishment, proscription, death,
etc.

The Magistrate is appointed for the punishment of them which do evil: Genesis
9.6. Who so sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed. By this
Scripture the power of the sword is confirmed to the Magistrate. So Exodus 21.14
and S. Peter affirms that Magistrates are sent for the punishment of evil
doers: 1. Pet. 2.14.

May the Magistrate pardon,

The Supreme Magistrate may, good of the Commonwealth, and no fraud to God or
good men: So David aggrauated the punishment of theft by his sentence upon a
rich man, which should have stolen the only sheep of his poor neighbor 2.
S^m. 12.56.
.

Also he forbore Ioab, that wilfully murdered two famous men, Abner and Amasa;
for he was a valiant man, in great account with the people, and there was great
need of him. But Solomon executed Ioab, and in the flower of his wisdom, upon
good reason pardoned Abiathar the Priest, a man worthy of death 1. King. 1.26.
.

War, lawful and necessary sometimes by this place: as he may draw his sword
against a private troubler of the Commonwealth, so against a public,
whatsoever Erasmus says to the contrary Erasm. Adag. Chil. 4. Cent. 1. Adag. 1.
.

The Saints by Faith subdued kingdoms, and turned to flight the armies of
aliens, Hebr. 11.33.34.

When the Soldiers demanded of John, what they should do: If he had misliked
war, he would have bid them to hurl away their swords, rather then bid them
be content with their wages, as Saint Augustine has observed Aug. epist. 5.
Marcel. (...) dirissime. to 6. l. 22 contra Fanst^m, cap. 74.
. So that war is lawful; and if the King command, lawful for the subject to
draw his sword, but not without his authority.

It is the duty of Magistrates to punish offenders. Clemency is most
commendable in Princes. Nero in the beginning of his Empire, when he was
requested to set his hand to the execution of an offender, would say, vtinam
nescirem literas, I would I could not write, which procured him great love
among the people.

And Theodosius the younger being asked, why he never executed such as iniuried
him; answered, I would to God it lay in me to revive them which be dead Secrat.
Schol. Eccles. hist. l. 7. 5. p. 22.
, A princely voice.

Yet severity is necessary, and God requires that wicked men should be
punished. Impunity is a great entisement to sin.

It is true which the Orator Aeschines. (...).
said, There is no profit of that Government which has not instruments of
punishment for wicked men.

It is profitable for the Commonwealth, for the safety of the Good, who are
in some sort wronged, when wicked men are spared. The Physician purges our
bodies of peccant humors, and the Sovereign Magistrate is the Royal
Physician of the State. A wise King (says a wise King Prou. 20.26.
) scatters the wicked, and brings the wheel over them.

Also for the amendment of the bad, who are punished even for this also, that
others may be warned by their example: If they will not amend, let them be made
Triacle, to expel the poison of sin out of others.

The execution of Justice in this kind, is like Thunder, which strikes few,
but fears many Poena ad paucos, metus ad omnes.
. Smite a scorner, and the simple will beware, Prou. 19.25. So God will have
the entiser to Idolatry Deuteronomy. 13.11.
, the false witness Deuteronomy. 19.20.
, and the incorrigible son Deuteronomy. 21.21.
, to be severely punished for a warning and example to others.

Magistrates are not to be a terror to the good, but to the evil: Dat veniam
coruis, vexat censura columbas, is a foul mistaking of the mark: They must
diligently examine matters, that they may pronounce right judgment; neither
must they proceed for favor or affection, for they judge not for man, but for
the Lord, as said a just King 2 Chro. 59.6.
.

It is reported of Artaxerxes long-hand Emperor of Persia J. Lypsii monitorum
and exemplorum polit. l. 2 cap. 9.
, that when his favorite Satibarzanes sued for an unjust thing, being drawn
thereunto by the promise of a great sum of money; the Emperor commanded his
Treasurer to bring so much money, and gave it to his favorite: Hold thee,
says he, though I give thee this, I shall be never the poorer, but if I grant
thy suite, I shall be much the vniuster.

We are to praise God for our Governors, and good laws, pray for the
Magistrates, that they may be all of them lovers of Religion, Justice, Virtue:
for according to their example, are the Commons for the most part fashioned. In
the time of Julius Caesar, soldiers; of Augustus, scholars; of Nero, Poets
and Stage Players flourished, because these great ones were such: As certain
flowers move according to the motion of the Sun, so do the common people
imitate the lives of their Superiors.

VERSE 5. Wherefore ye must needs be subject, not only for wrath, but also
for conscience.
IN this verse is the Conclusion of the former Precept and Reasons; the Apostle
peremptorily determining Subjection to Magistrates.

There are two parts: First, The duty commanded, Subjection: Secondly, The
reason, which is double: First, because of Wrath: Secondly, for Conscience sake.

Both these are generally amplified, and particularly.

Generally, in this term of illation, Wherefore, that is in effect: these
things being so, that Magistrates are of God, that they are his ordinance, for
the good of mankind, and armed with the Sword, then Subjection is due both for
wrath, and also for conscience.

The particular Amplification, is the manner of enunciating and delivering,
both the duty and the Reasons.

The duty is not plainly delivered, Be subject, but ye must, and more, ye
must needs be subject. There is a necessity of subjection.

The Reasons are delivered by comparison, not simply: for wrath; but not for
wrath only; but also, and much more for conscience.

The wisdom and care of the Apostle here appears, that handling a matter so
weighty, leaves it not rawly, but endeavors so forcibly to speak, that
all men may take knowledge hereof, and be persuaded.

Ye must needs. Things are necessary or indifferent. Things necessary to be
done, are such as are commanded in the Word: necessary not to be done, such as
are there forbidden: indifferent, such as are neither forbidden nor commanded.

Things necessary bind the conscience, because they are Moral; Things
indifferent both in nature and use also, bind not the conscience, but in case
of scandal.

Be subject, to Magistrates, to their Laws, Statutes, Decrees, Edicts, Orders,
Constitutions, etc.

For wrath: of God, for God is angry with all such, who resist authority; and
of the Magistrate, whom we provoke by our disobedience, and who may justly
punish us.

Not only for wrath, but also for conscience. If wrath make us subject, much
more ought conscience; and if a man could hide from the Magistrate his breach
of the Law, yet conscience must withold him from transgression.

For conscience: of the brother: for it is an offense to a peaceable and loyal
subject, that any should take liberty to break the laws of the Magistrate:
The argument is forcible if we so understand it: But better for thine own
conscience, as the Syrian Translator expresses.

Conscience is a faculty of the soul, taking notice of all things passing in
our whole life, and determining thereof, either accusing or excusing before
God. Calvin calls it the Sense of the divine Judgment Sensus Iudicii
diuini. Calvin. Instit: lib. 4. cap. 10. sect. 3.
. For conscience, that is, lest by not obeying the Magistrate, thou wound thine
own conscience, in sinning against God: for if conscience be offended, then is
God offended, who is the Lord of Conscience.

Every soul is bound in conscience to be subject to Magistrates.

This is proved by the fifth Commandment, Honor thy father, etc. Every part of
the Moral law binds the conscience: But to obey the Magistrate is a part:
Therefore, etc.

Matthew. 22.21. Render to Caesar the things which are Caesar's: we are bound to
deal justly, and to render to all their due.

Ecclesiastes 8.2. Keep the Kings commandment, in regard of the oath of God.
Both the oath which thou have solemnly made to God in thy Baptism, to keep
his laws, and the oath of Allegiance which thou have by the name of God taken
to obey thy Prince. An oath binds conscience; but thou have sworn: God has
bound thee to obey, and thou have bound thy self.

Saul sought David's life, then David having him at an advantage, only cut off
the skirt of his garment; no great matter one would think, yet it was his
Sovereign; and afterward his conscience was troubled, and his heart smote him,
even for that, 1. Sam. 24.5.

Do the Laws and Constitutions of Magistrates, bind the conscience?

It is the prerogative of Gods Law to bind conscience: bind, but not by their
own power, but by virtue of the law of God.

Nebridius exceedingly hated, de quaestione magna, responsionem breuem August.
refert, Epist. 23. ad Bonifacium, non procul a fine.
, a short answer to a weighty question: a word or two more therefore hereof,
to make it plain.

It is therefore to be understood, that Magistrates are invested with a power
from God, to make Laws and Constitutions, Civil and Ecclesiastical: and
these determining (not the substance, but) the circumstances of Gods worship,
as, what garments, what gesture, what times of meeting, etc. to be used in the
holy service, for comeliness and order.

This is only questioned; but it may thus appear.

The Magistrate is the Minister of God for thy good, as before, verse 4. But a
great part of this good, is in comely manner of worshipping God. The very
Heathen Philosophers saw by Natural reason, that the end and care of the
Magistrate, is, (...) Arist. Ethic. lib. 1. ca. 9. and 13.
, to make his subjects virtuous, and practisers of things good and honest.

This is grounded upon Deuteronomy. 17.19.20. The King must hear and read, and study
the laws and statutes of God, to keep and do them; as he is a man, in his
own obedience, and as he is a Magistrate, to see others obey them, punishing
the breach of the first Table, as well as of the second, and making laws for
the comely worship of God, as well as for the preservation of Justice and
honesty amongst men, otherwise, how does he keep all the words of the Law?

This is confirmed by the examples of all godly Princes, as of Moses, David,
Solomon, Asa, Iehosaphat, Hezechias, Josias, and since the coming of Christ,
of Constantine, Theodosius, Martianus, Leo, etc.

Saint Augustine more then once August. Bonif. comiti, ep. 50. and praecip.
tom. 7. contra epist. Parmeniani, l. 1. c. 7.
commends an Imperial law against the Donatists and Schismatics, which was,
that they which separated from the Church, and held private conuenticles, should
be punished with pecuniary mulcts; their Leaders with banishment, and the
place of their meetings to be forfeited to the Emperor.

Also that they should have no power to bestow their goods by will, nor to
enjoy any legacy bequeathed to them: and he instanceth in a certain Noble man,
who recovered a legacy from certain Donatists, specially from one Augustinus,
a Bishop of that side, given to them by his Sister.

Indeed the Papists would engrosse all this power Ecclesiastical to the Pope.
And the Donatists Aug. tom. 7. lib. 2. cont. epist. Gaudentii, cap. 16.17.
in Saint Augustines days, would be left to themselves, and not to be under
the power of the Magistrate, in matters Ecclesiastical, as to be compelled to
the outward service of God. This way run the Brownists also, who would have
the King to be but as one of the company, and to be subject to their
unwarranted Lay Elders.

These things then thus premised, the Answer is, that all Laws and
Constitutions of the Magistrate (not repugnant to Gods word) bind the
conscience, perse Calvin. Jnst. lib. 4. c. 10. sect. 5
, to obedience under the danger of mortal sin, in the General; for the
General is Moral, which is, that we obey Magistrates; and by consequent, in
particular also; because to violate orders established, to trouble the peace of
the Church, and to give offense, is moral Transgression: and the breaking of a
particular, inferres the breaking of the General.

The obligation we speak of, is not in the things commanded, but in the
commandment of God, who bids us in all lawful things to obey the Magistrate.

And thus things indifferent, in Nature, may become necessary in their use, and
bind the conscience, if the use be determined by the Magistrate, which is in
his power to do, though not to alter their Nature.

Is my conscience discharged of sin before God,

No:

And such laws (which are called mixed) are confirmed with a double band: the
wrath of the Magistrate, and conscience toward God. And so every transgression
of such laws, implies a double guiltiness; the one before the Magistrate, the
other before God. The first is an injury to man; the second a sin against
God. If thou vndergoest the punishment, thou art discharged of, and have
satisfied for the injury done to man; but thou have resisted the Magistrate in
his primary intent, and broken a profitable and just law, and so remainest
under the imputation of sin before God, from which no mere man can discharge
thy conscience.

We may pity such Princes, subiecting themselves to the Pope, are but half
Rulers, being deprived of their authority in things Ecclesiastical.

We must obey of conscience. resist authority, refusing to be obedient.

Let us all in the fear of God submit our selves to God and the King,

We use to say, must is for the King; and the King of Kings commands that we
should obey authority: we must needs be subject for conscience, says the
Spirit.

It is strange that any should dare to pretend conscience to disobey the
Magistrate or the Church commanding things lawful.

Thou say thou will not for thy conscience, and Paul says, thou must needs
for thy conscience.

When thy servant obeyes not thy word, thou say, what conscience? when thou
obeyest not the word of the Magistrate, it may much more justly be said to
thee, what conscience? Disobedience to lawful authority is for want of
conscience.

But thou can not be persuaded of the lawfulness of things commanded.

For answer, I desire thee well to consider these following aduertisements.

1. When Statutes are made by His royal Majesty and the three estates of the
Kingdom, the Lords spiritual, the Lords temporal, and the Commons; and when
by his Majesty's Authority, Constitutions and Canons are set forth, by the
reverend and learned Bishops, with the assistance of a multitude of learned and
godly Divines: is it tolerable or conscionable that the private opinion of some
Novel Divine, and inferior unlettered persons should be preferred before the
Grave determinations of such Reverend and Honorable assemblies?

Be modest, and think not thy self wiser then all other men.

2. Princes are not bound to render to every one a reason of their Laws: a
good Subject examines not whether this or that be more convenient, but is
contented with this, This is commanded.

If in making laws every particular man's fancy were to be regarded, there
would be no end, no order.

Submit thy self therefore to the present government, and follow the custom
of the Church wherein thou live in the received rites, which are not impious,
nor indecent in the judgment of the best.

Be not contentious: 1. Cor. 11.15. Hoc hominum genus authoritate potius
compescendum, quam longis disputationibus refellendum: Such kind of men are
rather to be repressed by authority, then refuted by long disputations, said a
learned and moderate Divine Pareus in c. 11. epist. 1. a. Corinth.
.

3. If thou doubtest of things commanded; never go for resolution or counsel
to them which are opposite to authority and the State, but to the peaceable:
and here apply the counsel of Syracides, Ecclesiasticus, 37.10.11.12. Consult
not in matters of obedience, with them which refuse to obey. By this have many
simple minds been dangerously misled. But fear thou God and the King, and
meddle not with the seditious, or them which are given to change Pro. 24.2^:
.

4. Judge charitably of the Magistrate, that he intends to govern according to
Gods word: and interpret things commanded at the fairest. Curse not the King,
no not in thy thought, says Solomon Eccles. 10.20.
. And he that stretches his wit to make the worst construction of a law, is a
very lewd person.

5. A certain gesture, or kind of garment is commanded; thou can not prove
it unlawful by any testimony of Gods word: Be not inquisitiue of the
lawfulness or unlawfulness: Ask no question for conscience sake. This is the
counsel of the holy Apostle in the like case, 1. Cor. 10.25. This is the way
of peace and obedience: and the itching after questions has laden many a good
mind with much guilti-nesse.

6. In matters that seem doubtful, follow the old rule, Tenecertum, relinque
incertum: Hold that which is certain, leave that which is uncertain. The
lawfulness of such a gesture, such a garment, such a rite, is uncertain to
thee, but this is certain that thou must needs obey the Magistrate. Leave
disputing then, and obey; for we are certain that God has commanded us to
obey the Magistrates; and when they command, our uncertainty will not excuse us
either before them here, or before God at the day of Judgment.

Let us all make conscience and obey.

Observe the power of thy conscience: if thou desire a peaceable and quiet
conscience, torment thee and no force, no cunning, no gifts can appease the
fury of it.

Lipsius calls conscience, Pietatis laciniam Lipsius politic. lib. 1. cap. 5. in
Summa aut titulo.
, a iagge or guard of piety; but I am sure it is much more then so, and that
there is no piety at all to be expected from him which regards not his
conscience: He that fears not his conscience will not fear God; and he that
puts away conscience, makes shipwreck of faith.

VERSE 6. For, for this cause pay you tribute also: For they are Gods Ministers
attending continually upon this very thing.
THe first syllable of this Verse shows that it depends on something going
before.

M. Calvin makes it thus. The magistrate must defend the good, and punish the
bad; but this he cannot do without means, therefore we must pay him tribute.

Pareus thus, for conscience sake we must pay tribute; true, but better, it is
an Argument to urge conscionable subjection: which is the meaning, of, for this
cause.

Pay you tribute. This word tribute by a Synechdoche implies all payments and
taxes whatsoever due from the subject to the Magistrate, by what name soever
you call them.

For they are Gods Ministers, as before verse 4. though the word here be
different signifying a public officer, yet the sense is the same, with a
little increase of it by this term.

Attending continually upon this very thing, that is, the good of the people
according to their calling from God.

The Reason in these words to urge conscionable subjection, is taken from the
sign of it, which is paying Tribute, or from the part to the whole, paying
tribute, being a part of that conscionable subjection spoken of in the first
verse: and this is showed by the term also.

The Reason may be thus framed.

To whom we pay tribute of conscience, to their laws we ought to be subject
of conscience.

But we pay tribute of conscience to Magistrates.

Therefore, etc.

The Minor is the Apostles.

The Mayor is confirmed from the end of paying tribute, which is that the
Magistrate may make laws for the good of the subjects: thus,

For the making of which we pay tribute, to such laws we are to be subject of
conscience.

But for the making of good laws we pay tribute.

Therefore, etc.

The Minor is the Apostles, For they attend continually upon this very thing.

The Mayor is grounded upon common Reason: For what manner of thing were it, to
offer the Magistrate tribute, and to sue for laws, and when they are justly
enacted to refuse to obey them. God who ordained that thou should maintain
the Minister that he might preach to thee; ordaines thereby, that thou
should hear him, so of the case of the subject toward the Magistrate.

There are then two parts of this verse: first, a duty, paying tribute. Second,
a reason from the original of such tribute paying, which is the Magistrates
care for the common wealth, and well governing the people, as in our
Parliaments plainly appears.

Paying of tribute is an acknowledgement of our subjection to the Magistrate
and his laws.

Mat. 17.24, 25, 26, 27. The (...) or tribute there spoken of, was a payment
gathered for the temple and maintaining Gods worship, in testimony of Gods
dominion over them, and the Recognition of their subjection, from a law Exodus
30.13. of all other payments, the Jews could least digest that this should be
paid to the Emperor; because it was a sign of their subjection to him, which
our Savior Christ was pleased to pay.

Pompey first converted that Capitation or headsiluer to the City of Rome some
sixty years before the Nativity of our Savior.

Ester 10.1. Ahashuerus lays a tribute upon his provinces, which was a token
of their subjection to him.

Luke 2.1. When Augustus Caesar was stablished in his Empire over all the
world, he caused by a decree that all the World should be taxed, which was a
sign, that he was an absolute Emperor over all.

Here subjects are to be admonished willingly to pay tribute. Paul, he is
unreasonable that should grudge them.

The Magistrate watches for our good, and attends continually thereupon. He
defends from enemies abroad: he represseth robbers at home. The
Administration of Justice, the security of our lives, the safety and peaceable
possession of our goods are from him.

Men scan at the revenues of the Prince, but not at the issues. Counselors,
Judges, Officers of State, a Guard, sending forth Ambassadors, rewards to the
well deserving, for general encouragement, and many other occasions cannot be
discharged without a great treasure, which is the ornament of peace, and the
sinew of war.

Beside; a King is to be maintained like a King for his honor: and his care
is worthy of great reward. We must pay of conscience; for not the greediness
of Princes, devised tribute, but it is by the ordinance of God himself.

It is not for subjects, how much the Prince shall have: but they should
moderately exact, and warily dispose of the tributes, for their own honor,
and the public good.

Tiberius liked not the Shepherd that flayed the sheep in stead of clipping.
Nor Alexander, the Gardner which pulled up the root of the herbs. Nor Tully,
him which so cut the wings that they should never grow again.

The Turks call the tribute of the Provinces, Saarum, the blood of the people,
which to convert otherwise then for the good of the people should be unjust.

If we owe tribute to Princes, their government; then what tribute and
subjection do we owe to God from whom we receive all good things, for this
life and for a better?

But what could enemies and traitors do more, then many among us do; treading
under foot, and contemning the very Laws of God, and violating all good order.

What shall we render to the Lord for his infinite goodness? even the tribute
of willing and thankful obedience.

VERSE 7. Render therefore to all their dues, tribute to whom tribute is due,
custom to whom custom, fear to whom fear, honor to whom honor.
IN this verse Paul brings a new argument to infer conscionable obedience and
subjection to Magistrates, and so concludes this whole matter.

The Argument is taken from Justice, which gives every one that which is his:
To pay debts is conscionable.

But subjection to Magistrates is a debt.

Therefore, etc.

Paul urges this point with many strong arguments, both because the Emperors
were then Heathen, and also because it is hard to corrupt nature to be
subject: every man would be a Ruler.

Here are two parts. The argument set down in manner of a precept: Render to
all men their dues.

The amplification in the rest of the words.

In the precept we have the duty, To render dues: and the persons to whom, To
all.

Render: not give, as if it were an alms, or gratuity, but render, or pay.

Dues: (...), debts, the same word which is used in the Lords Prayer.
Sabiection, and tribute, debts, so that he is perfidious and unjust which
pays them not.

To all: If you say men, then it follows well from the less: if to all men,
then to Magistrates, which are the worthiest men.

If you say Magistrates, then All respects either their quality, or degree.

Their Quality. To all, to the good to the bad. The euilnesse of the Magistrate
discharges not the subject of duty: no more then the euilnesse of parents,
their children: The ordinance of God not the unworthiness of men must be
respected.

Their Degree: to the chief, and to all inferior Magistrates sent from him.

The amplification is from a special enumeration of dues; which may be
referred to two heads: to the maintenance, and countenance of the Magistrate.

Tribute and custom are for his maintenance; Fear and honor for his
reputation and countenance.

Some distinguish these four thus. Tribute to be rendered to the Treasurer,
custom to the Publicans and collectors, Fear to the Administrators of
Justice, and Honor to the Person of the supreme Governor: but I think it is
easier to understand these to be rendered to the chief Magistrate, and for the
manner, to be left to his will.

Tribute: (...), that which is brought into the Kings treasury or Exchequer,
and so it is a general word: but usually translated Tribute: which is dersued
from tribuo, which is, diuido, because Princes must not take all but a part, as
Lipsius: Lips. polit. l. 4. c. 11.
but rather a tribu from the Tribes: The people of Rome were divided into three
parts, each part had a governor, which was therefore called a Tribune: and the
payments made to the State, a Tribute. So Capitation or payments by the poll,
or out of lands and goods, with us, may be called Tribute.

Custom. (...), from whence comes (...), or (...), A Publican, of which kind
of men there is often mention in the Gospel, after this manner, Publicans and
sinners. In Latin, vectigal a vehendo, and hereby are meant, Imposts and
taxations upon merchandise, exported or imported; called with us custom, and
his Majesty's officer herein a customer: whom the Romans called a Publican: an
office of honor among the Romans, but in disgrace among the Jews, (who
unwillingly paid any thing to the Romans) for their subjection and bondage
signified thereby, and for the oppression used by the officers, and especially
if any of their own contrymen had bought the office: Such an one was
Matthew, before his conversion. The office was lawful, but odious to the Jews
for the causes rehearsed.

Fear. Fear and honor are the Lords due, but he communicates them to
Princes which bear his Image upon earth.

Fear. Not the fear of an evil conscience, which follows evil facts of
which verse 3, 4. but reverence to their Persons, and regard to their laws,
which preserues from evil facts.

It is better to be loved then feared; and Nero was hated for his Oderint dum
metuant: but if subjects were in no fear, the Magistrate would be contemptible.

Honor. This word comprehends all the former, being expounded according to the
meaning of the fifth Commandment. As first, Reverence, inward of the heart:
outward, in word, behavior. Second, Obedience. Third, Thankfulness, unto
which due payments are to be referred.

Subjection to Magistrates, is a debt and of conscience to be paid them in all
the parts of it: Matthew 22.21. Render unto Caesar, the things which are
Caesar's. Ephesians 6.1. Children are commanded to obey their Parents; for this
is (...) just or right: much more just to obey the Father of the Commonwealth.
When the Son of Fabius Max. was Consul, Fabius taking horse before him and
setting forward; was commanded by his Son to dismount, and to give him place
being Consul: Plularch in Apo. Liuius l. 4. d. 3.
The Father says to his Son: Euge fili, sapis, qui intelligas quibus imperes
et quam magnum Magistratum susceperis. It is well done my Son, thou art wise,
and understand the greatness of thy Office.

He is no good subject that refuses, dues to his Prince.

Think it not hard, or that it is extorting: It is his due, and to render it
conscionably and willingly is an acceptable service, to the King, to God.

It is an Injustice, for him that is able, to desire to be freed, from
payments, from finding arms, and such like: this were to desire to reap the
benefit of a good Prince, and good Laws, and not to be thankful, and to
maintain them.

Only let Assessours be admonished to rate men equally that the poor man
bear not the rich man's burden.

reverenced and honored though they be evil: indeed glory is due to virtue,
but honor to their dignity.

Defame not their persons, cover their faults, cavil not at their laws, but
obey: For a divine sentence is in the lips of the King; his mouth transgresses
not in judgment. He that says he honors God and obeys not, lies; so he
that obeys not the King, is guilty of dishonouring him.

Render to Caesar that which is Caesar's, and unto God, the things that are
Gods.

VERSE 8. Owe no man any thing, but to love one another. --
IN this and the two next Verses following, is the second part of this Chapter;
teaching love to our Neighbors.

M. Calvin makes this another argument, to urge subjection to Magistrates,
because to resist them, is a violation of Charity.

M. Beza and Gualter, make it also to pertain unto the former, and to be the
removing of a grand impediment of due subjection: which impediment is the
unkind suit and contention between men, which when the Magistrate has
determined, the party which is cast, begins many times through corruption to
hate the Magistrate, and to deny due respect: now say they that such suits the
occasion of such denial, might be taken away, the Apostle bids them to owe
nothing one to another but love.

But I think rather that here is a new matter; though the manner of
propounding it, under the term of owing, might be occasioned from the verse
precedent: and indeed the precepts of godliness are of near acquaintance, and
run as we may say in a blood.

In this whole part are two things: A commandment, and the reason.

The commandment: that we should love one another; set down in these words;
which have a prohibition: Owe no man any thing: and a correction or exception;
but to love one another. Owe no man any thing: whether money, labor, etc.

But to love one another. (...), nisi, but: this is not declaratiue, pay your
debts, that mutual love may flourish: but exceptiue, Owe nothing but love,

One another. Not the Magistrate only who can compel; nor friends only,
which can requite; nor rich only, who can reward; but one another: Let the
rich love the poor, and the poor the rich.

The sum is in two precepts; A negative, owe nothing to any; an affirmative,
owe love to all: these seem, but are not contrary.

Debt is double: Civil, as money, etc. which we must not owe. Natural and
Divine, as love, which we always must owe.

Between these two debts there is great difference, beside the Excellency of
one, which is love, above the other.

1. Civil debts when they are once paid, the Obligation is void Love is
always to be paid, and always to be owed.

2. In Civil debts, he that pays has the less, and he that receives has
the more; not so in love, for he that loves, the more he loves, the more his
love increases.

3. Civil debts, may be pardoned and forgiven; a man may give out his bond,
and release his debtour; but no man has power to discharge his neighbor of
his love; though it may be in pride or heat, we sometimes say we care not for
such a ones love, yet this is no discharge.

Natural debts cannot be forgiven. No more can a man discharge his neighbor
from loving him, then a husband can discharge his wife from her conjugal
faith, or a father his child, of his honor and dutifulness.

We must owe nothing but love. Love alone is a perpetual debt. Here are two
branches.

1. We must pay and discharge all our civil debts: proved by the Law, Exodus
22. of restoring things stolen, trespasses done, things committed to our
trust, borrowed, or found. Also by the story of the woman, sometimes the wife
of one of the sons of the Prophets, 2. King. 4.1.2.3.4.5.6.7. Elisha charge
her to pay her debts, ver. 7.

Josephus affirms Joseph. Artiq. lib. 9. ca. 2. Sic Hieron. and Occelamp. in
Proph. Abdiam. Lyra in locum Reg. and Serrar. ibid.
that her husband was Obadiah, Ahabs Steward, who hid and maintained a hundred
Prophets in the time of Iezebels persecution 1 Reg. 18.4.
, and by that means came greatly indebted: for the payment of which debts, the
Lord wrought a miracle by Elisha.

2. We must always owe and pay love: Ioh. 13.34. and 15.12. 1. Ioh. 3.11. so
Phil. 1.9. I pray that your love may abound, (...), yet more and more. More and
more notes the quantity, yet notes the perseverance of it. In the Iubilee all
civil debts were remitted to the Jews: and we have many payments for years,
and during natural life; but charity never fails, but is perfected in
another world. 1 Cor. 13.8.


Is it lawful to borrow, or to buy for day? It seems no: owe nothing: and we
have experience that hence come many suits and controversies, to which purpose
Jeremy sometime complained. Ier. 15.10.


It is lawful to borrow for necessity and conueniency. lend, Luke 6.35.
he implies a lawfulness of borrowing: and without such things the life and
state of man could not well consist.

As for suits and controversies, that is Non causa pro causa. Indeed I read
that the Turks have few suits, because they deal for ready money. But the
true cause of suits about buying and borrowing is our corruption: of the
creditour in exacting more then his due; in the debtour, for not keeping touch,
and not paying at his day, or such like: the meaning of the prohibition not
simply to forbid all owing, but rather admonishing to deal justly, to pay modo
and forma, or otherwise to content.

Run not into debt: thou may borrow, free from borrowing, use it rather,
for it is a kind of bondage.

It is better to give then to receive. So, to lend then to borrow.

Borrowing is a fruit of sin, Deuteronomy. 28 44.
as are sicknesses and other calamities, from which the Saints in this world
are not privileged.

It is a kind of baseness to borrow, Debere verecundum est, Amb. l. de Tobia
c. 21.
non reddere verecundius: though it be more base not to pay that which is
borrowed See Pro. 22.7.

To keep thee out of debt, labor hard in thy calling, moderate thy expenses,
in diet, apparel, recreations, be husbandly: Here are such to be reproved, who
borrow here and there, and yet will abate nothing of their pleasures, though
they engage lands and houses for it. It may be questioned whether such men and
women be good; wise I am sure they are not, and that do their posterity feel,
who are many times driven to beg for their relief.

Pay that thou owe, commandment of God, it is a point of conscience. As thou
desire to free thy self from a snare, so endeavor to free thy self from
being indebted, Pro. 61.2.3.4.5.

It is against nature that one man should be enriched by another man's loss.

The Egyptians, Athenians, Romans, Jews, all Nations that have loved faith
and justice, have severely punished such as have refused to pay their debts.

It is the note of an ungodly man, Psalm. 37.21.

Three sorts of men deserve herein much reproof.

1. Such as will pay some, as five shillings in the pound, or thereafter: But
Paul requires to pay all: the horrible cousenage herein deserves a severe law.

2. Such as it may be will pay in the end, but they will drive the creditour
off from day to day: Aquin. 2.2. q. 66 art. 3.
For, Detinere quod alteri debetur, eandem rationem habet cum acceptatione
iniusta; says the Schooleman: To detain that which is due, is all one as if
you robbed your neighbor.

3. Such which pay not at all, but in stead of discharging their debts, they
discharge their tongues in evil and railing speeches against their creditours
when they demand their due: when they borrow they speak saire, when they
should pay they return evil and opprobrious language. Read Ecclesiasticus
chap. 29. the eight first verses.

Love is a debt, perpetual. It is not a thing indifferent, but we are bound
in conscience to owe and pay it one to another.

Many will say, they desire not a man's love, they care not for it, neither then
do they care for Gods Commandment.

Some for their civil debts are much troubled, and full of care; the sight of
a Sergeant much affrighteth them, but who laments the want of love in himself,
which is summum fidei sacramentum, the broad seal of our faith, as Tertullian
speaks.

In the primitive times there was so much love, that it was ad stuporem
Gentilium; but now there is so little, that it may be ad pudorem Christianorum,
to the shame of Christians.

VERSE 8. -- For he that loves another, has fulfilled the Law.
MAster Calvin says, That these words are a confirmation of our obedience to
the Magistrate, in which is placed not the least part of charity.

Master Musculus annecteth these words thus; Pay your debts, otherwise you do
against law; for whatsoever is against oharitie, is against law.

These things are true, yet because it appears that the principal scope of
this eight verse, and the two following is to persuade to charity; I take it
to be without question, that these words are a Reason, of the exception, or
affirmative Precept in the former part of the verse: Owe love, or love one
another.

The Argument is taken from the excellency of love, or from the definition of
it, set down in the concrete in stead of the Abstract.

In it are to be considered, the Thing or Person defined, and the Definition.

The Person defined, He that loves another: where we have the action,
loving; the object, another.

What love is, See Chap, 12. verse 9.10. It is a beneuolous affection, showing
it self in word and deed.

Another, (...), he means (...), Neighbor: Master Beza observes that there
is little difference among the Grecians, between (...), and (...), sodalis, a
companion or fellow: in the letters there is, I confess, not much difference,
but in sense a great deal: for (...) is such a one who eats at the same
table with us, a familiar; and therefore the feastings of friends were called
among the Heathen, Sodalitia, and Sodalitates, fellowships; Tertul. lib. 2. ad
vxorem. Cicero in lib de Senect. Plin. Epist. l. 10. epist. 79. ad Traianum.
and the meeting of the Saints to worship God, were in the primitive times
called Hetaeriae, but (...) which is Paul's word here, signifies any, which is
another from our selves, be he friend or foe.

Another, not meaning that if a man love one or two other then himself, it is
any thing; but that whosoever is another must be loved; so that the bounds of
the Earth are not larger then love. Love is natural, as between parents and
children. Or Sociall, as between friends; but the love of unclean persons,
and of drunkards, and other wicked men and women, one toward another, is not
here meant, neither is their mutual affection worthy the name of love, being a
dissoluing of all law, and not a fulfilling the same. Or Supernatural, when
the affection is renewed, sanctified and directed to the right object, according
to the word of God.

This love is a fulfilling of the Law.

Has fulfilled: The Law is empty, till we do it: God has given it that we
should do it, and then is it fulfilled, according to Paul's word here; or
finished and perfected, according to James his word, (...).
James 2.8. The Law is as an imperfect thing, till we obey it.

The Law: of God: the second Table, as in the next verse; yea and the first
Table; for the law is copulative: the laws of man also.

Has fulfilled the law. The fulfilling of the law, is either actually, in
regard of the singular precepts Affirmative and Negative; and so he that loves
fulfilleth it not. Or it is modo generali, after a general manner; and that as
I take it in four respects.

1 In regard of the root, and inward beginning of obedience, which is love, so
that he steals not, but lives justly by an inward beginning, and so
virtually fulfils the law, being able by such principium, within himself, upon
occasion, to keep any branch of it.

2 In respect of that on which the whole Law and the Prophets depends, Matthew.
22.40.
which is love.

3 In respect of that unto the which the law is ordained, which is mutual love
and society: The end of the Commandment is charity, 1. Tim. 1.5.

4 In respect of that whereby every thing is perfectly done which the Law
requires; which is, that it be done in love, as Saint Paul exhorts the
Corinthians, 1. Cor. 16.14.
Let all your things be done in charity. By love are things done perfectly,
for not only that such things should be done, and others undone, has God
commanded, but that they should be so out of love.

Charity is the fulfilling of the law, Luke 10.25, 26, 27. love, which is not
attained but by fulfilling the law, either in our persons, or by our surety:
the same is also confirmed in the next verse.

The fatherly goodness of God herein appears toward us, love, then which,
nothing is more divine; for God is love, and love is of God, 1. Ioh 4.7, 8. and
nothing more profitable to us and comfortable. What more sweet then to love and
be beloved? ex amore, amicitia, from love comes friendship, which to take out
of the world, were a greater damage then to take the Sun out of the firmament.

O our vile nature, which is prone to hatred and envy, the destroyers of
mankind: let us lament that we are so backward to keep this divine,
profitable, and comfortable law.

If the Lord had commanded things hard, burdensome, and unprofitable, we must
have obeyed; how much more ought we, when he says only, Love, and inherit
eternal life?

That our obedience should be acceptable and perfect, in love: The Lord
requires a pure affection, as well as the outward act.

Thou do not steal, defile thy neighbors wife. It is well: but would
thou not if thou had opportunity? Does fear only, or shame, or the sword
of the Magistrate restrain thee? Then thou do not such things, because thou
dare not: do if thou dare; this is not to keep the law.

He that loves will not do such things, though it were in his power, and
though he were sure never to be called into question, even for the love he
bears to God and to his neighbor.

If thou give all thy goods to the poor, etc. and have not love, it is
nothing. 1. Cor. 13.3.

True love seasoneth all things, and makes them well taken, being the life of
virtue, as prudence is the light of it.

As therefore there is great difference, between the speech of a Parrot, and
of a wise man; so between the obedience of him that loves, and of him that
loves not.

Balaams Ass speaks, so a wicked man says over prayers, hears the Word,
gives alms, abstaineth from some evils, yet fulfilleth not the law, because he
loves not.

Let us labor then for love, John 13.35.
which is the work of a true disciple of Christ: for as the Grecians are
distinguished by their clokes, Romans by their gowns, Graduats by their
habits, so we by Charity.

VERSE. 9. For this, Thou shall not commit adultery, Thou shall not kill, Thou
shall not steal, Thou shall not bear false witness, Thou shall not covet:
and if there be any other commandment, it is briefly comprehended in this
saying, namely, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self.
HEre is a proof, that he which loves fulfilleth the law, and the argument is
taken from an induction or enumeration of the particular commandments in the
Law, which are comprehended in the precept of love.

Love is all the Commandments: Therefore he that loves, fulfilleth them all.

Here are to be considered, the seuerals, or the sum: The Seuerals are the
particular precepts rehearsed. The sum, is, Thou shall love thy neighbor as
thy self.

In the Enumeration something is to be marked.

1 The fifth commandment is not mentioned, which requires Honoring of Parents.
Pet. Martyr.
Some answer, that Paul reckons them as the Jews did, who put that
Commandment into the first table: making five in each table. From whence we
may note what a sacred thing they thought obedience to Magistrates and parents
to be.

Or he has so plentifully spoken of that Commandment in the first part of
this Chapter, as there seems to be no need of any repetition.

Or he takes the Negatiues only, because they are most contrary to Charity:
and also that Commandment is comprehended in these words: and if there be any
other Commandment.

2 The seventh Commandment forbidding adultery, is put before the sixth,
forbidding murder.

The reason is alleged, because adultery was a common sin among the Romans.

Or for the feditie of it, and odiousness does he name it first: and so among
the fruits of the flesh is Adultery first named; and among the fruits of the
Spirit, Love. Galath. 5.19.22. and in some part of the Civil law, Faius in loc.
the title of Adultery is next to the title of Treason, to show the
heinousness of that sin.

3 The tenth Commandment is mentioned in this one word, Thou shall not covet:
whence it appears, that the commandment of not Coveting, is but one, contrary
to the doctrine of Rome.

Is briefly comprehended: is consummate, or recapitulated, Ambros. August.
epist. 29. ad Hieron.
as Orators in their Epilogue repeat the general heads.

So that, that which the Philosophers affirmed of Justice, is true of love,
(...). In sum Charity is all virtue. Charity is the Decalogue contracted, and
the Decalogue is Charity unfolded. A general virtue diffusing it self into
all virtues, as the blood and spirits into all parts of our bodies.

The sum then is, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self. In this we
have (...). The thing commanded, to love our neighbor; and the Rule, As thy
self.

Neighbor: Every one that stands in need of our help, by the proportion of the
parable of the Samaritane, Luke 10. known or unknown; friend or foe; this is
a hard saying, but it is law. Good and bad: the bad for communion of nature:
the good for communion of nature and grace. Kindred and strangers; Proximus non
sanguinis propinquitate, Aug. epist. 52.
sed rationis societate pensandus est, etc. says Augustine, Neighborhood is
to be esteemed, not by the neerenesse of blood, but by the society of Reason.

Hierome brings the blessed Angels within this order of Neighborhood; Hieron.
in epist. ad Gal.
and indeed Charity is as large as heaven and earth.

The Schoolmen make even the Devils and damned, Valent. tom. 3. Disp. 3.
quaest. 3. punct. 1.
secundum naturam, a part of the object of our charity; not in the deprauation
of their nature, but in their essence; not in their opposition to the Creator,
but in their relation, tanquam res amici, as part of the things or substance
belonging to our friend, that they be preserved and still exist, that Gods
Justice might have due execution upon them.

As thy self: both in the thing, and in the manner.

In the thing; as to wish the best to our neighbor, as we wish the best to
our selves, Luke 6.31. Mat. 7.12.
expounded by our Savior: As ye would that men should do to you, do ye
also to them likewise: wishing the same good to be obtained, and the hurt to
be avoided by them as by your selves.

In the manner: Truly, without dissembling; earnestly, without remissness,
and coldness; constantly, without changing.

We must love our neighbors as our selves. Leuit. 19.18. Gal 5.14. and Mat.
22.39. Where our Savior being asked by a Lawyer which was the Great
Commandment; answered, that the love of God, was the first and great
Commandment; and that the second was like unto it, which is, the love of our
neighbor. Like unto the first in three respects.

1 In form; that is truly. For God must be loved with all the heart, and our
neighbor as our self.

2 In time, we must always love God; and so we must our neighbor.

3 In difficulty; it is hard to love God above all, because our hearts are so
much upon the world; and as hard to love our neighbor as our selves, because
our hearts are set so much upon our selves.

Whether may I love my neighbor more then my self,

In regard of the affection, effect, in outward things I may at some time
prefer my neighbor before my self, and serve him first; not so in spiritual
things; I must wish my neighbors salvation as well as mine own, but I must
seek my own first.

May I love one neighbor more then another?

Appretiatiue, as they say, we may: Jacob loved one of his children, Joseph one
of his brethren, and Christ one of his Disciples.

It is lawful to love our selves; love, of the which the most part are sick.

There is a natural self love, and a moral: The natural is the Rule of our
love to our neighbor: the moral, is that which is forbidden in the law, which
destroies the love of our neighbor.

Nature requires, the law allows, and grace denies not that we should love our
selves amore recto, with a right love.

Neither can he love his neighbor well, who does not so love himself; even as
he can never write a right line, who writes by a wrong rule.

Many say they love their neighbor as their own souls; and therein they may
say true, and yet be far from the fulfilling of the law; or they care not to
damn their own souls, as well as their neighbors.

Learn to love thy self as thou ought, that God may commit thy neighbor
to thee whom thou may love as thy self.

To love a man's self, is not curare cutens, to pamper the body, to give a man's
self to liberty and pleasure; but curare animam, to have a care of the soul,
to love God, and our selves in God: For, He that sins, hates his own
soul, Pro. 8.36. and he that enticeth his neighbor to sin, hates his
neighbors soul. And he will never be profitable for another, who is
unprofitable for himself.

He that loves a garment, hates the moth that eats it; so he that loves his
own soul and his neighbors, will hate sin which destroys it.

Let him love me, who loves himself in goodness: The Godly man's love is the
best love.

Here diverse are to be reproved.

1 They that love themselves only. There is a City of God, and a city of the
Devil: The City of God, begins in the love of God, and increases to the
love of our neighbor; the city of the Devil begins in the love of our
selves, Aug. in princ. lib. de Ciuit. Dei.
and ends in the contempt of God and our neighbor, such were Caine and Nabal.

2. They which love some of their neighbors but not all: This man is mine
enemy I cannot love him: But Christ commands thee to love him, and he is thy
neighbor. Love him, that he may be thy friend. That man is wicked, and his
sins offend me. Think that thy sins offend others, and yet thou would
they should love thee. Consule Zanch. in explic ca. 2. ep. 1. Ioh.
Love him, but not his faults; and because he has faults, he has so much
the more need of thy love that thou may reclaim him. Evil men are to be
loved as sick men, we run to the Physician, for love to the man, not for love
of his sickness, to help the man, and to destroy the sickness.

3 They which love dissemblingly, Aug. ep. 54.
as Ioab and Judas, who will speak fair to a man's face, and cut his throat
behind his back.

4 They which love, and love, but their neighbor is never the better for their
love: their love is fruitless, as is the faith S. James speaks of.

5 They which love not good men, their best neighbors, their truest friends,
thou must love a wicked man, much more him that is godly; thine enemy, much
more him that is Gods friend.

We ought to pray and strive to love our neighbors as our selves:

Every Science has his principles: the proper principle of Christian
discipline is charity.

And there is nothing so useful and profitable as Charity. Chrysostom. hom. 51. ad
Pop. Ant.
A better good then all riches, a greater good then health and light, said
Chrysostom.

Suppose ten men to love each other as themselves, and so a hundred, a
thousand, etc. None of the ten is one alone, but every one is ten: Charity
contracts ten into one, and multiplies one into ten. None of the ten can live
in want, for every one has ten hearts to care for him, twenty eyes to see for
him, twenty hands to work for him, and twenty feet to travail for him.

Neither can any of the ten be conquered; for offend one and offend all, etc.
Thus S. Chrysostom.

VERSE 10. Love works no ill to his neighbor: therefore is love the
fulfilling of the law.
THis verse may be referred both to the 8. and also to the 9. verse, as a
probation of either.

If to the latter end of the 8. then it contains a Syllogism, only there is
a Crypsis of the Mayor. Thus, That which does no hurt or works no ill to his
neighbor fulfilleth the Law.
But love does no hurt to his neighbor.
Therefore is love the fulfilling of the Law.
The argument is taken from the proper effect of love.


If you refer it to the 9. verse, then it proves by the same argument, that
all the law is comprehended in the love of our neighbor. Thus, To do no ill
to our neighbor, is the sum of the whole Law.
But love does no ill to our neighbor.
Therefore love is the sum of the Law, or the whole Law is comprehended
briefly in love.


And then out of this is inferred according to the 8. verse, that Love is the
fulfilling of the Law.

So, in this verse are two propositions; the second inferred out of the first,
and the first the ground of the second.

The first proposition, Love works no ill to his neighbor.

The arguments disposed in this proposition are the cause, love: and the effect
denied, does no ill; amplified by the Patient, to his neighbor.

The affirmative effect, does any good; but the negative is set down that it
may have the better correspondence with the 9. verse, where only negatiues are
repeated; but the affirmative is included; and so by a figure, less is said,
and more is signified. Love not only does no hurt, but also does good: (...).
but because this is not always in the power of him that loves, he says not,
does good; but, not evil; and in this, the other necessarily to be understood;
for, as one says well, subtrahere debitum bonum est malum, Caietan.
to subtract or not to do the due good, is evil.

Love; the holy love of my neighbor, proceeding from the love of God.

No ill: mischief, damage, hurt, or sin; for in the second table every sin
is to the hurt of our neighbor.

Ill, is either of omission, or commission: and either are threefold: 1. in
fact; 2. in word; 3. in desire.

1. In fact, three ways: 1. either about his single person, in the sixth
commandment: 2. or his person conjoined in the seventh commandment: 3. or his
goods, in the eight commandment.

2. In word, in the ninth commandment.

3. In desire, in the tenth commandment.

He that loves will break none of these either in committing or omitting.

The illation: Therefore love is the fulfilling of the Law.

What love? and what law? The love of our neighbor; and the whole law or
decalogue: for though in proper speaking, the love of our neighbor is but the
fulfilling of the second table; yet the love of God is necessarily supposed,
because that flows from this; and so sometime the love of God is named alone,
where both are understood, for the necessary connection of the tables. Also the
Apostles brings forth the commandments of the second table, rather then of the
first, because it is more easy for us to discern true obseruers of the law,
by the second then by the first.

Charity toward our neighbor is the fulfilling of the law; Therefore Charity
simply: Therefore our love to God is to be demonstrated by our love to our
neighbor.

The doctrines are two according to the propositions, in their very words. The
second, that love is the fulfilling of the Law, is proved before verse 8.

The first, that love does no ill to his neighbor, 1 Cor. 13.5, 6. Charity
thinks no evil, it rejoices not in iniquity.

Also, it is proved from the rule Ephe, 5.29. No man hates his own flesh, but
cherishes himself: and true love is to our neighbor as to our selves.

Also from the contrary. To do ill, is to break the law. But love is the
fulfilling of it. Non potest peccari per illam, qua legis est perfectio: Amb.
in loc.
We cannot do ill by that which is the perfection and fulfilling of the law,
said Ambrose.

The Papists from hence infer two things: that we can keep the law, and
that we are justified by charity.

To the first.

He that loves, keeps the law: but how? even as he loves: if he love
perfectly, he perfectly keeps the law: if imperfectly, then he keeps it
imperfectly.

But we cannot keep it perfectly in this life, which is necessary to
justification, as they mean keeping; Deuteronomy. 27.26. Jam. 3.2.
for Cursed is every one that continues not in all things written in the Law,
and, in many things we offend all. We know in part only, and according to our
knowledge is our love. Though in the regenerate there be a perfection of parts,
yet not of degrees in this life. Aug. tom. 7. l. de Natura et gratia contra
Pola. c. 70.
Saint Augustine also says thus, Charitas inchoata, incheata iustitia est:
prouecta, prouecta iustitia est: Charitas magna, magna iustitia est: Charitas
perfecta, perfecta iustitia est. Our righteousness is according to our
charity, which is not perfect in this life.

To the second.

Perfect fulfilling of the law may justify: But love in the concrete is not
such fulfilling, but in the abstract.

The Apostle here propounds that which ought to be in the concrete, but not
that which is. Perfect fulfilling is propounded to us as a pattern, to the
which we ought to conform, not as a thing to be attained in this life.

True charity is not to do hurt, but good to our neighbor, do good rather
then to receive: else it is self love, not the love of our neighbor: I must
love my neighbor for his own sake.

A man loves his horse, his meat, etc. for the good he receives by them; but
we must love our neighbor for himself, otherwise we put no difference
between a neighbor, and a horse: now the best good we can do for our
neighbor, is to bring him to God, and save his soul.

All the Law is comprehended in love, and love does no ill, keeps all the
commandments; as a good mother tends all her children, and carefully
nourishes them.

Love is a Mother: the ten commandments, are her ten children, she forgets
none, is unkind to none, neglects none, fulfileth all.

David had an instrument of ten strings: love is that instrument, the ten
strings are the ten commandments, if one string be out of tune the harmony
is marred; so the breaking of one commandment destroys love, and corrupts it,
as one dead fly the precious ointment of the Apothecary.

The law is copulative, founded and comprehended in charity; James 2.11.
virtues are coherent: He that said, Do not commit adultery, said also, Do
not kill. Endeavor then to keep every commandment if thou would avoid the
curse of the law. For, then shall I not be ashamed, says David, when I have
respect to all thy commandments. Psalm. 119.6.
Charity is a good Catholic.

Charity fulsils the law.

If you say Charity, suppose doing good: for it is as possible to separate
heat from the fire, and light from the Sun, as good works from Charity.

Many speak of charity, and deeply protest it; but words will not carry it.
It is the shame of Christians, that charity is so much in our tongues, and so
little in our hands.

There are many which without any wit can turn house and land into smoke, as
our idle Tobacconists; but to turn the fume and breath of love into works,
requires wit and grace too.

Show me thy faith by thy charity, and thy charity by thy works; Let us not
love in tongue only, but in deed and truth, says Saint John. 1 Ioh. 3.18.
Ama vt videam, let me see thy love as well as hear it, for a verbal love is
like a painted fire, for show, not for use.

Love is a substantive, it must be seen, felt, and understood.

Charity is a beautiful Lady, which desires to be seen; she is no Nun; she is
not of that religion: she is conversant abroad, doing good to her neighbors.

Faith always keeps within to defend the conscience; but charity is always
without feeding the poor, visiting the sick, etc. The proper act of faith, is
to receive; of love, to give and distribute; of faith, to do our selves good;
of love to do good to our neighbor; and this is the fulfilling of the law.

As the Moon among the lesser stars, more excellent way, 1. Cor. 12.31.
then things greatly excelling. I would we were sick of love, as the Church in
the Canticles: and yet love is not a sickness, Cant. 2.5.
but the sanitie of the soul.

What is love more then other virtues?

Love is the comfort of life. If a poor man live in a town where love is, he
cannot want; for love will undo all locks; and if a rich man want love toward
his poor neighbor, he is as if he had lost the key of his money cupboard.

If a wicked man dwell where love is, he shall have good counsel, good
admonition, good examples, good prayers, etc.

If a man be rich, and not beloved, his life is miserable, etc.

Love is the spirit of piety and good life: Non faciunt bonos aut malos mores,
nisi boni vel mali amores; as our love is, Aug. Macedoni. epist. 52.
so are our manners, said Augustine.

Love is the life of faith, James 2.17. Bern. ser. 2. de Resur. and 24. sup.
cant.
He that does any hurt to his neighbor, though he be not a fratricide, yet is
fideicida, a killer of faith, said Saint Bernard.

Love is the strength of the Commonwealth: A City divided cannot stand,
Matthew. 12. as stones without mortar in a building, so are men without love in a
Commonwealth.

Love is the Nurse of the Church, Ephesians. 4.16. So Tertullian, Corpus Ecclesiae,
fibula charitatis connexum crescit in deum. The body of the Church being
buttoned and knit together in love, grows up in God.

Love is the soul of the law. Where there is love, Aristot. Ethis. l. 8. c. 1.
Cic. l. de Amici.
there needs no law, but where there is law, there needs love, as Heathen wise
men have observed.

Nay love can do more then all laws. There are good laws against theft,
murder, drunkenness, whoredom, etc. and yet there are many offenders: but if
there were love, none of these evils would be done to our neighbors: Will a
man take away his life, whom he loves? and for the saving of whose life, he
will venture his own? it cannot be; and so of the rest.

Thus, and much more excellent is love: as the tongue of Angels is nothing
without love, so it is not sufficient to commend love: The law therefore, non
dispendium sed compendium consecuta est, has not lost but gotten, by being
reduced into one precept of love.

Let us labor for love: The Corinthians had abundance of knowledge, but they
wanted love, and were rent into Schisms: we are sick of the Corinthian
disease; I wish we were truly humbled for it, that we might be healed.

If thou wishest well to the Church of England, live in love.

If thou wishest well to thine own soul, and desire to keep the law,
Chrysostom. hom. 33. in 1. Cor.
love thy neighbor: Magnus Doctor charitas, said Saint Chrysostom, Love is a
great Doctor. It will teach us to obey the Magistrate, to reverence the
Minister, to reliue the poor, to do good to all, and hurt to none: and to do
these things, James 2.8.12. Galath. 5.13.
willingly and freely: Therefore called a royal law, and of liberty, by Saint
James: yea it makes us very servants to our neighbors, as Saint Paul affirms:
The Lord give us this love.

VERSE 11. And that knowing the time, that now it is high time to awake out of
sleep: for now is our salvation nearer, then when we believed.
HEre begins the third and last part of this Chapter, which shows our duty
toward our selves, which is Temperance.

This part contains two Exhortations: The first, concerning the manner of
performing the duty required, in this verse. The second concerning the things
themselves, about which this duty is conversant, in the rest of the verses.

The manner is, that it be done, not sleepily and negligently, but strenuously,
cheerfully, and watchfully.

In setting down whereof, there are two things: first, A Transition: secondly,
An Exhortation.

The Transition: And that, not Bezaes Idque, nor Chrysostoms Praesertim,
referring it to the eight verse of this Chapter, as an enforcing of the duty
of love to our neighbor, as Piscator: but rather the ancient Et hoc: so that
we do not with Aquinas construe it with tempus; or M. Caluins Hoc etiam,
supplying Edico, out of the third verse of the twelfth Chapter: or Paraeus his
Insuper; or if you will, Ad haec, Praeterea; in English, Moreover, or Besides,
or Furthermore, I say, that now it is high time to awake out of sleep.

I take this verse then, to be as a Preface to that which follows, though it
may also be a conclusion of all that is before from the beginning of the
twelfth Chapter: for watchfulness is necessary to the duties precedent, and
that which follows is referred upon occasion of these words. So that this
verse may be likened to Noah, who saw the old and new world; or to Ianus, whose
two faces beholds the old and new year, or to Christ, who is the end of the
law, and the beginning of the Gospel.

In the Exhortation we have two parts: The Duty, exhorted unto; and the Reason.

The Duty, It is now high time to awake out of sleep.

High time: (...), the hour of waking, a short part of time being named, to
signify that we must speedily awake, and not lose a minute.

To awake: The Greek word signifies more, namely, to arise, which is best
here, and to be necessarily understood, if we translate awake, for many awake,
who rise not.

The Drunkard, common Swearer, etc. are awake sometime, they know they do
evil, and understand admonitions, but they lie still in their sins, and
arise not: now the intent of Paul is, that we should awake, and arise too, that
is, to stand up from the dead, as he speaks elsewhere. Ephesians. 5.14.


Out of sleep: Sleep is two fold; so properly called, and Metaphorical: the
first is of the body only, for the soul sleeps not; and it is that natural
rest, which God has appointed for the refreshing of the dissipated spirits,
and the preservation of wearied Nature.

Metaphorical sleep: is either of the body, or of the soul.

That of the body, Olli dura quies oculos, and ferreus vrget Somnus -- Virg.
Aen. 12.
is Death, often called in the Scripture Sleep, Iron sleep, as the Poet
called it.

That of the Soul: and it is either the Sleep of sin, noting an
unregenerate estate, or somnus inertiae, the sleep of sloth; when having
received grace, we begin to drowse in the duties of godliness: this last is
here meant; for he writes to believers, who somewhat began to be remiss in
holy duties. So is it said of the mighty men of the host of the Ammonites and
Moabites, in the days of Iehoshaphat, or of the host of Sanecherib, in the
days of Hezechiah; They have slept their sleep, that is, they have languished
and fainted, not having any heart to repel dangers, Psalm. 76.5.

The Reason is from the consideration of the time: knowing the time.

Time, that is, opportunity of time, fit and seasonable time. As men when they
call up their servants, urge them because the Sun is up: so Paul requires
that we should, considering the season, the more earnestly apply our selves to
our duties.

This time is set forth by a comparison, the time of faith received and
begun, compared with the time of faith continued and increased. Now is our
salvation nearer then when was believed.

Salvation: Not Christ incarnate, nor salvation begun in the remission of
sins, but eternal life, which is the reward of faith, unto the which we are
now nearer, then when we first believed, and therefore should be the more
lively in pressing toward the same.

The longer we profess the Gospel, the more strong in faith, and zealous in
godliness we ought to be, Hebr. 5.12. Paul reproues the Hebrews, because they
profited not according to their standing: and Hebr. 11.32. he urges them to
constant enduring and patient suffering of persecution, from the remembrance of
their courage in the days of their first Illumination: then they endured a
great fight; it were a shame now to faint and play the cowards.

The time of grace is no time of sleeping, but of waking, Now lay hold, now, if
ever, get some thing for hereafter, some faith and grace which may help, and
stand us in stead, in the evil day.

The Merchant observes carefully the best time of buying in his fraught, and
then bestirres him: The Husbandman in harvest time, rises early, calls his
people together, and away; for it is good to take fair weather while it lasts.
Now is our harvest, let us be gleaning something.

The Sheplieard in Lambing time watches his flock, as Jacob did Labans, let
us now watch to save our souls.

Many when they come to hear the Word, and to prayers, then begin to nod; Is
this a time of sleeping? for shame, awake; Ganst thou not watch one hour?

Lose not the precious time of Repentance; Non enim in tempore vtiliter
viuitur, Aug. Probae. Epist. 121. c. 7.
nisi ad comparandum meritum quo in aeternitate viuatur: He spends his time
unprofitably, who gets not some grace, whereby he may live in eternity, said
Augustine.

Our Adversary, the Devil, sleeps not: The soldier that is asleep when the
enemy is come, has his throat cut: Vt iugulent homines surgunt de nocte
latrones;
Vt teipsum serves non expergisceris? --


If the good man of the house know at what watch the thief would come, he
would surely watch, and not suffer his house to be dug through, Matthew. 24.43.

Besides, our time is short: all the time of grace is but an hour, and an
hour is soon out; cito pede praeterit aetas, said the Poet: Qui hodie habemus
horam, nescimus an cras habuerimus vitam: We which have an hour to day, know
not whether we shall have a life to morrow, said Anselme. Anselm. in loc.


Seven times passed over Nabuchadnezzar, Dan. 4.25. that is, he lived seven
years like a beast: but many among us have lived seven years twice or thrice
told, like beasts, and yet remember not to make use of the time that remains,
to turn unto the Lord.

Many of us have but a minute or two remaining; let us vow not to give sleep
to our eyes, nor slumber to our lids, till we have found favor with the Lord,
and grace to help in the time of need.

Here is a commendation of godliness: nearer then other, as a wicked man's
damnation is nearer and nearer; let this encourage us: Thou meetest with many
discouragements, but behold the kingdom of heaven is at hand.

This reproues them which begin well, after grow sleepie and sluggish: Honey at
the first tasting likes well, but a little cloyes us; so the beginnings of
many have been fervent, but their latter end drowsy and cold.

This was the disease of Ephesus, Revel. 2. and we are dangerously sick of it.

Many trees are very forward in the Spring, but a little frost nips the buds,
and then there is no fruit for that year; so it is with us: The forwardness
of many have come to nothing.

Take heed of falling from thy first love, of growing cold, of going backward:
Leo Mag. ser. 8. de Passione, in fine.
Qui non proficit, deficit, (...) qui (...) acquirit, non nihil perdit: He
that proceeds not, decays, and he that gets nothing, loses something,
said Leo.

Natural motions grow stronger at the last; a s^one that falls from a high
place, the nearer it comes to the proper place, the faster it moves: so the
nearer we come to heaven, the more zealous we should be in godliness.

What a thing were it, if after ten or twenty years profession, a man should
fall a sleep at the coming of the Bridegroom; or walk so, as if he regarded
not whether he came at heaven or no.

A man though weary of his journey, yet if he be within sight of the town
where his dwelling is, he puts on cheerily; yea the beast coming near home,
goes freely, though dull and half tired before.

Take courage, proceed on liuelily; Behold the tops of those holy mountains;
within less then an hour, thou shall be in heaven: A foul thing were it, to
faint in the sight of our Country, and in the very Havens mouth to be sluggish
and negligent.

VERSE 12. The night is far spent, the day is at hand: Let us therefore cast
off the works of darkness, and let us put on the armor of light.
IN the eleventh verse was the Preface, containing an Exhortation, to the
diligent and studious performing our duty, (as in things going before, so) in
things following.

The thing it self Paul exhorts unto, is a temperate and sober walking; and
this, in this verse generally, with a Reason: and in the two next verses
repeated, with a special and particular Exposition.

In this verse, are an Exhortation, and a Reason.

The Reason set before the Exhortation, and is laid down as a foundation; and
the Exhortation raised out of it, and built upon the same.

The Night is far spent, the Day is at hand: In these words is the Reason,
which is taken from a comparison of diverse estates, to a diverse kind of life:
The same things do not always become Old and Young, Noble and Ignoble persons:
Otherwise is the behavior of them which live in darkness, then is theirs who
dwell in the light.

In the day ought to be done the works of light:

But the night is far speat, and the day at hand: Therefore, cast off the
works of darkness, and put on the Armor of light.

The Mayor is grounded upon a Rule, which is, that our life must be answerable
to our condition and state; our works to the time.

The Minor is in the words of Paul.

The Night, the Day: These are taken either properly, or figuratively.
Properly, the Day, is either Natural or Artificial: Here such a day is
considered, which has a Night opposed to it; which the Artificial has; not
the Natural, being the space of four and twenty hours, comprehending in it
Night and Day.

The Hebrews began the Natural day at Even; the Grecians at Sunrise; the
Romans as we, at Midnight; the Arabians at Noone: All begin the Artificial day
at the Rising, and end it at the Setting of the Sun.

The Day is in Greek (...) of (...), gentle or came, because it is appointed
for tame creatures: or of (...), I desire, because it is to be desired; or as
(...), the daughter of the Sun.

In Latin, it is Dies, a Deo, of God, as a divine thing, as some also have
derived the Hebrew word, it being the measure which God has given for the
world.

Night, is the absence of the Sun, when there is nothing but darkness, which
is the privation of light.

It is called (...) of (...), to strike, as in Latin, Nox, a nocendo, of
Hurting, because, though there be singular use of it, yet in comparison of the
day, it is not so comfortable.

Day and Night are not here taken properly, but Metaphorically: and so 1. Day
is taken for Prosperity, Night for Adversity, Esaias 9.1.
and not unfitly; for as in the Night, a man meeting with his friend, Colos.
1.12.
neither knows nor salutes him; so is it in Adversity. Thus Heavens bliss is
called Light; and the Pains of Hell Darkness. Matthew. 25.30.


2 Day also is taken for Life, John 9.4.
and Night for Death, as the Poet: Soles occidere and redire possunt,
Nobis cum semel occidat lux breuis,
Nox est perpetua vna dormienda.


3 Night, is taken sometimes for this life, and Day for the life to come, as
Psalm. 49.14. though wicked men prosper here, yet, illo mane, in that morning,
the upright shall have the upper hand of them: In that morning, that is, in the
day of the Resurrection, which shall never have a Night.

4 Sometimes also Night is taken for the time of the law, Malachy. 4.2.
and Day for the time of the Gospel; so is the law called the time of
shadows, Heb. 10.1. Ambr. tom. 1. l. exhor. ad virg. non procul ab initio.
and the time of the Gospel the day of salvation, 2 Cor. 6.2. as Christ is
some where called the Sun of righteousness: and Saint Ambrose expounds that
of the Psalm, Day unto day utters speech, and night unto night shows
knowledge, thus; Day, that is, one Christian teaches another Christian: and
night, that is, one Jew teaches another Jew.

5 And sometimes these terms, are thus taken, namely, the night for the time
of our unregenerate estate, when we were without faith, repentance, etc. and
Day for the time of our regeneration, and conversion to God: as is manifest in
these places: 2 Cor. 4.6. 1 Thessalonians. 5.5. 2 Pet. 1.19. Ovid. 6. Metam.
Ignorance and rebellion are called night by the Poet.

Proh superi, quantum mortalia pectora caecae
Noctis habent! --
The question is, how Day and Night are taken here by our Apostles, for
interpreters judge diversely:

But not the first way, though to be without grace, be the greatest adversity
can be fall us: and on the contrary.

Nor the second, though indeed only believers live, and unbelievers are dead
in sin.

Nor the third, because the Resurrection is not our morning, our morning is in
this life: for here we have some light of Grace.

Nor the fourth, which interpreters ancient and later have much stood upon; For
first, the night of Jewish ceremonies, is not only far passed, but clean
gone and ended. Secondly, Paul wrote principally to the Gentiles, who had no
night of ceremonies: Thirdly, Paul sets down, verse 13. what be the works of
the night he means, viz. Chambering and wontonnesse, gluttony and
drunkenness, etc.

We therefore take the fifth and last to be the true meaning of this place.

The Night is far spent, the Day is at hand: The Apostles so speaks to note
the goodness, and yet the imperfection of our estate.

It is not so Day with us, but that we have much darkness, nor so Night but
that, blessed be God, we have some light, some knowledge, some Faith, some
power against sin, etc.

Our estate is excellently called by the Fathers, Crepusculum, which is a
middle time between darkness and light: it is as the gray morning with us,
between the darkness of sin and the light of the vision and glory of God.

Infidelity is midnight. Faith is the morning. The vision of God is as High
noone. If we look upon Infidelity, it is day with us: If to the blessed vision
of God, it is as night. The Angels have a day, which we have not yet; and we
have a day, which Turks and Infidels have not yet. Infidels see nothing: We
see in part: The blessed in heaven, see all things.

The time of Infidelity, is dark night: and the time of grace, as the
comfortable day. Act. 26.18. Paul is sent to the Gentiles, that they may turn
from darkness to light. Ephesians. 5 8. Yet were sometime darkness, but now are ye
light in the Lord.

As the evening was before the morning; night with us through our corruption,
before it be day with us by grace. No man is borne in this day: but as, when
darkness was upon the face of the deep, God made the light by his word: so by
the preaching of his Word, has he turned our spiritual darkness into light,
according to that comfortable saying: God, 2 Cor. 4.6.
who commanded the light to shine out of darkness, has shined in our hearts,
to give the light of the knowledge of God in the face of Jesus Christ.

The Creation of light, no greater work then thy conversion; Be thankful to
him who by his word, has brought thee which satest in darkness and in the
shadow of death, into the comfortable light of saving grace.

Happy are believers, Egyptians are under darkness which may be felt; then
are the children of God with the Israelites, in the blessed light of Goshen.

Truly the light is sweet, Eccle. 11.7.
and a pleasant thing is it for the eyes to behold the Sun: but darkness is
hideous.

How tedious to a sick man is the night! how desires he and longs for the Day;
for light of it self cheareth, and mitigates grief; so is the time of grace
most comfortable.

As is he who lies in the bottom of a dark stinking dungeon; so is the man
who has a conscience without the light of grace.

There is nothing more pure, more precious, more delightful, more powerful
then the light: Damasc. Ort. fid. l. 2. c. 7.
it is pulchritudo et ornamentum omnis visibilis creaturae, the beauty and
ornament of every visible creature, said Damascene.

The best things are called light: God dwells in the light; Christ is the light
of the world: The good Angels are Angels of light, the Word is light, Saints
are light, Baptism is light, etc. and the night or darkness is contrary.

To be bodily blind, is a great misery, but to be spiritual blind, is an
excess of misery. As it is easy to make the blind fall into the ditch, so, if
our eyes spiritual be darkened, how great is the darkness, how easily can
Satan lead such men into the very pit of hell!

If thou have received grace, show forth his praises who has called thee out
of darkness in to his marvelous light. 1 Pet. 2.9.


Night and Day are two contrary states: midnight and midday together: so
impossible, that a man being in the state of sin and infidelity, should be a
good Christian.

Examine thy estate, whether it be night with thee or day, thou shall know
this, by thy inward affections, and by thy outward actions.

1 Thou read in the Psalms; that God makes darkness, and it is night, and
then all the beasts of the forest creep forth; the Lions seek after their
prey, etc. But when the Sun arises, they lay them down in their dens, and
then man goes forth to his work, and to his labor till the evening.

Look now to thy heart; is pride there, malice, covetousness, etc. Surely if
these beasts be abroad, it is night with thee; these are not to be seen in the
light of grace, but are hunted out, to Hell (the Devils den) from whence they
came.

2 Thou read in S. 1 Thessalonians. 5.6, 7.
Paul, Let us watch and be sober, for they that sleep sleep in the night,
they that are drunken, are drunken in the night.

Look now to thy life; Ioh. 3.20.
Every one that does evil hates the light, Job. 24.14, 15.16.17.
says our Savior, and the thief, the murderer, the Adulterer wait for the
twilight, says Job, and the morning is to them as the shadow of death: If
therefore, whoredom, drunkenness, theft, etc. be thy practices, then
certainly it it midnight with thee: stand up from these dead works, that
Christ may give thee light.

The Night is far spent, the Day is at hand. Though we have some light, yet
we have some darkness, which the Regenerate see and bitterly complain of. O
the dullness, ignorance, rebellious corruptions that yet remain, we are not
perfectly renewed in every degree: let it admonish us to proceed in faith, and
the daily practice of repentance, that the Day Star, may more and more dawne
in our hearts. Hear the Word, and pray that thy light may increase.

Democritus the Philosopher, put out the eyes of his body, A. Gellius Noct.
Attic. l. 10.17.
persuading himself, that the cogitations, and commentations of his mind, in
the contemplation of nature, would be the more lively, and exact thereby: so,
one way doubtless to further the light of the soul, is to pluck off the
scales of worldliness, and voluptuousness, and to put out the carnal eye,
wherewith with so much doting we behold the things of this world.

Every day dress thine eyes, that thou may see more and more. Pre. 4.18.
He that is righteous let him be more righteous, that he may be like the
morning light which shines more and more, unto perfect day.

VERSE 12. -- Let us therefore cast off the works of darkness, and let us put
on the Armor of light.
IN these words are the general Exhortation, issuing out of the Reason
contained in the first words of this verse, of which before.

This Exhortation has two branches, according to the two parts of the Reason;
The night is far spent; therefore cast off the works of darkness: The day
is at hand, therefore put on the armor of light: In each of these are two
things: The Act: the Object.

In the first branch, the Act is, Cast off: the Object, the works of darkness.

Darkness is the privation of light, caused by the absence of the Sun, when
the body of the Earth is interposed between us and it: here translated to
signify an unregenerate estate, when the cogitation is darkened, and the soul
destitute of the light of Grace: and there is an excellent Analogy and
similitude between bodily and spiritual darkness, and that in five things.

1 Tenebra est visus impeditiua, J^^an a S Ge^^^^ano, lib. 1 de (...) and cl^^,
^^p. 3^.
darkness hinders sight: and therefore tenebrae, a tenendo, because our
eyes are as holden that we cannot see, to read, to distinguish colors, etc.
In the Night Coloromnthus vnus: So an unregenerate man is blind, he sees not
the foul^nesse of sin, the danger of his soul, etc.

2 It is gressus prohibitiua, it hinders a man's going and travel: when the
plague of thick darkness was upon Egypt, Exodus 10.23.
it is said that no man rose from his place for three days; they might have
candle and fire, yet the darkness was so thick, that the light of these could
not pierce it: it was a darkness that might have been felt.

So the unregenerate, in regard of their blindness, lie and die in their
sins, if God mercifully enlighten them not.

3 Darkness is casus inductiua, causes a man dangerously to fall: He that
walks in the night, here runs against a post, there tumbles into a ditch.

So the way of the wicked is as darkness, P^^^. ^.9.
they know not at what they stumble, as Solomon says.

4 It is timoris incussiua, darkness strikes a fear into a man. In the dark
night a little noise, any unexpected thing in our way, yea sometimes a man's
own imagination will make h^^ afra^d, though otherwise of good courage.

So the darkness ^f the unregenerate makes them fear, where no fear is; as
in the superstition of the Heathen is manifest. So the Papists are afraid of
eating an egg in Lent, and think the Devil would fetch them away if they
should eat fresh upon a fasting-day; but it is their darkness, for if they
had light, they would discern, that not for these things, but for the^r
^dolatries, Act 10.
cruelties, blasphemies, etc. they had cause to fear. Peter was afraid to eat
out of the sheet, but it was his ignorance.

5 Darkness is Verecundiae diminutiua, it diminishes shamefastness, and
makes men bold to do that then, of which they would be^ shamed in the
daylight: Nox and Amor vinumque nihil moderabile suadent.

So the unregenerate because of their darkness, are not ashamed of
drunkenness, whoredom, swearing, lying, etc. they are impudent as an harlot,
they have a whores forhead, and reiuse to be ashamed.

But a regenerate man, if he be by infirmity overtaken with a fault; how is
he ashamed of himself, and to show his head before God or men? If a man do
ill, and be not ashamed, it is his darkness.

Work^s of darkness. By works are meant all such practices and courses which
come from an unregenerate estate, which are called of darkness in three
respects.

1 Because they issue from the darkness of the mind, for it is that which
brings forth drunkenness, etc. All sins come from our corruption, and from
Satan the Prince of darkness.

2 Because they are done in darkness, 1 Thessalonians. 5.5.

3 Because they lead us to darkness, for such workers are sentenced to utter
darkness.

Cast off: as a man when he begins to rise, casts off his blankets and
bed-clothes; but because a man that does so, at night returns thither again
to be covered with such things: therefore rather so to cast off, as a man that
has so long worn a suite, that now it begins to do him discredit to wear
it; or yet rather, as a man coming out of prison, having filthy rags about
him, and full of vermin; goes aside, puts them off, and hurleth them away
on some dunghill, or into some ditch, and never purposes to touch them more:
so are we to cast off the works of darkness, as whoredom, drunkenness,
etc. these nastie rags, with indignation, throwing them into Hell, their
proper place from whence they came.

And let us put on the Armor of light. The Action here, is putting on; the
Object, the Armor of light.

1 Light, in opposition to Darkness, implying a holy and sanctified estate,
being renewed by the Spirit of God.

Grace of sanctification is called light: because as the light, James 1.17.
Malachy 4.2.
it comes from heaven, from the Father of lights, and from Jesus Christ the
Sun of righteousness. An estate of Grace, is a heavenly estate.

2 Because as light manifests dangers and snares, so the mind being renewed,
and enlightened with grace, discerns between good and bad, truth and
falsehood, and sees that the end of evil ways is assured destruction, etc.

3 Because, as light is comfortable, so the conscience is cheared by grace.

4 Because he that lives holily, is a light to others, who by the shine of his
good works, glorifieth God.

Armor of light: (...), Bez^ translateth with a circumstance of words,
Induamur habitu qui luci conucniat; put on a habit suitable to the light: but
the word (...), properly signifies Armor, and it is so proper to Paul to
speak after this manner, that I wonder M. Beza would not retain the ancient
and proper translation herein.

Romans 6.13. We read of Instruments or weapons of unrighteousness, and
righteousness: and when Paul reckons up the particular graces of
Sanctification, he does it under the terms of such pareels of armor, which
are used in the war. So Ephesians. 6.11. put on, says he, (...) the whole armor
of God, the parcels whereof follow in that place. So 1 Thessalonians 5.8. faith and
love are called a breast. plate, and hope a helmet of salvation.

Works of light, are called Armor, because of their defensive, and offensive
property: they help to defend our consciences against Satan, and they offend
Satan; nothing almost vexes the foul spirit more, then our conscionable and
upright proceeding in godliness.

Put on: a metaphor from the putting on of apparel, familiar with Paul, of
which more, verse. 14.

M. Beza translateth it in the passive, Induamur, let us be put on, because
this armor is bestowed upon us from above, it is the holy Spirit which
fashioneth it, and girdeth it to us.

The consideration of our holy calling to the state of grace, ought to teach us
to hate and abhor evil works, and to do the good. Ephesians. 5.8. Ye were
sometimes darkness, but now ye are light in the Lord; walk as children of
light. 1 Thessalonians. 5.8. Let us who are of the day be sober. Tit. 2.11.12. The
grace of God has appeared, teaching us to deny ungodliness, etc. 1. Ioh. 2.8.

Every man ought to manifest his regeneration, light of his life: nay it will
be so, if once enlightened, there will be as much difference from our former
estate, as between light and darkness; if once grafted into Christ, our fruit
will be so changed, that there will be as much difference from that which was,
as between the fair and sweet fruit of Paradise, and the most bitter
Coloquintida.

Every thing does agree performam, work according to, and by the form: fire
will heat, if it be fire, and light will dispell darkness: if we have
received grace, our conversation and whole behavior will be graceful: If we
say that we have fellowship with him (who is the light) and walk in
darkness, we lie, and do not the truth.

If thou be ord^narily drunk, if thou delightest in vanity, art a common
blasphemer, etc. there is no light, no grace. Esaias 8.20.
To the law, and to the testimony; if they speak, (and do) not according to
this word, it is because there is no light in them.

We must cast off evil with hatred to it, put on goodness with delight in it.

Many will spet at the naming of the Devil, and say they defy him; but have
thou cast him out of thy heart? Many will say they cannot abide hypocrisy,
dissembling, malice, slandering, pride, etc. which yet continually practice
such things: when thou hear or see evil, as swearing, drunkenness, etc.
does thy heart rise against such evils, for the true hatred thou bear to
them, and in this hatred do thou abandon the works and workers of such
darkness? If so, this is a good sign.

Many will commend the Word, but if the Preacher come home to their conscience,
and tell them of their beloved sin, they will storm and rage: many will
commend sobriety, chastity, humility, patience, but put thou them on, and
wear them.

Put on the Armor of light. Where there is use of armor, fear of danger; yet
if there come danger, blessed be God that we have Armor.

A godly man is armed from top to toe, Satan may buffet him, but destroy him he
cannot, for he is armed in proof.

Miserable is the unregenerate man, for he is both blind and naked: how
easily are such assaulted, wounded, and in body and soul destroyed by Satan.

Let us put on the armor of light: and for as much as Christ has suffered for
us in the flesh, (...) arm your selves with the same mind, namely, to cease
from sin, 1. Pet. 4.1.2.3.
and to live the rest of our time, not to the lusts of men, in lasciviousness,
excess of wine, etc. but to the will of God.

VERSE 13. Let us walk honestly as in the day; not in rioting and
drunkenness, not in chambering and wantonness, nor in strife and envying.
LEt us walk honestly as in the day. Concerning the coherence of these words
with them before, there is some difference, without any damage of the sense.

Some make it a new argument, ab honesto, Pet. Mart. Gryneus.
which certainly is of great force with them which have not put off humane
sense.

Some from the end of casting off, and putting on, of which in the twelfth
verse, Sarcerius.
translating (...), by two words, sic vt, in English, so that, thus the vulgar,
and our other translations, not well. The truest reading is, as it is here,
from his Majesty's translation: and so the first part of the verse yields us
an exhortation, which is another from that in the twelfth verse, in words, but
not in sense.

The duty required in this repeated exhortation, is Honest walking where is the
action, walking; the manner, honestly: and this amplified from the
consideration of the time, as in the day.

Let us walk: to walk, with the Apostle, is to live; the effect or sign of
life, put for life it self; and so the Commandments are called a way, and our
obedience a walking therein: there are diverse Analogies here, of the which I
have written somewhat upon the eight Chapter of this Epistle, verse. 1.

All our thoughts, words, deeds, whole behavior, must be honest, and so to
be, must be our delight, and we must daily go forward therein.

Honestly: honesty is taken sometimes in our ordinary speech for chastity, and
so here, but this is but a part of the sense.

Sometimes for faithfulness; so we say, an honest man, that is, a faithful
and just dealing: so here also, but this but in part, the word is (...), that
is, in a good fashion, implying all comely and commendable carriage.

The Adjective is somewhere translated, Act. 13.50.
Honorable: The Jews stirred up many devout women, (...), and honorable, and
this excellently fits here: and the Civil Lawyers oppose honest to vile and
base: let us walk honestly, honorably, according to the credit of our place
and calling.

The Syrian Translation reads, modestly; Beza, composite, orderly, fitly, as
you would say in print: The Vulgar and Master Calvin, Tit. de Zelo and ^^ore
post medium.
decently, and so Saint Cyprian read this place: Pareus expounds it by Paul's
three aduerbs, Tit. 2.12 soberly, righteously, and godly.

As in the day: for our night apparel, any thing, though patcht and homely,
will serve the turn; but in the day comeliness requires that we should be
more handsomely attired.

When a man is to go abroad, among his betters especially, he brusheth and
trimmeth up himself.

The Husbandman whilst he goes to plough and cart, is clad, it may be, in
lether, but at another time his garments are very neat and trim; he has
his worke-day and his holy day apparel.

So, because it is now day with us, and that we walk before men and Angels, we
are sutably to be fashioned and arrayed: and in as much as very day is holy day
with a true Christian, and every place as the Church to him, therefore he is to
walk thereafter.

Every Christian must have a special care over all his behavior, that it be
honest, and such as becomes the Gospel. Prou. 4.25. Let thine eyes look
right on, and let thine eyelids look straight before thee. 26. Ponder the path
of thy feet, and let all thy ways be stablished, or ordered aright. 27. Turn
not to the right hand nor to the left, remove thy foot from evil. Ephesians. See
that ye walk circumspectly, accurately. 1 Thessalonians. 4.14. (...).
That ye malke honestly, according to the Word in this place.

A Christian must be walking: Matthew. 20.3.6. An idle man falls into poverty,
and a man that gives himself to ease, into diverse diseases: Be walking, that
thou may expel noxious humors. When David began to take his ease, he
began to be ouer-growne with lustful affections. If the husbandman be not
always fallowing his land with the plough, it will run out with weeds, so
will our hearts with noisome lusts, through want of the daily practice of good
duties.

We must walk, that is, go forward in godliness,

A Nurse delights to see her babe battle and thrive, and it is a shame for a
scholar to be always in the lowest form. Go on therefore, and be every day
better then thy self. Not to go forward, is to go backward. Philip. 3.13.14.
I forget that which is behind, says Paul, and reach forth unto that which is
before, and I prease toward the mark.

We are not yet at our iourneyes end, we must walk on, and there are many
impediments, Et ibi incidimus in deficiendi periculum, vbi proficiendi
deposuerimus appetitum: There we begin to grow worse, Leo Mag. ser. 2. de
Quadrag.
where we strive not and desire to grow better, said Leo.

Our walking to heaven, is like the forcing of a Boat against the stream, or
a Chariot up a hill; if the oars and horses stand still, they go back as fast
as they went forward.

As in walking, many paces, so in our life many passages, we must carry our
selves decently in all.

Let thy speech, gesture, eating, drinking, sleeping, clothing, recreations,
etc. be honest, and such as becomes a Christian.

Be sober toward thy self, just toward thy neighbor, religious and devout
toward God; join them all together, which many do not.

Saint Paul uses this word, when he gives warning of our behavior in the
Church: Let all things be done decently, 1. Cor. 14.40. When thou come to
Church, let thy behavior be venerable: It is not a profane Theater, but Gods
house. Uncover thy head, bow thy knee, pray, hear, sing, with the rest of the
congregation: when they pray, read not thou; when they kneel, sit not thou:
uniformity and order, is most honest and comely in the Lords house: otherwise
there is not (...), but (...).

Walk honestly: at Church, at market, at thine own house.

Have such care of thy living, disguised or naked: Nature teaches us to cover
our uncomely parts, 1. Cor. 12.23. (...).
and grace should teach us, that drunkenness, whoredom, etc. agree not with
the honesty and comeliness of Christians.

A virtuous conversation does a man a great deal of honesty and credit; Age
it self without Virtue, is not honorable, Prou. 16.31. Follow virtue.

Sin disgraceth us: Romans 1.26. Romans 1.24.
lusts are called (...), vile, dishonorable affections, which do (...),
dishonor bodies. Hate vice.

VERSE -- Not in rioting and drunkenness, not in chambering and wantonness,
not in strife and envying.
THese words, and the next verse following, contain an exposition of the
exhortation, to walk honestly as in the Day.

That exhortation is two ways expounded: First, negatiuely in these words;
then affirmatively in the verse following.

In the negative are diverse particular vices enumerated, which are contrary to
this honest walking.

There are set down three pair of vices; not that there are no more; but
these are reckoned up, as the foulest, and most common, which most stain and
dedecorate a Christian; and under these all other to be understood.

The first pair are rioting and drunkenness. There are two staffes of our
bodily life, meat and drink, he forbids here intemperance in both.

Rioting. The Latin reads, non in comessationibus; which comes not of the
Latin comedere, which signifies to eat, but of the Greek (...), which is the
word in this place, and signifies, as Saint Ambrose expounds, luxurious
feasting, and banqueting, wherein men take liberty unto all lascivious and
riotous behavior; so called as some think, because such feasting, and riotous
feeding brings (...), heavy sleep, when men are as the Poet speaks, Somno
vinoque, Virgil.
or somnoque ciboque sepulti, Even buried in sleep caused by good cheer.

And because in such feasting, oftentimes there is Music, the Syriack
translation (it may be) rendered it, non in musica not in music; meaning vain
and filthy songs, and petulant behavior, according to the rude doings in many
places at marriages.

From hence the Heathen called their god of wantonness and reuelling, (...).
This was the abominable Idol of Moab, Chemosh, 1 Kings 11.7.
so called from some filthy behavior used or seen in the worship of that
Idol: This was Priapus; the Israelites grievously sinned, Numb. 25.1, 2, 3.
in joining themselves to Baalpeor, or Beelphegor; Pudendum idolu^ Targ.
Ionathae consule Hieron. in loc. Hoseae.
of which the Prophet Osee speaks, chap. 9.10. They went to Baal-peor, and
separated themselves unto that shame.

Nor feasting, nor eating that which is dainty is here forbidden; but rioting
in our eating, bringing forth proteruous and dissolute behavior.

Drunkenness. When this odious sin is named; we conceive a man vomiting,
reeling and staggering, not being able to speak, nor able to go: we think of
the deformity of his visage, the inordinate and uncomely motion of his body,
his dementation, or alienation of mind.

But drunkenness properly is not in these; These are the effects of it, or as
the Schoolmen say well, rather poena, then culpa ebrietatis, Esaias 51.21.
the punishment, then the fault of drunkenness.

Drunkenness is manifold: there is (...): as the Prophet Esaias speaks to the
Jews: thou afflicted, and drunken, but not with wine, with sin then, or with
plagues, for they were opplete with both.

There is Panaria ebrietas, and drunkenness with bread, prouerbiall used in
the Dutch language, Eras. chil. 1. Cent. 3. Adag. 3.
as the learned Dutchman of Roterdam says in his Adagies, noting petulant and
impudent manners.

There is also giddiness by Tobacco; the immoderate and unreasonable use
whereof is so much the more to be damned, because it is the nurse of this
brutish drunkenness, we have to entreat of.

The drunkenness here meant: is an immoderate drinking of any liquor, which may
inebriate.

The very form of this sin is in the term Immoderate; now that is
immoderate in drinking, which is beyond the necessity of nature, the good
health and strength of the body, and the reasonable refreshing of the spirits:
whether alienation of mind follow or not.

For whatsoever in the excess in drinking is contrary to Sobriety is ebriety:
But all Immoderate drinking is contrary to sobriety: 1 Pet. 4.3.
and therefore, Saint Peter does not only forbid walking (...), in
drunkenness, but (...) in any excess of wine, when we begin to be heat with
it, and in drinkings and unnecessary bibbing, and quaffing.

Thy conscience tells thee that drunkenness is a sin: abeast: to be deprived
of the use of reason, is the highest degree of this sin, but to drink
immoderately is drunkenness in some degree.

If by thy constitution, and strength of thy brain, thou be able to bear
as much drink as two or three men, without the alienation of thy mind; yet know
that thou art not the less but the more culpable thereby. Remember what the
Prophet says, Woe to them that are mighty to drink wine, Esaias 5.22.
and men of strength to mingle strong drink.

Gluttony and Drunkenness, disgrace the persons and profession of Christians.
Pro. 23.20. We must not be amongst wine bibbers, and riotous eaters of flesh;
much less may we do such things. Luke 21.34. Take heed lest your hearts be
over charged with surfeiting and drunkenness: 1 Peter 4.3. 1 Cor. 6.10. Gal.
5.21.

We may not, genio indulgere, be greedy of dainty cates, every day.

It is lawful upon occasion to exceed in provision; but never lawful to
exceed the bounds of moderate eating, Jude. 12.
nor without fear to feed our selves.

The Romans were greatly faulty herein; also the Jews, in the days of Esaias
and Amos. These are belly-gods, of whom Paul, Phil. 3.19. Epicuri de grege
porci, Swinish Epicures; which know nothing nor intend, but curare cutem, to
pamper themselves with dainty fare.

And surely so exceedingly are we of this Nation peccant this way, that, that
scoff may be returned upon us which was cast upon the Agrigenti^es, or men of
Megara. They build as if they were to live ever, they provide for their bellies
as if they were to dye to morrow.

But venture paruo contentus, si das quod debes, non quod potes;

The belly is content with a little, Seneca.
if you give it so much as you owe, not so much as you can.

Rich Alcamenes, provided, and fed sparingly: being asked the reason, he
answered that it became multapossidentem, pro ratione, non pro libidine viuere.

Plato invited to supper Timothy the Athenian Duke, and entertained him with a
root and a sallet, but with Philosophical discourses also; for which Timothy
gave thanks to Plato the next day, on this manner; They which sup with Plato
feel themselves the better for it the next day: for indeed many through
gurmundizing feel themselves the worse many days after: It has been
observed and affirmed that more perish by surfeiting then by the sword.

These examples of the Heathens should admonish us to beware of excess,
whereby we dull our apprehension, and unfit our selves for our duties to God
and man.

The frugality and moderation of the Patriarchs, and holy Kings is remarkable;
and also of the Christians of former times. One instance for many.

In the days of Tertullian, Tertull. in Apolog.
it was imputed to the Christians that the were prodigal and given to belly
cheer, because of their love feasts, which therefore Tertullian describes,
thus; Non prius discumbitur, etc. We sit not down, till an assay be taken by
prayer to God. We eat so much as may stay hunger, and drink so much, as is
profitable for the chaste and snamefast. We are filled so, as that we remember
that we must worship God in the night: we discourse so, as they who know that
God hears them. Post aquam manualem, after water and lights, every man is
provoked to sing unto God something out of the Scriptures, or out of his own
invention, by which a trial is made, how he has eaten and drunk: Also Grace
and prayer takes away, and ends the feast: and from thence we depart, not to
any wanton, riotous, or lascivious practices, but to the same care of modesty
and chastity, Vt qui non tam caenum caenauerint, quam disciplinam, so that you
might think that they had been rather at a Sermon, or at some Lecture of
sobriety, then at a Supper.

Abhor Drunkenness, and be sober: The fearful effects of Drunkenness are
manifold.

1 It wastes our Substance, it has brought many families to less then a
morsel of bread, and has clothed men of some note with rags. Pro. 23.20.21.
Diogenes seeing a bill fastened upon a drunkards door signifying that the
house was to be sold: I thought said he, that he would at last vomit his
house also.

2 It oucrthrowes health, causing Palsies, Apoplexies, and diverse other
diseases, as the Physicians witness.

3 It takes away a man's good name: Scurrarum est, says a Father, It was wont
to be the beggars sin, Hieran ep 83. ad Oceanum.
according to the Proverb, As drunk as a beggar; but now many that are no
beggars, are grievously faulty in this bruitishnes.

4 It extinguisheth the light of reason, and robbes us of that precious Jewel.
Anima sicca sapientissima, the dry soul is the wise soul: Many seem to have
animam pro sale, a soul they have but as salt only, to keep their bodies
from rotting above ground. They drown their wits, that as the earth oppressed
with water is unfruitful; so they are altogether unprofitable. Nabuchodonosor
was not more a beast then is a drunkard.

5 It is the sountaine of all luxurious and filthy doings, and the cause of
much sin. In it is excess of riot, says Saint Paul, Ephesians. 5.18. (...),
Drunkards are many of them of the principallest factors for the Devil; for
having been overtaken themselves, they never cease laboring to make others
the children of hell like themselves; and therein, after a hellish manner
rejoice. Consul. Amb. l. de Elia and Jeiunio ca. 11. Amb loc. cit. c. 17
These are they which know no way to honor their friends but by arinking
their healths; against which Ambrose declaimes: and this forsooth is to be done
by threes, which Saint Austin calls a filthy custom, the poison of the
Devil, and the unhappy use of the Pagans: he says farther, Aug. ser. 231. de
tempere ad^ sinem.
Quicunque he in suo conuiuio aut alieno fieri acquieuerit, diabelo se
sacrificasse non dubitauerit: that is, whosoever shall consent to such
healths-drinking by threes, at his own or at any other man's table, let him not
doubt, but that he has by so doing sacrificed to the Devil: and therefore
he adiureth his hearers by the dreadful day of judgment, that they banish
this heathenish custom.

It damnes the soul, 1. Cor. 6.10. Gal. 5.20.

Howl therefore you drunkards for the misery which shall come upon you, when
every drop of wine or bear immoderately taken, shall be recompensed with a sea
of wrath.

If thou desire to be able to serve God in prayer and faith, abhor
drunkenness, for a drunkard is a very Atheist; these are they which in Esayes
and Paul's time denied the providence of God, 1 Cor. 15.32. Esaias 22. Eccles. 2.3.
and the resurrection. Let us eat and drink say they, for to morrow we shall
die.

Solomon thought to give himself to wine, and yet to have acquainted his heart
with wisdom, but he found it impossible.

Not possible to be a drunkard and religious.

Abhor drunkenness in thy self, reform it also in others to thy uttermost
ability; that for the safety of thine own soul and other men's also, thou
may have a double reward.

Take heed thou have no hand in setting up unnecessary Ale houses, the very
Temples of Satan.

In as much as it is now become vitium Gentis, a sin of our Nation, and
committed in that, which Nature cannot want, be the more careful.

If thou have been preserved in these dangerous times, give humble thanks to
God: if thou have been guilty, repent of this thy wickedness, and pray that
if it be possible it may be forgiven thee. It is hard for a drunkard to repent.

VERSE 13. -- Not in chambering and wantonness. --
THese are the second pair of vices, contrary to temperance and honest walking.

Chambering, the Greek word signifies a bed, or bedchamber; Aquinas;
and some have interpreted it superfluous sleep, which follows gluttony and
drunkenness; and then wantonness follows such sleep. Good David at
Euening-tide rose from his bed: this was not well to rise from his bed at
Evening; and what wantonness followed the story declares.

The Syrian Translator reads Non in dormitorio immundo, not in a filthy
sleeping place; if it should be taken for a place, I would think the stews
to be forbidden.

Here these are doubtless meant, and also all preparation and provision made
for intising and nourishing our lusts, as the Harlot is described in the
Proverbs, to have Decked her bed, and perfumed her Chamber, etc. Pro. 7.16, 17.


But principally fornication and whoredom it self, by a metonymie, calling it
by a modest term: so is the word used, Heb. 13.4. Martage is honorable, and
the Bed undefiled; and (...) is translated to conceive. Romans 9.10.

Wontonnesse: (...), signifies, a monsirous profusion, (...).
and pouring out and spending ones self without measure, in, and unto all
lasciviousness: The word is thought to be compounded of (...), and (...);
Selge, they say was a city between Galatia, and Cappadocia, the inhabitants
whereof were most modest and temperate, and then (...), is priuatine, as noting
one in whom there is no modesty at all; others affirm that people to have
been most dissolute and lewd, and then (...) to be (...), intensiue,
dilating, and increasing the sense. (...) etiam dicitur (...), Fellator.
Pliny makes mention of the oil of Selge, Selgilicum, which is good for the
sinews, thought to be found out and used by that people, to confirm and
strengthen them, having spent themselves, in mutual and abominable filthiness.

By these two words, are not forbidden, either a bed, or a bedchamber, or the
lawful use of them; nor marriage, nor the sporting of Isaac and Rebecah, nor
friendly salutations; but all uncleanness, and unlawful copulation, either
according or contrary to kind, with all immodest and filthy behavior.

All fedity, obscenous and filthy behavior is contrary to that honest walking
which is enjoined Christians. Gal. 5.19. Ephe. 5.3. Col. 3.5. 1 Thessalonians. 4.3.4. 1
Peter 4.3.

The Holy Spirit calls unclean actions by the name of Chambering, to teach us
to abhor even uncomely words: law of grace, and may not run riot in all filthy
and broad language.

Sermo caracter mentis: out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks:
An unclean mouth, comes from an unclean heart, and ends in unclean actions.

Here married couples are to be admonished,

Their bedchamber must not be a shop of intemperance, but of modesty; not a
place of lust, but as a temple consecrated to chastity, and shamefastness; as
accustomed to prayer, holy conferences, and meditations; as to pleasure.

The bed and bed chamber are so to be used, that we may not be ashamed there to
call upon God: In no place take liberty of immodest and uncomely behavior, for
God sees in secret; in no time, not in the darkness of the night, Deorum
immortalium etiam noctes sunt, Hesiodus.
said the Poet. The Nights are the Lords, as well as the Days.

Note the order of these: rioting, and drunkenness, follow Chambering and
wantonness: As they are here joined together, Hos. 4.11.
so a Prophet said, Wine and whoredom take away the heart: where drunkenness
goes before, there whoredom soon follows after.

Tertullian says thus, Tertul. lib. de spectac. tit. de Theatro.
Liberto et Veneri conuenit; Duo ista Daemonia conspirata et coniurata inter se
sunt, ebrietatis et libidinis. Bacchus and Venus, agree and go together: These
are two foul fiends which conspire and are coniu^ed together for the
destruction of Mankind: Hieron. in Titu^.
Hierome affirms that he will never believe that a drunkard is chaste.

Exodus 32.6. The people sat down to eat and drink and rose up to play, that
is, to all manner of filthy practices usual amongst Idolaters; as they did,
Numb. 25.

He which is a riotous feeder and given to drunkenness and says he will live
chastely, is like unto him who says he will set stubble on fire, and quench it
when he list: As fire in stubble cannot be quenched easily, so nor unclean
lusts in riotous persons and drunkards.

Abhor fornication,

Though the world will not take knowledge of the heinousness of the sin of
uncleanness; yet it is a transcendent sin: witness the old world, the
filthy brood whereof were washed away with a flood.

Sodom also, and the twenty three thouland in Numb. 25. and 1 Cor. 10.8.

It breeds such foul diseases, the naming of which could not but be offensive
to men's stomachs and ears.

It shuts out of the kingdom of heaven, 1. Cor. 6.9.10. Hebr. 13.4. Gal.
5.19.21. Reu. 21.8.27. and 22.15.

Helps against uncleanness are diverse, especially these following.

1 Remember such Scriptures as speak against it, and among the rest this in
hand, Aug. Confesi. l. 8. cap. vl.
by which Saint Augustine was helped, and obtained an end of his unclean
lusts: For, as himself reports, with many tears begging power and an end of
his incontinencie, he heard a voice from the next house, as of some boy or
girl singing, and often repeating these words, Toll lege, Toll lege,
whereupon he presently fetched codicem Apostoli, S. Paul's Epistles, and the
first place he lighted on, was this, Not in chambering and wantonness; and by
the power of this word his bands were released.

2 Consider thy Resurrection: Thy body must rise again; will thou have a
filthy polluted body to appear before the Judge?

3 Hate Idleness, and walk diligently in thy calling: Otiasi tollas, etc.
Take Idleness away, and Cupids bow will soon decay.

-- Qui sinem quaeris amoris
Cedit amor Rebus; Res age, tutus cris
4 Fast and pray: Fast, for sine Corere and Baccho friget Venus: and pray, for
Chastity and continency are Gods gifts: These sins are of those kinds,
which go not out but by prayer and fasting.

If thou be guilty, use these helps, and repent betimes, lest thou be
eternally damned: If Saint Paul lived in these days, and beheld the goatish
behavior, and horrible uncleanness committed, not only with impunitie, but
with boasting, how would he thunder the judgments of God, both against the
guilty, and against Magistrates, which cause not such things to be severely
punished. Surely God will be avenged of both.

VERSE 13. -- Nor in strife and envying.
THis is the third pair: as the second follows the first as the cause and
breeder of it, so this pair follows both the first and the second. These all
are vitia connata, twisted together. Drunkenness begets Whoredom, and each
of them beget strife.

That drunkenness begets strife, Solomon witnesses: Who has contentions?
Prou. 23.29 30.35.
who has wounds without cause? They that tarry long at the wine, etc. They
have stricken me, shall thou say, etc. Experience also shows the same, in the
quarrels, potfights, Alehouse frayes, stabbings, blood-draughts, etc. rife in
every place.

Alexander the great was much given to drunkenness: when he was sober, he
overcame his enemies; but when he was in drink, he embrued his own hands in
the blood of his worthy Captains and dearest friends.

That whoredom begets strife; the Name of Troy will always testify; and
the many combats and duels, which are by godless men fought for their
Mistresses and Harlots.

Many Interpreters refer the two first couples to the body, this to the
mind, taking their hint from Iam. 3.14. But they also are sins of the mind;
for a drunkard and adulterer have a carrion heart, before they have a dunghill
life: and there is outward strife, as well as inward.

(...), Strife; evil strife, in affections, words, scoulding, brawling, etc.
yea all unjust suing, quarrelling, etc.

Here is not forbidden striving to enter in at the strait gate, nor striving
against corruptions; but corrupt strife, proceeding from an envious heart; as
the Apostle here coupleth the daughter and mother together.

Envy: (...), Zeal, which is in general, an earnest affection to a thing: a
thing indifferent, and good or bad, according as is the object whereunto it is
referred.

When it respects the setting forth of Gods glory, it is a virtue, for the
which Phinees and David are commended: Luke 6.15.
for this was one of the Apostles called Zelotes, Simon Zelotes, the zealous,
to distinguish him from Simon Peter; and he was so called, because of his
earnestness and zeal for the Gospel. He is called by Matthew, Simon the
Cananite, not of the Land of Canaan, called so from the Nephew of Noah by Cham,
Matthew. 10.4.
which is written with Caph, and comes from a root which signifies, He made
vile and abject, but written with Kuph. and coming from a root in Pihel Kin,
which signifies, He was moved with zeal; Revel. 3.19.
unto this was the Church of Laodicea exhorted.

When it respects our neighbors hurt, then it is a vice, whereby men grieve at
the good of their neighbors.

James calls it bitter zeal: sweet zeal is good; James 3.14.
but Paul means here, that which is bitter; a mischievous thing it is, viz.
to be grieved at my neighbors thrift.

The Latin word is Inuidia, of Inuidere, videre is good, but Inuidere is to
see with an evil eye, and a naughty mind.

When a man sees his neighbors corn to prosper better then his, then for a
man to grieve and fret at it, this is envy.

Inuidus alterius rebus macrescit opimis. An envious man grows lean, and
pines away to see his neighbor fat: he rejoices in nothing, but in the hurt
of his neighbor.

Envy is compared to the Basiliske, which is called Rex Inuidorum, the King of
the Envious, because the strength of his poison is conveyed by his eyes.

Strife and Envy are contrary to honest walking: So Paul, Gal. Phil. 2.3. Let
nothing be done through strife or vainglory. Vainglory the mother of strife
and envy, for, only by pride comes contention, Prou. 13.10. If you see two
men strive, either one or both are proud.

Strive not needlessly: quiet, we are called to peace.

It is reported that the Salamander is so cold, that it can live in the fire:
Surely we have many of this complexion; who account it no life if they have no
suits and brabblings on foot; then are they asleep in the chimneyes end: but
if they be engaged in some contention, then are they lively and merry.

These are to be reproved, together with the Barretter, Makebate, Carry-tale,
and such like.

You shall come into few towns, where there are not some of these unquiet
spirits, striving about the Asses shadow, or the wool of a dog, as a man
might say: suing for the chief and highest places in the Church, more then to
be religious; for taking the wall, and going out of the door first: who, if
God be dishonored, can be quiet enough, but for every trifle concerning
themselves, will seek the benefit of the law.

Contention in the Commonwealth is evil, but in the Church, most odious: Woe
to our times; he is now no body, that has not a faculty to quarrel at the
government of the Church, raising up new and strange opinions, and doting
about unnecessary questions.

It is lawful toaske questions for the satisfying of conscience; Aug. in
Euang. quaest. ex Matthew.
but so, that we keep the peace. Boni Catholici quod ad fidei doctrinam
pertinet ita quaerunt, vt absit decertatio periculosa: Good Catholics so
question, as that they avoid dangerous contending, says Augustine. But men of
corrupt minds, and destitute of the love of the truth, contend, not that
error might be overcome of the truth, Aug. lib. de doct. Christ. 4. c. 28.
but that their sayings may go for current, and other men's be put down, says
the same Father. Thus many like little children begin to play with their meat,
bringing forth such ill fruit of our so long peace and liberty of the Gospel.

Strive not. For this is the way to ruinate the Church. A house divided cannot
stand; so, nor a Church. If Altar be against Altar, Pulpit against Pulpit,
Minister against Minister, Professor against Professor, who gets thereby?
Not We, but Satan; but the Papists, to whom we have given this staff to
smite us with, namely, our Contentions.

Strive not: for this were to sin grievously, as we may see by the companions
of strife here, which are of the black^st iniquities.

Strive not: for that shows thee to be a carnal man, 1. Cor. 3.3. yea if
thou gloriest that thou beleeuest, James 3.14.
thou lie against the truth, says Saint James.

If thou will needs strive, strive to do good, to enter in at the strait gate,
to master thy corruptions, etc.

Abhor Envy.

It is a devilish sin, and comes from hell: The Devil is called the
Envious man, Matthew. 13.28. he envied our first parents, and so brought them
under the power of death. Through envy of the Devil came death into the world,
Wisd. 2. vlt.
says the Author of the book of Wisdom: and Saint James says, That the
wisdom which shows it self in strife and envy, is earthly, sensual and
devilish. James 3.15.


It is one of the torments of hell; Luke 13.28.
There shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth, when ye shall see Abraham,
Isaak and Jacob, and all the Prophets in the kingdom of heaven, and your
selves thrust out, says Christ to the Jews; now gnashing of teeth is a token
of envy.

It is to be hated because it is the forerunner of blood; witness Abel, and
Joseph also, whom the envy of his brethren had murdered, had not God specially
hindered it; witness our blessed Savior, whom the Jews delivered for envy,
Matthew. 27.18.
as Pilate knew very well.

Envy opposes the Providence of God, grieuing that God should dispose of his
blessings, as he does.

Envy is contrary to such things which most commend a man: as Mercy and
Charity.

It is a most unjust sin, for it is offended with nothing but that which is
good; and the more it is, the greater is the envy, and the offense; as the
brighter the Sun shines, the more are weak and sore eyes offended.

And it is a most just sin, Iustius Inuidia nihil est, etc. Horat. Cypr. sermon.
de Liuore. Prou. 14.30.
because it excruciateth and gnaweth upon the heart of him that enuieth, as a
moth breeding in the garment consumes it, and as rust eats and fretteth the
iron, so Envy is the rottenness of the bones. Socrates said, is was serra
animae, a saw to torment the soul.

An envious man is more unhappy then other sinners; for in other sins there
is some pleasure, though carnal, in envy, nothing but grief and torment. He
is doubly miserable more then other, for other men are troubled only for their
own evils, the envious man is also vexed for other men's good things.

It is a general sin, reigning among Soldiers, Courtiers, Scholars,
Citizens, Tradesmen, Countrymen, among all.

It discovers the envious man to be in goodness far inferior to him which
is envied.

It destroys friendship, Cleobulus. Basil. ser de Inuidia. Greg. Mag. l. 6.
Moral. in fine.
the comfort of man's life, and therefore a wise man was wont thus to advise, to
take heed of the trappes of enemies, and of the envy of friends.

The most effectual remedy which the Fathers have observed of this foul
evil, are the contempt of the glory of this world, and of all earthly things,
and the love of the glory of God, and of heavenly things.

For pride breeds envy, if pride therefore were mortified, envy would
vanish; and he that contemns all earthly things, cannot for them envy his
neighbor, no more then we envy a beggar for his rags, or a Lazar for his
sores: Envy is for things at least deemed excellent, and worth the having, by
which we think our neighbor advanced, and our selves disgraced.

And he that seeks Gods glory and heavenly things, will rejoice when God is
honored in his neighbor, as well as in himself, desiring that he may be
glorified in all.

Let us bewail the want of goodness, which we see to be in others, and
strive to attain it, and to imitate them.

VERSE 14. But put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ, and make not provision for the
flesh, to fulfill the lusts thereof.
IN these words is the Affirmative part of the Exposition of Honest walking.

To walk honestly, is to put on the Lord Jesus Christ: Under which phrase is
emphatically comprehended, sobriety, temperance, chastity, continency,
peace, love, and whatsoever virtue is requisite to a Christian conversation.

Neither does he follow his former manner of speaking, saying, Not in rioting,
etc. but in putting on the Lord Jesus; but delivers this part in the manner
of an Exhortation, for more force.

In this we have two parts: First, the duty exhorted unto, in the first part
of the verse: Secondly, an Amplification in the last.

But put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ.

In these words is the Duty; wherein are considerable, The Act, Put on; the
Object, The Lord Jesus Christ.

The Lord Jesus Christ: These titles describing the second Person in the most
sacred Trinity, who was anointed to be our Savior, redeeming us by his
blood, and therefore of right, our Lord and Master; are expounded in the
Catechism, and therefore I pass them over here.

Put ye on. This phrase is figurative, wherein Christ is compared to a
Vesture, and our obedience to the putting of it on.

Christ is our Vesture two ways, as our Satisfaction, and as our
Sanctification, as the Cause of our Salvation, and as the pattern of our life.

We put him on, as our satisfaction, when we believe, of which principally is
that Scripture, Gal. 3.27.
As many as have been baptized into Christ, have put on Christ.

As our Sanctification, when we follow his example, resemble him, and are
conformable to his holy life: and this is chiefly meant here, though the other
not excluded. As it was meat and drink to him to do his Fathers will, John
4.34.
so ought it to be to us.

This phrase is frequent in Paul, and he is much delighted with it; commending
Love and other virtues, under such manner of speaking unto us; as Coloss. 3.12.
and seq.

For the graces of Gods Spirit, will beautify us more, and set us forth, then
Jewels, chains of gold, or any rich garments: As all Samsons strength was in
his hair, so our strength is in Faith, but our beauty is in holiness and in
virtue.

Put on Christ, so put on the new man, Ephesians. 4.24. a kind of speaking taken
from a rite or ceremony anciently, even in Saint Paul's time used in Baptism;
Beza schol. in ca. 3. ep. ad Gal. v. 27.
as M. Beza acknowledges, when persons baptized by dipping, or putting their
bodies under the water, did either put on new garments, or their own, quasi
nouis, as new, as he speaks.

But all Antiquity witnesses that such garments were white: so do these
verses signify.

Candidus egreditur niueis exercitus vndis,
Atque vetus vitium purgat in amne nouo: Lact. in carm. paschal.

Fulgentes animas vestis quoque candida signat,
Et grege de mueo gaudia pastor habet.
And these.
Inde parens sacro ducit de font sacerdos,
Infantes niueos corpore, Paulinus.
cord, habitu.
And Saint Ambrose speaks of it as of a Ceremony generally received and used
in his time, which was about some 370. years after Christ: and therefore M.
Zanchy might well say of the white vesture, Amb. tom. 4. lib. de ijs qui
initiantur mysterijs cap. 7. Zanchius in explic. ep. ad Ephesians. ca. 5.
Credo fuisse in illa vetustissima Ecclefia vsitatam, I believe that it was
ordinarily used in that most ancient Church, meaning the time next after the
Apostles.

The manner was this: so soon as any was baptized, he received of the hands
of the Priest a white vestment: where such Ceremony is yet used, the Priest
says thus at the delivery of the white garment: Accipe vestem candidam,
sanctam, immaculatam, quam proferas sine macula ante tribunal domini nostri
Jesus Christi, etc. Receive this white, holy, immaculate, vestment, which thou
may bring forth without spot, at the judgment seat of our Lord Jesus Christ.

This garment he was to wear a whole week, at the end whereof he came and
rendered it to the Priest: and in ancient time baptism was administered but at
two times in the year, unless there were necessity; namely at Easter, and at
Whitsontide; and therefore was the week after Easter called Dominica in albis,
as we yet call the feast of Penticost from this ceremony, Whitsontide, as I
take it.

This was the ancient order, so in offensive was a white garment, even at the
Sacrament of Baptism, being there a significant Ceremony: and it signified
notably three things.

1 Liberty, that the parties so endued were set free from sin and Satan by
Jesus Christ: as the Romans when they manumitted their bondmen, among other
tokens thereof, Tertull. de resurrectione carnis.
they put them on a white garment: of which Tertullian makes mention.

2 I^y, for the grace and victory by the holy Sacrament: for of both is white a
token: of Joy, where the Scripture says, Eccles. 9 8.
Let all thy garments be white: of Victory, so says Christ to the Angel of
the Church of Sardis, He that ouercometh, Revel. 3.5.
the same shall be clothed in white raiment.

3 Innocence and purity of life, that they which were baptized should live
candide, fairly, not defiling themselves with sin, but hating the very
garment spotted with the flesh.

To put on Christ then, is abundantly to express him, following in all things
the holy rules and pattern which he has left in his word. Constancy also may
be here employed, for we are to put him on as our garments, which we tie fast
and button to us.

Doctrine, in the words of Saint Chrysostom; Qui Christum induit, omnem simul
in vniuersum virtutem habet: He that has put on Christ has together all
virtue: or, To walk honestly is to put on Christ; that is, to follow his
example, 1. John 2.6. He that, says he, abides in him, that is, Christ, ought
himself also to walk even as he walked. So when Saint Paul dehorts the
Ephesians from their Heathenish conversation, he says, But ye have not so
learned Christ, in sense the same with our Put on, in this place.

Christ is all good things to us: He is our King, Priest,

Christ an absolute example; no man may be so unto us: Paul himself, for we
are to be followers of him, 1 Cor. 11.1.
only as he is of Christ.

Here we are taught how to use Christ, money and use it not, or a workman
tools, or a scholar books, and know not how to use them, what profit are
they? If thou would use Christ aright, put him on. It is not enough to bear
him preach, for so did many of the Scribes and Pharisees: nor to be in his
company, for so was Judas: nor to eat at his table, for so did the man that
had not put him on as his wedding garment, Mat. 22.11.12.13.
and was thrown for it into utter darkness.

He must be put on as our Justification, and Sanctification, as was said before.

He has set us in the way, and has gone before us in it, and as I may say,
chalked it out for us, showing us by his own example how we should walk.

Many can be content to put him on as their Jesus, but not as their Lord, like
naughty servants letting their Master walk all alone: they will not follow him
in humility, patience, sobriety, etc. But we are in vain called Christians,
if we do not imitate Christ, who therefore called himself The way, vt
conuersatio Magistri forma esset discipuli; Leo Mag. Ser. 5. in Natiuit. Dom.
in ipso fine. Aug. Volusiano Epist. 3.
that the conversation of the Master might be the fashion of the disciple, said
Leo. Venit hominibus in magisterium and adiutorium: Christ came to men to help
and rescue them as a Redeemer, and to teach them obedience as a Master, said
Augustine.

He that walks in drunkenness, chambering, wantonness, etc. has put on the
Devil, and not Christ; for he nor did, nor taught so. No marvel if the
Heathens committed whoredoms, robberies, drunkenness, etc. for such things
are reported of their gods whom they worshipped: For which cause said Menippus
in Lucian, I approved and followed such things, for I thought the gods would
never have done such things, if they had not judged them to be good.

But in as much as the God whom we serve, is of pure eyes, and cannot behold
iniquity; and the Master whom we follow, (...).
is an unspotted Lamb, in whose mouth is no guile, who is holy, harmless and
undefiled; we must needs be damned if we walk contrary unto him.

Here are two sorts of men to be reproved.

Secondly, they which put him on, but so slouenly, as I may say, and
vnhansomly, that they have no benefit by him.

Of these, some put him on as a cloak or loose garment, which they may cast
off at their pleasure: these are holy day Christians, who at good times, or
when they go abroad into some company will walk soberly; but at other times,
and in other companies, are of another strain. But Christ must be a close
well-girt garment to us, never to be put off, by day or by night.

Some put him on their heads, and no farther, having knowledge, but being
altogether without the power of godliness.

Some put him on their tongues also, they will talk well, but their hands and
feet and foul and naked.

Some are clad half way, as the messengers of David to Hanun; in some things
they are careful, but in other they take liberty. But we must be clothed with
Christ from top to toe, that no part of our own filthy rags may be seen,
nor our nakedness; but that whatsoever is heard or seen in us, may be of
Christ. As a man is contained in his garments, Aquinas in loc.
and seen in their color, so in him who imitates Christ, must nothing be
seen but the works of Christ.

Christ is a neat hansome strait garment, it is not easy to put him on. He
that has a bunch of pride, drunkenness, can never get him over: all such
things must be pared off, before it will fit us.

In other garments, if they be too short, or too strait, they may be pieced or
eeked out, or if too wide or long, they may be cut less or shorter, till they
be fit to our bodies: but our Garment we speak of, may not be patcht nor
curtailed, nor fitted to us, but we must be fitted to that.

The Tailor fits our garments to our bodies, but we must be fitted to this
garment. Christ's will may not submit to ours, but ours to Christ.

Labor to put on Christ. fashion, and unreasonable for charge, men and women
daily invent and wear beyond their ability and rank, and contrary to their
sex: but the best and seemliest garment which is Christ, is not regarded or
put on.

Men and women seek for rich clothing for their body, but esteem not the
nakedness of their souls.

The reason of this strange negligence is this; Every one would be esteemed and
taken forth: they cannot for their virtue and honesty; and therefore they
think to carry it away with their sine clothes: these are they which lay
their whole substance on their backs: these are they which bestow so much time
in trimming and trussing, and cutting and poudering, etc. that between the
comb and the glass, as they say, they can never find leisure to serve God.
These are they, who had rather the Commonwealth should be out of order then
their perriwigs and disordered apparel.

Apelles his prentice, not doing his part in the face of Helen whom he was to
draw; all to be dawbed her apparel with gold and garish colors: Notat Clemens
Alex. 3. paeda. ca. 10.
to whom Apelles, O adolescens cum non posses pingere pulchram, pinxisti
diuitem; O young man, seeing thou could not paint her beautiful, thou have
painted her rich. So many, their lives be not fair, therefore their clothes
are rich.

It is our folly to esteem of men more for a gold ring, James 2.2.
as Saint James speaks, then for virtue: which has caused this madness in
many, more to seek gay and costly garments, then to put on Christ. Mat. 6.25.


Our Savior said, that the body is more then the raiment: but I verily think
that there are some so besotted, who if a rich suit of apparel, and virtue,
nay Christ himself were set to sale; would rather give a hundred pounds for
the gay clothes, then a hundred pence for Christ.

Let us not esteem of men but for their virtues, and let us seek to put on
Christ rather then outward apparel.

In the morning when thou dressest thy self, examine whether thou have put on
Christ.

Thou art ashamed of a foul garment; and art thou not ashamed of drunkenness,
whoredom, etc.

If thy garments need mending, does not thy life much more?

Thou art ashamed of the nakedness of thy body, and therefore thou put on
apparel. Oh consider if the vildenesse of thy heart, and thy wicked thoughts
and desires were known, or it may be, if that which thou did this last night
were known; what great cause should thou have to be ashamed? God knows it;
put on therefore the Lord Jesus Christ by faith and repentance, that thy
spiritual nakedness may be covered from the sight of God and men.

Have thou put on Christ? wear him honestly and carefully: white garment to be
spotted: otherwise, how will thou be able to bring it forth at the last day.

Muritta a Deacon, baptized one Elpidophorus, who afterward persecuted Muritta
and others: but the Deacon brought out his white garment, and held it up and
shook it against him, saying, These linen garments Elpidophorus shall accuse
thee at the coming of the Judge of all, which I have kept by me as a witness
of thy Apostasy, etc.

Have a care then that thou stain not thy profession, and dishonor his name
after which thou art called. If thou have put on Christ, wallow not with that
precious garment in the mire of thy former sins.

VERSE 14. -- And make not provision for the flesh, to fulfill the lusts
thereof.
THe exhortation to put on Christ, in the former part of the verse, is here
amplified from the Effect of such putting on; which is that we doat not on the
things of this life; and that our care for worldly things abates: He that
puts on Christ is rid of a great deal of care and thought for the flesh.

This Effect is brought in by an Occupation: of which after the exposition of
the words.

These words contain two parts: a Prohibition, Make not provision for the
flesh: and a Limitation, to fulfill the lusts thereof: which limitation is
added, because that which is forbidden is not simply evil.

Flesh: This word is of diverse significations; here it either signifies our
corrupt nature, or the body.

If you take it for nature corrupt; then the second part is an exposition of
the first.

But it is best to take it for the body, as the very words must needs import.

Make not provision: that is, with care, as it was sormerly translated, which
must also be here understood, according, to that of our Savior, Mat. 6.25.
Take no thought for your life, what you shall eat, etc.

To fulfill the lusts. To fulfill, is added, to fill the sense.

Lusts: Lust or concupiscence, is a natural faculty of the soul, desiring
objects convenient to nature, and abhorring the contrary.

That which (...) is in insensible things, in sensible and reasonable creatures
is (...).

This concupiscence or lust, in entire and pure nature was every way ordinate.

In corrupt nature, the faculty it self, as it is natural, is to be reckoned
among natural good things put into us by God; and the motions of it unto
things natural, as desiring of meat drink, sleep, apparel, etc. are
indifferent: but by prauity adherent they are evil three ways.

1 In regard of the object, when that is desired and coueted which is
forbidden; as in the tenth commandment that which is our neighbors.

2 In regard of the measure, as when we immoderately desire that which is
lawful to be desired: when there is no measure of our study for riches, meat
and drink, house and land, etc. as indeed it is very hard to bound our
concupiscence in such things.

3 In regard of the end, when we desire such things, to wrong ends, and not to
the glory of God. in the preservation of nature, for the service of God and of
our neighbor, and the furthering of our own salvation.

This exorbitant and inordinate concupiscence or lust is understood in this
place.

The meaning then is, Provide not so for the body, that thereby the lusts
thereof should be fulfilled and satisfied.

This is brought in by way of preventing an Objection.

Some might say, from the prohibition of drunkenness, and wantonness, etc.
What? must we cast away the care of bodies? is nothing to be granted to our
fragility and infirmity? may we not eat and drink, and be merry?

Paul answers: you may make provision for the body, but with limitation, that
you fulfill not the lusts of the body, which will easily upon a small occasion
grow unruly; as we may discern in our selves, how soon, in the putting on of
a new garment, etc. Corruption will discover it self.

There ought to be a care had of health, and state; of wholesome meat, competent
medicines, comely apparel; but excess is to be taken heed of.

Eat and drink, but not to inflame thy lusts: A little is enough for nature,
but nothing for our lusts.

Make not provision for the body. If Paul had stayed here, he had writ no good
divinity: therefore he adds, to fulfill the lusts thereof; warning us to keep
down concupiscence, and not to set her on cockhorse, as they say.

The body is not so to be tended and provided for that the lusts thereof
should be fulfilled, or strengthened. Mat. 6.25. Take no thought for your life,
what you shall eat, etc. We must not have an immoderate care for necessaries,
much less for superfluities, to the fulfilling of our lusts, Galathians 5.13.
Use not liberty for an occasion to the flesh, Saint Paul there spoke of Legal
ceremonies, and it is true, in all matters of like nature, God has given us
liberty to eat and drink, etc. this liberty is not to be used, to nourish
lust. 1 Peter 2.11. As Pilgrims abstain from fleshly lusts which fight
against the soul. Pilgrims comber not themselves with unnecessary things.

Here we may discern whether we have put on Christ or no: provide not for
the body so as to fulfill our lusts: this is to follow Christ's example.

Christ did eat and drink, but his fare was mean, and moderate; after forty
days fast, he being hungry, would not turn stones into bread, the most
ordinary refection, to retain nature, but stayed for an ordinary provision.

When he was weary how did he provide for his body? John 4.6, 7.
did he take up his Inn, call for dainty cheer, and a soft bed? no; but
rested himself upon a Well, and asked a little water, though there was a good
town hard by.

For his sleep: his body had need of it as well as ours: and besides, his
nature was most pure, and without the danger of inordinate lusting: and yet he
would not follow innocent nature herein, but broke himself of his sleep, to
spend whole nights in prayer to his Father. Luke 6.12.
It may be thou will sleep at a Sermon ordinarily and at prayer. This is not
to be like Christ to put him on.

It is not unlawful to provide for the body: nature her due; or clear his
forehead as they say, and be merry; in which morosities hypocrites feign
perfection. Yea to neglect the body is a sin; if it be not provided for and
nourished, how shall it be a fit instrument of the soul for good? To deny food
and raiment convenient to the necessity of nature, to our callings and estate,
is ostentation and rigidity, rather then true virtue. Our Savior furnished the
feast, Ioh. 2 10. Psalm. 104.13.
with excellent and neat wine, which God created to make the heart of man
glad: and S. Paul reproues such neglecting of the body. Coloss. 2.23.

Saint Augustine writing to Proba a rich Widow, Aug. Probae. ep. 121.
who had a great retinue, and provision for her body, and for her table
suitable; wills her not to cease to be so attended, and served as was fit for
her estate and place; but that she should temper and moderate her self in the
use of them, and to seek nothing therein, but integram valetudinem, quae non
contemnenda propter necessarios vsus huius vitae, good health which is not to
be contemned, for the necessary uses of this life; and he alleges this place.

Also he alleges Paul's advice to Timothy, 1 Timothy 5.23. Drink no longer
water but use a little wine: It was so that Timothy to give an example of
sobriety to the riotous and dissolute Ephesians over whom he was Bishop; did
so take down his body with unreasonable abstinence from wine, and continual
drinking of water; that Paul was feign to write to him, and charge him for his
stomach sake and often infirmities, to drink wine. For such abstaining Saint
Augustine gives the holy Bishop this censure, that he was nimius corporis
castigator; too great a chastiser of his body; for his very studying and
contemplation, with his continual preaching, were sufficient to weaken his
body, though he had not used such abstinence; and for this is wine necessary
for Timothy, for the preservation of his health.

Philosophers affirm that there is but one soul in man, which is both
vegetative, senfitiue, and rational, which together intends to vegetation,
sensation, and understanding: when therefore the soul is wholly busy in the
brain about contemplation, it must needs follow that she cannot attend in the
stomach at the same time to concoction; and so the stomach being destitute of
convenient heat and spirit and the influence of the soul, must needs abound
with crudities: and for this cause Physicians give this rule, to be merry at
meat, that through such remission of study, the soul may attend unto
necessary nutrition; and hence also it comes ordinarily, that great students
have weak stomachs. He therefore who is weary with labor or study, the
spirits languishing thereby, may with a good conscience drink wine, and use
other comforts of Nature, especially if he believe and repent; for God has
created such good things principally for such. That therefore which Saint
Bernard says of Timothy, Sermon. 30. in Cant.
we may say of every Saint: Give me a Bishop or Preacher like to Timothy, or a
holy man like him, and he shall eat gold, and drink Ypocras.

Though we may serve the necessity of the body, lusts: Deus prudenter vult
sibi seruiri; An brosius.
God will have us prudent in serving him: nor by nimity of fasting, nor of
feeding, so to oppress the body, that we must always have a Physician at our
elbow.

We must do wisely: The body is to be served, not the Concupiscence. This is
difficult: if you neglect the body, you weaken it to the exercises of
godliness; if you cherish it, you maintain your enemy, which is lust.

The body is a garment, the lusts are Moaths: kill the Moaths, and save the
garment.

The body is a Castle, the lusts an enemy or rebel within the castle: it were
easy to blow up castle and rebel and all: but thou have no authority to raze
the castle; thou must save the Castle, and destroy the Rebel.

They are to be reproved, which either so nourish the body that they withal
maintain their lusts; or so extinguish the prouocations to sin, that withal
they destroy the body.

Be content with that which is sufficient, and under a pretense of necessity
run not to excess.

As he is a fool which will have no fire in his house, because his neighbors
house was consumed with fire; so is he a fool, who because fire is necessary,
will make so great a fire, as which may burn down his house.

Too much ballast, or too little, are alike hurtful to a ship; so too much or
too little prouender for thy beast: too much or too little straining of the
string of thy instrument.

There is use of Hagar the bondmaid; but cocker her a little, and she will grow
insolent toward her dame Sara.

Ama tanquam osurus; love thy body, but so, that if need require, thou can
hate it: for the compassion of nature, it is to be loved, but for the
restraining of vice, it is to be hated: keep it from the fire, and yet in some
cases yield it to be burnt in the fire. Seneca.


Be not thy bodies slave. Viuendum non propter corpus, sed tanquam non sine
corpore: We must live, not for the body, but as not without the body.

David is a notable example herein; 2 Samuel 23.13.14.15.16.
he longs for water which the Philistines had in their possession; His
Worthies break through and fetch him some of it; when he had it, he would not
please his lusts, but poures it out as an offering to God. See how he curbed
his lusts: The three Worthies did a great exploit, but David a greater in
conquering his concupiscence.

Concupiscence is not fulfilled without a great deal of care in providing
here, torment hereafter.

Esau is weary in following his pleasure, and to satisfy his lust with red
pottage, he sells the richest thing in the world, even his birthright.

Do thou lust after dainty fair? It is not gotten without great charge, nor
made ready without great labor, nor devoured without great discommoditie.

But if Christ be thy meat, he refreshes without satietie, fills without
loathing, costs thee no money, breeds no diseases, but heals thy infirmities.

Do thou desire gorgeous apparel? It costeth thee dear, it requires much
care in the wearing, and occasioneth much danger; but if thou put on Christ, it
costeth thee not dear: great care indeed must be in the wearing, but then it
discharges us of all other unnecessary cares, and it so becomes us, and
sets us forth, that God himself takes pleasure in us.

It requires labor and ear to serve our lusts, and afterward comes
damnation: but though it require care to serve God, yet afterward it brings
everlasting life.

Most men are over careful for their bodies, careless for their souls: Nimia
corporis cura, nimia animae incuria: where there is so much study for dainty
fare, and gay apparel, for house and land, etc. there is little study and care
for grace, and a better life; and so on the contrary.

When Peter saw the heavenly sights in the Mount at Christ's transfiguration,
he forgot his nets; so they which set their mind too much upon their nets,
forget the heavenly things in the mountain.

Abate the care for thy body, and increase thy care for thy soul. Do here as
thou do in a pair of skales: If the body weigh down thy soul; take from
the body, and add to the soul, and then shall it come to pass, that thy
soul shall lift up thy body to heaven, otherwise, thy body will sink thy
soul to hell.

God has committed to our keeping, a body and a soul; the soul as a son,
to be delicately brought up, to be fed with the daintiest, and to be clothed
with the richest: the body as a slave, to be brought up to labor, and to be
fed with bread and water, to be chastised also, and kept under: but we
contrarily cocker the slave till he rebel; and make the son a slave.

But let our bodies serve, lest our concupiscence grow strong to our
condemnation, and whatsoever befall the body, let us take care for salvation
of our souls.

A PLAIN EXPOSITION UPON THE FOVRTEENTH CHAPTER OF THE EPISTLE OF Saint PAVL
to the Romans.
IN this Chapter and part of the next, the Apostle entreats of the use of
things Indifferent, and of Christian liberty; and how Christians, strong and
weak, are to carry themselves therein one to another, that God may have glory,
the Church peace, and themselves mutual comfort.

As there was great need to write of these things in Paul's time; so now also,
because our Church has of late years suffered more about these things, then
about the Articles of the Faith.

The occasion of this passage was this: By reason of the dispersion of the
Jews, the Churches almost in all places consisted of Jews and Gentiles: The
Jews could hardly be brought from the observation of Leuiticall Ceremonies,
being brought up in them from their cradle, as in Ordinances coming from God
himself: and therefore though they entertained the Gospel, yet they held
difference of days and meats, of conscience still necessary to be observed:
The Gentiles were easily persuaded of the Christian liberty from such things
purchased by Christ, and lived without making difference.

Hence grew hot disputations, eager contentions and dissension almost
inreconcileable; the Gentile holding the Jew as superstitious; the Jew the
Gentile as profane.

Paul comes with his bucket to quench this flame, which burnt vehemently in
the Church at Rome, and endeuoreth here as an Vmpire to arbitrate the matter,
and to make a pacification. Although he instanceth in Jewish Ceremonies, yet in
proportion here are Rules concerning all Indifferent things.

VERSE 1. Him that is weak in the faith, receive you, but not to doubtful
disputations.
HEre begin Paul's Hieraticks; or having before written of things commanded
and forbidden; here he writes of things of a middle nature: or before of
charity to our friends, our brethren, our enemies, the Magistrate, our
neighbors, our selves; here of charity toward the weak. The particular and
immediate coherence, Chrysostom. in loc.
is with the last verse of the thirteenth Chapter; for having there forbidden
satisfaction to be given to the flesh, lest either the weak should think
themselves neglected, Matthew. 26.41. Romans 6.19.
or the strong take occasion to contemn them, because weakness is attributed
to the flesh; therefore he falls here to direct both the one and the other,
how they should lovingly and charitably converse together.

Paul's Method is this: first he sets down a general Precept, in this
verse; then an Explication of it in all the verses following to the fourteenth
verse of the fifteenth Chapter.

In this general Precept, are the Duty: to receive him that is weak in the
faith; and the Amplification, from the persons who are to perform the Duty;
implied in the Greek, unfolded in the English, You; and from the end,
Negatiuely set down by way of correction, but not to doubtful Disputations.

Receive you: You, that is, you that are strong, (...) Chap. 15. verse. 1. which
have more able knowledge.

Receive, that is, join unto you, take and entertain unto your company, as a
friend, as a brother. When a friend comes to our houses, we use not to chide
him away, but receive him with all courtesy; so would Paul have the strong to
receive the weak in all love, cherishing them, and bearing with their
weakness, Chap. 15.1.

The same word is used by S. Paul, (...). Philemon. 12.
when he entreats Philemon to receive Onesimus, as his own bowels: so the
strong must receive the weak as their own bowels. Him that is weak in the
faith, not weak in body: yet such are to be received; but in the faith, not
justifying faith, though such are especially to be tendered: but in the doctrine
of faith: not weak in regard of the power of faith to apply the promise of
mercy in Christ to the conscience; but here weak to apprehend the doctrine of
Christian liberty in things indifferent.

Weak: that is, sick and queasie stomachs, which cannot brook strong meat;
such as Paul calls babes in Christ: 1 Cor. 3 1.
opposed to them which are strong and of full age, Heb. 5.13.14.
who by reason of use, have their senses exercised to discern good and evil.

But not to doubtful disputations: (...)signifies many things; here ambiguity
and doubting, as the verb is used before in this Epistle; (...) Romans 4.20.
He staggered not at the promise through unbelief. Receive the weak, but not
quarrel and contend with him in his opinions, as the vulgor reading is
expounded: nor to judge him for his opinions, knowing not his heart, as
Augustine; nor to fill his head full of curious and intricate questions, and
doubtful disputations.

The Affirmative end: to receiu^ him to edification, Chap. 15.2.

Those which are weak are not to be troubled with doubtful disputations, but
friendly to be instructed, Romans 15.1.2. strong are to bear the infirmities of
the weak, and to please them for their good to eaification. Gal. 6.1. If any be
over taken with a fault in regard of manners, or (by proportion) of opinion,
restore him in the spirit of meekness, 1 Thessalonians. 5 14. Support the weak.

Ministers ought to preach to the capacity of their hearers; weaker sort, not
to trouble them with profound matters which they are not able to understand,
much less with conceits and subtilties which profit not; but rather to teach
such things which may be understood, and may breed godly edifying. Our Savior
is an example, who would not trouble his Disciples heads with that which they
could not then bear, Ioh. 16.12. Also Paul in his preaching had regard to his
hearers, whether milk or stronger meat were to be given them, 1 Cor. 3.1.2.

The strong must sweetly, weak, they must join him to them, that by their
wise and gentle courses, they may win him to the truth: they must not
separate from them either in affection, or conversation.

Hence it may appear, that the practice of our Brownists it clean contrary to
the precept of Paul. They suppose themselves to be strong, and us to be weak;
and because we presently receive not their conceits, they separate from us, as
from Heathens and Publicans: for which we may justly suspect their charity; for
if we be weak, here is Paul's direction how we are to be dealt withal before
a separation; they must take us to them, bear with our infirmities, and teach
us soundly from the Word.

But alas, they are weak themselves, I would they were not wayward. For even
as a froward or sullen child, if it may not have the will, refuses the meat,
and strikes the spoone out of the Nurses hand; so these because they may not
have their will and their new devised and groundless discipline, they will
have nothing; no preaching, no Sacraments, no spiritual communion with us.

If the strong must gently take the weak unto them, weak must be admonished
not to be wilful, but aocible and tractable.

What if thou have spoken the word? stubbornly persist not therefore in thy
opinion, against Gods word. Many doubtless would have long ago submitted
themselves in the Church of England to orders enjoined, had they not held the
contrary: and now the Church must be troubled, lest they should be thought to
have erred.

O Germany! famous for the reformation of religion, how have thou been torn
with dissentions, wasted with miseries, plowed with the sword, and watered with
blood, through the weakness of even Luther himself, who having once affirmed
it to Carolostadius, for his credit may not publicly recant, and reuerse his
word.

Be not stubborn in thy weakness, Chrysostom. in loc.
and because Paul commands that thou must be gently used, account not thy
weakness a virtue; for here is a secret reproof of thee, as one observes,
when thou art called weak.

Charity must be used toward thee, that thou may not forsake the faith; but
discretion also, that thou may grow unto strength. We would wonder to see a
child hang five or six, or ten years at the breast. If thou were weak four
or ten years ago, and yet art weak, surely there eis some defect; either thou
prayest not, or thou art stubborn, or proud, or there is some secret sin that
keeps thee from growing.

Disputations: not fit for weak Christians: Disputations are not to be
disallowed; for as the whetting of a knife forward and backward scoures it
bright and begets an edge: so truth is cleared and fortified by disputations:
but it is not for the weak and unlearned to dispute.

The liberty that all sorts of men (and women also) take to dispute of curious
points, and to question every thing, is a great hinderance to the peace of the
Church. In Turkey it is deadly to question the general received religion,
whereby in a liberty of all religions, they enjoy pace inuidenda, I. Lips.
lib. aduersus diologistu^.
and nobis pudenda, such a peace which we may envy, and have just cause to be
ashamed of, as a learned man speaks.

Our Savior often disputed with the Scribes and Pharisees, but he would not
turn his Disciples to them: and Saint Paul a great learned Apostle disputed
daily in the school of Tyrannus. Act. 19.9.


It is not for simple men and ignorant women to dispute of points of religion,
nor to enter combat with the cunning Brownists. It is not for every
Protestant, no not for every Minister or Preacher to dispute with learned
Jesuits, that have School distinctions at their fingers ends, and travel in
nothing else but controversies.

What if thou have a good wit, and a great and strong apprehension, praise God
for it, and so use it that the Church may be the better, not the worse for thee.

I read of a Philosopher among the Lacedaemonians, who boasted that he could
hold argument and dispute of any position true or false a whole day: but the
Magistrates considering that such a fellow might be dangerous among the common
people, to disturb the peace of the state, banished him for it.

Children delight in knives, which will hurt them; and for the most part, the
weakest are busiest in questioning the laudable customs and orders of the
Church.

Study rather to live well then to dispute: and when thou meetest with thy
neighbor, spend thy time in conferring, not of controversies, or of things
which concern thee not, or be above thy capacity, but of obedience,
repentance, mortification, preparation for death, and such like.

VERSE. 2. For one believes he may eat of all things, another who is weak,
eats herbs.
IN this verse begins the Explication of the general precept; of which there
are three parts. A direction to the strong and weak. A special dehortation to
the strong: and a repetition of the precept.

The Direction is from the beginning of this verse to the 13.

The Effect of it is, to remedy the offense between them, by teaching them how
to carry themselves one toward another.

They were both faulty: but in this part principally the weak one is taxed. In
the dehortation the strong.

In the Direction are two things. 1. The cause of their dissension, which was
the diversity of their opinions in things indifferent. 2. The remedy or
direction it self.

Both these are propounded in two cases: the one of meats, the other of days.
Of meats, in the 2.3. and 4. verses: of days in the rest.

In that of meats; we have the case, and the remedy.

The case ver. 2. The remedy ver. 3.4.

In the case are set down the parties dissenting, and their opinions
concerning meats.

The parties are the strong and the weak Christian.

The opinion of the strong; that he may eat of all things: the opinion of the
weak, that he ought not to eat of some meats.

One; that is, the strong: who for the most part was a Gentile.

Believes; it is not only his opinion, but his faith; that is, he certainly
knows, and is fully persuaded upon good ground.

He may eat of all things; he has liberty by Christ to eat of all things
wholesome to man's body, without scruple or hurt to his conscience.

But he that is weak; for the most part, the Jew weak in knowledge.

Eats herbs. Not, let him eat herbs as the vulgar Latin, upon which the
ordinary gloss makes Paul as a Physician directing diet for the repressing of
lust.

But eats herbs, as being of opinion that some meats were unclean, and
therefore not to be eaten.

Some think that these weak ones ate no flesh at all, but only herbs; some,
which is likelier, that when they could come by no meat but that which was
forbidden by Moses, that then they chose to eat of herbs, which we read not
to be forbidden.

They abstained not, as Pythagoreans, holding the passing of men's souls into
beasts sometimes; of which opinion Herod smelt of, when he thought that Christ
had been John: nor as Marcionites and Manichees, who held flesh to be
unlawful, and to have come from an ill beginning; whom Augustine confutes, in
his books against Faustus: but they abstained for the reverence of Moses law.

Some hold opinion, that the Fathers had no liberty to eat flesh before the
flood: and some that no beast was actually carniuorous before that time: But it
is manifest that after the flood, liberty to eat of every moving thing that
lives was granted unto them. De vtroque consule Pererium in Genesim lib. 4. de
creat. hom. number. 256. et lib. 14. de car. esu, nu. 9. ad number. 26. Genesis 9.3.


Afterward, when God chose the people of Israel to be a peculiar people to
himself, he forbad them certain beasts and fowls, both for sacrifice and
(with certain fishes) for meat, of which, Leuit. 11. Deuteronomy. 14.

There are four reasons alleged, why God forbad some fowls, beasts and
fishes, to be eaten of the Jews. First, to acknowledge Gods Dominion.
Secondly, to inure them to obedience. Thirdly, to teach them to live holily,
since their diet must be so choice, much more must their lives. Fourthly, to
distinguish them from other people, and that they might abhor the fashions of
the nations.

This difference of meats was taken away by Christ, Mat. 15.17. Act. 10.11. 1 Timothy 4.4.
and the liberty granted to Noah, renewed, as appears in the New Testament.

But the Jew did not well understand that point, and so the Church of Rome, and
others also were exceedingly troubled.

In the Church of God upon earth there are always some which think one thing,
and some another. So was it in Paul's time at Rome, as appears in this place:
and at Corinth what differences of opinions were about things offered to Idols,
and some maine fundamental points, may appear in Paul's first Epistle to the
Corinthians.

And after this, before two hundred years were expired after the Incarnation
of Christ, what variance in opinions concerning the time of keeping the feast
of Easter was in the Church, Eusebius. bist. eccl. l. 5. ca. 21, 22, 23.
with the arrogance of Victor Bishop of Rome about the same, Eusebius makes
mention. It were infinite to reckon the sundry opinions which have at all times
been in the Church.

In Germany to this day, there is irreconcilable difference of opinions
concerning the presence of Christ in the Sacrament; and concerning the breaking
of the bread, which is doubtless of the integrity of the Sacrament.

And at this very time, none can be ignorant, of the difference of opinions in
the Lowcountries, about the doctrine of Arminians, and in our own Church about
Church Discipline, and ceremonies; though through the great blessing of God,
the vigilant care of our gracious Lord King James, and the worthy diligence of
our Reverend Bishops, and other learned men, both these places are notably
quieted, and estabilished.

But thus it must be to the end, for Paul's reason, viz. That they which are
approved may be made manifest. 1 Cor. 11.19.


Saint Paul attributes faith to the strong: from the weak though he mention
it not, faith in them, though joined with ignorance and doubting: Not to
believe and understand every thing infers not a nullity of faith.

Total ignorance and doubting destroys faith; if it be not total, yet it
manifests infirmity.

To deny a truth in things indifferent, breeds a tolerable error; in points
necessary, an intolerable. Obstinately to defend an error in things
indifferent, makes a man a Schismaticke; and in points necessary and
fundamental, an Heretic.

For every doubting or ignorance, say not, an infidel; nor for every error,
cry out an Heretic: Augustinus.
Let us all resolve with the holy Father, Errare potero, haereticus non ero. I
may err, but I will be no Heretic.

Such is the condition of the Church upon earth, some strong in the faith, and
some weak in it. As among men, some are tall, some of low stature; some
healthy, some sickely; as in our houses some are grown up, some are babes
hanging on the breast, so is it in the Church, and will be to the end. For,

1 Some are more ancient, some later in the faith.

2 Some have better capacity then others.

3 Some are more diligent to hear, read, pray, meditate, practice; and
therefore though standing and capacity be equal, yet the diligent outstrips
the other.

4 God in his wisdom gives more talents unto one then to another.

Art thou strong? be thankful to God, it is his gift; be not proud, despise
not thy inferiors; thou wast a babe sometime, had less knowledge, less
grace, yea there was a time when thou wast out of Christ.

Art thou weak? take heed thy weakness continue not through thy negligence
and default: pray for strength, and be diligent in hearing the word, as a newborn babe desiring the sincere milk of the word, that thou may grow
thereby. 1 Pet. 2^2.


In these weak ones, as some thing is to be discommended, some thing is to be
commended.

Their weakness is a fault and to be discommended: but their care not to
offend their consciences, is truly to be praised: It is always commendable,
whether in weak or strong, rather to abridge our selves of our liberty, then
to offend the conscience: and to be chosen, rather to be thought indiscreet
then impious.

O that we had more care of our consciences; for if conscience be put away,
shipwreck of faith will soon be made.

If these Jews and weak Christians will rather live hardly eating herbs,
then defile their consciences; what shall become of them, which daily defile
themselves in things manifestly forbidden, wallowing in the mire of
drunkenness, whoredom, and other abominable sins?

VERSE 3. Let not him that eats, despise him that eats not: and let not him
which eats not, judge him which eats: --
THe cause of the dissension between the believers at Rome, was their
difference in opinion, of which in the verse next before: Now in this verse is
the remedy; For here Saint Paul interposeth himself, and directs both parts,
how to carry themselves each to other, in these things.

Here are two parts: 1. A Direction; 2. A Reason.

The Direction in the words set down of the 3. verse.

As the parties are twofold, so is the direction to the strong, to the weak:
both tending to the same purpose, namely to preserve peace and charity betwixt
them; and to prevent separation.

The strong Christian contemned the weak for his abstinence, as a fantastical
fellow and superstitious: his direction is: not to despise the weak.

The weak Christian, which yet understood not the Doctrine of Christian
liberty, judged and censured the strong, as profane, because he made no
difference of meats: his direction is: not to judge the strong.

Both their directions are Negative, as secretly finding fault with both sides,
for their intemperate carriage one to another.

Despise. The Greek word is full of sense: (...).
to esteem a man to be nullius pretij, to have no worth in him, to disdain,
to vilify, to nullify a man, to set at naught, and basely to esteem of.

The Septuagint do use the word in the text, to render an Hebrew root, Maas,
which signifies to reject, to disdain, to cast off, to contemn: as Psalm.
53.5. God has despised the wicked: and Psalm. 58.7. Let them melt away as
waters, or, let them come to nothing.

So also they render another root: Bazah, Esaias, 53.3. Nibhzeh, He is despised,
meaning Christ: and Luke 23.11. it is said that Herod with his men of war,
set Christ at naught.

Judge: that is, condemn: the simple verb for the compound, which is not
unusual with Saint Paul.

By these two words, despise and judge, it appears, that they differed not
only in opinion, but also in affection.

For difference of opinion and practice in things indifferent, there ought to
be no breach of charity, or separation among Christians: Phil. 3.15.16. Let us
therefore as many as be perfect be thus minded, and if in any thing ye be
otherwise minded, God shall reveal even this unto you. Nevertheless whereto
we have already attained, let us walk by the same rule. Also all such places
which command unity and charity.

But what are things indifferent?

Things are called indifferent two ways, opposed to perfection of goodness,
or to necessity.

For the first way; we say a thing is indifferent when it is in some degree
good, but not so good but that it may be amended; so we say of health, that we
are indifferently well, when we are able to walk abroad, but not without some
weakness or pain.

This is not meant in this business, but the other, where indifferent is
opposed to necessity, or to a necessary duty, namely, A thing that may be
done, or left undone without any sin.

Some things are commanded to be done, some things are forbidden: some things
are neither commanded nor forbidden: These are indifferent.

The ground of this is, that howsoever the Law commands the reasonable creature
to do nothing but that which is good, and at all times, yet not to do every
good thing at all times.

A man has two suits of apparel, he may indifferently wear which he
pleases. A man has meat set before him, he may indifferently eat or
abstain: these and the like are indifferent: neither good nor bad in
themselves, nor commanded nor forbidden.

For although every action, considered as clothed with its circumstances (as
they say) proceeding from the reason of a reasonable creature, be or good or
evil, yet being considered naked, and in regard of the substance of the work,
is not presently necessary to be done.

The things called indifferent, (...).
are also by the Ancient called things in our power and liberty: and, things
lying in the midst between commanded and forbidden.

In the time of S. Paul the Jewish ceremonies were things indifferent, which
might be used or not used, as they saw it tend to Gods glory and the good of
the Church: otherwise Paul would have written in another manner of strain. And
this is profitable to know for the understanding of the History of the Acts,
where we shall find Paul using Circumcision, making vows, and purifying
himself, and yet writes against such things in his Epistles.

Before the death of Christ the use of such Ceremonies was not indifferent but
necessary, as being commanded of God.

After the death of Christ their use was indifferent for a time, Aug.
Hieronimo, Epist. 19.
I say for a time, which S. Austen elegantly expresses by a similitude: A man's
friend dies, he does not so soon as the breath is out of his body take him by
the heels and drag him out of the doors, and cast him upon the dunghill; but
he keeps him a certain time, wraps him in fair clothes, and so with honor
accompanies him to the grave: So these ceremonies were alive till Christ; when
he dyed they also gave up the ghost, and the veil of the Temple rent in
twain: and because they had been even by divine ordinance of great use in
Gods worship, they remained for a time indifferent, that so they might be laid
down in an honorable manner.

This time was till the doctrine of Christian liberty might be fully made
known to the world, which could not be done on a sudden: even as Acts of
Parliament have a day set down when they shall be in force, that so all the
subjects of the Land may have time convenient to take knowledge of them.

But now they are not necessary, nor indifferent to Jew or Gentile, but
absolutely forbidden. After the passion of Christ, the Jewish Ceremonies were
mortuae, says a learned man, that is, Aquinas in loc.
dead: but after the diuulgation of the Gospel, they became mortiferae, that
is, deadly.

Paul found fault with Peter, and with the Galathians, for the use of legal
Ceremonies: not simply because they used them, but because they taught and
conceived a necessity of using them for justification and salvation.

From small beginnings great schisms and mischiefs have grown. For a little
meat, and for days, East and West Churches for trifles: so in Germany, so in
England. So of a little spark many times arises a great fire, and of the
prick of a thorn a deadly sore.

O how it grieves my soul to read our divisions about black and white,
sitting and kneeling, and such like, to be cast in our teeth by the Papists; as
an argument that we have not the truth on our side: and also that among
Protestant writers, when occasion is given them to speak of schisms and
dissension for discipline and order, then that the Church of England should be
brought upon the stage for an example.

If there be any love in us to the Church wherein we have been brought forth
unto Christ, and nourished up in the faith, let us agree, embracing unity, let
us all be of one opinion: but howsoever our opinions differ, yet let not our
affections. Hierome and Augustine differed in opinion in some things, but
neither did they trouble Church, nor break charity between themselves; but
thought reverently one of another.

Here is our fault; we hate, despise, and condemn them who will not
condescend to us in our singular opinions.

But Paul commands the strong not to despise the weak: This is indeed the
fault of the strong, but they ought to instruct them rather.

He commands the weak also, not to censure the strong: this is the proper
fault of the weak; to be forward in censuring, is not strength but weakness,
not a gracious and wise, but an intemperate zeal: which censuring and over
forward zeal, if it be taken from many who glory to be accounted Professors,
there would nothing remain to show them religious.

It is a disgrace to our Church, that the plough and rockstaffe dare (and that
without punishment) censure Magistrates, Ministers, this thing as superfluous,
that as Antichristian, etc. profaning religion by their ignorant and sottish
discourses.

Thus was it in Greece: Lips. refert, lib. aduers. Dialogistam: ex Niceph.
hist. lib. 6. and 11.
but when? even a little before it came to ruin.

If we wish the Churches safety, let us amend this, if we have been faulty:
and also let us be careful so to do, as we love our own safety; for many
times God suffers such rash censurers of orders established, to run into
diverse pernicious errors, as a punishment of their rash judgment, as we have
experience in our Brownists, who first censured, and then separated, wilfully
cutting themselves from the Church of God: who if they had obeyed Paul's
precept, forbidding to judge any for things indifferent, they had never
separated.

We must not judge or censure our brethren: indifferent: for these things, as
for meat, for days, for apparel in regard of the color, or fashion (if
modest;) the conscience of thy brother is to be left free, and not to be
troubled. But for drunkenness, blasphemy, whoredom, etc. we have warrant to
censure men and women, and to trouble their consciences, Ioh. 16.8.
for the Spirit reprooues the world of sin.

A conscience snorting in sin, is to be rowsed and troubled that it may come
to repentance; for so long as it sleeps in sin, it lies in death.

For peaceable living in a Church, Christian liberty is to be made known; of
the which afterward, verses 20.21.

VERSE. 3. -- For God has received him.
IN these words, and in the next verse, are two reasons to persuade to the
direction.

There is some question to which part this reason should serve; and who should
be meant by him.

Him: that is, the weak one, say some: others by him understand the strong
Christian.

Some make this argument to be on the behalf of the weak, and the other of
the strong: some affirm contrarily: and some that both the reasons belong to
both.

Doubtless both the reasons are brought to the same thing, Chrysostom. Theod. Mart.
and alij.
and rather in the behalf of the strong Christian, who is the Gentile, against
the Jew, then otherwise.

1 For first, it is most natural and orderly, that him should be preferred to
the next before spoken of: Let not him which eats not, judge him which eats,
for God has received him.

2 The word received properly belongs to the Gentiles, as it is an attribute to
God; for the Jews were received before, and thought more contemptuously of the
Gentiles, and highly of themselves.

3 In the next verse, Who art thou that iudgest? to judge was the fault of the
weak Christian.

Does Paul then let the strong alone? No: but first he deals against the
weak, because he is most guilty. They both sinned in practice; but the weak
in opinion also, mantaining an intolerable error; and they took offense at
that which the strong lawfully might do, and therefore were the cause of all
the broils.

Afterward he deals against them both, verse 10. and principally against the
strong, verse 13. and so to the end of the Chapter.

The weak then may not judge the strong for eating: The reason is taken from
the dignity of the strong: God has received him. Those whom God has received,
men may not censure as profane:

But God has received the Gentile, called strong by reason of his knowledge of
Christian liberty. Therefore, etc.

In this argument are two things: The thing, to receive; and the persons
receiving, God received the strong.

God has received him: we had the word before, verse 1. but as Gods love is
greater then ours, so the sense of this word here is accordingly ex^ended.

Received; that is, lovingly, to the good of the received, vt suus esset,
Anselmus. Aretius. Ambrosius. Toletus. Caluinus. 2 Pet. 1.4.
that he might be his own: vt membrum Christi esset, that he might be a
member of Christ: ad gratiam, to grace: ad gratiam Euangelij, to the grace of
the Gospel. He suffered them not to remain in their sinner, but so received
them as to adopt them, that they might be partakers of the divine nature, as
S. Peter speaks.

It may be noted, that whereas David says, Blessed is the man whom thou
chusest, and causest to approach unto thee, Psalm. 65 4. The Septuagints
translate, (...), according to Paul's word here: which in Hebrew is vthekareb,
of karab: from which root comes Korbau, an offering: and Kereb, bowels or
inward parts, that are nearest and dearest to us: and so the meaning, that God
does so receive us Gentiles, as to esteem us as an acceptable oblation, even
as his own heart, or bowels.

There is a double receiving: to the visible Church; to inward and invisible
grace: to the means of the promises, and to their possession: here Paul speaks
generally presupposing both.

They are not rashly to be judged and condemned, whom God has received to
grace, Romans 8.33.34. Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods elect? It is
God that justifies: who is he that condemns? etc.

We are to be admonished, censuring our brethren for using their Christian
liberty in apparel, diet, etc. especially for their obedience to the
Magistrates, and the Church, in such orders which in their conscience they know
to be lawful: for a man for such things to be condemned, as a timeseruer, a
manpleaser, of no conscience, profane, etc. is most horrible.

This is to reproach Gods favorite; this is to condemn them whom God
approves, and has received: yea this is to reproach God himself for
receiving such.

Nay: thou will say, I find no fault with the Lord, and if I knew that God had
received him, I would not judge him. Do thou know the contrary? till then
thou must in charity judge thy brother received of God: so does Paul here, he
says God has received him that eats. How did Paul know it? in charity he
so judges: Be thou in like manner charitable toward thy brethren, toward thy
teachers, and give them not profane, unconscionable, damned, for every fancy of
thine own brain.

When thou see a man enlightened with the knowledge of God, satis testimonij
habes, says one, Calvin. in loc.
thou have testimony sufficient that God has received him.

Things censured, are either words and deeds, or opinions.

If it be doubtful whether a thing were spoken or done, or no: or being
certain to be done, whether well or ill: in charity take things at the
fairest, and judge the best. There is a notable instance hereof in Deuteronomy;
Deuteronomy. 22.23.24.25.26.27.
If a man lie with a maid betroathed to a husband, in the town, she also
shall dye, because she cried not out when violence was offered to her: but if
it be in the fields, then the man only shall dye, for the damsel cried, and
there was none to save her. How did they know she cried? In charity it is so to
be supposed, and the best to be judged in a thing doubtful.

If the thing be certainly spoken or done, and good, commend it. If evil,
judge the fact but not the person. Be not faith Bernard, either a busy and
curious examiner, Bern. ser. 40. in Cant.
or a rash Judge of another man's conversation. If any thing be ill done, excuse
the intention seeing thou can not the fact. Puta ignorantiam, think it might
be ignorance, chance, or some grievous tentation.

In matter of opinion, if it be controuerted, and uncertain whether an error
or no, suspend thy judgment till thou know more certainty, and leave thy
brother to his Conscience and Christian liberty: and so much the more, if he be
more learned then thy self; why should thou not think that he may see as
much as thy self into that which is in question.

If it be certain that the opinion be erroneous; yet thy brother is not
presently to be cast away: will thou be more just then God? We are men, and
therefore may, yea must err, as said a witty man Ego me labi and errare non
posse solum fatcor, sed debere: Lips. monit. ad Lect. in lib. politic.
.

And hence the Lutheranes are to be reproved, who condemn us for our opinions
about the Sacrament, thinking we err; when a man may be a Christian without
the Sacrament, but not without Charity: So the Brownists and other among us who
judge us, though unjustly, in matters of discipline, when a true Church may be
without the same which they devise.

We all err; if thy brother be otherwise faithful, and conscionable ^^^s
cruel uncharitableness to condemn him for his ^pinion of things indifferent,
as the lawfulness of a garment, or gesture, though he should err.

Saint Augustine is a sweet example of Charity this way: when the Donatists
objected for themselves the opinion of Cyprian concerning rebaptization; Aug.
Vincentio contra Donat. and Ragat. de vi orrig. Haeret. epist. 48.
Saint Austen answers for him; that either he did not in every respect hold it
as the Donatists alleged him; or if he did, that afterward he retracted it;
or that hunc quasi naenum candidissimi pectoris cooperuit vbere Charitatis, he
covered this blemish of his most fair breast, with the breast of charity; while
he did maintain the unity of the Church, and firmly retain the bond of peace.

Gods receiving should be a Protection against unjust taxing and censuring: nor
God, nor thy conscience condemn thee, esteem the perverse censures of
captious controllers no more then the barking of dogs against the Moon. What
if men praise if God dispraise? and contrarily: Fear not, says the Lord, the
reproach of men, Esaias 51.7.
neither be afraid of their reuilings.

Yet this is our great fault, to esteem the praise or dispraise of men, yea of
the multitude, more then of the Magistrate or of God himself; which has
deprived the Church of England of many an able Yeacher.

Let us put a case. The Magistrate and the Church command certain orders for
comeliness in the service of God: the Minister knows that he may lawfully use
them. If he refuse to use them, the people will praise him; if he use them,
they will dispraise him.

What shall he do? In any case let him obey, but if he do not obey, the
people will commend him. But what is that to the cause, or to his conscience?
Can they discharge a man before the Judgment seat of God, for not obeying the
Church and Magistrate?

Regard not the praises of the multitude, though there were ten thousand of
them, no more then thou would the chattering of Pyes, says an ancient
Father Sint innumeri qui te applaudant, nihil tame^ illi omnes a graculis
desuper garrientibus different. Immo si Angelorum theatru^, etc. Chrysostom. hom.
17. in Romans in Moral.
: nay the commendation of Angels is too infirm to rest upon; but if God, the
Church, and thine own conscience approve thee, rejoice.

Great is the dignity of a believer, he is received of God: people, are a
people, Rerobo, near unto him, Psalm. 128.14.
even near unto his heart.

Woe be then to the wicked, for they are rejected: If thou be a drunkard, a
blasphemer, etc. and repentest not, God will never receive thee: and not being
received, thou art left to thy self, to the Devil; barred from Paradise, and
from the entrance into glory.

VERSE 4. Who art thou that iudgest another mansseruant? --
IN this Verse is the second Reason, bred out of the former: If the Gentiles be
Gods favorites, and received into his family, what have we to do to judge them?

Here we have the Argument, and the Amplification.

The Argument is taken from the common right or equity; which is, that every
man has the rule and ordering of his own family; and that none ought to be so
polypragmaticall, as to judge other men's servants.

He which arrogateth right over other men's servants, is unjust:

But he that judges another man's servant, arrogateth to himself such right:

Therefore he is unjust.

The strong Christian is Gods servant who has received him.

The Amplification is double: 1. from the manner of setting down the Argument:
2. from an Occupation, in the rest of the words of this verse.

In setting down the Argument, the Apostle uses an Obiurgatory Apostrophe to
the weak one: Who art thou which iudgest, etc.

He does more grievously tax the weak ones, ne sibi blandiantur, Pareu^.
says one, lest they should flatter themselves. Thus severity was necessary
that they might understand they were in an error.

Who art thou? as if he said: Thou? who art thou? art not thou weak? and so
much the weaker, that being weak thou presumest to judge the strong: why do
not keep thy self within thy compass? Consider what thou art, and be not so
rash. The like speech, Romans 9.20.

Which iudgest: that is, condemnest: as before.

Another man's servant. The word is not (...), but (...), which signifies a
domestical servant, which always waits upon his master in such services as
are nearest to his person.

The Gentile is taken into Gods family, not as a slave, but as a free servant;
and therefore such in old time were called familiares, noting their liberty:
and indeed, Gods service is perfect freedom.

The Gentiles are received into Gods family with the Jews, not to be their
underlings, but their fellow servants, enjoying all the privileges of the
house as well as themselves.

He says not who art thou which give good counsel, but iudgest; nor thine
own servant, for that is lawful; but another, this is unlawful.

It is against right that one Christian should judge another: Mat. 7.1.2. Judge
not that ye be not judged, For with what judgment ye judge, ye shall be
judged, etc. James 4.11.12. He that judges his brother, judges the Law, but
if thou judge the Law, thou art not a doer of the Law, but a Judge. There is
one Lawgiuer, who is able to save and to destroy: who art thou which iudgest
another?

It is a great sin for a weak Christian to judge another for matters
indifferent: it can be no small offense, Paul's manner of speaking, Who art
thou, etc. he speaks with much indignation and heat: No Apostle so full of
bowels so pitiful and tender toward the weak, as Paul, yet if they fall to
censuring and judging, he cannot forbear, but takes them up as short as he
did the cauiller at Gods predestination, Cap. 9.20. So that as the fault is
great, so weak Christians are not to be soothed herein, but severely and with
some acrimony to be reproved that they may amend.

Julian the Apostata, taxed Christianity, Anabaptists also from such places
conclude that it is not lawful for a Christian to be a Magistrate, because
he is forbidden to judge.

But they take things which are spoken secundum quid, after a sort, as if they
had been spoken simply.

Neither is Judgment forbidden to Magistrates, but to private men; nor all
Judgment to private men, but rash.

Judgment may be either of persons or their deeds:

In persons; their present or their future estate to be considered: To judge
finally of men's future estate meddle not; for God may call thy Neighbor as he
has called thee.

For his present estate: If I see a man walk in drunkenness, common swearing,
whoredom, etc. I may judge him to be a wicked man in this estate; and that he
shall be damned if he repent not: I may judge the tree by the fruit: and this
is not rash judgment, because it is not mine, but the judgment of the word of
God.

Deeds are either good, or bad, or indifferent, or doubtful. Of good and bad
deeds, there ought to be Judgment in the Commonwealth, Church, private
Family.

And that censure should pass upon men's virtues, arts, faculties, offices,
religion, words, deeds, gestures, and whole behavior, is of singular use.

Most well governed States have had officers for the purpose; The Grecians had
such, whom they called (...), Lawkeepers: The Egyptians had their (...),
Presidents of the Law: The Romans had their Censors, censurers of manners who
examined and punished all disorders: If a man tilled not his land, Aulus
Gellius Noct. Attic. lib. 4. c. 12. and 20.
dressed not his Vine; If a Knight kept not his horse serviceable, etc.

It were to be wished that we had such Officers created among us, or that such
Officers as we have already would more carefully see to their offices.

We ought to commend good deeds, and to reprove bad; to call a mattocke a
mattocke, with Alexanders Soldiers, we need not fear.

But things doubtful and indifferent are to be free from our censure: Charity
authorizeth thee from the first; and Christian liberty thy neighbor from the
second: and in these has the Apostles obiurgation place: Who art thou that
iudgest such things?

A believer is Gods servant: servant seems to imply some baseness; but indeed
there is nothing more honorable then to be Gods servant: A mortal Kings
servant is honored; much more is Gods.

David gloried in that title; Psalm. 116.16.
and so did the Apostles; Paul a servant, Peter a servant, James a servant of
God, as may be seen in their Epistles. Justinian the Emperor, being the
greatest and first on earth, yet was wont to style himself in his Letters
thus, Vltimus Dei seruus, the lowest or last servant of God.

Thou were the slave of Satan, thou art now by faith become the servant of God:
Thou have a good Master, be thou a good servant, hear his Word, attend upon
him, obey him, and that cheerfully in this honor, who did cheerfully obey
Satan in that baseness.

We cannot add to the honor of our Master: let us not dishonor him, by
causing his Gospel to be ill spoken of by our lewd conversation.

We are fellow servants, serving one Master;

No man will endure a finde-fault in his house, much less will God: Thou art
but a servant, and it may be a weak one, the masters house is not to be
ordered by thy will, but by the Masters; If he blame not things done, why
should thou? If the Master give me liberty, why should thou restrain?

If thou will be judging and censuring, shake thine own bosom; look to thy
own servants; look to, and judge thy self.

Judas judged the waste, but not his own conetousnesse; the Pharisees judged
their neighbors moats, but not their own beams: First judge thy self, and
then either thou will have no leisure, or be the fitter to judge thy neighbor.

Why beholdest thou the moat in thy brothers eye, Mat. 7.3.4.5.
and considerest not the beam in thine own eye? Thou Hypocrite, first cast
out the beam out of thine own eye, etc.

Hear O thou that iudgest, and consider strange things:

It is strange that thou should have a beam in thine eye:

It is strange that a moat should hurt thy neighbors eye, and not a beam
thine own.

Also strange, that having a beam in thine own eye, thou should discern
the moate in thy neighbors eye: But indeed, only such do spy moats: for he
that has not a beam in his eye, has Charity there, and Charity covers a
multitude of sins.

The eye sees not it self, but the eye of a righteous man being cured, sees
and considers himself more then others.

A just man is the seuerest Judge of himself.

Pray for thy brother, Judge thy self.

VERSE 4. -- To his own Master he stands or falls: yea, he shall be
holden up, For God is able to make him stand.
IN these words is the second Amplification of the second Argument: and it is
the preventing of an Objection, which weak Christians might or did make in
defense of their judging their Brethren.

For this is our corruption, that though we be weak, yet we are loath to be so
accounted, thinking it a discredit to acknowledge that we have erred, though
by our errors the whole Church be troubled; when as the most glorious victory
in this kind is, to suffer our selves to be overcome of the Truth.

In this occupation, are, the Objection, the Answer.

The Objection not set down, but understood, and easisily gathered.

The weak Christian would justify his Censuring of the strong, from the
benefit of his brother, thus:

It is profitable for my brother that his fault should be corrected, and taken
away; and it is for his advantage to stand, and not to fall: Therefore etc.

To this Paul answers: of which answer there are two parts; a Concession, and
a Correction.

The Concession gathered, as if he should say; I confess it is a great
blessing for a servant to stand, and not to fall.

The Correction plainly set down; but he stands or falls, not to thee, but
to his own Master: Thou have nothing to do with it; look thou to thine own
standing: Art thou more careful of his standing then his Master.

Seruus est veluti pars domini sui, sed a corpore secuncta: The servant is a
part of his master^: it is his part to ouersee him, and to judge as he pleases.

To stand or fall: is to do well, or otherwise: to stand or fall to his
master, is to please or displease: To the master belongs either the advantage
or the damage of that which the servant does.

To his ownemaster: (...), to his proper master, not only as opposed to one
who is not his master, but to note also that God is properly our Master, by
creation, preservation, redemption.

Now this Answer is amplified in the words following:

Yea he shall be hold^^ up, For God is able to make him stand.

These words are a Correction of the falling mentioned; He falls to his own
Master.

As if he should say; Did I say he falls? Nay, he shall be holden up, for
God is able, etc.

In which words is an Affirmation; He shall be holden up, and a Confirmation
from the power of God: God is able to make him stand.

The Jew seeing the Gentile use his Christian liberty, in meats and days,
judged him profane, and began to fear his Apostasy: Now the Apostle says,
he shall be established even herein: For God is able to do it.

Yea, Able; but aposse ad esse, is no sound Collection: yes, if we be certain
of Gods will withal; which here appears, for God has received him.

In all promises and threatenings the will of God is to be supposed: as if I
say to a Penitent sinner: Thou shall be forgiven, for God is able to forgive
thee; or if I say to a Drunkard, if thou repent not, thou shall be damned, for
God is able to damn thee, the Consequence holds, because God has revealed
his will in these things.

But if, I say, God can make many worlds, therefore there are many, or God can
transubstantiate the bread in the Lords Supper, and turn it into the very
flesh of Christ, really and corporally, therefore it is so turned, this holds
not, because God has no where revealed that so he will do.

He shall be stablished, for God is able, etc. not that every one which is
called, and understands the Doctrine of Christian liberty shall be saved,
but it is spoken, either in regard of the Gentiles in general, or only of the
predestinate, or, Aquinas.
not of that which God will do, but of that which we are to hope and pray for
in every singular, whom we see to have received the beginnings of grace:
Pareus.
or not of final perseverance, but of standing in some particular thing.

The censure and judgment of men's deeds and behavior pertains to God:
Matthew. 18.23. and Matthew. 25.14.19. where the King or Lord is brought in, taking
account of his servants; for as it appears in that of the Talents, the
diligence or negligence of the servants, is to the Masters either benefit or
loss.

This Doctrine takes not away charitable reproof of my brother, if he offend,
doing that which is evidently contrary to Gods word; but it takes away rash
judgment concerning things indifferent, which are not commanded or forbidden
in Gods word.

Condemn no man for the lawful use of things indifferent, charitably: If thou
see thy brother standing, wish his establishing; if falling, pray for him,
and despair not of his rising again; considering not his Humane condition,
but the Divine virtue.

It was an excellent speech of M. Calvin. in locum.
Calvin: Semper been speremus de eo in quo cernimus aliquid Dei: Let us always
hope well of him, in whom we see any grace of God, though the least tokens of
adoption: It is our fault to require that every man by and by should be as
Paul, or Abraham; but God accepts of the least grace, if it be in truth: Let
us therefore be charitable.

Our deeds belong to God; he receives either profit or damage by them, but
our selves.

Not as we are benefited or hindered by our servants, Plato in Euthyphrone.
(...). Aug. de Genesis ad lit. lib. 8. cap 11. Jrenaeus aduers. Haereses, l. 4. c.
31.
so is God by us; godliness is grateful to him, but not profitable; as on the
contrary, sin is hateful, but not hurtful to him.

Ille seruitute nostra non indiget, nos vero dominatione illius indigemus,
says Saint Augustine, we need such a Master, he needs not such servants. To
this purpose also Irenaeus in a certain chapter, showing that God commands
that we should love him, not that he wants our love, sed homini deest gloria
Dei, etc. but we want his glory, which we by no means can be partakers of,
but by loving and obeying him; Ibid. ap. 32.
and a little after, that God commanded sacrifices, not for his gain, but to
honor us, and to have occasion to bestow his benefits upon us.

So Eliphaz to Job: Can a man be profitable to God, Job 22.2, 3.
as he that is wise may be profitable to himself? Is it any pleasure to the
Almighty that thou art righteous? or gain to him, that thou make thy ways
perfect?

And thus Elihu also to him: If thou sinnest, Job 35 6, 7, 8.
what do thou against him? etc. If thou be righteous, what give thou him?
etc. Thy wickedness may hurt a man as thou art, etc. but not God.

If thou do well, God will bless thee: if ill, he will slay thee, not as a
King does a traitor, because he fears him, but to manifest his justice.

Do well, because God acknowledges it: Do not ill, because thou fallest to
God.

Remember thou wretch, when thou art drunk, blasphemest, etc. to whom thou
fallest; even to thine own Master, to whom thou art bound a thousand ways; to
such a Master, as is able to kill body and soul, and throw them into hell; to
such an one, as has and is ready to offer grace, if thou repentest, seeking
thy good thereby, not his own.

O how this wounded David's heart, when he fell, he fell to God: Against thee,
thee only, have I sinned, etc. Psalm. 51.4.
So this broke the Prodigals heart, it was his Father, whom he had offended.

We have a Lord, who stands not for a Cyphar, but who will call us to account.

Let us so live, as remembering we must give up an account, and that to God.

Here is comfort; he that stands shall be stablished: To him that has shall
be given.

We have a loving and bountiful Master, who is able and willing to promote us
in the grace he has bestowed.

He is not so able, but we stand in as much need: we are weak, we cannot
bear a cross word; every little temptation foyleth us; pray to him who is
able, and has promised: 2. Tim. 1.12.
He is able to keep that which thou have committed unto him unto that day.

God is only able to make us stand,

Man falls by his own will and weakness, but he stands by the will and
power of God.

If God forsake, they which stand must fall, and they which fall must perish
for ever.

If Christ had not held Peter, he had sunk to the bottom; and if God had not
raised David, he had layne in his sin to this day.

Let him that thinks he stands, 1 Cor. 10.12.
take heed lest he fall.

It is fearful to be without grace, but to fall from grace much more.

What is then to be done? Pray, hear the Word, come to the Lords Table, and
receive his holy Supper: for this especially was instituted, for our
establishing and confirmation.

If thou come to the holy Communion with faith and repentance, This was
preached a few days before a Communion.
thou shall receive strength against Satan, against sin, against thy
corruptions.

Feel thou thy self weak? come that thou may be strengthened: Cypr. l.
4. Epist. epist. 6.
Art thou afraid of persecution? consider, Te calicem sanguinis Christi bibere,
vt possis et ipse propter Christum sanguinem fundere, That thou drinkest of the
Chalice of Christ's blood, that thou thy self might be able to shed thy
blood for Christ, says Cyprian.

Would thou that the Devil should be more afraid of thee, then thou of him?
Come to that holy Sacrament in faith and repentance, and it shall so come to
pass: For Quasi leones ignem spirantes ab illa mensa recedimus Daemonibus
terribiles: Chrysostom. hom. 61 ad pop. Antioch.
As lions breathing fire, we go from that Table, terrible even to the Devils
themselves, says Chrysostom.

If the woman which touched the Hemme of Christ's garment, Matthew. 9.21.
was made whole of her infirmity; much more they which touch, and eat the
very body of Christ by faith, shall be confirmed in spiritual health.

VERSE. 5. One man esteems one day above another; another esteems every day
alike. Let every man be fully persuaded in his own mind.
HEre is the second instance of Days; where we have the Case, and the Remedy
or Direction.

In the case we have two things: First, what days are meant. Second, what was
the opinion of each part, concerning such days.

Concerning the first; neither is here meant an observation of fasting days
appointed by the Church.

Nor the Civil difference of days, when some are set apart, for trading,
proceeding in law, etc.

Nor natural, observed by the husbandman, for plowing and sowing his corn,
planting, grafting.

Nor Medicall, for opening a vein, purging, etc.

Nor Astrologicall, whereby some are fained to be good and fortunate, some to
be evil and unfortunate.

But such an Observation is here meant, whose end is reputed to be the worship
of God; yea where the very observation of the Day is so esteemed.

For the second, some have applied the first point of the case to the strong,
understanding it of our Sabbath, the proper feast of Christians; One man, that
is, say they, the strong, esteems the Lords day to be precisely kept above
others. Others apply the same to the weak, concluding therefrom the abrogation
of the Sabbath.

But the first, to esteem one day above another, is the opinion of the weak
one, and to esteem every day alike, the opinion of the strong. And the days
here spoken of are the Jewish ceremonial holy days, appointed to be kept over
and above the Sabbath prescribed in the 4. Commandment.

Now the Jews, being trained up in the observation of such solemn feasts,
ordained of God, thought reverently and holily of them: not understanding that
they were as shadows now abrogated; and therefore they censured all them which
did not observe them.

But on the other side, the strong Christian knowing that such differences had
an end in Christ for observation of them despised the Jews.

The Ebionites both observed the Jewish holy days and our Sunday, Eusebius. hist.
ccel. l. 3. c. 24.
so also do the Aethiopians at this day.

The same Doctrine arises from hence, which we had, verse 2.

The direction follows, which is double; First, how each of them should carry
themselves toward themselves in particular. Secondly, how each to other.

The first is in these words: Let every man be fully persuaded in his own
mind: which is a caution to each severally, wherein we have the Thing, full
persuasion; amplified, by the subject, in his own mind. The Persons, every one.

Be fully persuaded in his own mind: The vulgar read it, abound in his own
sense; which a libertine might lay hold on, to be of any, or no religion. But
neither are the words so rendered, nor the sense: To abound in ones own sense,
is the part of one addicted to his own conceit, or much affected to an
unlimited liberty. We may not abound in a false sense: it is not to be
permitted in points of doctrine; though in things indifferent some such thing
be implied in the next verse.

To be fully persuaded, is by good arguments out of the word to be assured,
that that which we do, is neither displeasing to God nor contrary to his Word:
It is not enough, if the conscience do not check us, but the conscience must
be certainly grounded and informed by the Word, that a man may be able to say,
as verse 14. I know and am persuaded by the Lord Jesus. This is the plerophory
or full persuasion he speaks of; not I think, but I know, upon certain and
infallible arguments.

In his own mind: not to walk by another man's conceit, but himself to
understand what he does.

Let every man be fully persuaded: the strong, and the weak.

But how can there be a warrantable persuasion in both, that they please God,
when their opinions are contrary?

In things commanded and forbidden, both cannot have such persuasion; but in
things indifferent they may.

And yet the Apostle says not thus, as though the weak had a warrantable
persuasion of his courses, but that he might have it.

A Christian ought to be able to warrant his opinion and particular actions by
the word. Esaias 8.20. To the Law and to the Testimony; if they speak not
according to this word, it is because there is no light in them. Romans 14.23.
Whatsoever is not of faith is sin.

Be fully persuaded in his own mind. Then good meanings, if groundless,
will not serve the turn; nor the implicit, and colliarike faith of the
Papists, which believes as the Church believes, not knowing what the Church
believes.

In things indifferent a man must have full persuasion, much more in the point
of his justification before God.

To the welfare of a good conscience, full persuasion is necessary from the
word, about our doing or leaving undone things indifferent.

In deed herein differ things necessary from those of a middle nature; those
are mentioned in the word, by precept or prohibition: these are not.

For these, it is enough to faith, if they be not forbidden, for then they are
not reproved.

For the understanding of the simple; A thing is lawful: where the word has
not determined the manner and the circumstances, there it is lawful for a
Christian man to do, and for the Magistrate to command that, which agrees with
nature and reason, so that it contrary not the general rules of that thing in
the word: But where the word has determined, there only such determinations
are lawful.

For instance: It is lawful to wear apparel: now for the stuff, the color,
the fashion, because they are not determined in the word, a man has liberty to
use any he likes, so be, they agree with the general rules of apparel in the
word: Also the Magistrate has power to prescribe laws for apparel, and then
the use of our liberty is restrained and limited thereby.

So prayer is lawful, nay commanded: but inasmuch, as the Scriptures determine
not whether on a book, or presently conceived: a Christian has liberty, and
the magistrate authority.

So in gestures: we are commanded by our Savior to receive the Holy Sacrament:
now because our Savior has not determined the gesture, sitting, or kneeling,
the Christian has liberty, and the Magistrate authority; who if he determine
the gesture, the use of a man's liberty is also thereby determined.

So in all other indifferent things, Civil or Ecclesiastical; and then are
such our actions according to the Scriptures, when they are not determined by
the Scriptures, as aforesaid.

Whereas therefore many will say, where do you read kneeling at the Communion,
or the Surplisse, etc. commanded in the Bible; it is no good reasoning.

In matters of faith and of the substance of Gods worship, it is true which
Tertullian says, Tertul lib. de monogamia.
Negat Scriptura quod non notat. The Scripture denies that which it notes not,
and it follows well, to say: The Scripture mentions it not, therefore it is
not a matter of faith. But in matters of fact not so. It is not mentioned,
therefore it was not done; it follows not. Or, from a denial of fact, to a
denial of right; As, Paul lead not about a sister a wife as did other
Apostles: therefore it was unlawful for him so to have done, it follows not:
He took no maintenance of the Corinthians, therefore he had no right so to
have done: It is no good consequence.

Wisely apply this to all other things Ecclesiastical and civil of this
kind, the ignorance whereof has much troubled the minds of many people.

Know also that the scope of the word, isnot to set down all particulars, in
things Civil or Ecclesiastical: but only the general rules of such things:
The principal office of the Gospel, being to declare the way of justification
in the sight of God, by Jesus Christ.

It is most sound which Tertullian affirms about things of this nature:
Tertull. de Corona militis.
Consuetudo in ciuilibus rebus, pro lege suscipitur, cum desicit lex^ nec
differt, Scriptura an ratione consistat, quando et legem ratio commendet. Porro
si lex ratione constat, lex erit emne iam quod ratione constiterit. That is,
Custom in civil things, is taken for law, where law fails: neither skils it
whether a thing (of such nature, viz. indifferent, for he speaks of such
things) consist by Scripture or by reason, in as much as the Law is grounded
upon reason: If the law consist of reason, then whatsoever so does, is Law.

He that denies these things can never have a quiet conscience in that which he
does, because the Scripture mentions not infinite particulars of our life,
and many profitable things have been since invented, and therefore could not
be mentioned in the Bible.

See that thou be able to justify thy actions, thy opinions:

What warrant has the unclean person for his uncleanness? the drunkard for
his drunkenness? No warrant to do them, but proof enough that they which do
such things shall be damned, if they repent not.

Let every man be fully persuaded in his own mind. rule of thy walking.

Be certain, if thou desire a quiet conscience: to doubt of a thing and yet
to do it, is a great sin against the first commandment: for it takes away
Fear and Faith.

Fear: for, if thou think it may be, to do this will please God, it may
be, it will displease him; do it not: If thou do, thou art an open
contemner of God; whom if thou had feared, thou would have abstained.

Faith: He that doubts whether he please God, believes not that God hears
him; therefore he hates God, and by little and little falls into despair.

Who shall excuse them whom their own consciences do accuse? Save thy
conscience: To die in the peace of a good conscience, an unspeakable happiness.

VERSE 6. He that regards a day, regards it unto the Lord; and he that
regards not the day to the Lord, he does not regard it. He that eats,
eats to the Lord, for he gives God thanks: and he that eats not, to the
Lord he eats not, and gives God thanks.
IN these words begins the Direction, how they should carry themselves each
to other.

To omit many coacted expositions: M. Calvin takes these words as a precept, or
exhortation rather then an affirmation; and to this Pareus seems also to
incline: but the reason alleged of Thanks, notes a thing done, not a precept
of a thing to be done.

Here therefore I take it the direction verse 3. and repeated verse 30. is to
be understood: and here a reason thereof brought from the end, which both the
strong and weak propound to themselves in their different courses, which is
the glory of God, and the pleasing of him: which reason, both the instances
being here brought, may be thus formed:

He that does that which he does, to the Lord, is not of his brother to be
despised or judged:

But he that eats, or eats not, observes a day, or observes not, does it
to the Lord:

Therefore, etc.

To do a thing, or not to do a thing to the Lord; is so to do, or not, to
the honor of God: or because you are persuaded, that such doing, or not doing
pleases God, or at least displeases him not.

The strong put no difference in meats or days, because he knew that God
would no longer be worshipped by such ordinances, and that his Christian
liberty was not displeasing to God.

The weak made difference, because he thought his conscience was still bound
by the Law, and that such observations pleased God.

The weak erred; not of malice, but of ignorance and infirmity: his
observation of such things was lawful at that time, but not his opinion. His
opinion was superstitious, condemned under the name of weakness. Now that he
which is holden in such superstition, dare not violate the solemnity of the
day, this pleases God, because he dares not do against his conscience.

That both parties respect the glory of God in those things, is proved by the
sign, which is Thanksgiving.

The sum is, that the Apostle would have them cease from despising and
judging one another for meats or days: seeing neither part does any thing out
of any contempt of God, but to please him: they should therefore friendly take
and construe one another doings.

In things indifferent (in all things) we are to propound to our selves to
glorify God. 1 Cor. 10.31. Whether ye eat or drink, or whatsoever you do,
do all things to the glory of God. Col. 3.17. Whatsoever ye do in word or
deed, do all in the name of the Lord Jesus, giving thanks to God, and the
Father by him.

Cautions, for the meaning of this verse.

1 It favors not Academicks that we should question every thing, for in the
verse before he required full persuasion.

2 Nor will worship, for he speaks not of our inventions, but of things
commanded of old.

3 Neither does he commend the opinion of the weak, but would not have him
despised for his fact. His opinion was intolerable, because he put religion in
such things: his fact or practice tolerable, because he obeyed conscience.

4 Neither is every thing that is pretended to be done to the Lord, a good
work; nor does giving of thanks prove a thing to be done to the glory of God.
For the Jews when they set up the golden Calfe, proclaimed a feast to the
Lord: Exodus 32.5.
and if a thief should give God thanks that he met with a rich booty, he
should do no other but blaspheme.

Therefore it is to be remembered, that Saint Paul here speakeh of a right
intention: and only of things indifferent, not in their nature only, but also
so left to us in regard of their use.

Out of this verse and the former: in the time of the New Testament to observe
holy days beside the Sabbath day?

It is lawful: commanded nor forbidden, therefore their appointment and
observation is indifferent; and so the Church has power, and the Christian
Magistrate, to constitute them as things serving to the promoting of the
worship of God: as that there might be assembling together, for the reading of
holy Scripture, for prayer, and preaching of the word.

No man will deny but that it is convenient to celebrate the memorial of the
Passion and Resurrection of our Savior on some particular day. But if every
man should choose his own time there would be confusion: Therefore for order
in the Church, Consule Zanch. tom. 4. in 4. praeceptum. page 668. and seq.
and for diverse benefits accrewing thereby, it is very fit that there should be
some Holy days appointed to be observed besides the Sabbath.

1 Hereby our selves, our servants, our cattle have rest, which is one of the
ends of the Sabbath: The Jews had need of such addition of days of rest, and
therefore God instituted diverse holy days, and so have we need also.

2 Faith and good manners are furthered hereby: Aug. Ianuario, Epist. 118.119.
whatsoever is not contrary to Faith and good manners, may be done, says S.
Augustine, but hereby they are builded up, by public prayers, reading, and
preaching of the Word.

3 Hereby the love and joy of Christians is increased, Hieron. com. in Epist.
ad Gal. c. 4
through their mutual beholding one another, as Hierome affirms.

4 The poor have the more time to be instructed in Religion.

5 Hereby the principal patefactions of God, and benefits which he has
bestowed upon us, also the holy virtues of the Saints, are, being upon such
days inculcated, made the better known unto us.

6 Hereby we keep conformity with the Primitive Church, and with the
Fathers, from whom to dissent in things indifferent which may be useful unto
good life, were arrogance and indiscretion.

But some Holy days are called by the names of Saints.

They are dedicated not to them, but to God: story is then commended to the
Church: and on those days we make no supplication to the Saints, but only
praise God for them, and pray for grace to imitate their virtuous and holy
lives, as did the Ancients.

But here the error of the Papists, and Anabaptists and Familists, is to be
taken heed of: These will have no holy and festival days: They will have too
many, troubling the Church with their single and double feasts, etc. putting
Religion in the day, and dedicating it not to God, but to the Saint; yea
sometime to such a Saint which never was upon earth, or never shall be in
heaven: also they prefer the reverence of many of their holy days, before
the Sabbath.

Neglect not thou the holy days appointed in our Church, but yet make a
difference between the Lords day and them: For that is called the Queen of
days. Ignatius.
And therefore, as is the Virgin Mary blessed amongst women, so is the Lords
day amongst other holy days: for the dignity whereof the whole week among
the Jews was called Sabbatum, the Sabbath, as some Learned have observed:
Tremel. in annot. ad suam Syram trans. Noui Test. Mat. 28.1.
the days of the week being thus distinguished, prima Sabbati, secunda
Sabbati, etc.

It is requisite there should be some holy days for order sake and government.
1. But not over many, that the Church be not burdened. 2. Holden indifferent in
their own nature, that Christian liberty be not endangered.

Diversity of opinion for observation of days and such like indifferent
things, charity and unity among the Brethren when that we do is of conscience.

Hereof we have a notable example of Polycarpus and Anicetus Bishop of Rome,
who differing in opinion and observation of days, and fasting, yet continued
in love, and maintained unity, as witnesses Irenaeus in a Letter written to
Victor Bishop of Rome; yea, and Irenaeus gives this testimony to the Church
then and before his time, that all such which held contrary observations,
Luseb. hist. eccl. l. 5. c. 23. Socat. schol. hist. Eccl. l. 5. c. 21.
did notwithstanding hold fast the bond of love and unity.

Holy days are religiously to be observed, to the Lord, according the end of
their institution.

When a man walks according to the warning of his conscience, err in doing,
yet his religious and well nurtured conscience pleases God.

In things we discern not nor conceive, it is good for a man to walk
according to his conscience, so that he neglect not to be rightly informed, and
be ready to obey, when it shall be otherwise revealed.

The Jew may not use Christian liberty till he may enjoy it with a good
conscience: For it is better to follow an erring conscience when it cannot be
informed and corrected, then to do against conscience.

In all things give thanks, all things are impure, both our meat, and our
abstinence also; and with it every creature of God is good unto us, 1. Tim. 4.4.
as the Apostle witnesses?

Many, little better then Atheists, and like unto Swine, sit down to their
meat, without any acknowledgement of the giver of it.

Do thou give thanks: For,

1 Thus they did in old time. 1 Samuel 9.13. Mat. 14.19. Luke 24.30. Act. 27.35.
Plutar. in Symp.
Samuel must bless the sacrifice, before the people will eat. Our blessed
Savior always gave thanks before meat. The blessed Apostle Saint Paul used
so to do, as we read of him in the Acts. Yea the very Gentiles, used not to
eat, till they had offered a part as first fruits unto their gods. And I have
read that the Turks use thanksgiving or some form of benediction before they
eat.

2 Thereby thou acknowledgest that God by his providence maintains and
preserves thee. Cornel. Cor. a lap. com. in 1. Tim. c. 4.


3 By this thy meat becomes wholesome and nourishing to thee, which otherwise
would be as a stone, For man lives more by Gods blessing, then by bread. Mat.
4.4.


4 Hereby thou have always a table prepared; Chry. hom. 79. ad pop. Ant.
For as Chrysostom says, Mensa ab oratione sumens initium, et in orationem
desinens, nunquam deficit, etc. Where men begin and end their refections with
prayer, there shall be no want.

5 By this our minds are furthered to some holy meditation while we are eating
and drinking; as of laboring for the meat which perishes not; of our
mortality; Aug in Regula Monacharum. Ep. 109.
of eating bread in the Kingdom of Heaven. For which purpose the Ancients used
to have a Chapter read out of the Bible, in the time of their meals, as is now
used in some colleges.

Hereby also we are kept from surfeiting and drunkenness, and from feeding
our selves unto an inflaming to lust; Saint Chrysostom speaks of this
excellently, Opus est, nos et mensam petentes et desistentes gratias agere,
etc. It is needful that sitting down to meat, and rising from meat, we should
give thanks. For he that is prepared hereunto, shall neither fall into
drunkenness or insolence, nor be swollen with gurmundizing: but having the
expectation of prayer as a bridle to his senses, Chrysostom. loco supra citato.
he will with due modesty take of those things which are set before him, and
so fill his body and his soul with a plentiful blessing.

Holy Christians eat to the Lord; but such as give not thanks, but surfeit
themselves and are drunk, eat and drink to the Devil.

VERSE 7. For none of us lives to himself, and no man dies to himself.
THis verse has another Reason to prove that the believing Gentiles and Jews,
the strong and the weak do eat or not eat to the glory of God.

The reason is taken a generali intention fidelium, Aquinas. Caluinus. Pareus.
from the general intention of the faithful, which is to consecrate their
whole life and death also to God.

Or you may say, it is taken a toto ad parts, from the whole to the parts,
thus: They who live and die to the Lord, do eat or not eat, etc. to the Lord.
But both the strong and weak believer do live and die to the Lord. Therefore
etc.


For all our particular actions and passages, are comprehended under life and
death, and therefore Peter Martyr calls this Argument a general cause: and
Rollocke, a general reason, from the end of life and death.

Here are the Thing, Life and Death, and the Amplification; first, from the
Subject, None of us; secondly, from the End, denied, Not to our selves.

Life and Death: A living to righteousness, and dying to sin is not here
meant, though only such glorify God.

Neither is here meant a good life, and a dying in sin, as Chrysostom
expounds: for this will not agree with that in the next verse, We are the
Lords; for they which dye in sin are not his children.

But here Natural life and death are meant, comprehending generally all
actions and passions, and whatsoever befalls us in life or death.

None of us: Though all men live and dye, yet here only the faithful are
understood, which are set down generally, in respect of themselves, None, and
restrictiuely in respect of others, none of us.

None live, etc. True of right, but not of fact: but here of fact is to be
understood, and therefore he says, None of us: judging charitably that they
were believers in truth as himself.

Paul from their thanksgiving judges charitably of them; signs of goodness,
judge the best, if thou know not the contrary: The want of this charity is
the cause of much contention.

Lives, Dies, To himself: The end is denied, not to our selves, and it is
affirmed in the next verse, To the Lord.

To live and die to a man's self, may be taken Ciuilly, or Theologically.

To live to a man's self Ciuilly, has two Expositions: First, to be suiiuris,
as they say, to be his own man, not to be subject to the command and direction
of others, as a servant and bondmen are; and this is a Civil good; 1. Cor.
7.21.
and therefore Paul says to a bondsman, if thou may be made free, use it
rather. Secondly, In living, only to care for, and respect a man's solfe, and
this is evil, for we are not borne for our selves, but partly for our
Country, partly for our parents, etc.

To live and die to our selves, Theologically, both must be denied.

We may not live to our selves, for we are not our own, we must live to God,
and respect him in all things, prefer his will before our own, to be at his
beck, and to refer all things to his glory.

To dye to a man's self, is to die so, as that we respect no body, and no body
respects or cares for us: No man says, Ah my brother.

To die to the Lord, is to acknowledge God, to trust in God, to have hope of
going to the Lord, to bear our sickness and death patiently, and to be
content to glorify God, in any manner of death, which God shall appoint.

All Christians must live and dye to the Lord, not to themselves. 2. Cor. 5.9.
Wherefore we labor, that whether present or absent, we may be accepted of him.
1. Pet. 42. That he no longer should live the rest of his time in the flesh,
to the lusts of men, but to the will of God.

Paul's drift is to persuade to unity: judge and censure them, and to contend
with them, but to love and embrace them; for with whom should a man live
lovingly, if not with them, which live to the Lord, aiming at nothing but how
to please him?

Our whole life and Death must be to the glory of God: this maine end, the
glory of God: at home, abroad, in the Church, in the market, in prosperity, in
adversity.

Many will show a face of glorifying God, and living to him, while they are
taking, and while they thrive; but if God begin to take, and in stead of
health and riches, send the Cross, then they murmr. It was falsely said of
Job, Does he serve God for naught: let us take heed it be not truly said of us,
that we serve God only for our bellies.

Some would be contented to dye to the Lord, but have no care to live in the
Lord: It was Balaams wish to dye well, but the only way to this, is to live
well: True Christians both live and dye to the Lord.

He that lives to God shall die to God; he that lives to himself shall dye
to himself: and it is a thousand to one, but that he which lives not to God,
shall die to the devil.

None of us,

Their practices become not us: as they care not how they live, so they care
not how they dye, neither does God care for them, which is fearful. But all
our care ought to be for a good life, and a comfortable death.

Would thou not dye like a drunkard? nor rise to the last judgment, as the
Reprobates? then live not as they live; to themselves, to Satan, to sin, to
vanity; but to the Lord.

A good death follows a good life; to the Lord, is not to live to our selves:
Dimidium facti qui been caepit habet: It is easy to live to God, when we have
once learned not to live to our selves.

If thou have thoughts of serving God; then thy self, that is, thy flesh will
say; If thou will serve God, then bid adieu to thy pleasures, thy profits; thou
must be hated, scorned, and suffer persecution. If thou can overcome this and
deny thy self, thou have won the goal; and he that begins not here, will
never prove Christ's disciple, for thus says our Savior, Luke 9.23.
If any man will be my disciple, let him deny himself, and take up his cross
and follow me. If a man be called in question for the Gospel, and have not
learned this lesson, he will renounce Christ, before he will dye for him.

Pride, covetousness, envy, malice, revenge, etc. were easily conquered and
banished, if we could deny our selves.

Thou have opposed the Church a long time, refusing to kneel at the Sacrament,
and to submit to orders established: It appears that they are lawful; and
thou art not able to gainsay it; and yet thou yeeldest not: What is the cause?
thou have not yet learned to deny thy self: Thy heart tells thee that it is a
disgrace to be convinced to have erred all this while, especially having been
peradventure violent against the orders.

Now I beseech thee, whosoever thou art that stand out in these things,
whether thou be Minister or other, that thou will examine thy heart hereupon:
Examine whether thou do respect thy credit before men, more then the glory
of the truth, and the peace of the Church.

Yea let us all examine whether we would not sooner, being put to it, offend or
deny Christ for our commodity sake, then lose our commodity for Christ's sake.

Paul sometime complained, that all seek their own, Philip. 2.21.
and not the things which are Jesus Christ's. If we do so, preserring our base
dunghill names before the duty we owe to God: will not Christ say to us at the
last day; Nay, thou preferredst thy profit, pleasure, before me, thine own
will before mine, thy credit before the glory of my name, thou have thy reward:
what shall become of us if we be so found?

Let us therefore deny our selves: let us give our selves to the Lord and to
his Word: and if any motion, thought, 2 Cor. 8.5.
inclination, affection, desire, arise in our hearts contrary to Christ and his
word, let us kill it and cast it out, as a most vile enemy, confederate with
the Devil.

VERSE 8. For whether we live, we live unto the Lord; or whether we dye, we
dye unto the Lord: whether we live therefore, or dye, we are the Lords.
THe first part of this Verse sets down the affirmative end which true
believers have in life and death, viz. to live and die to the Lord; of the
which has been spoken in the seventh v. to which indeed that part does
specially belong.

The other part of this verse: Whether we live therefore or dye, we are the
Lords; is a most sweet and comfortable Illation, having the force of a reason
to prove that we should not live and dye to our selves, but to the Lord.

The reason is taken a relatis, from things that have a necessary relation one
to another.

They which are the Lords servants, must live and dye to the Lord.

But we are the Lords servants:

Therefore, etc.

Here is an affirmation of a thing, and an amplification of it.

The affirmation is, We are the Lords.

The amplification is from the extent of it; which is double; 1. of State. 2.
of Time.

Of State, in life; and not only so, but in death.

Of Time, both in life and death.

We: that is, which believe, not with a temporary or historical faith only,
but with a true, lively, applying, justifying, saving faith.

The Lords: How? his creatures; it is true, but so are the stones in the
street, yea the devils: how then? not his enemies; though there be many such
even in his Church: but his servants, bound to do his will, and to be at his
disposition, whether if it be to live or dye.

He has created us, and does daily preserve us; It is equal, that having our
being and maintenance from him, we should be subject to his will.

He has redeemed us, and so the Father has given us to him, (which is most
proper to this place, as the next verse shows) we were in captivity under the
devil, bound and holden down under him; but Christ has rescued and redeemed
us; and therefore we are his bounden servants in life and death.

But we are brethren with Christ,

True, Covenant makes us sons; but the Redemption, servants.

The Lords: yet we have not all the meaning. We are then the Lords, that is, in
subjection to him, and also under his tuition. Our service to him is not only
hereby employed, but, and that principally his care and protection of us. As,
Colos. 4.1. Masters give to your servants that which is just and equal. Just,
that is, feed them, govern them, protect them, reward them. So we are the
Lords, to receive from him, as well as to perform unto him.

Whether we live or dye: That is, in all estates of health, sickness, riches,
poverty, prosperity, adversity, life, death: and also at all times, even for
ever.

All true believers are in the Lords service, and under his care and
protection. Psalm. 55.22. Cast thy burden upon the Lord, and he shall sustain
thee. 1 Pet. 5.7. Casting all your care upon him, for he cares for you. 1 Cor.
3.21.22.23. All are yours, whether Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas, or the world,
or life, or death, or things present, or things to come, all are yours, and ye
are Christ's, and Christ is Gods.

We ought not to dissent and wrangle one with another; common service to one
Master, and are entertained of him with an equal care and love.

Will thou judge thy fellow servant? Is it equal that he should order his
life and conscience according to the Rule of thy will, or of the Lords? Works
of servants, in regard of virtue, or faultiness, are to be measured by the
will and law of our absolute Lord and Master.

It is a great dignity to serve King Solomon: 1 Kings 10.8. John 15.15. Heb.
2.11.
a wiser, richer, and more gracious Master then Solomon could be: who uses his
servants, not as vassals, but as his dear friends and brethren, protecting
them, providing for them, and rewarding them with everlasting life.

Be patient under the cross, even in death: in life and death we are the
Lords; be thou in vtrumque paratus, live willingly: and, if it be thy Lords
will, willingly die: Be willingly rich, and not unwillingly poor: willingly
enjoy thy children, and if thy Lord will have it so, willingly resign them
unto him. Whether the one or the other, it is the Lord, let him do what
seems him good, as said old Eli. Not as I will, 1 Samuel 3.18.
but as thou will, Mat. 26.39.
said our blessed Savior. So Saint Paul; Christ shall be magnified in my
body, whether it be by life or by death: If I live, by preaching; if I dye, by
suffering.

A great comfort. believe, we are Christ's; He preserues us while we live, and
he takes care for us when we dye.

Not as we do, does Christ: we, when a servant grows old, turn him away: But
our Master tenderly cares for us, to old age, in death, and after death.

We cannot do as Christ does: when our servants dye, it is out of our power
both to command them, and to do for them: But death cannot separate us from
Christ; but it even lets us in to our Masters joy.

O how sweet a thing is it, Christ to be a good Master to us when we are dying!
not to be forsaken in death, and left to our selves.

O the miserable estate of an impenitent sinner! As he has lived like a
wretch and a beast, so he dies. Think of it you drunkards, etc. you may live
in some pleasure here for a time, but your death shall be a very evil death,
then you shall be cast out. The Hawk while it lives, is in price, and upon
the Masters fist sometimes, but when it dies it is cast upon the dunghill: The
Partrich is hunted while it lives, but when it dies it is prepared for the
Masters own Table: such is the difference between a wicked man, and a true
believer, in death.

He which has no care to live to Christ, it is just that in death Christ
should take no care for him. It belongs to him to care for us in death, to whom
we have directed our lives. To whom have thou lived? to Satan? O truly
miserable, for whom none takes care in the hour of death but the devil our
deadly enemy.

Happy is the man that in the hour of death has the God of Jacob for his
help: so have all those which have lived to him: If thou forsakest not God in
thy life, he will never forsake thee in death; thy Master Jesus Christ will
then stick close to thee when thou have most need, and all the world can do
thee no good. Thou shall have assurance of the pardon of thy sins; Thou shall
tread down Satan under thy feet; Thou shall lie down in the peace, joy, and
comfort of a good conscience; For thy blessed Lord and Master lesus Christ
cares for thee, and his honor is great in thy salvation.

VERSE 9. For to this end, Christ both died, and rose, and revived, that he
might be Lord both of the dead and living.
THat we are the Lords, was concluded in the end of the 8. verse; of which the
reason is in this verse; where we have two parts: 1. who is this our Lord. 2.
what is the cause of his Lordship over us.

The person who is our Lord, is Christ; a title of the second person in the
sacred Trinity, noting both the Divine and Humane nature in one person, being
the name of our Mediator declaring his office.

In the cause of his Lordship, are the actions causing; and the effect caused.

The actions are three: 1. He died: I call this an action, because it was
voluntary, Potuit mori, John 10.18.
he could dye if it pleased him: No man takes my life from me, but I have
power to lay it down, says himself. The 2. He rose, that is, from death. 3.
He revived: Ambrose inuerts the order of these, speaking in the first place of
his life, as meaning his natural life; He lived, he dyed, and rose again.
Chrysostom leaves out the second, his resurrection: the Vulgar which the
Papists follow, leaves out the last, He revived.

Tolet censures the third to be superfluous, Caietamu.
but one of his own side approues it; noting thereby such a reviving, which
shall never be subject to death; or one might say, the pretertense is put for
the present, He revived, that is, Erasinus. Beza.
he now lives; or rather, he revived to a new state of life; not subject to
hunger, weariness, etc. but free from such things.

The effect caused, or the end: That he might be Lord both of the dead and
the living: where we have the authority, that he might be Lord; and the object,
both of the dead and living.

That he might be Lord: that is, so Lord, as to protect and save us, as well as
command us; a Lord, not only over us, but for us, to deliver us from the
bondage of other cruel Lords: we have need of such a Lord to defend us; he
has no need of such servants as we are, to serve him.

Both of the dead and of the living: sometime quick and dead comprehends all
men, both good and bad, as in the Creed; but here it is meant only of
believers, of whom some be dead, and some are now living, and some shall be
living at the coming of Christ.

His saving power reaches to all believers: it is sufficient for all, but in
regard of the Application, the wicked are excluded.

Christ by dying, rising, and reviving, obtained power over us, to save us and
bring us to heaven. Matthew 28.18. All power is given me in heaven and earth:
which words he spoke after his rising and reviving. John 17.2. Thou have given
him power over all flesh, that he should give eternal life to as many as thou
have given him. Ephesians 1.19. and seq. Philippians 2.6.7.8.9.

But, God is said, not to be the God of the dead: Matthew. 22.32.

The Sadduces denied the resurrection of the body, and the Immortality of the
soul, holding that men dyed as do beasts; now Christ affirms that God is
not the God of men so dying. Then by dead, the Sadduces understood, men ceasing
to live at all, Paul here by dead understands men ceasing to live this natural
and common life.

Did he merit and deserve this Lordship for himself, by his death and
resurrection,

So say the Schoolmen; but I find no sound ground for it. Amb. de fide resur.
c. 24.
The Scripture no where says, that he died or rose for himself, but for us
men and for our salvation, as says the Nicene Creed, Si nobis non resurrexit,
vtique non resurrexit, qui cur sibi resurgeret, non habebat: If he rose not for
us, he rose not at all, who had no cause why he should rise for himself.

Also such power and glory was due to him as he was God, for ever: as he was
man, from the time of his Incarnation: by reason his manhood was assumed into
the unity of his person. But God appointed and ordained that he should this way
enter upon the execution of his right, and that it should be thus made manifest
unto us.

Judge not thy brother; that right of Chirst, for which he died, rose, and
revived.

Here is the universality of the Church; unity, for these all, living and dead,
are servants to one Lord, Jesus Christ.

Here is a threefold comfort.

1 Of assurance of remission of sins, and of eternal life; for though he
died, yet he rose again and revived, which he could not have done, if he had
not fully satisfied for all our sins: Also he is able to save them to the
uttermost, Heb. 7.25:
which come to God by him, seeing he ever lives to make intercession for them.

2 Of supply of all necessary grace and good things: He is our Lord, and will
maintain his servants, The Lord is my shepherd, I shall not want, says
David. Psalm. 23.1.


3 Of encouragement, against all opposites; we have many enemies, but our
Master is stronger then all. He cannot forsake us now he lives, who loved us
so, that for our sakes he died.

Will he suffer that to perish through any tentation, which he purchased at
such a price? By no means. Jonas makes great account of a gourd, which he
labored not for; and we neglect not a beast which has cost us money: much
more will our Lord care for us, for whom he has suffered so much, and whom
he has redeemed, not with corruptible things, as gold and silver, but by his
own blood.

If Christ died for all, then were all dead: and he died for all, that they
which live, should not henceforth live unto themselves, 2 Cor. 5.14.15.
but unto him which died for them, and rose again.

Let us therefore sanctify our bodies and souls to his service, who has
redeemed both our souls and bodies.

Ye are bought with a price; 1 Cor. 6.20. 1 Cor. 7.23.
therefore glorify God in your body and in your spirit, which are Gods.

Ye are bought with a price; be not the servants of men, much less the
servants of sin or of Satan.

Obey Christ whatsoever it cost thee: If thou walk and continuest in
drunkenness, uncleanness, or any sin, not repenting, thou art more guilty
then the very Devil: for he died not for the Devil, nor ever offered him
grace; and the Devil never denied the Lord that bought him: 2 Pet. 2.2.
which is affirmed of every unrepentant sinner in the time of the Gospel.

Consider wicked wretch, that thy soul which thou castest away through thy
abominable life, was purchased with no meaner price then the blood of the
Son of God: and therefore thou shall have the sorer damnation if thou
repentest not.

VERSE 10. But why do thou judge thy brother? or why do thou set at
naught thy brother? we shall all stand before the judgment seat of Christ.
HEre is a new Argument from the last Judgment. In which we have the
Admonition repeated, which we had in the third verse, and the Reason it self.

The Repetition is with advantage, having two things which we had not in the
third verse. The first a Reproof: The second a Reason.

The Reproof is in the manner of delivering it, by a chiding Apostrophe in an
Interrogation: But why do thou judge thy brother? or why, etc. which is a
sharp manner of reproouing, pointing out particulars, and speaking as it were
face to face. Why do thou?

The Reason is from the condition of both, they are brethren: not by blood, nor
by nation, but by faith and profession; not by natural generation, but by
supernatural regeneration: for, for the most part, they were Jews and
Gentiles that so dissented.

From the Repetition we may observe, knowledge then other men, we are ready to
despise them; and if we have a conceit of our own hatching, we censure every
man, that does not approve it and dance in our ring.

From the Obiurgation, Paul chides so angerly them which are faulty.

From the Reason observe, that we are to be charitable, unity, because we are
brethren.

It is of very ill report for brethren to quarrel about trifles: it was
Abraham's reason to Lot for peace. Genesis 13.8.


Art thou strong, despise not him that is weak; for though he be weak, yet he
is thy brother.

Art thou weak? judge not him that is strong: for he is strong, and also thy
brother.

We would be loath that other men should judge or despise us, let not us do so
to others.

The new Argument to enforce this Admonition, is taken, as I said, from the
consideration of the judgment day: thus, They which shall stand before the
judgment seat of Christ to be judged themselves, ought not to judge others.

But all, both strong and weak, must stand before Christ to be judged
themselves.

Therefore, etc.



Some apply this Argument only against the weak; Chrysostom. Musculas.
but in as much as S. Paul spoke to both in the admonition, therefore I think
it concerns both; but principally the weak.

In this Reason are two things: The thing it self spoken of, standing before
the judgment seat; and the Amplification.

Standing before the judgment seat; put, for being judged; by a figure, the
sign put for the thing signified: a tribunal or judgment seat being
attributed to Christ, by a similitude, of the sitting of earthly Judges: The
throne is for the King; the chair for the Doctor; the tribunal (...), for the
Judge, which usually is a seat erected on high, whither the Judge ascends,
both for the more reverence of his person, and also that he may the better
behold the malefactors, the witnesses, etc.

The Amplification is from the persons, judging, to be judged.

The person judging, is Christ; which is the name of our Mediator, God and man:
Christ is our judge, and he shall execute this judgment in his humane nature,
He has appointed a day in which he will judge the world by that Man, whom he
has ordained, Acts 17.31.

The authority to judge, which is in Christ as he is God, by nature; is in
Christ as he is man, by grace, But yet he shall not judge as a Delegate, but as
the Principal, from whom there is no appeal. And though the pronouncing of
sentence shall be by his humane nature, yet the validity and force of it is
from the Divine.

The persons to be judged, are set down two ways; by their generality, all:
and by their manner of appearing, shall stand before. All, Angels and men, good
and bad, strong and weak, great and small. Shall stand: The Judge sits, the
malefactors to be arraigned must stand. The word is, (...), and might be
rendered, shall be presented; though we be unwilling and hang back, or would
hide our selves, yet sistemur, we shall be set or presented before the Judge.

The consideration of the last judgment, should persuade us to our duties, and
to refrain from that which is evil, Act. 17.30.31. God commands all men
every where to repent, because he has appointed a day, wherein he will judge
the world, etc. 2 Cor. 5.10.11. We must all appear before the judgment seat of
Christ, that every one may receive, etc. Knowing therefore the terror of the
Lord, we persuade men.

Judge not thy brother, thou thy self shall be judged. Shall the prisoner
that stands at the bar for his life, leap up into the seat of the Judge?
Anselmus.
Qui iudicat fratrem, tantum crimen elationis in currit, vt Christi tribunal
fibi videatur assumere, and eius iudicium praeuenire. He which judges his
brother, shows so great pride, as if he should advance into Christ's
tribunal, and prevent his judgment.

Judge nothing before the time, until the Lord come, says Paul elsewhere: 1
Cor. 4.5.
Let us not meddle with judging, we shall have judging enough at that day; let
us rather be careful, that we may stand with boldness and confidence before
the Judge.

Saint Paul gives us here to understand, that one of the bills of enditement
that shall be put in against us, and to be enquired of, is for Judging our
Brethren, for which he cueth the Romans, to answer it before the great Judge
at that day.

There shall be a day of general Judgment, Peter speaks: 2. Pet. 3.3, 4.
and though thousands wish it might never be: Oh how much would the Drunkard
and other abominable sinners give, to buy off that day! But we must all stand
before the Judgment seat of Christ.

It is most true, that every particular man's soul in death undergoes a
particular judgment, and in the same moment is elevated intellectually to
hear the Sentence of the Judge, by an illumination or locution intellectual,
and so knows it self to be saved or damned by the authority of Christ, by
the law appointed by God, and accordingly at that instant goes unto, or is in
joy or torment. But this is but Particular, and there must be a General
Judgment, as the Scripture signifies, which may also appear by reason.

1 Many just persons are here afflicted, and wicked prospered; there shall be
therefore a time wherein exact Justice shall be manifested.

2 Many wicked men are punished here, and many are not: there must be therefore
a time of general judgment, or else there may seem to be some inequality.

3 Many just persons are condemned here to death, as if they were wicked, and
many wicked dye with an opinion left of their sanctine.

4 Also in the particular judgment only the soul is judged, but the body
must also: therefore there must in justice be a general Judgment.

5 Some affirm, Bellarm. in Explicatione, Symb-Apostol. art. 7.
that our good and ill deeds are not finished in death; but our sin, or
worthiness increases to the day of Judgment, as any are bettered or
corrupted by our example, speeches, writings, etc. and therefore because every
one shall receive according to his works, that there must be a general
Judgment, even for this.

It is a great consolation to true Believers, Christ shall be their Judge, who
dyed for them, who yet makes intercession for them, who is their Advocate,
their Friend, their Brother, whose members they are.

Surely this day will be the happiest day that ever dawned upon us: It shall
never repent us, that we have served God, mortified our corruptions, denied our
selves, refused the pleasures of sin, which are but for a season, that we
have fasted, prayed, wept for our sins, endured the Cross, etc. for we shall
then receive a thousand fold by the sentence of the Judge.

This day is not so comfortable to the good, as it will be terrible, even a
day of blackness and confusion to the wicked, when their greatest Enemy shall
sit upon his greatest Enemies.

Oh, how shall Judas and Pilate tremble and be confounded at that day! Think
of it thou Drunkard, thou blasphemer, etc. He whom thou have condemned shall be
thy Judge: How dare thou expect pardon and mercy? Now indeed is the time of
mercy, but then only of Judgment.

The remembrance of the day of Judgment should persuade us to repentance; Act.
10.42.
that he is ordained Judge of quick and dead. So Saint Paul uses this as the
last Argument to draw men from their sins. 2. Cor. 5.11.

And truly who can have any desire or delight in sin, when he shall think
of that Judge, of that Judgment, of that Sentence, of that never dying worm,
of those unquenchable flames?

Magna est peccati poena, Aug. ser. 120. de Temp.
metum and memoriam futuri perdidisse Iudicij: It is a great punishment of
sin, to lose the fear and remembrance of the Judgment to come, said Saint
Augustine. But if thou do remember it, and hear of it, and yet not fear, it
is a sign of the infinite Anger of God upon thee.

The found of the last Trumpet was always in the ears of Saint Hierome, who
wheresoever he was, thought he heard the voice of the Arch-angell, Arise ye
dead, and come to Judgment. Act. 24.25.
Yea Foelix himself trembled to hear Paul preach of the Judgment to come.

Always think of this day, and repel the temptations unto sin with the
remembrance thereof. Consider what it will cost thee. Now the Drunkard, the
unclean person, the proud, the covetous, etc. see not the foulness of their
faults, but then thou shall see, and wonder that thou were so mad to run into
such danger for such small and idle satisfactions.

When thou shall appear before that Judge, when Satan, and thine own
conscience shall accuse thee, when thou shall behold the frowning and irefull
countenance of the Judge, and those fires prepared for thee: What will thou
do? whither will thou go? nor friends, nor riches, nor promises, nor prayers,
nor tears can avail. What shall we do, if that day shall find us, often
forewarned, but unprepared? How shall we endure that fire, that cannot endure
the tooth-ake, the stone, a fit of an Ague?

Let us use all care, while we live here, so to behave and discharge our
selves, that that day may be happy and comfortable unto us. Amen.

VERSE 11. For it is written: As I live says the Lord, every knee shall bow to
me, and every tongue shall confess to God.
IN this verse is proved that we shall all stand before the Judgment seat of
Christ; and in the next verse, the end of such appearance there is declared.

The proof, is by a Testimony; In which we may note, the quality of it, and
the substance.

The Quality, it is a written Testimony, Esaias 45.23.

Sin is to be convinced, Errors reproved, and Doctrines proved by the
Scriptures. Yet of points taught, there is difference: Some things are
Substantial, some things Circumstantial. The first must have plain proof out
of the Scripture: for the second it is enough if they agree with the general
Rules of such things, delivered in the Word.

In matters of substance, that which the Scriptures command not, Matthew. 12.30.
they forbid; He that is not with Christ here, is against him.

In matters of circumstance and outward order, that which the Scripture
forbids not, Luke 9.50.
it permits; He that is not against Christ here, is with him.

In the substance of the Testimony, we have the Argument to prove that we must
all stand before the Judgment seat of Christ, thus,

To whom every knee must bow, and whom every tongue must confess, before his
tribunal we must stand.
But every knee must bow to Christ, and every tongue confess him. Therefore
etc.
If any shall take exception to the Argument, because the prophet Esaias speaks
of the vocation of the Gentiles; it may be thus answered: that the Prophecy
contains more, being begun to be fulfilled in the Gentiles, and to be
consummate at the last judgment, when all shall submit: and aptly did the
Apostle bring such an Allegation, speaking of the Gentiles, because the Jews
thought not so friendly of them, as they ought.

Herein we have two things: An Affirmation, and a Confirmation.

The Affirmation is, that all shall acknowledge Christ for their Judge, and
submit unto him.

This is set down in two phrases:

The first, Every knee shall bow to me. Where are the Action and the Persons.

The Action, shall bow, that is, shall submit to me, shall adore me, shall be
subject to my sentence: the sign put for the thing signified: for by making a
leg, or kneeling, we acknowledge his Maioritie, toward whom we use such
gesture: and therefore among the Egyptians, the Elephant that scarce has, or
boweth the knee joints, is the Hieroglyphick of Regal power.

The persons are bowing, or bowed unto.

Bowing, noted generally, Every knee, that is, every man, noted by the
Instrument of bowing: Jew and Gentile; yea, every reasonable creature, Angels
good and bad, and Men, Editio Complutii.
as one Greek copy has it, Every knee, of things in heaven, of things in
earth, of things under the earth; which our Beza thinks to be added out of
Philip. 2.10.

And although the knee be a part of the body, yet it is translated to the mind
also, of whose submission, this is a sign.

We must bow the knees of bodies and souls also to Christ.

The Person bowed unto; Christ, named in the verse before, to whom Adoration is
due.

Christ is a name of our Mediator, signifying his whole Person: and therefore
this bowing must be to the Humanity with the Deity, to the Godhead, perse, by
it self: to the Manhood, in the person of the Son of God, and for the
Godhead.

It is due to the Person, and because the Person cannot be divided, so neither
may the Adoration; but as the person is one and the same, so must it be
worshipped with one and the same Adoration.

But all do not bow unto him. The Jews do not,

They do not; but they ought: and they shall bow,

The second phrase: Every tongue shall confess to God: Here we have also,

The Action, and the persons.

The Action, confess. What shall they confess? Whatsouer they have done,
says one: rather as Philip 2.11. Sarcerius.
that Jesus Christ is Lord. In the Prophet Esaias it is read, Every tongue shall
swear: which is all one in sense. For in every oath there is a confession, and
an acknowledgement of a witness, a Judge, and a revenger of falsehood and
injustice.

The Confirmation is from the Oath of God: As I live says the Lord: He swears
by himself, who has no greater to swear by: The manner of this swearing, is
as if God should have said, It shall as surely come to pass, as it is sure
that I live and am God.

All men must and shall submit themselves to Christ as to their Judge. Ioh.
5.22. The Father has committed all judgment unto the Son. Philip 2.9, 10,
11. Where are the very words of this Text; declaring that all shall bow at the
Name of Jesus; this name was contemptible among the Jews, but it was declared
glorious in all the world by the preaching of the Apostles; and shall much more
be glorified at the last day.

All knees have not yet bowed to Christ,

That which in Esaias is attributed to Jehovah,

We may here note the original of that Ancient Ceremony of putting off the
hat, Name of Jesus in the Congregation, in token of reverence and Adoration:
not of the bare Name, as the Papists do superstitiously, attributing force and
virtue to the very letters, pronounced, written and worn, making it a part of
Gods worship, but unto the person so named.

This Ceremony is not only of ancient practice in the Church, but has
approbation of as great, learned, and holy men, as any have written in these
days.

Master Zanchy says, Zanch. com in Philip. c. 2. v. 10.
that it is Consuetudo non improbanda, a custom not to be found fault with, if
it be used without superstition: For there is no other Name whereby we must be
saved; and therefore it is worthily exalted above every Name, showing that he
which bore that name, being accounted among the Jews, a mere man, a
Carpenter, a sorcerer, a wine-bibber, is declared to be the very Son of the
living God by nature.

Pareus also; Pare. com. in loc.
Si vt ritus indifferens praestetur externa reuerentia, nemo improbat, No man
does find fault with bowing the knee at the Name of Jesus, if such reverence
be used, not as a necessary part of Gods worship, but as an indifferent rite;
and I am sure that it is used no otherways in the Church of England.

The end of this Ceremony was threefold.

1 For confutation of the Arians being mixed with the Orthodoxall Christians in
their assemblies: who thereby also were discovered.

2 For working attention to the holy Scriptures when they are read; for unless
they attended, they might easily fail in performance of such reverence and so
be questioned.

3 For testifying our duty and submission to Christ as our Lord: and mine
opinion is that it were a most comely thing, if whenever we speak of God, or
of our blessed and dear Master Jesus Christ, we would, by putting off the hat,
or bowing of the knee, or both; acknowledge our dutiful reverence.

Seneca never thought of Cato, Laelius, Socrates, Seneca. epl. 64.
and such like famous men, but with great respect. Ego illos veneror, et tantis
nominibus semper assurgo. I reverence them, quoth he, and always rise up at
their names.

There is small reason then that any should quarrel with our Church for
requiring this ancient rite to be practiced: and for my part I endeavor at
every mention of Gods mercies, to testify some reverence, which I know I can
never sufficiently perform.

Bowing of the knee is taken for the worship of God, unlawful to be used in
the worship of God.

Nay it is the most decent form of prayer, or receiving the Sacrament, because
in the one we beg, and in the other we receive the greatest blessing at the
hands of God.

It may seem that God has made our knees flexible even for this purpose: So
Ambrose was of opinion. Ambros. Hex. l. 6. c. 9.
Flexibile genu, quo domini mitigatur offensa, ira mulcetur, gratia prouocatur.
Our knee, says he, is made bowing, by the which we crave pardon for offense,
mitigate the anger of the Lord, and obtain grace; alleging the Text in the 2.
of the Philippians, That at the Name of Jesus every knee should bow, etc.

By this gesture we declare our selves to be impotent, and needy; It is the
gesture of suppliants for favor: It is both a testimony, and a stirring up, of
yielding affections.

Reverent gestures, do not a little foster religion, and inflame and provoke
the reverence of the mind: so that I cannot but marvel at many, who at
prayers, rather choose to stand, then to kneel, though they may very
conveniently so do.

Let all acknowledge and submit unto Christ, God, and our Judge, let us adore
him; which we do when we believe, and live well.

He that lives wickedly, Hieron. com. in epl ad Ephesians. lib. 2.
bows to the Devil: Toties Diabolo flectimus genu, quotieseunque peceamus; so
often does a man make a leg to the Devil, as he sins, says S. Hierome. The
blasphemer, the drunkard, etc. acknowledge the Devil to be their Lord.

I warn thee that thou speedily submit thy self to Christ: If thou do not
now so do by his word, the time will come, when thou shall be compelled to
do it spite of thy heart, and to thy damnation. Behold, it is sealed; As I
live says the Lord, it shall be so: Thou shall be made to stoop, for the
Lord has sworn it: Rather now let us fall down and worship him, that we may
have comfort to salvation.

VERSE 12. So then every one of us shall give account of himself to God.
IN this verse is set down the end of our standing before the Judgment seat
of Christ, which is to give account: and it is amplified three ways.

First, from the Persons accomptant: Second, from the matter of which account
must be made: and third, the person to whom it is to be accounted. Shall give
account: for this end must we appear to account for things done and received:
The process of the last Judgment being set down under the similitude of
things Civil. As a Master delivering money and goods to his servants,
afterward exacts a reckoning; and as a Schoolmaster calls his scholars to
render the lesson he has taken thence; so shall we appear to render an
account of our stewardship.

Every one of us: of us men, and so good and bad to be included: or of us
believers, and so the wicked to be concluded from the less.

The person accountant: every one, he says not all, but every one, not all
shuffled together, and in the gross, Revel. 20.12.
but eueuery one severally.

Every one, without exception, both small and great; Emperors, Kings, Princes,
Judges, must there give account and be judged, as well as others.

Here, not every man that comes to the Assizes is judged, or stands forth:
but there, we shall all be actors our selves, as well as spectators of others.

But the Saints shall judge the world, 1 Cor. 6.2.

True: but that is as they are considered, Reprobation, or condemnation; but of
Approbation, having obtained their Quietus est, and full discharge from the
Judge.

Of himself: This is the matter of the account: We shall give account for
others; as fathers for the bringing up of their children; Kings for the
governing of their Subjects, etc. But of others only so far as any thing of
theirs belongs to our calling; as Ministers must give account for the souls of
the people, as S. Paul says.

Here we may have an Attorney to appear for us, Heb. 13.17.
and a Counselor to plead for us, but there every one of us shall give
account of himself.

Of himself: that is, of all his thoughts, words, deeds, passed in his whole
life, and of all things which concern his person, calling or actions.

But this seems impossible, because we are not able to number, or to remember
all which has passed us in our life.

But God knows, and remembers, though we know not nor remember: For there are
books of remembrance: the book of Gods predestination, wherein the persons of
men are recorded; and the books of conscience, wherein every man's particular
thoughts, words, and deeds, with their circumstances are registered. Revel.
20.12. Aug. lib. de Ciu. Dei ca. 14. Orig. comment. in Romans 14.


I saw the dead, says John, both small and great stand before God, and the
books were opened; of the Old an New Testament, says Augustine; of
Conscience, says Origin: and another book was opened which was of life; and
the dead were judged out of those things which were written in the books
according to their works. God will put a kind of divine power into the
conscience, Qua fiat vt cuique opera sua bona, vel mala cuncta in memoriam
reuocentur, and mentis intuitu mira celeritate cernantur; Aug. loco mod^ citat.
whereby the conscience shall remember and wonderfully apprehend, and the mind
discern, all our works, good or bad, said S. Augustine.

We shall see our own, and each others faults.

Before God; This is the person unto whom the account must be made.

Before he said Christ, here he says God, therefore Christ is God.

In the same humane form and shape, in which Christ came to be judged, Revel.
1.7.
shall he come to judge: and every eye shall see him; the wicked shall see him
to their confusion, the righteous to their comfort. There shall be no
difference on the part of the Object appearing, but on the part of the Subject
seeing; the same brightness of glory shall fill the Saints with joy, and
stricke the wicked with horror.

Every one must give account of all his matters to God, to our Lord Jesus
Christ. 1 Pet. 4.5. Who shall give account to him that is ready to judge the
quick and dead. So 2 Cor. 5.10. and in the parables, Matthew. 25.19. Luke 16.2.
and seq.

Look to thy self, and to thine own matters; leave meddling with thy brother,
and censuring him: put not thine care into another man's boat, but regard thine
own; for thou must give account of thy self: of thy judging thy brother, of
thy breaking thy peace, and unity of the Church: even for these thou shall be
questioned at that day: Therefore be not rash.

The righteous may be comforted, own innocence, but of a free pardon by the
mercy of the Judge.

Prepare carefully for the day of judgment,

The most part of men neglect it, suffering the score of their sins so to
increase, and their debt to grow, that in the end, they will be found tardy to
their condemnation.

Three things should make us careful: The consideration of the Judge; of the
suddenness of our accounting; and of the matters to be accounted for.

1 The Judge is our Lord Christ: infinite in knowledge and justice; who cannot
be deceived by cunning, nor corrupted by gifts; and whose glory it is to render
in most strict justice, unto every man his due. Now he is infinitely merciful;
then he will be infinitely rigorous and severe.

The consideration of this Judge made devout Arsenius to fear, who being in
his sickness told by his friends, that he needed not to fear, because he had
led a holy life: answered, Indeed I fear, for Gods judgment is not as man's.

2 This judgment, and our giving account may be sudden, ere we be aware: When
Iesabel had painted her face, she little thought her judgment and account had
been so near. So neither thought Ammon at the feast; nor Absolon being
mounted on his Mule; nor Dives upon the view of his goods: that so soon they
should have been called to a reckoning.

The day of the general judgment shall not be yet, but the time of any man's
particular judgment and account may be this very hour: How many diseases are
we subject unto, which knock us down on a sudden?

Every man has his particular judgment in death; and as death leaves him, so
the last judgment finds him. Death is the gate of judgment, and the
judgment the gate of heaven or hell. Spend not the rest of this hour, before
thou have examined thy self: look to thy account; if thou have it not yet
ready, consider in what a fearful estate thou were, if God should at this
instant call thee to thy reckoning.

3 The matters to be accounted of; Eccles. 12. vlt. Act 8.22. Romans 2.15.16.
Mat. 12.37. 2 Cor. 5.10. Mat. 5.26. Mat. 12.36.
our selves, our thoughts, our words, deeds, committed, omitted: yea the
smallest and least things: farthings, idle words. How great rigor!

If a King call his Treasurer to account for every pin, how much more for
pounds, and great sums of money; So if God will reckon with us for idle
words, how much more for cursing, lying, common swearing, and blaspeming his
Name: If for the utmost farthing, how much more for Covetousness, Oppression,
Drunkenness, Whoredom, Theft, Murder, etc.

Thou shall be called to account, for that which thou have received: for the
gifts of nature and grace, for thy body and soul; for every Sermon thou have
heard, for every good occasion and opportunity offered of well doing.

And this; before God, before Angels and men, yea before the Devils.

How great must the shame of the wicked be, when all their abominable, and
secretest sins shall be laid open. Then shall that be published on the house
top, which thou would not now should be discovered for the whole world. It
may be thou would blush, if that which thou did the last night should
be published at the market Cross, in the hearing but of a few in comparison;
how will thou be confounded, when all thy damnable practices shall be brought
forth to light before the whole world.

Then shall be emptied in the view of all, that end of the wallet which we now
hang at our back.

What shall we do to avoid the shame and horror of that day?

Let us every day cast up our account: Let us unfeignedly repent: Every sin
we commit is scored up; and so soon as we repent, it is wiped and blotted
out: Repent and be converted, that your sins may be blotted; said Peter,
Act. 3.19.
who had experience of the force of repentant tears, which blotted out his
horrible denial of his Master.

The Jesuits report of a Student at Paris, who coming to Confession, and not
being able for tears and sobbing to speak, was willed by his Confessor to
write down his sins, which he did; and when the Confessor received it, the
writing vanished, and there remained nothing but the white and clean paper:
this, say they, was by a miracle, because of his great contrition. Let the
credit of this story be upon the Reporters; but upon the credit of the word
of God, if we repent unfeignedly, all our sins shall be blotted out, and a
book of clean paper (in respect of sin) shall be presented to the Judge.

Repent therefore, and bring forth good fruits, for this also shall further
our reckoning at that day. So Paul tells the Philippians, that their charity
in relieuing him, was a fruit that did abound to their account. Thy Prayers,
Philip. 4.17.
thine Alms deeds, thy Tears for sin, thy conscionable walking in thy
Calling, shall exceedingly further thy reckoning.

VERSE 13. Let us not therefore judge one another any more: but judge this
rather, that no man put a stumbling block, or an occasion to fall in his
brothers way.
HEre begins the second part of the Explication spoken of in the second
verse.

The first was a Direction for the compounding of the Controversies among the
Romans about meats and days.

This second is a Dehortation from Scandal, with diverse Reasons following, to
the end of the Chapter.

This Dehortation is set down by an Antithesis, where two things are opposed;
the one is denied, the other affirmed.

The first has a Prohibition, showing what we must not do: We must not judge
one another any more: The second has a precept showing what we must do, We
must judge this rather, that we put not a stumbling block, or an occasion to
fall in our brothers way.

The first is used as an Introduction to usher in the second.

And it has two parts: First, The Prohibition, not to judge one another.

By Judging, he means censuring, condemning; not all Judging forbidden, not
public by the Magistrate; but private and rash; such principally, which has
with a diversity of opinion, an alienation of affections, as has been showed
before.

There are four things we may not judge:

1 Secret things; Deuteronomy. 29.29.
of God, so says Moses, The secret things belong to the Lord our God, but
things revealed to us, etc. If thou see a wicked man, say not a reprobate,
for the decree of God is secret; and he which has showed mercy to thee, may
show mercy to thy neighbor also.

Of Man: as the heart, for no man knows his neighbors heart, 1. Cor. 2.11.
When thou see a man in prayer lift up his eyes, take heed of rash judgment,
to say an Hypocrite, for thou know not his heart.

Duo sunt in quibus temerarium iudicium cauere debemus; Aug. ser. 202. de
Tempore.
cum incertum est quo animo quicquam factum fit: vel cum incertum est qualis
futurus sit, qui nunc vel bonus vel malus apparet: There are two things (says
Anselme here, out of Saint Augustine) in which we must beware of rash
judgment; when it is uncertain, with what mind a thing is done; and when it
is uncertain, what he may be, who now appears to be good or bad.

2 Things doubtful: when things may have a double interpretation, take the
fairest; this is charity.

3 Things to come: Prou. 27.1.
Thou know not what a day may bring forth.

4 Things indifferent: of the which Saint Paul entreats in this Chapter.

Things openly and certainly evil, we may and must judge, and it were to be
wished, that Drunkards, unclean persons, etc. were more censured; Aug. loco
supra citato.
but yet with Saint Augustines prouiso, that we hate and detest, non hominem,
sed peccatum, non vitiosum sed vitium, morbum potius quam aegrotum: not the
man, but his fault, the disease rather, then the patient.

The Amplification is threefold:

1 From the Illation, Therefore: In as much as our brother stands or falls,
to his own Master, and whether he live or die, is the Lords; and that we must
all stand before the Iudgement-seat of Christ, to give an account for himself,
let us chamber our tongues, and not judge and censure one another.

2 From the persons who may not judge, implied in the verb, and expressed in
the English, Us, Let us not, he annumbreth himself, either because he is a
fellow-member with them, of the same body, and so in some sort it pertains to
him, as one who is sensible of his brothers failings, Musculus.
or, vt hoc tolerabilior sit admonitio, quo minus habet pudoris, that the
Admonition might be the more tolerable, the less it shameth them: or from the
remembrance of his own pronenesse, and forwardness to rash censuring in
former times, for he was a Pharisie, whose sect was intemperately censorious.
In many things we sin all: James 3.1.
-- Optimus ille est, qui minimis vrgetur -- Happy is he that has least and
fewest faults.

3 From the consideration of something spoken or done before, in this word
(...), any more: wherein there is a secret accusation of some thing past, and a
warning of something to come; as if he should say, Indeed it has been your
fault heretofore, to be too busy and forward in censuring your brethren, but
now being admonished and taught the contrary, you ought to leave such rash
judging.

From this part of the Amplification we have this Doctrine. After admonition
and instruction, we must be careful to amend our ways, Matthew. 3.10. Now is
the ^xe laid to the root of the trees, etc. Now though heretofore you have
been fruitless, yet now seeing I have admonished you, and God has sent his
own Son to teach you, see you bring forth good fruit, and repent: So John
5.14. Act. 17.30.31. 1. Pet. 4 1, 2, 3.

When a Minister has instructed and admonished his people, leave their sins,
and be conformable to good orders.

The Husbandman rejoices in his good croppe, and the Physician in the health
of his patient, to whom he has administered: So we rejoice if our admonitions
prevail, and have good success to your amendment; if otherwise, it is a great
grief to us, and not profitable to you.

Admonition is necessary,

1 Because we are hardly drawn from our errors, conceited opinions and
sins: therefore our Savior requires three Admonitions, Matthew. 18.
and an Heretic to be twice admonished, before avoided.

2 Because when we are recovered by Admonition into the right way, we easily
step aside, as wax melts with the heat, and loses the former impression.

He is miserable which wants a faithful Admonitour, but he is more, who
having one, will not hear him and be reformed.

The Use of all Admonition is that we should cease to do evil, Tim. 3.16.17.

Here are to be reproved such, who will not obey Admonition, but
notwithstanding, still continue the same: which is to make void the end why God
has commanded Admonition, and to wrappe our selves in grievous guiltiness:
for an evil man not admonished, shall be damned, much more admonished, if he
amend not, John 15.22.

Not to be bettered by Admonitions, Deuteronomy. 21.20.
is a sign of a very wretch, as in the incorrigible son; and in the sons
of Ely may appear: 1. Sam. 2.25. Ecclesiastas 4.13
and Solomon says, Better is a poor and wise child, then an old and a
foolish King, that will no more be admonished.

It is the way by the just judgment of God, to run into farther, and more
dangerous errors and sins. It is a rule, Minus peccatum cum arguitur,
Remigius, citatus a Chemnitio, Har. c. 31.
and non corrigitur, causa fit maioris peccati: A less sin reproved and not
amended, is made the cause of a greater sin: as Herod not reforming his
incest upon admonition, fell into the sin of murder, cutting off the head of
John Baptist. So the Brownists we see by experience, have by the judgment of
God run farther and farther into absurd errors: as many also among us,
finding fault with the government of the Church, and not being reclaymed by
admonition have turned Brownists.

Let every man therefore look to it, how he behave himself after admonition:
This shall one day torment thee thou drunkard, because thou have been often
admonished and repentest not.

To be bettered by admonition is the token of a wise man: but to harden the
neck, Pro. 9.9. and 17.10. Pro. 29.1.
is the forerunner of destruction.

I am black, but comely, says the Church, Canticles 1.5. Black, says one,
for her defects: Comely, Origin.
for amending upon admonition. He that continues in sin is doubly black,
for his sin, and for perseuering in sin being admonished: Peter and Paul,
etc. had never been so famous and beautiful in the Church, if they had not
yielded to admonitions.

Cain was admonished; if he had obeyed it he had been happy; for whosoever
being reproved, repents and amendeth his life, shall have mercy and be
pardoned.

VERSE 13. -- But judge this rather, that no man put a stumbling block, or an
occasion to fall, in his brothers way.
IN this part of the Verse is a Dehortation to the strong, unto which the
former part of the Verse was an Introduction, showing thereby that as this is
to be performed, so the other is not to be forgotten.

The sum of all to the end of the Chapter, is, that as the weak may not
judge the strong for the use of Christian liberty, so the strong must not in
such use contemn the weak, but moderate his liberty for their good.

The method is this: Chrysostom. Gryneus.
First, he sets down a general Precept, which is in these words: I say
general, because it belongs to both parts, not to give offense: all are bound
to this.

There are diverse reasons brought, all which principally are applied to the
strong, as in the other part they were to the weak.

In these words are two parts: First, the sum of the Precept, We may not give
offense.

An offense is, non bonae sed malae rei exemplum, aedificans^ad delictum;
Tertul. de velandis virginibus.
an example of a thing not good but evil, edifying (or emboldning) unto sin,
1 Cor. 8.10.
as speaks Tertullian, using Paul's phrase.

Or rather an offense is, dictum aut factum minus rectum, occasionem praebens
ruinae, Aquin. 2.2. q. 43. and in loc.
a word or deed, not well performed, yielding occasion of falling, as says
Aquinas, and the Schoolmen generally from S. Hieron. in ca. 15. Matthew.
Jerome.

A word or deed; for thoughts though they offend God, yet not men unless they
be manifested in word or deed.

Not so well performed; not only implying things unlawful in themselves, but
things lawful to be done, as things indifferent, but done indiscreetly.

Yielding occasion of falling: For though by that which a man does no man
falls, yet it is a scandal if it be apt to give occasion thereof. As when
Peter gave counsel to our Savior Christ, proceeding from great affection, but
from as great indiscretion, our Savior told him that he was an offense to
him, Mat. 16.23.
though it was impossible that he should fall thereby.

The second part is the Amplification or setting forth of this sum which is
threefold.

1 From the care every one should use not to give scandal, in these words, But
judge this rather. Where there is an elegant Antanaclasis or reuerberation of
the same word in a diverse sense. In the first part of the Verse, to judge
signified to condemn or censure: here accurately to examine, and singularly to
advise and consider. Before it was used of persons, here of works: as if he
should have said, Caiet. in locum.
Non exerceamus iudicia personarum, sed transite ad iudicium operis, Let us not
judge the persons of others, but use judgment in your own works.

2 From two Metaphors, in the words rendered A stumbling block, or an occasion
to fall.

The first, signifies a stone, or impediment in the way, (...).
against which a man dasheth or may dash his foot, especially the heedlesse,
the blind, the aged, or the weak: and then the meaning is, that we should
have a care of the weakness of our brethren, that they may not be hurt or
hindered in the way of godliness: for, Eccles. 12.5.
as the old man is afraid of that which is high, so they easily stumble in
regard of their weakness.

The second word signifies to halt, (...).
and this seems to follow upon the former: for when a man dasheth his foot
against a thing, he halteth or falls.

The word is almost proper to the New Testament, and to the Church, used for an
occasion of spiritual falling, whereby a man is any manner of way made worse,
and backewarder in goodness. Grammarians say that Scandalum is the bridge in a
trappe, which when the mouse puts down she is taken: as if to give scandal
were as the laying a trap in our brothers way to destroy him.

Some make the first to be the lesser, and the second the greater, but so in
things denied it follows not so well, rather in apt speaking the first should
be the greatest, though for my part I think with them, who take them both to
be of equal latitude, expressing the same thing, one word expounding another.

Offense or scandal is either active and given, or passive and taken.

That which is given is that which has actiuity in it self to scandalize, as
things merely evil and unlawful: or that which being good and lawful in it
self (as a thing indifferent) yet has such actiuity by accident, namely by
the unseasonable doing thereof. That which is taken is either of the little
ones so called from Mat. 18.6. or of the Pharisees, from Mat. 15.14.

That wherein the little ones suffer, is either justly given, and so taken, as
when things are merely evil: or not justly given, nor justly taken, as when
things indifferent are lawfully used.

That wherein the Pharisees suffer, is when by the malice of their own minds,
they are offended at things lawful and good.

Here the Apostle forbids giving scandal to the little and weak ones by an
indiscreet and unseasonable use of things indifferent; whose use is so, when
God has no glory, nor our brother edification, but hurt by it.

3 From the Person who is not to be offended: A brother, whether strong or
weak: Sometimes the strong to the weak, and sometimes the weak to the
strong, in a self persuasion of strength, gives offense.

His brother: not determinately, but rather comparatively; not in any man's way,
much less in our brothers.

We must not give offense one to another. Cor. 8.9. Take heed lest by any
means this liberty of yours become a stumbling to them which are weak: and
verse 13. If meat make my brother offend, I will eat no flesh while the world
stands, lest I make my brother to offend. 1 Cor. 10.32. Give none offense
neither to the Jews, nor to the Gentiles, nor to the Church of God. Of this
Paul had a care that his Ministry might not be blamed. 2 Cor. 6.3.


M. Calvin here observes that Paul taxes malignos istos censores, these hard
censurers of others, who spend all their Acumen in prying into other men's
doings, neglecting their own: Busy thy self at home, in thine own bosom.

Judgment is necessary to a Christian in his walking: advised of his doings,
whether lawful by the word; if lawful, whether convenient and expedient;
whether any hurt may come to our brother thereby: 1 Cor. 9.12.
of this Paul is an example, who will not use his liberty, where the Gospel
may be hindered by it.

Those are to be reproved which give offense,

1 Contemners of their brethren, See more hereof at the 20, and 21. verses.
which will not bate an ace of their liberty in their diet, apparel,
recreation, for their weak brothers sake, making a bad use of their liberty,
which is given us to do good withal.

2 Curious persons, who broach new opinions, and bring up new orders in the
public Holy Service, without authory, canilling at rites ancient, approved,
and commanded.

It is the cause of great stirs in the Church when private men especially
unlearned, will censure their Ministers and Magistrates in matters of their
office: This is an occasion given of wrath and indignation; and that many
accuse our whole profession of Nouelty.

3 Persons openly profane, who licentiously rush into all lewdness; of whom if
a man should begin to speak, he should never make an end: there are cartloads
of offenses given in this kind: O the abominable uncleanness, drunkenness,
pride, etc. which fill all places!

Let us use all our judgment herein, that we no way give offense, or put a
stumbling block in our brothers way. Thou shall not put a st^mbling block
before the blind, but thou shall fear thy God, Leuit. 19.14. It were better
that a millstone were hanged about a man's neeke, and he so cast into the depth
of the sea, Mat. 18.6.
then that he should offend one of the little ones. When at the day of
Judgment it shall be laid to our charge that we have given scandal, we will
wish rather to have bin drowned.

A greiuouser punishment remains for them which cause others to offend, then
for them which do such things themselves. So the Serpent was punished more
then Eve, and Eve more then Adam, So Iesabel, had a more grievous judgment
then Ahab.

Peccare non tantum in se perditionis habet, Chrysostom* Hom. 25. in Epl. ad Romans in
Morali. ad locum.
quantum quod reliqui ad peccandum inducuntur: To sin has not so much
perdition in it, as to induce others to sin, says Saint Chrysostom.

Use judgment also that thou take not offense; give, so to take scandal, if
there be not just cause.

Blessed is he that is not offended at me, says our Savior: and again, These
things have I spoken unto you that you should not be offended: and in another
place, Woe unto the world because of offenses. There is sin on both sides,
but specially on the side of the party offended in indifferent things; and
therefore woe.

Tertullian says, Tertul. lib. de. velan. virgin.
Bonae res neminem scandalizant nisi malam mentem; Good things and lawful
offend none but them which have evil and corrupt minds. Where we are
therefore so ready to take offense at the liberty of our brethren in things
indifferent, it is a sign of unmortified reason, and affections, Mat. 18.8, 9.
If thine eye cause thee to offend, pluck it out, etc. it is the counsel of
our blessed Savior.

Let this be thy judgment and wisdom, in nothing to give, and in things
indifferent not to take offense.

VERSE 14. I know and am persuaded by the Lord Jesus, that there is nothing
unclean of it self: but to him that esteems any thing to be unclean, to
him it is unclean. But if thy brother be grieved with thy meat, now walk
not thou charitably. --
IN these words is the first reason of the Dehortation; Aretius.
though some make the 14. verse to contain a reason by it self, and that he
thereby persuades to peace, thus:

All meats are clean, and therefore the weak have no cause to be offended, in
as much as they defile not the strong: and the strong have no reason to stand
so strictly upon their liberty, but that they might abstain, because they are
not the purer for eating; and therefore that they should not contend about
meats.

But indeed the substance of the Reason lies in the 15. verse, and is drawn
from Charity, and brought in by a Prolepsis: and this and all the rest urged
upon the strong Christian principally, to this end, that he should moderate his
liberty for his weak brothers sake.

Now the instance in all the arguments is only of meats; but to be applied
unto all indifferent things.

In the setting down of this first argument, are to be considered; The
objection of the strong, and the answer of Paul.

The objection is gathered out of the 14. verse, and was thus:

There is nothing, said the strong, unclean of it self, though it be unclean
to him that thinks it so.

Therefore seeing I know and am persuaded of the cleannes of the creatures, I
may and will use my liberty in eating of them.

Unto this Paul answers; of which are two parts, the first, is a concession,
verse 14. The second, a correction, where lies the argument, verse 15.

In the concession, we may consider the thing granted, and the amplification.

The thing is twofold: First, that there is nothing unclean of it self:
Second, that to him that thinks a thing to be unclean, it is so.

The amplification from Paul's assurance of these things: He knows and is
persuaded, set forth by the author, the Lord Jesus.

I know and am persuaded: these two are necessary to faith, and it is as much
as if he should have said, I steadfastly believe.

By the Lord Jesus: this to be referred, not to that which follows, but to
Paul's knowledge, and persuasion; Jesus taught Paul these things; though the
sense were good if they should be read with that which follows, viz. that
through Christ no indifferent thing is now unclean of it self.

Unclean. The word properly signifies common, and (only by the language of
the Scriptures) taken for impure, or unclean, so common hands, that is
unclean. Mark 7.2. So Peter says that he never ate that which is common and
unclean, Act. 10.14.

That which was common to other people, Leui. 11. Deuteronomy, 14.
and interdicted to the Jews was called unclean.

Diverse meats were forbidden the Jews, and before Christ were unclean to
them, as appears in the law, which law had diverse reasons of it,

1 It was for their health; that they might avoid certain diseases unto the
which the temperament of that people, De his omnibus pene consul. Th. Aqu.
prim. secund. q. 102. Art. c. ad primum.
by eating such things might incline, and so be hindered from the contemplation
of heavenly things, and from the service of God, and (by distemper caused
through ill juice in the body) be made sluggish unto good works; all alike as
if you put a bright shining candle into a duskish lantern; thus say the
Rabbines.

2 To distinguish them from other nations, and that they should avoid their
company, with whom they might not feed on the same meats.

3 For a mystical signification of manners: these meats not being by Nature
unclean, but only in signification: which was the reason that Saint Augustine
called the Jews a Prophetical people: Their very meat was an instruction,
they might not eat the swine to teach them to avoid sluttishnes, nor the Hauk,
to teach them to abhor rapacity, etc. So their garments; they might not wear
Linsey woolsey, to teach them sincerity.

4 To restrain their desire of dainty fare. Chrysostom.


5 To inure them to obedience, Ambr.
and to take down their pride and stubbornness, by this yoke.

By it self: By nature says Chrysostom; for to the Jews they were not
unclean by nature, but by a positive law: He denies not, but that serpents,
and dogs, etc. are unwholesome; but nothing was forbidden for moral
uncleanness in it self: Genesis 9.3.
for all creatures were given to Noah without exception, as the green herbs.

Here we have a distinction: That a thing may be unclean per se, aut per
accidens, by it self, or by accident.

But to him that esteems any thing to be unclean. Meat may be considered,
in it self; or in relation, to the Law, or to the conscience: to him which was
under the Leuiticall law some meat was unclean, so is it to him who esteems
it so in his conscience.

Not that clean and unclean is determined by man's opinion, as affirm the
Libertines; Man is not the measure of things, as Aristotle has taught long
ago; but my conscience may make a thing unclean to me, because to do against
conscience is sin.

Things indifferent are clean of themselves, but unclean to him that so
esteems them. The first branch is proved: Act. 10.5. What God has cleansed,
call not thou common. 1. Tim. 4.4. Every creature of God is good, and nothing
to be refused, if it be received with thanksgiving.

The second is proved by the fifth verse before, and the two and twentieth and
three and twentieth following.

The reason hereof is this: An erroneous conscience makes a thing unlawful:
For Actions receive their qualification, according to the will of the Agents;
and the will is moved by the thing apprehended: If Reason judge that thing to
to be sin, and yet the will be carried unto it; it is manifest that such a
one has a will to sin; and so the outward action which is informed by the
will, whether it be lawful or unlawful in it self, is a sin.

We are to praise God for his bounty, David, Lo, we have sinned, but these
sheep what have they done? 2. Sam. 24.17.


We may eat, but with these prouisoes.

1 That we eat not in idleness, but in the sweat of our brows.

2 That we labor in that which is good, having an honest vocation, not to
live by theeuing, gaming, etc.

3 That we eat with thanksgiving.

4 That we give part to the poor, and send portions to them for whom nothing
is prepared; to give at least some crummes to Lazarus.

5 That we feed moderately, and soberly, as those who remember they must die.
When Socrates was asked how he differed from others, answered: Others live to
eat, I eat to live.

6 That we give no offense, of which this part of the Chapter speaks.

I know and am persuaded: first to be persuaded, and then to seek to know:
knowledge must go before persuasion, as a candle to direct it.

It is the fault of our ignorant Papists, of our Brownists, and of much people
among us, who are great fault finders; ask them why they dislike such and such
things; this is their reason, they are persuaded, being notwithstanding
destitute of knowledge of those things which they reprove.

First know by good ground from the Word, then resolve and be persuaded:
Augustinus.
Praiudicium non est iudicium sed vitium; Prejudice, or judgment before
knowledge, is not true judgment, but presumptuous opinion and vice.

It is a miserable thing to doubt in things commanded; Not to obey is sin,
because the Magistrate is resisted; and to obey, is sin also, because the
conscience doubts.

O perplexity! but yet no man is perplexed simply: such then must put away
their erroneous and doubting conscience, by learning, and being persuaded. But
here is a great corruption; many among us desire rather to hear that which may
confirm them in their doubting, then take it away, and conform them to the
peace of the Church.

Rightly labor to be informed, for as an unskillful Pilot, so an erring
conscience brings into danger.

Terrible is the state of wicked men, know and are persuaded of the euilnesse
of things, and yet they do them.

These sin against the light of Nature; Cicero. Offic. l. 1.
for, Nihil faciendum de quo dubites, sit necne recte factum; Nothing is to be
done, which thou doubtest whether it may lawfully be done or no, said a Heathen
man.

Tell me, thou Drunkard, thou Whore-master, etc. do not thou know that
whoredom and drunkenness are sins? And yet dare thou do them, and wound
thy conscience? What peace can thou have, when thy heart accuses thee? 1.
John 3.20.
and GOD is greater then thy heart.

Saint Augustine compares Conscience to a wife which continually scoldeth.

It is better to dwell in the wilderness, then with a contentious and angry
woman: and a man were as good to be in hell, as have a wounded and accusing
conscience.

VERSE 15. But of thy brother be grieved with thy meat, now walk^st thou not
charitably: Destroy not him with thy meat, for whom Christ dyed.
THese words are the second part of Paul's answer, which is a correction; in
which is the Argument it self, urged upon the strong, that he ought not to
offend his weak brother by his liberty in things indifferent.

The Argument is taken from the Cause, removing scandal, which is charity.

And here we have the Argument, and the proof of it.

The Argument is thus:

That which is contrary to charity, is not to be done.

But to give offense is contrary to charity.

Therefore etc.

The first Proposition is sure, for charity is the fulfilling of the Law, as we
have heard before, Chap. 13.

The second Proposition, is proved from two effects of Scandal set down in
this verse: The first is Grief: the second Destruction.

From the first effect, the Argument is thus: To grieve our brother is contrary
to charity.
But to give scandal is to grieve him.
Therefore etc.
Of the other effect we will consider by it self.


But if thy brother be grieved with thy meat, now walk thou not charitably.
In this part of the verse, by it self considered, we have two parts: a
Supposition, and an Accusation.

The Supposition, If thy brother be grieved with thy meat.

The Accusation, Now walk thou not charitably.

Grant the Supposition, and the Accusation holds; take away the Supposition,
and the Accusation is of no force.

To use indifferent things, as meat, apparel, etc. is lawful, if charity put
not in a bar: we must set more by our brothers grieved conscience, then by
the use of our liberty in such things.

We may at no hand forgo our liberty in such things, (for it is a part of the
purchase by the blood of Christ) but the use of it.

In the Supposition, we have the thing supposed, Grief; and the Amplification,
from the subject grieved; thy brother, and from the object, with thy meat.

Grief is a passion, whereby the appetite does abhor with perturbation,
evil present; whether so indeed, or in apprehension.

This affection is natural and good, if it be directed upon the right object,
which is sin, with the appurtenances, and that it be in due measure, and to
the right end.

The subject, thy brother: whether strong or weak, for it is against charity,
either to grieve other; but here the brother grieved is the weak one; who
three ways lies open to grief, by the liberty used by the strong.

1 By the sin of the strong, as the weak supposes; for this he is grieved,
thinking that thereby God is offended, and the soul of his brother in danger.

2 By reprehension: taking indignation to be reproved by the strong, for the
retaining of differences of meats, days.

3 By being drawn by the example of the strong, to do against his conscience,
which breeds grief, post factum, after the deed done.

With thy meat, that is, thy liberty in eating meats, supposed by the weak
to be unlawful.

Now walk thou not charitably. Though in other things, yet now, thou walk
not charitably in this particular. He condemns not the strong, as to be
without charity altogether, but to step awry herein. The Imputation is great,
because charity is the Rule of our life.

To use things indifferent to the grief of our Brother, is against charity.
Or, To give scandal is against charity, because thereby my brother is grieved.
1. Corinthians. 8.12. To sin so against the brethren, is to wound their weak
conscience.

May I in nothing grieve my brother?

Yes, in somethings I may: sin, that he may be brought to godly sorrow, unto
repentance: Thus did S. Peter prick the hearts of the Jews, Acts 2.37. So
Paul tells the Corinthians, that though he made them sorry by a Letter, he did
not repent, though he did repent. Look how the affection of a father is in the
correcting of his child, he is grieved to beat him, and yet he is glad if it
do him good; so was Paul toward the Corinthians, it never repented him that he
had made them to grieve, in as much as it profited them to repentance and
salvation.

It is not against charity for Ministers to reprove sharply, and for
Magistrates severely to punish notorious offenders; nay it is true charity to
correct them unto their amendment; and to neglect this, is want of charity: let
disordered persons be grieved; let drunkards and such like smart for it, that
if it be possible, they may be thereby brought to repentance, and so be saved.

But to use our liberty in indifferent things to the grief of our brother, and
so to stand upon it, as not to omit the use of it for our weak brothers sake,
is unlawful, and against charity.

Yet here are two cautions to be remembered.

1 It must be in such indifferent things, the use whereof is not determined by
the authority of the Magistrate: as, in it self it is indifferent to sit or
kneel at the Communion; but if the Magistrate determine the gesture by his
authority; then though our brother be grieved, we are to use that gesture: For
not to obey the Magistrate in a lawful command is a sin. The use of our
liberty is not in our power.

2 The brethren grieved, must be weak ones; Sarcerius in locum.
If they be stiff, and obstinate in their opinion, we are not bound, but may,
nay sometimes we ought to use our liberty before them, as we shall note
afterward.

The phrase is to be observed: If thy brother be grieved; thou grieuest thy
brother; to note, that the fault is rather in the patient then in the agent.
And therefore weak ones are to know, that it is no virtue in them to be
scrupulous in every thing, and to be grieved at their brothers lawful liberty;
but a sin, which is to be amended by knowledge and charity.

Faith gives liberty, charity is a binder. Omnia libera per fidem, serua per
charitatem: I may do all things by faith, I may eat of any meats, or
abstain, I may wear any colors in my apparel, etc. But by charity I must
do or not do that, which most makes for the peace of the Church, and the good
of my brethren. Paul by faith may circumcise Timothy: by charity he will not
circumcise Titus.

We must have great care of the weak:

Even nature (much more grace) teaches not to hurt, but to love our brethren.

Weak brethren are not to be contemned, but to be tolerated, if so be they
grow not perverse and obstinate.

We ought not to strike the strong: but to fall upon him that is sick and
weak, is no credit.

To grieve a weak brother, is to wound him: What more inhumane thing, then to
wound a brother? Especially being sick and weak; yea and to wound not his
head or face, but his very conscience, the weakest part in him, and the
pretioussest; whose hurt cannot be without great danger.

Off with that hair, away with that apparel, those colors, etc. which wound
thy weak brothers soul.

We must have care of all, grieve any. Grief is a sickness, a consumption of
the soul: he that gives just cause of grief, is accessory after a sort to
his brothers death.

He that cares not how he grieves the godly by his carriage, is no true
Christian: for without love we are no Christians.

How many are they which by their beastly living make the hearts of good
Christians sad!

Who that has but a mite of piety can abstain from grief, to hear the
blasphemies, to see the drunkenness, and wretched behavior of wicked men?

If thou walk in these sins, know that thou offendest God, and grieuest
good men; and then is the Devil pleased and his angels, Luke 15.7.
even as the good Angels rejoice at the conversion of a sinner.

If thou have made the good to sorrow by thy sins, repent, and make them glad
with thy amendment. This is true charity toward God and men.

VERSE 15. -- Destroy not him with thy meat, for whom Christ dyed.
THe Apostle here proves by another Argument, that scandal is contrary to
charity, namely by another effect of it. Thus:

That which destroys our brother is contrary to charity.

But to give scandal destroys him.

Therefore, etc.

This Argument is set down in the manner of a prohibition. Where we have the
thing prohibited, to destroy our brother: And the Illustration.

In the thing prohibited is the action, to destroy: the object, him, that is,
our brother.

Both these are illustrated: the action, from the instrument of destruction,
with thy meat: The object, from his dignity, which is, that he is beloved of
Christ; declared by an infallible token of such love, he dyed for him.

Destroy not. The word signifies total destruction. It is no light loss that
comes to our brother by giving offense, but even the loss of body and soul.
Not that every one who is scandalized is so lost: but that scandal is apt so
to do, and where it is taken, without the mercy of God brings forth such
effect.

Such a destruction is here meant which came to Judas, John 17.12. 2 Thessalonians. 2.3.
which shall come to Antichrist, who are both called the sons of perdition,
from this word.

Such a destruction as wicked men shall have at the day of Judgment, 2 Pet.
3.7.
which is therefore called the day of perdition of ungodly men.

Such a destruction which the devil endeavors to bring upon us, (...). Revel.
9.11.
who is therefore called Apollyon, the destroyer.

So that here is an Auxesis, scandal, not only grieves, but destroies our
brother.

Him: the strong, says Ambrose, who by the abstinence of the weak, begins
to doubt of his liberty; as diverse at this day among us, doubtless, have by
the scrupulousness of some, begun to stagger at such things, whereof before
they have been well persuaded.

But it is rather meant of the weak: destroy not him, that is, Aretius.
thy weak brother: he says not brother, but him, though that term be used
before and after; because, desinit esse frater cum pergas occidere, says one:
He cease to be thy brother, when thou go about to destroy him.

With thy meat: Meat is the instrument of this destruction, not a Sword, or
Pistol: and so surely many perish through riotous eating and drinking; but he
means here, by using our liberty in eating of all things, without the respect
of our weak brother, who is in danger of destruction thereby three ways.

1 In regard of a passive scandal through rash judgment.

2 By being in danger of eating against conscience, by the example of the
strong, which brings shipwreck of faith.

3 From the danger of Apostasy and alienation from the faith.

For whom Christ died. For him, for whom Christ died, we should be careful
and esteem him above our meat, apparel, or any indifferent thing: here a
comparison being as interpreters observe, between our meat, and our brother
redeemed by the death of Christ.

Scandal is apt to destroy our Brother, Cor. 8.11. And through thy knowledge
shall thy weak brother perish, for whom Christ died. And verse 20. of this
Chapter. For meat destroy not the work of God.

Can any of them be destroyed for whom Christ dyed?

If we consider the counsel and decree of God, promise of salvation unto them,
they cannot: But divide and separate them from these, and then they may in
regard of their own infirmity, of the malice of Satan, and of the innumerable
offenses which are given, which they were never able to outstand if they were
left to themselves.

Here is a comfort for the weak: Christ dyed for them. Abraham, so much
patience as Job, etc. yet if thou have a true faith, though small; and striuest
against corruption, though weakly, thou art to be reputed one belonging to
Christ, and shall have benefit by his death.

Here is a threefold admonition.

1 To the strong, that out of their indulgence to their weak brethren, they
should abstain from the use of their liberty in things indifferent. They are
their Brethren, Charity requires it, and Christ also who dyed for them: and not
so to do, Paul elsewhere calls sinning against Christ. 1 Cor. 8.12.


Thy meat or apparel are thine, but thy brother is Christ's: he came to save
thy brother, will thou go about to destroy him? that were in some sort to bean
Antichrist.

Christ did that which was hard, he parted with his blood and life for thy
brother: what madness is it, if we will not do that which is easy, as to
refrain some dish of meat, or some color or fashion of garment, for our
brothers, nay for Christ's sake.

2 To the weak, that they should beware how they take offense at the liberty
of their brethren: for hereby they are in danger to be destroyed. own sin,
It is a rule, Aquinas in loc.
Scandalum passiuum non est sine peceato scandalizati: A passive scandal is
not without the sin of him that is scandalized: but it may be without the
sin of the scandalizing. As first, if he do an indifferent thing by the
commandment of the Church or Magistrate. Secondly, if he do it, not knowing,
nor being able upon any probability to suspect that any would be offended at
his liberty. Now in these cases to be offended is a sin: and sin has a
destroying nature.

Do then as thou please in indifferent things, whose use is not determined
by authority; but leave thy brother to his liberty, and judge him not. He may
use his liberty and not sin, but thou can not be offended at it, but thou
must needs sin.

Men speak of tenderness of conscience and grace, but it is a sign of
neither, to find fault and be offended at that which we cannot soundly prove
to be unlawful by Gods word.

3 To all men. That they have a care of the salvation of their brethren; also
of their own.

Give no ill example: entise no man to theft, drunkenness, uncleanness, to lie,
to forswear themselves, or to any sin; for this is to play the Devil, and to
oppose Christ in the work of man's salvation.

Christ dyed for thee; have a care of thy own soul for which Christ dyed, and
damn not thy self by thy sins.

VERSE. 16. Let not then your good be evil spoken of.
IN this Verse is another Argument to dissuade from scandal, from the
pernicious effect thereof: which is the defamation of our good.

That which makes our good to be evil spoken of is not to be done.
But giving offense makes our good to be evil spoken of.
Therefore, etc.
The Argument is set down in the form of a prohibition: where we have the
thing prohibited, and the amplification.

The thing prohibited is the causing of our good to be evil spoken of. Where
is the evil action prohibited, and the object of such action. The evil
action, speaking evil: the object, good.

Be evil spoken of, or blasphemed, according to the sound of the Greek word,
which is now familiar with us in our tongue.

Blasphemy is a speech hurting another good name. The use of Divines has
obtained by custom of speaking, that it is taken for evil speaking against
God, or persons and things which are nearly conjoined to God, as his Word and
his Saints.

Now blasphemy against God is, when it is affirmed, that that is in him which
is not in him: or that not to be in him which is in him. And so of his word and
ordinances.

And this is, either of the mind, or of the tongue, or of the life: for sin
is a kind of blasphemy, because he that sins, signifies thereby that he
thinks not well of God; and therefore for such cause we call common swearing
blaspheming, because such a one seems to have a base opinion of God, that he
dares so to transgress.

The blasphemy of the mind is, when we do conceive amiss of God, according
to the former description of blasphemy.

The blasphemy of the tongue, when we speak in such manner.

And both these are committed, either enuntiatiue, Greg. de Valen. tom. 3. co^.
Theol. Disp. 1. Q. 13. puncto 1.
or optatiue: by the way of simple enunciation, or wishing: as to say there is
no God, or to wish there were no God: to say God is not just, or to wish that
he were not just: so to say there is no day of judgment, or to wish there
were no such day to come: so of the Word, to affirm there was never merry
world since there was so much preaching, or to wish there were no preaching.

And that of the tongue may be committed, either actu signato, expressly
uttering such things, or actu exercito, covertly signifying so much, as when
one speaks that which is true of God or his word, but in a contemning, and
diriding, and scoffing manner.

Good: Translated before, Commodity. Some say faith, Chrysostom. Ambr.
piety, and the hope of eternal life. Some Doctrina dominica, the Lords
doctrine. Hierome says, our liberty. Some the Gospel. Oleuian very well
observes by good to be meant the kingdom of grace, as it follows in the
next verse: so that I think by good here to be meant in general the Gospel,
in particular the right of our Christian liberty, which is a notable part
thereof, and which is taught therein.

This good which he speaks of is set forth by this possessiue your. And herein
is the other part of the prohibition comprehended, which is the amplification
from the persons; which may be considered to be twofold.

First, Ambr. in locum.
to whom he gives this prohibition. S. Ambrose says to the weak; Blasphematur
bonum, cum dubitatur de Dei creatura: Our good is blasphemed when we doubt of
the creature. He means of meat, which was the fault of the weak.

And surely it is meant to both, though principally to the strong; yet the
weak not to be excluded: for they have no more liberty to object the good to
blasphemy then the strong. And doubtless it was evil spoken of as well by the
nice curiosity and rash judgment of the weak, as by the despising of the
strong. And therefore the Commentaries ascribed to Hierom, Blasphematur si
propter talia contendimus: It is blasphemed, if we strive about such things;
applying it to both.

Secondly, the persons who should speak ill of our good. Those without, says
Chrysostom: the weak, says Martyr. I think it may be meant of both, or of
any whosoever.

Every Christian ought to be careful that he cause not the Gospel of the
Kingdom, and our Christian liberty a part of the same, to be evil spoken of.
1 Timothy 6.1. Servants must so behave themselves, that the name of God, and his
doctrine, be not blasphemed. Which also is to be understood of all. So 1 Pet.
2.12. and 1 Cor. 10.29. Why is my liberty judged of another man's conscience?
and verse 30. Why am I evil spoken of for that for which I give thanks.

In the general the Gospel is our good, (...)


If it were not our great good the Papists and the rest of the world would not
so envy us for it as they do, and seek to get it from us.

To have a house well built, well watered, well woodded, and in a good air, a
great good: but what is all this without the Gospel? unless we have the
Heavenly dew, the Manna and Quails, to fall every day about our Tents?

Liberty also a great good, to have a Patent for trading in woll, in wines, in
spices, etc. matters of much good; and greatly esteemed.

But who is able to value the good of our Christian liberty even in this; that
we may with a free conscience join with the people of God in the word and
Sacraments, and use the good creatures of God? what benefit to be compared to a
quiet conscience?

They are surely ungrateful to the blood of Christ, who in such things lay
bands and fetters upon themselves, in which Christ has purchased them
freedom; as in apparel, diet, recreation, and such like.

But chiefly they are herein guilty which place a part of Gods worship, in the
using or abstayning from certain habits, or gestures in the Divine service:
which is a sin against the second Commandment, and a will worship.

But does not the Magistrate and the Church enjoin a certain habit,

Yes, but not as a necessary worship of God, comely rite and ceremony, to be
changed when it seems unto them to be requisite so to do.

Here are to be reproved both the strong and the weak,

The strong because they will yield nothing to the weak, nor forbear the use
of their liberty to give them any satisfaction.

The weak because they are so ready to censure and speak evil of the strong,
who do nothing but that which in it self is lawful to be done: and also
because in some things they resist authority, and government.

And thus, as in Rome in those days, so in our days, partly through the
indiscretion of the strong, and partly through the peevish obstinacy of the
weak, there are great contentions: whereby the minds of believers are
distracted: discipline is dissolved; the licentiousness of the multitude is
confirmed, who think that the word and Sacraments are not things so sacred and
of such reverence and necessity, because such which would be accounted the top
of profession, refuse them for a vesture or gesture.

And hence profane people account all profession to be curiosity, and the
preaching of the Gospel to be the cause of contention, and while we contend
about such things, they laugh all religion to scorn.

Let the strong gratify the weak in abstaining from their liberty in such
things which are in their power: and let the weak, because nothing is imposed
upon their consciences, suffer themselves to be persuaded to conformity and
uniformity, that so we may redeem the Gospel, and our liberty from contempt.

All are to be admonished to have a special regard to our good,

If by our drunkenness, whoredom, etc. we cause the Gospel to be ill spoken
of, God will severely punish it, as he did in David.

If we which should shine as lights, be turned into darkness; if we who by
our conversation should win others to the Gospel, cause them to abhor it,
how shall we escape?

To sin ignorantly, is damnable; but for him, which professes knowledge, to
err in that which he does profess, is abominable.

The Church has never sustained more damage then from her own children. S.
Bernard alleging in a Sermon the words of Ezechias, Esaias 38.17.
In pace amaritudo mea amarissima, that is, according to that letter, In peace
is my bitterness most bitter, says thus;

Many ways has the Devil hurt the Church, but never more then now. Bernh. in
ser ad pastores in Synod.
Ecclesiam incipientem por tyrannos, proficientem per haereticos, iam laetam et
florentem per motus illicitos, he hurt the Church when she began, by Tyrants;
when she had well profited and proceeded, by Heretics, (and Schismatics;) and
now she florisheth, by the unlawful motions and inordinate lives of wicked
men: Fuit amara in persecutione Tyrannorum, amarior in versutia Haereticorum,
amarissima in prauitate filiorum. She was bitter under the persecution of
Tyrants, more bitter by the subtilty of the Heretics, and most bitter by the
prauity of her own children.

Wisdom is justified of her children; let us not eat out the bowels of our
Mother the Church of England, by our contentions and profaneness; but justify
her, and adorn and grace her, and the Gospel which she holds forth unto us,
by our peace and piety, Amen.

VERSE 17. For the Kingdom of God, is not meat and drink, but righteousness,
and peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost.
NOw follows a reason why the strong and the weak should not by their
contentions about indifferent things, cause their good to be evil spoken of.

This reason is brought in by a Prolepsis unto which also belong the two next
verses.

Chrysostom well observes that this pertaines to both of them: for indeed both
of them seem to have good ground for their contentions, and not yielding each
to other, thus: For that wherein the Kingdom of God consists, we ought to
contend.
But the Kingdom of God is, in not eating (says the weak) by the Law; in
eating, says the strong, by the Gospel. Therefore.


Now hereunto Paul answers, denying the minor, and in stead thereof puts
down a contrary assertion in this verse, which is confirmed in the 18 and
applied in the 19. verse, He proves herein that they ought not to contend, by
an argument drawn for a definition of the Kingdom of God: or from the nature
of things indifferent; or from a comparison of things necessary to the
promoting of Gods kingdom, and things not necessary, thus: For those things
which further not the Kingdom of God we ought not to contend.
But meat and drink further not the kingdom of God. Therefore.


In this assertion are two things. The thing it self, and the description of
it.

The thing it self is the Kingdom of God, which, being spoken of the Elect;
is ordinarily taken either for the state of the Church present in this world,
and so called the Kingdom of grace, or for the Kingdom of Glory in the world
to come.

Chrysostom understands it of the Kingdom of Glory, that it is not attained
by eating or not eating; others understand the Kingdom of Grace.

Some interpret our justification not to consist in meat, Hier.in locum. Aug.
1. 2. quaest. Euan. c. 11. Aquinas. Melanchton. Oleuianus. Gualterus.
or drink; some, that whereby we are brought to Heaven; some that, by the
which God reigns in us; some, spiritual motions in our hearts; some, the
administration of salvation by the Word and Spirit, which was before called,
our good; some, the whole business of our salvation, of which Christ is the
Auther, destroying the Kingdom of Satan, and setting up the Kingdom of God;
setting certain notes, whereby the citizens of this Kingdom should be known,
which are, not meat and drink, but righteousness, etc. as if ye should say,
Christianity is not meat, etc.

These several expositions are as a large commentary, and all to be received,
that of Saint Hierome concerning justification being warily understood.

This Kingdom is described here Negatiuely, it is not meat and drink; and
affirmatively, but righteousness and peace, and joy, amplified by the Author
of them, the Holy Ghost.

Is not meat and drink: that is, is not conserved and maintained, 1 Cor 8.8.
by meat and drink, or such transitory things; meat commends not us to God,
says Paul in another place, for neither if we eat, are we the better, nor
if we eat not, are we the worse; to which purpose speaks Saint Ambrose. He
says not; is not liberty, for this is an especial privilege of this Kingdom.

This must also warily be understood; for in some construction, the Kingdom
of GOD may be furthered or hindered by meat and drink, and things indifferent.

Here therefore we must distinguish, that principally and substantially the
kingdom of God is not in such things; for substantialia regni, as one says,
Caietanus.
the substantial things of the kingdom are righteousness, joy, peace: For
meat is for the belly, not for the conscience; for the temporal health of the
body, not for the eternal salvation of the soul; for this life, not for that
which is to come.

Accidentally the kingdom of God may be in such things, which Aquinas here
excellently shows, Externa, etc. Outward things, says he, do so far
belong to this kingdom, as the affections are ordered, or disordred about
those things in which principally consists this kingdom; not per se, but in
regard of using, or abstaining, which he confirms by the sentence of Saint
Augustine.

We may so eat, as that we may destroy the kingdom of God in our selves, as
in surfeiting and drunkenness; and we may so abstain, that we may help to
build it up, as in fasting and abstinence, for our more humiliation and
feruencie in prayer.

We may consider Adam: The kingdom of God was not in the Apple; for what is an
Apple thereto: but Adams obedience in abstaining, and his disobedience in
eating, pertained to the kingdom of God.

So, what is meat? What is a white or black garment? What is color or
fashion? What is kneeling, or sitting, or any other gesture? And yet a man may
so use or refuse these things, as thereby to procure much good or hurt to his
soul.

But righteousness etc. This is the Affirmative part of the description, from
the effects or notes of such in whom God reigns.

Righteousness imputed; Peace of conscience proceeding from our Justification:
Joy, the sweet and comfortable estate of the heart and affections, issuing from
such peace.

It is true that these are the great privileges of such who belong to Gods
kingdom; but in mine opinion not principally meant here.

I understand therefore by righteousness, that which is infused and inherent,
or the exercise and expression thereof, in the duties of obedience. By Peace,
that of the Church, whereby by the members thereof do mutually consent, and not
strive one with another; and by Joy, that holy affection whereby we delight in
such righteousness and peace; and thus expounds Thomas Aquinas.

My reason of this exposition, is, first, because these are called Services, in
the next verse, He that in these things serves Christ, etc.

Now imputed righteousness is not a service of ours, but a free gift of God to
us, in which we are Passiues, rather then Actiues: and therefore learned men
observe that we are called, faithful, not (...), but (...).

And peace of Conscience and Joy, are rather rewards then services.

Secondly, the peace here meant, is that which is in the nineteenth verse,
which is that which ought to be between Christians, the stablishing of which
among the Saints at Rome, is Paul's whole drift in this Chapter.

In the holy Ghost, who is the procreant cause of sanctity, unity and joy:
added, to distinguish this peace and righteousness from that which is Civil;
and this Joy, from that which is Carnal.

The kingdom of God is not in things of a middle nature, but in things which
are necessary. Luke 17.20.21. The kingdom of God comes not with observation,
that is, with washing of hands and pots, etc. says Christ to the Pharisees,
that put righteousness in such things; but the kingdom of God is within you,
as if he should have said, Look into your hearts what the Spirit works
there, and show the presence of that holy Spirit, by righteousness, and peace,
and joy. 1. Cor. 8.8. Meat commends us not to God: for neither if we eat, are
we the better, nor if we eat not, are we the worse.

So, 1. Tim. 4.8. Bodily exercise, that is, meat, drink, apparel, sitting,
kneeling, profits little, but godliness, etc.

Paul's Assertion should quiet and appease all quarrels in the Church,

The contentions in our Church have bin grievous about Vestures and Gestures;
Tertul lib. de Ieiun. aduersus Psych.
but I would say of these, as Tertullian about meat or abstinence; Etsiclaues
macelli tibi tradidit, permittens esui omnia, non tamen in macello regnum Dei
inclusit, nec enim esus aut potus est regnum Dei: though he has delivered to
thee the keys of the market, permitting thee to eat of all things, yet he
has not locked up the kingdom of God in the market.

Or as Basil; Abstinence from meats, of it self, Basil. Mag. citat. a Bened.
Justiniano.
profits not to salvation, seeing for the most part they which eat, are
equal or superior in piety to them which eat not.

Let us not then contend about such things, but if any man will contend, let it
be for the faith that was once delivered to the Saints.

And let no man or woman so impudently slander our Church, as to say that the
wearing of a garment is preferred before the preaching of the Word: for there
is no man barred for a garment, but for his stubbornness and disobedience to
lawful Authority; he being justly thought unfit to teach others obedience to
Powers, Titus 3.1.
according to Paul's commandment to Titus, which refuse to obey themselves.

Note a difference between things indifferent and righteousness, peace and
joy: These are necessary to perform, other: The kingdom of God cannot be
without these, but it may be without them.

And yet here behold the subtilty of the Devil; many contend about these so,
as if Christianity it self consisted in them; refusing to hear the Word, and
(which is most horrible) to come to the holy Sacrament, because of some
indifferent things commanded; putting great religion, not in abstaining from
malice, pride, covetousness, etc. so much, as from a garment or a gesture: but
it appears to me that they are three ways guilty.

1 Of gross Ignorance, in not putting difference between things necessary, and
things of a middle nature.

2 Of Superstition, for it is equally superstitious, to put the worship of God
in abstaining from things, as though they did displease God, when they do not
displease him: as to put it in the doing of things, as though such things did
please God, when they do not please him.

3 Of resisting lawful Authority.

He does not worthily enough esteem of the Kingdom of God, righteousness,
and peace, and joy in goodness, before all outward things whatsoever, Matthew.
6.33.

It is a great comfort to know our selves to be subjects of the kingdom of
God: such are the righteous, the peaceable, and such which delight in good
things: but such as are of an unrighteous and unpeaceable life, and of vile and
disordered affections, are far from this kingdom: God rules not in such,
but Satan.

VERSE. 18. For he that in these things serves Christ, is acceptable to God,
and approved of men.
PAVLS Assertion, that the kingdom of God is righteousness, peace and joy, is
here confirmed by two Arguments.

The first from the Genus of those things: they are services unto God.

The second from their effects, which are two: Gods Acceptance; Man's
Approbation.

That which is the service of God, and acceptable to God and approved of men,
in that is the kingdom of God. But such is righteousness, peace, and joy.
Therefore, etc.
He that in these things: Whosoever in doing these things.

Serves Christ: For it is the will of the Father, that all men should honor
the Son, John 5.23.
even as they honor the Father.

Serves, that is, behaues himself as a servant, applying himself to the will
of his Master in all things. By which kind of speaking, is understood in many
places the whole obedience of man in all the duties of godliness, Psalm. 2.11.
and 110.2. Mat. 6.24. Act 20.19. Romans 7.6. and 12.11. and such like.

These (viz. Righteousness, Peace, Joy) are understood with an Antithesis, of
meat and drink, and the like, which are not services of God; neither necessary
to salvation, as are these, which are so connected to the kingdom of God, that
they cannot be omitted or neglected, without danger of losing the same.

Meat and all indifferent things, if they be considered in themselves have a
free use; and may, and sometimes ought to be omitted for our brothers sake;
which is otherwise in those things, which of themselves do belong to a blessed
life.

Acceptable to God: as he is our Father now reconciled by the merits of Jesus
Christ; so God is said to be well pleased with our devotion, Heb. 13.16. But if
we consider God as a Judge, then all our service is too deficient to procure
acceptance; and we and our sacrifices are acceptable only by Jesus Christ, as
S. Peter speaks. 1 Pet. 2.5.


Approved of men: (...), a word taken from the allowance of Coin as if he
should have said, that he which serves Christ in these things is a Current
Professor.

Of men: that have a sincere judgment; Caluinus.
for wicked men revile and disgrace such; and yet outward righteousness and
peace, have praise among such; for unjust dealing, and contention are things
odious to all.

The just and peaceable, are acceptable to God, and approved of men, as the
true servants of Christ. Pro. 3.1.2.3.4. My son forget not my law etc, let
not mercy and truth forsake thee, etc. So shall thou find favor and good
understanding in the sight of God and man. So for the acceptance of God. Acts
10.35. and the approbation of man, 1 Pet. 3.13. and of these was Christ a
singular example, who increasing in wisdom and stature was in favor with God
and man, Luke 2.52.

Whether thou use indifferent things, or use them not; abstain from sin,
obey the Magistrate, and live peaceably in the Church, for in these things thou
seruest Christ, not in the other.

Acceptable to God, and approved of men: before approved of men; and these are
so knit together, that whosoever is, or is not acceptable to God, ought, or
ought not to be approved of men: but it does not hold backward, that they which
are approved of men, ought to be, or are acceptable to God.

Hence we have three things.

1 A direction: would thou be acceptable to God? be righteous and peaceable:
would thou be approved of men? labor to be acceptable of God.

The way to credit and glory even in this life, is to glorify God: 1 Samuel
2.30. Ioh. 12.43.
Them that honor me, I will honor, says the Lord. And because the Pharisees
love the praise of men more then the praise of God, therefore are they
contemptible even before men. Hence it comes to pass that many Noble and rich
men are despised notwithstanding: because, though they desire to be honored,
yet they begin not at God.

2 An admonition; that we should approve of them which are acceptable to God,
and improve them which are not.

The just and peaceable are accepted of God: approve thou of them.

How can thou justify to approve of drunkards, common swearers, and to
contemn such who conscionably serve God?

How can thou justify to neglect the just and peaceable, and to esteem of
the unjust and contentious? and yet we have some who will vilify them which
keep peace and good order, and highly esteem only of those who break the
same.

It is wonderful that to obey Magistrates and to live peaceably should be
accounted a fault; and to resist Magistrates and be contentious, a virtue. What
is it to call good evil; and evil, good; if this be not?

3 Consolation. If men do not approve thee, yet if God accept of thee, it is
enough, thou have great cause to be of good cheer. The safest way is to please
God, howsoever men think of us.

I would be approved of men, and please them, if they will be pleased with
doing good; but if they will not be pleased unless I be unjust, and
unpeaceable; I dare not buy at so dear a rate the approbation of any mortal
creature.

The Kingdom of God is not in words but in power. form of godliness, show
the power of it in thy life: If thou professest that thou know God; deny him
not in thy works.

This the blemish of religion that to twenty good words, we have not one good
work: But Christ will not be served with words, but really in the works of
righteousness, and with a peaceable conversation.

(...), said Nazianzen. Nazian. in Tetrast.
A speechless work is better then a deedlesse word.

VERSE 19. Let us therefore follow after the things which make for peace, and
things wherewith one may edify another.
THis verse is the application of the 17. and 18. verses: In the which is an
exhortation to peace and mutual edification.

In this exhortation, are the Duty, and the Amplification.

Of the Duty there are two branches. 1. Peace. 2. Edification.

Outward peace is here understood, which is either general, and may be called
Civil, which is to be with all men, of which we have written, Romans 12.18. or
more particular, which is Ecclesiastical, with the Brethren: and may be
described, to be, a mutual concord and consent of Christians, in opinion,
affection, words, and behavior in their whole life. A precious Jewel.

To edify, is a Latin word, and signifies to build a house, chiefly a
Temple. And here translated to signify the promoting of our brethren, in faith
and grace, that they may be made better, and more and more grow up in Christ.

As builders of a house, do mutually help one another till they have finished;
so every one is to be ready to do service to his brother, till he obtain the
glory.

The faithful by an elegant Metaphor are called the temple and house of God in
which he dwells by his spirit, and the whole company of the elect are
compared to a great City, 1 Cor. 3.16. and 6.19. 2 Cor. 6.16.
the new Jerusalem, built up of the believers as of living stones, as divinely
the Prophet Esaias declares: Esaias 54.11, 12. and S. John, Revel. 21.10. and seq.

The Amplification is threefold.

1 From the Illatiue, therefore; In as much as the Kingdom of God is peace,
and so Christ is served; therefore let us put away strife, and embrace peace.

2 From the persons; let us, implying the strong and weak also, we must all
live peaceably one with another, and edify one another: I am bou^^ to thee,
and thou art bound to me in these things.

3 From the manner; these must be done, wisely; let us endeavor unto things,
which make for peace, etc. by avoiding those things which may hinder, and by
doing such things which may further the same.

There is wisdom required to discern what makes for peace, and what for
contention.

Also we must earnestly follow such things, as the word signifies; many wish
for peace, and say, would God we were at peace, and God send peace; but they
labor not for it doing the things which make for it, but rather which make
against it.

If thou would have peace, put to thy helping hand; be wise, and earnest in
the pursuit and procuring it.

The Churches peace, and mutual edification must especially be regarded and
furthered: for peace, Psalm. 34.14. Heb. 12.14. for edification, Ephesians 4.29. 1 Thessalonians. 5.11.

Break not, sow discord amongst brethren; now the most excellent brotherhood
is that which is spiritual, therefore the more to be hated are they which
dissolve that.

There are three things, principally necessary to him who would preserve the
peace of the Church.

1 Wisdom and knowledge; and that is, of the truth: and of the weightinesse
thereof.

Be sure the point thou contendest for be the truth: for he that fights in
the dark, may as soon hit his friend as his foe.

Examine the weight of the truth; for all truths weigh not a like: It is one
thing to affirm that Christ is God; another to say that it is lawful to eat
of all meats; for the first, I will contend to the death; for the second, I
will not break the peace of the Church.

It is indiscretion to be alike zealous for a thing indifferent, as for the
maine Articles of Faith.

2 Meekness, which is a great friend to peace, when we are not stiff in our
opinions, nor froward; for Solomon says, that a froward man sows strife,
Pro. 16.28.
there is no pacification to be had with wilful men: a meek man will not
easily be provoked, neither does he delight in contradicting others, which is
a way of preserving peace.

3 Humility. For, only by pride comes contention: Pro. 13.10.
Some men, when they have once spoken the word, they will maintain it, for
their credit: as they think, though it be with the ruin of the Church.

If men stood not so much upon a vain conceit of their own glory, they might
be more peaceable. But many are more careful of their own, then of the Glory
of God: and in every cause which they have undertaken to defend, they must
overcome, or else there can be no peace; and hence comes controversy upon
controversy, and that for small matters, till the Church be miserably
distracted, and objected, to the scorn of wicked men.

I have read that in Sweueland of ancient time, if two had contended, and any
man had but said or pronounced this word peace, it had been mortal if they
had not ceased their quarrel. Surely they are much guilty which will not be
persuaded to live peaceably in the Church.

Every man must edify his brother in goodness,

No man is so perfect but that he stands in need of edification, nor any man so
imperfect, help to another. The right hand washes the left, and though the
stronger, yet, is washed of the left.

The weakest members and parts of the body, serve and are useful to the
stronger, neither could they be without them; and this is the wisdom of God,
that there might be peace. So have I seen a small piece of timber shore up
the side of a great house, and a few small sticks set on fire many great
logges.

The two maine ends of all our actions, peace and edification: which God has
in his wisdom joined together, that there can be no edification without
peace: If men take in hand to build, and agree not, there must needs be a very
Babel.

Pray for the peace of the Church; for when peace is within her walls, then will
prosperity be within her Palaces: then will the walls of Syon go up apace, if
there be peace.

Peace is an Adamant to draw men to the Church. One of the maine arguments
whereby Hamor and Schechem went about to persuade their people to entertain
Jacob and his family and their religion, Genesis 34.21.
was, because they were peaceable.

And let all things be done to edifying, 1 Cor. 14.26.
which cannot be, as was said, without peace.

Examine therefore thine opinions, if they tend not to peace, and to build men
up in faith and repentance, better that they were buried as low as the center
of the earth, then that thou should broach them to the people.

If all Preachers and hearers did conscionably weigh this, I am persuaded there
would be less contention in the Church.

VERSE 20. For meat destroy not the work of God: --
HEre is a new argument against scandal; I call it new, not in regard of the
substance of it; for we have had the same before in the latter end of the 15.
verse: but in regard of the terms, which are all diverse from the former, as we
shall see in the opening of them.

The argument is taken either from the pernicious effect of scandal, which is
destruction; or from the dignity of our brother, who is here called the work
of God: thus, That which destroys the work of God, is to be avoided. But
scandal destroys the work of God. Therefore.


This Argument is brought in by way of opposition to something in the verse
going before: there he wished us to follow those things which make for
edification: hence he infers, for meat destroy not the work of God.

It is set down in the manner of a prohibition; where we have the thing
prohibited; and the amplification.

In the first, is the action prohibited, destroy not: and the object not to be
destroyed, the work of God.

The amplification is from the moving cause, For meat.

Destroy not. The word thus rendered, was before (...), or (...), I kill, or
make to perish: here it is (...), of (...), I undo or loosen; and is as much
as if he had said, break not down, pull not down, overthrow not the work
of God, which he has edified: the word being translated from the demolishing
of buildings.

The work of God. Before he said, Him for whom Christ died: here, the work of
God; which some expound faith, so called, Pet. Martyr. Pareus and alii.
John 6.29. This is the work of God that ye believe. Some, the weak brothers
salvation. Some the work of grace, Chrisost. Aquinat.
which is wrought in us. And the Chaldee paraphrast, in the plural, opera, the
works of God. Some the Church, out of Ephesians. Rollo^us.
4.12. If so, then the whole is used for a part; for every believer is a part,
a living stone of that edifice: this comes near unto the point.

All these expositions are good, but I prefer that of Saint Ambrose, whose
comprehends them all: the work of God, that is, says he, Man, who is two
ways the work of God; first, by Creation; and yet not so only the work of
God, as a stone, or a beast, but (...), an excellent work, brought forth with
the consultation of the Trinity.

Secondly, by Regeneration, and here, faith, redemption, charity, grace, etc.
are concluded; according to that of Paul, We are his workmanship, etc. Ephesians.
2.10.
and the believers are the temple of God in particular, 1 Cor. 6.19.

For meat: not as though meat were not the work of God; but to note that there
is a great distance, as Ambrose says, between meat and Man, especially a
believer, the very child of God. Among all the visible works of God. Man has
the pre-eminence, as the Sun above the lesser Stars.

The life, says our Savior, is more then meat, and our body then raiment. No
wisdom therefore to destroy a brother for the sake of any indifferent thing.

Man is Gods work, not man's, it is therefore a kind of impiety to destroy it
for meats sake.

Man is a little world, as Philosophers have affirmed; to destroy a man for
meat sake, is to destroy a whole world, which were madness, for between these
there is no comparison.

Scandal given and taken for things indifferent, destroieth the work of God:
this was proved before, v. 18. and 1 Cor. 8.11.12.

Hence a learned man reproues the practice of mercenary Soldiers, Gualter. in
loc.
because, for money they destroy the work of God. But whatsoever becomes of
these, sure I am, the case is desperate of those that destroy the work of God
by furious duels upon private and petty brabbles.

In the 19. edify one another, here we are commanded, not to destroy one
another: Some build with one hand, and pull down with another; and some build
with the tongue, and pluck down with the hands: these are good Preachers, and
wicked livers: the former such which do teach and do some things well, but in
other things they walk amiss: but we must every way build and no way destroy.

Here some Ministers are to blame, who in regard of preaching the foundation of
faith and good life in the general, do famously and build much; but when they
breed conceits in the hearers minds against orders established in the Church,
and persuade them to a mislike of the present government, they do pull down
faster then they built up.

For the people being forward to listen unto novelties, and having received
such accusations, and calumniations of the state, (...). Tertul. lib. aduers
Valentinianos.
do bend themselves more eagerly against the comely orders enjoined, then
against the capital crimes which are forbidden in the Decalogue.

Here also many hearers, being the passive disciples of such affectate leaders,
as Tertullian calls them; are justly to be reproved, and that with severity, who
in all their conferences only inueigh against the present discipline of the
Church; for this is not to build, but to destroy the Church, the faith,
themselves and all.

Here is a threefold Admonition.

1 To the strong, work of God, as no way justly to offend them by their
Apparel, Recreations, or other indifferent things: but how far the weak are
in such things to be respected, we shall consider in the rest of the words of
this verse, and in the one and twentieth, which we will handle together.

2 To the weak: That they should be more temperate and discreet; and not to
object themselves to perdition for things indifferent: To be offended at the
commanding of things indifferent, or at the use of them, not being commanded or
forbidden, is to be guilty of their own destruction.

My weak brother, thou art the work of God, destroy not thy self for a
garment or a gesture.

The holy Sacrament is the work of God; sitting or kneeling the conceit of
man; destroy not, nor renounce the work of God, for such conceits.

The Ministry is the work of God; a Garment the work of man; destroy not,
nor forsake the work of God, for a garment.

When a King shall command many workmen to build him an house; and some work
standing, some sitting, some kneeling; some clad in black, some in white, etc.
If some of the workmen should forsake the Kings work, because this man uses
such a gesture, and is so apparelled, were they not worthy of censure? Or if
the King should command all his builders to be clothed in one livery, would
thou refuse to build in the Kings work therefore?

The Church, I mean the Communion of faithful people in the Word and
Sacraments, is Gods work; will thou destroy it by faction, or separation, for
a Garment, etc. Suppose some outward circumstance might (in thy conceit) be
amended; is not peace better, then to move contention thereabout? Will a wise
man pull down a fair building, because some one tyle is laid awry? Indeed the
Brownists would overthrow our Material Temples, the places of our Assemblies;
but do thou spare the Church of God.

But thou would bring in some better Discipline: So have I seen some unwise
men, who not content with the strong and substantial buildings, wherein their
Ancestors kept good hospitality, have plucked them down, to build others
more fair, curious, and more finely set forth; but with what success? Even
with this, That they have been never able to do the good their Ancestors
did, and that within a few years, themselves have been utterly undone, and
their gay house become a nettle-bush.

Remember always this of Paul, For meat destroy not the work of God: there
is no comparison between them.

3 To all: That we destroy not the work of God, that is, the souls of others,
and our own, by evil counsel, example, by an evil conversation.

If it be a heinous thing to destroy the work of God for meat; much more
heinous is it to destroy it, for whoredom, drunkenness, and the beastly
satisfying of our lewd lusts.

He that shall break open thy house to steal, shall be guilty of Burglary;
much more guilty shall he be that destroys his own or his neighbors soul.

No Painter can endure to have his pictures defaced; even a child will be
angry, if you put down his childish building; much more will God be angry, if
you destroy his work.

Herod exceedingly sinned, in destroying John Baptist for Herodias daughters
sake: Judas more, for betraying our Jesus for thirty pieces of silver: So also
thou most grievously sinnest, which for riches, or pleasure, or the
accomplishing of thy vile mind in the committing of any sin, destroyest
thine own soul, or entiseth others to sin, that together with thee, and
with the Devil they might be destroyed.

Sin is the Devils engine, whereby he destroys the work of God. And for
this purpose the Son of God was manifested, 1. John 3.8.
that he might destroy the works of the Devil.

Build thou the work of God, in thy self and others, by faith and repentance;
and destroy the works of the Devil.

VERSE 20. -- All things indeed are pure, but it is evil for that man which
eats with offense. It is good neither to eat flesh, nor to drink wine, nor
any thing whereby thy brother stumbleth, or is offended, or is made weak.
THe Apostle having hitherto by diverse arguments dehorted the strong from the
scandalous eating of certain meats, in these words, and so to the end of this
Chapter, he takes away two maine objections, whereby the strong fortified
themselves in their practice, not regarding the weak.

The first Objection is taken away in these words of the twentieth, and the one
and twentieth verses, where we have the Objection, and the Answer.

The Reason is taken from the Nature of things, from whence the Objection may
be framed in this Enthymeme.

All things are pure, and God has given liberty to eat of all.
Therefore I will eat of all, and will not be restrained, take offense at it
who will.
Unto this Paul answers; of which answer there are three parts. First, a
Concession. Secondly, a Correction. Thirdly, a Collection.

The Concession and Correction are in the twentieth verse.

He grants the Antecedent, but corrects and denies the Consequence, and so
divides fidem a facto, the faith of the strong, from his fact. By faith he
might eat, by charity he might not eat, namely, with the offense of his
brother.

There was sin on both sides: weak was against faith; the sin of the strong
against charity.

All things indeed are pure. Of this before, verse. 14.

But it is evil. Malum morale, Moral evil, Caietanus.
which brings also malum poenale, penal evil.

To him that eats. To him that offers; so to him that suffers offense.

With offense: of his own, here of his neighbors conscience; not simply to
him that eats, but, with offense; if none be offended, we have liberty to
eat at our pleasure; this being understood of things that are open, not of
things hidden, and secret.

The Collection is in the one and twentieth verse; It is good neither to eat
flesh, etc. And it contains an Advice, or general sentence inferred by an
Antithesis: by which we may consider the matter of the Advice, and the
Illustration of it.

The matter is, not to eat flesh, not to drink wine, nor any thing.

The Illustration is from the Commendation of the Advice, It is good: and the
limitation, whereby thy brother stumbleth, or is offended, or is made weak.

It is good: Profitable, pleasing to God, morally good.

Not to eat flesh, nor to drink wine: flesh and wine, which are praecipua
inter appetibilia cibi and potus, Caietanus.
the daintiest of the kinds of meat and drink, for all others, and these for
all other Indifferent things.

Nor any thing: This must not be taken simply: but with the restraint following.

Whereby thy brother stumbleth or is offended, or made weak: Here is a
threefold restraint, from the more grievous, to the less grievous.

The first notes falling away: the second some hinderance in the way of
godliness, without falling away from the faith: the third shows the cause of
the former, which is weakness: If any man be offended at Christian liberty,
it is a note of weakness.

We must abstain from indifferent things, though lawful, for our weak
brothers sake. 1. Cor. 6.12. and 10.23. All things are lawful for me, but all
things are not expedient; all things are lawful for me, but I will not be
brought under the power of any, and all things edify not. 1. Cor. 8.13. If
meat make my brother to offend, I will eat no flesh while the world stands,
lest I make my brother to offend: Note the translation, which is excellent, for
whosoever is scandalized at Indifferent things, does commit an offense.

Now that all these things formerly in this Chapter delivered, may be the
better understood, Explication.
I will here briefly unfold the point of Christian liberty, as it is agreed
upon by the learned.

Liberty is either of the will, or of the Person.

This of the Person is that which we call Christian, and it may be thus
described.

Christian liberty, is a spiritual manumission, whereby the faithful are by
Christ delivered from the tyranny of sin, the curse of the Law, the anger of
God; from the yoke of Moses, and from the bondage of things Indifferent; Dan.
Tilen. Siles. disp. Theolog. par. 2. d. 44. These. 1.
that they might freely, willingly, and cheerfully serve God, to his glory,
the edifying of their brethren, and the salvation of their own souls.

Hence we observe three parts of this liberty: The first from sin and
eternal death, which is the greatest: The second, from the Leuiticall
ceremonies commanded by Moses, which were (...), according to that of S. Peter,
Act. 15.10.
a yoke which neither our Fathers nor we were able to bear. The third, from
the obligation of the conscience in things Indifferent, which also is a very
great benefit, and purchased with no less then the blood of Christ. This last
belongs to this place, which is called Christian, and of the faithful and
spiritual, to distinguish it from Civil, and from that licentiousness which
many bad Christians use, being a liberty of the flesh, and not of the spirit.

Concerning this liberty, we may in general out of this Chapter, but
especially out of this text, verse. 20.21. observe two general Rules.

The first Rule is,

This is proved from hence, All things are pure: and in the places of the
Corinthians, All things are lawful; not whoredom, theft, etc. but Indifferent
things; for those sayings are to be restrained to the kind of such things,
which are of a middle Nature, as being neither commanded nor forbidden in the
Word.

Also, 1. Cor. 10.25.26. Whatsoever is sold in the shambles, that eat, asking
no question for conscience sake: For the earth is the Lords, and the fullness
thereof, as David says, Psalm 24.1.

In this place observe, Paul affirms it to be lawful to use and eat that
meat which was offered to an Idol: his reason, 1. Cor. 3.21.
because the earth is the Lords, and the fullness thereof: and if all things
be Christ's, then ours also in Christ.

Any creature offered to an Idol, is pure to the believer; so that it is a
frivolous objection, to say, this was used in and to Idolatry, therefore not
lawful to be used; which is the maine Argument of many against Garments
enjoined to Ministers in the public Service, which yet by this place are
lawful, unless we should use them after an Idolatrous manner.

If any shall say, that it is lawful to use them in civil affairs, but not
in the holy Service: I would ask, whether when any man has made him an
ordinary garment of some vestment used and dedicated to Idolatry, it be not
lawful for him to go to the Church in such garment, and to hear divine
Service: and if lawful for him to hear, why not for the Minister to say
Service in such garment.

Also we find that Groves were planted and dedicated to Idols, and yet Gideon
commanded by the Lord to offer sacrifice, Judges 6.26.
with the wood of such a Grove.

The second Rule is,

There are two Moderators of this liberty: The one General, the other
Special.

1 The General is charity, which directs when and where it is to be used.

2 The Special is lawful Authority, by Sanctions, Civil or Ecclesiastical:
For the Civil Magistrate, for the common good, may abridge our liberty in
things indifferent: as for instance.

It is lawful for a man to use any trade: but for the common good, it may be
enacted, that no man may use or set up a Trade, for the which he has not
served certain years; and also that no man, though so serving, shall set up
such Trade in certain places, without a special Freedom.

Also it is lawful for the Magistrate, to forbid the Exportation of Corn,
Leather, etc. though it be as lawful for Merchants to use traffic in those
things, in regard of the things themselves, as in other commodities.

So to restrain the eating of flesh on certain days, both to give an
occasion to the subjects of fasting and prayer, and also for the preservation
of the breed of cattle, and for the maintaining of Navigations.

Also the Church has power to determine the use of indifferent rites and
ceremonies in Gods public worship, for the maintaining of good Order and
Uniformity, as for instance.

It is in it self indifferent, to pray standing or kneeling, to receive the
Lords Supper sitting or kneeling. Now the Church has authority here to
determine of that gesture which is most orderly and decent, from that of Paul,
1. Cor. 14.40. Romans 13.5.
Let all things be done decently and in order; and this determination is of
conscience to be obeyed.

Neither by this do I give any power to the Civil or Ecclesiastical
Magistrate over the consciences of men: For by their laws the inward liberty
of the conscience is not taken away, but the outward use only restrained, for
good order sake.

Hence may be deduced two Conclusions, concerning the abstaining and the using
of our liberty.

1 When the Magistrate has determined, then we must abstain from the use of
our liberty, and hold to the Determination, whosoever be offended; because,
not to obey the Magistrate, is a sin, unto which no man upon any respect is
bound.

Also we must abstain, when such abstinence may be to the glory of God, and
the edifying of our brother; and when the use of our liberty (understand in
such things which are left in our power) may endanger our weak brother.

Now he is to be accounted the weak one, who is yet ignorant of Christian
liberty, and yet willing to learn, as the Jews of whom Paul entreats in
this Chapter.

But how long must I abstain for the weakes sake?

No, satisfied; he is to be taken for one that is obstinate: this is
confirmed by the practice of the Apostles, who for a time bore with
Circumcision, Purification, Vows, etc. namely, till the Gospel, and the
Doctrine of Christian liberty was sufficiently and fully published by them.

And yet there ought to be a great difference put between the weak Jews, and
such among us, who will sometime pretend weakness: because the Jews had
direct command from God, for that which they did; but ours have nothing to
ground upon, but their own conceits; so that it may be questioned, whether
among us, after so much teaching, any are to be accounted weak.

To make this plain by an instance.

Some man is offended at the fashion or color of my garments: what shall I
do? I must discreetly and gently inform him of my liberty, rendering him a
reason grounded upon the Word: If he will still be offended; then it is not
weakness, but perverseness and peevishness. Such, is not a little one,
Matthew. 18.6.
which must be regarded: for little ones, will easily be persuaded.

If a plain countryman coming to the Court, and seeing the rich apparel of
Nobles, and their fashions, should be offended; should the Princes and Nobles
abstain from such apparel, for his offense? No: but he is rather to be
corrected, and taught to keep himself within his bounds.

An inferior is no meet censurer or Judge, of the colors, fashions, cost, of
the garments of their superiors. A husbandman may be a competent Judge of
that which is fit for a husbandman to wear, but not of that which is fit for
Nobles.

The second conclusion.

We may use our Christian liberty before them which know it: before them which
know it not, our knowledge is sufficient, our use is forbidden. And,

We ought and must use our liberty before the obstinate: as Paul circumcised
Timothy, because of the Jews, Act. 16.3.
becoming a Jew to them that he might win them. 1 Cor. 9.20.
But he would not be compelled to circumcise Titus. Gal. 2.3.
Yea he rebukes Peter to his face, for yielding to the Jews: and inueighes in
his Epistle to the Galathians against those which urged Cireumcision.

For weak ones are not to be nourished in their weakness, and the wilful,
both by words and practice are to be opposed.

Non minus interest proximorum libertatem in eorum bonum et aedificationem
interdum vsurpare, quam pro ipsorum commodo eam loco moderari: It is as much to
our neighbors good sometimes to use our liberty, as to abstain from the use
of it, Calu. inst. l. 3. ca. 19. sect. 12.
says M. Calvin soundly.

Hence are diverse uses.

Pray for wisdom and discretion, Virtus cum indiscrete tenetur, amittitur;
cum discrete intermittitur, plus tenetur. Virtue indiscreetly practiced, is
lost: and sometime discreetly intermitted, Greg. Mag. moral. 28.
is the more possessed, said Gregory excellently. So all the beauty of our
liberty is in the discreet use or not use of it.

At the doing of some indifferent thing, one will be offended: at the not doing
of it, many: rather offend one then many.

In the like case, some private men; and the Magistrates and Ministers will be
offended: rather offend private men, then the Magistrate and thy Minister.

And take heed always, lest thy actions betaken for an example to the ignorant.

Labor soundly to understand the Doctrine of Christian liberty in things
indifferent: it is most necessary to be known for diverse weighty reasons.

First, for the peace of our consciences. If a man begin to make question and
to doubt of his meat, Consule Calu. de tota hac doctrina Libertatis
Christianae Jnstit. l. 3. ca. 19. sect. 7. ad finem capitis.
recreations; it comes to pass many times, that such a one will be afraid,
super transuersam festucam incedere, to step over two strawes lying a cross,
as Master Calvin speaks.

Therefore, that our consciences wander not in such labyrinths, it is
profitable to know that God has not taken from us, the use of outward things,
but given us great liberty therein; even as he gave Adam liberty to eat of
all the trees in the Garden, that which was expressly forbidden only excepted.

Secondly, lest we injury the creatures, accounting them, nay making them to
be unclean unto us through ignorance; which are clean in themselves.

Thirdly, that we may be able cheerfully to give thanks for the creatures
whereby we are maintained. But he which doubts whether God gives him leave
and liberty to use them, cannot seriously give him thanks for them.

To avoid superstition, of which there is no end, nor measure, if we be
ignorant of our Christian liberty; for then we put conscience and Religion in
things which of themselves are indifferent, and free to be used, or forborne.

It is lawful for the Civil Magistrate in the commonwealth: Church in the
administration of holy things to determine the use of things indifferent. For,
if I be bound to one part for the good of a private man, much more may
Authority in such things bind me, for a common good of all.

Now for the satisfying and pacifying of doubtful minds concerning their
submission to the constitutions and ordinances of our Church, I will briefly
show in what the Church has authority to command, and in what it has not:
Call. inst. l. 4. ca. 10. praecipue sect. 27. et seq. Hieron Zanch. tom. 8. loc.
13. de liberate Christiana et 14. de Scand et 16. de Traditionibus humanis.
and this for the most part, in Master Caluines words; the rather, because I
find, that Master Zanchy in the setting down of the doctrine of Christian
liberty, and of the power of the Church in the constituting of the external
policy and Eutaxy thereof has transcribed Calvin.

The actions of Divine worship are twofold; Essential, and Ordinate.

The Essential, are such as differ not from the worship it self; as Piety and
Sanctity of mind.

The Ordinate are such as are appointed as helps, and instruments for the more
commodious performing and outward declaring of such worship; as, Prayer,
Preaching, Administration of the Sacraments, etc.

In these are to be considered, (...) and (...): that such things be
performed, and the outward order or manner of their performance.

The first sort of action it is only in the power of God to institute, whose
will is the perfect rule of good life, and who only is able to infuse into the
heart true piety and sanctimony: And of this kind whatsoever are not commanded
in the word, are thereby forbidden; neither has the Church here any power, to
add, to detract, or to change.

Of the second sort; Prayer, Preaching, etc. in regard of the things
themselves, are necessary, and instituted of God; neither can the Church
abrogate them, or appoint other things in their room.

But as concerning the manner of performing these; as time, place, gesture,
etc. God has so far permitted them to the Arbitrament and Authority of the
Church, as may stand and agree with the condition, comeliness, and edification
of that particular Church.

So that in these, the Church has power to abrogate, alter, or institute such
rites and courses, (as the Pilot hoyseth, strikes, or turns his sails) that
the common course of edification may be the better holden and maintained.

That the Church has this authority is proved by two arguments.

The first from the Word of God: 1 Cor. 14.40. Let all things be done decently
and in order.

Decently, that is, set forth with such dignity and honor, which may be
suitable to the reverence of the holy administration, that the faithful may be
admonished with what veneration such sacred things are to be handled: so we
pray bareheaded, and upon our knees; we administer and receive the communion,
yea we bury the dead, with a venerable comeliness, etc.

In order; to this are to be referred, the times of assembling, the place, the
uniformity of gesture, the silence, and quietness, etc, that all tumults, and
barbarous confusion and dissension may be avoided.

Also: 1 Cor. 11.24. And the rest will I set in order when I come.

He by writing set some things in order; some other things he let a lone, Calu.
in locum Epl. ad Corinth.
till he might come and see that which was done; because as M. Calvin says,
Certius ex presenti aspectu cognoscitur quid expediat. It is more certainly
known what is expedient by presence and sight.

The second argument, is taken from the continued practice of the Church from
Christ's time, hitherto, disanulling and ordaining such things, as best served
for the present times and state of the Church.

The Apostolical Church enjoined abstinence from meats offered to Idols, Act.
15.29.
from strangled, and from blood which now from a long time is abrogated.

In the time next after the Apostles they used from Easter to Whitsontide to
pray standing, this is out of use now.

After the time of Constantine, in the public service, the Apostles Creed was
rehearsed with a low voice; the Nicene with a loud voice; the first, because it
was set forth in the time of persecution; the second, because it was made in
the time of peace, as says Aquinas. Aqui. 2.2. q. 1. art. 9. ad 6.
This and the like have now ceased in the Church.

But to receive the Communion in the morning, and fasting; in Baptism to use
the sign of the cross; to make abrenuntiation; to sit with our faces toward
the East; not to fast upon the Sundays; to join the contracted in matrimony
publicly in the Church; with the benediction of the Minister; and such like,
the Church by her power has continued.

Hence arise two conclusions.

1 Traditions, Constitutions and Canons, are necessary for the Church: because
otherwise, concord, decency and order cannot be maintained.

For in as much as in men's manners there is so much diversity, in their minds
variety; and contrariety in their opinions and judgments; if a Church should
not be knit and bound together by such Decrees and Laws as by certain bands,
it must of necessity be soon dissolved.

2 Whatsoever by the judgment of the Church is appointed for order and
decency, we may with a good conscience, nay we ought to obey the same.

For all things are pure: and in the general such constitutions of the Church
are of divine authority.

Hence come brawlings and confusion, when matters of order are left to the will
of every particular man; and when any such may change or alter that which
belongs to the common state of the Church; for it is never to be hoped in the
best ordered Church, that one and the same thing should please all.

2 Whatsoever by the judgment of the Church is appointed for order and
decency, we may with a good conscience, and must obey.

For all things are pure: and in the General, such constitutions of the Church
are of divine authority; according to that before alleged, 1 Cor. 14.40.
Let all things be done decently and in order.

These Conclusions afford two Admonitions.

1 That we contemn nor, nor with supine and gross negligence forbear, much
less with pride and arrogance openly violate and break the established orders
of the Church wherein we live.

It was the counsel which S. Ambrose gave to S. Augustine, in a question of
the Saturdayes fast, Nec disciplinavlla est in his melior graui prudentique
Christiano, quam vt eo modo agat, quo agere viderit Ecclesiam, ad quamcunque
forte deuenerit: Neither is there any discipline better to be observed of a
grave and wise Christian, then to do as he sees the Church to do, unto which
he shall fortune to come. This counsel gave S. Aug Ianuario. Epist. 118. ca. 2.
Austen to Ianuarius, making some question of the different rites of diverse
Churches; and confirms this his advice with the authority of S. Ambrose, who
gave advice to S. Austen, and to his Mother, not to fast at Millaine, but to
fast on Saturdayes when they came to Rome, according to the fashion of the
Church there, as he himself was wont to do. Sic etiam tu ad quam forte
Ecclesiam veneris, ius morem serua, si cuiquam non vis esse scandalo, nec
quemquam tibi: So also thou, says Ambrose to Austen, to what Church thou shall
fortune to come, observe the manner thereof, if thou will not offend others,
nor have others offend thee. This counsel S. Austen confesses that he
esteemed and received as by heavenly Oracle.

The same counsel in another Epistle before he gave to a certain Priest
called Casulanus, Aug. Casulano. Epist. 86.
repeating the story of S. Ambrose his counsel to him and his Mother: and in
the latter end of the same says and counsels farther; that where some fast
and some dine on the Saturday, that order is to be kept and followed which
they observe; quibus little populorum congregatio reganda commissa est, to whom
the congregation of such people is committed to govern: and so in the last
words of the Epistle he writes thus: Quapropter, etc. Wherefore if you will
rest in my counsel, Episcopo tuo in hac re noli resistere, and quod facit
ipse, sine vllo scrupulo aut desceptatione sectare: Do not resist your Bishop
herein, but follow that which he does, without any scruple or desceptation. A
point to be considered by all inferior Ministers, and by the people.

But in vain do they worship me, teaching for doctrines the commandments of
men, Mat. 5.9.

This Scripture touches not the ceremonies enjoined in the Church of England:
parts of Gods worship, and therefore it was superstition; these for decency:
those were appointed as necessary to salvation; these for common order. Call.
Jnst. l. 4. c. 10. sect. 28. Zanch tom. 8. loc. 16. de trad. Eccl.
And when this shall be published, as it has been long ago in our Church,
then by the judgment of M. Calvin and M. Zanchy, the Church is to be freed
from such imputation, and hereof we have an example in Scripture.

The children of Gad, the children of Reuben, and the half Tribe of Manasse,
whose portions were beyond Jordan, built by Jordan a great Altar to see to:
when the children of Israel heard hereof, they sent Phinees the Priest, and the
Princes of the Congregation, supposing it had been set up for burnt offering
and sacrifice: but when they were informed by their brethren that it was only
for a witness between them, that they also were the people of God; both the
Priest, the Princes, and all the people were well pleased, and the Altar stood,
and was called Ed. Josh. 22.


But some of our ceremonies were used superstitiously,

1 It is an hard task to prove that they were invented first by Pope or
papists. But if so, 2. Cain: Genesis 4.

Neither does the superstitious use of a thing, make it to be unlawful in it
self to be used, the superstition removed: for all things are pure to the
believer, and the earth is the Lords, as has been declared before in the
first Rule of the explication of the Doctrine.

It is as lawful to use the invention of a Papist for matter of outward order
in the service of God, as to use the prescriptions of popish Physicians, or the
plots invented by popish Masons and Carpenters.

2 The second admonition is that we put no religion or worship, either in the
using, or forbearing and refusing of outward orders.

Hereby some deserve blame, who account themselves the more pure and holy for
not submitting themselves to the constitutions of the Church: which has a show
of wisdom and sanctity, but indeed is nothing else but will worship, and a
making void the Commandment of God, for the invention and device of man: men
being more zealous about these things, then for true piety.

Use not all thy liberty always: abstaining, as in using. It is sufficient
that thou know that it is all one before God, whether thou eat, or eat not,
etc. and so when the conscience is freed from a false opinion of necessity one
way, then there is liberty.

Some think liberty is taken away if they may not eat flesh every day: But
our Christian liberty is not in eating, but in knowing that no meat is
unclean, but that we may eat of it. If therefore we know that it skils not
before God whether we eat flesh or fish, wear white, or yellow, or black,
it is enough; for now the conscience is free; though afterward we perpetually
abstain from flesh, or use only one color in our garments: yea, because we
are free, we do with free conscience abstain.

It is a sin to use all thy liberty to the offense of thy weak brother; much
more a sin is it, to live licentiously to the dishonor and offense of God.

Here are to be reproved such who pretend Christian liberty,

Many offend in the excess and vanity of apparel: when they are reproved,
they say, all stuffes, colors, etc. are indifferent.

But thou must know, that when thou do proudly and luxuriously use the
creatures of God, then they are unclean to thee, not by their own fault, but
by thine, who abusest them.

In the word we find them reproved, who laugh, Luke 6.25.
who have music at their feasts, etc. Esaias 5.12.
and yet neither do we find laughing forbidden, nor music in the Scripture:
but to wallow in delights, and to have our minds drunken and besotted with
these things, is far from their lawful use.

Where the mind is composed to sobriety, there such things are to us pure: but
where moderation is wanting, course fare and homely attire is too much.

Whether therefore we fare meanly or plentifully, be attired homely or costly,
let us all know, that we are maintained by God, that we should be the more
expedite and cheerful in in his service.

VERSE 22. Have thou faith? Have it to thy self before God. --
THe second objection of the strong is taken away in these words, and so to the
end of the Chapter.

We have then to consider, the Objection, and the Answer to it.

The Objection is thus framed.

He that has faith must not dissemble it, but publicly profess it.

But I have faith says the strong Christian.

Therefore, etc.

To this Paul answers: of which his answer are three parts; 1. a Concession; 2.
a Correction; 3. a Direction.

The Concession and Correction are in these words.

He grants the Minor, but corrects and denies the Mayor. The faith here
spoken of must not always be showed, it is enough if we have it within,
before God.

There is some difference in the Copies, about the pointing of these words; but
because it nothing varies the sense we pass it over.

Have thou faith? I prefer to read it with an Interrogation, as fitter to
beat down the stoutnesse of the strong.

Faith, is not here meant of justifying faith: for that hates nothing more then
to be hid; He that believes with his heart, must confess with his mouth, and
also show his faith by his works.

A dumb or lame faith in this kind, will not profit us.

Faith here signifies knowledge and persuasion of our Christian liberty. Of
which before, Verse 5. and 14. called knowledge, 1 Cor. 8.7.11.

Have it to thy self before God. This Correction is set down in manner of a
precept. The precept, Have faith to thy self: A reason is added, Before God.

In the precept is the duty, Have faith: and the manner, to thy self.

Have it: It is necessary thou should know thy liberty given by Christ.

To thy self: within, in thine own conscience, make no ostentation of it. Let
it be enough that thy conscience is edified and sustained by this faith. Thou
art not troubled, trouble not thou the Church, nor destroy thy brother. This
agrees not with the nature of faith.

Before God. This reason is taken from the danger of indiscreet manifesting our
faith about indifferent things: as if he should say, If thou so do, thou
shall answer it before God at the day of Judgment

Or rather, it is taken from a chief end of such faith, which is to pacify
the conscience before God: before God being here opposed to before men. As if
he should say, This faith is for thy own use and benefit; though men know it
not, it is sufficient if thou be at peace with and before God in that which
thou do.

The faith and knowledge of Christian liberty in things indifferent, is not
always to be manifested and declared by practice. It is the scope of this
Chapter, and of 1 Cor. 8. and a part of the tenth.

Aquinas gives an instence of it in Marriage, A man knows that he may lawfully
marry; yet he is not bound to manifest this is knowledge, by taking of a wife.

Have faith. know the doctrine of Christian liberty in things indifferent. Such
knowledge must be had, and indeed the ignorance of it is the cause of much
distraction in our minds, and of much unpeaceable living with our brethren.

Have faith to thy self.

Have it to thy self before God. If thou be wise, thou shall be wise for thy
self, says Solomon. So, Prou. 9.12.
have thy faith for the benefit and comfort of thine own soul before God.

Many are the worse for their knowledge, as they are for their wealth: they use
their knowledge to quarrel and contend, troubling by their unprofitable
iangling, the peace of the Church. Better it were for such that they had less
knowledge.

Many have knowledge and are quiet enough, but they live brutishly, their
damnation is the greater.

Be not a loser but a gainer by thy knowledge.

Before God. Our greatest care should be to have a quiet conscience before God.

We must, as Paul did, Acts 24.16.
exercise our selves to have a good conscience and void of offense before men,
but specially before God.

Thou think, it may be, well of thy self: but what does God think of thee?
thine own hearts is deceitful.

Thou art esteemed or reproved before men, but examine how thou stand before
God.

Vain is the breath of men: but Gods approbation is an haven against all
storms. For he is approved or reproved, whom God commends or disallowes.

VERSE 22. -- Happy is he which condemns not himself in that thing which he
allows.
IN these words begins the third part of Paul's answer, which is a direction,
containing two Aphorisms or short pithy sentences: the one directing the
strong, which is in these words; the other directing the weak, in the next
Verse.

In this sentence are two parts to be considered: the Subject, and the
Predicate.

The subject in these words, He that condemns not himself in that thing
which he allows.

The predicate, is happy.

In the subject, the person capable of this happiness is described by the
effect denied, condemns not himself. Where we have the action, condemns;
the object personal, himself. Both these amplified from the generality, He,
this indefinite being equipollent to a general: and from the object real, the
thing about which he condemns not himself, in that thing which he allows.

He that condemns not himself. For the variety of the signification of the
Greek word which signifies to judge as well as to condemn, this Aphorism is
diversely applied.

Some say that Paul here strikes the weak, Chrysostom.
telling him that he is blessed and happy, if he cease judging of others, yea,
if he judge not himself to be justified or more righteous for his abstinence.
Caiet.


Others, Sarcerius.
Happy is he which makes not a conscience to himself, and binds not himself
when God binds him not.

Others still applying it to the weak, Corn. C. a lapide refert.
that he is happy which takes not upon him to determine of things on his own
head, that trusts not to his own judgment, but advises himself by them
which have more knowledge in the Scriptures, Fathers, and stories of the Church.

But with Mr. Calvin, Aretius, and other many, I refer it to the strong, not
only in the particular of meats, but of all indifferent things, lawful in
themselves, but unlawful in the case of scandal.

In that which he allows. The word signifies allowance upon due examination
and trial, and so implies allowance upon sound judgment and unerring.

He that knows the lawfulness of things indifferent, and does not so use
them (namely giving offense to the weak) that his conscience check him for
it, is happy.

Happy. We may take it largely for the aggregation of all profitable things:
for certainly he is in a most blessed estate, which does nothing contrary to
his conscience well and rightly instructed by the word.

The predicate happy, is by an inuersion of the terms put in the first place,
as is usual with David in the Psalms, and with our Savior in the Gospel,
for the greater commendation of the thing, being uttered with a kind of
acclamation or admiration: so that here we have sententiam Apostoli and
affectum, both the sentence and the affection of our Apostle declared.

A Conscience not condemning is a great blessing, Pro. 15.15. 2 Cor. 1.12.

In things lawful beware of a condemning conscience: eat, against conscience.

Do nothing against thy conscience, the good testimony whereof is thy glory
and happiness.

Conscience is either thy best friend, or thy worst enemy.

What if the Scribes and Pharisees, with the Priests, clap Judas on the back
for betraying his Master; yet his Conscience will never leave condemning and
tormenting him, till he go out and hang himself.

The times pass, and we know not how soon we may be called to appear
before the great Judge of all; let us so spend the remainder of our life, that
we may have the wellinformed approbation of the little Judge in our breasts,
and lie down in peace.

Here they are pronounced happy which condemn not, nor judge themselves: 1
Cor. 11.30.
and in another place they are by Paul commended which do judge themselves.

They are both true, and not meant of the same: he that does not that for
which his conscience may check him, that is Paul's meaning here. He that having
so done, repents of it, that is Paul's meaning to the Corinthians.

It is a happiness not to sin, or to do that whereof we have need to
repent: and it is a happiness when we have sinned, if we can repent.

I write unto you that you sin not, that you condemn not your selves in that
which you allow: but if any man finne, happy is he if he obtain pardon, and
judge himself, repenting of the same.

In the Corinthians he means judging in the practice of repentance; Hier.
epist. ad Demetr. de virginitate seruanda. Poenitentia quasi secunda post
naufragium miseris tabula sit.
not so here.

The first care of the Pilot is to keep the ship from shipwreck: but if
shipwreck be suffered, to swim out on some boards end.

He that condemns not himself in his doings, because of the error of his
conscience, not happy, this not condemning must proceed from a sound and right
judgment.

Many approve better of drunkenness, whoredom, etc. then of sobriety and
chastity, and condemn not themselves, though they daily walk in such
beastliness; but they are therefore the more miserable.

O that they did condemn themselves, and that their conscience would awake,
and sting and check them for their evil deeds: for then there might be some
hope that they might be saved.

Though thou condemnest not thy self in thy evil doings, yet God will,
unless thou repent.

First try, allowest, wisely proceed to action, and not before.

Thou weighest thy gold before thou receive it, weigh thy opinions and thy
actions, before thou entertain and execute them: but weigh them, not by the
false skoales of thy conceit, or by the judgment of man; but by the equal,
true, and unerring beam of the Sanctuary.

The heathen Orator could see that the first thing required to true virtue,
Ciccero Offic. 1.
was that we should discern the truth, and not incognita pro cognitis habere,
hisque temere assentiri; to receive things doubtful for things certainly
known, and rashly to assent unto them. Which vice he that would avoid (as all
are so to will) adhibebit ad res considerandas and tempus, and diligentiam;
must says he, take time and use diligence to consider of things: if he had
added, the word of God, he had spoken like a Christian Philosopher and Orator
indeed.

In a matter of opinion, be sure it be the truth: when thou art sure of that,
sit down and consider whether it be fit to broach it or no: what profit, what
hurt may come by the same. There is not the same end of counsel, and a course
or race. (...).


The hastiness of many to vent their raw and ill digested opinions, has been
a great trouble to the Church.

If wicked men would take time to consider of their doings, they would not be
so mad upon drunkenness, theft, murder, uncleanness, etc.

Consider thou drunkard, what thou do think of the present turpitude and
infamy, and of the shame and torment to come. He that is not finally hardened
must needs be moved upon such consideration.

VERSE. 23. And he that doubts, is damned if he eat, because he eats not
of faith: For whatsoever is not of faith, is sin.
IN this Verse is the other Aphorism for the direction of the weak: to take
heed how they use or refuse things indifferent to the hurt of their souls.

Here are to be considered the Aphorism, and the Confirmation of it.

The Aphorism is this, He that doubts is damned if he eat.

The Confirmation is from the procreant cause of our actions, which is faith:
because he eats not of faith. And this further confirmed by a general Rule,
Whatsoever is not of faith is sin.

In the Aphorism propounded, are the Subject and the Predicate to be noted.

The Subject, He that doubts, if he eat; The Predicate, is damned.

In the Subject are the Action, attributed to the weak, and the Manner.

The Action, eating; the Manner, with doubting. Both which are to be joined
together, that the Predicate may follow affirmatively: For of it self it is
neither damnable to eat, nor to doubt: but sometimes to make question or put a
doubt deserves praise.

But he that eats doubting: and therefore doubting is here restrained with a
condition, if be cate.

Is damned, of his own conscience, which he violateth, and of God also, if he
repent not.

The Reason from the procreant cause, is faith. For though all actions, as they
are actions proceed from the understanding and the will: yet as they are
referred to God, they must spring from faith, which supposes an understanding
well informed as a beginning imperant, and a will pliant as a beginning
obsequent and exequent.

The Reason may be thus formed.

He that eats not of faith is damned. But he that eats doubting eats not of
faith. Therefore, etc.
The Minor is in the Text; the reason whereof is, because contraries expel one
another: for as it is between light and darkness, so it is between faith and
doubting; they mutually expel one another.

The Proposition Mayor is proved from the cause of damnation, which is sin.
Thus: Sin is the cause of damnation: or, Whosoever sins is damned. But he
that eats not of faith, sins. Therefore, etc. The Mayor is manifest; Romans
6.23.
The wages of sin is death. The Minor is in the Text.


All the terms are easy are familiar, saving doubting and Faith.

Doubts. The word signifies to discern sometime, and to put a difference,
as a weak Christian holding this meat lawful, and that unlawful: this is
more then to doubt, and so is a minore here included.

But here it is better rendered, doubts; as also it is used, Acts 10.20. James
1.6. (...), nothing doubting. And it is expounded by a learned man,
alternantibus sententiis secum disceptare, Budaeus Comm. ling. Graec.
when a man is at no certainty with himself, but at variance; sometime being
of one mind and sometime of another.

Mr. Calvin and Aretius, with others, render it dijudicat, which is when the
judgment is carried into diverse parts.

So dubious signifies such doubting, as when a man of two ways knows not which
to take: this is James his (...), double minded man, who is now of the mind
that he may kneel, now that he ought to sit; James 1.8.
halting between two opinions.

Faith: this many take for a justifying faith, whereby our persons are accepted
before God: and surely what is not done out of this faith, it shall be
accounted as a sin to the doer.

But I refuse this, because Paul speaks not of a profane man, but of such a
one who has confidence in Christ; but erreth in some particular action.

Therefore it is to be taken for that knowledge and constant persuasion, of
which we have spoken before; whereby, by the word of God, or good reason from
the same, a man is persuaded of the lawfulness of indifferent things.

To do any thing without this persuasion, is a sin.

In this persuasion we speak of; that which faith understands, Conscience
applies to the work: If therefore when faith understands a thing to be
unlawful, or doubts of the lawfulness, we do the same; we sin, and are in
danger of damnation, because we do that which we believe may be contrary to
the word of God.

These two faiths therefore are to be distinguished, neither do they always
concur in one person; but the one may be without the other.

Justifying faith is applied to the person; the faith of indifferent things,
only to the work.

By the first we obtain remission of sins, and acceptance of our imperfect
obedience.

By the second only we understand that this particular is not a sin, whether
we do it, or abstain from doing thereof.

The faith and knowledge of Christian liberty in things indifferent, is
necessary to preserve us from sin and condemnation:

Weak Christians that are docible, and not obstinate, severely but gently to
be dealt withal, because that which they are urged to do, may be to their
damnation, if they repent not.

Labor for this Faith and persuasion, lives.

Without it, not only things middle, but things commanded and good become
evil to us and damnable if we do them: for it argues a contempt of God and a
profane mind, when we dare do a thing (whatsoever it be in it self) which
we are persuaded tends to the contumely and dishonor of God.

That we may have and keep this faith.

First, 2 Pet. 1.19. (...).
study the Scriptures, and search them, for they bear true witness of all
things: the Word of God is a more sure word, on which a man may safely rely.

When our Savior bade Peter and his fellows, to launch forth, and let down
their nets for a draught, after a whole nights labor lost; Nevertheless,
says Peter, at thy word I will let down the Net. So if thou have the word for
thy warrant be confident: thou may do it. Yet it is not necessary that we
should have an express word, it is enough if we have it by Collection.

So baptizing of children is warranted, not by an express word but by
collection: so the public solemnization of matrimony by the Minister in the
Church, etc. So Rahab received the spies by faith, not of an express word, but
by collection, as appears. Josh. 2.9, 10.11.12.

Correspondence to the general rules of things, is sufficient unto faith in
the particular actions of things of those kinds. Yea in matters hidden and not
expressed which are commanded to be done, a probable certainty suffices, if
nothing of moment be brought to the contrary, and that we neglect not to be
informed, and are ready to yield upon better information.

Saint Augustines rule is, Quod neque contra sidem nec contra boros mores
iniungitur, etc Aug. Ia^uarto. cp. 118 c. 2.
that whatsoever is not contrary to faith and good manners, is indifferent, and
to be observed, for their society among whom we live.

Secondly; timely resist doubting, and give not place to the Devil: he will
iniect and throw doubts apace into thy heart, do thou throw them out as fast.

Thirdly, trust not too much to thine own wit and knowledge; neither be thou
partial: Bring not affections without judgment; but let judgment rule
affections.

Fourthly, be careful not to trouble thy own peace, with every doubt that may
be put in. Many desire to be resolved, and yet never leave seeking
objections, and refuse all resolution, till they understand an answer to all
arguments: which is the way not to be settled in any article of the Faith,
against which objections may be framed, which (especially unlearned men) cannot
answer.

Fifthly, pray to be illightned, and so to be settled, and of such stayed
judgment that thou may not be carried about with every wind of doctrine.

Here are diverse to be reproved.

1 Those who refuse to kneel at the Sacrament, and will sit, or else they will
renounce the Sacrament: this cannot be of faith; for this is to resist
authority: and the word prescribes not any particular gesture. And whereas some
have alleged that Christ sat; it is frivolous: for suppose it should be
granted, which I verily think he did not at that time; how weakly does it
follow: Christ sat when he delivered the Bread, therefore we must sit when
we receive it: But many have thought that Christ did receive the Supper with
his Apostles, which is absurd to imagine.

2 The Papists, who teach doubting.

3 All our profane people among us: for what faith can there be in committing
drunkenness, etc. Nay such things are contrary to faith and good manners.

They doubt not but they know that these things are unlawful, and yet they do
them.

To do a thing indifferent doubting, is damnable; but not to doubt of evil
and yet to do it; is a thousand times more damnable.

Let us believe, and live according to the Word.

The three last verses of the sixteenth Chapter are here placed in some copies,
and here added and expounded by Chrysostom, but we leave them to their more
due place.

A PLAIN EXPOSITION UPON THE FIFTEENTH CHAPTER OF THE EPISTLE OF Saint PAVL to
the Romans.
IN the thirteen first verses of this Chapter, is the third part of the
Explication of the Admonition delivered in the first verse of the fourteenth
Chapter.

This third part is a Repetition of the said Admonition, whetted on with new
Arguments, and so tempered with Apostolical sweetness accustomed, that it
might be the more effectual, as no doubt it was, to reconcile the minds of the
strong and weak among them, and to reduce them to concord and unity, which is
the sum.

The Method is this: In the first verse there is a general Admonition; in the
rest a Confirmation by diverse reasons.

VERSE 1. We then that are strong, ought to bear the infirmities of the
weak, and not to please our selves.
THis Admonition I call General, because it not only concerns the strong and
weak in the Particular of Christian Liberty, but comprehends the duty of
all strong, to all weak ones.

In it we may consider the Sum of the Admonition; and the Amplification.

The sum is, that the strong must bear the infirmities of the weak, and not
please themselves.

In this, are the Duty, and the Persons.

The Duty set down Affirmatively, To bear the infirmities of the weak; and
Negatiuely, not to please themselves.

The Persons are two: First, which ought to perform this duty, and bear:
secondly, which must be borne withal; The strong must bear with the weak.

Strong: There are some strong in their own opinions, strong in errors, but
this is weakness: Esaias reports of some who have great strength to pour in
wine and strong drink; Esaias 5.22.
but this is wickedness: But here strong is taken in a good sense: strong in
faith, in knowledge, in grace, who have received a greater measure of any good
gifts, natural or spiritual, then others.

Weak: (...)
These are opposed to the strong; and are such which have but a little faith,
knowledge, understanding to judge of matters in question, which meddling with
controversies are easily drawn away, which ouershoot themselves in rash
judgment; such of whom Paul speaks, 1. Cor. 3.2. and Heb. 5.13. Babes that
had need of milk; such as have small power to withstand temptations, and to
subdue rebellious affections, generally such as are weak in body or mind.

To bear with the infirmities of the weak: That is, to bear at their hands,
their rash censures, their inconsiderate carriage, till they may be better
instructed, and grow stronger, as a father with his child, or a man with his
sick friend, not to disdain him, and laugh him to scorn for his weakness.

Not to please themselves: That is, not to give themselves only satisfaction,
but to endure something, though displeasant, that we may do our brethren good.

The Amplification is from diverse circumstances.

1 From the person of Paul: We, not only Apostles or Ministers, as some would
put off this duty only to them, but in general, we that are strong, whosoever:
nor does he speak ambitiously; he might truly put himself in the number of
the strong; for who so strong as Paul? But he says, We, putting himself
among the rest as an Example.

2 From a Debt or Duty, we ought: We use to say that Must is for God and the
King: God requires it as a debt to be paid. We ought, he says not, It were
good, or convenient that ye did bear, etc. But, we ought, not leaving it at
our choice, but imposing a necessity of performance.

3 From the Cause of this duty; because strong: God gives to some more
strength then to other for this cause, that they may bear with the weaker, as
riches to some, that they may relieve the poorer, etc. so the bones in the body
bear up the weak flesh, and the principal pillars in a building, the weaker
parts thereof, and the Nurse her little child.

4 From a figurative setting down of the Affirmative part of the Duty, must
bear: a metaphor taken from Porters, which carry other men's burdens, and as
by the Porters strength and pains, the owner of such burden is eased, so must
the strong so bear the infirmities of the weak, that they may rid them of
them: they must tollere, take them up, and take them away, the end of the
action being here employed.

5 From a figurative description, of the ignorance, rash judgment, etc. of the
weak: they are called infirmities, sicknesses, diseases: as we bear with the
waywardness of a sick man, so we ought with weak Christians.

6 From an Opposition of the cause of the contrary; Not to please our selves:
for the cause why we bear not with infirmities of our brethren, is, because
we are loath to be troubled, we love our own ease, more then their good;
we only seek to please and content our selves.

The stronger must bear with, and tolerate them which are weak. Galath. 6.2.
Bear ye one another burden, as ignorance, hastiness, etc. 1 Thessalonians. 5.14.
Support the weak.

The strong are to be admonished to use indulgence toward the weak:
weakness: they may be strong: thou also thy self were weak. Burdens are
troublesome, I confess; but charity will make it easy. Act. 13.18.
God (...) did suffer, and bear with the manners of the Israelites forty
years in the Wilderness. How did Christ many times bear the rudeness of his
Apostles! nay he has in our room borne that insupportable burden of our
sins, and wholly eased us of them; we then at his commandment ought to
bear the infirmities of our brethren.

Let the husband bear with the wife, who is the weaker vessel; let the wise
bear with the unwise, etc.

Does thy brother err in opinion? Bear with him awhile, if he be not
obstinate, and instruct him; the learnedest have had their errors; in this
life we know but in part. 1. Cor. 13.9.


Does he err in life and manners? Bear with him, and seek his amendment; the
holiest man that ever was, Christ only excepted, had his faults, wherewith he
was blemished.

We all have our infirmities: Though we may be strong in one thing, yet we
may be weak in another: some are hasty, some are worldly, some are
suspicious, every one has some fault or other; we must of necessity bear
one with another.

Let the young man bear with the forwardness of age; let old men bear with
the indiscretion of green youth.

Bear thou with my hastiness, that I may bear with thy pride, etc. this is
the way of concord and love.

We are all travailing to heaven, if any saint or fall sick by the way, let us
which are strong and in health, bear, and help, that he may keep company
with the rest.

He that is bound to succor his enemies fainting beast, is much more bound to
relieve his brothers weak and sinful soul.

What must I bear? infirmities; not the blasphemy, whoredom, drunkenness,
etc. of filthy beasts; let the impudence and insolence of such abominable
wretches be repressed by just severity.

Art thou ignorant? err in opinion? art thou rash in judgment? rude in
speech? then art thou sick and weak.

Art thou weak? then art thou burdensome to thy Teacher, to thy brethren, to
the Church which bears thy infirmities, and thou have cause to love them
therefore.

Art thou weak? then carry thy self according to thy condition; It is the
fault of the weak, and a great sickness of their mind, to take upon them the
parts of the strong: viz. to determine things doubtful; to read the books of
adversaries; to consure their brethren, etc. Ah, how insufficient are they unto
such things! So sometimes a sick man longs for that which the stomach of a
strong man can hardly digest. Are blind men fit to judge of colors? or sick
men to fight with enemies? Let every man weigh and examine himself,
-- Quid valiant humeri, quid far recusent:
what he is able to do, and what is fit for his strength: as we seek to
recover out of bodily sickness, so out of our infirmities of the mind: Let us
amend our ignorance and error, that we may be in malice children, 1 Cor.
14.20.
but in understanding men.

VERSE 2. Let every one of us please his neighbor for his good to edification.
IN this Verse is a Reason of the Admonition, specially applied to the Negative
part of it, Not to please our selves; and set down by way of Antithesis; Let
every one of us please his neighbor.

The Reason is taken from the end: thus, That which makes to the good and
edification of our neighbor, is to be done:
But to please our neighbor, and not our selves, makes to his good and
edification.
Therefore we ought not to please our selves, but our neighbor.


This being to be understood in such cases, where both could not be pleased, as
in the point of difference about meats and days at Rome.

This is set down by way of precept; where is the duty; To please our
neighbor: and the Amplification.

Please: that is, to condescend unto, to accommodate our selves unto, to
gratify, to behave our selves so that we may be accepted, and if it be an
indifferent thing, out of a Christian indulgence, to abstain.

The Amplification is double.

First, from the persons, which must please, which must be pleased.

Every one must please: and it is significantly expressed; Every one of us,
which are strong. Poor men please rich men; and mean men the mighty, etc.
this is easy to be obtained: but here the rich must please the poor; the
learned such as are unlearned, etc. this is hard, because we think that it is
a falling from our selves to yield to our inferiors, and to give them content,
and to please them. Here the perfectest and strongest not exempted.

He that must be pleased, is our neighbor; though the meanest.

The second Amplification is from a limitation; for his good to edification.

For his good edification, Comment. Hier. adscripti.
some say, because there is an evil edification, edificacio ad delictum, of
which 1 Cor. 8.10.

But severally they more effectually teach: and then appoint duo grana salis,
Caietan.
two grains of salt to season the duty of pleasing our neighbor, the first on
the part of the matter; that it must be good, or at the least, not evil, and
referred to that which is good: the second in regard of the vtility; that it
may profit to edification. For all things which are good and lawful edify
not: 1 Cor. 10.23.

Or, for good, that is, our neighbors good, as is well expressed in his
Majesty's translation: and this good expounded, Sarcerius.
to edification of our neighbor; of the Church, says one, and the stablishing
of the peace thereof, and to the conservation of the weak.

Every man must seek the good of his neighbor. Cor. 10.24. Let no man seek
his own, but every man another wealth: of the which Paul is an example, in
the same Chapter, verse. 33. Even as I please all men in all things, not seeking
mine own profit, but the profit of many that they may be saved. 1 Cor. 13.5.
Love seeks not her own.

To edify our neighbors is and ought to be one of the chief ends of our
actions: carry thy self so, advantage to do him good, and that he may admit
of thy counsel.

He that is weak will speak and do many things absurd, and offensive: thou
must as a Physician handle him gently, as thou would a sick man, that he
may receive thy admonition.

Thou must so please him that he may be saved: we gently stroke our horses that
they may be the more handsome and useful, much more are we to please our
neighbors, that we may live the more comfortably and peaceably with them, and
that they may become more obedient to God.

This is hard unless we deny our selves: he will never please his Ruler, his
Minister, his weak brother, his neighbor, who trusts in his own wit, and
hunteth after glory.

If thou be weak, for thy good and edification: not that thy weakness should
so far be tendered, till thou grow obstinate and stubborn; this were to
destroy, not to edify,

A loving Father yields to please his child in many things, but not to give him
a knife, or that which may hurt him.

It were a vain thing to please the Jews, Papists, Brownists, in their
desires, for this were not for their good.

The Civil Supreme Magistrate, and the Church, may yield to many among us, and
please them, in giving them liberty to sit at the receiving of the holy
Sacrament; but this were a way to make them more troublesome; and if they held
a necessity of sitting, not at all is it to be granted unto them.

The Prince may please his people, but not in suffering them to violate the
laws: The Pastor must please his flock, but not to suffer them to arrogate
power to themselves, to make innouations in the house of God.

Please not thy neighbor in that which is evil: with him, as a beast; or
forswear thy self for him, like a Devil, etc. but if thou shall please men
in such things, thou were not the servant of Christ. Gal. 1.10.
If men will be pleased with that which is good, please them on Gods name; but
if they will not be pleased, unless thou do evil; displease them, and please
God.

Some would be pleased exceedingly, if their Minister would not preach, and so
sharply reprove sin; but we must reprove sin, though we displease.

It is a sign of a very ill mind, not to be pleased with good, but with evil;
as it is a sign of a very ill affected stomach, to prefer the eating of
coals before wholesome meat.

If thou be humble, sober, godly, thou shall please God and man.

VERSE 3. For even Christ pleased not himself, but, as it is written, The
reproaches of them which reproached thee, fell on me.
IN this Verse is another Argument proving that we should not please our
selves, and it is richly amplified in the verses following.

It is taken from example: Longum iter per praecepta, breue and efficax per
exempla, Seneca.
said a Philosopher: A compendious way to virtue, is to observe and follow good
example: and therefore Paul urges the precept with example, yea, with the best
example of all others, even of Christ; Christ pleased not himself; therefore
nor we must.

Or thus: Whatsoever is written of Christ (in regard of his moral obedience)
we must follow. But it is written that he pleased not himself:


Therefore.

The mayor is proved in the fourth verse. The minor is in this.

The Conclusion in the seventh verse.

In this verse we have two things: The Proposition of the Example, and the
Proof of it.

The Proposition in these words: Christ pleased not himself, but.

The Proof, from a written testimony, in the rest.

In the Proposition, are; The person from whom the Example is drawn, which is
Christ, and the Illustration of the person; first from a particle of special
note, whereby he is accented: Even Christ. Secondly, from dissentany effects;
He pleased not himself, but us, or others.

Even Christ: The lively and only absolute pattern of all virtue, in whom we
never want matter of imitation. All others are to be followed, with this
restraint, si recte praecesserint, if they have gone aright. And therefore Paul
propounds his example to the Corinthians, with this clause; 1. Cor. 11.1.
as I am of Christ: and to the Philippians, Philip. 3.17.
he propounds himself and others, as Types and Copies, not as Prototypes and
Principalls, for so only is Christ.

Pleased not himself: not that he was displeased in taking upon him, and
working our Redemption; for he most willingly undertook it, Luke 12.50.
and was straightened and grieved till it was finished. But he sought not his own
ease, or the content and satisfaction of the inclination of Nature, which
abhors pain and the destruction of it self. He took such a course which
demonstrated, that he sought therein our good more then his own ease or
pleasure.

But; here is an Elipsis of some thing, which is supplied thus; but us, or but
others: and it is an elegant bringing in of the proof, where in stead of the
other Dissentany, the probation is inferred.

It is written, The reproaches of them which reproched thee, fell on me.

This testimony is taken out of Psalm. 69.9. the first part of the verse, The
zeal of thine house has eaten me up, is applied to our Savior by his
Disciples, Ioh. 2.17. the other part here by Paul: in the first he shows his
zeal to God; in the second his love to us: for he grievously took the sins
of men against his Father; and translated the sins of the Elect upon
himself, 1. Pet. 2.24.
and expiated them: His own self bare our sins in his body on the tree.

By reproaches he means the sins of the Elect, by a Synechdoche, one
outrageous kind being put for all; and indeed all sin is a kind of reproach
and despite to God.

Here also is another figure, the cause being put for the effect, sin for the
punishment of it.

Fell on me, as a most heavy burden, unto which no strength was sufficient
but Christ's.

Christ was not in all his life and death indulgent to himself, pleasing
himself, but he pleased us. 1. Cor. 11.1. Be ye followers of me, even as I
also am of Christ: which words depend upon the last verse of the tenth Chapter,
where Paul declared that he pleased not himself; as Christ sought not his own
glory, Ioh. 8.50. so nor to please himself.

Hence we are to be admonished, bear with him; we need our selves to be borne
withal: Christ bore the abominable sins of his enemies, we the infirmities
of our neighbors; Christ was not obliged by precept to have done it, but we
are; therefore if he did so much for us, freely of his own accord, we are to
do so small a thing for our brethren at his commandment: otherwise the
reproof of the unmerciful servant will lie upon us: I forgave thee ten
thousand Talents, should not thou have had compassion on thy fellow servant,
and have forgiven him an hundred pence?

He that will live godly, Judges 7.17.
as Gideon bade his soldiers, look on him, and do likewise: Matthew. 11.29.
so Christ provoke us to his example, and also the Apostles; as Peter, 1.
Pet. 2.21. and Paul in many places, for many particular duties: for
Forgiveness, Ephe. 4.32. for Love, Ephesians. 5.2. for Humility, Philip. 2.5. for
Beneficence, 2. Cor. 8.9. for the Profession of faith, 1. Tim. 6.13. for
Fidelity, Hebr. 3.2. etc.

Examine thy self whether thou be conformable to his example; if not, then art
thou so far wicked, as thou followest not his steps.

He was peaceable, obedient to Magistrates, frequent in prayer; if thou be
contrary, neither art thou holy, nor belonging to his discipline.

Christ was a pattern of temperance, sobriety, etc. The drunkard then, of all
other, is one, who lives most contrary to our Savior Christ.

No marvel, if the Heathen were notoriously guilty of whoredom, drunkenness,
etc. for such things are spoken of their gods: but our God, he is holy; our
Master most innocent, a Lamb without spot, wholly pure, and without all sin;
like whom we must live here, if we would live like him hereafter.

When then thou shall be tempted to drunkenness, or any other sin, say as
Vriah did; My Lord, and the people of my Lord, live soberly, chastely, etc. and
shall I commit such things? As the Lord lives, I will not do this thing. 2.
Sam. 11.11.


Let the love of Christ to us, constrain us to love and obey him.

Christ took upon him our sins, and dyed under the burden for us. He sought
not his own pleasure, but our good: let not us seek to please our selves, but
him.

What should have become of Manasses, David, Mary Magdalen, Peter? Yea what
should have become of us all, if he had sought to ease and please himself? Yea
if he should not bear with us every day.

Let nothing draw thee from his obedience, whom nothing could draw from
effecting thy good.

If most unspeakable torments, most bitter death, most shameful reproaches,
could have done it, he had never redeemed thee.

If counsel, even Peter's counsel could have prevailed, Matthew. 16.22.
he had pleased himself, to our eternal displeasure: But he overcame all
impediments, to please and profit thee, though to his infinite pain; so do
thou, to please and obey him, though it should cost thee ten thousand lives.

Sins are reproaches against God, to commit drunkenness, revile the most High.

He that curses and reuileth his Parents, is worthy of death; much more if
the Creature shall reproach his Creator.

God accounts himself honored, when we obey him, and dishonored by our
rebellions: remember what is written, and reproach him not. The Lord says, Them
that honor me, 1. Sam. 2.30.
I will honor, and they that despise me, shall be lightly esteemed.

VERSE 4. For whatsoever things were written aforetime, were written for our
learning, that we throughpatience, and comfort of the Scriptures, might have
hope.
THe first Proposition of the Argument, verse. 3. was this: Whatsoever is
written of Christ we must follow. This is here proved by an argument taken from
the end of the Scriptures, they are written for our learning.

It seems to be inferred by a Prolepsis; It is written that Christ pleased
not himself: some might say, what is that to us? Much says Paul; For,
whatsoever is written aforetime, is written for our learning. That of Christ is
written before.

Therefore etc.

Here are two things delivered of the Scriptures, making for the commendation
of them: Their end, which is Doctrine; Their use, which is Hope; which Hope, is
set forth by the means whereby it is nourished; Patience and Consolation,
which are noted by their Instrument whereby they are wrought, the Scriptures.

Whatsoever things are written aforetime: This notifieth the old Testament
which was then only written, and is to be applied to the New also; for there
is the same end of both, which is Christ.

Learning: that is, heavenly learning: For other matters, as the Art of
Navigations, Husbandry, etc. may be learned by other writings; but, to know God
aright, to understand his providence, the Redemption of man by Christ, etc. by
no book to be attained, but only by the Scriptures.

There is a great book which shows us the Invisible things of God, which is
the Book of the Creatures: but the Scripture only able to make us wise in
such things to salvation.

That we might have hope, through patience and comfort of the Scriptures. Hope
is the certain expectation of eternal life to be given freely for Christ, the
daughter of faith, yet being as ancient as the mother. Faith believes, hope
expects.

Patience is a voluntary suffering of things grievous, for piety sake.

Comfort is better felt then by words declared; yet you may say that it is a
sweet effect of our Justification, upon the affections, whereby we re^oyce in
the promises of God.

Some read exhortation, because the Greek word signifies both, and M. B^za
does not much disallow it; Ambrose
but it cannot be so taken here, for the resuming of both these in the next
verse, The God of patience and consolation; for I remember not that God is any
where called the God of exhortation.

Patience and comfort: though they beget not hope, yet they are as the two
breasts which nourish and confirm it.

Job said, Though he slay me I will trust in him: and again, All the days of
my appointed time will I wait, Job 13.15. Job 14.14.
till my change come. His patience, and the comfort he felt, sustained him in
this hope.

Of the Scriptures: Scripture is a Latin word, and signifies writing: now the
books of the Old and New Testament are called the Scriptures or writings, in
regard of their excellency; as only worthy to be written: Scriptures, with
this addition, Holy.

So we call the Scriptures in one volume, the Bible; which is a Greekish word,
as if we should say, The Bible, because as David said of Goliahs sword, there
is none to that, so we may say of this Book: a Caedar in Lebanon not more
exceeding the lowliest shrub, then this all other books. As the gold and
silver, and raiment of the Israelites coming out of Egypt was nothing
comparable to the riches of Jerusalem in the days of Solomon: August. l. 2. de
Doct. Christ. ca. 42.
so neither the learning of all profane writings, with the holy Scriptures, as
says Saint Augustine; For, says he, Quicquid homo extra didicerit, etc.
Whatsoever a man learnes in other books, if it be ill, it is in the Bible
condemned, if it be good it is there to be found; and over and above, there are
things of exceeding profit to be found, which we shall meet with in no other
book.

These holy Scriptures work patience and consol^tion: that patience and
comfort which is gotten elsewhere, will fail in the time of need.

The Scriptures were written for our edification in learning, and hope, by
patience and comfort. Psalm. 19 7.8.9.10.11. where the effects of the law, or
Scriptures of the old Testament are set down to be most sovereign and
wholesome; much more now in the addition of the New Testament: Romans 4.23. 1
Cor. 10.11. Ioh. 20.31. 2 Timothy 3.15.16.17.

The Scriptures are most excellent.

1 In regard of their Author which is God; but this is not in our Text.

2 In regard of their Contents, which is the heavenly Doctrine, whereby the
wounded and dead conscience is comforted and revived.

3 In regard of their perfection; there is no error in them; there is nothing
idle or superfluous: for whatsoever is written, (as Paul here (and elsewhere,
all Scripture) is exceeding profitable to learning and hope.

We read the ancient Fathers with singular comfort, but in them as in all
modern writers, there is something, if not erroneous Consule Aug. Marcellino.
Ep. 7
, yet that might be spared; but this Book, the whole and every part of it is
profitable, useful, and necessary; and this only has this privilege, as S.
Augustine twice in one Epistle acknowledges Aug. Hieron. Ep 19.
, and elsewhere Aug. Vincent. Ep. 48.
.

Quaeuis bracteola Chrysostom. Hom. 1. ad pop. Anteoch.
, every little filing, the least ray, is of great value.

Singuli sermones, syllabae, apices, puncta, in diuinis Scripturis plena sunt
sensibus: In the divine Scriptures every word, syllable, accent, point, is full
of sense, said S. Hierome Hieron. com. in 3. ca. Ep. ad Ephesians.
.

The Anabaptists are here confuted,

1 For equalling unwritten traditions, to the written word in authority.

2 For denying lay people as they call them, to read the Scriptures, lest they
should thereby prove Heretics, but in very deed lest the common people by that
light should discern their impostures; and therefore whereas the Council of
Trent licenced young men to read the Bible, having a certificate from their
Curate of their wisdom and sincerity: the Pope, after restrained that liberty.

3 For holding the Scriptures not to be necessary but only to the well, and
more convenient being of the Church. They make them necessary no otherways,
then riches to our life, or a horse to our travail: but we hold them, as
necessary as our daily bread for life; and as our legs for travailing on foot.

Though when God spoke face to face to the Patriarcks, and by dreams, etc.
there was not such necessity of writing, yet now those means being ceased, S.
Jude said, Jude v. 3.
it was needful for me to write.

The Scripture is necessary for all,

Quae nullis animis, nullis non congruit annis, Esp. in 2. Tim.

Lacte rigans paruos, pane cibans validos.
Saint Augustine says, His praua corriguntur, Aug. Velus. Ep. 3.
parua nutriuntur, and magna oblectantur ingenia: Here ill dispositions may
find for them amendment, weak ones for their nourishment, good ones for their
delight.

Let the unlearned study them that they may come to knowledge; and the learned,
that they may be put in mind, and stirred up to do according to that they know.

If thou be faint, here are the Flaggons of wine, and apples of Paradise to
comfort thee: if thou be strong and healthful in grace, here is the salt,
which will keep thee from putrefying and corrupting.

If the Devil assault thee, here is the River out of which thou may choose
thee smooth stones to repel and throw him under thy feet.

If thy lusts rebel, here is the Sword to cut them off.

If thou be sick, here is the Apothecaries shop of Cordials, Conseruatiues,
and Restoratiues.

It were infinite to travail in this commendation.

Let us all read the Scriptures and learn them; let us teach our children to
say Hosanna, Timothy, knowing the Scriptures from a child, proved an admirable
man.

Get thee a Bible, at the least a new Testament; it is the best implement of
household: As he is a simple Soldier that wants a sword, so he is a very sorry
Christian that wants a Bible.

The book of the Scriptures given for our learning, patience, and consolation,
and hope.

They are Gods letters to us to make us not only more learned, but also more
godly.

Apply the Scriptures to thy life, and turn the words into works, or thou
losest thy labor.

Many the more they know, the nearer they are to hell, because they live not
according to their knowledge.

As meat plentifully eaten, and undigested, destroys the body; so much
knowledge, not digested into works, damneth the soul.

Therefore If you know these things, happy are ye if ye do them: John 13.17.

VERSE 5. Now the God of patience and consolating grant you to be like minded
one toward another, according to Christ Jesus: That ye may with one mind, and
one mouth, glorify God, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ.
THese two Verses are a Prayer for unity and peace among the now dissenting
Romans. It is a singular light and ornament of Paul's discourse.

It is brought in by a Prolepsis; as if some should say to Paul: you have
brought many strong reasons, but do you ever think to bring the weak to
yield to the strong? or the strong to forbear their liberty for the weak, by
arguments? no, they are too much heat in the controversy to hear reason.

To this Paul may be supposed to answer; that which corruption denies, prayer
obtains: Now the God of patience and consolation unite their minds: For he is
able to make the Lion and the Lamb so to dwell together, that a little child
may lead them.

In this prayer are two things: The thing prayed for, and the Amplification.

The thing prayed for, to be like minded; which implies a union of their
thoughts, judgments, sentences, affections: this we call Concord, which is a
joining together of hearts, that as they are concorporated into one outward
profession, Ephesians. 3.6.
so they may be coanimated, as I may say, into one inward love in Christ.

The Amplification is diverse.

1 From the Author, God, the Father of the rain, etc. but especially the giver
and maintainer of unity and peace.

God is here described by two effects, Patience and Consolation: Of Patience
before Consolation, because by divine dispensation, the way to mount Thabor is
by mount Caluary.

Of Patience and Consolation together: Because of the abundant sweetness and
comfort, which he powers into the hearts of his children under the Cross.

But why of Patience and Consolation here, rather then of Faith and Hope?

Because in prayer it is most comely to suite the thing we pray for with
attributes to God accordingly: The strong were not patient toward the weak,
nor the weak toward the strong, for if they had been so, they might in time
better have understood the Doctrine of Christian liberty.

If hot spirits would have patience, they should not so much ouershoot
themselves, and the Church should have more peace.

2 The persons which should be like minded, one toward another, the strong
with the weak, and the weak with the strong, not only with them of their
own party, but also of the other, that so parting and siding may be taken away.

3 According to Christ: which you may call the Kind of unity; an unity in truth
and godliness. Agreement is a thing indifferent in it self, but good or bad,
according as the things are, in which the agreement is: The agreement of
drunkards and thieves, etc. is against Christ; but this, according to Christ.

Or you may say, according to Christ's example and commandment, which seems
to be fittest for this place, because of the Argument of Christ's example, of
which this prayer is an illustration, and because this implies the other.

4 From the End of like-mindednesse, which is the glory of God; and this is
amplified two ways.

First, from the instrument of this glory, which is double; the Inward,
Anselmus.
one mind: the Outward, one mouth, that is, Quando vnus and idem sensus and
sermo per diuersorum or a procedit; When one and the same meaning, and speech,
proceeds out of the mouths of diverse men.

Secondly, from a description of God, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ;
adding force to his prayer by the mention of Christ, whom the Father gave to
death, to unite us to himself, and together.

The members of the same Church, ought to be like minded one to another, that
God may be glorified, 1. Cor. 1.10. Paul prays that the Corinthians may all
speak the same thing, that there be no divisions among them, but that they may
perfectly be joined together in the same mind, and in the same judgment, Phil.
3.16. and the Apostolical Church is an example, Act. 4.32. And the multitude
of them that believed were of one heart, and one soul.

In trouble seek patience and consolation from God; thankful.

Many think by their own strength and manly stomach to bear trouble, but if
God give not patience, a little pain or cross will move us to impatience.

Also to find comfort in their calamities, from their purses, from their
friends, from merry company, seeking to drive away the evil spirit, by
music, as Saul; but it is the Holy Spirit which is the Comforter.

Resort thou in thy trouble, to God the Author, and to the word of God the
Instrument of Patience and Consolation.

Paul unto his preaching, Prayer: for disputation and sound arguments will not
prevail unto concord, though they do to conviction unless God move the
heart, as we have experience with the Papists and Brownists.

Many learned Preachers profit not their hearers, for want of Prayer: Paul may
plant, and Apollo may water, but God will be entreated for the increase.

As in the nourishment of the body, many feed of the daintiest, and yet are
lean and sickly; so many hear and read the Word, which is the food of the
soul, and yet are not nourished, because they pray not.

Be at the Prayers as well as at the Preaching, if thou would profit.

Unity and Concord are here specially commended unto us, error or evil, but in
truth and goodness.

How good and pleasant it is for brethren to dwell together in unity: It is
precious as the ointment of Aaron, Psalm. 13.^^.
and profitable as the dew of Hermon: The Lord make this dew abundantly to fall
about the Tents of the Church of England.

Herod and Pilate shake hands against Christ, set on, it may be, by the High
Priests, Annas and Caiphas, and the wicked Jews: Let us agree and hold
together for the defense of Christ and his Gospel.

The Papists brag of Unity, as of an infallible note of the Church; and
surely Jerusalem is a City compact together: Psalm. 122.3.
they also face the world down, that we cannot have the Truth, because of our
Contentions: this is that which they lay in our dish, in all their Pamphlets;
the more guilty are they which broach new opinions, which contend for trifles,
and so cause the Truth, which we profess, to be evil spoken of by the
Adversaries.

God is not glorified there, where there is no unity,

He cannot endure them which call him Father, and will not live quietly and in
unity with their brethren.

By strife and contention God is not glorified, but blasphemed.

The Lords Supper is instituted, as a band and nourisher of Unity and Concord,
but it is made a fountain of discord and variance by some, and that for a
gesture: there can be no religion in this, neither is God glorified thereby.

What is the reason that our contentions are not coniured down by that most
effectual charm of the Apostle to the Corinthians, in the beginning of his
first Epistle to them? Now I beseech you brethren, by our Lord Jesus Christ,
that there be no divisions among you, 1. Cor. 1.10.
etc. And by the end of the last Epistle to them: Finally my brethren,
farewell, be perfect, be of good comfort, 2. Cor. 13.11.
be of one mind, live in peace, and the God of Love and Peace shall be with you.

Whom should not that Patheticall prayer of our Savior going to his Cross,
move to unity: Holy Father, keep through thine own Name, those whom thou have
given me, that they may be one, John 17.11.21.
as we are, that the world may believe that thou bast sent me.

Surely if we have not put off Christianity, these speeches must and will
prevail with us unto Peace and Unity.

VERSE 7. Wherefore receive ye one another, as Christ also received us to the
glory of God.
IN this Verse is the Conclusion of the Argument taken from the Example of
Christ, verse. 3.

Christ pleased not himself:

Therefore we ought to receive one another: The phrase Receiving one another,
being put for, Not pleasing our selves, because pleasing our selves is the
cause why we receive not one another. Not to please our selves, To bear the
infirmities of our brethren, To receive one another, are Synonima, with Paul
here.

And thus not only is repeated the Argument of Christ's Example, but also the
maine Admonition, set down, Chap. 14.1. and Chap. 15.1.

The Argument is repeated nouo modo, after a new manner, vt pondus addat,
Aretius.
that he might add weight thereunto.

The Admonition is now the third time iterated, here the word Receiving being
used, that so by a holy kind of Art, Pet. Martyr.
he might end this disputation in the same term in which he began it.

This Conclusion is set down by way of precept, that it may be the stronglier
imprinted in us.

In it we have the Duty commanded; and the Rule of it, wherein is the Argument
of the example of Christ.

The Duty has the action, Receive; and the object, one another.

Receive: as before, Chap. 14.1. not only to entertain our brethren coming
to us, but to seek them up; not to shun their company, but with all love to
embrace them, and to admit them to familiar conversation, fellowship, and
communication of offices.

One another. In the 14. Chapter, verse 1. the admonition was charged upon the
strong toward the weak; but here both are charged, the strong must receive the
weak, and the weak the strong.

As Christ also received us to the glory of God. In these words is the Rule; in
which we have the Note of the Rule, and the Argument from Christ's example.

As: This notes the Rule. We must receive one another, as Christ has received
us: this note signifies syncerity, not aequality: there being as much
difference in the degree of receiving and disprop^rtion, as is between that
which is infinite, and that which is finite.

The Argument is taken from the effect of Christ; where is the Action, has
received, which contains all his love; he redeemed us, purchased life for us
with his blood, of enemies made us the children of God, reconciled us to God,
bore with our manifold infirmities, and yet does bear.

The persons received, us: here is a great Emphasis, miserable sinners,
enemies, etc. that we might be admonished not to make nice to receive our
brethren.

The condition, to the which we are received, Glory, set forth by the owner and
author of it God, Acts 7.2: Ephesians. 1.17.
called the God of glory, and the Father of glory elsewhere; that is, to be
partakers of the heavenly glory with himself.

By Christ's example we are kindly to love one another, Ioh. 13.34. 1 Thessalonians.
4.9. Ephesians. 5.2.

There ought to be inwardnesse and friendly familiarity upon all occasions,
same Church and faith, though in country far distant one from another: much
more between them of the Church in the same kingdom, in the same town,
enjoying one and the same ministry.

A foul thing it were if such should not love, agree, and receive one another.

Thy brother has not offended thee, then do not reject him: or, he has
offended thee, yet receive him, for Christ received thee when thou had ten
thousand times more offended him.

Receive ye one another. Paul commands it, the Spirit commands it, Christ
Jesus himself commands it, and gives us an example. Let us no longer study for
dissension, but for peace and love. Let us not quarrel for circumstances, as
if the substance of Religion were contained in them: we may peradventure think
it zeal, but it can be no good zeal which is contrary to the precept and
example of Christ: For we see by experience, that contentions about such
things as have been spoken of, draw our affections one from another, that we
are more ready to separate, then to receive or be received.

We many times are together in the same place and duty of prayer, but not like
minded one to another, which is fearful.

Do thou receive a rich drunkard, poor believer? Beware lest Christ refuse
to receive thee. The foot of a believer is better and more honorable then the
head of a wicked man: and if Christ vouchsafe to receive him into Paradise,
disdain not thou to receive him into thy company.

Christ has received us to the glory of God.

We were created glorious, but we abased our selves by transgression, we have
all sinned, and come short, or are deprived of the glory of God. Romans 3.23.


Now our Lord Jesus has received us: From whence? from shame, from slavery,
from the Kilnes mouth, burning brick as the Israelites, from the very bottom
of misery: whither? to the glory of God, Joh. 17.5, 22, 24
to the glory that himself had with the Father before the world was: By what
means? Even by his Agony end bloody sweat, by his Cross and passion, by his
precious Death and burial, etc. Tantae molis erat -- So much did it cost to
bring us to glory.

Let us not be ashamed of him in his glory, which was not ashamed of us in our
baseness: let us receive him in his word and Sacraments, that we may be fit
for that glory.

O the happiness of such which believe, peace and unity, and holiness! Behold
what glory our Master has put upon us, that we should be the children of God,
and fellow heirs with him in that glory.

If thou live wickedly, thou shall never have the glory to enjoy his presence
in that kingdom.

If thou be a drunkard, a filthy unclean liver, etc. should thou enter
into that glory? Auaunt, wretch, into hell, and shame everlasting, if thou
repentest not.

Do thou look that thy very body should be a vessel of such glory? deforme
it not with sin, repent, make thy hands and thy heart clean: this is the
generation of them which enter into their Masters joy and glory.

VERSE 8. Now I say that Jesus Christ was a Minister of the Circumcision, for
the truth of God, to confirm the promises made unto the Fathers.
THat Christ has received us all, is here proved in this and in the verses
following.

The Argument is taken from a Distribution: thus, He that receives Jews and
Gentiles, receives all: for all men may be so distributed.
But Christ has received Jews and Gentiles.
Therefore, etc.


That he receives the Jews is proved in this Verse; and that he receives
the Gentiles, in those which follow.

The Argument whereby he proves the assumption of the Jews, is taken from the
destinate end of his humiliation, which was, to confirm the truth of God, and
the promises of the Fathers: thus, He who became the minister of Circumcision
to confirm the truth of God, and the promises of the Fathers, assumeth the
Jews.
But for such end was Christ the minister of the Circumcision.
Therefore, etc.


In this Verse are two parts: a Description of the humiliation of Christ, and
the end thereof.

The humiliation of Christ in these words; Jesus Christ was a minister of
Circumcision: not that he administered the Sacrament of Circumcision, John 4.2.
as neither did he baptize; but because by his coming he sanctified
Circumcision, and all other Shadows and Ceremonies, Faius.
and made them effectual, as a learned man expounds: which sense if it be
admitted, it affords this Observation.

If the Sacraments be effectual unto us, sign that we are received: but if
we being baptized, and coming to the Lords Table, are not so enabled, it is a
sign we are not received.

But there is another more apt interpretation, which the most do follow, and
that is, to take Circumcision for the Circumcised, the Abstract for the
Concrete; meaning the Jews, to whom that Sacrament and Ceremony was commanded.
So often with Paul, as Romans 4.12. Gal. 2.7.8.

The Minister of Circumcision: implying a mean and laborious service, as our
Savior speaks of himself, The son of man came not to be ministered unto,
Mat. 20.28.
but to minister, and give his life a ransom for many.

For the truth of God, to confirm, etc. In these words is the end of his
humiliation; which is double: the utmost end, for the truth of God; the next,
to confirm the promises made unto the Fathers.

For the truth of God. That God might be justified in his sayings and promises.

To confirm the promises made to the Fathers; of his coming, and of the
effect thereof; to make good unto them eternal life. And so the New Testament
is a fulfilling of the Old.

These Promises were made to Adam, Noah, Abraham, and to the Jews, that Christ
should be the salvation of the world: and he came in the fullness of time to
make them good. Not but that the promises were of virtue and force to Adam; but
the Action or Passion from whence such virtue came, was performed at the
coming of Christ.

All this is amplified by Paul's asseueration: Now I say.

Christ came in the flesh to make good the truth of God, and to confirm his
promise to the Jews, for their salvation. Luke 1.68. and seq. The first part
of the Song of Zachary is to bless God for visiting and redeeming his people
by the coming of Christ, As he spoke by the mouth of his holy Prophets, etc.
To perform the mercy promised to our Fathers, etc. Matthew. 15.24. I am not sent
but to the lost sheep of the house of Israel, Acts 13.46.

The tenure whereby Abraham and the Jews held eternal life, was by the free
promise of God. Read Deuteronomy. 7.7.8. merit.

Christ was a Minister not in name and title only, discharged his calling, by
praying, preaching, watching, fasting, doing good, and adorning his ministry
with a most holy life.

Let no man therefore contemn the Calling of the Ministry; though we be
unworthy, yet it must be also acknowledged that there is no person on earth
worthy enough to bear that office: Colos. 4.17.
Let Archippus take heed to the Ministry that he has received in the Lord,
that he fulfill it. For if our Lord Christ did all the days after his
inauguration most painfully labor, and to much and often weariness in
fulfilling his office; let all Ministers be ashamed, especially to take the
honor and maintenance of their places and callings, and to neglect the work.

Let hearers see they profit by our labors: If we labor, and they profit
not, the loss is theirs; yea the more we labor, the more and greater their
loss.

Many account it a great blessing, and so it is, to have a learned, faithful,
and painful Teacher; But they must know that if Christ himself were their
Minister, it would be no advantage to them, unless they believe and obey his
doctrine. Christ was the Minister of the Jews, but he converted but few of
them, and yet never man spoke as he did. It may be some comfort to Ministers,
who by all their pains cannot turn the hearts of drunkards and other wicked
livers; but it shall be the greater condemnation to such hearers, that have
received the word in vain.

Even Moses that famous Prophet of whom the Jews boasted, John 5.45.
shall accuse them to God because they believed him not: So shall thy famous
Teacher accuse thee, because thou amendest not by his teaching.

It is our happiness to be received, promises be not confirmed unto us. Let
us then pretiously account of the Word and Sacraments, which are the seals to
assure us of the love of God. What shall become of our consciences without
these? It will be hard to stand in the day of affliction: attend unto these,
that the promises may be confirmed unto thee

The truth of God is of great weight: for that Christ was feign to come in the
flesh.

If thou be a drunkard, a blasphemer, etc. thou know what the word of
truth says of thee, John 10.35.
and the Scripture cannot be broken.

Consider, Gods truth is dear unto him: If God be true, in what estate art
thou? He spared not his own Son our Lord Jesus, that the Scripture might be
fulfilled, and that his truth might appear: and shall he be untrue, and the
Scripture unfulfilled to spare thee? The promise of life shall be made good to
the comfort of his Children, though it cost the abasing of the Son of God:
and so the sentence of damnation shall be executed upon hypocrites and
unrepentant sinners, cost what it shall.

Christ came in the flesh, and suffered in the flesh, for the truth of God: and
for the truth of God he shall come to judge the quick and the dead; that God
may be true in saving the godly, and in damning the ungodly which repent not.

VERSE. 9. And that the Gentiles might glorify God for his mercy, as it is
written, For this cause I will confess to thee among the Gentiles, and sing
unto thy name. And again he says, Rejoice ye Gentiles with his people. And
again, Praise the Lord all ye Gentiles, and laud him all ye people. And
again Esayas says, There shall be a root of Iesse, and he that shall rise to
reign over the Gentiles, in him shall the Gentiles trust.
IN these Verses he shows that the Gentiles are received.

Here are two things; a Proposition, that the Gentiles are received: and a
Confirmation by diverse testimonies, which was needful, because the Jews would
hardly be persuaded of the mercy of God unto the Gentiles.

The Proposition is set down by the effect; The Gentiles glorify God for his
mercy, for this is the effect of their receiving: they had had no cause to
glorify God for his mercy, if they had not been received to mercy.

The first testimony brought for proof is, Psalm. 18.44. David or Christ will
praise God among the Nations: therefore they are received to mercy.

The second, Deuteronomy. 32.43. Rejoice ye Gentiles with his people: therefore the
Gentiles are ingrafted into the people of God; and the partition wall being
taken away, there is become one sheepfold under one Shepherd.

The third, Psalm. 117.1. Praise the Lord all ye Gentiles, and laud him all ye
people: But in vain should they be exhorted to praise him with them, if they
had not obtained like mercy.

The fourth, Esaias 11.10. where there is a Description of our Savior Christ:
from his humane nature, A root of Iesse: and from his office, which is, To
reign over the Gentiles, as their Emperor, Captain, and King. In the Hebrew
it is, that Christ shall stand as an Ensign to the people, that is, he shall
gather them together by the preaching of the Cross, as by an Ensign.

This is amplified by the effect: The Gentiles shall trust in him, or seek to
him, as in the Hebrew, which is all one; for they would not seek if they did
not trust to find him, and in him a glorious rest.

The Gentiles are received to the glory of God by his mercy in Christ. Esaias
49.22.23. I will lift up my hand to the Gentiles, etc. John 10.16. Other sheep
I have which are not of this fold, them also I must bring, and they shall hear
my voice, and there shall be one fold, Amb. lib. 7. com. in Lucan, c. 10. in
ipso initio.
and one Shepherd. This was figured by the going of the clean and unclean
beasts into the Arc, and showed to Peter in a vision in the tenth of the Acts.

The Jews and Gentiles are become one people of the New Testament; meats and
days.

Let not the Gentile despise the Jew, because Christ was the minister of the
Circumcision to perform it, etc. Let not the Jew condemn the Gentile, because
they are received, and do glorify God for his mercy.

So we are one people, of one Church: small matters should not disunite our
minds and affections.

The Jews were received for the truth of God; for his mercy. Christ was
promised to them; there was no promise made to us. There were Oracles and
Prophecies of the Grace which should be showed us, but no Promise: and yet we
are not saved without truth, for the Oracles are fulfilled: nor the Jews
without mercy, for the promise was of mercy.

It is mercy that the Jew is saved by Christ; but greater that thou art which
art a Gentile. The Jew might expect salvation because of the promise; but he is
found of us which sought him not, Esaias 65.1.
nor called upon his name.

The Gentiles praise God for his mercy and rejoice. True joy is because of our
Calling and receiving to grace. This allayeth the force of the fiery trials,
making us not only to rejoice in hope of glory, but even in afflictions and
tribulations. Romans 5.2, 3.
Do thou laugh and rejoice? Thou have more cause to weep, if Christ have
not received thee.

Christ is our Emperor and General, Standard among us, which is the Word and
Sacraments: The Devil, the world, and the flesh are our enemies: Let us fight
manfully under Christ's Banner; let us neither play the Cowards, nor the
Traitors; for having such a Captain, if we follow him, and obey him, we
cannot but conquer and be saved.

VERSE 13. Now the God of Hope, fill you with all joy and peace in believing,
that ye may abound in hope through the power of the holy Ghost.
THis verse contains a Prayer, with which Paul sweetly concludes whatsoever
has been before written of faith and obedience, but especially the last
Discourse of Things indifferent, about which they were exceedingly troubled and
distracted, to the diminution of their Hope.

Now he prays, that being united in charity, they may feel abundantly the
joy and peace of Faith and Hope.

Herein are two things: The thing prayed for, which is double; Joy and Peace:
and the Amplification.

Joy and Peace, two most excellent things, of which, chap. 14 verse. 17.

Peace; that is, of Conscience, within us: of Charity, with our Neighbors.

Joy; that which issues from this double peace. For the want of either Peace,
breeds grief and sadness; and without doubt for the distractions of the
Christians at Rome, there were great thoughts of heart.

These are amplified diversely.

1 From the Author of them, which is God; who is here described to be the God
of Hope, so called either because he gives Hope, as well as Joy and Peace, or
because he is the Object of our hope, in whom we trust, as in the latter end
of the verse last before.

And this is a most magnificent title; for He who is the God of hope, must be a
Savior, Good, Faithful, and Omnipotent; for which cause we cannot say, Angels
of Hope, nor Kings of Hope: For Angels are not omnipotent, nor Princes; and
besides, men are not faithful, and therefore it were in vain to trust in them.

2 From the measure; Fill you with joy and peace. He wishes these things unto
them, not in a sparing manner, but that they may be filled, and well filled,
for we are empty by nature, and worldly joy fills not, but with wind; but
this is a full joy, and it is the will of Christ, John 10.10.
that we should have life more abundantly, so also joy.

3 From the kind of Joy and Peace: All joy, not filthy joy, nor wicked peace,
but perfect: by all noting, not an universal comprehension of the species of
Joy, but the perfection of that one species, which is spiritual joy and holy
peace: so all faith, 1. Cor. 13.2. for a perfect faith of (...) Allioy then, is
true, perfect, and constant, which passes not, but remarneth, John 16.22.
Philip. 4.4.
and shall not be taken away, and by which we rejoice, and again I say rejoice.

4 From the root of these sweet fruits which is Faith; for from the sense of
our Reconciliation these things proceed.

5 From the End, that they may abound in hope, amplified from the Worker of
such hope, the Holy Ghost, to whom is attributed Power in the working of these,
which works them not as an outward instrument, but as the third Person in the
Trinity; from whence may be observed, a distinction of the Persons.

We must wish unto our brethren joy and peace in believing. Paul in the
beginning of his Epistles, wishes peace to the Churches, and Saint John, Joy,
1. Ioh. 1.4. These things write we unto you, that your joy may be full.

Paul's often praying, frequent in this duty, and that prayer is as sweet a
close to a business, as marmalade is for the stomach, to a plentiful dinner.

Prayer sanctifies all things, and makes them profitable; therefore do
Preachers begin and end their Sermons with Prayer: from hence is it that in the
holy Service, Pet. Martyr. in loc.
prayers are so often mingled with reading of the Scriptures, which Peter
Martyr calls an Healthful custom; and hence Augustine oftentimes confuted
the Pelagians, who attributed a power to our selves to perform holy duties, by
our free will.

And of this I willingly write, the rather, to admonish all good Christians,
that they should not so lightly esteem of the Public prayers in the Church,
as many do; who will come to the Church, if there be a Sermon only; but so
they will not do if there be prayers only: whereby it comes to pass, that
there is some knowledge in diverse, in whom there is not a ^ot of true piety and
godliness.

Joy and Peace, are more to be desired then gold; conscience which is without
them, and so is the Church which wants them, they come from Faith, Romans 5.1.
1. Pet. 1.8. and the want of them, either in the conscience, or in the Church,
is a sign of the want of faith.

Fill you with all joy and peace: Labor to be rich in these; so much of these
that thou may abound in hope, which is a sure Anchor of the soul, and Seal
of salvation.

The sick man's heart is even as dead, who is without hope of recovery; and if
the Husbandman sow his corn without hope, he is full of heaviness.

Sin takes away joy and peace, and destroys hope: Alas, what peace, joy,
or hope, can a wicked man have? But they which abound in the fruits of
righteousness, abound also in the sure hope of eternal life.

The whole strength of men and Angels, rejoice, and to be in peace, nor to have
hope in the hour of death: It requires the very Almighty power of the Holy
Ghost: So contrary is Satan, our selves also to our own good.

The Lord show his power on our hearts, in working Faith, Hope, Joy and Peace
in us, by his Holy Spirit: Amen.

VERSE 14. And I myself also am persuaded of you my brethren, that ye also
are full of goodness, filled with all knowledge, able also to admonish one
another.
THe Conclusion of this Divine Epistle, begins at this Verse: which though
it be spent in complements, yet in its kind excels, as the precedent parts
in points Dogmaticall and Moral: And, in as much as All Scripture is given by
Divine inspiration; this, with as high reverence to bereceiued as the other.

Of this Conclusion there are diverse parts: The first is in the residue of this
Chapter, which is an Excuse.

Now two things are excused: 1. The manner of his writing: 2. His not coming
to them all this while. The first to the 22. ver. the second, from thence to
the end of this Chap.

The first is brought in by a Prolepsis, wherein we may conceive, how they
might object, and how Paul does answer.

The Romans, whom the Poet calls -- rerum Dominos, might out of the height
of their spirit, some of them, say thus to Paul: You take, Paul, too much upon
you, what need such length? such sharpness? We are neither babes in
knowledge, nor base in manners. Besides, who called you? To this Paul
answers: Of which there are two parts. First, a Concession. Secondly, a
Correction.

The Concession in this 14. ver. the Correction in the verses following, in
which he rendereth a reason of this his writing.

In the Concession we have, first, the thing granted: secondly, the
Amplification.

The thing granted is threefold: 1. Goodness: 2. Knowledge: 3. Ability to
admonish one another: This, as the effect of the two first.

Knowledge, in particular set forth by the kind of it; All knowledge, not the
knowledge of Navigations, Mathematics, etc. but the best knowledge, namely, of
things belonging to Faith and Salvation.

Goodness; not only as it may be opposed to rigor, and so to be restrained to
their mutual failings about things indifferent: but extending it self to the
whole probity of a Christian connersation.

Able to admonish one another: therefore not needing Paul's monitions.

They were able; but they did not accordingly: and so he makes that which he
writes the more acceptable, says Museulus; for we more easily endure to be
noted of Negligence, then of Ignorance and Malice.

The Amplification is threefold.

First, from a friendly compellation; My brethren.

Secondly, from his own person; I my self also am persuaded of you.

I my self: though I thus write, which am an Apostle, which am able to judge,
which use not to flatter: others; I my self also. Am persuaded: The word
signifies of our own an infallible, of others goodness a probable conjecture.

Thirdly, from the quantity: Filled and full: and yet some understood not the
doctrine of Christian liberty: and had unbrotherly contentions about things
indifferent: but he either writes to the learned amongst them, from whom they
all receive denomination: or such speeches are not too punctually to be
examined, but to be understood, in comparison of others, and in respect of that
which might be expected from them.

We ought to acknowledge and praise the graces of God in others: Mat. 25.21.
Well done thou good and faithful servant: and S. Paul in all his Epistles.

An ingenuous mind willingly believes the good report of his neighbor, as
Paul of the Romans; ill report: He were very malignant, who should think ill
of them, who of all hands hear well.

Be not sparing in commending the virtuous. undue praises to any, so to detract
that which is due. Yet Qualem commendes etiam atque etiam aspice: Horatius.
As thou art wary to what thou set thy hand and seal, so upon whom thou
fastnest praise with thy tongue. Paul went upon good ground, so do thou.

It was a credit to the Romans to be commended by S. Paul: every man's word is
not a commendation. Vulgus ex veritate (...) ex opinione multa iudicat, Pro
Roscio Comaede.
said Tully: The common sort use not to speak as the truth is, but as they
fancy. And a lewd man's praise, Cicero. Ep. Fam. l. 15. Ep. 6.
is rather a dispraise. Ea est enim profecto iucunda laus quae ab ijs
proficiscitur, qui ipsi in laud vixerunt: No praise can truly delight, but
that which comes from praiseworthy men. If Paul commend the Romans, if John
praise Demetrius, 3 Ioh. v. 12. Ibid. v. 3.
and the Brethren report well of Gaius; this is a blessing, this may be
esteemed as a rich Jewel.

Ministers must take knowledge of the forwardness of their people in piety and
all goodness, commend them for it, as well as reprove them for their faults.
So Paul in this Epistle. So in the 11. Chapter of his first Epistle to the
Corinthians, he does as well commend them for observing his constitutions, 1
Cor. 11.2.
as reprove them for some abuse about the Lords Supper. Apoc. 2.
So our blessed Savior in his Epistle to the Churches, commends their
virtues, reproves their vices.

The Minister must lift up his voice like a trumpet to denounce against their
sins, so to proclaim their praises. Both, in wisdom performed, profit unto
godliness.

-- Laudataque virtus -- Crescit. Little children are brought to ply their
books as fast for praise as for fear. It was one of the directions of S.
Hierom to Laeta, for the bringing up of her daughter: Laudibus excitandum est
ingenium: Hieron. Ep. ad Laet. de institu. fill.
her wit and conceit must be raised and sharpened by commendation. Look what
the trumpet is to great horses in the wars, and the horn and hollaing to
hounds in the chase, such is praise to us in the way of virtue.

Blessed be God that we can praise our people: But let our people see that such
things be in them in truth, for which they are praised: For as our
reprehensions are of no validity where they are not descrued, so nor our
praises. Let us so preach, and the people so obey, that we may be allowed and
praised, not of men only, but even of God.

The Romans are filled with spiritual abilities: Paul speaks, 2. Tim. 3.7.
He that learneth not a manual trade in seven years, is accounted a block
(...) what is he who after twenty years hearing, is grossly ignorant? The
blessing of the Creation, Increase and multiply be upon us in our Recreation.

Admonition (though a thanklesse, yet) a necessary duty. a pit, and admonish
them; into sin, and let them alone: we deal with our brethren, 1 King. 1.
as David with Adoniah, we see them and suffer them to run into hell it
self, and never will say why do you so? for displeasing of them. Admonish one
another: but wisely.

Unto this two things are necessary, goodness and knowledge: the first that we
may be willing, the second that we may be able to do it. He which admonishes
without goodness, is malicious and ambitious: he that without knowledge, is
inconsiderate and foolish.

VERSE 15. Nevertheless, Brethren, I have written the more boldy unto you, in
some sort, as putting you in mind, because of the grace which is given to me of
God.
IN this Verse begins the second part of Paul's answer, which is a correction:
in which he shows how that by a kind of necessity he was enforced so to write
unto them: and herein Paul sets us a copy of a most loving, modest, courteous,
and civil manner of writing.

In it there are 2. parts: 1. an affirmation: 2. a confirmation.

The affirmation in these words, I have written the more boldly unto you, in
some sort. where we have, first, the fact; secondly, the manner of it.

The fact, I have written: The manner, the more boldly in some sort.

In some sort, ex part, (...), not on the part of some; nor I have written in
part; that is, imperfectly, as Stapleton would have it; nor in part of the
Epistle; nor referring it to the words following, in part putting you in mind,
as Faius; though this be very good, yet it is sufficiently there implied with a
quasi; but more boldly in part, in some sort; or as we use, so he what boldly.

More boldly: this boldness is to be referred both to the severity and to the
prolixity of his Epistle. The nice and dainty stomackt Romans could abide
neither: not the first, because they were great ones; not the last, because
they were learned. Neither can great ones endure plain and sharp reproves;
nor learned ones long and tedious discourses. Verbum sapienti. Our Apostle is
sharp and severe to the Gentiles in the first Chapter: to the Jews in the
second: to Jews and Gentiles in the 11. and 14. Chapters. And if we measure
his Epistle by the due proportion of a Letter, it seems rather a book then a
Letter.

The confirmation is in the rest of the words; wherein Paul excuses not
himself, as Siracides in the beginning, or the author of the Machabees in the
end of his work: but iustifies and auowes his boldness; yet with such
sweetness as becomes his Apostolical breast, and is for our imitation.
Boldness is confessed, not culpable, but commendable.

There are two arguments of justification: The first taken from the persons
writing, and written unto: the second from the causes of writing.

The persons appear in this word, Brethren: a term much used by Paul, but
scarce in any place more forcibly, and to purpose then in this. I am, says
Paul, your brother; the force of my love has extorted this both severity and
prolixity. When friends meet, they draw out the time in discoursing, a day
seems but an hour, and in the end they are loath to part: and he is no true
friend, who when he sees there is need, will not admonish his friend.

The causes are two: Final, Efficient.

The Final; as putting you in mind: He says not, to teach you being
ignorant; nor to correct you being disordered, but to put you in mind, being a
wise and very good people. The word signifies in the double composition, a
light, and secret putting in mind, as by a beck or holding up of the finger,
by which even the diligent are admonished: which is farther allayed by a quasi,
(...), as it were, that the curstest among them might have no occasion to be
offended.

The efficient is his calling and duty thereby enioined; which calling, is in
the last words of this verse more generally set down, according to the grace
given to me of God: and more particularly in the next verse.

In the general, we have the quality, it is a Grace: the Author, given of God.

Grace, that is, special favor, with the gifts issuing there from, fit for
the Apostolical function. This, and these are from God: and it is as if Paul
should say; By Divine Grace I am appointed a Preacher, an Apostle, and a
Teacher of the Gentiles: and you are the top of the Gentiles; 2 Timothy 1.11.
therefore I could not omit to write unto you; more boldly it may be you
think; but not then is warrantable and fit, it being from God.

Ministers must faithfully and diligently perform their office, Cor. 4.2. It
is required in Stewards that a man be found faithful, 1 Cor. 9.16. --
Necessity is laid upon me, yea woe is me if I preach not the Gospel. Read
also the 4. Chapter of 2 Timothy ver. 1, 2.

A modest and civil writing and speaking, Paul excelled all others herein,
who, if ever any, knew (...) to change his voice, Gal. 4.20.
and to attemper his style, that he might profit.

Some are so sour and rigid, that they account civil and well nurtured
language, dawbing with untempered mortar; and interpret that to be zealously
spoken, which is uncivilly and rudely. But Paul teaches and practices
otherwise, as in that his famous Apology, in the 26. Chapter of the Acts of the
Apostles, verse 25, 26, 27, 28, and 29. As also in all his Epistles. 1 Timothy 5.1,
2. Blanditiis enim obtineri solent, quae authoritate non possunt. Amb. in loc.
Tim.


To this belong those instructions he gave Timothy, that he should not rebuke
an Elder, but entreat him as a Father, younger men as brethren, etc. We
prevail many times more with gentle then with rough speeches. The very beasts
are tamed more with gentle stroking and coyeing, then with fierce blows.

The best need to be put in mind, even the Romans,

Acer et ad palmae per se cursurus honores,
Si tamen horteris, fortius ibit equus.
A free horse, if you remember him with the spur, will the more eagerly put
forward. 1 John 2.21.
I have not written unto you, (says Saint John) because you know not the
truth, but because you know it. 2 Pet. 1.12, 13.
And Saint Peter writes, I will not be negligent to stir you up by putting
you in remembrance of these things though you know them, and be stablished in
the present truth: and again, to stir up your pure minds by putting you in
remembrance. 2 Pet. 3.1.
So also Jude, verse 5.

This is profitable and safe, Phil. 3.1. A Garment double died holds the color
the surer, so decies repetita (placebunt) manebunt: often teaching the same
things deeply imprints them. God bids us remember the Sabbath in the fourth
Commandment; Christ bids us remember, John 15.20.

We are all dull to learn that which we should do, and flow to do that
which we have learned. The sharpest knife grows blunt, and even the best are
subiest to abatements and forgetfulness.

Hence we may take knowledge of two things. First, of the necessity of often
preaching, if it were for no other thing then this, to put us in mind. Philip
the haughty King of Macedon, commanded one to cry every morning at his chamber
door, Memento te esse mortalem, Remember that thou art a mortal man; which
his Son Alexander the Great, though he knew, yet had almost quite forgot. For
our forgetfulness we have need of often preaching.

The second thing we may hereby take knowledge of, is our corruption and
reprobatenesse unto that which is good, that we may be humbled for it, which
as it shows it self in other things, so especially in our forgetfulness of
the best things. We easily forget good things, not so things vain and worldly.

As, if you put meal into a seiue, the finest flower with the least motion
falls through, but the branne and course skufflings ^^^^^ine: So if our
memories lose any thing, it is the best not the werst.

What is the reason hereof? Surely because we love not nor delight in good
things as we do in vain and transitory. Did you ever know a covetous man
forget where he had bestowed a bag of gold? and Can a Maid forget her
ornaments, Ier. 2.32.
or a Bride her attire? Yet we forget good lessons without number. Did we Love
these as our richest treasure, and delight in them as the beauty and ornament
of our souls, we would also remember these.

Be careful to remember good things, and the rather because Satan is so busy
to filch these things from us. If thou hear a Sermon, twenty to one, but the
Devil by inward suggestions, or outward objects, will make thee forget it: but
if thou hear vanity, he will never tempt thee to such oblivion. As a thief
breaking into a house takes not away earthen vessels, or vnprositable and
cumbersome luggage, but gold or silver, or plate, or jewels, or fine linen; so
Satan empties not our heads of vanity, and idle stuff, but if there be a
lesson of price, that he seeks for a prey.

For help of your memories, hear often, repeat often, continually practice,
and always pray, that you may love and delight in that which is good, and that
your minds and memories may be sanctified to retain it: which God grant.

The ministry of the word is a Grace: It was to Paul, Romans 12.3. It is also to
us: in respect of our selves, and of our hearers.

1 We are graced by it, being hereby Christ's ambassadors, 2 Cor. 5.20. 1 Cor.
3.9.
and laborers together with God in the salvation of men.

2 And it is a great grace and favor to you, that we are enabled with gifts
to reveal unto you the Gospel of Jesus Christ: not for our own sakes does
God thus gift us, but for yours; See that you profit by us.

Among many, Diligence, and boldness. He of all other men must not be idle;
but either preaching, or studying or praying, etc. always in preparation, or
execution, public, or private, till he be translated. As a shepherd or
husbandman never wants work, as plowing, and sowing, and reaping, and then
plowing again, and so from year to year. So ye are Christ's flock, ye are
Gods husbandry, we must diligently, teach you, and rather then we should have
nothing to do, put you in mind of the things you have learned. But why does
God require so of us, that we may not have our liberty nor take our ease? even
that you may thrive and grow fruitful. Be answerable therefore to our pains,
or you are nigh unto cursing. Heb. 6.8.


He must have also audacity. When Iethro advised Moses for the choice of Judges
and Justices in Israel; the first thing he required in such, was, that they
should be men of courage: this also is requisite in a Minister, not to be
afraid, to tell an Ahab or a Herod, if there were such, and we saw cause, of
their faults. Paul also desires the Ephesians to pray for him that he may
boldly utter the Gospel. Ephesians. 6.19.
By virtue of our calling we dare tell blasphemers and drunkards, etc. of their
sins. If you dare offend God, we dare reprehend you. Ah my brethren these
times require bold Preachers: for sin is grown impudent: It is rare, to make
evil men, afraid, ashamed of their doings.

It is our part to instruct the ignorant, to confirm the weak, to comfort the
troubled conscience, to terrify the rebellious, to preach mercy to the
penitent, to thunder out judgments against the impenitent: to commend the
good, to reprove the bad; to encourage the zealous, to put in mind the
negligent and forgetful: and it is your duty meekely to hear and readily to
reform, that you may be blessed. Amen.

VERSE 16. That I should be the Minister of Jesus Christ to the Gentiles,
ministering the Gospel of God, that the offering up of the Gentiles might be
acceptable, being sanctified by the holy Ghost.
SAint Paul does in these words more particularly set down his calling, of
which he made a general mention in the latter end of the 15. verse.

His Apostleship is here described by the Genus, and the Difference. The Genus,
He is a Minister of Jesus Christ to the Gentiles: where we have, first, the
office, a Minister; second, the persons: First, whose Minister, Jesus Christ's:
second, to whom, to the Gentiles.

In the form or difference, we have the principal and essential function
distinguishing it from all other ministeries, Ministering the Gospel of God:
amplified by the end, Act. 13.2.
That the offering up of the Gentiles might be acceptable to God: this
acceptance set forth by a condition requisite thereunto, sanctification:
illustrated by the Author thereof, the Holy Ghost.

A minister, the Greek word signifies a public officer, which though here and
elsewhere used of the Ministry of the Word, yet it is given also to civil
Magistrates, to Angels, Romans 13.6. Heb. 1. vlt. Heb. 8.2. Luke 1.23.
to our Lord Christ, to the Priests of the Law: always a title of great honor
and public performance.

Of Jesus Christ, the King of his Church, the owner of his house. Heb. 3.6.

To the Gentiles. Paul preached upon occasion to all; but especially by his
calling, Act. 9. and by a constitution agreed upon between him and Peter,
James, and John, he was a Minister of the uncircumcision, as they were over
the Circumcision. Gal. 2.7, 8, 9.

To minister the Gospel of God: to santifie, to consecrate, to sacrifice. The
word is Leuiticall, and in it an allusion to the sacrifices of the Law; and by
a Metaphor here used for preaching, or ministering.

That the offering up of the Gentiles might be acceptable: either Actiuely,
that the Gentiles might offer themselves, as Romans 12.1. or rather Passiuely
that Paul by his Ministry might offer them up to God through faith of the
Gospel.

Sanctified by the Holy Ghost: not a spiritual conversation, but noting the
third Person in the Trinity the Author of Sanctification.

As S. Paul's Apostleship is here described; so proportionably the ministry of
the word to be continued to the end.

Paul is a Priest, the Gentiles the sacrifice, the preaching of the Gospel the
sacrificing knife.

Ministers must by preaching offer up the people an acceptable sacrifice to
God. Esaias 66.20. They shall bring your brethren as an offering to the Lord out
of all Nations. Ephesians. 4.12.
Act. 26.18. Romans 1.16.

Ministers by their office are sacred persons: they must therefore adorn their
function with a holy life; and their calling should so far be from being a
disgrace unto them, that even in this regard they should be had in singular
estimation.

If the Ministry of the Law were glorious, more the ministry of the Gospel.

The office of the Ministry is sacred: themselves therefore to be reverently
performed and carefully: by the people reverently to be attended unto.

Ministers are priests: Mass priests of the order of Rome, to offer up their
Maker as a propitiatory sacrifice for the quick and the dead: we abhor such
blasphemy. Nor Leuiticall priests of the order of Aaron: they offered beasts,
we men in sacrifice, killing their lusts, that they may be an offering
sanctified and acceptable.

As we are Priests, so all Christians are priests, or else we have no part in
the blood of Christ, Revel. 1.5, 6. and we are a holy, 1 Pet. 2.5.9.
and a Royal priesthood, says Saint Peter, alluding to Exodus 19.6. where God
says that the Israelites shall be to him a kingdom of priests: for though
the Rituall priesthood were conferred upon the tribe of Leui, and appropriated
to it: Romans 12.1. Phil. 2.17. Psalm. 51.17. Psa 50.14. Heb. 13.16. Psalm. 4.5.
yet the Royal priesthood belonged to the whole kingdom. You are all Priests;
your sacrifices are your selves; your faith, your repentance; your prayers and
praises, your works of mercy; offer then the sacrifices of righteousness, and
put your trust in the Lord.

As Ministers are priests, sacrifices: which term puts them in mind of their
sinfulness deserving death: for sacrifices must be killed, under the law there
was confession of sin by the parties bringing the sacrifice: it was they
which deserved to dye not the guiltles beast.

Also they must learn, that they must be pure; the sacrifices were washed, and
they must be sanctified, or not acceptable. There might be no blemish or
imperfection in them: Leu. 22. If we be wicked and profane, we are fit for the
Devil, but no sacrifices for God.

And if we our selves be sacrifices, then, our bodies, souls, with all the
members and faculties of both must be dedicated to God.

We must deny our selves, and live only to God.

The end of preaching and hearing is,

It is painful to be launced, but if thou part not with them, thou must be
damned with them, and can be no sacrifice acceptable to God.

When thou come therefore to a Sermon, remember thou come to be sacrificed;
struggle not, yield thy self, be not angry when thy sins are touched, lie as
still as Isaac did when he should be made a sacrifice, if thou desire to be
saved.

As Isaac said to his Father: Here is the knife and the wood, but where is the
Lamb? so I fear me a man may ask at our ser mons: Here is the Priest and the
knife: but where is the sacrifice? many come to the Altar, but they break away
and will not be sacrificed, going from the Sermon with more sinfulness and
condemnation then they brought with them.

Great is the happiness of such which are sacrificed to God: acceptable.

They which are not, are rejected, and a very abomination, reserved for the
shambles, but if thou be converted, thou art for the holy Altar in heaven.

He seems to be deprived of the sense of piety which hearing that the
conversion of a sinner is an acceptable sacrifice, rejoices nor for it.

If thou have once been sacrificed to God, thou art for ever to be separated
and set apart from common use: see then that thou take not thy body and soul
being dedicated to God, to prostitute before the Devils altar by abominable
sinning.

VERSE 17. I have therefore whereof I may glory through Jesus Christ, in those
things which pertain to God. For I will not dare to speak of any of those
things which Christ has not wrought by me, to make the Gentiles obedient: --
IN these words, and so to the end of the 21. verse, he commends his
Apostleship, from the efficacy of it, which was such that he might justly glory
in it.

There are two parts: First, an assertion, I have whereof I may glory.
Secondly, a declaration of certain bounds, whereby his boasting is limited,
which bounds are set down in the 17. verse, and expounded in the 18.

Those bounds, are either in regard of the efficient, or of the matter of his
boasting. The efficient: Jesus Christ. The matter: Things pertaining to God.

Not in my self, but in and through Jesus Christ.

In things pertaining to God. All things pertain to God. Good things as to the
Author and Rewarder of them. Evil things as the Judge and auenger of them.

But here Paul has another meaning: In the 16. verse, he described his
Apostleship, in terms borrowed from the Leuiticall priesthood, calling it a
Leyturgye, and Hierourgye: and here continuing the same Metaphor, he calls
the execution of his function, Hes 5.2.
a performing of things pertaining to God. So in the Hebrews: A high priest is
ordained in things pertaining to God, that is, to declare the will of God to
the people, and to offer the sacrifices of the people to God.

These two are expounded in the 18. verse. The first: I dare not speak of
those things which Christ has not wrought by me, that is, I acknowledge that
what good soever has come to men by my labors it is wrought by Christ, whose
instrument only I have bin. It is not effected by my virtue, but by his
goodness. Let the glory be to him. I have planted and watered, but the increase
is of him. Paul and Apolles are but vnderworking causes, Ministers by whom the
Gentiles believed, even as the Lord gave to every man, 1. Cor. 3.5.
not according to their will and appointing.

This is amplified by Paul's modesty: I dare not; Augustine.
Melior est in malis factis humilis confessio, quam in bonis superba gloriatio:
An humble confession of the evil we have done, is better then a proud bragging
of the good we have done: therefore Paul dares not glory in himself; this had
been Thrasonicall and vain boasting, but he glories in Christ.

The second is expounded thus, To make the Gentiles obedient, that is, by the
preaching of the Gospel to bring them to the obedience of faith: and of this
there are diverse things declared, as shall appear in the due place.

It is lawful for a Minister, when God blesses his labors, to glory in it,
but through Jesus Christ. Exodus 6.26.27. These are that Auron and Moses, etc.
These are they which spoke to Phoraoh, etc. This Moses wrote not without some
touch of glory; but in the whole story he attributes all the wonders unto God.
1. Cor. 15.10. Gods grace was not bestowed upon me in vain; But I labored
more abundantly thon they all; yet not I, but the grace of God which was with
me.

The matter of Law and Physic, is, Divinity and the Ministry (...): the
Ministry ought to be the more commendable to us.

That of Jeremy, twice repeated by Paul, Let him that glories, Ierem. 9.24. 1.
Cor. 1.31. 2. Cor. 10.17.
glory in the lord.

Have thou done any good in thy calling to Church or Commonwealth, or to any
particular place or person? give God the glory; for from him have thou had
wisdom, counsel, ability, opportunity so to do: that thy endeavors succeed is
from him: when thou give a poor man a penny, it is God who gave thee ability,
it is he who brought the poor man to thee; and who moved thy heart, who art by
nature cruel and covetous, to commiserate him.

We are but Instruments: and are greatly honored, if God will vouchsafe to
make us (which are evil) means and instruments of good to any: so the
carkeyse and ribs of that ship is honored as a monument, in which some
skillful Nauigator has surrounded the Globe of sea and land: and yet the glory
not given to the ship, but to the Nauigator.

We are not worthy to be instruments; let us not rob God of his due glory: if
so, then will the Lord curse us, and take away our gifts, or the opportunity,
or the good success.

When the proud King of Assyria, Isay. 10.12.
will not attribute the glory of his victories to God, he shall be punished:
and when Nabuchadnezzar remembers the honor of his own Majesty and forgets
Gods, Dan. 4.30. Acts 13.23.
he shall become a beast: and when Herod swalloweth up the glory due to God,
he shall be eaten of worms. For this are many great ones vnplaced, and mean
ones vngifted, because they proudly glory in themselves, and not in God.

Let us imitate Paul, John 1.20.27.
also John Baptist, and Peter, who when the people gazed upon him and John, for
healing the cripple lame from his mothers womb, said; Why look you so
earnestly upon us, Acts 3.12.16.
as though by our own power and holiness we had made this man to walk? The
God of Abraham, etc. has glorified his Son Jesus, etc. and his Name, through
faith in his name, has given him this perfect soundness.

As the chiefest glory of a servant, God.

Paul glories not in that he was rapt into the third heaven, etc. but in the
blessing of his labors: It is not great learning, nor great living, etc. which
is a good Ministers chief glory; for these a wicked man may have, but by his
labors to bring men to heaven.

So, art thou a Magistrate? glory not in the money thou have heaped up, and in
the land thou have purchased by thy office: for these may be wi^nesses of thy
corruption: but if thou have done good, in justice and equity thou may
glory, but in the Lord.

Damned wretches they are, who glory in their shame, as that they have drunk
down so many men, that they have defiled so many women, that they have so
revenged themselves of their enemies: Philip. 3.19.
Their end is damnation.

To make them obedient. True conversion is accomplished in our obedience, and
then are we acceptable sacrifices to God: Not hearing, but doing of the law
justifies, says Saint James: Not saying Lord, Lord, saves, but doing Gods
will, says our blessed Savior. A good Christian, as the good Huswife, is
praised in the gates by his works.

It is not boasting and bragging speech which is required in a soldier, but
stout fighting; so not speaking, but doing, is the praise.

It is commendable to hear, and to repeat, but to do, is the principal
ornament of a Christian. Gods children shall be equal to the Angels: to have
the face of an Angel works not this, nor to speak like an Angel; but to
do as Angels do. Let thy will be done in earth, as it is in heaven.

I dare not glory in my self, says Paul, why?

This ought to be the voice of a Christian; I dare not steal, lie, be drunk,
etc. O the audaciousnesse and madness of our times, wherein men dare provoke
God to his face, by their lewd conversation. How dare thou live so
profanely? Do thou not know that, That God whom thou offendest, is a
consuming fire? and that the end of thy wicked life, is to dwell with
perpetual burnings? Though wicked men dare sin, yet we dare not.

A godly man is not afraid of banishment, imprisonment, the Rack, the
strappado; he fears not a Tyrant, a Tormentor, a sword, a gibbet, etc. but he
is afraid to offend God: He dares dye for Christ, he dares even be burned at
a stake, but he dares not sin: This is true Fortitude, and Heroical
Magnanimity.

VERSE 18. -- By word, and deed, Through mighty signs and wonders, by the
power of the Spirit of God.
THe matter of Paul's glory, was to make the Gentiles obedient: concerning
which, he delivers three things: First, The means thereof: Secondly, His
Travail: Thirdly, His Desire to do Christ service therein.

THe means of making the Gentiles obedient, is in these words: the other two
in the rest, to the end of the one and twentieth verse.

The Means are twofold: Outward: Inward.

The Outward, Audible or Visible.

The Audible: The Word, that is, the preaching of it, to which may be referred
his Conferences, Disputations, Letters.

The Visible, two: First, His holy life: Secondly, His Miracles.

His holy life, in this word, Deed; as Chrysostom, Aretius, Sarcerius and
others expound. Not a General; expounded or divided in the words following,
Signs and Wonders; nor his labors, cares, and troubles undergone in
preaching, for his labors are spoken of in the latter part of the nineteenth
verse; and his cares and troubles, were rather Sufferings then Deeds.

The holy life of a Preacher is a great attractiue to win unto the Gospel
the good liking of men; 2. Cor. 1.12. Philip. 3.17.20. 1 Thessalonians. 2.1. etc. 2.
Tim. 3.10.
and Saint Paul often makes mention of it in his Epistles.

His Miracles: Through mighty signs and wonders.

Signs; not Sacraments, though they be visible signs of invisible grace:
Aquin. in loc.
but lesser miracles, as Thomas: which are things which might in time have
been done by natural means, as healing of some diseases.

Wonders: Greater Miracles, which altogether exceed the power of Nature; as to
convert the substances of things, to raise the dead, etc.

Or, Signs and Wonders, that is, Miracles, called Signs for their use,
Wonders for their form.

Miracles are True or False.

True Miracles, are things done by the power of God, beyond the course and
strength of Nature, to manifest the omnipotency of God, and to confirm the
truth of the doctrine revealed in the Word. Such were the wonders wrought by
our Savior, and by his Apostles, and by Apostolical men, for the first three
hundred years of the Church of the New Testament, which about that time
ceased; and they were, either in the things themselves, or in the manner of
them: as in putting life into a dead carcass, or in healing a disease
(otherwise curable by natural means) by a word, and in an instant.

False miracles are wrought by the power of Satan, for the confirmation of
lies, and to deceive; being either truly beyond the strength of nature, or
only in show, as delusions of sense, or which have hidden causes in nature.

Mighty signs and wonders: or through the might of signs, etc. Being meant
either of Paul's might to work them, or of their might in the hearts of such as
saw them.

By the power of the Spirit of God. Which blessed the words, deeds, miracles of
the Apostles, and effectually wrought by them in the people.

Christ furnished his Apostles with the gifts of utterance, holy life, and
miracles, to make the world obedient to the Gospel. Mar. 16.20. And they
preached every where, the Lord working with them, and confirming the word with
signs following. Amen. 2 Cor 12.12. The signs of an Apostle were wrought
among you, in all patience, with signs and wonders, and mighty deeds. Heb.
2.4.

The preaching of the word is the power of God to salvation to all that
believe. Romans 1.16.
By this Word Paul converted the Gentiles: and this word we have. Let us be
thankful, and suffer the power of it to convert us. This is the Word which was
confirmed with mighty signs and wonders: if thou beleeuest it not, thou shall
be damned.

The word and life of Preachers must edify. Judge. 7.20.
Math. 23.4
as Gid^ons soldiers. The Scribes and Pharisees are taxed because they lay
heavy burdens upon other men's shoulders, but themselves would not move them
with one of their singers.

Alexander would brag that he was a good Leader and a stout Soldier. (...).
Preachers must not only require of others, but do themselves.

Miracles were a time in use, Nichodemus argued that Christ was a teacher sent
from God, because of his miracles. John 3 2.
Aposteli^miraculorum sagena homines expiscantes, Damasc, orth. fid. l. 1. c.
3. paulo post initium.
ex ignorantiae profundo respirare fecerunt: The Apostles fishing with the net
of miracles drew men out of the bottom of the Sea of ignorance, that they
might breathe in the comfortable air of the Gospel, says Damascen.

Such miracles were either to prepare the minds of men to receive the truth,
or to confirm it being received. So before the Sermon in the Mount, Luke
6.17.18.19.20. and seq. Leo Mag. sermon. in fest. om. Sanct.
our Savior did many miracles; Vt cuius potentiam experiebantur tam benignam,
non ambigerent salutarem esse doctrinam: That having experience of the
goodness of his doings, they need not doubt of the soundness of his doctrine,
says Leo. Also Signs fellowed the preaching of the word, Mark 16.20.

Bellarmine endeavors to show the Church of Rome to be the true Church,
Bellarm. tom. 2. lib. 4. de eccl. c. 14
because of the power it always had, and has (says he) to work miracles:
and for want of this power vpbraydeth the Protestants: among fifteen notes of
the church, making the glory of miracles to be the eleventh.

But many Canus loc. l. 11. c. 6. Caiet. opusc. tom. 2. tract. 1. c. 5. Eling.
loc. com. l. 4. c. 42. Espen. in 2 Timothy 4. Digr. 21.
, and those not the meanest of his side, disclaim their Legends, and are
ashamed of their miracle-workers, affirming that there is no stable more full
of dung, then such stories are of lies.

There is now no necessity of miracles: so affirms S. Chrysostom Chrysostom. hom.
19. oper. impers.
. And Saint Augustine says, that he which now requires a miracle to believe,
makes himself prodigious Aug. de C. Dei l. 22. c. 8.
. Signs are for unbelievers, 1 Cor. 14.22.

What glory Bellarmine gets to his Church by miracles may be discerned by
these Scriptures, Mat. 7.22. and 24.24. 2 These. 2.9. Revel. 13.13.14. Where
miracles in these days are the note of wicked men, false prophets, and of
Antichrist: especially if they be to admiration only, and not to profit, as to
fly in the air, to make images walk, speak Chrysostom. loc. sup. citat.
, etc. such as are the miracles of the Romanists for the most part.

It is necessary that a new doctrine be confirmed with miracles, says
Bellarmine: but the doctrine we teach is as old as the Bible; and therefore
we willingly leave to them the glory of their monkish wonders.

And yet we are not without miracles. We cannot cast out Devils by exorcismes,
as their Friars do, till they make themselves ridiculous to all the world: but
we through preaching the Gospel cast out sin. We cannot raise the bodily
dead, as every petty Saint in the Church of Rome: but we through the blessing
of God raise them which are spiritually dead in trespasses and sins. I desire
no other miracle to prove the truth of the Religion I profess, but the work
of Faith and Repentance in my heart, manifested in my life.

By the power of the Spirit of God. Moses tells the Israelites, Ye have seen
the great tentations, the signs, Deuteronomy. 29.2.3.4.
and those great miracles which God did to Pharaoh, and unto all his servants,
and unto all his Land: But the Lord has not given you an heart to perceive,
eyes to see, and ears to hear, unto this day.

Neither does the word; nor the judgments, and exemplary punishments which God
inflicteth, in our eyes upon lewd persons, as drunkards, etc. avail to bring
us to repentance without the effectual operation of the holy Ghost. O the
unutterable corruption of our hearts, and our reprobatenesse unto that which is
good.

Pray that thou may profit unto godliness by the word, Sacraments,
Judgments of God, which is a sign thou have the Spirit dwelling in thee: Pray
for that Spirit: For thy heavenly Father will give the holy Spirit to them
which ask him, Luke 11.13.

VERSE 19. -- So that from Jerusalem, and round about unto Illyricum, I have
sully preached the Gospel of Christ. Yea, so have I striuen to preach the
Gospel, not where Christ was named, lest I should build upon another man's
foundation: But as it is written, To whom he was not spoken of, they shall see:
and they that have not heard shall understand.
IN these words are the two other things set down concerning Paul's bringing
the Gentiles to obedience, namely his travel about it, and his earnest desire
to do Christ service therein. The first in the 19. verse, the other in the 20.
and 21. verses.

In the first we have the Execution of his office, and the Place. The execution
of his office, preaching the Gospel of Christ; set forth by the manner, fully.

Fully preached. The word in the Greek signifies to fulfill.

Some think that Paul uses a Metaphor, Tolet.
in which he should compare the Gospel to a net, which Paul has filled with
the Gentiles.

Some expound, Luther.
I have filled all places with the Gospel.

Some, Calvin.
I have supplied that which was lacking, carrying the Gospel of Christ far
off, which was neer-hand preached by others.

But the best is that is here translated, fully preached, that is, fully
discharged the duty of an Apostle, as Archippus is wished to fulfill his
ministry: Coloss. 4.18.
which Paul by another word somewhere (...). Acts 20.24.
calls finishing his ministry, and declaring the whole council of God
(...). Acts 20.27.
.

The place is set down by the two termini, or uttermost bounds of his travel,
Jerusalem and Illyricum: and the medium or middle places between, round
about, not by a right line, but circlewise.

Jerusalem a City of Judea in the East: Illyricum a country westward from
Jerusalem, having on the North Hungary, on the West Istria a part of Italy, on
the South the Adriatickesea: it is now called Sclauonia. Danubius the greatest
river in Europe entering into Illyricum, receives into it 60. Rivers, and is
thenceforth called Ister. S. Hierom was borne in this country in a town called
Strido, though the Italians contend this town to be in Istria.

From Jerusalem to Illyricum by a right line is about 1000. miles; but Paul
traveled not so, for it had not been difficult so to have done in a short
time, both Jury and Illyricum being situated upon the Sea: he began at
Jerusalem, though his first Sermon were preached at Damascus, from whence he
went into Arabia, and so to Damascus again, and then to Jerusalem, then to
Syria, Phaenicia, Cilicia, Pamphilia, Licia, to Phrygia, Pisidia, to Galatia,
Bithinia, Cappadocia, and many other Countries Northward from Jerusalem many
hundred miles: thence Westward into Greece, and so through Macedonia and Achaia
to Illyricum: and this not once only, but diverse times returning to the same
places: So that that was fulfilled which Christ spoke unto him being in a
trance at Jerusalem, I will send thee far hence unto the Gentiles. Act.
22.21.


The horses which Habakkuk speaks of, Habak. 3.15.
Thou did walk through the sea with thine horses, Hicrom there expounds of
the Apostles which carried Christ, Psalm. 45.4.
riding prosperously to the Gentiles, and among all the Apostles, he says that
Paul is that white horse in the 19. of the Revelation. I think he might
rather have said, Reu. 6.2.

Hierom also calls Paul the Arrow of God, Hieron. tom. 3. in expos. Psalm. 45. ad
prin^ipiam virg.
applying to him that of Psalm. 127.4. As arrows in the hand of a mighty man.

S. Chrysostom compares him to the Sun, so speedily and powerfully did he
illustrate the whole world almost with the Gospel of Christ.

Moses and Aaron converted not one country, namely, Egypt with their signs
and wonders: but Paul many Cities and Countries, saving innumerable souls.

The second, which is Paul's earnest desire, is in the 20. and 21. verses, where
we may consider two things: 1. The intention of his desire: 2. The object of it.

The intention is notably expressed in the Greek word, (...).
which signifies a high ambition to preach the Gospel: that which he did, he
was ambitious to do.

The object, to preach the Gospel, set forth by the condition of the place
where: which is set down negatiuely and affirmatively.

The negative; not where Christ was named and preached before; declared by a
reason; lest he should build on another man's foundation: not that it was
unlawful for him so to do, but because it was proper to Apostles to lay
foundations of Churches, he would not enter upon other men's labors, and so
derive the glory due to them, to himself. Where Christ was already known
there was not so much need of him; and therefore he applied him to such places
where he was not known, that he might enlarge his kingdom, and save the more:
not unlike our Master who left the ninety nine sheep in the wilderness, and
seeks the lost one.

The affirmative; but where Christ is not named, which he delivers in the
words of Esaias the Prophet: Esaias 52.15.
To whom he was not spoken of, they shall see, etc.

Paul greatly and with earnest desire labors in preaching the Gospel, as
appears in the book of the Acts.

Ministers of the word must earnestly labor in discharging their office, Mat.
9.38. Ministers are called Harvest laborers, 2 Timothy 4.5. They must watch, they
must suffer, they must work, that they may make their ministry fully known.

For prevention, Paul's travel from place to place is not to be followed of
ordinary Ministers. In a Church planted a rouing and vagrant Ministry is
uncomely.

It was said to the Apostles, Act. 1.8.
ye shall be witnesses to me both in Jerusalem and in all Judea, and in
Samaria, and to the uttermost part of the earth: Tit. 1.5.
but Titus must ordain Elders in every City: 1 Pet. 5.2.
and to us it is said, Feed the flock which is among you.

Pastor, is a word of relation to a flock, so that no flock, no Pastor
properly.

Minister is a term of action, and requires a place for lawful employment.
Book of Constit. Can. 33.
Therefore it is well provided in our Church, against making Deacons or
Priests, which have not first some certain place where to use their function:
though there be Titular Bishops at Rome, yet we are not to reckon of the
Ministry as of a title only.

Those therefore which have no station, are to be accused; for we are to be as
stars fixed in our several orbs: those also which having a station delight
to gad abroad, and to entrude into other men's Cures, without a just and orderly
calling.

Chrysostom justly accuses Epiphanius Bishop of Cyprus, to have done contrary
to the Canons, in making ministers in his Diocese, Socra. Schol. l. c. 11.13.
and administering the Communion without his license.

The Elders of Ephesus must feed (not the Corinthians, but) the flock
committed to them, Act. 20.28.
over which God had made them overseers, which was the Church at Ephesus.

Paul would not build on another man's foundation, 1 Cor. 3.10.
and we build thereupon.

It is our happiness that we have a foundation already laid, for it requires
more skill to lay the foundation of a Church, then any Minister in Christendom
in their ordinary calling may challenge to themselves.

The Apostles and apostolical men planted, and we must water: some such
founded this Church of England; it is our part not to suffer the Churches we
have received to be dilapidated, and fall to decay: neither is this without
glory, For non minor est virtus quam quaerere parta tueri: As it is a virtue to
get, so to keep that which is gotten. Though we convert not men from
Gentilisme to Christianity, yet we convert men from sin to righteousness,
without which none can be saved.

Idle and ignauous Ministers are to be reproved. Paul labors, and our
blessed Savior himself even toyleth in preaching, and shall we be negligent
and slothful?

One of the greatest commendations of a good Minister, is to be painful, and
therefore Paul when he would commend himself, speaks of his labors: 1 Cor.
15.10. 2 Cor. 11.23.
I have labored more abundantly then they all: and in labors more abundant.

The Husbandman cannot plow his ground, and get in his harvest without much
sweat: nor a Carpenter hew his timber, and frame and raise his house without
sore labor: now Ministers are Gods Husbandmen and Christ's builders, and
therefore they must labor in studying, in preaching, etc. that Christ may be
glorified, and their people saved.

A sore travail is appointed for us, but it is in the power of our people much
to ease us, though not by discharging us from laboring, yet by making our
labor pleasant and delightful to us: namely, when they receive the word with
meekness, being tractable, and becoming obedient thereto. A rich and
plentiful crop, makes the Husbandman to rise early in harvest time, not as to
labor, but as to play and pastime.

If our people be stubborn and froward, it takes away our heart and courage;
but if we may see good fruit of our labors, it rejoices us, it encourages
us, yea our healths, our lives are not dear unto us, but we cheer fully
sacrifice them to Christ and his Church.

The top of every man's ambition,

The Magistrate must, the Minister must, yea every private man must be careful
hereof: which is, when we live so, as that by our godly conversation others are
won to the love of Christ and the Gospel. If thou be a profane and wicked
liver, thou hindrest the enlarging of Christ's kingdom, not only in thy self,
but in others also, who are scandalized, and speak evil of the way of
godliness through thy naughtiness.

It is fearful to hear how the hearing of the word, and the study of
godliness is blasphemed by the niggardise, dissembling and falsehood of such
who would seem the forwardest in professing the Gospel.

Let us all pray and endeavor, 2 These. 3.1.
that the word of the Lord may have free course and be glorified, which shall
be, not when we only speak, but when we live like Christians, professing the
Gospel of our Lord Jesus.

To whom he was not spoken they shall see,

It is miserable to be deprived of our bodily eyes: but to be without the eye
of the soul, which is the understanding of Christ, exceeds in misery: and in
this case is every one unconverted though he have never so politic a pate,
and great Acumen.

Not to see and understand: that is, to be a blind beast: For understanding and
reason is the specificall difference between a man and a beast; and the
Psalmist says, Psalm 49. vlt.
that man in honor, if he understand not, is like the beasts.

So is Nabuchadnezzar said to be turned into a beast, when his understanding
was taken from him.

Diogenes his seeking for men in the populous city of Athens may be hither
applied: for indeed, though many in shape resemble reasonable men; yet in their
lives are unreasonable beasts. So are wicked men called Lions, Foxes, Dogs,
Swme, etc. in the Scriptures; because either they know not and so speak evil,
or what they know naturally, in those things they corrupt themselves as bruit
beasts, as S. Jude speaks. Jude 10. Ierem. 10.14.


Every man is a beast by his own knowledge, or brutish in his knowledge:
Psalm. 73.22.
and David for uttering some erroneous speeches in a tentation, says that he
was foolish and ignorant, a very beast before God. If David for that be a
beast, much more are our drunkards, and other lewd livers, beasts. And that
they are so may be showed thus.

A beast lives only by sense; so are the lives of lewd people merely
sensual. Again, a beast foresees not future things; As a horse that has good
pasture to day, thinks not of any pasture for to morrow, for he has no
reason; so a carnal man dotes upon the things of this present life, forethinks
not, nor foreprouides, of the life which is to come.

Farther, speak to a beast it understands not; it is not won by entreat^es,
nor terrified by threatenings, nor persuaded by arguments: So when we preach the
promises, or the threatenings, and use all arguments to persuade blasphemers,
drunkards, etc. yet they reform not their conversation; what are they then
other then very bruit beasts? would not a bruit beast profit as much as some
do? Ah, it were well for them in regard of themselves, that they were dogs or
toads, and not men and women, that they might not be sensible of everlasting
burnings.

If God by his word, has given thee an understanding and obedient heart,
praise him, and glorify him in thy life.

VERSE 22. For which cause also I have been much hindered from coming to you.
But now having no more place in these parts, and having a great desire these
many years to come unto you, Whenever I take my journey into Spain, I will
come unto you: For I trust to see you in my journey, and to be brought on my
way thitherward by you, if first I be somewhat filled with your company.
HItherto he has excused his manner of writing; now in these words, and so to
the end of this Chapter he excuses his not coming to the Romans.

And this he excuses two ways: first, that he has not come yet; secondly,
that he does not come now.

The first of these in these verses, the other in the rest.

This is brought in by a Prolepsis: for from the 19. verse some might object:
Paul, you have traveled into many Countries for the space of these 20. years;
in all this while could you find no time to see us? must we of all other be
the most neglected?

To this Paul answers: of which his answer there are two parts: first, the
rendering of the reason, why he came not to them as yet. The other a promise to
come unto them.

The reason: he was hindered: as if he should say; It was not, my brethren, any
want of good will, but I have bin hindered.

This is amplified first by the greatness of the impediment; I have been much
hindered: if it had been but a slight matter, Paul would have stepped over it,
and have come, but it was very weighty.

Secondly, by setting down the thing it self which hindered him; in these
words, for which cause; namely, preaching Christ where he had not been named;
mentioned in the 20. and 21. verses. The Romans were converted already, and if
Paul had gone to them, he had lost so much time for the converting of many
people which never heard of Christ; and so had preferred a matter not so
necessary, before the necessary and most weighty duty of his Apostleship, which
was to plant Churches where there were none. In some other place he mentions
Satan's hindering him, who is most busy to oppose the preaching of the Gospel,
as that which brings ruin to his kingdom, 1 These. 2.18.
but here he mentions the other, which is the let he speaks of, Chap. 1.13.

His promise is in the 23. and 24. verses, where we have the promse; I will
come to you; and the amplification.

First, by two reasons: the first, a kind of necessity; seeing I have no more
place in these parts, being now come to the borders of Italy; and to the sea
coast, planting the Gospel every where.

The second, from his desire to come unto them, set forth by the antiquity of
it; these many years: That which we truly desire we endeavor to enjoy, but I
have had a long desire to come unto you, therefore I will come.

Secondly, from the time: whenever I take my journey into Spain: It is
probable that Paul never was in Spain, though some and those ancients too be
of another mind, Howsoever, Paul's project was, to have by Rome traveled into
Spain, and there to have preached Christ.

Thirdly, from an exposition: for I trust, etc. where is first a correction; I
trust to see you: he does not absolutely promise, but he trusts: which word
here imports fallability, and uncertainty, though when it is used of the
Supernatural grace of hope, grounded upon says, it notes certainty
infallible; but here Paul had no word of faith, though afterward he came to
Rome, as in the Story of the Acts. He was not ignorant that many things fall
between the Chalice and the chinne, according to the proverb, and therefore he
adds this correction.

Secondly, here is mentioned the benefit coming to Paul by his journey to
Rome, which makes up a most Christian complement. The benefit is double:
First, to be brought on his way toward Spain by them: not that Paul affected
any state, but to be furthered by their advice and intelligence, that, being
one of their famous Provinces. The other, contentation, and much satisfaction
in their company: that I may be filled somewhat with your company: He says
filled, lest they should think he meant to make no stay with them; and
somewhat filled; to let them understand, that in his opinion he could never be
weary of their company, nor satisfy himself with it.

The sum is, that Paul desires to come to Rome, but is yet hindered; and he
will come if God permit.

The purposes and desires of men, are ruled and ouer-ruled by the providence
and will of God. Prou. 16.9. A man's heart deuiseth his way, but the Lord
directs his steps. We have a quotidian experience hereof, as witnesses our
ordinary speech: Man purposes, but God disposes.

The Gospel comes to a Country not by chance, will of God: and the
iourneyes of Ministers are specially directed, yea their words, as a godly man
having to admiration spoken, Moses Abbas, apud Cassian. collat. 1. c. vlt.
confessed, saying, That though at that time he was so enabled, yet he had
observed, that at some other time, being entreated, and having a desire, he
could not utter one sentence profitably.

Augustine also says, That at a Sermon he converted an Heretic, by a
passage which was given him at that instant, of which he had no way meditated
before.

In the Revelation, Christ is said to have Stars in his hight hand, which are
the Preachers of the Word, enlightening the world with the Gospel: and said to
be in the right hand of Christ, not only for protection, but because they
rise and set at his appointment, now shining in one Country, now in another.

By the merciful and good providence of God, the Gospel has shined many
hundred years ago to this Land: Let us take heed unto it, and walk in the
light while we have it, that it never may be said to us, as sometime to
Corazin, Bethsaida and Capernaum, If the preaching that has been in England,
had been in the East or West Indyes, they would long since have converted, at
least, not so have slighted and abased it, as England does.

From Paul's practice observe a point of wisdom: Paul prefers planting of
Churches, before seeing either Rome or the Romans. So prefer thou things
necessary before unnecessary, the maine duties of godliness and thy calling,
before things of meaner consequence.

Martha is reproved by our Savior Christ, Luke 10.41.42.
for want of this wisdom; and they are not to be excused in the Parable, who
prefer the trying of Oxen, etc. Luke 14.16.17. and seq.
before coming to the great Supper.

Esteem not by-matters, as maine; nor the maine, as those of the by. It is the
great fault of many, that pursue matters of pleasure, profit, and unnecessary
and unprofitable travail, leaving the principal and necessary duties of their
calling and grauer and more weighty employments, Phrasis Ennianae apud Gell.
Noct. At. l. 19. c. 10.
praeterpropter vitam viuentes, living to any end rather, then that to which
they should live.

Here also note a secret: sign, and revealed, or of his good pleasure and
secret.

Whatsoever thought or desire is contrary to the first, is a sin; but not so in
the second, if it be subordinate thereunto.

Paul desires and plotteth to come to Rome, and comes not; to go into
Spain, and goes not: Act. 16.6.7.
to preach the Word in Asia, and is not suffered, for God wills otherwise,
and yet Paul sins not.

Augustine gives a notable instance: A man lies very sick; God wills that
he shall dye of that sickness; Aug. tom. 3. Enchir. cap. 101.
he has two sons, one prays heartily for his fathers life, the other
heartily wishes his death: The piety of the one pleases God, though willing
another thing then he wills; and the impiety of the other displeases him,
though willing the same thing which he wills.

David also is an ensample: He purposes to build a sumptuous house for the
Arc: I, says he to Nathan, dwell in an house of Cedars, 1 Chronicles. 17.
and the Arc of the Covenant remains under curtains: I will therefore build
an house for it.

Nay, says God, thou shall not build me an house; yet thou shall be no loser
by it, for I will build thee an house, and raise up thy seed after thee, and
stablish thy kingdom.

Though God willed otherwise then David, yet David's will was accepted, as may
appear by the blessing, for which David feelingly gave thanks.

Let us study and desire to glorify God, to do good in our callings, and in
the places where we dwell, in repressing and reforming sin, and in
countenancing and furthering godliness, we have a sweet encouragement, though
our purposes want effect, yet they shall not want a reward.

In all thy promises and purposes, Act. 18.21. Romans 1.10. 1. Cor. 4.19. Philip.
2.19.
If God will; So Paul diverse times: so also the Heathen, as Tully, Si Dij
velint: as Taurus a Philosopher in Gellius; Dijs beneuolentibus: as Homer,
(...): So that it is a kind of Atheism, not to acknowledge the events of all
things to be in the hands of God.

Though the Lawyers have a Rule, that that is idly expressed, which is
necessarily understood, because the expression thereof works nothing: yet let
us often express this, which is always to be understood, both to preserve
our selves in the faith and remembrance of Gods providence; and also to
instruct others therein who hear us.

Say not thou, James 4.13.14.15.
I will go into such a City, and continue there a year, and buy and sell;
whereas thou know not what shall be on the morrow, and thy life is like a
vanishing vapor: But say if the Lord will, I shall live and do this or that.

Nor say thou will be revenged on thy contrary; for not thy will, 1. Kings
19.2. 1. Kings 20.10.
but Gods shall stand: Iesabel threatens Eliah, and Benhadad threatens Ahab,
but it is not in their power to bring to pass.

Promise not to thy self prosperity for a long time, especially
liuingwickedly: for the life of all men is uncertain; and the destruction of
wicked men sudden, so that they shall not escape.

The rich fool in the Gospel will build his barnes bigger, and promises to
his soul many merry years, when he had not one night to live: Thou fool,
Luke 12.18. and siq.
this night shall thy soul be taken from thee.

Boast not thy self of to morrow, for thou know not what a day may bring
forth, Prou. 27.1. To boast of to morrow, is to sell the Lions skin while it
is on his back, and he in the forest.

To day hear Gods voice, Nemo tam Diuos habuit fauentes Crastinum vt possit
sibi polliceri. Senec. in Thyeste. Act. 3. Psalm. 102.24.
thou can not promise thy self a morrow: David prays, O my God, take me
not away in the midst of my days: which some expound, Take me not away then
when I think to live longer: For it cannot be but exceeding dangerous, then to
be called to judgment, when a man thinks of longer life, a thousand to one
that man's account is not ready.

Filled with your company.

It is a great corruption not to delight in the society of the godly: and as
great, so to speak, live, and behave our selves, that the godly can take no
delight in our society. What pleasure can it be, nay it is rather a kind of
Hell, to live in the company of blasphemers, drunkards, and profane wretches.

VERSE 25. But now I go unto Jerusalem to minister unto the Saints. For it
has pleased them of Macedonia and Achaia, to make a certain contribution for
the poor Saints which are in Jerusalem. It has pleased them verily, and
their debtors they are: For if the Gentiles have been made pertakers of their
spiritual things, their duty is also to minister unto them in carnal things.
IN these verses, and so to the end of this Chapter, he excuses his not
coming to the Romans Now.

Here are the Excuse, and the Amplification to be considered.

The Excuse in the 25. verse. The Amplification in the rest, which has three
parts: First, An Exposition, verse. 26.27. Secondly, a Promise, verse. 28.29.
Thirdly, a Petition to the Romans, verse 30. to the end.

The Excuse is brought in by a Prolepsis: In the 23. verse he spoke of a great
and long desire he had to come to Rome. Hence they might say: If Paul, you have
so great a desire, why then do you not instantly come unto us. For answer
hereunto he shows that he is upon weighty affairs and not to be dispensed
with, bound for Jerusalem, verse. 25. where we have his journey, and the end of
it, to minister to the Saints.

I go to Jerusalem: He is now taking his journey, which admits of no delay.

To minister to the Saints: That is, to the Christian Jews there: and because
there are diversities of ministrations; he declares it by exposition in the
26. and 27. verses, as namely, that it is about a contribution or alms, which
he is to convey and deliver to them from the Greek Churches. For though his
office was principally to preach, and not to serve tables, yet at this time
there was a necessity of mercy above sacrifice; and it was enjoined Paul
specially by a decree of the Church, Galath. 2.10. and therefore he could not
neglect it without much imputation.

Contribution: See the exposition of this word, chap. 12. v. 13.

Concerning this Contribution, there are two things: First, the Persons:
Secondly, the Manner of it.

The Persons are two fold, Giving, Receiving.

The Persons giving, Those of Macedonia and Achaia, two famous Countries in
Greece. The Macedonians a poorer people; the Achaians, of whom were the
Corinthians, very rich, as may appear, 2. Cor. 8. and 9. Chap.

The persons receiving, the poor Christian Jews, described by their
condition, and by the place of their habitation.

Their Condition, outward and inward. The outward, they are poor: The inward,
they are Saints. The place of their habitation, Jerusalem.

Poor: For through a hatred unto Christ, the Jews unbelieving, grievously
persecuted all them which turned Christians, spoiling them of their goods, as
may appear, Heb. 10.34. 1 Thessalonians. 2.14. And indeed the Apostles and Christians,
in no place, met with more grievous adversaries then the Jews.

The manner of giving to them: It pleased the Macedonians, by which word is
noted, that such contribution was not extorted from them, but proceeded from a
willing and ready mind, taking delight in the same.

This manner is repeated in the seven and twentieth verse, with a correction:
It pleased them, and their debtors they are. Though the alms was voluntary,
yet a debt also, though alms and debt seem to be opposite.

But a debt by a double law, the law of Charity, Romans 13.8. and the law of
Gratitude: and this is proved from a rule of Equity.

For that which a man receives, he owes requital. But the Gentiles have
received the spiritual things of the Jews. Therefore their duty is to
minister unto them in their carnal things.
Salvation is of the Jews, said our Savior, John 4.22.
and theirs were the Promises and the Covenant, etc. and we are enriched with
the Gospel, and the blessing of it, by them: and whereas before we were as
dogs, not admitted to the crummes under the table, yet now we sit down with
Abraham, Isaak and Jacob, in the kingdom of heaven.

From hence it was, that all the Churches of the Gentiles until the time of
Theodosius, sent collection to the Church of the Jews at Jerusalem, as to
their Mother Church, vt totius orbis fouerentur ministerijs, as said Hierom,
reproouing Vigilantius for finding fault therewith.

Now it is to be observed that Saint Paul has set a double accent upon the
Macedonians and Achaians, the one of commendation, the other of obligation,
that he might closely admonish, or prepare the Romans thereunto.

We must contribute to the relief of the poor Saints, Romans 12.13.
Distributing to the necessity of Saints, Gal. 6.10. 1 Ioh. 3.17.

The Office to ouersee for the poor, honorable; The chiefest Apostles, yea the
Angels have borne it, ministering to Eliah, 1. King. 19. let no man despise it,
but willingly undergo it, and faithfully discharge it, having a principal
regard to the religious poor, of which see more upon the twelfth Chapter, and
thirteeth verse.

Distance of place discharges not from contribution, a Christian Jew in his
want.

Be ready to distribute, Tim. 6.18. Remember the Macedonians, whose deep
poverty abounded in liberality; and who beyond their power were willing of
themselves entreating that they might be admitted into the fellowship of the
ministration to the poor Saints at Jerusalem. 1. Cor. 8.1.2. and seq.


They entreated as if they had been to receive, not to bestow an alms.

Beware thou withdraw not thy self when thou should be called to give alms:
and account him to have done thee a great good turn, who calls thee to
relieve a poor Saint: Make much of such opportunities; to show thy charity,
thy faith, to adorn thy profession, and to allure to the liking of the
Gospel: Thus many in ancient time were won to the faith: Hebr. 13.16.
and with such sacrifices God is pleased, and at the day of Judgment Christ
will reward for this. Mat. 25.

He that turns away his face from a poor Saint, may justly fear that God
will turn away his face from him; of the which an ancient Father excellently,
(...)
(...) Greg. Nazianz. in tetrast.

(...)
(...).


A poor man comes, says he; if he go away and not obtain; O Christ, I fear
lest needing thy hand, I depart succourlesse by my own law. For he with gives
not, let him not hope.

How prodigal are we in vanity, how niggardly in charity! spending wastfully
upon our lusts; but not vouchsafing a halfpeny to the poor Saints. Shillings
and pounds in harlotry and drunkenness, etc. and a few pence grudged to the
poor members of Jesus Christ, what hope can such have?

Here is a rule.

Hence Paul proves the maintenance of ministers. 1 Cor. 9.10. Gal. 6.6.

By this rule we ought to bear a pious affection to that Church in which and
by whose ministry we are regenerated: whereby the unnatural practice of the
Brownists in reuiling their mother the Church of England it to be reproved.

By this rule we discern that spiritual things are more excellent then
carnal. If we sow unto you spiritual things, 1 Cor. 9.10.
is it a great matter if we reap your carnal things, says Paul? as if gold
and silver, were too base to enter into comparison with the Gospel and the
blessing thereof.

By this rule we are bound to our Benefactors: most to God from whom we
receive all good things carnal and spiritual: let us no ways offend him, but
perform all true and thankful obedience. Amen.

VERSE 28. When therefore I have performed this, and have sealed to them this
fruit, I will come by you into Spain. And I am sure that when I come unto you,
I shall come in the fullness of the blessing of the Gospel of Christ.
IN these verses Paul promises his coming unto them: where we have the
Promise, I will come by you into Spain: and the Amplification from two
Circumstances: Of the Time: and of the manner of his Coming.

The Time in the 28. verse. The manner in the 29.

The Time: when I have performed this: that is, safely dispatched the matter of
the alms of the Greek Church, and faithfully discharged my self thereof, as
he expounded himself with a note of his care in that affair, And have sealed
to them this fruit.

Sealed. Paul shows his care by a Metaphor: as men seal up their letters and
tokens, that they may come with the more safety to their friends: so Paul will
deliver the alms, obsignatis tabulis, under seal without any violation, or
impeachment.

Here are the persons to whom, and the thing sealed.

The persons, Chrysostom.
to them: that is, to the Jews: to the Christian believing Jews.

Though some have expounded it of the Gentiles, because all alms and good
fruits, do ratify faith, as a seal does a writing.

This fruit: Alms is a fruit: here a fruit of the faith of the Grecians: Corn.
Corn. a Lapide.
some have said the fruit of the faith of the Jews: for God has promised the
blessing of his Providence to believers: and therefore outward things and
transitory, are in the word propounded to such as fear God, that they shall
not want that which is good for them.

Though the principal end and fruit of faith and Godliness be eternal life,
yet Godliness has the promises of this life, 1 Timothy 4.8.
also.

Faith is wonderful useful: as wheat being sown, not only brings forth
the kernells of wheat for man's sustenance, but straw and chafe also for fodder
for cattle: so faith furnishes both body and soul with necessaries.

But the best and most natural, is to understand the fruit of the faith of the
Gentiles.

The manner of his coming: in the fullness of the blessing of the Gospel.

The blessing of the Gospel: what this blessing is Authors diversely expound,
but we may from Paul himself fetch the meaning, in the 1. Chapter, verse
11.12. he says: I long to see you, that I may impart unto you some spiritual
gift, to strengthen and comfort you. The blessing of the Gospel is nothing
else but the comfort and strength of Grace conveyed into our hearts by the
preaching of the Gospel.

With this Paul promises to come, wherein me thinks he deals like unto
fathers, who when they go abroad promise to bring their little ones something,
whereby they both still them for their absence, and make them long for their
return: So by this promise of his coming with blessing, he makes them the
more contented with his absence, and inflameth them with a great desire of his
presence.

This manner is amplified by the certainty, I know, by secret revelation: This
confidence of Paul is not so much to his commendation, as to the Romans. For
not only good seed, and a good Tilths man, but good ground is also necessary
to a good crop: Herein Paul implies the confidence he bad that the Romans were
a very Godly people, in whom he should have much comfort.

Every man is faithfully to perform that which he undertakes: Luke 12.42.43.
Who is that faithful and wise steward, etc. Blessed is that servant, etc. so
is the faithful servant commended, Mat. 25.21. and one of Moses his principal
praises was that he was faithful. Numb. 12.7. Heb. 3.2.

Here Paul is an example unto all men,

Let servants apply it to themselves, that they be no pickers or stealers, or
wasters of their masters goods committed to them, but let them show all good
faithfulness.

Also Executors that they enrich not themselves by the trust committed unto
them by the dead, to the damage of Orphans, widows, and such who are to
receive lands or legacies. Genesis 47.29, 30, 31. et 50.5, 6, 7, et seq.
Let them remember Joseph, who faithfully dealt with his Father Jacob according
to his will.

Also all feoffees that they take no advantage to them and their heirs, but
conscionably discharge the trust imposed in them.

Also all such to whom is committed any stock of the Church or commonwealth to
be employed to necessary, 2 King. 22.7.
civil or pious uses, to be faithful like these good men in Iosiahs time
spoken of in the 2. of the Kings.

And specially all Overseers for the poor, to remember Paul's example, and
neither by any cunning to enrich themselves by the money collected, nor by any
negligence to dissipate it: but in their states, and every other way to husband
every thing for the best advantage of the poor, for whom they are put in trust.

Not to give of a man's own, is a sin, but to defraud the poor of that which
others give is a thing abominable: and such unfaithfulness most unworthy of
pardon. Neither can any good be expected from such as says our Savior, Luke
16.10, 11, 12.

To deceive a trust committed unto us, argues a lewd mind, and among the
Pisidians such were to be put to death. Also the Imperial laws adjudged him
who converted things committed to his trust, to his own use, to be guilty of
theft.

By proportion also Ministers hereby are to be careful to keep that good
thing which is committed to them: 1 Timothy 6.20. 2 Timothy 1.14.
as Paul twice charge Timothy.

And if we are faithfully to satisfy the trust committed by men: much more to
deal faithfully in that which God commits to our trust: as our bodies and
souls that we return them unpolluted, and the gifts and talents we receive,
that we employ them faithfully to our Masters use.

The Grecians are an Example to all Christians, bring forth fruit of their
profession.

A Godly man is compared to a tree which is fruitful: Psalm. 1. and herein
says Christ, is my Father glorified, John 15.2 8.
if you bear much fruit.

To speak well, and make fair shows without fruit, is to bring forth leaves
only like the cursed fig tree, and is the note of an Hypocrite: and to bring
forth ill fruit, is the note of a profane beast.

To be planted in Paradise, and to be barren, or to bear ill fruit, as
drunkenness, whoredom, etc. is as contrary to nature, as it is agreeable to
Nature, for the Sun to shine, or the fire burn.

Let us then have our fruit unto holiness, and the end everlasting life. Romans
6.22.

An admonition, to ministers, with the fullness of the blessing of the Gospel:
they must live, and yet to make their people partakers of the blessing of the
Gospel, must be as, or more dear unto them then their lives.

Also to the people, to know what use they are to make of their teachers; not
to make a gain of them in outward things but to receive by them the blessing
of the Gospel.

We bring a blessing, and treasure in earthen vessels more precious then gold:
faith, repentance, remission of sins, peace of conscience, life eternal. Qui
capere potest capiat. He that is able to receive them let him receive them, and
woe to them which despise these things.

VERSE 30. Now I beseech you brethren, for the Lord Jesus Christ his sake, and
for the love of the Spirit; that you strive together with me, in your prayers
to God for me. That I may be delivered from them which do not believe in
Judea, and that my service which I have for Jerusalem may be accepted of the
Saints. That I may come to you with joy by the will of God, and may with you be
refreshed. Now the God of peace be with you all. Amen.
THese words contain the third amplification of Paul's excuse that he comes not
now to the Romans, which is a request he makes to them.

We may consider here two things. First, Paul's manner of requesting: secondly,
the request it self.

In the manner, there is first a compellation, Brethen. Secondly, an
obtestation, I beseech you for the Lord Jesus Christ's sake, and for the love of
the Spirit.

Brethren. This title come in seasons, for it becomes brethren whether by
Nature or Grace, to help and further one another.

I beseech you, etc. In this obtestation, are the form, and the matter of it
to be considered.

The form, I beseech you, exhort you, call you to my help.

The matter contains two arguments, whereby he adiureth them to help him by
their prayers: By our Lord Jesus Christ, and by the love of the Spirit.

To beseech one for a thing: is so to beseech, as if you obtain, he may have
comfort by it, if not, the contrary.

For our Lord Jesus Christ's sake, is as if he should have said: as you desire
to have any benefit by our Savior, if his love may prevail any thing with
you, see you pray for me.

For the love of the Spirit: Hypallage Martyr.
either by a figure as some, the Spirit of love: or as you desire the Holy
Spirit should love you, or for that love which he has shed abroad in your
hearts, or as you desire that the Holy Spirit should work in you a love to
God, and your brethren.

This manner of speaking is after a sort proper to Paul; and indeed nothing can
be devised to be spoken, more grave, See more hereof Romans 12.1.
more excellent, more powerful, more divine.

Some great matter it must needs be which Paul craves under these terms, even
this, that the Romans would pray for him, and yet Paul far excelled the best
of the Romans in all grace.

The prayers of the meanest may be profitable, Paul shows very great modesty
and humilty, in requiring them.

In this request that the Romans should pray for him, are two things: 1. That
which they should pray for in his behalf: 2. The amplification.

That which they should pray for is twofold. First, that he may be delivered
from them which do not believe in Judea. Secondly, That his present service
may be accepted of the Saints.

The first was necessary, 2 Thessalonians. 3.2.
because in all places they chiefly withstood Paul. These are called
unreasonable and wicked men.

The second also, because even the believing Jews were not so well affected to
Paul and to the Gentiles among whom Paul preached, as they ought to have been,
as may appear in that uproar by them occasioned, Acts 21.20. and so forward,
which was the beginning of Paul's greatest and last troubles.

Paul knew the Alms he should bring might well be accepted because of their
necessity, but desires they might receive it with as much love as he and the
Greek Church offered it to them. For this he desires them to pray; For he
doubted that either they would not receive it at all, or not so kindly as he
wished: For much is detracted from a gift, which comes either from one, or by
one, of whom we think not well: and a trifle from a friend, and by a messenger
whom we affect is welcome.

The Amplification is threefold; First, from the manner in which they should
pray for him, that is, they must strive, (...), a military word, noting such
feruency, as if for life and death. He prays for himself, and desires them
to help him, as Aaron and Hur helped Moses. He desires not the Emperors
letters to be procured for him, nor their sharp swords, but their earnest
prayers.

The second, is from the fruit of such deliverance, and acceptance; which is
double, in the 32. verse: 1. That he may come to them with joy, set forth by a
correction, by the will of God. That he might be delivered, that he might come
to them, that his service might be acceptable, that he might come with joy. By
the will of God, well put in, because the event of all things is in the hands
of God: and he was not delivered, and that was (by the will of God) an helping
cause of his coming.

The third, from an Apostolical benediction, verse 33. The God of peace be
with you. Now three times in this Chapter does Saint Paul pray for them: and
this compriseth all: If God be with us, then have we the inexhaust fountain
of all goodness, whether we understand the collation of things good, or a
protection from things ill.

The God of peace: that he may be appeased and peaceable toward them, that
they may have peace of conscience. And that they may be peaceable among
themselves, that they iar not about things indifferent.

The Seal of this benediction; Amen. Of which see. Romans 11.36.26.

Believers stand in need of the Prayers of their Brethren, and ought one to
pray for another. Almost in every Epistle Paul requires the prayers of the
Churches, and always prays for them. And we read: James 5.16. Pray one for
another that ye may be healed: and our blessed Savior taught every one to
say, Our Father, etc. Give us, forgive us, lead us not, but deliver us, etc.

It is the lot of good men many times, ill entreated by them, of whom they
deserve well. This was the lot of Miltiades and Themistocles among the
Athenians; of Camillus, and Scipio Africanus among the Romans; of Moses and
Samuel among the Prophets in the Old Testament: in the New Testament, of our
blessed Savior, who came into his own, and his own received him not, but
preferred a murderer before him, and delivered him to be crucified. Also of
our Holy Apostle, who gathered no small sum of money to relieve his Nation,
and yet they persecute him; Thus is many a good Magistrate, Minister, Citizen,
unkindly rewarded by them who ought to have honored them.

If it so fall out to thee. Thou art not better then Saint Paul, then Christ
himself: Be not discouraged, neither let the unworthiness of others make thee
to be any whit the more negligent, or to deal the less worthily in thy
place, by the example of Saint Paul, who omitted no opportunity or care to do
the Saints at Jerusalem good, though he knew not whether they would accept it
or no.

The singular courage and constancy of Paul is to be observed; bonds and
afflictions abode him: But says he, Act. 20.23, 24.
None of these things mou^me, neither count I my life dear unto my self, that
Imay finish my course and ministration with joy. And being at Caesarea, he was
warned by a Prophet of his bonds, and that he should by the Jews be delivered
into the hands of the Gentiles; whereupon the brethren with tears besought him
not to go up to Jerusalem: But he answered: Act. 21.11, 12, 13.
What mean you to weep and to break mine heart? For I am ready not to be
bound only, but to dye at Herusalem for the Name of the Lord Jesus: O worthy
speech of an Apostle! O Divine Paul!

Let us labor to be prepared with such resolution: we know not what hangs
over our heads: We have cause to fear the worst, for our barren and fruitless
profession: and, -- Iam proxim us ardet Vcalegon -- our neighbors and brethren
in Germany and France are under the fiery trial: Prepare thy self: Happy are
they which endure: See that there remain no sin unrepented of; for, if any
thing, this will make us cowards, and shame us.

The prayers of the Church are most excellent and necessary, Paul would not in
such terms have begged them.

Think thou reverently of them: as of means which God has appointed and
blessed for the great good of such as are in distress.

The Prayer of one righteous man avails: much more of a whole Congregation,
Tertull. Apolog.
City, Kingdom. If many, quasi manu facta Deum ambiunt orantes, as Tertullian
speaks, Act. 12.5. et seq.
banding themselves together sue unto God, praying for things agreeable to his
will, they must needs obtain.

When the Church prays for Peter, he is miraculously delivered.

When a legion of Christian soldiers upon their bare knees make supplication
to God, when the Army of Aurelius the Emperor was ready to join battle with
the Germans and Sarmatians; Eusebius. Eccl. Hist. lib. 5. ca. 5.
These their enemies were discomfited by thundering and lightning, and the whole
army ready to perish for thirst, is refreshed with water.

In the time of the Holy Emperor Theodosius the Younger, Socra Scholast. Eccl.
hist. l. 7. c. 22.
at the prayers of the whole City, being come together upon another occasion, a
grievous tempest was suddenly turned into calmnesse, and the former dearth and
scarsity, into abundance and plenty of all things.

Absent not thy self from the Common prayers of the Church in the times
appointed. Beware thou disparage them not, nor think basely of them in
comparison of preaching, or when they are alone: wise and conscionable
Christians, and such as are truly religious, will even for prayer alone resort
to the house of prayer: and if all would so do reverently, how might we
prevail with God?

Paul's example begin all thy lawful affairs with prayer: he that does not,
begins without Gods good speed.

But strive in prayer, for God delights to have his blessings and the kingdom
of heaven, to be wrung out of his hands by the violence of our prayers.

Cold and drowsy praying gets nothing at the hands of God; thou must
wrestle with the Lord, as Jacob did, Ignauis precibus fortuna repugnat.
when he obtained to be called Israel: He will not let go his hold, till the
Lord bless him, though he receive a blow which lameth him: he will strive for
a blessing, Genesis 32.24, 25, 26.
though it cost him a limb.

Such an Orator was Moses in the behalf of the Israelites: when the Israelites
had sinned in the golden Calfe, God is ready to destroy them, and Moses is
ready to pray for them: which when the Lord sees, he says to Moses, Let me
alone Moses; Exodus 32.10.
as if Moses prayers so bound his hands that he could not strike. O infinite
goodness of the invincible God, to suffer himself to be as conquered, by the
fervent prayers of his servants.

In this manner also prayed the Syrophenissian, and obtained to her great
commendation. Mark 7.25. and seq.


Three things amongst others should move us thus to pray.

1 The excellency of blessings we stand in need of: as Remission of sins,
Faith, Repentance, etc. in which is our happiness.

2 The strength of corrupt nature, and of our lusts, as Covetousness, Pride,
etc. which are to be subdued by pr^

3 The subtlety, malice, and unwearied violence of the Devil, seeking to
destroy us, who is not made to fly, without faithful and fervent prayer.

Paul not only discharges his conscience in gathering and bringing the Alms
of the Greek Church, quali, quali modo, but acceptably to the Church.

To be popular, may be a just imputation, neither may we seek to please and
satisfy curious humors, or wicked men; and yet we must not be careless how
our labors are accepted, but account it a blessing, if sober and wise
Christians esteem of our pains.

The God of peace be with you: Paul requesteth the prayers of the Romans for
him, and he will not be in their debt, but thus he prays for them.

It is a comely thing when Ministers and people mutually pray one for another.

Art thou a Minister? Say with Samuel, that it should be thy sin, 1. Sam.
12.23.
to cease to pray for thy people.

Art thou a Hearer? Leo Mag. ser. 2. de Pass. Dom. in initio.
pray for thy Teacher, and great reason: Ad commune lucrum pertinet, says one,
quia vestrae impenditur aedificationi, quicquid nostrae tribuitur facultati. It
is the common gain, for if by thy prayers, thy Teacher be the more endued with
devotion, gifts of utterance, and holy life, he is the better able to edify
thee thereby.

If thou will say, Endue, O Lord, our Minister with righteousness: Thy
Minister will say, And make my people joyful with thy salvation: If thou will
say, Blessed be he that comes and speaks to us in the name of the Lord: We
will say with Paul, The God of peace be with you all. Amen.

A PLAIN EXPOSITION UPON THE SIXTEENTH CHAPTER OF THE EPISTLE OF Saint PAVL to
the Romans.
VERSE 1. I commend unto you Phoebe our sister, which is a servant of the
Church which is at Cenchrea. That you receive her in the Lord, as becomes
Saints, and that you assist her in whatsoever business she has need of you:
for she has been a succourer of many, and of my self also.
THe Conclusion of this Epistle began at the fourteenth verse of the fifteenth
Chapter, and is absolved in this.

The first part of the Conclusion was an Excuse: the rest of the parts follow
now to be considered, which are in number five.

1 A commendation of a certain woman unto the Romans.

2 Salutations.

3 An Admonition interserted, but handled after all the Salutations.

4 A Comprecation, or the Apostolical Seal or Benediction.

5 A Doxologie, or acknowledgement of praise and glory to God.

The first of these parts, which is the second of the Conclusion, is in these
two verses, where are two parts.

1 A description of the party commended, by three Arguments: First, By her
name, Phoebe: Secondly, by her profession, a Christian, in this Title, Our
Sister: Thirdly, The fruit of her Profession, A servant of the Church which is
at Cenchrea.

2 The end why she is commended, set forth by a Reason.

The End is double: 1. That they should receive her: amplified by the manner
expressed in two phrases: First, In the Lord: Secondly, As becomes Saints. 2.
That they should assist her: amplified by the extent of such assistance: viz.
In whatsoever business she has need of them.

The reason, from common Equity: For she has been a succourer of others: of
many, and also of me: Therefore to be received and assisted.

I commend unto you: not (...), I commit: but (...) I commend, that is, as the
Interlineary Gloss expounds, Commendabilem estendo, I show to be commendable,
as if he should say, I desire you to take knowledge of this woman, the bearer
hereof, as of a virtuous and very devout Christian, or I desire to conciliat
your minds so to this woman, that you may admit her into your Christian
fellowship, as one that is most worthy: so we desire in our ordinary language
to be commended to our friends, that is, that such mention should be made of
us, as whereby both our love may be testified to them, and theirs confirmed to
us.

Phoebe: Phoebus, the Sun: Phoebe, the Moon; sometimes taken for Diana, the
Goddess of Hunting and Chastity; a name likely to have been imposed by her
parents, being Gentiles: but whatsoever her name were, her self was most
virtuous.

Our sister: Not his wife, as some, nor his natural Germane sister, as others;
but their sister in Christ, and by the profession of the same faith: For all
believers are the sons and daughters of God by Adoption, and therefore
brothers and sisters between themselves.

A servant of the Church which is at Cenchrea: Cenchrea, A Naual station, or
Port belonging to Corinth, on the East side of the Ishmus there, toward Asia;
another Haven they had on the West toward the other parts of Europe, called
Lechaeum, Consule Plin. n. hist. l. 4. c. 4. Ho^at Carm. l. 1. od 7. Ovid. 4.
Fastor.
for which double haven the Poets called Corinth, Bimarem. Here Paul preached
and converted many, among whom Phoebe shined, as the Moon, in the night of
persecutions, doing much service to poor and distressed Christians: and
therefore here called a Seruam of the Church: Not a Deaconnesse, or one of the
College of Widows, of whom Paul speaks, 1. Tim. 5. for she was not poor,
Gloss. Ordinar. Aeselmus. Caietanus in loc.
but Nobilissima and ditissima faemina, a very noble and rich woman. She
served the Church, fauoribus and facultatibus, says one, by her countenance
and purse, succouring many, as in the next verse.

That ye receive her, that is, entertain and acknowledge her with all respect.

In the Lord: In the name of the Lord, because she belongs to the Lord: as
Matthew. 18.5. and 10.41, 42.

As becomes Saints, to receive, or to be received; not in any fashion, but
after a singular and extraordinary manner, as most dear and worthy friends.

That ye assist her: stand by her; a military word, and further her in any her
business: whether she had any suit at the Emperors Court, or any traffic
with the Merchants, or whatsoever it was, it is not expressed, but we may be
sure it was just and warrantable, or else Paul would not have written to have
had it furthered.

For she has been a succourer of many, and of me also.

A Succourer; A Patroness, standing between poor Christians and their
dangers; standing before them to defend them, that they might be in safety. It
is equal that the Romans should be (...) to her, for she has bin (...) of
many: she relieved the Saints, received them to her house, countenanced them,
and protected them.

Of many, and of me also: There is an Emphasis on both sides: of Paul; who
would not help Paul? of others also.

Of many; of such as were more obscure, and of inferior note, which were not
much regarded or sought after: yea of Paul himself, against whom Satan most of
all raged, so that it could not be but much more dangerous for them who should
receive him.

We must if occasion require, commend good Christians to others. So does Paul
Phoebe here, and many others in his Epistles. So did the brethren, at Lystra
and I conium, commend Timothy to Paul, Act. 16.2. So did the Brethren commend
Gaius to John, 3 Ioh. v. 3. and John, Demetrius, 3 John 12. And in the
primative Church it was so ordinary to give Christians letters of
commendations, that he which acknowledged them not, was taxed as if he had
denied the faith.

And there is great reason for it; Pareus.
For first it concerns them which are requested to commend, that they may show
their charity: Secondly, the Commended, that they may be helped. Thirdly, them
to whom, that they may do good to the worthy, and not be deceived by the
unworthy.

Though we must commend,

Hence are to be reproved such, who reserve their worst language for the best
affected persons, always railing, and mocking such as fear God.

Also such, who for a fair word, or at the entreaty of a friend, or for a
present, will write or speak for them which are lewd and wicked, and in
matters most unjust; commending them for honest, good and orderly persons:
which is to bear false witness.

Remember the reproof of Ioash, Judges 6.31.
Will thou plead for Baal? and the correption of Iehoshaphat by the Prophet:
2. Chron. 19.2.
Will thou help the wicked, and love them which hate the Lord? Before Paul
would have written or spoken in commendation of a drunkard, a blasphemer, or
profane person, he would have had his right hand chopped off, and his tongue
plucked out of his head: Pro. 24.24.
For, him that says to the wicked, thou art righteous, shall the people curse
and abhor.

This indiscretion (though it deserve to be called by a harder name) confirms
evil men in their lewdness, who being admonished, brag they can have hands
and seals for their behavior.

A servant of the Church. This is a title of honor.

Christ is our Lord, and the Church his Spouse, and therefore our Lady as I may
say: and it is the will of the Father, that he which serves and honors his
Son, should honor his Spouse also: for the honor of the husband is derived
to the wife.

What service do thou to the Church? whether thou be in or out of office,
if neither by thy purse, prayers, countenance, counsel, example, etc. thou do
service, thou shall have no reward.

What reward then shall drunkards, unclean persons, etc. have? even the reward
of evil servants, who for their iniurying, and dishonouring their Lady and
Mistrisse the spouse of the Lord Jesus, shall be cut off, have their portion
with hypocrites, and be cast into utter darkness, Mat. 24.51. and 25.30.
where shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth.

It is the duty of Christians to receive strangers: Abraham, and Lot, and
others. The Israelites must love strangers, Deuteronomy 10.19. and Christians may not
forget it, Heb. 13.2.

But Christian strangers which profess true Religion, must be received in the
Lord, and as it becomes Saints. Do good unto al men, but specially to the
household of Faith, says S. Paul elsewhere. So of true Protestant Christians
there must be a special and honorable regard.

The Saints are consecrated to God, look what difference we make between the
Lords day and the other days of the week, so much ought we between the
Saints and other men: as there is another manner of use of things holy, and of
things common.

O happy England which know not what it is to be a stranger: But there may
a storm arise and for thy fruitless profession, drive of thy Children into
foreign parts, as in the days of Queen Mary, therefore receive thou
strangers, especially the persecuted members of Jesus Christ: In the midst of
the Noonday make thy shadow as the Night, to hide the outcasts of the Lord;
Let them dwell with thee and be a covert to them from the face of the Spoyler:
Esaias. 16.3, 4.
as the Prophet Esaias admonishes Moab.

Whatsoever is done to such strangers, Mat. 18.5.6. and 25.34. and seq.
Christ accounts done to himself, either by way of offense or defense.

It is a gainful office to receive such: as witnesses the example of Abraham,
Lot, the Widow of Sarepta, and others, And I am persuaded that England fares
the better for kindness showed in dangerous times, to French and Dutch
strangers: long may England be a Sanctuary, refuge, and harbor for the
persecuted Saints. For he that receives a righteous man in the name of a
righteous man, shall have a righteous man's reward, Mat. 10.41.

Let us remember therefore the monition of Saint Peter, 1. Pet. 4.9.
Use hospitality one toward another without grudging; and in these times of
domestical peace, and foreign troubles, let us cheerfully and with a
liberal mind, and not Nabal-like relieve such as fly unto us.

Account it no small blessing if God by his providence, send one of his poor
Saints, a stranger to thee to be relieved; and say after the words of
Elizabeth, Luke 1.43.
Whence is it that a brother of my Lords comes unto me? God honors thee if he
give thee such occasion, and commits to thy trust such a Jewel.

Make such thy friends, that when thou failest, they may receive thee into
everlasting habitations. Vouchsafe them a room in thy house, whom Christ
disdaines not a place in Paradise, and if it were needful, even wash their
feet, knowing that the foot of a true believer, is more honorable then the
head of the proudest wicked man on earth.

The Romans must assist Phoebe in all her affairs:

As one hand washes another, so we being members of the same body, ought
mutually to be helpful.

Wicked men will take part with wicked men, and ride, and go in the behalf
one of another; yea, even the Devils back and second one another, much more
ought Christians to countenance and further one another: but always in that
which is good only, and among good things in spiritual chiefly.

It is just that such as have by their place, birth, due can expect no such
regard: much less may they, who have wronged and disgraced the Church and
members thereof by their cruel and evil life.

VERSE 3. Greet Priscilla and Aquila, my helpers in Christ Jesus. (Who have for
my life laid down their own necks; unto whom not only I give thanks, but
also all the Churches of the Gentiles.)
THe second part of this Chapter begins in these Verses, and is continued to
the end of the 16. Verse, and again in the 21. V. and so to the end of the 23.
In the verses between the 16. and 21. is the third part of this Chapter.

This part is nothing but salutations; which are either from Paul, or from
sundry others.

A Salutation is a signification of our love, whereby we wish all temporal
and spiritual welfare to our brethren. Barac. Imperatiuum (...):


The Hebrew word, as also a Greek word, are used to this purpose both at
meeting and parting of friends.

The Greek word in this place implies the performance of such courtesy and
well wishing. The Latin word comes of a term which signifies, health. Salus.


The reason of Paul's saluting so many here; is threefold.

1 That he might win them by such courtesy, the readilier to entertain and
follow the good admonitions given them, about indifferent and other things, in
this Epistle; and for a preparation against his coming.

2 That the Romans might take special knowledge of these above the rest, that
they might imitate their grave and peaceable courses, and follow their counsel.

3 That these persons saluted, by the praises which Saint Paul gives them,
might be provoked to persevere in such praiseworthy virtues: for every
commendation implies a secret admonition of perseverance.

These things premitted, our order in handling of this part, shall be first to
note the general Doctrine of Salutations; and then briefly to pass it over,
making some few observations out of some of the verses.

To Salute our friends, present or absent, is a courtesy not to be neglected:
This is to be proved by the practice of holy men of all times, of Iethro and
Moses, Exodus 18.7. of the Angel to Gideon, Judges 6.12. of the Angel to Mary,
Luke 1.28. So Christ commanded, Matthew. 10.12. and practiced, John 20.19. so
Saint Paul, here, and in other of his Epistles. So Peter, 1. Pet. 5.13.14.

Christians are not to omit this duty,

There are notwithstanding two exceptions hereunto.

1 The first, Luke 10.4. Our Savior charge the seventy disciples, sent
forth to preach, to salute no man by the way. By which prohibition he does not
utterly take away such complements, as the Anabaptists, from that place; but
shows that they were to use no delay, but to set all other occasions aside,
and speedily to attend the preaching of the Gospel.

When friends meet they are loath to part, and therefore such courtesies to be
omitted, when weightier matters are to be performed.

When we should preach, or hear, or resort to the Congregation to public
prayer, etc. it is then no time of visiting friends, entertaining them with
discourse, or such complements which may take up that time, which ought
otherwise to be bestowed.

2 The other, 2. Ioh. v. 10.11. If any come to you, and bring not the doctrine
of Christ, receive him not into your house, nor bid him, God speed: For he that
bids him God speed, is partaker of his evil deeds.

An Heretic and stubborn maintainer of false doctrine against the
foundation, is not to be saluted. Polycarpus meeting with Marcion the
Heretic, refused to salute him; and when Marcion said, Cognosce nos, Irenaeus
aduers. Haeres. l. 3. c. 3.
I pray you take knowledge of us: Polycarpus answered, Cognosco te primogenitum
Satanae, I know thee for an Impe of the Devil. We may pray for such, but we
may not familiarly salute them.

Thus much of the general doctrine of Salutations: now of the particular
persons saluted.

The first whom Paul saluteth, are a married couple: Aquila and his wife
Priscilla: who are described in the third and fourth verses; which description,
as the rest following, contains a commendation of them.

These are here described three ways.

1 By their Names, which doubtless are from the Roman tongue: the woman being
here, and elsewhere called Prisca in some copies; but the Romans very usually
called women by Diminutiues, as Drusilla, Petronilla, Domitilla, Tulliola; so
Priscilla; either noting their love to them, or the softness of their sex, or
their lesser stature.

There were other of these names, but after them, as one Aquila, who of a
Heathen became a Christian, and of a Christian, at length, a lew; who
translated the old Testament into Greek, and thereby much perverted the
Scriptures. Also there were diverse of the name of Priscilla, some virtuous, but
one infamous, namely, one of the impure prophetesses of Montanus.

But these are that Aquila and Priscilla, of whom we read Acts 18.2.3. by
nation a Jew, borne in Pontus, by occupation a Tent-maker.

2 By their Help which they afforded Paul, not only in making of Tents, for
Paul was of that trade; but in Christ Jesus, that is, in preaching the Gospel
of Christ: not that they preached, but furthered the preaching many ways
privately, as occasion was offered: Act. 18.26.
as by Catechizing of Apollos, and by protecting of Paul, as it follows in
the next verse.

No man is so mean,

3 By their love to Paul, set down by an infallible token of it, which was,
that for his life they laid down their own necks: Greater love can no man
show, then to venture his life for his friend.

This is amplified by Paul's thankfulness and the Churches to them for it.

When, or where, or in what manner this was done, is no where set down that
ever I read: It is supposed to have bin either at Corinth, or at Ephesus, in
both which places Paul was in danger, and they in his company, Acts 18. and 19.

There are three persons for whom we are to venture our lives.

1 For our Natural parents, for we receive our lives from them.

2 And most principally for the Father of the Country, for the King or Supreme
Magistrate; 2. Sam. 21.17.
as Abishai for David: for the King is more worth then ten thousand others, 2.
Sam. 18.3.

3 For our faithful Preachers, being public persons, and such as may by their
labors save many souls.

Hearers owe themselves to their Pastors, as Paul tells Philemon, Phil. 19.
and their lives, as in the example of Aquila and Priscilla.

They ought not then to rail on, and slander their Teachers, neither ought
they to defraud them of their due maintenance: but they ought to submit to
their godly admonitions. Thou owe thy life to thy Teacher, much more the
reformation of thy wicked life at his admonition.

Paul gives thanks to them: so do all the Churches of the Gentiles also: for
Paul was the Apostle of the Gentiles, and by his death they had had an
unspeakable loss.

We must give thanks to God for his blessings:

Singular examples of thankfulness, are David and Elisha: the one enquiring
for some of the house of Saul, that he might show kindness to them for his
friend Ionathans sake: 2 Samuel 9.1.
the other in studying how to requite the woman of Shunem. 2 Kings 4.8.13: Genesis
40.23.
On the other side Pharaohs Butler is an example of unthankfulness, though
afterward he acknowledged his fault. Genesis 41.9.
So is Ioash King of Judah, who unjustly caused to be put to death the son
of Iehoiada the high Priest, which Iehoiada had saved his life and advanced him
to the kingdom. For thus is it written; 2 Chronicles. 24.22.
Thus Ioash the king remembered not the kindness which Iehoiada had done unto
him, but slew his son.

A people are bound to them who show kindness to their Teacher.

VERSE 5. Likewise greet the Church which is in their house. --
SAint Paul salutes the household of Aquila, which he calls a Church, for the
private duties of Gods worship, as prayer, catechizing, reading the Scriptures,
etc. performed therein: and also for the good and orderly life of the family.
It is not like, that Saint Paul means the Saints which met there for the
public service of God, by reason of the particular salutations of diverse of
them following.

We ought so to govern our families that they may be worthy to be called
Churches. Adams house was called The face of God, Genesis 4.14. And so did
Abraham, and Jacob, Genesis 18.19. Genesis 35.2. Josh. 24.15. Psalm 101. Acts 10.2.
and Joshua, and David order their families: Also Cornelius, though a military
man. A house where there are no exercises of religion, but where idleness,
lying slandering, common swearing, cursing, are rife, and where drunkenness,
uncleanness, and riotous living, are ordinarily practiced, may be called an
assembly of Atheists, a den of thieves and lewd beasts, and the Devils
chapel, rather then Church of God.

As our bodies and souls, so our families are to be consecrated to God as his
holy Temples.

VERSE 5. -- Salute my well-beloved Epenetus, who is the first fruits of Achaia
unto Christ.
EPenetus is here saluted, and described three ways.

1 By his name, Epenetus, that is, as the Greek sounds, praiseworthy or
laudable; and doubtless his life was answerable to his name.

2 By Paul's love to him, his well-beloved, without doubt for his virtues.

3 By his forwardness in Religion; The first fruits of Achaia unto Christ:
that is, one of the first that in that country received the Gospel, and gave
his name unto Christ.

This is expressed by a speech alluding to the Leuiticall Law: The people were
commanded from God by Moses, to offer the first fruits of their corn, etc. to
God: and this was a pledge of the blessing of God upon the rest.

As God accepted of the first fruits, and such are most acceptable, as the
first Cherries, etc. so was Epenetus before God and men.

And as the first fruits drew after them the rest of the crop, so was Epenetus,
Chrysostom. in loc.
Porta and introitus aliorum, a means to draw others unto Christ.

Paul speaks of none of these, virtue may have the due honor, and that we
may manifest our selves to be admirers and lovers of virtue and godliness.

He that would be commended (it is every man's desire,) (...).
Of this see my Exposition upon Romans 12.10. upon these words, In honor
preferring one anther. Use 3.

It is a great praise to be the first in good things. their forwardness was
such, that the Disciples were there first called Christians.

He that first invented the profitable Science of Printing, shall be famous to
the worlds end.

To be the first Professor in a town is a great credit: or the first that
stepped forth to reform disorders.

To believe at any time is our happiness, but to be the first in town or
City, deserves praise. As he that is first knighted has precedence before
those which are knighted after him; so seniority in profession is not without
some glory: which is part of the commendation of Andronicus and Iunia, verse 7.

But to be the first drunkard in a town, or the first inuenter of a new
disguised fashion, or of any evil, or the first bringer up of any wicked
custom or order, deserves to be branded with perpetual infamy and reproach.

Let us strive to be foremost in that which is good, but let us persevere in
goodness: for as it profited not Judas to be one of the first, no more will it
profit us, if we after fall away.

To have our latter end worse then our beginning, is a foul disgrace.

VERSE 6. Greet Mary who bestowed much labor on us.
MARY here saluted, is described two ways: first by her name, Mary; secondly
by her love to the Preachers of the Gospel, she bestowed much labor on them.

Labor, in entertainment, maintenance, etc.

On us: Not (it may be yet) on Paul himself: but them who preached the Gospel
as Paul did.

There was one Mary whom Ignatius highly commended, calling her (...) and
(...), that is, skillful in all things pertaining to true wisdom, and full of
all good learning, but whether this was she or no, there is no certainty.

From hence it were frivolous to collect that we ought to salute the Virgin
Mary with the Angels salutation: Mary whom Paul saluted was then living, and
Paul had means to send to her: But the Virgin Mary is departed in the Lord,
neither can we send to the dead to salute them: and to pray to the Virgin Mary
for help is far from the manner of Paul's saluting this woman.

VERSE 7. Salute Andronicus and Iunia my kinsmen, and my fellow prisoners, who
are of note among the Apostles, who also were in Christ before me.
HEre are two saluted, who are described: First, by their names, Andronicus and
Iunia; whether Iunia be the name of a man or woman is to me uncertain.
Secondly, by their kindred, they were a kin to Paul. Thirdly, by their
concaptiuity with Paul: his fellow prisoners; Where, I find not whether at
Philippi, or in some other place, for Paul was frequent in prison; 2 Cor. 11.23.
the cause, doubtless for the Gospel. Fourthly, by their fame, they were of
note, and special mark, not only with but among the Apostles; not that they
were of the twelve, but in a large sense, as the term Apostle may be given to
any preacher. Fifthly, by their seniority or priority in the faith, they were
in Christ before Paul.

A part of the commendation of these two, Paul's kinsmen: so of Herodian, verse
11. A good man is an honor and credit to all his blood, as a wicked man is a
shame and discredit. Let us credit the houses we come off.

But let no man think it shall avail him to have a godly man, though Paul,
nay though Christ himself of his kin, if he believe not.

If thou have a godly man of thy kindred, imitate him in godliness, and then
thou shall partake with him in honor and estimation.

They were Paul's fellow prisoners. Paul, and for Paul's cause is a great glory.

To be a fellow prisoner with murderers, thieves, drunkards, etc. of this we
have just cause to be ashamed. Let none of you suffer, 3 Pet. 4.15, 16.
as a murderer, or as a theife, or as an evil doer, etc. Yet if any suffer as
a Christian, let him not be ashamed, but let him glorify God, on this behalf.

The Saints before us, have suffered imprisonment, us prepare for such things;
whatsoever has besallen them, may also befall us. Examine thy self, what
courage thou have, and resolution, if such things should come to pass.

These were of note among the Apostles: virtue or goodness is commendable:
beware thou be not marked for lewdness or villainy: Abraham was famous for
faith, Job for patience, Andronicus and Iunia for preaching and furthering the
Gospel: But Judas was infamous and branded for a Traitor; and Barrabas, was
(...), a notorious prisoner, so some are marked, Mat. 27.16.
and branded drunkards, harlots, etc. better for a man to live in perpetual
obscurity and darkness, then to be so noted.

VERSE 8. Greet Amplias my beloved in the Lord.
AMplias his commendation is, that he is beloved of Paul for his grace and
holy profession; so is Stachys verse 9. so Persis, verse 12. Chrysostom. in loc.


It is more to be beloved of Paul, then of a King: Paul's love presupposes
virtue and desert, but he is ready to anathematize such as are wicked and
ungodly.

Will thou love them that hate the Lord? 2 Chronicles. 19.2. Psalm. 16.3.
so was Iehoshaphat reproved. Let all thy delight be in the Saints, and in the
excellent, with David.

VERSE 9. Salute Urban our helper in Christ, and Stachys my beloved.
Our helper in Christ, that is, in preaching the Gospel.

Paul's modesty and humility may be here noted, Urban, a mean preacher in
comparison to be his fellow helper.

Also Vrbans zeal, to help in enlarging the bonds of Christ's Kingdom: Help
thou according to thy place, but hinder not the preaching and passage of the
Gospel.

VERSE 10. Salute Apelles approved in Christ. Salute them them which are of
Aristobulus household.
THere was one Apelles of the I Will Coos, a famous Painter, but this Apelles was
famous for the Image of Christ drawn in his heart, and upon all occasions
appearing in his life.

To be in Christ is a great honor; approved in Christ, exceeds in
commendation. Tried gold is precious, a tried Soldier is of great account: so
upon trial in tentation to stand fast, and hold our own, is a Christians
greatest praise.

Peter was a valiant Champion, yet upon trial he failed denying his Master,
though afterward he was an approved Soldier.

When Paul would commend Timothy to the Philippians, Philip. 2.22.
You know, says he, the proof of him.

Many speak well, and make fair shows, who upon proof and trial are
altogether other men. They are patient, till prouokt; chaste till tempted, and
there be opportunity; true men, till a booty lie in their way, which they
think they may take up and never be espied; resolute, till persecution come,
etc.

But Abraham upon trial proved his love to God; Susanna her chastity; Job his
patience; Apelles his grace. Labor thou also to be a Christian of proof, and
pray to stand in tentation.

The effect of the next salutation we will handle in the next Verse.

VERSE 11. Salute Herodian my kinsman. Greet them which be of the house of
Narcissus, which are in the Lord.
OF Herodians description and commendation see before, Verse 7.

Paul saluted in the tenth Verse those of Aristobulus household: here, them of
Narcissus his household.

What Aristobulus was, is not certain, likely not converted.

The most hold Narcissus to be Claudius the Emperors great favorite, of whom
histories make mention. Tacit. Annal. lib. 11.
Tacitus describes him as a very subtle politician, in his plot upon Messalina
the Empress, whom he accused to the Emperor, and also put her to death.

He was a man of infamous life, he was not converted, nor all his household,
and therefore Paul distinguishes them; he salutes them only which are in the
Lord.

Christ rules in the midst of his enemies: Narcissus he gathers his Church.
Psalm. 110.2.
There is a Moses in Pharaohs Court, an Obadiah in Ahabs, a Ioanna in Herod's,
the wife of Chusa Herod's steward; Luke 8.2.
good Christians in the family of Narcissus: and after, some in Neroes Court.
Phil. 4.22.
Yea S. Chrysostom reports that Saint Paul converted one of Neroes concubines,
which was one of the causes of his death, Chrysostom. lib. 1. adu. vituperat. vitae
monast.
because her affection and love was alienated from him.

If the power of the word persuade such to turn from their unclean and wicked
life, it were a foul shame for us, who live in Gods house, not to be brought
by it from our evil conversation.

No body would have looked for zealous Christians in Neroes Court, in Narcissus
his family, yet there were such there: And no man (one would think) should
look for drunkards, thieves, whoremasters, strumpets, etc. in Gods house, in
the household of faith: yet there are such to be found.

VERSE 12. Salute Tryphena, and Tryphosa, who labor in the Lord. Salute the
bel^ued Persis, which labored much in the Lord.
AS there are many famous men commended in the scriptures, so also many women;
Sarah, Rebeccah, Miriam, Hannah, Deborah, The blessed Virgin, etc. and many in
this Chapter.

These are commended, not for their beauty, birth, gay clothes, etc. but for
their labor of love to the Gospel, and the Saints professing the preaching of
the same: and for this shall they be commended till the second coming of
Christ.

Let all women hence learn, not to set their minds upon outward adorning of
the body, as in plaiting the hair, wearing of gold, and putting on of
apparel; but upon the inward ornaments of the mind; upon chastity, modesty,
meekness of spirit, which in the sight of God are of great price.

VERSE. 13. Salute Rufus chosen in the Lord, and his mother and mine.
CHosen in the Lord: that is, a choice Christian and Professor: not speaking
here of his eternal Election. So John writes to the elect Lady, that is, who
was a choice Lady for godliness and virtue: as Chosen men of Israel note the
worthiest of that kind.

His Mother and mine. Our Country is our mother: So is Abel a City, 2 Samuel
20.18.19
called a mother in Israel. Old women are mothers: so are benefactors; thus was
Pharaohs Daughter a mother to Moses, thus was Rufus his mother, a mother to
Paul: and Mothers, are parents which bear children in their womb, and bring
them forth, and thus was Paul's mother a mother to Rufus.

A toward son is a credit to his mother,

VERSE 14. Salute Asyncritus, Phlegon, Hermas, Patrobas, Hermes, and the
brethren which are with them. Salute Philologus, and Iulia, Nereus and his
sister, and Olympas, and all the Saints which are with them.
IN these 2. verses are some saluted by name in particular: and some in
general under these titles, Brethren, Saints.

Of the men and women here by name saluted, there is little, and no certain
mention made in history, for ought that I have read; and therefore I pass them
over: only this we are to remember, that they were worthy and famous for
godliness in the Church of Rome at that time.

And because it were too long to reckon every particular man and woman
believing, therefore, in general terms he comprehends all the rest.

Brethren: So are the elect professing the Gospel, by reason of their
Adoption: They have all one Father, which is God; and one Mother, which is, the
Church, therefore they are Brethren; and in ancient time, Jn my exposition of
the 12 Chap. v. 10.
the meetings of the Saints, were called Fraternities, as I have some-where
observed.

This title notes Union with God, communion among our selves, and so urges
Unity.

Saints, Believers are usually so called by Paul: and these are either such
which are outward only; or such which are outward and inward also.

The first have only the outward profession of the Gospel, and these are
Hypocrites: The other, beside their outward profession, have true inward
sanctification. These are either perfect, such as are to be found only in that
part of the Church which is triumphant; or Imperfect, such as are in the Church
militant, who daily fight and strive against sin.

This title admonishes us to live holily according to our name; to be called a
Saint, and to live like a Beast, Devil as many do; is to dishonor the holy
name after which we are called, and to damn our selves.

God is called, Merciful, and True, and therefore, when David prays for
forgiveness, Psalm. 25.11.
he says: For thy Names sake O Lord pardon mine iniquities, desiring that his
dealings toward him, may be according to his Name: So we may say to a man:
Be answerable to thy Name: Thou art called a Saint, live not like a wretch,
but even For thy names sake live holy.

VERSE 16. Salute one another with an holy kiss. --
PAul concludes his own salutations with this precept, that they should
mutually salute one another; adding the sign of true love and friendship: A
holy kiss.

There are unholy kisses: Pro. 7.13. 1. Kings 19.18. Hos. 13.2. 2. Sam. 15.5.
The unchaste kiss of the Harlot: the Idolatrous kiss of the Israelites to
Baal, and the Calves; and of the Papists to their Images, and Relics: The
flattering kiss of Absolon: The traitorous kiss of Ioab, and of Judas.

A holy kiss, is when the love is unfeigned which is testified thereby.

As it is the fashion among us for men meeting with their friends, to shake
hands, so was it among the Jews, as appears by many places in both
Testaments, for men to kiss men, at meeting and partings.

Now because the Romans were troubled with dissensions about meats and days,
as we have seen Chap. 14. therefore Paul wishes them, that they should
salute one another with a holy kiss, that is, in a true conjunction of minds
and affections, forgetting all former offense.

This Peter calls, Aug. tract. 6. super Ioh.
the kiss of charity: 1. Pet. 5.14 and Saint Augustine, Osculum Columbinum,
the Doue-like kiss.

From whence it came to pass in the Primitive times, Clemens Alexan 3. Paedag.
Anaxag orat. ad Christian.
that Christians before the receiving of the Communion, kissed each other,
which fashion, for some abuse, was prudently laid down; In the stead whereof
is the superstitious kissing of the Pax in the Church of Rome.

Christians ought to love one another truly without dissimulation; of which,
see Romans 12. v. 9.

VERSE 16. -- The Churches of Christ salute you. Timotheus my worke-fellow, and
Lucius, and Jason, and Sosipater my kinsmen, salute you. I Tertius which wrote
this Epistle, salute you in Lord. Gaius mine host, and of the whole Church,
saluteth you: Erastus the Chamberlain of the City saluteth you, and Quartus a
brother.
IN these verses are set down the salutations of others to the Romans, and
these are either whole Churches, v. 16. or particular persons, in the rest of
the verses.

These are, both to cherish love between the Brethren in all places though
far remote; and for the more confirmation and authority of this Epistle,
that it may prevail the better with the Romans.

The first particular, is Timotheus, whom he calls Workefellow; this is he of
whom Act. 16.1.2. to whom Paul wrote two Epistles: whom he commends diverse
times to the Churches, and whom he ordained Bishop of Ephesus.

The next are three, described by their names and by their kindred.

Their Names, Lucius, of whom Act. 13.1. Jason, of whom Act. 17.5. and seq.
Sosipater of whom Act. 20.4. all famous men for godliness.

These were akinne to Paul.

The fifth, is Tertius, described by his Name, and by his effect: he wrote this
Epistle.

Tertius, so many Romans were called. Some Secundus, as one of the Plinies;
some Quintus, as Fabius; some Sextus, as Roscius Amerinus; so in the next
verse, Quartus a Brother.

Which wrote this Epistle: either from Saint Paul's mouth, or from his papers.

It is a great honor any way to further true Religion; write part of the
Scripture, so to read it, to hear it, but most to believe the Scriptures and
to obey them.

The sixth is Gaius, who is described and commended for his liberality and
hospitality, both to Paul, and also to the whole Church.

There were diverse of this Name: Act. 19.29. Act. 20.4.
one of Macedonia, another of Derbe, another (it may be) to who Saint John
wrote his third Epistle.

This Gaius most like to be the Macedonian, because of the writing of this
Epistle at Corinth.

Have thou riches? Gaius: relieve the poor, maintain the preaching of the
Word: and let it not be done niggardly, for Gaius maintains, and gives
entertainment to the whole Church: Riches so expended, will be comfortably
accounted for; Many have a heavy reckoning to make, who have bestowed many
great sums upon harlots, drunkards, and in vanity, but nothing or very little
upon pious uses.

When thou dyest, thy goods shall not follow thee, but thy works shall, be
they good or bad: according therefore to thy ability upon all occasions do
good, laying up a good foundation against the time to come.

When the rich man increased in wealth, Luke 12.16. ad. 21.
if he had studied to enlarge his liberality to the poor, as he did to enlarge
and biggen his barnes, he had not been so branded with the name of a Fool by
our Savior.

He cared for himself and not for the poor, nor for maintayning of Gods
worship. We are but Stewards of riches, which are lent us, that we should have
comfort of them our selves, and that we should bestow them for Gods glory and
the good of the Church.

The seventh is Erastus, of whom Act. 19.21. and 2. Tim. 4.20. described here
by his office; Chamberlain of the City of Corinth.

It is lawful for godly Christians, the Anabaptists say to the contrary.

Not only mean persons, great Personages also are by the Gospel converted to
Christ. Wise Joseph of Arimathea; Learned Nicodemus a ruler of the Jews; Noble
Theophilus; Virtuous Ioanna, wife to Chusa Herod's Steward; Sergius the
procorsul; Erastus the Chamberlain; the Eunuch of Candace, and others.

Not many such: but in the Wisdom of God, some Kings, some Queens, some
Princes, Nobles, great ones, that the Church may have countenance.

We are to pray for the conversion of such, and to praise God for them: Their
example is potent either way: When the chiefest in a Town are Religious, and
sober, and enemies to disorder, the meaner sort are easily governed: but where
the chiefest are contrary, there it is impossible to settle any good order.

So much hurt as thou have done by thy example, so much heavier shall thy
judgment be; if thou had done so much good, great would have been thy
comfort, in the last day.

The last is Quartus, described by his profession; A Brother.

In all these we may note the blessing which follows a good life even in this
world;

The memory of the Just is blessed, Pro. 10.7.
but the name of the wicked shall rot.

VERSE 17. Now I beseech you Brethren, mark them which cause divisions and
offenses, contrary to the Doctrine which ye have learned, and avoid them.
IN this and the three verses next following, is the third part of this
Chapter, and the fourth part of the Conclusion, which is, an Admonition.

In which are the manner of it, and the matter considerable.

The manner in these words, Now I beseech you Brethren; It is tendered unto
them with exceeding love, such manner of speaking we had before, Chap. 12.
verse. 1. and Chap. 15. verse 30.

In the Matter, we have the Admonition it self, verse. 17.18. and the
Amplification of it, verse. 19.20.

In the Admonition it self: are the Duty, verse. 17. and the Reason, verse. 18.

The Duty is, to beware of false teachers, and false brethren.

In this we may note a Declaration of the wariness required, and a Description
of them, of whom they are to beware.

Unto this wariness belong two things; first, to mark, secondly, to avoid.

The Description of the parties to be marked and avoided, is from the Effects,
which are two, Divisions and Offenses: They which make Divisions and Offenses,
are to be marked and avoided.

These two are amplified, by the Rule unto which they are contrary, which is,
the Doctrine which they have learned.

Mark them: (...).
The word signifies such a marking, as uses a watchman that stands on a
Tower to descry enemies, he marketh diligently all comers, and gives notice
accordingly for the saving of the City: Hence are the chief Pastors and
Fathers in the Church called, Episcopi, Bishops.

One Copy, Clarom. codex.
as M. Beza notes, has an aduerbe joined to the verb; (...) to mark so that
we be in surety, and not deceived.

And avoid them: Which Peter Martyr understands of Excommunication.

Which cause divisions and offenses: Pareus.
The first of these some think to be referred to Doctrine, the other to
Discipline: the first of Heresy, the other of Schism: and I think we may
understand both of these in the first word: and by the second, the offense
which comes by such Division, and also that which comes by a wicked life,
for these also deserve to be marked and avoided.

Contrary to the Doctrine of Salvation by Jesus Christ only, which ye have
learned, either by this Epistle, or by your first Conuerters.

False teachers and brethren are carefully to be marked and avoided, Matthew.
7.14.15. Beware of false prophets, which come to you in sheep clothing, but
inwardly they are ravening Wolves: ye shall know them by their fruits: Which
fruits are in this text, Division and Offenses: Philip. 3.2. Beware of Dogs,
beware of evil workers, beware of the Concision. For here Saint Chrysostom
would have the Jews to be understood, who urged the Necessity of the
Observation of the Ceremonial Law: I think also such Gentiles who maintained
Jewish opinions.

Here note Paul's wisdom, and that in three things.

1 That he puts this Admonition in the very end of his Epistle, Musculus.
to note that amongst all other things formerly written of, this in especial
not to be forgotten.

2 That he interserteth it among the Salutations; that so it might the more
prevail with them; for as then the wax easiliest receives the print of the
seal, when it is softened; so having by his gentle salutations, greetings by
name and commendations, prepared their affections, then he puts in for peace
and unity, and that they should beware of such which cause divisions.

3 He names those which were worthy amongst them, but not the factious and
schismatic, that they might discern this admonition not to proceed from any
private spleen, but merely out of a true and unfeigned desire of their good.

We ought to have a watchful eye upon all such,

We may not keep company with Papists, Anabaptists,

There are two things which strike at the very heart of the Church, Division,
and Scandal, or Offense.

If thou desire that the Church should live and flourish, O, pray for the
peace of Jerusalem, and beware of faction and schism; hate evil, and lead a
godly life.

VERSE 18. For they that are such, serve not our Lord Jesus Christ, but their
own belly, and by good words, and fair speeches, deceive the hearts of the
simple.
HEre is a Reason of the Admonition, which is twofold: The first is taken from
the End; the second from the Effect, of them which cause Divisions and Offenses.

Their End is set down, first Negatiuely, They serve not Christ, then
Affirmatively, but their own belly.

To serve Christ: Is to submit our selves to his will, and to seek to please
him in all things, and to set forth his glory; but this the factious spirits
intended not, but to serve themselves and their own turns, whatsoever became
of the service of Christ.

Their own belly: That is, profit, maintenance, ease: For we are ten-fold more
forward to bestow upon such, which shall broach a new opinion, or be factious,
then upon peaceable teachers: Opposition to the present government of the
Church in England, may easily be discerned to be a very mystery of gain.

Also by Belly, Faius.
by a Synechdoche, understand Vainglory, Ambition, and all carnal affections,
and wrong ends.

The Effect, They deceive the hearts of the simple, set forth by the
Instrument: Good words and fair speeches.

In the Effect are the Action, they deceive; the parties deceived, the Simple:
The extent, how far they are deceived, even in their hearts.

They deceive: The word signifies such a deceit, which a false thief uses to
a trauailer, offering himself a guide to direct him a better way to his
iourneyes end, and so leading him into some dismal place, that he may rob
him, and cut his throauand therefore the vulgar translation, and M. Beza, with
the Syriack, read it, they seduce.

The hearts: To note that alienation of Affections, follows division in
doctrine and opinion: Division and faction, is as a canker, not only impairing
the soundness of the Judgment, but diuerting the current of the Affections.

Of the simple: (...), (...).
is such a one who having a desire to do well, yet wants wisdom to
discern the subtlety and ends of such who make divisions in the Church.
Simple or Innocent, as the vulgar, being so called, Lyra in loc.
non a puritate conscientiae, sed a defectu industriae, not from the purity of
their conscience, but from a defect of wisdom, or care and industry, to
observe and find out the packing of such contentious and factious spirits,
says Lyra.

By good words, and fair speeches: (...), is when a man makes show of much
goodness in words, but is nothing so in substance and deeds: so Pertinax, the
Emperor, was called (...), which one expounded, Aurelius Victor citatus a Beza.
blandus magis quam benignus, fair spoken, but no ways liberal, (...), is
when a man uses many good prayers and benedictions, taken here in the worst
sense, for that bad eloquence and counterfeit zeal, which Heretics and
Schismatickes use, to draw the simple to their side and opinions.

Such which cause divisions and offenses, contrary to the true Doctrine, serve
not Christ, but their own affections, deceiving the simple. 2. Tim. 3.4.5.6.
Lovers of pleasures more then lovers of God: Having a form of godliness; for
of this sort are they which creep into houses, and lead captive silly women.
Tit. 1.10.11. There are many vain talkers and deceivers, specially they of the
Circumcision, who subvert whole houses, teaching things which they ought not,
for filthy lucres sake. Our Savior in Matthew. 7.14. calls them ravening
Wolves in sheep clothing.

This is principally to be meant of the Jews professing Christ, who withal
urged the necessity of the Ceremonial law, and of such Gentile Christians, who
embraced such Jewish opinions, these were liberally maintained by the Jews.
Both these Paul sharply taxes almost in all his Epistles: Notwithstanding,
this Admonition is to be applied to the necessity of the Church in all times.

He that serves his belly or carnal affections, the servant of Christ; Matthew
6.24.
ye cannot serve God and Mammon.

Beware of the sugared and fair tongues of Heretics and Schismatikes, not
naked, Irenaeus in prooemio, lib. 1. aduers. Haeres.
but as Irenaeus says, amiculo splendido callide ornatos, cloaked with good
works and fair speeches, that they deceive the simple and unskillful.

Thus the Papists offer their Indulgences and Pardons, and such trumpery,
beguiling the ignorant, and serving their own bellies. Thus the Anabaptists
preach of Temperance and other virtues, and in the mean time like idle bellies
live of other men's labors. Thus do the Brownists, and all factious spirits,
convey the poison of their schismatic opinions, under a pretense and show of
purity and zeal. Thus did the Pharisees, Matthew. 23.14.
under a pretense of long prayer, devour widows houses.

As strumpets paint their faces, and deck and perfume their beds, Prou. 7.
to allure simple ones, and young men without understanding; so false prophets
wear a rough garment to deceive.

Thus have many simple men and women of forward affections been enueigled, and
drawn to oppose the Church and Civil Magistrate, by the fair shows of zeal
and conscience of such Leaders, who have therein aimed at their own gain, or
credit, and not at the glory of God, and peace of the Church.

It is a detestable thing to show in words and gesture,

Woe to them, who by their unfaithful dealing, give just cause for men to say,
that they had rather deal with Turks, Infidels, Drunkards, Whore-masters,
etc. then with Professors and goers to Sermons: Matthew. 7.21.
Not every one that says Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of heaven,
but he that does the will of God, which is in heaven.

VERSE 19. For your obedience is come abroad unto all men: I am glad therefore
on your behalf; but yet I would have you wise concerning that which is good,
and simple concerning evil.
THis verse and the next following contain an Amplification of the Admonition;
which is threefold: An Occupation, in this verse, and a Consolation, and a
Prayer in the twentieth verse.

In this Occupation we must consider the Objection, and Paul's answer.

For the Objection; whereas he admonishes them to beware of those which caused
divisions, because through fair speeches they deceived the hearts of the
simple: hence they might perchance thus object.

What do you think us so silly, that every fair word will carry us?

Unto this Paul answers, whereof there are two parts: A Concession: A
Correction.

The Concession: Your obedience is come abroad unto all men, I am glad
therefore on your behalf.

The Correction in the rest of the words of this verse.

In the Concession are the things granted, and the effect of it in Paul.

The thing granted: that their obedience is come abroad unto all men, or
places: that which he called simplicity, here he calls obedience, attributing to
them a facility and readiness to obey the Gospel, which is a singular
commendation. Simple, that is, not blockish without understanding, but honest
hearted, sincere, of tender conscience, desiring to their uttermost to take that
way, which might further the peace of their consciences.

This is come abroad among all men, says he, and therefore it were vain for
me to deny it.

Nay I am glad therefore on your behalf: so that he mitigates the envy of the
word simple, by obedience, and shows that it is a great part of their
worthiness, that they are so ready, so teachable, so flexible to obey,
signifying that it wrought this effect in him, that he therefore did singularly
rejoice.

The correction: But I would have you wise unto that which is good, and simple
concerning evil.

This correction has a secret reproof, which was want of prudence to observe
and discern the sleights of Schismatic teachers, and to suspect danger
under their fair shows.

Facility to obey is soon deceived, if it be not joined with Prudence. For
when men shall come in the habit of the servants of God, and making a great
show of zeal; here an honest heart would be loath to suspect any corrupt end,
either of gain, or ambition, or such like: and therefore Paul tells them that
as he would have them simple concerning evil, not to be cunning to do or
cover, or persuade to evil, so to be wise unto that which is good: to use all
their cunning, to try true and sound doctrine, and to retain that which they
had learned.

As we must be ready to obey the truth, so wise to try and discern what is
such, 1 Thessalonians. 5.21. Prove all things, keep that which is good, 1 John 4.1.
Believe not every spirit, but try the spirits whether they are of God: because
many false prophets are gone out into the world.

Here Paul's sweetness, sweetness in admonishing them so lovingly; his wisdom
in writing so cautelously; his care, that the Romans might be at peace and
unity, because their example might do either much good or hurt to the
Churches. If such disturbers of the Churches peace, and broachers of new
opinions, be not suffered at Rome, neither will other churches give credit or
audience to them: For that which the Romans, inhabiting the principal city, do
in such cases, goes abroad unto all men.

He says not, knowledge, but your obedience is come abroad unto all men. A
great commendation; for the praise of godliness is in obedience: unto this,
Cities, towns, families, private persons should aspire, so to live, that their
obedience may come abroad among all: if it be rather justly said, that their
disorder, drunkenness, riotousnesse, profaneness, is come abroad, it is a
fearful hearing.

Paul is glad of the good report of the Church of Rome for their readiness to
obey, at the conversion, and proceeding in grace of others.

We must be wise to that which is good, simple to that which is evil: for as
it is a sin under a show of zeal to deceive, so is it to be deceived and
mislead.

The Merchant buys not all wares, but those which are for his turn, and
commodity: The Husbandman, buys not all, or any corn to seed his land, but
that which is clean and sound; so are we to be much careful and choice what
opinions we drink in, with what fair words, and under what fair shows souer
they be, by what persons soever, tendered unto us.

Observe here a direction from Paul: Note this Direction.
In a Church where the Doctrine of Salvation by Christ only, is soundly and
truly taught and received, if any the most sanctified man in show, shall teach
any thing, which may tend to make a division, or faction, and to disturb the
peace of the Church, suspect, and be sealous thereof; for it is either false,
or if true, yet better to be buried as low as the Center of the earth, then to
be broached, to break the peace and unity of the Church.

Here it is that Paul would have them wise, that if any opinion smell never so
little of Schism and division, to damn and renounce it.

There are two things which are to be most precious to us: The truth of
Doctrine, the Peace of the Church: they are as two sisters, either of which
without the other is unprofitable and dies.

Be wise therefore unto that which is good, as serpents; Mat. 10.16.
be simple unto that which is evil as Doves.

As the Serpent stops her ear, and will not hearken to the voice of the
charmer charm he never so wisely, so, stop thine ears, and refuse to hear
the hissing such serpents, which shall go about with their fair tongues and
shows, to cause thee to eat of the forbidden fruit, to oppose the state and
constitutions of a true and famous Church, and to disturb the peace thereof.

The Lord by his Prophet, complains of the Jews, because they were wise to
do evil, but to do good they had no knowledge: Ier. 4.22. 1 Cor. 14.20.
be thou wise to do well, and simple to do evil; in malice a child, in
understanding a man.

VERSE 20. And the God of peace shall bruise Satan under your feet shortly: The
Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you. Amen.
IN this verse are the two other parts of the Amplification. The first is a
consolation: The God of peace shall bruise Satan under your feet shortly. The
second, which is a prayer, to be referred to the 24. verse.

The consolation is a promise, that howsoever God permit Satan to trouble the
Church of Rome then, by the Authors of divisions and offenses, yet shortly he
will bruise him under their feet.

They must fight it out, but the victory is certain: of which their are four
things here considerable.

1 The author of this victory: The God of peace, so called also in the last
verse of the former Chapter: because he loves peace, and gives peace: and
surely so he loves it that the peace makers are pronounced blessed by our
Savior, and to be marked thereby for the children of God. Mat. 5.9.


The god of the world which is Satan, sowes dissension; but the God of heaven
and earth, the God of his Church, he makes peace.

2 The party conquered: Mat. 13.39. 1 Pet. 5.8.
Satan, that is, an enemy, our adversary, who stands against us even at the
bar before God, accusing and pleading against us, laying our sins to our
charge that we might be damned.

Even this Satan, the Devil, shall by the power of God be bruised under our
feet: himself; and his instruments, tyrants, heretics, schismatics,
hypocrites; and those things whereby his kingdom is vpholden; out of the
church, idolatry, and infidelity; in the church, dissension, and profaneness.

3 The manner of the conquest: Shall bruise under your feet, we shall
gloriously conquer, and Satan shall be abased unto the lowest degree of
Deiection.

As Ioshuah caused the princes of Israel to set their feet on the very necks of
the five kings, so will God throw Satan down, and make us trample him under
our feet.

4 The Time: Shortly: though he now rage, yet ere long he shall be thrown
down: that is, at the day of Judgment, Ambrosius.
say some. Which we may expound the day of every man's particular judgment,
which is death: or of the General Judgment at the last day.

Or shortly, that is, prophesying of the conversion of the Roman Empire to the
faith; Toletus.
which was in the days of Constantine: or of the Judgments of God upon the
persecuting Emperors: or rather comforting them, Gualterus.
that shortly the dissensions caused among them by the subtilty and malice of
the Devil; should be quenched, and the Authors silenced, which I verily think
came to pass, by this letter, and by Paul's labors (...) among them.

God will make (...) Church and children to conquer Satan. Genesis It, that (...)
^ee^ of the woman, shall bruise thy head, that is, of Sa^a^. This is meant of
Christ, and in as much as that which he^^^, he did for us, who are his members,
we in him shall do the same, that is, conquer him. 1 Cor. 15.57. Thanks be to
God which gives us victory through our Lord Jesus.

Satan is the author of all dissension and mischief wrought in the Church
whosoever be the instruments of it. Revel 2.10.
So the devil is said to cast some of the Smyrnians into prison, meaning the
enemies of the Church by the Devils instigation.

The Devil is our deadly enemy, of whom, power is great, and his malice not to
be expressed; and he has infinite slights and policies do deceive us and bring
us to confusion, never ceasing going about, and seeking to devour us.

He knows how to fit every man's humor, and to apply a temptation according to
his inclination.

He knows when open force, and when secret fraud will most hurt the Church;
of God.

In Queen Mary's days when the governors and rulers were enemies to
religion, then he set upon the Church, with imprisonments, banishments, fire,
and sword. Leo Mag. sermon. 6. de Epi. domini.


Why does he not rage so now? non deposuit odium, sed vertit ingenium; he has
not given over his malice, but he alters his device, Idem sermon. 7. de Ieium.
11. mensis.
and cruentas inimicitias, ad qui^tas conuertit insidias, the turns his bloody
enmity, into slye and secret snares, as says the same Author in another place.

Now since God has blessed us with a Nursing Mother and a Nursing Father of
our Church, he has not fought to take away our lives, but to corrupt our
manners; he has not set upon our Church with tyrannical open cruelty, but
undermined it with subtlety, sowing dissension among us about ^^tes and
orders, and the Discipline of the Church; seeking thereby to ruinate us, as he
sought to ruinate the Netherlanders of late by the division of Arminius.

He knows that a Church divided cannot stand, and that in effect it will be
all one to take away peace, as to take away Truth; and all one to destroy the
Church by outward force, or inward schism and division, saving that this is
more dangerous and shows his greater subtlety.

For in outward opposition, we have to do with enemies but in inward division,
Protestants oppose Protestants: and indeed here is our overthrow the more
shameful, if those which are the Children of the Church by his subtilty shall
be brought to be the accusers and defamers of their reverend Mother, as in our
Brow^^sts and other factious people is manifest.

Let us all therefore pray to the God of peace that he would make us wise unto
that which is good, and able to discern and defeat the stratagems and devices
of the Devil, who if we be left to our selves will easily ouermatch us; but by
the power of the God of peace, through Jesus Christ we shall be able to bruise
him under our feet.

Art thou afraid of the Devil? Resist him by Faith and he will fly from thee,
or if he stay by it, thou shall be able to quench all his fiery darts, 1. Pet.
5 9. James 4 7.
and to tread him under thy feet, Christ has conquered and wounded him so,
that though he may tempt and trouble thee, yet he shall not ouercom^ thee.
Rore he can and make a terrible noise, but overcome he cannot, unless thou
consent to him.

R^giat quantum vult, tantum non fugiat ouis Christi, Let him rore as much as
he will, only let not the sheep of Christ run away, but stand to him and
resist, says Bernard. Bern. sermon 13. in Psalm. Qui habitat.


He that runs away at the sound of the Trumpet, before a blow be stricken, is
a coward. Fight therefore and be of good courage, for he that is in us is
greater then he that is in the World. 1. Joh 4.4.


As when Goliath was overcome by David, the Children of Israel fell upon the
Philistims and slew them; so let us fall upon our sins, repenting of them;
for sin is the head of the Devil: he therefore who conuerts unto God, he
who withstandeth temptations, tramples upon the very head of the Devil: as he
who is overcome in temptation, and drawn to sin, is trampled upon by the
Devil.

Christ has thrown him down, and wounded him, let us keep him down and
tread upon him, that we may gloriously conquer.

VERSE 20. -- The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you, Amen. The grace
of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all, Amen.
IN the 24. verse is the fourth part of this Chapter, which is the Apostolical
Benediction; and because the latter part of the 20. Verse is of the same sound,
I have joined them together.

In this Benediction, we have the blessing which he wishes to them, which is,
Grace: The Author of this blessing, whose grace, The Grace of our Lord Jesus
Christ; The parties to whom he wishes Grace; to them all, Be with you all; and
the Ratification, Amen.

The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ: By Grace I here understand with Peter
Martyr, The Divine favor, with the rich effects thereof; called the Grace of
our Lord Jesus, both because he favors us himself, and also because he has
purchased for us the favor of God.

Be with you All: All, is added in the 24. verse, which was understood in the
20. Amen, of this word see Romans 11.36.

This is the seal of Paul's Epistles, token whereby by they are known, 2.
These. 3.17.18.
as he says in the second to the Thessalonians.

In the stead of the ancient concluding of letters, Farewell, Saint Paul
wishes unto them to whom he writes the Grace of Christ; for without this all
health of body little avails.

And he above all the rest was the Preacher of Grace, being from a Persecutor
received to so much Grace: and look what he received, he earnestly wishes to
others.

Chrysostom observes that Saint Paul lays the foundation of his Epistle in
Grace: Grace to you and Peace, etc. Chap. 1.7. and here he finisheth with,
Grace be with you; thereby showing that our Justification, Sanctification,
Election, Vocation, Power to resist Satan, to his bruising under our feet, and
all, is of Grace.

The Best thing we can wish to our selves, the Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ.
To be gracious with earthly Princes is something: but to be gracious with God
in Christ surpasses all: For this is unchangeable, and in the hour of death,
when the favor of Kings can stand us in little stead; then, This, will be able
to comfort us, and to let us out of this world, into the Kingdom of Heaven.

VERSE 25. Now to him that is of Power to stablish you according to my Gospel,
and the preaching of Jesus Christ, according to the Revelation of the Mystery,
which was kept secret since the World began: But now is made manifest, and by
the Scriptures of the Prophets according to the Commandment of the Everlasting
God, made known to all Nations for the obedience of Faith: To God only wise,
be glory through Jesus Christ for ever, Amen.
IN these words is the last part of this Chapter, of the conclusion, and of the
whole Epistle; which is a Doxology or an acknowledgment of glory to God.

Where we have the sum: To God be glory: and the Amplification, from diverse
Arguments.

From a description of God; in which, two things are attributed to him, for the
which he gives him glory: The first is power, the second Wisdom.

His Power set down with the effect of it, v. 25. To him that is of power to
establish you.

Corroboration in Grace, is by the Power of God: only, which is added to his
wisdom, v. 27.

For such is the power of the Devil, and our weakness, that unless God
himself who is Omnipotent, did establish us, we must needs utterly fall away.

This establishing is amplified from the instrument of it, The Gospel, of
which are three things set down.

First, the administering cause thereof; which is Saint Paul: according to My
Gospel: not the History of the Gospel written or dictated by Paul; but
according to the Doctrine of the Gospel preached by Paul, and the rest, of the
Apostles: or written unto the Romans in this Epistle, wherein indeed, the
sum of the Gospel is contained.

Secondly, The material cause of it: The preaching of Jesus Christ: For Christ
is the scope and sum of the Gospel, and as Paul desired to know nothing but
Christ crucified, and gloried in nothing else, so he preached nothing else.
Unless we would expound the words actiuely; Heb. 2.3.
according to that which was preached by our Savior Christ, according unto
that in the Epistle to the Hebrews, where the Doctrine of salvation is called,
the Word spoken by the Lord.

Thirdly, The formal cause: The Revelation of the Mystery, kept secret, since
the world began, but now made manifest and known: Concerning which we may
here note four things.

First, to whom it is now manifested and made known: to all Nations: before
there was a great silence of the Gospel, it being shadowed with many types and
figures, but now such veyles are taken away; there is a Revelation, and
manifesting of it: before it was known to the Jews only, but now, to all
Nations.

Secondly, the means whereby it was made known; the Scriptures of the
Prophets: For to him, (that is, to Christ) give all the Prophets witness: Act.
10.43. Act 26.22.
and therefore Saint Paul in his preaching, said, none other things, then those
which were spoken by Moses and the Prophets: and when he came to Rome, he
expounded and testified unto them the Kingdom of God, persuading them
concerning Jesus, both out of the Law of Moses and out of the Prophets. Act
28.23.


Thirdly, the Authority: The Commandment of God, set forth by another of his
attributes, Everlasting, without beginning and without end.

Fourthly, the end of the manifesting and publishing of the Gospel, for the
obedience of Faith; not only that we should know it and taste of it; but
believe it, and obey it.

The second Attribute in the description of God, is his Wisdom, v. 27. set
forth by this Exclusive Only: To God only Wise: So 1. Tim. 1.17. the only wise
God, and Jude v. 25. the only wise God our Savior: which exclusive is to be
added to all his Attributes, 1. Tim. 6.15. 1. Tim. 6.16. Revel. 15.4.
as Only Potentate, Only has immortality, Only Holy.

There are many wise men and women; so the Angels: But men by institution and
means; and Angels and men, by participation and the Gift of God, and in part;
But God is wise absolutely, Hieron. in locum
infinitely, and by Nature, being the Fountain and Ocean, from whence the
drops, and small streams of wisdom are deri^^ed unto the Creatures.

The publishing and preaching the Gospel to all Nations, Commandment of the
Everlasting God, who is omnipotent and Only wise.

As no other wisdom and power could have so brought it to pass; so, though
the Devil, Tyrants, Infidels, Atheists, Papists, and all wicked men join
their power and cunning, they shall never be able to root it out.

This is our comfort; though our enemies be strong and wise, yet our God is
stronger and wiser then they.

2 From the means by whom we are to give glory to God: which is, by our Lord
Jesus Christ: so Colos. 3.17. Giving thanks to God and the Father by Him: For
our spiritual sacrifices are acceptable to God by Jesus Christ, as Saint Peter
speaks. 1. Pet. 2.5.


3 From the continuance of performing this duty, for ever.

4 From the Affection, wherewith Paul glorifies God, which is vehement,
testified in this word, Amen.

God is specially to be glorified of his Church, for his power and wisdom in
confirming of his Elect by the Gospel. Ephesians. 3.20.21. Now to him that is able
to do exceeding abundantly, above all that we ask or think, according to the
power that works in us. Unto him be glory in the Church, by Christ Jesus,
throughout all ages world without end, Amen. Jude v. 24.25. Now to him that is
able to keep you from falling, and to preserve you faultlesse before the
presence of his glory, with exceeding joy, To the only wise God our Savior,
be glory, and majesty, dominion, and power, now and ever; Amen.

REVELATION 5.13.14. Blessing, Honor, Glory, and Power, be unto him that
sits upon the Throne, and unto the Lamb for ever and ever.

And let the whole Church in Heaven and Earth fall down, worship, and say Amen.


Amen, Amen.

