A MOORNING DITI UPON THE DECEAS OF THE MOST NOBL Prins HENRY EARL of ARVNDEL,
The ancient and Primer Coounte of England, and right honorabl Baron Mautrauers
and Clun one of Gour mest gracious Queen ELIZABETH'S Maiesteez most honorabl
privy Coounsel, and of the right nobl Order of the Garter the eloeu Knight:
that departed in the Lord at hiz Place by Toour hill ny London, on Thurzday
Saint Matthiez day the latter xxiiii. of February in the xxii. year of her
highness most prosperoous Rein. 1579.
CArez and complaints that ruful moornings may purport,
Proceeding from a mind with woez oppressed:
A heavy heart dooun sunk within the breast,
A damped coountenauns deuoid of all comfort,
May best beseem the state of woeful wight:
And so may sorroz smart, us rightfully compel
With sighs profoound bewail in careful plight,
The late deceas of hun whooz honor did excel,
HENRI that nobl Prins the EARL of ARVNDELL. Descended-from Carolus magnus w
bodied. at Aix 815.

Born and allied in Line long and Heroical,
Coomly in foorm of featurez and personage,
Matched in hy and equal marriage, His first Wife Mary the Lord Marquis Dorsets
daughter.

Parent to one Worthy Lord and Ladyz two, withal: Henry lord Matrauers

For the rare bloomz of true Nobilttee
That first oout budded in hiz tender spring, Lady Jane married to John Lord
Lumley. Lady Mary married to Thomas Duke of Norfolk.

The Earl hiz Father yet alive, William
and he
But Lord Mautrauers: Anno.xxx. Hen. viii.
Oour late most famoous King
Of Callis too him gave the trust and goouerning.
The weighty charge whearof when he had vnderfong,
He ransakld the orderz olld and nu,
The good he held in execution du,
The bad he brake, and ay by Justice righted wrong:
With the tine French he tempred in such sort
Az for hiz Proowes great and Pollecyz again,
For Feign to Prins and safety to the Fort,
Both far and near it waz pronoounced of all men.
That Callis never had like Capitain az then.
Oour King him made upon this five yeerz nobl say, Captain of Calls v. years.

At Bullen seege hy Marshall of hiz host: Lord Marshall at the seege of Bullen.
An.xxxv. Henry viii.

Wheraz hiz peinz his daungerz with the most,
Hiz valiauns by heart and hand waz prompt all way.
And though a molehil to a mooknt be small,
For certain truth yet this the writer bringz to mind,
Whoo served him thear at theez most actionz all:
And for the grace enteet that ever he did find,
May most deplore hiz death, but honor all his kind.
The Prins benign anon soon az the tooun he wan. xxxv. Hen. viii.
Prou. 17.

For seruis hy ooon by this nobl Peer,
Chaz him too be one of hiz Coounsel near,
Lord Chamberlain also: which Honorz after than
King Edward gave him: but Queen Mary made,
Him Prezident of Coounsel and Lord Stuard too be:
Of our Queen eak that dignitee he hade. Anno.i. Regine Elizabeth.
Prou. Ibidem.

So az a thing it is right evident to se,
In hoow great grace With all hiz Soouerainz waz he.
The higher karged ship, and deepar it does draw,
The danger more of storm of rok and sand,
And blasts may blo that no state can withstand.
At anchor holld of Fortitude when roze a flaw,
He lay, with honor till he came to port.
And az he thought none praized virtue az they ow,
Onles their deedz true virtue did reaport,
He surely for hiz part, commended virtue so,
Az waz hiz Embleam, LAVS VIRTVTIS ACTIO.
For Worthy pleazurz else: hiz Horse and Armor sitch.
Hiz skill profoound in both, his solemn Queer
By vois and Instruments so sweet to here,
Hiz Iewelz, Antiquiteez, so many rare and rich,
Hiz Tablz, Cloks, and his symmetricall
Billdingz, so lumptuoously adoournd in every part:
For eend, his exquizit appointments all
So excellent for cost, for hy devise and art,
Az might be signz certain of hiz so nobl heart.
For seruis then, for honor, or for hiz Princez pleazure, Twice Ambassador to
King Philip in Flaunderz and cheef Co^misione: in Queen Maryes days.

Hoow mooch ioyd he thear too be liberal?
Of heart sy nceer toward the Noblz all,
Too State of life he made his Birthdegree his meazure,
Ootherz merit small, mooch he wolld avauns
Boounteous, benign, releeuing many grievous gronez,
In freendship firm for any change or chauns.
But ah for woe: dear death not moouabl by monez,
All theez hiz shining lights quite quenched has at onez.
Obscuring orgulioously by dark and deadly blast,
The lustr of Jewel, the more inestimabl,
Az iz the loss so far irreperabl:
An Earl, a Peer, a Prins, the only and the last
Of that so by FITZ ALLENZ name and blood,
But why so sharp O Memory do thoou declare
Theez groudz of greeuez: more meet wear for thy mood
Sum Opium for sleep or else white Nenupbare,
A sooup of Lethes lake for to forget thy care.
But noow, az wants a cheef one amoong the States hy,
So Nobl youth, and all of gentl heart:
The Herallds sage, the wize and learnd in Art, Borne at Gaunt 1500 Croound
Emperoor at Bonon^ 1530.

This forlorn skath alas be wail may rufully
And thoou infaust day, dismoll, bisextill,
Not hallt by Charliez birth and coronation sight
So good, Charlez slain by conspiratoour^ at Burges 1127. I. (...) The french
Kings poour (...) slain and he (...) takeat Pau^ (...) 1525. Io.
az too the Earl of Flaunders ill
And too French Frauncis eak. O cruel in thy spite
Woe worth the tune that noow so soon ye camst too light.
But sins that, heavy sprite does freat the mind to naught,
Driez up the bonez and gallz the heart so sore,
Healps not the case (God wot) a whit the more,
By wizdoom then bethink we, heerin az we ought,
First yt this Peer (hoow ever wear the case)
With love of all Estatz in hearts sinceer enrolld,
In honor pure did run hiz nobl raze,
Then saw his Childerz Children (a crooun to hiz yeerz olld
Az Grau^dstre (to their glory) eak him they did behold.
Whoo wear so virtuous all of mind and inclination
As God took them, the sooner to be blessed:
Yet here left one to coountervail the rest,
Of whooz increasing honor such iz the expectation
That in Avitall State and Dignitee
Az he succeedz and luckily enioyz the same,
So hope iz that through Gods benignitee:
By him shall glister long in honor and in fame,
The bright shine of ye magnific ARVNDELLI name.
Bethink we eak hoow well he dispozed thingz eachon,
What tender words our Queen unto him sent:
Whereat his heart did earn, hiz eiz relent,
Reizd up hiz febl Sprite, that then by him anon
Intoo the Lords handz recommended is.
In Fame and in Succession sins here he lives ay,
In Soul also too everlasting bits
Let us by solas suppl oour sorroz az we may,
And hope in Christ to have a joyful meeting day,
Deuinctissimo (pro facultate) Arundelius. Guil. P. G.

Born on Saint Georgez day 1512. Lived a Coounseller and in great Officez 43.
year. Buried at Arundell in Sussex Tuisday the 22. of March An. R. R. E. 22.

Imprinted at London by John Allde.


