Letters containing sundry devises, touching the state of Flaunders and
Portingall: Written by Card. Granuelle and others, and lately intercepted and
published.

Imprinted at London at the three Cranes in the Vinetree by Thomas Dawson, for
Thomas Charde. 1582.

Letters of the Cardinal of Granuelle.
SIr provost my Lord the Prelate of Saint Vastz brought me your letters of
the 14. To the provost Morillo^ April. 1582.
of February, wherein you yield me sufficient testimony of the said
Prelates sufficiency and good qualities, the which for the time that I have
had here to deal with him, I find to be correspondent to your words. I have
used him friendly, and have endeavored to make him good cheer. I have also
written to the court, there to procure him some good entertainme^t. I am sorry
yt here we be somewhat dry, howbeit we do (according as we ought) e^deuor our
selves to win credit with strangers, at the least I will do the best I may,
to let them understand of it. I have also very earnestly preferred the suit of
his brother and of Secretary Vasseur and his father, and that is all I can do,
being so far off. The matter is the less, seeng the county Egmond, and the
L. of Champagney be yet in Gau^t, notwithstanding they be kept very straightly:
for if they had bin transported into Zealand, I fear we should never have had
any good reconing of the^. If this wretched Orange had died of the blow, there
had been better hope of their recovery. I remain still in the same fear as
before: that is, that so long as the said Orange may and shall bear any sway,
we shall hardly obtain the delivery of the said Lo. of Champagny.

His Majesty has written very earnestly to my L. the prince of Parma: but it
was needelesse, considering how favorably of his grace he assisteth us. God
send us shortly good news, and grant you (my L. Provost) the accomplishment
of your desires: commending me heartily to your good remembrance.

From Madrill, this 19. of April. 1582. Your good brother and assured friend.
Ant. cardinal of Granuelle.
The superscription was.
To my Lord the pouost of Air. Sir Maximilian Morillon, great Arch deacon of
Malines, my good brother and friend.



SIr provost, To the same man. April. 25. with his own hand.
I have no letter of your unanswered. As they write out of France the prince of
Orange is yet a foot, notwithstanding his hurt received by a young Biskain,
who lost his life in this world in the enterprise. God peradventure keeps
him for an other purpose. Alancon triumphs, but it will be without an Iron
corselet. Non durabit as I hope: the month of May is not yet past. I do to my
power solicit the sending of soldiers into the Low Countries, and especial
go^d provision of silver. I assure you there is no want in thee, as not
respecting how small thank I have of those of Hazienda: so that may be done
which belongs to the service of God, and the master, and the benefit of ye
poor countries. There is on al sides great preparation, as well by sea as by
land, against those that would hurt us, and I hope that the French can not
procure ye ariuall of ye turkish army this year, how arnestly so ever they
labor, as well by ye ordinary ambassador that is at Constantinople as by an
express messenger, whom the Queen mother has sent by Marseyles: bcause that
by letters, even lately received out of the east, we are assured that the
Persians have of late given the Turks a shrewde blow, which much troubles
the Constantinopolitaynes: besides that the Turk labors all he may about
sending away 4000. Ianissaries, and 3000 Spachies: and has commanded two
Sangiaques to be in redines, and hasted the feast of the circumcision of the
son, to the end, the better to entend to the said resistaunce, for that all
hope of agreement is past, also in the Arsenall they work more slowly about
the furniture of the navy. I hope my Lord the Prince, has already delivered
you the nomination of Turney, and the deane of Saint Gaul that of Malines, and
I have written to Rome, by the former ordinary there to prevent, and there
with my Auditor M. Leander Lana, and Blioul, he shall find all good address.
I have also sent my procuration to resign, and by this ordinary do hope to
send the copy. We have had a shrewde turn about the Pensions levied upon
Turney, but we must for the time have patience, and look for remedy
hereafter. I lodged here my Lord of S. Vastz, making him the best cheer I
could, he is going toward Portingall, whether I have written (as I am
bound) in his behalf, as also in the behalf of Secretary Vasseur, his
father the Lord of Valhuon, and the little enfant: At the least I omit
nothing for my part that I am able to do. My niece the La. of Ashey writes
unto me, that Vateuille has exhibited a petition to those of the Chamber of
accounts of Dole, and sent another to the Exchequer in the low Countries,
pretending a title to Verseiles, as the recompense of the late Lord of Peleux
the father (being one of the Emperors chamber) for all his service together with
the loss of his goods in France for the Imperial majesty's sake, as also for
having his two sons slain, together with the death of my said Nieces
second father, who perished in ye battle of Graueling, besides such
consideration as is to be had of the service of ye late L. of Ashey my nephew,
together with his expe^ces in his masters affairs This request has she sent
unto you with the perticulers thereto adjoined: heretofore you prevented my L.
the prince, stick now therefore to it, that at this time Verseil may be hers,
notwithstanding, presently you can not obtain the rest of that whereto her
demand prete^deth. Desiring you to help her in what you well may.

I have heretofore given you to understand, yt the king has given Don Francis
ye entry of Aspargosse de Lara which now is worth 3500. crowns, and will
hereafter be better. He has had word thereof sent into Burgondy, but I know
not whether they found him there. For some do write that he had altered his
mind for coming hither, and that he was determined to go to Fraunkfort to buy
Horses, and so to serve in the wars in those parts, but I wotte not whether
this may cause him to take some other advice. I had here this Easter his
brother and his people with me: I like him well, and he profits in study, I
have conceived a good hope of him, and he likes his master, and his master
him. A Burgognion gentleman, named Monsieur of Thon goes that way, and shall
take acquaintance of you: his purpose as I hear is to take charge of my said
nephew in stead of the L. of Vauldrey. If you please I pray you write unto me
your opinion, whether you think it convenient. The King is gone to meet with
his sister the Empress at Almerin, and from thence are to go to Lisbon, we
shall see what will come of this enteruiewe.

Thus heartily commending me to your good grace, I beseech the creator to
grant you the accomplishment of your desires.

From Madrill this 25. of April. 1582. Your good brother and assured friend,
Ant. Cardinal of Granuelle.
The superscription was.
To my L. the provost Morillon, great Archdeacon of Malines, my fellow brother
and friend.



SIr counselor, To the cou^sellor of Assonuill. The 25. of April. 1582.
I have received your letter of the 25. of February, and have very willingly
given audience unto my Lord, the prelate of S. Vastz. Having often conferred
together, he is departed in post toward the king into Portingall.

His Majesty likes very well of the resolution of the reconciled estates,
and in mine opinion they have laid a good foundation of change, in saying that
their earnest request to be rid of strangers was only upon such hope as the
others ministered of framing the^ selves to obedience, if they were gone, seeing
that the resolution taken, and the sworn treaty, was the only ground of
discharging them, as also that ye others had showed great hope of accommodating
them selves to them, and returning to obedience after the said strangers
departure, which nevertheless they have not done, but do still persist in their
obstinacy.

The Prince of Orenges death will alter many of their minds: And the duke of
Alenson having none of his own people about him, may perhaps repence that he
ever came so far. The right way were, if the inhabitants of Antwerpe for making
their own peace (considering that my Lord the Prince does yet offer them all
favor, if they would but return and acknowledge them selves) would deteyne
him prisoner, and deliver him into his Majesty's hands, to the end he might
reward him as he deserves. I solicit so much as possibly I may the speedy
sending of men and money, which I hope will be done: the men do already
march, and dealing for money goes forward: I hope God will assist us
notwithstanding, whatsoever hindra^ces they procure us. He is above all, and
the redier he will be to help us, if we help our selves, as surely for the
final wading through so many miseries, we must. Concerning your particular
parson, Secretary Lalloo may very well testify, that I have done so much as
you can require. Also by Spanishe letters which I have written to his Majesty
with my own hand. God grant you may as I desire reap some fruit. And this
I assure you: My Lord the Prince has as earnestly commended you as is
possible.

Thus heartily commending me to your good remembrance, I beseech the creator
(sir Counsaylor) to grant you your desires.

From Madrill this 15. of April. 1582. Your good Gossip and friend Ant.
Cardinal of Granuelle.
The superscription was.
To my L. of Assonuille counselor, and one of his Majesty's privy counsel
in the Low countries.



MAdam, To the Duchess of Parma the 27. of April. 1582. with his own hand.
I have answered al your highness letters that came to my hand, and do very
desirously attend news from thence of your highness perfect recovery, to
the end, to be eased of my care in yt by the last I heard that the gout had
not yet perfectly left you. God for his mercy send me shortly good tydinges.
The letters which lately we have had out of England puts us in hope that we
be delivered of the Prince of Orange, since the 14. day after his hurt (as they
write thence) there was no more hope of his life, and the Q. of England was
duly aduertized from time to time of the state of his hurt. They say moreover,
that he has been grievously tormented as well with the pain of his wound, as
also, with the pain that he has bin put to, partly by such incitions, as the
surgions have made to come to the bottom of the hurt, and partly by cauteries
of towe for stopping of the blood: which yet they could not atteyne. It is
pity he died not long since, together with a great number of his faction,
namely. S. Aldegonde. His death will bread great alterations as is most like,
and we look for news of what have since happened, and what course matters have
taken. We hear that the duke of Anieow has sent the P. Daulphin to the king
of France for succor, we shall see what will come of it. I wot not what breach
of war we look for, ^th the D. of Anicow does al by ye knowledge, consent and
assistance of his said brother, as also he helps the Queen his mother, who
openly joins with Don Antonie to make war against us. It is evident they
would do more if they could. But we can have no help of our power, neither
know it, or consider in what state those be that do on all sides disquiet
us, yea so far as by procuring the discente of the Turks army, who I
suppose verily would come, in case the Persian war, which yet continues,
did not let him, as having lately on that side had an overthrow of his people,
whereupon, according to the last news, Constantinople was much troubled, and
the said Turk has sent into his frontiers new relief of two Sangiaques,
with 4000. Ianissaries, and 3000 Spachies, notwithstanding they give out that
they do attend an ambassador out of Persia, who should bring the conditions
of peace, which I hope is but a voice to deceive them, and that he has to do
with a people that do fight in running away.

My Lord of S. Vastz went this way, and by post continues his journey toward
the king, who is now at Almerin whether he went to meet the Empress, and my
Lord the Archduke Cardinal is gone to receive her upon the confines of the
kingdom. The said Abbot of S. Vastz seems a wary man, and such a one as
can yield good account of the state of the Low Countries. I entertained him
very well, and have commended him in the court, to the end they may so use
him, that he may return well satisfied. I am well assured that for his part
he will solicit the sending of soldiers and money for the pay: whereabout I
have labored these two months, calling upon it so much as I might. And
already we have word from Sicill and Naples, that the power that should come
thence, will march very shortly, so to join with Don Ferdinand of Tolete, who
is yet in the Neapolitayn galleys at Calibry, while Don Ihon of Cardoa,
attends convenient time to pass the gulf: and in troth, he is very slack.
So as the County Oliuares, who is in the same galleys, is not yet gotten to
Rome, to the great prejudice of the affairs: notwithstanding his Holiness
has already granted the subsidy, which he has stayed these three years full
under color of the abstinence of war, which John of Marliano had concluded
with the Turk. I do within these two days look for the Prince John Andrew
Dorye, who returns toward Italy with his Galleyes, and the Duke of Ossuna
goes with him, who, as your highness may have heard, goes as Viceroy to
Naples. His Majesty and all his blood thanked be God, are in good health, and
we wait what resolution they will take after their Majesty's have been
together, who are to return from Almarin to Lisbon, where (if I be not
deceived) the King has yet enough to do: for concerning justice, government,
treasury, and such like concerning surety, I see nothing yet done to my
lyking: besides that, I wot not how his Majesty can without danger leave the
Realm of Portingale. Our Navy is providing, but slowly according to custom,
so as if want of money had not hindered Don Anthony and the Q. Mother of France,
they had by this prevented us. The fear of the Turks army has caused the
levy of 6000. Almaines in Tirol, who are to take shipping at Spetie: but if
the Turks army comes not, yet shall we not want place where to use them, if
I may be believed. It is doubted whether the enterprise of Tercera shall be
executed this year, or whether they take any other order. God put into his
Majesty's heart, that that may be for the best. It is still said, that the
Imperial diet shall be holde^ at Auspburg, but I cannot think it, it began upon
Sunday last, notwithstanding the purport of ye letters of convocation. I
suppose my L. the prince has sent out of the low Countries some one to
supply the place for the circuit of Burgondie: at the least, I gave knowledge
of it at the Court a good while since, to the end thereupon to write to him
what was best, together with my opinion.

Your highness may have heard how it has pleased his Majesty to nominate to
the Bishoppricke of Turney Morillon, Provost of Air. Also that I have granted
to discharge my self of the Archbishopricke of Malines, as that I can not be
there resident, nominating thereto M. John of Auchin, deane of S. Gaul my
official, who under the said provost of Morillon has governed the said
Archbishopricke many years. The favor which it pleased your highness to extend
toward the said Morillon in testifiyng so well of him to his Majesty, for ye
which I most humbly and heartily thank you, together with the commendation of
my said Lord Prince have bin a good help to him herein, and certaynely I
hope that of ye choice which his Majesty have made of these two persons, he
shall be well served, and that when your highness shall know the said deane,
your self will be of the same opinion. It is above fifteen years since I
first sued to his Majesty to discharge me of the said Church of Mallines,
which as your highness knows I accepted full evil against my will. For I
sufficiently did foresee what would ensue, as that by my absence his Majesty
could not reap the fruits whereto he pretended by uniting the Abbaies unto
the Byshoprickes, which he did, to the end, the Bishops might have some
oversight in dealing with the states of Brabant, for withstanding the prince of
Orange, and other of his faction, that troubled the affairs: and the better to
train the Abbots, who being abused by the said Prince of Orange, have given
him opportunity to hurt both them selves and the rest. As for John of
Sermillan, in whose behalf your highness have written, concerning the Abey of
Dane in your letter, dated the 17. of February, I have already written to
Provost Foncq, who has returned me an answer that it is already bestowed, I
wot not on whom, without making his Majesty privy thereto, which he
imputes to the Counsaylor of Assonuille, so that if it be bestowed, there is no
more to say. I see no other matter at this time worth the troubling of your
highness, then you understand by my former.

Finally, most humbly and heartilye commending me to your highness good grace,
I beseech the creator, to send you a good, and long life.

From Madrill, this 27. of April. 1582. Your highness most humble and
bounden servant. Ant. Cardinal of Granuelle.
The superscription was.
To my Lady, to her highness own hands.



Most noble and most excellent Lord, right honorable.
To ye prince of Parma.
I Have answered all your excellencies letters, and since the blow given to
the Prince of Orange here have commen none of your news. By England we have
perticularly heard the whole success of his hurt, in that this Queens
agences remaining in Antwerpe, have bin diligent in giving daily notice of all
that have been incident to his hurt: and (as we have there learned) he lived
for the space of 14. days after the blow in vehement torments, by reason as
well of the grief of his wound, as also by the Anatomy which the Surgeons
made by incisions, as if it had been in dead flesh, for the searching thereof,
and seeking to help it: also by molesting him with fierye Cauteries,
endeavoring to stop the vain, which they could not bring to pass: farther,
that the 14. day he was in such case, as even his own familiars were past hope
of life. There is no speech in what state the affairs of Antwerpe remained all
the while, saving that Alencon often visited him, and that he made a short will.
It can not possibly be, but that this hap will breed great alterations. God
grant it be to our benefit.

His Majesty trusts, that your excellency will without fail help by all
means possible to procure some good effect, by using such means (as you were
determined) with the inhabitants of Antwerpe and other towns, offering unto
them (notwithstanding whatsoever their former committed offenses) all pardon
and courtesy, in case they will reclayme themselves: as also that you will not
omit what so ever occasion, to be dooyng somewhat with such small force as
you have, if opportunity may serve. All sending of speedy succor is daily
called upon, and already out of Naples, Sicilie, and Millan. We hear that men
be providing, farther, that the Horsemen that were at Naples should presently
march to Millan. The regiment of don Ferdinando of Tolete (which as I write
unto you shall not go with the other troop, but rather Peter of Paz) was yet
at Colibre the 20. of this month, through the unreasonable flacknesse of Don
John of Cardoua, who seeks to sail so sure. The provision of 40000. crowns
appointed for victualing in Sauoy, are already in the hands of Sanctius of
Padilia. Also for fear of the turkish army, there are 6000. Almaines levied,
and shall take shipping at Spetie: which (this fear past) may serve some other
where, to which end, there are 76000. crowns already sent. I do by all
means possible, call upon the provision of coin, as I have already written,
which as I hope will be with profit.

Don Antony, being openly assisted by the Q. mother, threatens to depart
toward the coast of Portingall, and thence to the I Will of Terecra, and the
Indies, in the beginning of May. Our army is providing more slowly then I
could wish. I have already twice written to his Majesty.

And I assure my self, your excellency shall shortly have answer. All this
written in Cyphres. Cyphres.
I would it were already done, and might no longer hang in suspense, and
have besought his Majesty.

The ambassador John Babtista, affirms that Orendge remained the 14. day
past hope of life. Others that come by sea, think him already dead. The ^aide
John Babtista, says moreover, that ^he prince Daulphine was gone to the French
Court, there to solicit the bro^her to send aid: yea and that with hi^
^peeches I wot not wherefore: for I am ^f that opinion, that Alenson does
no^^ing but what the mother and brother ^ill. I beseech your excellency, for
a^^yding the spoil of the Country of Burgondy, to cause the Infanterie and
Horsemen that are levied in these Countries, to march with all speed that may
be toward Flanders, otherwise they will spoil all. Besides, if the French
should come, they will serve as soldiers use to do in their own houses, and
therefore I am still of that mind, that for the safety of that country,
2000. Switzers were very requisite, who being retained, until the power that
is to pass ou^ of Italy be come, might then be friendly dismissed with full
payment, to the end, still to have them ready as need might require. And
therefore considering the harm that those of the country do commit, this way
would be the cheaper.

The Prince John Andrew Dory is not yet arrived here, but I look for him
within three or four days at the farthest.

The Duke of Ossuna, is yet a^ Pegnafiel: It is enough that we may say that he
is onwarde of his way: for certaynely he will make hasts: for i^ he tarry
long, I am persuaded tha^ the Prince Dorie will not stay for him, whereby he
may remain in Barcelone longer then willinglye he would.

His Majesty is at Almerine, where the most Noble Empress is to arrive the
first day of May, or peradventure sooner.

We shall see what great matters will ensue after this enteruiewe of the
brother and sister. Farther, if I be not deceived, there is yet enough to do
in Portingalle before his Majesty can depart, in case he will leave all
things in safety: for that in trothe, there is much less done then I could
well wish, as well concerning Justice, and P^llicie, as any other taking of
order in the affairs.

His holiness has granted the subsidy toward the mainteynaunce of the
Galleys. Also there is news freshely come from Constantinople, importing that
the Turk has lately received some new soil about the borders of Persia,
whereupon Constantinople was in some care or heaviness.

They hasten the feast of the circumcision of the son, to the end, to gather
some coin which wanted. And the Turk has sent a supply of 4000. Ianissares,
and 3000. Spachles: besides that he has made two of his Sangiaques to march
with their power. For that many feared least the speech raised, that the
Persian sought for peace or truce, is but dissimulacion. So as we hope, that
notwithstanding the French soliclting, the Turkish army yet it will not come
otherwise that it well be very small: but thereof we have as yet no certainty.

Your excellency may have heard of the peace concluded between the Polaque
and the Muscouite for 10. years. Also from Armue, we have by land heard good
news, that the Portingales have there overthrown many people of those
quarters which purposed to have hurt them, and that they remained in his
Majesty's obedience.

The Abbot of S. Vastz has been here: I have procured him good
entertainment: he proceeds on his journey in post, and seems to be a
meet and serviceable person. I have provided him of what so ever I have
thought might turn to his good entertaynement and cherishing, and have not
omitted to break my mind to him concerning my opinion in matters, to the end
he might the better deal. I think certainly, that besides the letters which
your excellency have received of Don Guillen of Saint Clement, you have also
had letters out of Portingall, touching ye affairs of the Imperial diet,
wherein I refer my self, as having before written my opinion at large.

God keep and preserve your excellency, granting you good success in all
your endeavors and enterprises.

From Madrill this 26. of Apryll. 1582. Underneath was written. Of your
excellency. The most affectionate servant. Ant. Cardinal of Granuelle.
The superscription was.
To the most noble and excellent Lord my right honorable L. the Prince of
Parma, governor and captain general for his Majesty in the low Countries,
of Flanders and Burgundy.



To the Marquise of Roubaisthe 16. of April. 1582.
MY L. the Prelate of S. Vastz, who arrived here this day, delivered me your
letter of the 19. of February. I have already by sundry my L. the P. writings
to his Majesty, heard of the holy resolution taken by ye estates. Also that at
your soliciting and by ye which so fitly you propounded, together with your
endeavors so well acco^modated, what you by my L. and my L. president, with others
of your setting on work, have bin done. The inahbitants of Artoise have trod
the path to the rest, whereof may redounde great benefit to all the country,
for ye relleuing the^ at length out of so many miseries. and you shall before
these letters come to your hands, have notice of his majesty's liking of ye
said resolution, together with those yt have traueyled therein: assuring you yt I
have not, nor do not omit any means in hastening your succor and furniture
of coin. And besides the 400000 crowns mentioned in your letter, there is
means made for 300000 more. I have done my endeavor to procure the setting
down of an assured monthly sum, which should not be slacked: but there
is more to do in finding the means, then in wishing the doing of it. It is
still in hand, but I dare not put you in any assured hope before I see the
devise in a better forwardness: at the least, I assure you, there is no want
in me, and well I may say, that I do all that I may.

As for such soldiers as appear at the moustre, and ordinarily in following
their ba^ners, or when they come to ha^dy blows, are absent* that is an
ordinary disease, especially among such soldiers, as are in their own
countries. I dare say the faule is not in you, and what soever comes to your
notice, you would willingly redress: for besides the respect yt ought to be
had to the masters service, by such means you venture your own parson,
together with other captains in great danger. For weening to have your number
of enrouled soldiers, for want thereof you are the weaker before your enemy,
which may procure such danger as you may easily comprehend.

I never saw the said Provost of S. Vastz before: but having conferred with
him, besides the testimony with his works already do give, he seems in my
opinion, a very serviceable person. He shall proceed on his journey to his
Majesty, where he shall find part of that he has in charge in a good
forwardness, by means of such diligence as have been used. I am to thank you
for such courteous offers, as it pleases you by your letter to make unto me:
and for my part, for requital thereof, you shall always find me ready, and
willing to do for you (as occasion shall serve) whatsoever I may.

Finally, most heartily commending me to your good grace, I beseech the
Creator, my L. to grant you the accomplishment of your desires.

From Madrill this 16. of April. 1582. Wholly ready to do you service. Ant.
cardinal of Granuelle.
The superscription was.
To my L. my L. Marquise of Roubais, Governor of Artoys and Hesdin.



MY Lord the Prelate of Saint Vastz has delivered your letter of the last
save one of February. To the L. of Montigny.
In troth such are your deserts, in that you have so nobly employed your self
in his Majesty's service, that your self need not to speak thereof, as being
a thing manifest, whereof his Majesty is sufficiently enfourmed, assuring you
that notwithstanding it was needless: yet I failed not to put him in mind
upon every occasion. And I perceive he likes you well, and esteems of your
valiancie, and of that you have upon every opportunity that have been
offered, so nobly and so often employed your own person with such manhood and
honor: whereby I hope that his said Majesty will omit no occasion, to let
you understand what accoumpt he makes of you: also what courtesy you are to
hope for of his greatness and liberalty. As for the charges of Flanders, I
perceive not that his Majesty does yet go about to take any resolution:
besides you know (sir) in what state Flanders matters do yet stand, howebeit
I hope that if you have not yet heard of it, you shall shortly by my Lord the
prince understand, that he is careful in employing you honorably. And I can
assure you, that the good will which I have perceived in his Majesty toward
you is such, that in my opinion, you can not wish it better. I am here as you
know far from him, at the least twelve days iourneys off, and therefore can
do nothing but by letters, which can not always watch their times so as those
that are present had need to renew the contents of the letters, and I hope
that my Lord president Foncq, who now is there, through whose hands also the
affairs of the low Countries do pass, and who in my opinion likes you well,
will not fail to do whatsoever to your behoof he may possible, as also I
assure you, that for my part what so ever in me lies, you shall be remembered
with all good and assured affection. Whereupon for an end hereof. I commend
me to your good grace, beseeching the Creator, to grant you the
accomplishment of your desires.

From Madrill this 16. of April. 1582. Your perfect friend to do you service.
Ant. Cardinal of Granuelle.
The superscription was.
To my Lord the Lord of Montignye.



SIr,
To the L. of Capres.
the Lord of S. Vastz arriuinge here in good health this present day, gave me
cause of great contentation, in that by him I understood perticularlye, besides
what before I knew, the endeavors which your self together with other Lords
have used for the common wealth of the country, upholding the religion, and
his Majesty's service, wherein in troth, your desert is great: and I do
especially wish that his Majesty may effectually (as occasion may serve)
declare how well he likes thereof. For my part, I will not fail, but
willingly testify unto his Majesty, and so far rehearse the same always as
time may serve, to the end my endeavors may one day yield such fruits as may
turn to your full contentation, wherein you shall always find me ready, as
also in whatso ever else I may, to do you pleasure and service.

Finally, most heartily commending my self unto your good grace, I beseech the
creator, grant to you the acco^plishment of your desires.

From Madrill this 16. of April, 1582. Your good friend to use. Ant.
Cardinal of Granuelle.
The superscription was.
To my L. my Lord the Earl of Henninlietart, L. of Capres.



MY Lord of Gongnies,
To the L. of Gongnies.
the Prelate of Saint Vastz has delivered me your letter, dated the 22. of
February.

The goodwill and love which heretofore I have offered unto you, is not only
not diminished: but rather daily encr^^seth, understanding the duty, with in what
you may, you do use toward ye upholding of religion, and his Majesty's service:
as also by reason of such good will, as you have borne toward me, and do now
again offer. Neither have I omitted often to testify your deserts, and still
will be ready upon all occasions to renew the same, and will send unto my
Lord the provost Foncq your request, to the end he may make report thereof to
his Majesty, into whose hands, the same which you procured to be exhibited,
whereof this yt now you send me, is the copy, may by this time be
delivered: desiring him to put his Majesty in mind of my former suite which
willingly I will renew, earnestly wishing him to take such order therein, as
may be to your full contentation.

Thus most heartily commending my self to your good remembrance, I beseech the
Creator, to grant you your desires.

From Madrill this 16. of April, 1582. Your good friend, Ant. Cardinal of
Granuelle.
The superscription was.
To my L. the L. of Gongnies.



MY L. tresorer general,
To Tresorer Stercke.
ye prelate of S. Vastz, ariuing here this day, have among others delivered me
your letters, bearing date the 15. of February: by the contents whereof I
gladly understood that his Majesty's grant, signed with his own hand for
confirming you in your estate, was made to your liking. The testimony of your
loyal service is due unto your works, in that continually you have so well
employed your self: and I am very glad that your age and disposition can bear
it, so well to tend daily to the masters affairs, which (considering in what
state they now remain) do need some great assistance. I heartily thank you
for your offer, which at the request of my L. the provost of Air you made to
assist my pretense, for the payment of my wages and pentions, that have so many
years bin due: and I perceive you know that I have great reason, and that I
have borne my self modestly in using no importunacie: notwithstanding, I have
so long stayed. But the losses which on all sides I have sustained, together
with my expenses in my iourneys for our masters service, as also my serving
purely, and with out interest, do now force me to be earnest. By the said
provost of Airs letters I understand, that by your good furtheraunce the
matter draws to some end, that at the least I may be relieved with some
good portion, either in Burgondy or else where, for the wc I heartily thank
you: as also of the assurance that you make me of your good will, together
with my Lords your fellow brethren in my behalf, whereby I am greatly bound to
employ my self for the whole company, especially for you in whatsoever
occasion may grant me opportunity.

The resolution of the estates has bin great, and of great importance: as
that whereof the whole country I hope shall reap commodity, his Majesty being
resolved to accept of this good will, and to send aid for the assurance of
the said Countries against the French, so to procure the rest and quiet which
after so many mischiefs were thereto, more then necessary.

Thus most heartily commending my self to your good remembrance, I beseech
the Creator, my L. Tresorer to grant you your desires.

From Madrill this 16. of Apryll. 1582. Your assured and old friend. Ant.
Cardinal of Granuelle.
The superscription was.
To my L. Stercke, high Tresorer of his Majesty's recepts in the Low countries.



MY Lord,
To the L. of Billy.
I have received your letters of the last of February, which my L. of S.
Vastz delivered me at his coming hither, from whence he is now departed
upon his journey. I was glad to see him, and we have often conferred together.
The resolution that he brings from the estates, deserves that he be very
welcome, especially, for that he has so honorably behaved himself therein,
as also in reconciling the estates of the Wallon Provinces. In truth he is a
meet man, and I am glad that I have found him affectionate toward you. Of
your good will toward me, I assure my self by reason of such offers as both
by mouth and letters you have often made me. And your self may be sure to
find me always correspondent in like desire, to employ my self in what
soever concerns you, which certaynely, both willingly and favorably I do
perform in what I may.

Wherefore heartily commending me to your good grace, I beseech the Creator to
grant you your desires.

From Madrill this 15. of April. 1582. Your perfect good friend. Ant.
Cardinal of Granuelle.
The superscription was.
To my L. the L. of Billy. etc.



Letters of A. Dennetiers.
MY Lord,
To the L. of Rassenghie^.
I lately received the letters which it pleased your Lordeship to write unto
me by the L. of Saint Vastz, who was most honorably received and feasted by
the most noble, my L. of Granuelle, and as I understand, shall so be also by my
L. Foncq at Lisborne, where he is already arrived, and was like speedily to be
dispatched, having such an host, had not his dispatch by reason of the
enteruiewe between the K. and the Empress, (who was gone to see her at
Almerin whether she came to meet him) bin stayed. I have and still will
willingly do my L. of Vendegies all pleasure I may, for besides his deserts,
and virtuous qualities, there is in us a certain kind of conformity, which
makes me to love, reverence, and honor him, rejoicing and congratulating with
your Lordeship, for such a Lord and friend, and such a nephew, of who^ I hope
of much in time to come, concerning the administration of ye common wealth and
benefit of our country. I would to God we had many such.

We can come to no end with the widow, who is a foolish woman, and has evil
counseile, I hope nevertheless that time and friends may mollify her, and
teach her to know her wrong. In the mean time my Lord of Secry waxes so
lively and practice in the language and knowledge of spanish affairs, that his
emprisonment will not only be not unprofitable to him, but also most
profitable. As likewise to the aforesaid L. of Vendegies, who has daily
dealings with proctors and atturneys, learning the phrase and manner to
proceed. Of this mishappe will redounde this benefit, that they shall have
learned the speech and customs of the kingdom.

It is supposed, that his Majesty's soiourning at Lisbone is very fit for ye
reducing of the Hollenders and Zeala^ders, who have learned and understood what
ye K. our M. is. Also that herewithal the P. of Ore^ges death, with is thought
certain, may breed great alteration: God grant we may well use this
opportunity. I suppose that will be when the French is better known: also that
until then we shall have enough to do and more then ever. For a good and firm
peace, a strong war is necessary. The uniform resolution of ye Wallon
provinces was hard very acceptablie, god grant it may be well used, otherwise
I am in ye same fear with your Lordship. Whereupon I dare say his Majesty
will use both wisdom and discretion.

Your L. does greatly bind me in showing so great favor toward me, my
kinsmen and friends. I hope God will give me grace to deserve it toward your
Lordshippe and yours, according to my small ability, in whatsoever I may
understand requisite to your honor, wealth, and service. A suppose that some of
my years pentions, in title of a Lord of the privy counsel, are yet
behind. I am to crave your Lordships favor in the payment thereof, toward
the relief of my mother, and other our wantes which are great, by reason of
the great losses which in our goods we have sustained during these wars. If
your Lordeship would do me this favor, to wish me some means how to be
recompensed, I think his Majesty would have some regard of my services and
losses. The Admiralles son of Castile, was lately by Alcaldes and Aguacilles
led prisoner to the Castle of Alameda, as guilty of the death of a
gentleman, named Guttieres, who was slain by three or four unknown
Rebocados, of whom there have been some Gentlemen and others found in
Arragon, and brought hither, who being here racked, the said Admiral and other
great persons have found them selves grieved, alleging that it is against
their privileges, and as I understand, there have bin a plaintiue request
exhibited to his Majesty: whereupon is great discoursing. I am glad to hear
of the recovery of Lens out of ye Frenches hands: for if his leisure had
served, that he might have fortified it, it might have done much mischief all
over the flat Countreye, and bred great harm before it had been recovered.

Thus my L. most humbly commending me to your L. good grace, I beseech the
Creator to grant you the accomplishment of your most noble and virtuous desires.

From Madrill this 19. of Apryll. 1582. Of your said Lordship, the most humble
and affectionate servant. A. Dennetieres.
The superscription was.
To my L. my L. the Baron of Rassenghien, of the counsel of Estate, and chief
of the Catholic K. of Spaines recepts in his low Countries.



Letters of the Abbot of Saint Vastz.
MY Lord,
To counselor Richardot.
I suppose you have received the letters I writ unto you by the way: Now
that I am at my Lo. the Cardinals, who has lodged me at his house, and does
me all honor possible, granting me private audience so often as I desire it, I
have not forgotten to report your virtues and deserts. Wherein I assure you, he
has taken such a liking, that shortly you shall see the effects, and that cum
faenore that shall be restored you, which by others envy has bin taken away.

The rest is not to be referred to paper: only I pray you think that your
affairs are at a good stay, whereunto I will be still assistant, and will not
cease nisire plane confecta. We depart to morrow toward Lisbone, from whence
you shall hear of our news. My Lo. of Morillon is nominated to the
Bishopric of Turney, and the Deane of S. Gudule to the Archbishopricke of
Malines, as one in whose behalf my L. has resigned. One of Morbecques
children is here in prison, for killling his host peeuishly. The L. of
Gomicourt returns with one habit, athousand crowns and counsel for ye war.

No more, but I pray you have a care of our houshoulde affairs, and so
beseeching God to continue you his favor. I do with al my heart commend me to
yours.

From Madrill this 26. of Apryll. 1582. Your perpetual obedient friend. John
Abbot of Saint Vastz.
The superscription was.
To my L. my L. of Richardot, president of Artoys, and of his Majesty's privy
counsel. Arras



Letters of Peter Aldobrandine.
My most noble Lady,
To the Duchess of Parma.
THe 2. of this present, I wrote to your highness of my occurrences, and I
received yours of the 22. of February, four days since, which as your self
may imagine, bred my great contentation, as thereby understanding how after
your great trouble with goutes and fevers, you now find your self so eased,
as we shortly hope that the Lord God has restored you to your former health,
which I have, and daily do beseech his divine Majesty to grant you. I do
likewise understand of your highness determination, wholly to obey his
Majesty, concerning your aboode for a time in these quarters: which
undoubtedly both is and will be greatly to his Majesty's liking: as
presupposing that your highness person and shadow in these Countries, may yet
bring forth and work very great and good effects, for that he would that
on the one side my Lord the prince should forceably compel such as remain
obstinate: and on the other side, yt your highness should stand with your
arms open and as it were an vmpire, to end all controversies toward such as
would have recourse to the gate of mercy: as also to those that cannot be
persuaded and believe that the way of great and mighty force, is the same
wherewith these countries should be reduced to due obedience. Yesterday I had
great talk with the Lord Don John Idiaqz, and thanked him for such pains, as
I know he had taken, to the end, your highness might at his Majesty's
hand, obtain such satisfaction, as the zeal wherewith you have, and still
do serve him does deserve, and besought him to persist, especially to procure
ye reuoking of your highness, out of this exile with his favor and good
liking. Whereupon I digressed in opening sundry purposes concerning your
highness intent. Hereunto he made me answer, that his Majesty was
sufficiently persuaded, how greatly he was bound unto you. Also that he never
douted of your readiness to fulfill willingly whatsoever his Majesty's
pleasure, who also will not omit all due considerations of your highness
service and quality. Farther, that it is necessary you should attend the
success of this spring, that afterward he may the better resolve himself: he
promised me also yt he would not omit any convenient time or place, so
earnestly to deal with his Majesty, as your highness may trust unto him. For my
part I will slack no time or opportunity, to the end, to keep the said L.
well disposed and affected: who besides his great good will to your highness, is
also in great credit and authority with his Majesty, and is glad to see me,
and does by all means favor me: neither would he suffer me as yet to move
his Majesty, as I have been about to do: but willed me to conform my self
to that your highness writ unto him, for that he says his Majesty could not
yet peruse your letters, so that it were good he should first see them, and
then when time served to speak, he would give me warning. So as I will wholly
fulfill what so ever the said L. shall command me, who also has promised to
procure often letters to your highness. To be brief, to grant you such amends
as your devotion to his Majesty's service does deserve.

I have assisted Nicelly in whatsoever I thought convenient for the service of
the house: and if he had not bin here, he might have bin in the briars, and
therefore may certify you in what credit eue^ your highness shadow is here. But
perticularly concerning the Castle, I have not spoken one word, but am ready
to perform whatsoever you shall appoint and command me.

The knight Blondo writes to me that concerning the kings reuenew, he
endeuoreth not yet to use any farther diligence until the L. Duke, names the
persons yt shall bye the lands, and then all necessary conueiances shall be
dispatched, when we also must take heed ye you be assured concerning the title
to Nouara. Because that at Madrill, there have bin particular dealing touching
the enhauncing and augmentation of your highness privileges, and that there it
is to be dispatched: Samaniego has particular care of ye business, and I have
here procured a consultation to be sent to Madrill, which is in the hands of
his Majesty, Bourbon, and La Posta, and as Matthewe Vasques promises me
shall be sent to morrow: and withal, this business may be finished and ended,
which is not of such importance as to put it in account of reward, howebeit,
I will be still so advised, that if I hear anything, I may know how to
answer.

Earl Claudes sons have presented a remembrance to the counsel of Italy,
demanding the same that their father required, touching the goods confiscate
by the death of Captain Camillus, and I suppose they shall have the same
answer their father had, namely, to go to the Duke. And as occasion fall out,
I will not omit any endeavors. Cardinal Farncsius corriuales do all they
may: and I think his Majesty, Granuel, and Don John Idiaqz sufficiently
answered, who toulde me that they go about to remedy it. Farther, yesterday
the said Don John willed me to be of good cheer: for his Majesty had his
noble Lordshippe in such reputation, as the service which this hole family
had, and still does unto his Majesty did deserve, but all valiant parsons
have Corriuales. So long as I remain here, I will never desist as well in
this, as in all other matters, but conform my self wholly to your highness
will, neither will I omit any diligence or endeavor, to the end you may have
such satisfaction, as by reason you are to hope for of the goodness of this
great king, who God be praised is in better health then ever he was: and in his
determinations, uses such secrecy and advice, as no man can well enter to
know any thing, before it please him to publishe it.

The common opinion is, that in any wise he will in September return to
Madrill, as being both in Castile and Arragon greatly desired. And yesterday
the said Lord Don John toulde me, that the most noble Empress did very
well like the Monastery des Dechauses at Madrill, and that her Majesty does
yet mind to come thither, howebeit, that such is the love and respect she
bears to her said brother, that it is thought that at his being here, she
will fulfill his Majesty's will, who wishes to leave her the government of the
kingdom, together with the same. I will advertise your highness of what so
ever shall daily happen. The French do threaten to enter this kingdom with
Don Anthony, who truly is here as it were adored of the base co^munaltie, and
it is said that in Britain, there is a great army ready. Also in as much as
they cannot beat any places but what lies between Duore and Mignio, his
Majesty sends toward the City of Porto the Prior Don Hernando with 10000.
footmen and 800. horse, with whom he shall keep that Country. In this City
there is a sufficient garrison. Also at Settubar a regiment of Almains; and ye
rest of the fortresses hereabout are sufficiently provided. His Majesty's
shoulders are charged with great expenses. Also it may be the shadow is bigger
the^ the danger, which is increased by him that endeavored to hinder the
sending of any power of importance into those parts, as being but a small
friend to our Princes glory, and an utter enemy to the providing of ye remedy
for ye affairs of those parts which have by him been lost and subverted: so
as without farther speech your highness do well understand me.

Howebeit as Don John toulde me, although his Majesty be to provide for
diverse Countries: yet is he resolved to take order for great provision of
coin for the affairs of those Countries, neither will he that the said
assignation be employed any other where. I am not sure of the just sum, but I
understand it will be at the least 2. millions of gold yearly. The most part
of the said coin the Fouquers shall provide monthly at Collen. In Italy
there is order taken for 4. or 5000. Italians, a few horsemen, and 2.
Regiments of Spaniardes, who all shall march thitherwardes. And in as much as
I perceived all this provision to proceed but slowely, and especial that of
coin, (that is the principal) by the counsel of Don John, I determined to
exhibit a brief to his Majesty, the tenor of the copy whereof is here
enclosed, the which together with other diligence used could not but bring
forth good effects.

I have sent a copy thereof to Cardinal Granuelle, who likes it very well,
and sends me word that for his part he has and still does all that he
may, in what so ever is needful to be brought to pass: and I have put him in
mind that if that which was begun to be propounded, be put in execution, all
will go well forward, and that there is no other sure way to revoke your
highness out of this exile. I will procure earnest war in those parts: for
in so doing, we shall soon see those peoples mind: likewise to what purpose
your highness stay in those countries, may serve. I have and will use for
County Mansselt upon all occasions as well with his M. as with his servants,
all means possible: and the Lord Don John shows me that his Majesty does
often write yt he shall be continewed. Also to seek some means to content and
satisfy the said Lord, as well because he deserves it, as also for easing
your highness mind: which is all that at this time I can say, most humbly
kissing your highness most noble hands. And I pray God grant you all
supreme felicity.

From Lisbone, this 8. of April. 1582. Your highness most humble servant Peter
Aldobrandine.
The superscription was.
To the most noble Lady, my Lady. etc.



Letters of Peter Isunca.
Most noble sir.
BEseeching God this present may come to your Lo. and find you in such health
as I beseech and wish you. To Jasper of Annastro.


By the last ordinary I writ to your Lordeshippe of my occurrences. In these I
will rehearse the substance thereof, so far as I can remember (for I keep
no copies of my writings) as also what else shall come in my mind. For not
being as then assured of the princes death, I now speak otherwise, then then
I did, and although at that time I was earnest with you to come speedily
hither, so to get you from among those beasts feet. Also that thereupon I writ
you a particular, which in case of necessity you should show to the prince,
yet now I say, that by a letter which my father writ me the 23. of this
month, his mind is, that your Lordeship come not presently, until that the
heat of Orenges death be cooled, for that he doubts least they have laid
your way, and so you should have greater labor and pain to pass them, then
to remain under the princes protection. Also in respect of so small
assurance, I think it meet (for preventing what may happen) that you send me
a proxy to recover of his Majesty that which he has promised you for this
service, with a several note under your hand, in what manner you will that
this quantity be employed and divided: prescribing therein how much you
allow me for my pains. For although my father assured me of more then the
third part, and that I was then content therewith: yet now I say, in
consideration of such great depts as the Marchaunts do publishe, that your
Lordship owes, I will be content with the fourth part: but if you be
otherwise minded, you know that my father is a party, which notwithstanding I
will procure him to be content with what I think good, and therefore I beseech
you set it so down in your particular note and instruction, to the end we may
conclude upon that which concerns this matter. For that is the way to deal
for satisfiyng my father, besides that, so your self may be pleased, and he
will not fail in whatsoever occurre^ce may happen about his Majesty. In the
mean time, I pray God preserve you in such health as I do desire. I likewise
put your Lordship in mind in the said instruction, to make particular mention,
that you would have before the high alter in the Church of the town or village,
of whence he was, a tomb built of stone, in such form and manner, as you or I
should appoint for ye slaier of him. It were also good in my opinion, to build a
perpetual chantry of 2. chapleyns. Also to buy for the young man's father and
mother, or his nerest kinsman 3. or 400. ducats of rent for them jointly to
enjoy: and that they and their successors might be Lords of the said
chantrie and tomb, etc.

Now I say the Chamber has procured to learn of my Father who the young man
was, and of whence, therefore if they should also require to see the
demonstration, that your Lordeship makes of your affairs, it were meet you
declared at large, and discretely whatsoever concerns the same. I said also
that (if you could) you should procure the perfect picture of the said
young man to be sent hither, which your Lordeship may easily do considering
the good nature wherewith it has pleased God to endue you: and so you should
satisfy many that are desirous to know him. My cousin Peter gave me warning
that your Lordships creditors determined to molest my Lady your mother,
purposing to take away her goods for your debt. Also yt he had written unto
her, to send some docket whereby to avoid this trouble, and so incontinently
I gave my father notice, wishing him with all speed to get forth two scedules,
which for this purpose, as also for preferring you before all the creditors of
Peter Martinez of Arbalu, he had craved of his Majesty in your name: and that
we will procure to be done, notwithstanding the king seeks to delay for a
few days the overplus of such gratification as he owes you. Whereupon, as
also concerning other articles, presently upon tydinges of Orenges death I
wrote a letter, the copy whereof I sent to your Lordshippe, and do hope that
you have received it. For default whereof I will se^d another, to ye end you may
see with what goodwil and service I have and do employ my self in your service:
not that I deal any whitt of my own interest, but only of your Lordshippe and
of your house, until I have by Gods help brought and set the^ clear. I writ
likewise in my last, that because it had been capitulated, I say, by words
concluded with the (...) that the bills of 80000. should be dispatched in my
name, it were good for the accomplishing thereof, that the said Instruction
which I require were sent me, to ye end I might word by word, accomplish it
according as your lordship should appoint.

And I said unto (...) that it was requisite to have (...) the order that
(...) had observed, This written in Ciphers.
and he (...) in the same, until we understood how they had taken (...) in
the estates (...) and other parties: and I immediately aduertized my father that
it could not be, as having showed (...) the letter which (...) writ to him
and to sundry other, the diverse copies disagreeing, together with that which
(...) writ to Peter Lopes, are dispersed in this court, but all might be
excused if there were any order taken.

Howebeit presuppose the aforesaid so to be, yet I writ to my father that
if it pleased (...) to publishe me to have been the party that had given the
(...) I would with all my heart to do him service do it: but I know not what
resolution they will take.

This I thought good to imparte unto you, that you might understand it, There
is a naughty man in this Town, who with excessive liberty in my absence,
has meddled in your Lordships affairs. Especially one day among the rest, in
the presence of Lady Frauncis of Aratia who is here, who also (as she is not
troubled with the pippe) paid him home again presently: in such wise, as
they had gone together by the ears, had not one of the Kings Secretaries
wives, in whose presence this argument begun, stepped between them. All was
about Orenges death, etc. And the same honest man toulde a very friend of
mine but yesterday, that he knew by some of credit, that (...) was in the
disgrace of (...) for certain causes which there were not to be spoken of,
of him and his affairs: which when he could not bear: he said,

By the habitte of Saint Peter and S. Paul, if I could catch him, he
should pay me.

This likewise I thought good to certify your Lo. to the end, If this be
amiss, we might deal warily with this man. But if it be otherwise, and we
may know that this wretch has invented it, as he has done other things,
also that you be sure, that neither by word nor writing you have not said any
thing against the (...) then that you consider whether it were good that you
writ one letter unto him, also that ye prince writ him another, to certify him
ye you are his faithful servant: and therein your Lo. may say, that this has
bin published and given out, by reason of some displeasure conceived against
(...) native of (...) for that is the cause why I tell you this wretches name,
and no other: for now it is no time to make enemies, especially if herein this
man has reported the truth.

Send me word whether you made any Bargain with the Mansleyer: For this
wretch here says, that he was a cutlers son of Bilbao, and that he will
cause his father to repair to the king, for the reward which his Majesty by
his last edict offered to him that should stay Orange. In case he should have
audience, they might bring our pretense in question. This is the cause why I
speak: but if your Lo. would presently let me understand, who or of whence
this young man was, we would enter acquaintance with his father and mother,
or his nighest kindred, and so compounde with them that they should not
disturb or hinder your Lo. reward. And admit they can not have it, yet will
they still trouble us. For although the king would not do as I say, yet might
he command your Lordshippe to give the youngmans father, or nearest kinsman,
part of that belongs to you. Your Lordshippe must therefore well consider
hereof: and send me word of your mind, to the end, by good counsel, we
may order this matter, which is of so great importance.

By reason of the pleasure that the reverent father Peter of Olaue has done in
helping me in so fit a time unto 200. crowns, I trust God willing, this day
seuennight to depart homeward toward my house, where your worship may write
to me and command me. Also, if your ability could bear it, to help me
as I have requested, with 500. Ducats, toward ye reparations of my house, your
worship might greatly bind me to your service: but if you do it not, I will
impute it to your want.

Thus commending my self to Sir Olaue, I will ad no more, but that I send this
by means of the Lord ambassador John Babtista Tassus, whom I beseech
carefully to send it to Sir Olaue. I also pray your worship, to let me
understand of your receipt hereof, whose noble parson and estate, our Lord God
keep and preserve as I desire.

From Madrill this last of Apryll. 1582. The superscription was.
To the noble L. Jasper of Annastro, my L. etc. at Turney.



NOble Lord,
To the general paymaster of the P. of Parma his army.
I have received your letter, dated the 18. of February. which
notwithstanding, it lay above two months by the way, yet came in so good time,
that together with ye supply of 200. crowns wc you sent me there with, I hope
godwilling wtin these 8. days to go home to my house, where God willing you
shall always find me ready at your command, as also hereafter where ever I
be, even to the death. And because you have, and still do deal so earnestly
in my affairs, notwithstanding, you have assigned these 200. crowns, together
with the other 300. upon Hierome of Salamanca, I will deliver them to
whomsoever you shall appoint as speedily and diligently as reason requires,
for I will slack no longer then until the first opportunity.

Concerning the estate of Arcauty his business. I assure you (as peradventure
you have heard) although he lay at Paris under the name of his Majesty's
factor, yet had his highness taken express order that no money should come to
his hands: but be altogether delivered to Isuard Capello, and after to Elias
and Simon Caluia, which was presently performed in such wise as Arcauty was
not bound to any account of money by him received. But he took order in his
great discompt of 36300. crowns. whereof he had given bills of exchange unto
such merchants as he had dealt with, notwithstanding, there came never a penny
into his hands, as I said, but to Capello and Caluia, with nevertheless was very
indiscretly done of his highness in respect of Arcauty: for it was a very
absurd matter, to deliver letters of exchange for that money that never came
to his hands, although it fell out well.

And if after giving up of that account, he had gone home to his own house,
as he purposed when he came hither, he had not bin at that point that now he
is at.

But he stayed in this Court almost 2. years, only to clear him self of the
theft of 28000. crowns, which he says Alphonse Curiel has committed, from
his Majesty, arising of two Commissions of 55000. crowns: for when he had
here received them out of the Cheft with three keys, he disboursed not there
above 22000. So that when the factor, who is Curiels kinsman, or at the least
his very friend, came to be chief of the Counsel of acompts in Flaunders, he
did so inform him, as well by word of mouth, as also by certain the
writings of Isuarde Capell, Arcautyes enemy, that he made him believe, that
Arcauty ought the said 28000 crowns, so that thus without farther a do, they
have brought him to that estate he is now in. But the receauer is escaped out of
their hands, as he who gat the licenciat chumacero his majesty's counsayler,
who is the visiter of the counsel of Demaynes and other the King his officers
to be the judge of his cause: but when the factor and his commissioners
perceived that all they went about, was smally to the purpose, they would not
directly charge the said Arcauty, but did, and still do greatly molest him.
Howebeit, it is said that Chumacero will soon end this matter, and that the
affection of these Judges will soon be spied. Of whom the one is Alfons
Carner, who has playde him the worst trick of frindshippe that any man
could: as if him self had lived sine crimine. In this estate do the
receivers affairs now stand.

Where you desire to know whether bringing instructions from the general
receivers, he might bouldly come to give up his accomptes: I say he may, so
that the said instructions be effectual: also that there be set down both
the recepts and disboursings of the money. By this means, together with
bringing money for your expenses, you may easily stop that gappe: for the
King allows neither wages nor any other thing unto the Lo. of Vnceta, who
stays here about giving up of Lexaldi the receivers accounts and his own,
yea it is said he will not give him so much as a loaf of bread. I am
therefore of opinion, that if you could get your account to be passed there,
you should save much, both money and labor: but if not, be of good cheer,
for by the means aforesaid you shall give the physician a fig. Father, so
soon as God will give me leave to get to Victoria, I will immediately send
you your predecessors relation, as curious and brave as you could wish, for
until then I can not for the causes that aforetime I have showed you. I am
very glad of that you write concerning Bernarde of Isunca, as also the La. Mary
his sister will be, to whom I have sent the copy of your letter: for she
loves him dearly. God give him that I wish him.

At his coming, I pray you salute him from me, and will him to do that he
toulde me. Also that Lady Mary and her son were in good health the 20. of
this present. I hear so much of the child, that notwithstanding every man
affirms it, yet I can not believe it. God preserve him to his service. Amen.
The prouider the 23. of this month, was in such health as my self stand in
need of, and labors still to resign his office unto me: but he cannot
compass it. He will godwilling, tarry still at home: some say his Majesty will
send him into the Low Countries with the soldiers that shall go thither, to
be their general commissarie: but I know he will not take it upon him,
unless he help me to the other: also that in case I have it, he will not
refuse any thing. But make not me author hereof. In the said letters of the
23. it is said, that his Majesty departed the 19. out of Lisbone, to meet
his sister the Empress. Also that he returns the tenth of May, wholly to
receive her.

Also that the great Prior is in the field, with whom there shall join 8000.
Castilian soldiers, 4000. Almaynes, and 800. Horses of the guard of Castile,
and that with that camp he shall go to visit all the houldes and countries
beetweene Oporto and Bayon in Callice.

The cause is said to be for that Don Anthony is in France, furnishing him
self to come upon us, but I can not think that. But his Majesty will stop
him, and so he may make a fair hand with these people. If he were here,
though it seem impossible, yet many would be very glad. From Guipuscoa there
came to him 18. ships gallantly furnished with above 1500. Mariners, I wot
not what to say of it: and although here were a voice of late that when the
Empress was comen into Portingale his majesty would go to Castile, ye now is
there no more speech: whereupon we may gather that until he sees the end of
this french dealing, he will not out of this realm. It is said that within
these few days the great Chapleyne of Portingall was in hand with him in the
behalf of the Realm. And hat although his Majesty did them great honor in
bringing his sister to govern them, yet should they greatly complain of his
departure, sith now he knew both the estate, quality and governors of the
kingdom. But the K. understanding whereat the Chapleyne leueled, made him this
answer. My sister knowing me to have here so great affairs, would not but
come to see me.

Thus the Chapleyn could not understand his purpose: so great is his Majesty's
discretion.

A while since, one Antony Guttierez, heir to 6000. crowns rent in this
town, was slain by night, and therefore a near kinsman of the Admiral of
Leon, was carried to prison. They fet him out of the Church, and the prouostes
of the court (coming hither) apprehended him, whether by right or wrong, and
tormented him bravely, even to the vnknitting of his joints: which the
Admiral is grieved at, and complayneth of the officers of Justice, in that the
Gentleman being his kinsman and of such calling, they had racked him, and
therefore used great words against the president of Castille: whereupon his
Majesty commanded to take him prisoner, so as he is prisoner in his own
house, and his eldest son, the Earl of Melgar is carried to prison to
Alameda, in the county of Varaias, because (as the speech goes) he is
thought author of this murder.

The Marquize of Pennafiell, heir to the Duke of Ossuna Viceroy of Naples,
coming hither a while since with a woman, who was said to be his lover, they
have taken away the woman, and committed him as prisoner to his own house.

Thus these three Lords remain in the state of mean Gentlemen. Also by reason
of some folly committed in the Monastery of the Dechausses, which is in this
town, about the holy week shall be a twelve month. The Earl of Castanneda,
Don Jews of Cordoua, who ought to be the Duke of (...) and Marquize of
Comarez: Don Anthony Manricqz son of Don John Manricqz: Don Peter Vanegas and
others, are banished the court. Don Henry Mendoza, brother to the Duke of
Infantado is likewise banished for another trifle: besides for the former
matter of the Dechausses, the prince of Ascoli was almost a whole year in
exile. Thus may you see what K. Philip can do, even in his absence. God
preserve him. I have no satisfaction in that which perticularly touches
Annastro for his assurance, only that you keep him there with you. Which God
grant it be so. Who preserve you in such state as I do desire.

From Madrill this last of Apryl. 1582. Noble Lo. B. L. M. A. V. M. Your
servant. Isunca.
The superscription was.
To the noble L. Peter of Olaue, my very good L. High tresorer of the happy
army, which the Catholic Majesty maintayneth in his estate of Flaunders. etc.

At Turnay.



Letters of Frauncis Guillam.
MOst noble L. since the copy of my former writing unto you is hereunto
adjoined, To ye prince of Parma.
I will certify you only of what have since happened me. The Abbot of Saint
Vastz arriving here the 16. of this present, did deliver me that which your
highness writ me the 27. of February. Also whiles very earnestly we
waited for news from your highness, there arrived yesterday a post here, by
whom I received the letters which it pleased you to send the 16. of this
month, whereunto I will make a short answer, because the post of Italy by
whom I always write, is this day to be dispatched. Cardinal Granuelle
entertained the said Abbot at his house: wherein I assisted him until he
departed toward his Majesty, which was the 20. of this month. I showed him
what your highness writ unto me: also how he should behave him self:
wherein I will not there fail him. I desired him to let me understand if there
were any thing wherein I might do him any pleasure. I writ also to D. John of
Idiaxz how earenestly he had trauayled to bring ye estates to this resolution
yt they have taken. Also that it were good yt his majesty let him understand
that your highness informed him of the whole, with what so ever else I thought
meet. Concerning the return of the soldiers that are departed out of these
estates, also of the Italians that are to go with them, I can say nothing:
only I was glad to understand that his Majesty has nominated such Captains
over them to guide them, as your highness does so well like of, and as is
meet for his Royal service, and I assure my self, he will so deal in your
highness behalf, by reason of the great love he bears you.

That which now me seems the best, is the furniture of coin, and surely if I
could do any more then put him in mind thereof, your highness should not
desire it more. But I have done that, and do it still, yea and daily will upon
every opportunity, considering how evident it is, that your highness can do
nothing without that substance. Upon which occasion, together with that I
said before, Maldonado shall come and serve your highness. Don John of
Idiacq^ has answered my letters, the copy whereof I have sent hereunto
adjoined. I have put both of them in mind, and will advertise your highness of
their resolution. The Cardinal showed me how desirous he was of this
resolution: Also how often he had propounded it, willing me to do the like.
I suppose that the ordinary provision that is to be made, depends
undoubtedly upon the president of the Tresurie: for I have talked with him, and
he makes me no answer to the purpose. But since this is ordered by the way of
estate, it is no marvel.

Of Madams health and recovery, all we your highness servants are very
glad, and reason. The contrary whereof we do feel, in that the French have
opportunity to try that they do, and to bring all into trial, but I hope in
God that in the end, by means of such order and forecast as your highness
will in all places use, they shall reap no fruit of their purposes.

We have of late days greatly wished for letters from your highness, to
resolve the doubt conceived of the death of Orange, the news being here so
diverse, as well from Paris as Antwerpe. All wise men think him dead, and so we
are to believe, although it be strange, yt your highness cannot fully verify
it. There came news from Lisbone that he was in extremities, and here it was
said that he was dead: But his fautors had concealed it a few days, while
they took order in their own affairs.

I will write unto Velasques of Minaya, who is of his Majesty's chamber,
concerning the good you have done him, and do still wish to do, neither can
it be but many will like well of it, that your highness are so willing to
favor and pleasure his Majesty's servants, especially such as are so near
his royal person.

I do infinitely thank your highness for the pleasure it pleased your
highness to show me, in thanking his Majesty, and honoring his servants.
The great good will you bear me, together with whatsoever I am or may be, I
will confess to depend of hour highness, and will wholly employ my self, even
to the death, in your service. I hope by your favorable assistaunce at all
times, I shall be able to do it, and I pray God I may requite it.

The liberty and commodity that your highness have given me to distribute
among sundry persons, to the yearly value of two or three hundred crowns, as
my self shall think good, was very comformable to your highness mo^^ noble
service. I thank you for this favor, and will beware of exceeding farther
then need shall require: and all that I may reserve in this expense I will, as
one that herein do not pretend to any other then your highness service.

Certaynely it shall be to make demonstration of that which your highness meant
to have done with Foncq, Lallo, and Sebastian of Santoyo.

In Francis of Humaras behalf I will use all diligence, as your highness have
commanded, toward those officers that receive letters in his commendation.
Truly he deserves all the favor that you show him, and it were meet his
Majesty should resolve upon that he pretends. He is here, and having
showed him your highness desire to do him good, also that you wished his
service, to the rude, in the camp as also in all other occasions, to have the
better opportunity to gratify him, he is fully resolved to come and serve
your highness, for he takes him self as earnest a servant to your highness
as any other, and not respecting any pretenses or benefits that here he
might reap, and assuring him self of such favor, as your highness have and
will show him: he minds to take order to depart with the first Galleys. He
had need leave some provision of money with his mother, but for that, and any
other thing needful for his journey, he will seek the best remedy he may.
It may please your highness to write to don Sanctius of Padilla, so to
accomodate him thitherward, that he may pass with those that shall set first
forward: also to whomsoever shall have charge of him, to use him as your
highness servant, and according to his profession: for his goodwill to serve
your highness does deserve it.

I hear that Don Bernardino of Mendoza who is in England, has written to his
Majesty, and complains that your highness do keep no correspondence with
him, as that since August last, when you writ of the success of Turnay, he
has not had any letters from you, notwithstanding he has sent you sundry
posts. I grant many are lost, nevertheless among so many some should come
safe. I thought good to certify your highness hereof, because many think it
strange there should be so small familiarity. Our Lord preserve your
highness noble person, with the increase of long life, and such honor as all
your servant do desire and stand in need of.

From Madrill this 30. of Apryll. 1582. Most noble Lord, your highness humble
servant who saluteth you. Frauncis Guillamas.
The superscription was.
To the most noble Lord, the prince of Parma. etc. my very good Lord.



These two letters ensuing, which were sent from the I Will of Tercera, being come
to our hands, we would not defraude the reader thereof.
The copy of the letters which the K. of Castile writ unto Ciprian of
Figueiredo Vasconcellos, by Jasper Homem, who came to the town of Praya the 7.
of March. 1582.

D. Cyprian of Figueiredo,
I the K. do salute you, steadfastly believing that you will perform what
ever you are bound unto for my service, and the benefit of this I Will, as also
of any thing perticularly touching your self, I thought good to commend unto
you that trust which I repose in you, also to write unto you, that behauing
your self, (as I will believe you will) I will not only forgive all former
offenses, but also shall be glad to recompense the service that herein I hope
for of you, to the end, the great damage of this I Will, and the inhabitauntes
thereof, proceeding of such preparatiues of soldiers, ships, and munition
as I have commanded to provide, as the bringer of this my letter may more at
large declare unto you, may be stayed and excused.

Written at Lisbone the 14. of December. 1582. The King.
The superscription was.
By the king. To D. Cyprian of Figneiredo.



THis letter together with another from Don Chistopher of Moura, and two from
Ambrose of Aguiar, governor of the I Will of S. Michel for Castille, and one from
Don Peter, Bishop of Castille, the said Cyprian of Figueiredo would not open,
but sent them from the Town of Praya with others to Don Michel de Silua, Earl
of Torres Vedras to the City of Angera, who likewise would not open them: and
thereupon the said Cyprian of Figueiredo, referred them to the earl, who at
his instaunce, they both being together, did finally break them up: and then
he desired him, to send them to the kings Majesty. Don Antonio.

The answer to the former letter which Ciprian of Figueiredo Vasconcellos,
governor of the Isles to the use of K. Don Anthony sent, to the K. of Castille,
which the Earl of Torres Vedras sealed, when he had perused the^ and so sent
them by the way of Saint Michels I Will.
I Have perused your Majesty's letter which you sent me by Jasper Home^:
wherein you say you cannot but think that I will fulfill what ever I am bound
unto for your service, the benefit of this I Will, and perticularly for mine own
person: would to God your majesty knew how greatly your self are bound to
the most noble Infant Don Jews, who with his subjects, always assisted your
father the Emperor in his wars, the^ would you not attempt any thing
against the Crown of Portingall, to the prejudice of his son king Anthony,
and so grievously offend our L. God, in the destruction of our honor, life,
and goods, which you have procured: neither would I, or any the rest of the
Portingales, his true subjects, refuse to serve you as a Christian King, and
such a one as the Portingales nation have ever borne great goodwil unto. For as
well in respect of the said duty, as also by reason of your kindred with the
K. of Portingall, it becomes not you to desire that I should serve you as
your vassal, neither will my duty bear that I should serve you as your
subject.

This I Will together with the inhabitauntes thereof belong to king Anthony, to
whom they are sworn as to their king and natural Lord, and that as well in
his right of succession, and free election of the people of this kngdome, as
also for that the city and chamber of Lisbone writ down certain reasons,
together with his right thereto, which I cannot think but your Majesty have
notice of.

Farther, although there were no other cause but ye only election of ye people
of this Realm, who for default of kings, are by their decrees and ordinances
to choose others: yet was it enough, that your Majesty entered the land with an
army, the controversy not being decided: for had your title bin never so
good, yet had you thereby utterly lost it. But I trust in god the whole will
return to such pass, as your Majesty for the enjoying thereof, will not
damn your own soul, but that it will in the end fall again into the right
Lords dominion, notwithstanding, he be now dispossessed thereof. Your Majesty
must not think me past shame, but a man damnified. And I would to GOD that all
kings had in their counsels free men, deuoyde of ambition, so should not our
R. Don Anthony, have fallen into that estate, whereto great treasons have cast
him headlong, neither your Majesty into the great danger of the loss of your
self, and subversion of all Christiandom: besides, if you be at the day of
judgment to give account of the honors, deaths, and pillages of so many men,
and of their liberty, you can not sufficiently repent and make amends for
that is already passed. If your majesty would but think upon ye hour of
your death, together with the evils that then will offer them selves to your
view, and remember that you are everlastingly to suffer the pains which you
have inflicted upon the Portingalls perceiving then how near the loss of all
is unto you; Oh! how would you turn aside from all that is past: for at yt
time it will be before your eyes. How much better had it bin for you, quietly
to have remained in your own realm, to see your vassals in peace, your self
beloved of all Christians, and obeyed of all your subjects! for in respect of
that you have done in Portingall, not only all Christian kings and princes,
but also the very barbarous nations do mortally hate you.

Consider how many Innocents you have with your weapons murdered: think upon
the rauishments of so many widows and maids, bournings and lamentations, as do
cry to God for vengeance aginst you. Remember how many wives ar e separated
from there husbands through forced adulteries: how many Churches are profaned,
and religion dishonored: also into what slavery you have reduced the
inhabitants of Portingal, for that of all this, and of more which you have
caused, you shall give account before God, who will call you thereto with
rigorous justice, as that the whole has been perpetrated in a realm which God
has loved above all others in the world. That which the inahbitants of this
afflicted realm do endure, is sufficient to let you know, that they which are
out of this bondage and heavy yoke, do covet rather freely to dye in the
wars, then to fall into such slavery: neither will I otherwise counsel the
inhabitants of this I Will, least I should both damn my soul, and my honor
should fall into less reputation the^ now it is in. For thereof I make such
accoumpt, as I had rather lose all lives that it were possible to enjoy, then
not to continue loyal to any king to whom I am sworn. For to die well is
perpetual honor, for the preservation whereof, I had rather persevere in
loyalty, then fear the preparatiues of people, ships, and munition,
wherewith your Majesty does threaten me: for I have such a confidence in God,
that he will fight for us and our ships. The sea and havens of this Island,
together with the foretresses, walls, and trenches are ready for the munition:
yea, and many pittes opened, whereinto to cast those people yt shall come to
seek us, who are not to have any pardon, by reason of such mischief as
proceeds of forgiving them. Your Majesty are not to blame me: for I have
sworn to R. Antony to defend this crown for my K. and L. And the like I
would have done for for you, in case I had been sworn thereto, though not
with so good a will. For it is enough that he is king of Portingall.

But if I should through mishappe fall alive into your bondage, and for doing
my duty, you should put me to death, neither the remembrance of my loyalty,
neither the fame of your cruelty and injustice would ever perish. I serve not
Don Anthony for any benefit, notwithstanding, I may obtain more of him then
of any other K. But my loyalty consists in fulfilling my duty, which causes
that such rewards as by other then the K. of Portingall are promised, can no
whit move me. For beyond my duty, there is nothing that can change my honor
and loytie, which I do more esteem then all the kingdoms in the world,
which is the same that enuegleth many Gentlemen.

Our Lord God guide your Majesty to your kingdom, and restore Portingall to
her right king and lord Don Anthony, as all true and loyal Portingals do
wish.

From this noble City of Angera, in Jesus Christ's. I Will of Tercera.
The superscription was.
To the K. of Castille from the governor of the Assorian Isles.



Imprinted at London at the three Cranes in the Vintree, by Thomas Dawson, for
Thomas Charde.


