De Adiaphoris. THEOLOGICAL AND SCHOLASTICAL POSITIONS, CONCERNING the Nature
and Use of Things Indifferent.

WHERE ALSO IS METHODICALly and briefly handled, of Civil and Ecclesiastical
Magistrates, of Humane Laws, of Christian Liberty, of Scandal, and of the
Worship of God.

A Vowed Work, destinated (by the grace of GOD) to appease the Dissentions of
the Church of ENGLAND.

Written in Latin by M. Gabriel Powel, and translated into English by T. I.

AT LONDON Imprinted by Felix Kyngston, for EDWARD WHITE, and are to be sold
at the little North-doore of Paul's, at the sign of the Gun. 1607.

THE TRANSLATOR TO the Reader.
Having been very desirous not long since, to be resolved in the truth of the
Controversies of our Church, and lighting upon this excellent and learned
Treatise of Things Indifferent; J received such satisfaction thereby, out of
the very grounds and principles of Divinity, that I could not hear any
difficulty objected touching the things in controversy, but presently I was
able to resolve the same, out of those very grounds which here I had learned.
Wherefore having received so great profit by this Book: J thought it part of
my duty, to communicate the same unto others, in a more familiar language, not
doubting but many may receive the like satisfaction thereby, as I have done.
And albeit in the very translating, it has lost much of that elegancie,
wherein it was originally penned by the Author: yet I have endeavored to come as
near his meaning as possibly I could. Thus much I thought good to signify
unto thee. Adieu. From OXFORD this 28. of November 1606.

Thine in what he may, T. J.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE AND RIGHT REVEREND FATHER IN GOD, RICHARD VAVGHAN
Doctor of Divinity and L. Bishop of LONDON, his very good Lord;
All prosperity and happiness external, internal, eternal.
Whatsoever be the opinions of others (Right Reverend and most worthy
Prelate, my singular good Lord) concerning the Adiaphoristicall Controversy,
which so long time has troubled the state of our Church: I am not any whit
dismayed, but have very great hope thereof, in so much that I am not affraide,
to exspect and promise unto my self a very happy and desired issue of all
these domestical iarres. Specially, The ROCKS whereat the refractarie
Ministers impinge.
because I seem to descrie and discover those dangerous ROCKS, whereat many
both heretofore have been, and at this present (alas!) are not a little dashed:
which being detected and propalated unto the whole world, the Godly may provide
for themselves, and safely sail in the maine Ocean of the Gospels work,
without danger or fear of shipwreck. Now these ROCKS are specially three;
whereof

The FIRST is, I. ROCK. That Christ is a Lawgiver.
that some do suppose, that Christ Jesus, as a LAVV-GIVER, has instituted a
certain POLICY in his Gospel, and decreed Ecclesiastical Laws, which every
man ought necessarily to observe and obey: upon which sandy foundation the
whole frame and building of the Presbyterian Discipline is founded. But whence
this new and insolent false-Position is drawn, no man can be ignorant, that
has but superficially read over the Decrees and Canons of the Council of
Trent. For thus those purple Fathers have superciliously defined, or thundered
rather; If any man shall say, that Christ Jesus was given of God unto men, as a
Redeemer, whom they ought to put confidence in, and not also as a Lawgiver,
whom they ought to obey, let him be accursed. Council. Trid. Sess. 6. Can. 21.

But (o the immortal GOD!) The Detectio^ of the 1. Rock.
what manner of Christ, do both the Tridentine Fathers, and the refractarie
Ministers propose unto us! Of CHRIST our Redeemer, they make also a LAVV-GIVER;
yea they transform JESUS the Savior of the world, into MOSES the Lawgiver.
This they do, after the example of Mahomet, who fained that GOD sent CHRIST
into the world, to propound a perfecter Law, than Moses did. Yet Christ
himself ( out of the Prophecy of Esaias, cap. 61. verse. 1.) teaches us, that
he is sent, to Preach the GOSPEL unto the poor (Luc. 4.18.) Now to
Evangelizare.
Preach the Gospel, that is, to bring glad tidings, is not, to propound new
Laws. And albeit ( in Matthew. cap. 5.) Christ interpreted and expounded
certain Precepts, yet thereby he did not make, or deliver us any new Law; but
only vindicated the law of Moses from the corrupt and false glosses of the
Pharisees, and restored it to the former perfection. That we ought to obey
Christ according unto the Precepts of the Decalogue, which Moses delivered, no
sober man ever denied: but this is it, that we constantly disavow and
gainsay, to wit, that CHRIST is a LAW GIVER; or that the Gospel, which is
the glad tidings concerning spiritual and eternal righteousness, has ordained
any new corporeal Policy. Yea rather, it commands us, to obey the present
Magistrates and Laws, if they do not repugne the laws of nature; and wills
that we endeavor to defend, maintain and beautify the present Policies.
Excellent well has M. CALVIN written hereof: Because in the external
Discipline and Ceremonies of the Church (says he) God would not particularly
prescribe what we ought to follow (because he did foresee that these depended
of the condition of the times, Note well.
neither did he judge that one form could be convenient for all ages)
therefore herein we ought to have recourse unto those general Rules, which he
has given (in his Word) that what things soever, the necessity of the Church
shall require to be commanded for order and decency, they may be examined by
them. Therefore has he delivered nothing expressly concerning these things,
because they are not necessary unto salvation: and ought to be diversely
fitted for the edification of the Church, according unto the different manners
of every Nation and Age, as the profit of the Church shall require, as well for
the changing and abrogating the usual Discipline and Ceremonies, as also for
instituting of new, as shall be convenient. Calvin. Institut. lib. 4. cap. 10..
30.

The SECOND Rock whereat the Ministers impinge, II. ROCK. That whatsoever is
performed in the Worship of God, is Worship.
is that some have inconsideratly defined, that nothing at all may be performed
in the duties of Religion, or in the exercise of divine Worship, which is not
Worship it self, or at leastwise some part of the Worship of God. Hereupon
they exsecrate the Consignation of the Cross in the Sacrament of Baptism, and
the bowing of the Knee in the Lords Supper, as new Worships.

But who would have thought, The Detectio^ of the 2. Rock.
that any man, by any importunity of opinion, could be brought into this
sentence, to define thus? I see the Prophets and Apostles oftentimes calling
upon GOD and fasting. I see CHRIST himself kneeling and praying ( Luc. 22.41.)
What? Do the Ministers think, that fasting and kneeling, are the Worship of
God? Impossible. Yet these things are performed in the very exercise of Divine
Worship.

The THIRD Rock, III. ROCK. That the Church can ordain no significant
Ceremonies.
is that some have determined, that the Church has no power to ordain any
significant Ceremonies. Hence also they do condemn the Consignation of the
Cross in Baptism, and the use of the Surplice in the celebration of Divine
Service.

But who does not see, The Detectio^ of the 3. Rock.
that this Paradoxe is deduced and derived from the former? Because the
Ministers think, that all such actions as serve for order, decency or
edification in the Worship of God, are very Worship it self, therefore they
will have no Ceremonies at all to be ordained. But all the holy Scripture, and
the whole World reclaim the judgment of the Ministers herein, as we have
abundantly and at large proved in the Book it self. We must diligently and
warily avoid such monsters of opinion, and such strange kind of speaking, as
manifestly and directly contradict the express sentence of holy Scripture: for
this is (...) to teach otherwise, as Paul speaks.

These be those pernicious ROCKS, which now I have plainly discovered and
detected, to forewarne the weaker and vnlearneder sort, that they be not moved
with Syrenian sweet songs, to fall into the gulf of eternal ruin. And
verily I do not doubt, but the Ministers for the most part al of them (such is
the grace, wisdom, learning and conscience GOD has endued them with) will
easily understand and embrace this counsel: Only I greatly fear the (...).
curiosity and business of the Lay sort (whom for (...). The intolerable
curiosity of the Laytie.
difference sake we do so nominate) in this matter. For these are wont, even
with Tribuniticall clamours to reprehend and tax Vetera instituta mediocria.
ancient Constitutions moderatlie ordained, to decree new Laws, to prescribe
Policies, and what not? These urge the Ministers with continual importunity,
and add oil unto the fire. But let them know, that the Discipline and
Government of the Church, is committed to other artificers, not unto them; and
let them remember that usual precept, that every man adorn his own boat.

Even as, Aristophanes his Cleon.
in Aristophanes, Cleon is said, to have one foot in the Court, and another in
the Tents: So amongst us, there are many restless Cleons, who have one foot
in the Court, and another in the Church; and in such manner build their City
and frame their Policy, as the Ape did, in the Fable of Hermogenes; which I
will briefly recite, that all men may behold the picture, or image of their
foolishnes who frame new Policies.

There was an old APE, Hermogenes his Ape.
that had long time lived amongst men; which at length, being negligently
looked unto, made an escape, and returned unto the other Apes, into the woods
and plains. There she declares, that the life of men was very happy and
blessed, who were guarded, with houses against rain, cold and heat, and with
walls against wild beasts and enemies: she shows also the corn stored up
in their granaries, their assemblies and meetings, their theaters, their
sights, their plays. She exhorts the rest of the Apes, to imitate this
wisdom of Men, to build houses, and to compass them in with walls, to keep
away other wild beasts. Whole troops of Apes are met together, to hear this
new Counsel. All of them applaud such a specious and profitable sentence: and
presently the Senate and People of the Apes did publish a Decree, that
forthwith they should begin to build a City. But the younger Apes being sent
to provide and fetch in timber and stones, when they wanted instruments, and
had no means, to hew down trees, to polish and fit the stones; at last they
learn by experience, and acknowledge, that foolishly they attempted a thing
impossible, and abhorrent from their nature.

Such altogether, are all those Builders of new Cities, who dream of new
Policies, and a new Discipline. And albeit it be credible, that in all Ages
there were some such Apes: yet our Age (alas for pity!) has seen very many,
who have been the cause, of great perturbation in the Commonwealth, and of
horrible ataxie in the Church, and now for a great time have troubled all
England. But let the wiser and godlier sort remember the precept delivered in
this Fable, and let them not rashly and inconsideratly contend against
Politic constitutions, which do not contain manifest impiety or turpitude.
I would have spoken more to this purpose (Right Reverend and most worthy
Bishop) but that I did know your Lordships Wisdom and Learning to be such,
that you do far better understand these things, than they can be spoken by
me.

To conclude therefore, I have presumed to publish these Positions of THINGS
INDIFFERENT, which according to my weak ability, I have described in a most
brief and plain method, as it were in a table, under the defense and
protection of your Lordships name: which mean signification of a grateful
mind, most prone and ready to your Lordships service, I humbly beseech your
Honor that you would vouchsafe to accept in good part. The Lord Jesus Christ
preserve your Lordship, and still more and more heap upon you his blessings
spiritual and temporal, for the good both of Church and Commonwealth.

From you Ho. Palace at LONDON, this 7. of February, 1606. Your Lo. Domestique
Chaplain humbly to command, Gabriel Powel.

THE CONTENTS OF this Book.
CHAP. I. 1 Of the Definition of Things indifferent. CHAP. II. 2 Of the Causes
of Things indifferent: and first of the Efficient Cause. CHAP. III. 3 Of the
Material Cause of Things indifferent. CHAP. IV. 4 Of the Formal Cause of
Things indifferent. CHAP. V. 5 Of the Final Cause of Things indifferent. CHAP.
VI. 6 What things be truly and rightly termed Indifferent. CHAP. VII. 7 Of the
lawful Use of Things indifferent. CHAP. IIX. 8 Of the power of Laws,
especially of Ecclesiastical Laws: and whether they bind the Conscience.
Where also is handled of Civil and Ecclesiastical Magistrates; and of
Christian Liberty. CHAP. IX. 9 Of Scandal. And who in the Church of England
are the Authors of Scandal; whether the Reverend Bishops and the Civil
Magistrates, who require obedience in the received and approved Ceremonies; or
certain Ministers who rather forsake their Ministry and places, then that
they will conform themselves. CHAP. X. 10 Of the Worship of God. And that
Things indifferent, and Ceremonies ordained for Order and Decency in the
Church; are not the Worship of God. CHAP. XI. 11 A Solution of the Refractarie
Ministers Objections. 12 The Conclusion, unto our beloved Brethren in Christ,
the Ministers who are uncomfortable unto the Discipline and Ceremonies of the
Church of England.
THEOLOGICAL AND SCHOlastical Positions concerning Things Indifferent.
CHAP. I. Of the DEFINITION of Things Indifferent.
ALbeit in this most exulcerate and distressed age of the world, the Church of
God has been long encombred with needless Disputations about THINGS
INDIFFERENT, or Ecclesiastical Traditions; wherein some have labored for
retaining and observing ALL manner of Traditions, without difference, All Tra
ditions are not to be rejected.
and others again for rejecting and despising ALL without any scruple or
regard: Yet had I rather incline to their assertion, who, sailing as it were in
the wide Ocean of humane opinions, take the middle course or line, going
directly between both the two former Rocks; that is, of such, who neither
refuse ALL, nor yet retain ALL, without due regard, examination and trial.

2 For it is the part of Christian discretion and wisdom, to observe the Rule
of the Apostle, Try ALL things, keep that which is GOOD, 1 Thessalonians. 4, 21.

3 Seeing the Apostle wills us, to TRY ALL things, doubtless he gives us
to understand, that ALL things, are not, either to be rejected, or to be
received; but rather wisely, to be examined and tried. And seeing he
counsels us, to KEEP that which is GOOD, he sufficiently admonishes us, to
beware, that we embrace not those things which are EVIL, neither despise those
which are GOOD; since thot both these argue a man, to be either of very weak
judgment, or altogether irreligious, such as Christians cannot be, without
great offense and reproach.

4 Now under the word ALL, are also comprehended Traditions: wherefore seeing
the Apostle speaks generally, TRY ALL THINGS, they also ought not to be
exempted from trial.

5 Let Traditions therefore be tried and examined with competent discretion
after the Rule of GODS truth, Traditions ought to be tried.
whereby the evil may be discerned from the good; and whereby those things
which we ought to observe, may be observed, and those which we ought to reject,
may be rejected.

6 But it is easily propounded generally, that such Traditions are to be
observed, which are good, profitable, indifferent; and such also to be rejected
and refused, which are evil, hurtful, pernicious. But when we are
particularly to declare, what Traditions be good and indifferent, this thing is
not so easily determined.

7 Wherefore, that both Truth and Falsehood may appear herein; and that godly,
religious and sober men may understand and know, out of GODS word, what they
ought to follow, and what to avoid in this business; it is expedient that we
prosecute this point somewhat more exactly.

8 Hereupon I thought it would be answerable unto my labor, and counteruaile
my travel, if that I should repeat the whole doctrine of THINGS INDIFFERENT
methodically handled, and should lay it open before all men's eyes, to behold
the same, and to judge thereof.

9 Wherefore being about to speak of Things indifferent; Of Things Indifferent.
we must first declare the Nature of the word and name thereof; What the Word
signifies.
and then show what the thing it self is.

10 (...), Things indifferent, as Suidas thinks, the Grecians term such,
whose use lies in the midst, so as we may use them WELL, or ILL, at our
pleasure; which make not a man truly happy or unhappy.

11 These are called of Basil, (...), such things as be in our own power, and
middle; and of Nazianzen, (...), things placed in the middle: such as be
Riches, honor, health, strength of body, and the like; which, of themselves,
cause not perfect happiness, albeit they do not a little adorn the same, being
rightly applied and used.

12 And they are either (...), such as Go before; or (...), such as Go not
before.

13 (...) and things Going before, (...).
the Grecians call those, which contain honor and dignity in themselves, the
lawful and right usage whereof, makes our felicity the more noble and
glorious. For example; Amongst the Gifts of the mind, such Indifferent things
Going before, is good towardlines, a fair condition, an easy and facile
nature, a sharp and ready wit. Amongst the Gifts of the body, strength and
health. Amongst outward Gifts, riches, honor and glory. For these go before
true virtue, wherein the Philosophers place perfect happiness, and do as it
were prepare the way, and open an entrance to felicity.

14 (...), are such as Go not before, (...).
but rather depart and turn aside from felicity, yea and sometimes obscure
and blemish the beauty and glory thereof. Such amongst the Gifts of the mind,
are dulnes of wit, stupiditie, and slouggishnes: In the Body, sickness and
diseases: In outward estate, poverty and scarsitie of friends, which otherwise
are accounted amongst miseries.

15 This explication of the name and Word, does agree with Ecclesiastical
matters: for which cause, that appellation was transferred, from the use of
common life, unto the use of the Church. For even as Philosophers do term
those things INDIFFERENT, which of themselves do not consummate civil
felicity, neither yet do hinder the same; albeit they are an ornament, and as
it were an help unto it: So the Church calls those things (...), Indifferent
things what they be.
Indifferent, which of themselves are not necessary to everlasting salvation,
and the happiness of Souls; neither do make the Worship of GOD more acceptable
unto him, yet in regard of men, they add a certain outward honor and grace
unto Religion.

16 And although this very term and word, be not expressly found in the holy
Scriptures: yet the Apostle describes the thing it self, where he says, that
there are some things, in which a Brother or a Sister is not bound to perform
necessary service or worshiop unto GOD, 1. Cor. 7.15.

17 The whole matter shall better appear by examples. It is in a Christian man's
free choice, to lead a married or single life, so that he live chastely: also it
is free for him to endure bondage and service, or honestly to free himself
therfrom. In the Primitive Church it was lawful, either to be circumcised, or
to refuse circumcision: also to be present at feasts with the Gentiles, or to
avoid them; so that by his liberty he did not scandalize the weak, nor give
occasion of offense unto the enemies. In like manner, the use of meats, or
abstinence from the same, and the observation of days etc. are permitted in
the free will and power of a Christian, so that he beware of superstition,
wantonness or Ieuitie. The Definition of Things indifferent.
Matthew. 11.18.19. 1. Cor. 8.8. etc.

18 Now Things indifferent and Traditions, are such ceremonies, rites, actions,
things, works or businesses in the Church, which are neither expressly
commanded, nor forbidden by the Word of GOD; being brought into the Church and
used, for good order, decency, discipline and edifications sake, which we may
safely use, or abstain from without any damage to our religion, or hurt to our
conscience; which of themselves commend not a man the more before God being
used, neither being refrained from, do they make the abstainer the more
acceptable unto the divine Majesty. The General kind of Things indifferent is
Moral.


19 The General kind of these, is moral; seeing they are determinations of
circumstances necessary or profitable for the observation of the moral
precepts of the first Table; that is, to preserve order and decency in the
assembly and meetings of the Church, and in the use of the Ecclesiastical
Ministry; or for public or private exercises of piety; or to shun and avoid
the scandal of the weak, and to bring them to the Church, and the
acknowledgement of the truth.

20 Hence it is, Note well.
that they are and may be called Worship of GOD, namely in their General, not
in their Special kind. I will speak more plainly.

21 Things indifferent, Traditions, or Ecclesiastical precepts of men, are the
WORSHIP of GOD, as they be Moral, but not as they be Ceremonial.

22 For examples sake. The assembly or meeting together of the Church, to
exercise the duties and offices of piety, is the Worship of God: Public and
private Prayers, Divine Sermons etc. are the worship of God: but to meet to
gether this or that day, or hour; to conceive or recite our prayers, to sing
Psalms, or other holy hymns, in this, or that form of words, or
pronunciation, either standing, or sitting, or kneeling, is not the Worship of
God. It is a Worshiop of God, not to scandalize our neighbor; but to eat, or
not to eat flesh, is not a Worship of God.

Hitherto have we declared the Definition and Nature of Things indifferent; It
follows that we speak of the Causes thereof.
CHAP. II. Of the CAUSES of Things Indifferent. And first of the EFFICIENT
Cause.
THe EFFICIENT Cause of Things Indifferent, The Efficient Cause of Things
indifferent. 1. Principal.
is twofold, Principal, or Adiuuant.

2 The Principal Efficient Cause, is GOD (by whom Things Indifferent are
GENERALLY instituted and commanded) who in his Word declares unto the Bishops
and Governors of the Church, the fountain, from whence they ought to be
deduced and drawn, governing also their wits, and directing their tongues in
that business. For GOD will have all things to be done in good order, so as they
may serve both for the setting forth of his own glory, and also for the
edification of the Church (1. Cor. 14.40.) seeing he is the GOD of order, and
not of confusion. 2. Adiuuant: and this is, either.


3 The Adiuuant Cause, is either the Whole Church together, or Certain wise
and intelligent Men, to whom the Church has committed the institution of
Things indifferent.

4 The whole Church.
The Whole Church, because she has power to appoint and prescribe rites and
ceremonies in particular (for all things are the Churches, 1. Cor. 3.22.) which
performs this her Office, with a Free, and Godly will. Free, being no manner
of way compelled; Godly, that is, fitted and accommodated to the will of God,
which may only regard the glory of God, and the edification of good and godly
men; and no way seek after humane or worldly commodities, by the institution,
or use of any Indifferent things.

5 Now the institution and ordering of these rites and ceremonies, Or, Certain
Men.
the Church ought to commit to the care of certain godly, wise and circumspect
Men, whom she perceives to be endued with divine gifts, and well able to judge
of such matters. So the Apostles command the Church, to choose and ordain such
Deacons ( Act. 6.3.) And that chosen vessel of God, writes unto the Church of
Corinth, that she ought to ordain Judges, who might understand and decide the
controversies and causes of the Christians. 1. Cor. 6.7.

6 Concerning which Ceremonies notwithstanding, the judgment and censure
thereof, is to be permitted unto the Church, as also of the whole Doctrine
taught by the Ministers and Pastors, according unto that which the Apostle
says; Let two or three Prophets speak, and let the other judge. And if any
thing be revealed to another that sits by, let the first hold his peace. The
Spirit of the Prophets is subject to the Prophets. (1. Cor. 14.29.30.32.) And
the Doctors and Teachers of the Church, are not LORDS over the same; but
Ministers and Servants unto it.

7 Out of these things which have been spoken of the Efficient Cause, it is
plainly gathered; Ecclesiastical Traditions are not merely Humane, but also
Divine.
that such Indifferent things, as by the Church have been lawfully and orderly
instituted and approved, are so far Humane, as that they are also Divine,
and therefore have more than Humane authority, yea plainly DIVINE.

8 The reason hereof is. Because the Church is directed and governed by the
Spirit of Christ, who is Truth: therefore the Precepts of the Church in THINGS
INDIFFERENT, are both true and holy.

9 Moreover, sithence the Church of Christ does always depend on the Word of
God; insomuch that if it should err (which notwithstanding is impossible) and
fall from the same, it should not be the Church of Christ: Therefore the
Traditions and Constitutions which are ordained by the Church, following the
Word of God, are grounded upon the authority of GOD himself, and drawn out
of the holy Scriptures; and therefore consequently DIVINE.

10 An example hereof we have in the Surplice, which Ministers use to put on,
Question.
in the solemnizing of Divine Service, or the administration of the Sacraments.
It is demanded, Answer.
Whether this be an HVMANE Tradition, or not? I answer: It is so an HVMANE
Tradition, as that it is also DIVINE. It is DIVINE, so far forth, as it is a
part of that Decency, the care and observation whereof is commended unto us by
the Apostle (1. Cor. 14.37.40.) But it is HVMANE, as it does particularly
design, what has been generally pointed at, rather than plainly declared.
Note.
For it si our part, to determine in particular and precise form and manner,
that Decency and Order, which in general terms is delivered in the holy
Scriptures. By this one example may appear what we are to think and judge of
all other of this kind.

11 These things repugne and are contrary to the Efficient Cause, What things
are contrary unto the Efficient Cause.
namely, I. To institute and ordain such rites and ceremonies, as are
contrary unto the will and Word of GOD.

12 Of which sort are in the Church of Antichrist, the Popes Supremacy, the
Sacraments of Penance, Confirmation, Order, Matrimony, Extreme Unction, the
oblation of the sacrifice of the Mass, the Communion under one kind,
Crucifixes, Invocation of Saints, Prayers for the dead, Purgatory,
Indulgences, Single life of Priests, Auricular confession, Papisticall
satisfactions, etc.

13 II. To pervert, contrary unto the Word of GOD, such Ceremonies, as are
lawfully and advisedly instituted by the Church.

14 III. To appoint and ordain indifferent Ceremonies and rites to be
observed, without the consent and approbation of the Church.

15 IV. Wilfully or carelessly to neglect and omit those indifferent ceremonies,
which the Church has lawfully commanded and received: to despise them, as
merely Humane, and to account them superstitious and Idolatrous.

16 V. The Church of Antichrist, or the Papacy, false Prophets and Heretics,
who imitate the Church of GOD in outward rites and ceremonies.

Thus much of the Efficient Cause: Next follows the Material.
CHAP. III. Of the MATERIAL Cause of Things indifferent.
THE MATTER of Things indifferent, The Matter of Things indifferent.
may be considered two ways: 1. As Constituent. 2. As Concomitant.

2 The Constituent Matter, (...), 1. Constituent.
termed by the Schoolmen Materia exqua, whereof consist Things indifferent;
are Ceremonies, actions, things, works or businesses performed by certain
rites.

3 And they are, either Words, such as are used in blessings; or Actions, such
as are practiced in particular gestures; or else they are, referred unto time,
place or person.

4 The Concomitant Matter, 2. Co^comitant; which is, either
as it has respect either unto the Subject, or unto the Object, is twofold,
1. Materia in qua, that wherein it stands. 2. Materia circa quam, that
whereabout it is employed.

5 The Matter in which, In which.
as it is referred unto the Subject, is the Church of Christ, wherein Things
indifferent are handled and exercised aright, according unto her own free will
and pleasure.

6 For GOD has given absolute power and authority unto the Church over all
Indifferent actions, rites and outward ceremonies, to dispose of them, for her
own conservation, utility, decency, order and discipline. Which appears
manifestly out of the holy Scriptures to have been used and practiced in the
Primitive Church in the Apostles times. Neither can any man justly deny the
same power to be granted unto the Church, even in these our days.

7 For seeing that the sefesame SPIRIT governs the Church in all ages;
wherefore should it not be as lawful for the Church of these latter times, to
institute laws and orders concerning external rites, as it was in times past?

8 The Matter about which Things indifferent are exercised, Or, whereabout.
as it has reference unto the Object, are these following; the Worship of God,
pure Religion, and necessary Confession.

9 For these (as we have said before) are Determinations, necessary or
profitable, for keeping and observing of the Precepts of the first Table of the
Moral Law.

10 The things which repugne and are Contrary to this doctrine, Things
contrary unto the Matter of Things indifferent.
of the Matter of Things indifferent, are either the Changing of the matter
thereof, or else the substituting of foreign and strange matter. Such as are,

11 I. Things commanded of GOD concerning Faith, or good Works, which Epicures
account among Things indifferent, with whom it is all one, whether they
exercise the duties of Piety and Charity, or not.

12 II. Things forbidden by God; such as are sins against every of the
Commandments of God, which profane Men reckon amongst Things indifferent; and
namely Blasphemy, drunkenness, gluttony, Usury, deceit in buying and
selling, Simonie, riot, licentiousnes, and such like.

13 Moreover, there are some who impudently account simple Fornication (as they
term it) amongst Things indifferent. But seeing that these sins and the
like, are manifestly prohibited in the Moral Law, it is a sign of Epicurean
profanitie, to go about to place them amongst the number of Things indifferent.

So much for the Matter of Things indifferent: Next of the Form.
CHAP. IV. Of the FORMAL Cause of Things indifferent.
THe FORM of things in different, The Form of Things Indifferent. 1.
External.
is either External, or Internal.

2 The External Form of Things indifferent, consists herein, namely, that
they are such Constitutions and Traditions, which have bin wisely and
discreetly ordained, though without the express letter of the Scriptures, yet
not without the foundation of the Scriptures.

3 The Internal Form of Things indifferent, 2. Jnternall, which is twofold.
ought to be considered two manner of ways; either Generally in regard of the
whole; or Specially and particularly, as every such Thing indifferent has a
proper consideration in it self.

4 I. GENERALLY the Form of Things indifferent, I. General.
is Indifferency it self; because this properly and essentially belongs to
all and every Thing indifferent, namely that they be free for every Church to
use, or not to use, according to the circumstances of times and persons, and
every occasion that shall happen: for if they should not be free, they should no
longer be (...), Indifferent.

5 Our Lord God has comprehended all the parts of his WORSHIP, and whatsoever
is necessary for our salvation, in the holy Scriptures: and therefore nothing
ought to be admitted in matters of fairh and religion, without the manifest
testimony thereof, as absolutely and simply necessary either to be believed,
or to be done.

6 But in the outward Discipline, The Discipline, Government and Ceremonies,
may be diversely fitted according unto the manners and nature of every nation
and age.
ceremonies and government of the Church, he would not particularly prescribe
what we ought to follow; because he did foresee, that this depended upon the
condition of the times; and that ONE FORM of Government would not be
convenient for all ages.

7 Therefore herein we ought to have recourse to those Rules, which he has
generally propounded in his Word, that whatsoever the necessity of the Church
requires to be commanded and ordained for Order and Decency, it may be
ordered and performed after the direction and line of the Scriptures.

8 Wherein also, those things which seem not profitable for the edification of
the Church, may be changed and taken clean away; and such as seem commodious
thereto may be retained, according as the diversity and variety of several
Churches, nations, places, times, adversaries, and other circumstances shall
require. For it is not needful that the same Ceremonies and orders should be
observed in all Churches, at all times: but are to be used as they be most
behouefull for the edification of the Church; therefore they are always
mutable, and most free.

9 But this Freedom is twofold; How Things Indifferent are said to be Free.
for it may be considered either in Respect of the Whole Church; or in Respect
of any Private person in the Church.

10 In Respect of the Whole Church (I mean a particular Church) every Thing
indifferent is FREE: because the Church has power and authority, to change or
to abrogate any thing that is presently used, and to institute new, where it
shall seem expedient so to do.

11 Wherefore, Note well.
in regard of diverse observation of Indifferent Ceremonies, no Church ought to
condemn another, as an Apostatique, seditious or schismatic Church,
separated from the people of God, or excluded from the Communion of Saints.

12 As with an hostile mind VICTOR Bishop of Rome unjustly and tyrannically
condemned and excommunicated the whole Eastern Church, because they did not
celebrate the Feast of Easter on the same day, that the Western Church did.
Eusebius. Hist. Ecclesiast. lib. 5. cap. 24.

13 This opinion, concerning NECESSITY, ought chiefly and specially to be
taxed, lest the Righteousness of the Gospel may be thought to be any such
external Policy; also, that there be no contentions by reason of the
difference in the observation of rites and ceremonies.

14 This Liberty is granted in the Gospel; neither can the same be taken away
by any Humane authority.

15 So Christ will have us know, that Rites are not NECESSARY, whether they be
Mosaicall, or of Humane Traditions: as ( Coloss. 2.16.) Let no man condemn you
in meat or drink, etc. that is, Let no man bind or judge your conscience for
these rites.

16 Again, If you be dead with Christ, free from the ordinances of the world;
that is, from such precepts and constitutions, whereby this humane life is
governed, wherefore as though you lived in the world, are you burdened with
traditions? As, Touch not, Taste not, Handle not? Coloss. 2.20.21.

17 And (Galat. 5.1.) Stand fast in the liberty, wherewith Christ has made us
free, and be not entangled again with the yoke of bondage. He wills them to
retain the doctrine of Liberty, lest they be vexed with the foolish torment
of conscience; or should move contentions and discord, if there be any Church
which observes not the same rites and ceremonies with us.

18 In Respect of any Private person in the Church, It is not lawful for any
private person, to violate, or to contemn the ordinances of the Church.
that Liberty is not such, that any man by careless and wilful negligence,
pride, disdain or contempt, may without great sin violate the ordinances and
constitutions of the Church.

19 Otherwise, what seeds of discord would the confusion of those things be,
if it were lawful, for every man at his pleasure, to alter and change those
things, which belong unto the common state and policy Ecclesiastical, seeing
ONE and the SAME thing will never please all men? if all things, being as it
were set in the midst, should be left unto every man's particular discretion
and choice?

20 Neither is it sufficient to exclaim and cry out, The BISHOPS have no
power and authority to make Laws, therefore we may LAVVFVLLY violate and
transgress their Traditions. For we OUGHT to obey; but yet so, as that they
do not ordain those Ceremonies, for the WOASHIP of God; or for things
profitable for attaining Remission of sins; as we shall show afterward.

21 And as concerning the power and authority to make Laws. The power of
making Ecclesiastical Laws, after what manner it ought to be.
Such tyranny ought not to be permitted in the Church; that the Lay sort (as
they are termed) ought to assent and applaud ALL, without choice, whatsoever
the Bishops shall decree.

22 Neither ought this power to be Democraticall, whereby every man
promiscuously should have license to cry out, to move doubts, to propose
doctrine, to ordain ceremonies. But rather it ought to be Aristocraticall,
wherein the chief Rulers and Magistrates, the Bishops and Princes, ought
orderly to communicate their counsels. For the Cognition both of the Doctrine,
and Rites, belongs UNTO THE CHVRCH, that is, to the Bishops and Princes: who
also, when the matter shall be decided and agreed upon, ought to be the
Keepers, maintainers and defenders of the external Discipline, and the putters
in execution of the sentence and decree of the Synod; so as they prohibit and
forbid idolatrous worship, blasphemies, perverse and wicked opinions, also the
contempt of mere Indifferent and profitable rites; and punish the professors
thereof.

23 II. II. Special.
SPECIALLY or particularly the Form of Things Indifferent, is that whereby
every Indifferent thing has his peculiar and proper reason delivered and
determined by GOD and the Church: which verily ought not to be changed or
violated by the authority and will of any private Spirit.

24 Things Contrary unto the Form of Things indifferent, Things contrary unto
the Form of Things indifferent.
are I. To change the form of Rites ordained by the Church according unto the
Rules of holy Scriptures; and that either through Hypocrisy, or through
Impiety.

25 Hypocrisy offends herein two ways: 1. In the Excess, by heaping
together over many external Ceremonies. 2. In the Defect, either by contemning
such Ceremonies as are lawfully ordained, or by rejecting ALL altogether.

26 Impiety substituteth other Ceremonies, the true and lawful rites being
abolished; as Antichrist has done.

27 II. To observe Ceremonies superstitiously, and to neglect faith, not to
hear and learn the Word of God: and so to persuade himself, that by the very
work wrought they are acceptable unto God.

And so much for the Formal Cause: Now follows the Final.
CHAP. V. Of the FINAL Cause of Things Indifferent.
THE FINAL Cause of Things indifferent, The Final Cause of Things indifferent.
is that which the Apostle (1. Cor. 14.) prescribes; to wit, that ALL things
be done in the Church Decently, and in Order, and for Edification.

2 For GOD will have men publicly to meet together, to hear his Word, and to
receive the Sacraments, that with one accord they might call upon GOD, and
praise him: and not after the manner of Beasts, to lurk in dens and caves,
and there, like Bears, murmr with themselves.

3 Where there is no Order, and no Discipline, The necessity of Order.
there men cannot be taught: But it is necessary that the Gospel be taught
and heard. For GOD does not otherwise gather his Church, but by the voice of
the Gospel: neither is the Holy GHOST effectual, but by the Gospel: neither
can we imagine that there is any Church of the Elect, but in this visible
company, wherein the Gospel is purely and rightly taught. Wherefore we must
of necessity love and cherish, and retain the Ministry of the Gospel, that
there may be solemn meetings: unto which these following ought sufficiently
to persuade the godly.

4 I. What things ought to move men to frequent the public Assembles of the
Church.
The Will of GOD, declared in his commandments of the Conservation of the
Ministry, and of the Sanctification of the Sabbath.

5 II. Our Necessity: because experience teaches, that Invocation of God, and
the whole study of godliness and piety does by little and little wax cold
and faint in those, who abstain from the public Assemblies of the Church.

6 III. The greatness of the Divine benefit, in gathering a Church unto
himself, by the Gospel, which of his special goodness he has ordained, now
preserves, and still reformeth amongst men if need shall require.

7 IV. The Divine promise, of GODS special presence in the public meetings
of the Church, and of the efficacy of public Prayers.

8 V. Contrariwise, the Consideration of such punishments, as GOD threatens
unto the contemners of the Ministry; such as are blindness, private and
public punishments, amongst which the most grievous and miserable are, the
famine of the Word of God, the tyranny of the Diuill, and the licentiousnes of
life and manners.

9 VI. Hitherto appertains the reason of Scandal, which is committed, when
through our example, others are made more negligent.

10 VII. The power and efficacy of that heavenly consolation, that there are
no Elect, but only in the company of such as be Called.

11 IIX. Because these Assemblies are a representation and image of the Life
everlasting; where the Son of God, that WORD, shall teach us, laying open unto
us all the treasures of the Divine Wisdom; and where GOD shall immediately
communicate himself unto us.

12 Besides these things, it is certain that we have need of Laws, Order, and
some Ceremonies.

13 Hence may be gathered the NECESSITY of Laws and Traditions
Ecclesiastical, which ought to be, The necessity of Ecclesiastical Laws.
as it were the bonds of Order and Decency.

14 What things soever are done in Order, they also are done Decently; and such
things as are done in Order and Decency, they also appertain unto Edification:
So that under this one word, EDIFICATION, the whole Final Cause of indifferent
Ceremonies may seem to be comprehended. Yet we will speak of all three in
particular, and first of Order.

15 ORDER in the Church, is that composition, ORDER in the Church what it is.
which hinders al confusion, barbarism, contumacie, and takes away all
Sects and dissensions.

16 The Apostle Paul most gravely said (1. Cor. 14.40.) (...), Let all things
be done honestly, and according to order: where he requires not ORDER only,
but a special care of adorning Order. Wherefore he added [(...), honestly] that
we should consider what best befitteth the persons, places and times.

17 We must meet in Churches with greater modesty and reverence, then at
Theaters. The actions and speeches of the Teachers, must be more peaceable and
grauer in that Assembly gathered by God, wherein Christ himself and the
Angels are present, then at the Scene or Stage.

18 In Order, two things are contained; Note well.
whereof the First is, that every one of the Teachers and Hearers do rightly
execute his office and duty; and accustom himself to the obedience of GOD,
and true Discipline.

19 The Second is, that the State of the Church being well ordered, every man do
endeavor to preserve mutual peace, concord and amity.

20 Again, Under Order^ are comprehended, 1. Persons.
those things that are comprehended under Order, may be referred, either unto
Persons, or unto Time and Place, or else unto Actions,

21 For the PERSONS; Some ought to be Doctors, Pastors, and Ministers of the
Church: Others, according unto their age, learning and other gifts, in regard
of Ecclesiastical Policy, ought to be Superiors: as also Paul places Bishops
above the Deacons. And in regard of their gifts GOD himself makes difference
and order amonst men, Ephesians. 4.

22 For all men have not the life gifts: ALL are not fit to decide and
determine obscure controversies of doctrine: ALL are not able to exercise
judgment.

23 And in this imbecillitie and weakness of men, seeing that some inspection
and oversight of the wiser sort is very needful; and that Judgments also are
necessary; therefore there must be certain places, and certain persons, unto
whom this weighty business ought to be committed.

24 And these places ought to be so furnished with fit persons and wealth, as
that, as much as man's diligence can provide, there may be hope that such
policies may continue for many ages. Wherefore there must be BISHOPS, as a
degree above the rest of the Ministers.

25 Now every Government does require Ministers and maintenance. Wherefore
Bishops do need some company of learned men, for the right exercising of
ordination, of examinations, of institution and instruction of those that are
to be ordained, of visitations, of Counsels, of writing, of embassages, of
Synods or Councels: so the Governments of Athanasius, Basilius, Ambrosius, and
such like, have been full of businesses, and have comprehended MANY CHVRCHES,
that many nations might be furnished against Heretics, and that there might
be some company of learned men in the Synods. Also John the Evangelists and
after him Polycarpus, and many others, had always with them many companies of
excellent men, both Teachers and Hearers, very famous for learning and virtue.

26 To this business there does need many fellows and Ministers, who cannot
live without maintenance and stipends: also it is needful that Bishops have
some store of living, whereby they may be enabled to bestow and undergo
necessary charges in Government.

27 Furthermore, the inferior Ministers may be promoted, as it were by
certain staiers and degrees, to more weighty and ample functions, and also to
greater commodities: of which S. Paul makes mention, when he says, They get
to themselves a good degree, least that, as a certain man did say, They first
sit at the helm, before they handle the oaer.

28 But now, if the Policy of Bishops should be dissipated, contrary to the
will of God, and the consent of Churches of all times; then there would follow,
tyrannies, barbarismes and infinite vastnes; because both Kings, and Princes,
which do govern worldly Empires, are very often times busied in other
affairs, little regarding the Ecclesiastical businesses.

29 Also there ought to be certain TIMES, 2. Time.
days and hours, wherein they may meet together, and certain Lessons and
Psalms fitting and agreeing to the times.

30 Wherefore the order of Festival days was not rashly instituted: for all
Histories cannot be recited in one day; Of Festival Days.
therefore it is more fit and commodious, that one part be propounded rather
at one time, than at another. And seeing the distribution of the times, does
agree with the eue^ts, this is not only commendable, but also does help the
memory.

31 Neither have Men only kept a certain order of days; but also GOD
himself has in like manner observed an order of certain Feasts in his
wonderful works, in the old and new Testament.

32 As when he willed that the Paschall lamb should be killed in the beginning
of the Spring; so in the same time of the year, our Lord JESUS CHRIST was
crucified, and rose again. As in the fiftith day after the coming from
Egypt, there was proclaimed a law, by manifest testimony, in mount Syna; so
in the fiftith day after the feast of Passover, the Holy Ghost was given, also
by manifest testimony.

33 Furthermore, 3. Place.
there must be a public PLACE instituted for the sacred Actions of the
Church: For that in the times of the Apostles, and afterward in the Primitive
Church, they met in the night time, and in private houses, yea even in caves
and holes in the earth, which were called Cryptae from hiding, that was done of
Necessity, which has no law, as the Proverb is.

34 And for the ACTION, 4, Action.
when the people shall be assembled in greater multitude, then Prayers and
praises ought to be made in a known speech, and something ought to be read out
of the holy Scripture; and other exercises of godliness performed, as shall be
convenient and agreeable to good Order.

35 And specially those things which do preserve Discipline, as Catechisings,
Ecclesiastical censures, fasting, etc.

36 Furthermore, we must beware, that many Actions be not done together in one
Congregation, which may mutually hinder one another; as it was among the
Corinthians, when many Prophets spoke at once to the people, and when many took
together the Lords Supper, some of them being drunken, and othersome hungry,
1. Cor. 11.18. etc.

37 Such confusion was frequent and usual in the Papacy. For at one time, in
one and the same Church, were celebrated many and diverse Masses, and other
Offices.

Thus much for Order.
It follows to speak of Decency.
38 Then are things said to be done DECENTLY in the Church, DECENCY, and such
things as belong thereunto.
when they are performed with gravity not rashly, with authority not vainly
or lightly, and with unfeigned piety.

39 As for example. It does more become Men to speak in the Church, and to
undergo offices, than Women, as also S. Paul prescribes: and those that are
ancient, rather than young; and in the morning, rather than in the evening; for
which cause the Church has ordained the Lords Supper to be administered in the
forenoone.

40 Hereunto do those things belong, which the Apostles have delivered,
concerning the holy Congregations to be assembled on the Sabbath day, ( Acts
20.7. 1. Cor. 16.2.) concerning the manner and order of Prophecysing, of
Singing, and Praying in holy assemblies (1. Cor. 14.5. etc.) of covering of
women (1. Cor. 11.5.6.) of the rite of ordaining Ministers of the Church, 1.
Tim. 3.4. Tit. 1.7. etc.

41 All which things, Note well.
although they were delivered and ordained by the Apostles, yet are they of
less importance and regard, than are the Articles of faith, delivered by the^;
because the Grounds of religion remain immovable and unchangeable; but these
are changeable, and may be altered upon necessary occasions.

42 There is a double End of this Decency. First, The end of Decency twofold.
that when such Ceremonies are enjoined, as do win reverence unto the holy
exercises, by such helps, we may be stirred up to piety.

43 Secondly, that modesty and gravity (which ought to be inseparable
companions of all honest actions) may herein be most apparent and visible.

44 CONFORMITY also seems to belong unto Decency. For it is a comely and
Decent thing, Conformity belongs unto Decency.
that in the waightier businesses, when certain things, being of one and the
same nature and kind, have also, as it were, like attire and accidences.
Wherefore it is requisite that in the Ministry there should be a certain
Conformity.

45 For herein the variety and diversity of the external form, does not
only argue a certain leuitie, but also seems to import as it were a
diversity of Religion, whereby the simple and unlearned sort, are oftentimes
scandalized.

46 Now Conformity, Conformity what it is.
is a certain similitude or likeness of parts one with another, or also of
things altogether unlike.

47 And this in the Church is required; either in the Greater and substantial
points; or in the Lesser and accessorie.

48 That Conformity which is required in the Greater points, as in Doctrine,
and Sacraments, is every way necessary, and no way Indifferent.

49 For if there were not in ALL Churches, one Faith, one Baptism, and one
Mediator, then were some necessarily in error.

50 But in the Lesser points, as in Ceremonies and outward rites, there is no
such absolute necessity of Conformity: And yet notwithstanding even this also
ought to be endeavored, and embraced with all diligence and care, both for the
preserving of Decency, and also for avoiding of the scandal of the weak.

And thus much also of Decency.
51 Also, EDIFICATION.
even these things, which are done Decently, and in Order, both may, and ought
to be referred unto AEDIFICATION.

52 For God forbid, that the gravity of the gracious Ministry of the
Gospel, should be only outwardly painted, with an idle and pageant like
Decency and formal Order, and not apply all things to Aedification: that is,
to promote true piety and godliness; that so they may serve to the sincere
Worship of God, either Spiritual and internal, or Corporeal and external,
which yet is ordained for the internal.

53 For there are two things required of those, which either speak, or do any
thing in the Church. The First is, that whatsoever they do, they perform it
with a purpose and intent of Aedification. The Second is, that they add, to
their intention, such a way and means, whereby Aedificacation may be attained.

54 Unto this end, that is, to Aedification, does also appertain, the care and
charge of DISCIPLINE, excommunication, and other moderate, and not
superstitious, Censures of the Church, whereby the Ecclesiastical Prelates
ought to enforce not only Lay men, but also the Ministers or Clergy, to an
honest and sober life; and seriously to see that no man abuse the freedom of
the Spirit, to the carnal liberty of the Flesh.

55 But if profane Epicures and belly-gods will not be restrained by the
Prelates and Church-gouernours, The Civil Magistrates ought to aid and assist
the Prelates of the Church.
but rage and strive against them, contemning their Censures; then ought the
Civil Magistrate to put his helping hand, and assist the Bishops.

56 But (with grief I speak it) there are many which are negligent, and
careless in this point, being always in a foolish jealousy, lest the
Ecclesiastical power should grow too great or strong: for they themselves
would feign dominiere over the Gospel, the easy and sweet yoke whereof they
can in no wise endure.

57 And thus, foolish men, while they endeavor to avoid one vice, they fall into
another.

58 For as in former times, they did not only submit themselves to the
spiritual, or rather carnal, slaves of Antichrist, as to their Ghostly
Fathers, but also in a manner worshipped them, as Gods, with all honor and
reverence. So now on the contrary, they never think themselves FREE enough,
except they tread and trample under their feet the holy Gospel, and faithful
Ministers of CHRIST JESUS, and reign over them, like as Lords do over their
bondmen.

59 But it cannot be, but that Almighty GOD, will take an horrible revenge for
this wicked contempt of his holy Ministry and ordinance, and for the
damnable ingratitude for the restitution of true Christian liberty and piety.

60 The Things Contrary to the Final Cause of Things indifferent, are I.
Things contrary to the Final Cause.
To institute Ceremonies for private gain or respect, or else so to abuse such
as are already lawfully instituted.

61 II. To observe or ordain any Ceremony with an opinion of Worship, or of
merit, or perfection, or of absolute necessity.

62 III. To surcharge and ouerburthen the Church with ouer-many Ceremonies,
whereby many better actions are hindered or neglected.

63 IV. To admit no profitable or lawful Ceremonies, such as belong to good
Order and Decency.

64 V. To change and alter Ceremonies often, and without grave and just causes:
which thing cannot, but lie open to scandal.

65 VI. To place Order in trifling pompes and vain shows which has nothing
in it, but gliding and glittering shadows.

66 VII. To call that, Decency, wherein is nothing but an empty delight or
pleasure, and riot without any good fruit.

67 IIX. To institute unnecessary, scandalous and impious Ceremonies
(cunningly painted, and varnished over to deceive the simpler sort, as it were
by sorcerie) to destruction, and not to Aedification.

So much for the Final Cause. And hitherto have we spoken of the Causes of
Things indifferent.
CHAP. VI. What Things be rightly and truly termed INDIFFERENT.
WHat things are to be accounted and held INDIFFERENT, and what not; may be
collected by the precedent Disputation, about the Definition and Causes of
Things indifferent.

2 But yet for the more plain demonstration of this point; How Things merely
Indifferent may be discerned.
and to the end, that no error be committed in the Use of Things indifferent;
these succeeding Distinctions, Canons and Cautions are diligently to be marked
and remembered.

3 I. The General kind of every ceremony, 1. Distinction.
rite, thing, action, fact, work etc. is either Commanded by GOD, or Forbidden.

4 If the General kind be Commanded, then also the Special kind, work,
thing, or action it self, is rightiy termed INDIFFERENT.

5 As for example. This General kind, Order, or Decency in the Church is to be
kept, is Commanded by GOD (1. Cor. 14.40.) Therefore all the Special kinds of
this General, as, the circumstances of time, place, persons, garments, and
such like, are free and indifferent.

6 But if the General kind be Prohibited and forbidden by GOD; then cannot the
Special kind, or work be accounted in our own power, and indifferent.

7 As, it is Forbidden, that any man worship God with the Traditions of Men:
Therefore the Popish Mass, and all other inventions of will worship contained
under a forbidden General kind, are not to be placed among Things indifferent.

8 II. Among Things indifferent, 2. Distinction.
Some are Free and lawful, but at some certain Times: And some are Always
Free and lawful.

9 Things in diffdrent at a certain Time, were the Jewish Mosaicall Feasts,
observed by the weak Christians in the Apostolical Primitive Church; and so
also was Circumcision and some such other Ceremonies, permitted by the Apostles
unto the weaker sort in the infancy of the Church: otherwise it was lawful
for any man, to neglect them at his pleasure.

10 And yet these things, before the revelation of Christ, were not free to be
done, or not to be done; but necessary parts of religion, because they were
commanded by God himself.

11 But in the Apostles time, although they were abrogated, yet they were made
Indifferent, so that if any did observe them, for peace and quietness sake, he
was not reckened an offender against Christian faith.

12 Add also, that this was the will and counsel of GOD, that the Ceremonies
of the Law should not be abrogated, and taken away altogether, and at once; but
by little and little, one after another, until the Temple were utterly
subverted: for he would not that the Temple should stand without any
Ceremonies. But after that the Temple was taken away, then also were all the
Feasts and Sacraments of the Jews made unlawful to all the Church.

13 And this is that which S. Augustine wrote to S. Jerome, that the Jewish
Synagogue was to be lead with pomp to her funeral, and to be buried with
honor.

14 Wherefore, after the Church was established, they ceased to be Indifferent,
even as at this day also, they are Forbidded in the Church of Christ, according
to the saying of S. Paul ( Gal. 5.2.) If you be circumcised, Christ shall
profit you nothing at all.

15 Those things which are Always Indifferent, are these; to eat flesh, and
not to eat, to marry a wise, or to remain unmarried, to use a Surplice in the
ministerial office, or not to use it, and such other things.

16 III. 3. Distinction.
Indifferent things are considered two ways, First In themselves, as middle
things, without relation to persons: Secondly, Relatiuely, as they are referred
to the persons that use them.

17 Being conddered In themselves, then, Such things as are Indifferent in
their own natures, are all free, and such as neither please, nor displease God:
for they neither come under the compass of his precept, nor of his prohibition.

18 But being considered Relatiuely, they may be either Lawful, or Unlawful,
according to the respective quality of the men that use them: who are of two
sorts.

19 For some of them, are men Regenerate, and some Unregenerate, never borne
again in the womb of the Church.

20 Among such as are Regenerate; some are Strong in faith, and some are Weak.

21 If any Regenerate man which is Strong in faith, do use any of the
Indifferent things, without doubting or scruple of conscience, then are they to
him Lawful, and his obedience in Things indifferent pleases Almighty God.

22 For we ought to be persuaded, out of the Word of God, what things are
permitted, commanded, or forbidden unto us, according to that saying ( Romans
15.5.) Let every man have a full persuasion in his own mind. And again ( in
the verse. 14.) Nothing is unclean in it self; but to him that thinks any
thing unclean, to him it is unclean. And ( in the 22. and 23. verse.) Blessed
is the man that does not condemn himself in the thing which he allows, etc.

23 Neither is the saying of S. Paul against this, That Things Indifferent want
not the authority of the Word of God.
when he writes ( in Romans 14. verse. vlt.) Whatsoever is not of faith is
sinnne. Because that those Things which are INDIFFERENT, do not altogether want
the authority of the WORD OF GOD, but rather are established upon the same, for
so much as concerns the General kind of the particular fact, from whence it
comes, that the Work has his estimation in the sight of God, if it be
performed in faith. 1. Cor. 14.37.

24 Ezechias had no EXPRESS Word of GOD, for the taking away of the brazen
Serpent, and yet it pleased God: because the General kind of that particular
fact, was commanded by God, to wit, to take away all Idolatry, and the
occasions thereof. And therefore this fact of Ezechias being done of faith,
pleased God, and was acceptable unto him.

25 But if the Regenerate be as yet Weak in faith: that is, If they do use any
of these Indifferent things to the scandal, either of themselves, or of any
other, then are they unto them Unlawful, as is manifest.

26 And if a man Unregenerate uses them, or an Infidel, to him they are also
Unlawful, because the minds and consciences of such men are polluted. ( Tit.
1.15.) for Whatsoever is not of faith, is sin ( Romans 14. vlt.) that is, it is
polluted, and accursed before God.

27 Now then, it remains that we express a certain Canon or RVLE whereby we
may assuredly know what Things are INDIFFERENT unto us, and what are not: and
the RVLE is this.

28 If these Traditions, on the one side, A Certain RVLE to know what Things
are Indifferent.
be grounded upon the Written Word of GOD, or, at the least, be not repugnant
unto it: and on the other side, tend to the advancement of godliness and
piety; that is, if they be profitable, as well for the exciting, conseruing,
promouing of the Inward Worship, which consists in faith, hope, charity and
a good conscience; as also for the more reverent exercising of the Outward
Worship, which consists in the hearing of the Word, receiving of the
Sacraments, public Prayers and such like: then we constantly affirm, that
such Traditions and Ceremonies are profitable Indifferent things: and therefore
being commanded by the Church, they are necessarily to be observed, and
entertained as godly and wholesome.

29 The Reason of this Rule or Canon, is because all the Traditions of the
Apostles, had these two things, First, They had Grounds from the Scriptures;
Secondly, Profit to the furtherance and help of public piety and edification.

30 And this is manifested by two arguments. First, out of the general Rule
which the Apostle prescribes for these matters (1. Cor. 14.) Let all thingi be
done to edification: and again, Let all things be done decently, and in good
order. Secondly, by a particular Induction of those places, wherein we read
the Constitutions of the Apostles, whereof I have thought good to express some
Examples.

31 (1. Cor. 11.) The Apostle ordains, that Women should pray in the Church
covered, and Men bare-headed. First of all, this is not repugnant to holy
Scriptures. Secondly, the end of this Constitution, is honesty, the
preservation of Decency, and the edification of the Church; that is to say,
that the outward Worship may be performed with greater honesty and comeliness.
Again, Another End of that Ceremony, is, that thereby every one might be
admonished and put in mind of his own place and duty; namely that the Man is
the head of the Woman: and the Woman was put in mind of her subjection to the
Man: which things are profitable to the Internal Worship.

32 In the same place; the Apostle sets down an order, for the due
celebration of the Lords Supper, that all of them should meet and assemble
together, and tarry one for another. First, he shows that this ought to be
done out of the Word of God, that is, out of the Institution of Christ
himself. Secondly, The End hereof, is their Salvation, least they should be
guilty of the body and blood of Christ. Thirdly, that the same holy Supper
might be celebrated with greater reverence. Lastly, that this outward Ceremony
of meeting and assembling together, might serve to the inward Worship, namely
to faith, charity, and the spiritual union of the minds, or souls.

33 (1. Cor. 14.) He ordains, how Tongues may be used in the Church; to wit,
that no man speak in a strange language, without interpretation and
explication. First, How many reasons does the Apostle use, drawn out of the
holy Scriptures, to prove this ordinance, to be according unto will of God, to
be good and honest? After many Reasons used to that purpose, at last he
brings the authority of sacred Writ; saying, It is written in the Law, I
will speak unto this (unbelieving) people in diverse tongues, and with strange
lips, that so they may not hear me: as if the Apostle had said in other
words, Suffer not these men, to speak strange tongues in your congregation,
without explication; for this were a sign that God loves you not, for he is
wont to send such Prophets to the unbelieving Nations, whom he would not have
to know his will, or to attain to the knowledge of the truth. Secondly, he
plainly affirms, that the End of this constitution, is the edification of the
Church, that they might have consolation, exhortation, instruction, etc. that
is, that it might serve the inward Worship, faith, love and consolation of
Spirit.

34 The self same thing may be said of all other Canons, Constitutions and
Ordinances of the Apostles, all which, it were very tedious to repeat in this
place. First, They have their foundation in the Word of God, or else they do
not repugne the same. Secondly, They serve to advance piety, to stir up
repentance and faith: and finally, they serve to the end, that the godly in the
Church, may with greater desire, and more fruit, hear the Word of God,
receive the Sacraments, believe his promises, and observe his commandments all
their whole life.

35 Out of these things, which hitherto we have declared, these Conclusions
following, do manifestly follow.

36 I. What Traditions and Ceremonies are not to be accounted Indifferent.
Those Traditions, which of their own nature are contrary unto the Word and
Commandment of God, or which cannot be performed without sin, are not to
be numbered among Indifferent things, because in themselves they are Things
impious and damnable.

37 II. Even then also, when Traditions do speak of things in their own
nature Indifferent, yet they are made impious and doctrines of Devils, by
adding unto them the false opinion, to wit,

38 1. Of Merit, as though the observation of them did merit Remission of
sins.

39 2. Of Worship: as though God would be worshipped thereby, contrary to that
express saying ( Matthew. 15.) In vain do they worship me with the precepts of
men. Also that ( of Ezech. 20.) Walk in my commandments, and not in the
precepts of your fathers.

40 3. Of Perfection, as if their observation did make us perfect before God.

41 4. Of absolute Necessity, as if it were simply necessary, to observe them
for Conscience sake.

42 III. Ridiculous, Scenicall, or theatricall gestures, idle and unprofitable
Ceremonies, which neither serve for Discipline, nor for Order, but rather make
ostentation and appearance of heathenish vanity, and expose Religion to
contempt and scorn; which obscure true Doctrine, and are the sinews of Popish
superstitions; which make men profane and without all true reverence of God:
such as are, a pish and ridiculous gestures, processions about Churchyards,
carrying about of Images and relics, the laying of Christ into the Sepulcher,
the Play of Christ's resurrection and ascension, and such like fooleries: None
of these are to be ranged among the number of Indifferent things.

43 IV. Those Ceremonies which are, either the Seminaries of superstition, or
cannot be used without superstition, or certainly without some show or
appearance of superstition, which they draw with them inseparably by the very
use thereof; do not belong to this place of Indifferent things.

44 V. Neither are those Ceremonies rightly termed Indifferent things; by whose
use, the Enemies of truth are confirmed, or the weak Christians offended. For
all Ceremonies ought to be helps, prouocations, inducements, and sinews of
godliness, edification, the works of charity, Discipline, good Order, and
Comeliness.

CHAP. VII. Of the lawful USE of Things Indifferent.
THE true Church of God has liberty at all tiems, and in all places, The
Church vleth Things Indifferent freely.
to use those things which are truly Indifferent, to her own purpose and
commodity, or else to abstain from them; also, to change and alter them,
according to her own will and pleasure.

2 For so says the Apostle ( Coloss. 2.16.) Let no man judge you in meat and
drink, or in a holy day, or new Moon, or Sabbaths, which are but shadows of
good things to come, but the body is Christ.

3 And (1. Tim. 4.) speaking of the Indifferent use of meats, Every creature
of GOD is good, and not to be rejected, but to be received with thanksgiving:
for it is sanctified by the word of God and prayer. Also, God has created
meats to be received of the faithful with thanksgiving, and of all them that
know the truth.

4 And seeing there is a twofold Condition of man's life, one Worldly, which
we call Animal, A twofold Condition of Man's life.
because it respects our being in this present world; the other Spiritual,
which is referred to the world to come: Meats and every external Indifferent
thing, are referred to the first condition of life in this world, and they
ought not to be conjoined or mingled with the Spiritual estate or condition.

5 Therefore the Apostle (1. Cor. 6.13.) writes, Meat is for the belly, and
the belly for meat: and again, Meat does not commend us to GOD, for if we
eat, we have nothing the more, neither if we eat not, have we any thing the
less, 2. Corinthians. 8.7.

6 Whereupon the words of S. Paul (1. Cor. 10.25.) concerning Christian
liberty and power, are rightly opposed against Jewish Traditions. Whatsoever
is sold in the shambles, that eat, asking no question for conscience sake, for
the earth is the Lords and the fullness thereof.

7 And this Doctrine is also taught by our Savior Christ, when he reprooueth
the Pharisees, for taxing his Disciples eating meat with unwashed hands. That
which goes into a man does not defile him, but that which comes out, that
defiles the man: for that which goes into the mouth, descends into the
belly, and is cast forth into the draught, Matthew. 15.11.17.

8 But the place of S. A place of Romans 14.1. etc. concerning Things
Indifferent, expounded.
Paul (to the Romans cap. 14.) is most clear of all others, about the use of
Indifferent things, wherein he prescribes three remarqueable Rules, whereby we
may know, both what, and how this is to be performed. 1. That the Weak in
faith ought not to be rejected or scandalized. 2. That no man's Conscience be
charged or burdened thereby. 3. That by outward and indifferent things, we
ought not to judge of other men's faith and religion.

9 And for the better understanding of that place of the Apostle, we will
paraphrastically expound the nine first verses of this XIV. Chap. whereby this
matter shall be made more clear.

10 Seeing there are many younglings, A Paraphrase of the 1. verse.
weak or sick in faith, and such as have not attained to any great measure of
spiritual strength, because they have not learned thoroughly the Doctrine of the
Gospel, and the true use of Christian Liberty, but are still in opinion, that
they are bound to observe the Ceremonial law of Moses, about forbidden meats,
and other such external rites: yet they hear the Gospel preached, and are no
enemies thereunto; it is therefore necessary, and not the least part of
Christian charity, that such persons be not offended, but rather cherished,
patiently tolerated, taught and instructed with all meekenes and lenity, that
they may be delivered from their present scruple, doubtfulnes, and anxietie of
mind and Conscience. And this ought to be done, not only by permitting them
to live after such manner as they please, but also, by courteous and familiar
conference, and conniuencie, and by applying or conforming our manners and
behavior to theirs, by a peaceable and delectable society or conversation, so
long, until they be brought without all contention, scandal or dispute, to
lay aside their vain persuasions, and to understand the doctrine of Christian
Liberty, how by JESUS CHRIST we are delivered from sin, wrath and damnation;
and therefore much more, from Ceremonial types, rites, sacrifices, observance
of days, choice of meats and humane Traditions. And before they can be
brought to bear these things, their Consciences ought not to be troubled,
neither ought any man to reason with them contentiously, racking and snatching
their words, sayings or actions, unto the worser part: but their weakness is to
be tendered, and cured by little and little, seeing they do not sin of
malice, nor have any purpose to defend their errors stubbornely, but are
docible, albeit they are not as yet confirmed and settled in judgment.

11 Hereupon, when those which are Stronger in faith, Verse 2.
and well instructed in the Doctrine of Christian liberty, do know, that,
notwithstanding the law of Moses, yet they have a freedom to eat any kind of
meat, without any offense of God: And the Weaker, on the other side, strain
at all the law of Moses, both for meats, days and other things, living upon
herbs, and abstaining from meats, thinking that their religion cannot be
sound and sincere, nor their conscience quiet, except after their old fashion
they live according to the law of Moses; From hence one side falls to despise
another, and mutually accuse each others manners, whereby simultation,
ielousies and contentions arise. Yet neither of both sides do well.

12 Wherefore, Verse 3.
they ought to handle the matter in this sort. The Stronger that can eat any
kind of meat, must not contemn, deride, or set light by the other which are
Weak, as though they were blockish, superstitious, stubborn, froward, ignorant
in the doctrine of Christian Liberty. Contrariwise, the Infirmer and weaker
sort, which are not yet persuaded of Christian Liberty, but hang upon Moses
Law, must not rashly condemn their Brethren, that abstain not from forbidden
meats; or proclaim them, wicked, profane, rash and polluted persons. For
there is one LORD of both, whom they serve, because they are both the members
of Christ; converted unto the true faith and religion, and have one common
right of Redemption, and know that they are equally cherished and norished by
the fatherly love of God.

13 Unto this their LORD, Verse. 4.
and GOD, shall every one render an account for himself; not this man for thee,
nor thou for him. And therefore it is nothing unto thee, what thy neighbor
does in this point; for he is not thy servant, but the servant of God. It is
GODS right, and not thine, to give judgment or sentence upon his servant, who,
if he do not well, shall be chastened by the Lord, but if he do well, he shall
be approved and commended by him: and both these things shall be performed,
without thy gain or loss, because that this whole business does nothing at all
belong unto thee. See therefore that thou do thy own duty, and cease from
contemning and condemning thy Brother, for mere Indifferent things. And
although he seem to thee, to sin every day more and more, and to wax worse
and worse; yet is the contrary true: for he shall be established and
confirmed, and so shall remain and be safely preserved in the grace and favor
of GOD. For GOD (of whose good will and helping grace, we are well persuaded)
who is wont to enlighten his own children, and to adorn them every day with
increase of grace, is both able and willing to strengthen that weak member,
that his faith may always abide sound and safe, and receive no damage or
hinderance by these In different actions.

14 I add also this. One man, Verse 5.
after the law of Moses observes the difference of days, as Sabbathes, the new
Moons, the feast of Tabernacles, and such other holy days, although he know
that none of these things are requisite and necessary to salvation. Another
man observes none of these, but accounts all days Indifferent; one while
laboring, another while resting, even as seems best unto himself: and yet is
not a contemner of Religion, nor offends good men, nor yet with any untimely
actions troubles the peace of the Church. But whatsoever any man does, he must
principally regrad, that he be fully persuaded of the lawfulnes of his own
fact or deed, and consult with his own conscience, according to the rule of
the Word of God, doing nothing doubtfully, but examining every thing, by a true
and lively faith (which is a full assurance) and not hurt his conscience, by
any rash and intemperate endeavor, or by the desire and lust of contention.

15 For they which are yet weak in faith, Verse. 6.
and do observe the Festival days, after their old manner, but without
opinion of Necessity, Merit, or divine Worship in them, they do not sin
against God, but observe that difference, for the glory of God, until they
be better instructed. And those which have perfectly learned the doctrine of
Christian Liberty, and do (without scandal) not observe any of those Feasts,
do not only not offend against God, but rather do that thing which cannot
displease him. In like sort, he which eats of every meat, does not sin,
but please God, unto whom he renders honor, and praise, and thanks, with
all reverence, for all sorts and dishes of meats set before him. And he
again, which abstaineth from some certain meats, contenting himself with
herbs, does not evil, but pleases God, unto whom also he gives thanks,
having a special care and regard of the tenderness of his conscience.

16 The Sum is. Verse 7.
Whether we use our Christian Liberty in Indifferent things, or whether for
reasonable causes, we abstain from the use thereof, for a season: yet we
please God, and are approved by him; because all our actions proceeding from
faith, whether we live, or die, tend to the praise and glory of his Name. For
no man lives for himself, or for his own commodity: No man lives, or dies
to himself: No man ought to respect himself alone, nor once to imagine, that
he can live by his own will and pleasure. For the faithful do acknowledge
with thanksgiving that they have not their own, but the will and word of God,
for the rule and canon of their life, acknowledging also that unto him alone
they shall give account of their doings, being subject to his power, law and
jurisdiction, both in life and death.

17 Therefore whether we live, Verse 8.
we yield grateful obedience to God, which he accepts; or if we die, we
give him the same obedience, and are patient in death: and always both in life
and death, we are his beloved Sons, the Brethren of our own only Savior
Jesus Christ; yea we are wholly the Lords, and LORDS our selves, being equally
cared for, and respected by our Lord,

18 Who died for our sins, Verse 9.
and rose again having overcome death, and now lives for ever, the LORD both
of quick and dead; who takes us into his tuition and custody, and so
nourishes and saves us, that whether we live or die, yet wills us to be
saved, that we might also live with him for ever.

19 Now we will join unto this Paraphrase, Canons of the lawful use of
Things in different.
certain Canons, whereby the lawful USE of Things indifferent, may more
clearly and evidently appear.

20 I. 1
Among all those things which are commanded by GOD in his express law, there is
not one of them, but ought to be confidently used, performed and taught,
without fear of Scandal.

21 And that, Note well.
because the Cause of faith, is to be preferred before Love: even as this one
sentence ( Act. 4.19.) does abundantly prove, It is better to obey God, than
man. And our Savior Christ also speaks of himself, ( Matthew. 10.34.) I came
to send a sword, and not peace, etc.

22 Hereupon you may observe, that if the Church or any Magistrate shall
command any thing, against the Law of God; you must not obey it, but constantly
and confidently gainsay it. For we are no further bound to obey the Laws of
our Superiors, than they stand in correspondencie and similitude, with the Law
of GOD.

23 No creature has any power to command, or to do any thing contrary to the
Commandments or Word of God; as we are taught by the first Precept of the
Decalogue, Thou shall have no other Gods, but me: and in another place, Walk
in my Commandments, etc.

24 II. All necessary things must be done: 2
In things that are not absolutely necessary, we must ever observe that temper
and moderation, that our examples hurt not other men's consciences, or break
the common bond of concord and amity: as the Rule of the Ciuilians does
sufficiently declare; Quod tibi non nocet, and alteri prodest, id praestandum
est. That which hurts not thee, but profits thy brother, that ought to be
performed. For it is a just thing, to abridge and restrain ones own liberty
and privilege, for the salvation of another: as travelers, in a common
journey, wherein the strongest and best footman tarieth, to accompany the
weakly, not ouergoing him.

25 III. 3
All Indifferent things being considered In themselves, and in their own
nature, are lawful and good. In Use, they are indifferent and free. By
Accident, they are evil and unlawful, as when they are performed by the
Unregenerate or by the Regenerate with scandal, either of himself, or of
others. And by Accident they are necessary to be done, as when they are
commanded by the Church, and cannot be omitted without great scandal and
offense. Act. 15.28.

26 IV. Such Indifferent things, as are commanded, 4
either by Ecclesiastical, or by Civil authority, do not bind any man to the
performance of them in case of absolute Necessity.

27 Because CHRIST himself dispenfed with his own divine Law in case of
necessity, when his Disciples plucked and rubbed the ears of Corn, Matthew.
12.1. etc.

28 And that all laws, both Ecclesiastical and Civil, may be dispensed
withal, in peril of salvation, S. Paul evidently teaches (2. Cor. 13.10.)
when he says, We have power to edification, and not to destruction.

29 In like manner ( Col. 2.22.23.) if there be any peril of the body, the same
S. Paul dispenses with it; where he condemns foolish laws and ordinances,
against the necessity of the body, As, Touch not, Taste not, Handle not,
which all perish etc.

30 V. 5
If our Adversaries require the observation of their Traditions, as of things of
absolute necessity to salvation; then in their presence, and to their teeth,
we may safely do the contrary, without respect of scandal: for every part of
Christian Liberty ought to be so dear unto us, and safely preserved by us,
that we may not yield any piece or fragment thereof, to treacherous or
malicious minded Adversaries.

31. From this occasion it is reported ( Matthew. 15.12.13.14.) Thou have heard
that the Pharisees were offended at this saying: our Savior Christ makes this
answer, not caring for the offense of such vipers; Every plant which my
heavenly Father has not planted, shall be plucked up by the roots. Let them
alone, they are blind guides of the blind, etc.

32 And for this cause, S. Paul would not circumcise Titus, at the request of
the Jews, requiring it as a thing necessary, Galath. 2.3.

33 VI. 6
If there be any among the weak, that may be instructed, for their instruction
sake, any man may do contrary to the usual Traditions or Ceremonies, that so
he strengthen and confirm their tender consciences.

34 So S. Paul reproved Peter, because that by his example, he did not confirm
their consciences, which were weak among the Gentiles.

35 VII. Amongst those weak ones, 7
which may be easily instructed, we must both do the work of charity, and
observe the Traditions.

36 Even as S. Paul did when he came to Jerusalem, where among a great
multitude, he found a very few, that understood plainly the Liberty of the
Gospel, he both observed the Traditions, and was himself also shaued,
according to the manner of Jews. Act. 21.

37 And hereunto is to be referred that kind of Scandal, which is mentioned in
the Epistle to the Romans ( Chap. 14. and 1. Cor. 9.) There were some that did
observe the Ceremonies of the law; and again there were some that did not
observe them. Now when the Obseruants saw such as did not observe them, they
began to doubt in their minds and consciences, whether what they did were
lawful, or no? and stayed not here, but also went farther, beginning to think
amiss of Christian religion, as though it gave liberty to the flesh, against
the Law of God. And many times the Weaker were drawn against their
consciences, following the example of the stronger, to neglect the Ceremonies;
whereupon afterward they fell to be perplexed. Here S. Paul charge the
stronger sort, to bear with these, until they were better instructed and
learned; when he says, Bear with the weak in faith, etc. Romans 14.1.

38 IIX. Necessity excuses all scandal or offense; 8
as we may see ( Matthew. 12.1. and 2. Sam. 21.7.) and so also does the Precept or
Prohibition of the Church, arising from just cause, Act. 15.28.

39 IX. 9
We must take heed of multitudes of Ceremonies, albeit otherwise they be
tolerable in themselves, for thereby pure Religion and true piety, is not only
very often not helped, but much hindered, obscured and impaired, if not
clearly extinguished.

CHAP. IIX. Of the power of Laws, especially of Ecclesiastical Laws: and
whether they bind the conscience. where also is handled of Civil and
Ecclesiastical Magistrates; and of Christian Liberty.
BEcause the LAW of God (the sum or abridgement whereof, Of Humane LAWS
is comprised in the Decalogue) contains many general principles; out of
which, every man is not able to collect and derive special Conclusions or
Laws, for the common benefit of Church and Commonwealth; therefore it was
needful that Almighty GOD should raise up special wise and understanding Men,
who might more sufficiently and prudently expound and draw exact Rules out of
that Divine Law, for the profit and conservation of the Commonwealth.

2 Hence first of all, proceeded all HVMANE LAWS, which were not only
conceived, declared, and proclaimed by Men, as Ministers and Messengers, but
derived out of Man's understanding and wit, as from an author and inuentour.

3 Now if these be just and righteous, they are worthy the name of LAWS, but
if they be unjust and tyrannical, who can afford them such a title or
appellation?

4 Wherefore to the intent, What things are required in just Laws.
that we be not deceived in our judgment, let us see what things appertain to
the right ordination of every Law.

5 There are two things requisite in every just Law; Necessary Reason; and
Just or lawful Authority.

6 Necessary Reason does also depend upon two things; 1. Necessary Reason.
to wit, upon the Original of the Law; and upon the End thereof.

7 The Original of every Law, The Original of Humane Laws.
ought to be taken out of the only fountain of Laws, namely, THE ETERNAL
LAW OF GOD, commanding the eternal LOVE of GOD and MAN.

8 The End of the Law is twofold, Subordinate, The End of Laws.
and Principal; whereof the former, which is the safety and profit of the
people, ought to be subject unto, and serve the latter, that is, the
Principal, which is, the Glory of GOD. For if any Law does not serve for this
purpose, it cannot be just?

9 The Authority or power which is requisite to the sanction or ordinance of a
righteous Law, 2. Just Authority.
is the sovereignty of the lawful Magistrate over his Subjects.

10 This sovereignty, albeit it may seem to be always just, in respect of the
Subjects, yet it degenerateth and becomes unjust, if it be not subordinate
and subject to the the Law of GOD.

11 For as all Humane authority is sinite and limited, Humane Authority ought
to be subject to that which is Divine.
so of necessity it must be subordinate and subject to that authority which is
infinite, of which sort there is no other authority, but only GODs; from which,
if any Humane power does swerve, by abuse it becomes unjust and tyrannous.

12 Humane Laws are of two sorts, Ecclesiastical, Humane Laws twofold. 1.
Ecclesiastical.
and Civil.

13 Ecclesiastical Laws, are the Determinations of Circumstances, necessary,
or profitable for the keeping of the Moral Precepts of the first Table.

14 For they belong, either to the preservation of good order and comeliness in
the Congregations of the Church, in the use and practice of the Ecclesiastical
Ministry; or to the outward exercises of piety, whether public, or
private; or for the avoiding of the Scandal of the weak, and for their
conversion to the Church and knowledge of the truth; as we have said before.

15 Civil Laws, 2. Civil,
are the Determinations of Circumstances necessary or profitable for the
keeping of the moral Precepts of the second Table.

16 Because they concern the Conservation of Order and Comeliness in common
life and civil society, and of peace amongst men.

17 And albeit both the Ecclesiastical and Civil functions be, Both the
functions have all others subject unto themselves.
every one in regard of it self, Principal, having all other functions
subordinate and subject thereunto, yet are they distinguished one from another,
by certain bounds and limits in the administration of the affairs of Religion.

18 For the Minister of the Church instructs the consciences of men by the
Word, The Minister.
whereunto the greatest Magistrate is as well bound to harken and yield
obedience, as the inferior citizen of lowest degree.

19 And the Civil Magistrate takes charge and care, The Magistrate.
that the Word be truly taught, preached and received; punishing, with the
external sword the violators and contemners of Discipline, whether they be
Ministers, or common people.

20 And this is certain, The Ecclesiastical and Civil functions are distinct
Offices.
that these two Offices or functions, are distinct and different one from the
other, which Satan has marueilously confounded in the Papacy; but we, and all
other good Christians, must watch diligently, that they be not confounded
again.

21 From whence it arises, Note well.
that one and the same Person cannot be a Bishop, and a Prince or King, also a
Pastor and a Master of a family. For as these Offices are divided and severed,
so ought also the Persons to be.

22 And yet ONE MAN may undergo and bear both Persons, Whether one and the
same Man may bear two persons.
as the same N. may be both a Minister, and a Master of a family. So N. being
one and the same man may be, both Duke of Cornwall and Archbishop of York; and
yet the Duke of Cornwall cannot be Archbishop of York.

23 A Bishop, as he is Bishop, has no power over the Church, to impose any
Law, Tradition, or Ceremony, without the consent thereof, either express, or
implied.

24 Because the Church is a free Lady or Mistress, and the Bishops ought not
to bear rule over the faith of the Church, nor to oppress or burden her
against her will. For they are the Stewards and Ministers of the Church, and
not LORDS over the same.

25 But if the Church does give her consent, and join as one body with the
Bishops, then they may impose what they please upon themselves, (provided it be
not against the analogy of faith) and so again omit and release the same at
their own pleasure.

26 A Bishop, as he is a Prince, much less may burden the Church with any
constitutions: for this were to confound both Offices, and to be indeed (...).
I speak this of the Church, as it is a Church, and distinguished from the
Civil estate.

27 A Bishop, as he is a Prince, may impose whatsoever he thinks good upon
his Subjects, as they be Subjects, and they are bound to yield obedience
thereunto, so it be godly and lawful. For then they obey, not as they are the
Church, but as citizens and Subjects. For there is a twofold Person in one and
the same man.

28 So N. as he is Duke of Cornwall, commanding all his Subjects to keep a
general fast, or any other such lawful thing, this commandment constrains
all them that acknowledge his power, as he is Duke, to obedience: but not all
those which acknowledge him to be their Archbishop, namely, which are subject
to some other temporal Duke or Prince, albeit they be of the Province of York.

29 Even as N. compels his Servant to be obedient unto his Oeconomicall or
Domestique Laws and Orders, but not his Church N.

30 But to come nearer the point, The Office of the Civil Magistrate in
Ecclesiastical matters.
there is a threefold Office of the Civil Magistrate in Ecclesiastical
affairs. First, that after the example of David (1. Chron. 16.27. and.) he
provide, that true Doctrine and the sincere Worship of God may flourish in
every part of his kingdom; and that the Churches may be rightly settled and
governed by able and sufficient persons.

31 The Second Office is, that the Magistrate do by his public authority
approve and establish that Order, which was ordained by GOD himself for this
end and purpose. Even as the godly King Iehoshaphat destroyed the groves, and
took away the high places out of Judah, and sent his Nobles with the Priests
and Levites through all his kingdom, with the Book of the Law, which they
had, that they might go about all the cities of Judah, and teach the same to
all the people. 2. Chron. 17.6.

32 So also Ezekias sent letters and messengers into all Israel, to call them
to the house of the Lord, at Jerusalem, to offer the Passover to JEHOVAH the
God of Israel. 2. Chro. 30.2. etc.

33 And so Nehemiah caused the Book of the Law to be read in the ears of the
people, and according to the Law therein contained, he separated and put away
all the strange wives, which the Israelites had married, contrary to the
ordinance of GOD, Nehem. 13.1. etc.

34 The Third Office is, that they provide, that all those things, which do
appertain to God, and concern the consciences of men, be administered only by
the Ministers of the Church: and yet themselves ought to assist and defend the
Ministry with their presence, counsel, protection and authority: so as
there may be a conjunction, and not a confusion of both these Orders and
functions.

35 According to the Rule and counsel of David, to his son Solomon, when he
exhorts him, to the care and charge of building the Temple, and also of
providing for the holy Worship of God (1. Chro. 28.21.) Let all the Priests and
Leuits be with thee, in all the Ministry of the house of God.

36 The Sum briefly is. The Civil Magistrate is the keeper of the Law of
God, for so much as concerns the outward discipline: that the difference
betwixt the Ministry of the Gospel, and the Magistracy, may always be
preserved.

37 The Ministry of the Gospel, proponeth the Gospel of grace, whereby the
Holy Ghost is effectual in the believers; as it is (2. Cor. 3.6.) He has made
us able Ministers of the new Testament, not of the letter, but of the spirit.

38 And yet in the mean time, the Magistrate has his outward Office, for the
repressing of all Scandals, for forbidding Idolatry, as well as adultery and
murder. Which thing is notably manifested by S. Paul, saying, The law was
given against the unrighteous, profane, and despisers of God. And the same
Apostle calls this the LAVVFVL use of the Law, namely, when the Magistrate,
by outward punishment, represseth all offenses committed against the Precepts
of the first and second Table.

39 But here arises a very difficult Question, 1. Question. Whether Humane
Laws do bind the Conscience?
concerning the observation of Humane Laws; namely, Whether Humane Laws do
simply bind the Conscience? And, With what conscience they are to be observed
and obeyed?

40 Some boldly and magnifically brag of their CHRISTIAN LIBERTY, whereby they
affirm, that in corporal things, they are exempted and freed from all
Politic servitude and obedience. For, say they, if Obedience be necessary,
then is there no Liberty; for Liberty and Obedience are things repugnant one
unto the other.

41 Others hold, that the obligation of Ecclesiastical and Civil Laws are
different and unlike, affirming that the Civil Laws do simply and absolutely
bind the Conscience; and that the Ecclesiastical Laws do bind only in
case of Scandal.

42 Unto whom we Answer: First, Of the Necessity of Laws among Men.
As concerning Christian Liberty: there be some men so wild and rude by
nature, that they hate all Laws, as they do a prison or jail, and never
think themselves FREE enough, except they break all the chains and bonds of
Civil obedience and Brotherly society.

43 But if once they did, but in their conceits, imagine such an estate of
life, wherein there were no LAWS at all, then should they be forced, though
against their will, to confess that that life of Man cannot want the safeguard
and defense of Laws.

44 For in that lamentable and miserable estate, there appears nothing, but a
confusion of all licentiousnes and wickedness, and a commixtion of all heinous
crimes, committed with freedom, without any controulement; all places
abounding with robberies, slaughters, rapines, thefts and deceits.

45 Wherein no man bridleth or curbeth his own lusts, but dares commit any
villainy that comes into his mind: so as no man, good or bad, can be secure
and safe from open wrong, oppression and violence of others.

46 And to conclude, in this estate, there is not any appearance of the life of
Men, but of Beasts, or rather of monstrous Cyclopes; who being asked in the
Poet Euripides, what kind of life they did lead: they answered, We are (...)
brutish rogues and vagabonds, wandering from place to place amongst beasts,
(...), and not one of us do hear or regard another.

47 Now by this it may be sufficiently acknowledged, how much we are to
attribute to LAWS and ORDER, which whosoever goes about to abrogate, or to
remove from Humane society, it were verily to remove, or to take away the
Sun out of the world.

48 And yet by this we do not abolish the Doctrine of Christian Liberty, The
Obedience of laws takes not away Christian Liberty.
which concerns matters of far greater importance, than civil and
external Liberty.

49 But wicked Epicures and godless men, do above measure stretch and strain
this doctrine, transferring it to that Liberty of the flesh, which is not
allowed by God: because under the pretense of Liberty, they seek immunitie
from all Civil charges and burdens, from all Laws, and from Magistrates;
whom our Lord JESUS CHRIST himself did not only by word, but also by his own
example teach, that he does not abolish the lawful Magistrate, or any godly
and profitable Laws and Constitutions: but rather that he perpetually
ratifieth them all, giving moreover this perpetual Rule or precept, Give unto
Caesar the things which are Caesar's, and unto God the things which are Gods.

50 And for the more clear manifestation, Of Christian Liberty.
and evident demonstration of this point, we will a little more exactly,
(though briefly) express the sum of the Doctrine of Christian Liberty.

51 The LIBERTY of the Sons of God, is that benefit, whereby they by Faith
are made the SONS OF GOD, and by the Righteousness of JESUS CHRIST, are
delivered from spiritual bondage and thraldom, Galat. 5.1.

52 And this is called CHRISTIAN LIBERTY, as well because it was obtained by
JESUS CHRIST, as also because by him it is imparted, and left by perpetual
legacy, to all Christians and faithful men of all ages to the worlds end.

53 And this is, Liberty two-sold.
either Common to all the Believers and faithful men in the old and new
Testament, or Proper and peculiar to them of the new Testament only.

54 I. I. Common, which is threefold.
The Common Liberty of all the faithful in the old and new Testament, is
threefold: First, from the Rigor and severity of the Moral Law. Secondly,
the Bondage of sin. Thirdly, from the Yoke of Humane Traditions.

55 The Liberty from the Moral Law, is twofold: First, 1. From the rigiour
of the Law.
from the Strict exaction of perfect obedience. Secondly, from the Eternal
curse and punishment, for violating the Law.

56 Whereupon it follows, that we also have obtained Liberty from the power
and tyranny of the Devil, from condemnation, and death eternal. Ioh. 8.26.

57 And herewith we are comforted and encouraged in the Combat of conscience,
before the judgment feate of God.

58 The Liberty from the Bondage of sin, 2. From the Bondage of Sin.
is that whereby we are delivered from the rule and dominion of Sin, or from
sin reigning in us, that it might no more bear rule over us; but being
justified and endued with the Holy Ghost, we may willingly and of our own
accord, without constraint or bond, serve and live to GOD in all righteousness (
Ioh. 8.34. 2. Cor. 3.17.) Where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty.
Romans 6.6. etc. 2. Pet. 2.19. Galat. 5.13.

59 The liberty from the Yoke of humane Traditions, 3. From the Yoke of
Traditions.
is that whereby all the faithful are freed from observation of men's
Inventions, Ceremonies and Superstitions, which are obtruded and thrust upon
the Church under color of piety and religion, or else imperiously and by
absolute power and tyranny commanded.

60 Such were the Pharisaicall Traditions, which the faithful did not regard.
( Matthew. 24.4. Matthew. 15.2. and 9.14.15.) Of this Liberty speaks S. Paul, 1.
Cor. 7.23.

61 II. II. Proper. which is twofold.
The Proper Liberty of the Faithful in the new Testament, which is specially
termed CHRISTIAN LIBERTY, is twofold: First, Freedom from all the Judicial
Laws and Ceremonies of Moses. Secondly, Freedom in Things Indifferent.

62 Liberty from the Judicial and Ceremonial laws, 1. From the Ceremonials
of Moses.
is that whereby Christians are released from observing of those laws, namely,
in as much and as far, as they concern only the Polity of Moses, and the
instruction of the ancient people of the Jews, Act. 15. 1. Cor. 9.1.19. 2.
Cor. 3.17. Heb. 9.10.

63 For those things which are of the law of Nature, are not abrogated by
Christian Liberty, but al Nations are still bound to obey them.

64 Liberty in Things Indifferent, 2. Liberty in Things Indifferent.
is that by which Christians are free in the use, or abstinence of middle and
indifferent things (1. Cor. 9.1.) which may be, either observed, or omitted, by
force and virtue of Christian Liberty.

65 They may be observed verily, and kept for quietness and concords sake, also
for avoiding of Scandal ( Romans 14.15.16. 1. Cor. 8.19. and 11.29. 2. Cor.
11.12.) But yet so, as that the false opinion of Merit, Worship, Perfection,
and Necessity, be removed and taken away.

66 Also they may be neglected and omitted without Sin, out of the case of
Scandal, and without the appearance of the denial of the truth, and without
the omission of necessary Confession.

67 They that, neglecting these things in the Reformed Churches, do violate
such Indifferent Ceremonies, do grievously sin, albeit they cry out a
thousand times Christian Liberty, Christian Liberty, etc. and make that a
pretense, either of their boldness, or of their obstinacy.

68 Hence appears manifestly, The Servitude of the body repugneth not
Christian Liberty.
that neither Corporeal and outward Servitude and Subjection; as is that of
Inferiors toward their Superiors; nor yet that Servitude and subjection, which
is of the Spirit toward GOD ( whereof the Apostle speaks, 1. Cor. 9.27.) do
any way repugne Christian Liberty: seeing nothing hinders, but that a man
may be free in mind, who is a Servant touching the Body.

69 Therefore S. Paul says (1. Cor. 7.21.22.) Art thou called being a Servant?
Care not for it; as if this calling were unworthy of Christ: But if yet thou
may be free, use it rather. For he that is called in the Lord, being a
Servant, is the Lords free man: likewise also, he that is called being free, is
Christ's Servant.

70 The Kingdom of Christ, is a far other thing, The Kingdom of Christ what
it is.
then Political and Civil Liberty, namely, the restitution of eternal life,
and everlasting righteousness: and is gathered in this life, of diverse and
sundry Nations, who use several Policies, Laws and Government. For it is
most certain, Note well.
that the GOSPEL HAS NOT ORDAINED ANY EXTERNAL OR CORPOREAL POLICY: but
permits us freely to use the Policies of ALL Nations, as we do freely use
the aer, meat, apparel, and arts amongst all Nations.

71 Yea he will have us (concerning the Body) to be subject to the Laws proper
unto the Body, of meat and drink, of apparel, of Politic order: because
meat, drink, apparel, wedlock, the education of children, Politic
socientie, and defense, are NECESSARY for the Body: and it is written, We owe
honor unto the Body.

72 But yet the Consciences of the faithful are exempted from the power of
Man, God only has to do with men's Consciences.
because our Consciences have to do, not with men, but with GOD only: neither
are our Consciences bound by any Laws, but only Divine.

73 For, as the Prophet says, JEHOVAH is our Lawgiver ( Esaias 33.22.) and the
Apostle also, There is one Lawgiver, which can both save and destroy, Iac.
4.12.

74 They therefore that impose Laws upon men's Consciences, do challenge unto
themselves power to save, and to destroy, and do rob GOD of his own right.

75 And indeed, what difference should there be, betwixt Humane and Divine
Laws; if they should as well bind the Consciences, as these do? So should any
edict or commandment of man, be equal unto the Divine Precepts.

76 But lest any man stumble against this stone: A twofold regiment to be
considered in Man.
First, we must diligently observe the difference betwixt the Spiritual or
internal, and the Politic or external regiment of man: for by the former,
the Conscience is informed in the exercises of piety, and of the Worship of
God; and by the latter, it is instituted in the outward duties of humanity and
civility.

77 Now then, How man is subject unto human Laws.
according unto the external and Politic regiment, every Christian is
necessarily subject to all Humane Laws (I mean such as are lawful and just)
whether they be made by the Civil Magistrate, or by the Church. According
unto the internal and Spiritual regiment, the Consciences of the faithful
are free before God.

78 The mixture and confusion of this difference, ought carefully to be
avoided; least that from Spiritual freedom, Politic Liberty be
preposterously inferred.

79 Again, That Law is said to bind the Conscience, which does simply and
absolutely bind a man, without any consideration, regard, or respect, either
of Men, or of any Circumstance.

80 So we ought simply to obey the Divine Commandments of almighty God,
without any regard or difference of men, or of time, or of place, or of any
other circumstance.

81 But we ought to obey Humane Laws, How far we ought to obey Humane Laws.
because they are necessary for conservation of peace and tranquillity; NOT
SIMPLY, but so as the Circumstances require.

82 As, he that is an English man, and lives in England, is bound to yield
obedience unto the Laws and policy of England: but if the same man go over
into France, then he is not necessarily bound to obey the English Laws.

83 Which is a manifest and invincible Argument, that the Conscience was not
simply and absolutely bound by those Laws; for then they were to be observed,
as well in France or any other place, as in England.

84 Furthermore, Albeit S. Paul wills, Of the place of Paul, For conscience
sake etc.
that the Magistrate should be obeyed, for Conscience sake, (that is, lest by
our rebellion and contumacie against the Magistrate, we offend GOD; that so we
might retain a good Conscience before him, who has set the Magistrate over
us) yet he does not tie our Consciences with politic Laws, but only wills
that the Magistrate be obeyed so far, as he commands honest and lawful
things, agreeing with the Word of God: because we have received this
commandment from God, which ought in no wise to be gainsaid, or resisted,
Romans 13.5.

85 The Apostle does not ensnare and entangle our consciences with every
particular edict or precept of the Magistrate, but speaks only of the
AVTHORITIE it self, which is holy, and may not be contemned, with a safe
Conscience.

86 For it is the commandment of GOD, that we submit our selves unto the
Magistrate, and this Precept of God touches the Conscience.

87 Therefore we ought to obey the Magistrate, NW.
in respect of the General kind, for Conscience sake: because we are by the
general precept commanded, to yield obedience and subjection unto the
Magistrate: yet the particular Laws of the Magistrate have no dominion over
the Conscience.

88 To conclude, when we observe the particular Laws of the Magistrate, we
do not respect the Precepts themselves, as if by performing of them, our
Consciences were satisfied: but we respect the End, that is the Will of GOD,
which commands obedience unto honest and just Laws.

89 Yea we willingly, readily, and with a free Conscience, obey all Laws
necessary for preservation of peace, and Civil society; or such also, as
concern Order and decency: yea and that, albeit we do not see and perceive
that order.

90 The Sum is. Albeit GOD only does properly bind the Conscience, yet in
as much as either the Magistrate, who is the Minister of God, does judge it
behouefull for the Commonwealth, that some thing, although in it self
lawful, be not done; or the Church, having a special regard unto Order,
Decency, or Edification, does lawfully and orderly make some Laws concerning
Things indifferent; such Laws (we absolutely hold and affirm) the Godly
OUGHT to obey: And they do altogether bind the external work; yea and the
Conscience also so far, that no man, wittingly and willingly, with a
rebellious or contumacious mind, may without Sin, either do such things,
II. Question. Whether Ecclesiastical and Civil Laws bind alike? That Civil
and Ecclesiastical Laws have the same authority and bond. Proved, 1. From the
Efficie^t Cause. 2. From the right of authority.
as are so prohibited; or omit such things, as are so commanded.

91 It remains that we speak of the other Question; to wit, Whether
Ecclesiastical and Civil Laws do bind alike? or, Whether they bind with
different obligation?

92 ANSWER. The obligation of both these Laws, is altogether like: for the
one binds as much as the other, which may be proved by many Reasons.

93 First, from the Efficient Causes: for GOD is the author of both Powers,
Ecclesiastical and Civil, Luc. 22.25.26. 2. Cor. 10.

94 Secondly, from the right of Authority. The Civil Magistrate, by Divine
authority, has right out of the second Table of the Moral Law, to determine
those things, which appertain to the defense of corporal life, and unto
civil Society.

95 So also, the Ecclesiastical Power, by Divine ordinance, has right, out of
the first Table of the Decalogue, to determine the particular Circumstances
appertaining to Religion and the Worship of God.

96 Thirdly, 3. From the transgression of both Laws.
By the violation and breaking of Civil laws, the second Table of the
Decalogue is broken; because either something is detracted from the
Commonwealth, and politic society hurt; or else some occasion of hurting it,
is yielded.

97 So also, by the transgression of Ecclesiastical Laws with scandal,
contempt, contumacie, or careless negligence, the first Table of the Decalogue
is violated, unto which they are subordinate and serviceable.

98 Fourthly, Even as it is said of the Civil Magistrate, 4. From Divine
authority.
Let every soul be subject unto the higher powers (Romans 13.1.) Whosoever
resists power, resists the ordinance of God (Romans 13.2.) Put them in
remembrance, that they be subject to principalities and powers, and that they
be obedient, etc. (Tit. 3.1.) See also, Ephesians. 6.1. Coloss. 3.22.23.

99 So also it is said of the Ecclesiastical, Obey them that have the
oversight of you, and submit your selves: for they watch for your Souls, as
they that must give account, ( Hebr. 13.17.) He that hears you, hears me;
and he that dispiseth you, dispiseth me, ( Luk 10.16.) If he will not hear the
Church, let him be unto thee, as an Ethnique and Publicane, (Matthew. 18.17.) Ye
know what Commandments we gave you by the Lord Jesus. He therefore that
dispiseth these things, dispiseth not man, but GOD, who has given us his Holy
Spirit. 1 Thessalonians. 4.2.8.

100 Wherefore seeing the right of both powers be like, the Laws also bind
alike.

101 Fifthly, 5 From the Matter.
from the Matter about which they are employed. The Matter of the Civil power,
is the society of men, and the conservation thereof, to live in this life
under one and the same Magistrate.

102 So also the Matter of the Ecclesiastical power, is the Church, that is, a
company of Christian men, as they are called by God, and consecrated to lead a
spiritual life in the true obedience of God. Therefore there is the same reason
of both.

103 Lastly, 6. From the End.
from the proper End of both. The End of the Magistrate, is that he may
maintain and preserve Humane society in peace and quietness, inform it with
good Laws, conserve the bodies and goods af his Citizens and Subjects, and
protect their lives; namely, as they are inhabiters of this world, and live in
earth, Romans 13.3.4.5.

104 So also, the direct and proper End of the Prelates and Pastors
Ecclesiastical, is that they may edify, govern, inform, and teach by the
Word of God, the Consciences of the Citizens of the Church; to wit, as they are
heirs of the kingdom of heaven, and are, at one time or other, to be gathered
thither, Ephesians. 1.18. Philip. 3.20. Coloss. 3.2.3.

105 Whereupon the Ecclesiastical power, is termed; Ius Poli, the Law of
Heaven: and the Civil, Ius Soli, the Law of Earth.

106 Every particular man, for defense of Common peace, ought to confer (as
it were his shot) his obedience, tribute, and help; he that does not so,
defraudeth the rest; for he enjoys the labors and duties of other men, and
conferreth nothing himself. Even as he, that, in a common banquet, pays not
his own shot, defraudeth the rest of the guests.

107 So in like manner, they that confer not their obedience (as it were
their shot) unto the Ecclesiastical Laws, they hurt the faith, manners and
consciences of other men, they raise Scandals, and rashly and schismatically
disturb the peace and quietness of the Church.

108 Seeing therefore, that Love is hazarded and endangered by the
transgression of the Laws of both Powers, and that Scandals arise therefrom;
it follows, that the Authority and Obligation of both these Laws, are
altogether like.

CHAP. IX. Of SCANDAL. And who, in the Church of England, are the Authors of
Scandal. Whether the Reverend Bishops, and the Civil Magistrates, who require
Obedience in the received and approved Ceremonies; or certain Ministers, who
rather forsake their Ministry and places, then they will conform themselves?
SCANDAL, Scandal what it is.
is whatsoever is either a cause, or an occasion of offense unto any man. Or,
it is a saying, or fact, or example, or counsel of ours, whereby our Brother
or Neighbor is grieved, or troubled, or offended, so as he is thereby, either
hindered in his right course unto the way of life, or turned aside there from;
or lead into some error or sin, or confirmed in his evil may, Romans 14.15.
1. Cor. 8.9.

2 Scandal is twofold, Internal, and External. Scandal twofold. 1.
Internal.


3 Internal, or inward Scandal, is when the old Man gives offense unto the
new Man ( Matthew. 5.29.) If thy right eye offend thee, etc.

4 External, or outward Scandal, 2. External.
is that which comes from without, and gives any man either cause, or
occasion of ruin.

5 External Scandal is twofold, Active or Given; External Scandal twofold.
and Passive or Received.

6 In both these, two things are to be observed; First, NW.
the Foundation or Matter, that is, the fact it self. Secondly, the Term or
Form, that is, the occasion of imitation and offense: whereupon it has the
name, Scandal.

7 ACTIVE or Given Scandal, is that, I Of Active Scandal.
the fault whereof proceeds from the Author of that thing or action whereof the
Offense comes. Or, it is when any man ministereth an effectual cause of
falling unto another.

8 And this, if you respect the Matter thereof, arises either from a fact,
which in it self is Evil, that is, expressly forbidden by the Law of God; or
from a fact which in it self is Indifferent, but either done, or omitted
importunely, against the rule of Charity. In that, there is committed a
twofold sin; in this, one only.

9 Of the Former, Christ speaks unto Peter (Matthew. 16.23.) Go behind me
Satan, thou art a Scandal, or an offense unto me. For albeit indeed, Christ
was not scandalized, yet it was not long of Peter, but that Christ being
terrified with the cogitation of the Cross, did break the course of his
vocation: and the saying of Peter did verily grieve him; and, unto the weak,
might have been an occasion of ruin.

10 Unto this kind of Scandal are subject, NW.
all Heresies, all heinous Crimes, all actions or omissions repugnant unto the
Law of God; briefly, whatsoever is contrary unto the Love of God, or of our
Neighbor.

11 This Scandal ought all the godly, and such as have any care of their
salvation, to beware of, no otherwise, then they would beware of Hell it self;
seeing our Savior himself has said, that it were better for a man, then to
be the Author of this Scandal, that a Mil-stone were hanged about his neck,
and that he were drowned in the depth of the Sea, Matthew 18.6.

12 Of the Latter kind, the Apostle speaks (1. Cor. 8.13.) For S. Paul would
not, that any man should, either use Things indifferent, or abstain from the
use of them, with the offense of his Neighbor.

13 But here we must consider three sorts of Men. Three sorts of Men to be
considered in the use of Things indifferent.
Some have learned Christian Liberty, who therefore are accounted Firm and
Strong. Unto these an Indifferent fact cannot be a Scandal, but rather joy and
consolation.

14 Some are Obstinate and indocible. Concerning these the Rule of Christ is to
be observed: 1
Let them go, they are blind, 2
and the leaders of the blind.

15 Some are Weak, 3
and as it were Yonglings in the School of Christ. Of these there must special
regard and care be had in the Use of Things indifferent.

16 For whosoever uses Things indifferent with the Scandal of such, that is,
of them that are Weak, he violateth the Law of Charity, and denies the Faith
of Christ.

And hitherto of Active or Given Scandal: it follows that we speak of that
which is Passive and Received. 17 PASSIVE or Received Scandal, II. Of Passive
Scandal.
is that which Men take unto themselves, either from the good deeds, sayings or
counsels of others; or from true Doctrine and the external form of the
Church; or generally from any other thing whatsoever.

18 More specially, It is some fact of ours, or saying, or counsel, that in it
self is godly, just, and honest, or at least some Indifferent thing, not
wickedly nor importunely done; for the which notwithstanding, some man, either
of perverse morositie, or of envy and evil will, or of some other sinister
malignitie or error of mind, judges evil of us, and so draws it, into
occasion of Offense.

19 And this Passive or Received Scandal is twofold, Passive Scandal
twofold.
Humane, or Diabolical.

20 Passive Humane Scandal, is either of Wicked Men, 1. Humane, which is either
or of Godly Weak Men.

21 The Passive or Received Scandal of Wicked men, Of Wicked Men.
either of Worldlings and Wise men out of the Church, or of Hypocrites in the
external Assemblies of the Church, is when the Wicked are offended,

22 I. Either with the base estate, humility, and cross of Christ in his
assumpt Nature or Manhood, 1 Cor. 1.23.

23 II. Or with the unwisely conceived and supposed absurdity of the Gospel,
the suspicion of novelty, the simplicity of the Doctrine of truth, the
preaching of Grace, the article of Predestination, and with the mortification
of the Old Man, Matthew. 15.12.

24 III. Or with the external form of the Church.

25 IV. Or with the Life and actions of the Godly, whereby they peaceiue
themselves to be reproved in the free use of Things indifferent.

26 V. Or with the Cross and persecutions, which ever accompany the profession
of the Gospel.

27 The Passive or Received Scandal of the Godly, Or of the Godly-Weak.
is that which is taken by the Weak ones which are in the Church, and they not
of the worser sort: but is greedily caught by those that are malignant, that
they may make the doctrine of the Gospel uncertain and doubtful unto the
ruder and simpler people. And that,

28 I. Either from the oppression of the Church, and punishment of such as be
Innocent.

29 II. Or from the Heresies and Contention which disturb the Church.

30 III. Or from the multitude, power and authority of the Adversaries of the
celestial Doctrine.

31 IV. Or from the flourishing fortunes and prosperous success of the Wicked,
Psalm. 73.2.

32 But the Godly overcome this Scandal again, the Holy Ghost confirming
them, partly by the Examples of the Church of Christ in all ages, and partly by
fervent Prayers, etc.

33 Passive Diabolical Scandal, 2. Diabolical.
is that when Men wickedly take hold of the falls and vices of the Saints, for
license of Sinning; that so without all shame, they may plunge themselves in
all licentious wickedness, Genes. 9.22. Genes. 19.30.31. 2. Sam. 11.2.3.15.
Matthew. 26.72.74. Luke 19.8.

34 This kind of Scandal is termed Diabolical, from the quality, not from
the subject, because it is maliciously used to the shame and reproach of the
holy Fathers, and to the dishonor and contempt of almighty GOD. Wherefore this
is most of all to be avoided and abhorred.

Now let us apply these things unto our purpose.
35 As, Of the Reformation of the Church of England.
amongst all the Churches of Europe, none instituted the Restoration of
Religion and Divine Worship, more opportunely, nor embraced the fame in a more
convenient order and form, then did the CHVRCH OF ENGLAND: wherein nothing was
done tumultuously, nothing by force of arms, nothing by deceit and fraud:
but althings were revoked and restored according unto the prescript Rule of
Gods word, and the undoubted Example of the purer Primitive Church, with the
greatest applause of all States and degrees, with the uniform consent both of
Prince and People, of Nobles and Commons, even in the open and public
Assembly of Parliament.

36 So the OVTVVARD FACE, OR FORM OF THE CHVRCH, does not any where else
appear, with more luster and magnificence, in other Provinces or Kingdoms,
wherein all things hanging on the pleasure of the Presbytery and plebeiall or
common sort of people, do not yield unto the beholders, that specious grace of
Ecclesiastical Policy, nor that delightful show of orderly form of things,
which we see in ENGLAND.

37 And this most orthodoxe and pure Religion, we have now (by GODS grace)
most constantly professed, for the space of almost threescore years, excepting
the lamentable five years of Queen Mary, as manifestly appears out of the
Liturgy, according unto the prescript whereof, we celebrate Divine Service.

38 But notwithstanding that any man, being not monstrous Cyclopicall, The rage
of certain Ministers against the Liturgy of the Church of England.
would willingly embrace and rest in this Consent both of GOD and the CHVRCH;
yet (behold, alas!) some Men, interpreting all things into the worse sense, not
knowing any thing aright, weighing no reasons, and considering not the times,
do insolently set upon, not the Doctrine (against which the Devil himself
dares not mutter any thing) but the Discipline and Liturgy of the Church of
England; and most boldly pronounce and judge of other men's Counsels and
actions. What is done, they reprehend and carpe at: what ought to be done,
they prescribe and dictate. They loath what is well delivered, and being full
of arrogancy hunt after new opinions.

39 Neither do they these things, as good men are wont to do, modestly, and
timously, and in due place: but accusatorily and insolently, and in the pulpit,
and before the Common People, unto whom nothing is more pleasing, than railing
and backbiting.

40 Yea and in the Streets and tipling-houses they move dispute about
Ecclesiastical Discipline and Ceremonies, and that very superciliously and
haughtily.

41 From hence also certain INFAMOVS LIBELS fly abroad of such factious and
giddie brains, Infamous LIBELS.
as fear, lest by the moderation and gentleness of some, all Controversies be
composed, and solid peace once again established amongst us.

42 This perverse improbitie, and importune license with Tribuniticall
clamours, has given cause of horrible distractions.

43 For the most Reverend Prelates of the Church, together with the wise Civil
Magistrates, perceiving that these are the Censures and clamours, not of Men
seeking the truth, but for the most part of turbulent and seditious fellows,
such as hate quietness, or hunt after popular applause; or certainly of giddie
and curious men, of which sort there is not any man, but he is maleuolent and
envious, as the Poet notes; will not permit any untimely alteration in the
Liturgy or Discipline of our Church, Alterations dangerous.
in which always even in the most peaceable times there is some discommoditie:
specially seeing this Age, I know not by what destiny, seems to be subject
to often changes; and seeing the inconstancy, curiosity and wantonness of
men's wits, is marvelous strange in these our times.

44 Wherefore, both for procuring of the peace of the Church, and for
preservation of Order and Decency in the Assemblies and Congregations, they
add also a Commination, that whosoever refuse to use the Common and public
Liturgy according unto the order established, they depart from their places.
The tumults of the Refractarie Ministers.


45 Hereupon certain turbulent men, being angry and contentious, either by
nature, or by evil custom, lovers of cauilling and sophistry, do not rest,
but perpetually braule, and foolishly contend where there is no need.

46 And that they might stir up hatred, and heap up suspicions and
iealousies, they cite sundry places out of our Liturgy, which calumniously
and maliciously they interpret, directly against the sense and meaning of the
Church. Then tumultuously they exact the suffrages and consent of others; and
here and there they pick out certain sentences, out of our Writers, that so
they might seem to have, not only witnesses, but also abbettors of their
Schism and faction.

47 In the mean time tragically complaining of the most grievous and
intolerable Yoke (forsooth) of Ceremonies and Humane Traditions: (namely of the
Surplice, What Ceremonies the Refractarie Ministers dislike.
in the celebration of Divine Service and administration of the Sacraments; of
the Consignation of the Cross, in the Sacrament of Baptism; and of Kneeling,
in the Lords Supper) of a mere foolish morositie and contumacious obstinacy
and stubbornnes, they resist and contradict their Governors, nourish strife
and contention; and, either for the care of retaining the opinion of
constancy, or by the endeavor of gratifying others, or for desire of
licentious Liberty, or for the love of novelty, The Refractatie Ministers
forsakers of their Churches.
or for the hatred of peace and order, or out of the nature of the Spirit of
giddiness, or for some other cause, they forsake their Churches and charge,
and so by their own pertinacious refractarines they impose deep SILENCE upon
themselves.

48 Now then, seeing the matter stands thus, Who are the Authors of Scandal
in the Church of England.
it is no difficult and hard thing, to judge, who in the Church of England, are
THE AVTHORS OF SCANDAL.

49 But this superstitious and obstinate SILENCE, the impiety whereof is
apparent and manifest, Woe be unto me, if I preach not the Gospel, etc. ought
not to be preferred before the invocation of the true GOD in the Assemblies of
the Church, before the necessary labors and works of our Vocation and
calling, before the eternal salvation of many thousand souls.

50 And albeit subtle and crafty men invent fig-leaues to palliate and cover
their error, yet this Verity is so manifest, that it can be overthrown by no
Sophistry, by no Sycophancie.

51 For this OBSTINACY AND PERVERSENES of the Ministers is a manifold SCANDAL.
The Ministers obstinacy is a manifold Scandal.
It grieueth the Holy Spirit of God in the Weaker sort, who see themselves
sorsaken of their Pastors, without greater, without any cause at all. Also,
they are brought in doubt, fearing that the use of Liberty, is not approved
by them, whom they know to excel in learning, and think to be truly
religious.

52 Neither are the sighs and desires of good men, in many Churches, obscure;
whose pitiful moan and grievous tears, the Ministers ought to regard, and
be affected with, if they would be accounted PASTORS, and not TYRANTS.

53 For this cause Many, being hindered for want of skill, yea overwhelmed in the
darkness of ignorance, do not call upon, but rather fly from GOD.

54 And Many rush headlong into an Epicurean and Atheistical contempt of
Religion, or are plunged over head and ears in the lamentable gulf of
Desperation.

55 So that this morositie and contumacie of the Ministers, has drawn
infinite multitudes of Souls from GOD, and driven them headlong into the pit
of eternal destruction.

56 O slintie hearts of Pastors (forsooth) if they do not consider these so
great mischiefs! if they have no commiseration and pity at the lamentable
destruction of so many Souls! if they weigh not how grievous a Sin it is, to
hinder the true invocation of Gods holy name! if they think not that
themselves, being learned and diligent Teachers, are more profitable for the
Churches, than unlearned and negligent Ministers!

57 Furthermore, the refractarie Ministers confirm the enemies of the Gospel
in their errors, and in their furies against the true Church, who by this
shameful tergiuersation and looking back of the Ministers, are now become
more obstinate, and more insolent, than they were before.

58 Neither can there be any spectacle more wished for, Dissension among the
Reformed Churches, a pleasant spectacle unto Antichrist.
and pleasing unto ANTICHRIST, than when he sees the true Christians, by
mutual dissentions and domestique iarres, to be consumed one of another; whom
he has hitherto labored in vain to reduce under the yoke of his Tyranny.

59 Contrariwise, there cannot happen any thing, But very lamentable unto the
Church of Christ.
more lamentable and more miserable unto the CHVRCH OF CHRIST, than when she
beholds the fire of Dissension to be kindled at home; and feels her own
bowels, to be pitifully torn and rent asunder, by them who with one heart and
hand ought to have opposed themselves against the Common Adversary.

60 But these Divine Comminations and threatenings are seriously to be
considered and regarded, WOE unto the man, by whom the Offense comes, etc. I
will require my flock at their hands, and will confound them; which verily are
not spoken in vain.

61 Wherefore it were to be wished, that all these Challengers and Rescuers of
LIBERTY, would have some care and regard of their own salvation; and that
they would free themselves from these so horrible Scandals. For this argument
cannot possibly be refuted by any means. That the Bishops are not: Authors of
Scandal.


62 And in that they labor to retort the Scandal upon the BISHOPS and the
Civil MAGISTRATE, affirming that they are the Cause thereof. We know well,
that some clamorous Preachers mainely cry out, even until they are hoarse
again, that the Prelates profane the Worship of GOD with horrible and
intolerable impiety.

63 But, as it commonly happens in factions and parttakings, they do but
indulge and give the raines unto their partial affections; showing the
extremity of their hatred and contumacie against the Magistrate; and unjustly
traducing the most reverend Prelates of our Church; who now these many years,
to their great commendation and honor, with infinite travel have labored to
promote the Salvation of the people, to the singular profit and edification of
the godly; and have excellently well deserved of the Church of Christ.

64 Yet we deny not, but that evil and contentious men, might happily TAKE
occasion of Offense, out of the deeds and discipline of the Bishops: but that
they GAVE any, or could prevent al inconveniences, or are now bound to make all
such good; this is it that we constantly deny.

65 What? NW.
If in the feeding of Christ's sheep, and in the Governing of them, EVERY CHVRCH
cares for the flock committed to her own custody and charge, and prescribes
nothing unto others, nor medleth with them; Is it not equity and reason, that
the CHVRCH OF ENGLAND should enjoy her own Liberty? whereof also she has
special reason, and is ready to render an account thereof unto Christ Jesus,
the assertor of our Liberty, and to his Catholic Church?

66 But let the true Authors of Scandal look into themselves, The Refractarie
Ministers are Schismatiques.
and consider what it is to rend the Church, and to sow the seeds of SCHISM,
but only to aim and strike at the throat of Charity?

67 Which they verily do, who with private prejudice, carpe at, and reprehend
the public judgment of the whole Church, and brand with a black coal the
Magistrates authority in Things indifferent.

68 And thus am I forced to break off this, not Disputation, (because the
thing is evident and plain) but Complaint; which verily is much shorter, and
feebler, then is required by the greatness of the mischiefs and evils, which by
the ouerflowing petulancy and license, which every man has to speak, and to
write what he lists; have risen in the Church, do still rise, yea and will
arise daily more and more, until the Son of GOD, our Lord JESUS CHRIST shall
deliver his Church, showing himself unto all mankind, having raised the Dead.

CHAP. X. Of the WORSHIP of God. And that Things Indifferent, and Ceremonies
ordained for Order and Decency in the Church, are not the Worship of God.
WORSHIP OF GOD, The Worship of God what it is.
is all that servitude, obseruancie, reverence, and religion, whereby as well
inwardly in the heart, as outwardly in the work it self, we honor GOD, and
serve him.

2 This, if it be rightly performed according unto the will of GOD, is termed
True Worship; but if contrariwise, it is called False and Idolatrous Worship.

3 True Worship of God, True worship what.
is every work inward and outward commanded by GOD, performed in faith, to
this principal end, that GOD may be glorified.

4 And to worship GOD truly, is so to worship him, as he has commanded in his
Word how he would be worshipped.

5 The Efficient Cause, The Efficient Cause of Worship.
I mean the first and Principal Efficient of true Worship, is the Holy Ghost,
by whom we are moved and stirred up to worship and honor God.

6 For the Spirit is he, which gives us Faith it self from whence flows
Worship, and exciteth us to do the works of piety, both internal and
external. He works in us both the will and the deed, after the good pleasure
of his will, as the Apostle speaks.

7 The Secondarie and less Principal Efficient Cause of Worship, are We our
selves, who adore and honor God. The Material Cause of Worship.


8 The Material Cause, is the Work it self commanded by GOD, whereby we
serve him, a loring him with the greatest reverence we possibly may: for no
Creature has any right of instituting the Worship of God.

9 Hereupon is excluded all Will Worship, and the figment of good Intention, to
wit, when men do evil, that good may come thereof, or when they themselves do
invent works, which they obtrude unto God for Worship, not works evil in
themselves, but yet not commanded by God, 1. Sam. 15.22. Ezech. 20.19. Matthew.
15.9. Esaias 29.13.

10 For it is not sufficient, NW.
for Worship, that some work be not evil, or not forbidden, but it ought to be
Commanded by GOD, 1. Sam. 15.22. Ezech. 20.19. Matthew. 15.9. Esaias 29.13.

11 The Formal Cause, The Formal Cause of Worship.
is Faith. For good works and just actions do not only flow from Faith, as
from the Efficient Cause; even as all humane actions proceed from the Soul:
but also those works have their being from Faith, as from a Form, whereby
they are godly, holy, and therefore acceptable unto God.

12 The Final Cause, The Final Cause of Worship. Worship of God twofold 1.
IMMEDIATE, which is
is the Glory of God; whereunto must be referred all the whole Worship of God.

13 Worship of God is twofold, Immediate, or Mediate.

14 Immediate Worship, is when our Works are performed and attributed
immediately unto God. Which is generally contained in the first Table of the
Decalogue.

15 And this is, either Internal, or External.

16 Internall-Immediate Worship, I.
consists of many parts, Internal.
which howbeit they are indeed inseparable one from another, yet are they
really distinguished among themselves, and have a certain order.

17 And first of all, NW.
this Worship is distinguished into two principal kinds of Actions. For Some
answer GOD speaking unto us, manifesting himself, promising and offering the
grace of the Covenant and other goood things unto us, by believing in him,
knowing him, humbling out selves, adoring, and receiving his graces. And Some
subscribe unto God, couenanting with us and commanding, by promising in like
manner and yielding obedience unto him.

18 Unto the former Kind, do appertain, I. Faith, which is adhibited unto GOD
speaking unto us.

19 II. Knowledge of God, such as he manifests in his Word by the Holy
Spirit.

20 III. Adoration and Fear, whereby a faithful man submits himself unto
GOD being known, and reverently adoreth and fears him.

21 IV. Confidence, whereby he receives and rests in the promised and
offered Grace, and wholly depends upon GOD.

22 V. Hope and Patience, whereby a faithful man exspecteth the performance of
the promises, yea even in the midst of death.

23 Unto the latter Kind do appertain, I. Love, whereby every man does
consecrate unto GOD, his whole heart, body and Soul.

24 II. Invocation, whereby every one, opening his wants and necessities unto
GOD, offers, yields, and as it were delivers himself unto him, to be
cured, eased, helped and saved.

25 III. Thanksgiving, whereby he offers unto GOD, the sacrifice of praise,
for all his benefits.

26 IV. Repentance, whereby he kills his own heart, yea himself wholly body
and Soul, with the sword of the Spirit, and offers unto GOD a living, holy,
reasonable and pleasing sacrifice.

27 V. Obedience, whereby he willingly offers and exhibiteth unto GOD, his
mind ready and careful to fulfill all his commandments.

And so much for the Internall-immediate Worship. Now follows the External.
28 Externall-Immediate Worship is twofold, II. External, and this is 1.
Moral, which is either.
Moral, and Ceremonial.

29 Moral Externall-Immediate Worship, is that which consists in the
external obedience of Gods Moral Commandments, proceeding notwithstanding
from the internal obedience.

30 Of this is disputed in every Precept of the first Table, NW.
whereunto is to be referred, whatsoever is otherwhere spoken by Moses, the
Prophets and Apostles in all the Scriptures; seeing all these things are the
exposition of the Decalogue.

31 And it is of two sorts: for either it consists in Words, which we call
Verbal; or in Fact, deed and work, termed Real.

32 Verbal Moral Worship, Verbal,
are an Oath in general, Confession of the faith and name of GOD, Invocation
of GOD conceived in words, Thanksgiving, Praises of GOD, Witness of the
truth, and whatsoever the tongue can perform both publicly and privately,
whereby GOD may be glorified and honored.

33 Real Moral Worship, O Real.
is that which consists in deed, fact, or work, such as are all other the
external works of faith.

34 Ceremonial Externall-Immediate Worship, 2. Ceremonial.
is that which consists in the external obedience of GODS Ceremonial
Precepts.

35 And this is divided into that I. Which was before the Law. II. Which was
under the Law. III. Which now is used in the Church since the Law.

36 For the Church of GOD militant in earth, NW.
never wanted Ceremonies, neither can want them: seeing that without Ceremonies,
the Faithful can neither assemble and meet together, nor worship GOD
publicly.

37 Wherefore even from the beginning of the World, yea before Moses was borne,
the Church ever had her Sacraments, Sacrifices, public meetings, public
prayers, sacred rites and ceremonies, as is evident out of the holy Scriptures.

38 But this was common to every particular state of the Church in Ceremonial
Worship, that the same among all nations consisted, and does consist at this
day, partly in Words, partly in Deed and work, as also we have spoken before
of the External Moral Worship.

39 Because the Sacraments could never be administered, nor Sacrifices ever
offered, no nor any thing performed aright in the Worship of GOD, except Words
were joined together with Deeds and works.

Hitherto have we spoken of the Immediate Worship of GOD.
Now let us come to the Mediate Worship.
40 Mediate Worship of God, 2. MEDIATE Worship of God.
is when Moral works are performed unto our Neighbor for GODS sake.

41 This Mediate Worship, which consists in duties toward Men or our
Neighbors, is contained in the second Table of the Decalogue.

42 And it is in like manner, Mediate Worship twofold
either External, or Internal.

43 Externall-Mediate Worship of GOD, 1. External.
consists I. Partly in the Duties of Superiors toward their Inferiors, and
contrariwise: of which Duties, as also of Politic Order and such things as
be comprehended under the same, is handled in the Fifth Precept.

44 II. Partly in the duties of one Neighbor toward another, specified in the
rest of the Commandments.

45 And they are, either the Conservation of life and health, both of himself,
and of others, required in the Sixth Commandment.

46 Or the Conservation of chastity and Wedlock, established in the Seventh
Commandment.

47 Or the conservation of goods and possessions, contained in the Eight
Commandment.

48 Or the Conservation of Verity and truth, exacted in the Ninth Commandment.

49 Internall-Mediate Worship of God, 2. Jnternall.
is the rectitude or vprightnes of all our affections toward our Neighbor,
which is implied in all the precedent Commandments, and is specially required
in the Tenth Commandment.

And thus far of the Mediate Worship of GOD.
50 Out of these things which have been spoken, Ecclesiastical Ceremonies and
Indifferent actions, are not the Worship of God.
may plainly appear, that the Worship of GOD, is such a work, whose proper End
is the Honor of GOD: and by the performance whereof he is specially honored
and served, as by the omission of it, he is dishonored and reproched.

51 Hence we gather, that Ceremonies, or Rites, used in the public assemblies
and congregations of the Church, and Indifferent works or actions, such as are
neither commanded nor prohibited by God, are diligently to be distinguished and
discerned from the Worship of GOD.

52 I. 1
Because that to invent OTHER WORSHIP of God, is to feign another Will of GOD,
and consequently, another GOD. And such as do so, as Aron and Jeroboam
sometimes did, are no less to be accused of Idolatry, than if purposely they
should worship some other God in the Church, besides JEHOVAH the only true GOD.

53 II. 2.
Because that, if diverse kinds of Worships be promiscuously used and confounded,
the true GOD is confounded with Idols, which are honored with worship invented
by man. But GOD will be discerned from Idols, by that properforme of worship
instituted by himself.

54 III. 3
Because that Whatsoever is not of Faith, is Sin, (To. 14 23.) And he that
does any act to Worship GOD by, with an ignorant and doubtful conscience,
whether GOD will be so worshipped, or not, he does it not of faith, seeing he
knows not whether such an act is pleasing or displeasing unto GOD; and
thereby contemns GOD, for that he dares do any thing, albeit it please him
not.

55 But the Church observes Humane rites and ceremonies for corporal
utility, that the people might know, at what time to assemble and meet
together; that al things might be gravely performed in the Church for examples
sake; and that the common people might have some excitation and inducements to
piety and reverence.

56 For these causes also the ancient Fathers observed Traditions and
Ceremonies, as Epiphanius plainly witnesses (in his Disputation against the
Encratites) who imagined (as the Papists do at this day) that Humane
observations were the Worship of GOD, and that Righteousness whereby God was
pleased, and his wrath pacified.

57 This Opinion Epiphanius improueth and condemns, affirming that there were
other Ends of Traditions and Ceremonies in the Church: For so he says, that
those Traditions are to be allowed, which were made (...), that is, either to
bridle the flesh, or for the discipline and instruction of the rude people, or
for politic Order.

CHAP. XI. A Solution of the OBJECTIONS opposed by the Refractarie Ministers.
HItherto we have (Catasceuastically) fortified the Truth, and demonstratiuely
and plainly laid down what we hold concerning THINGS INDIFFERENT: where
also, for the better understanding of the Nature thereof, we have adjoined
certain Compound and mixed Questions, whence may be drawn General Solutions
of any Objection. Now it follows, that we choke Falsehood, and
(anasceuastically) dispute against the Adversaries of this Doctrine, by
Answering their particular Objections.

OBJECTION I.
2 First therefore, Object. 1.
the Ministers do Object, It is not lawful for any mortal Man, to institute
any new Worship of GOD.

Ergo. The Church cannot institute any Ecclesiastical Rites and Ceremonies.

ANSWER.
I. To the Antecedent.
3 I. Answ. Ecclesiastical Ceremonies are not Worship.
I grant the Antecedent. For if it were lawful for men to institute new
Worship, then were the whole Worship of the Gentiles to be approved, as also
the Worship ordained by Jeroboam and others, contrary unto the Law. For what
difference is there? If it be lawful for us to institute new Worship, wherefore
is it not as lawful for the Gentiles and Israelites to do the same?

4 II. If nothing can be affirmed concerning the will of God, without the Word
of God; then is it certain that God does not approve any new Worship.

5 The Apostle says, Whatsoever is not of faith is sin, (Romans 14.23.)
Wherefore seeing no new Worship has any testimony out of the Word of God, the
Conscience must needs doubt, whether it be acceptable unto God, and so cannot
be done of faith.

6 III. And verily the Worship of God, is a work commanded by GOD, or
instituted by the certain and infallible testimony of God, whereby God
pronounces that he is honored; to be done to this End, either immediate, or
principal, that God may be obeyed and celebrated, as we have abunbantly
declared in the precedent Chapter. And all Will Worship is precisely condemned
by name, in the Holy Scriptures.

II. To the Consequence.
7 I. The reason of the Consequence is none at all. What? Do not we plainly
distinguish, between the Worship of GOD, and Ecclesiastical Rites and
Ceremonies?

8 Worship, is a work whose proper End, NW.
is the honor of GOD: but the End of Rites and Ceremonies, is Decency, Order,
Edification of the Church, Discipline and necessary Institution for public
life.

9 II. The Error, is (...).

10 The Ministers insist. Object. 2.
Such things as the Church commands by the instinct of the Spirit of God,
are Divine precepts, and the Worship of God.

Good and profitable Constitutions, are such things as the Church ordains,
being guided and governed by the Spirit of God; as the Prelates of the Church of
England will have it.

Ergo. Such Constitutions of the Church are the Worship of God.

11 ANSWER. To the Proposition. I. Such things, Answ.That Ceremonies are not
Worship.
as the Church, by the instinct, in the name and authority of the Holy Ghost,
commands, not retaining liberty of deliberating therein, or of changing them,
or of omitting them out of the case of Scandal; are indeed the Worship of God.

12 II. But such things as the Church counsels, decrees and commands in
her own name and authority; are not the Worship of God, albeit that in
ordaining and commanding of such, she be governed and directed by the Holy
Ghost.

13 For the Spirit dictateth both unto the Church, as well what is profitable
for avoiding of Sca^dal; as also that those things which are commanded for
avoiding of Scandal, are neither the Worship of God, nor yet necessary to be
observed without the case of Scandal and contumacie: as appears by those
sayings (1. Cor. 7.6.35.) I speak this by permission, not by commandment.
This I speak for your own commodity, not to entangle you in a snare, but
that you follow that which is honest, and that you may cleave fast unto the
Lord without separation.

14 So S. Paul forbids to eat things sacrificed unto Idols with Scandal:
but without the case of offense, he leaves it free and indifferent for any man.

15 So also the Apostles in the Synod at Jerusalem, by the instinct of the
Holy Ghost, command abstinence from things strangled, and from blood: and they
leave it free unto the Church, to omit that precept without the case of
Scandal and contempt.

16 III. The Error, is (...), for there are four Terms in the Syllogism.
And, (...).

17 Again, Object. 3.
they insist. What things are done for the Glory of God, by them God is
Worshipped.

But the Determinations of the Church are done for the Glory of God, if we
will believe the Prelates.

Ergo. These things are the Worship of God.

18 ANSWER. Answ.
To the Proposition. What things are done for the Glory of God, That Ceremonies
are not Worship.
to wit, of themselves; that is, such things as are commanded by God, to this
special End and purpose, that by those works we might declare our obedience
toward him; they are the worship of God.

19 And not such, as serve for the Glory of God accidentally, that is, such as
do sometimes serve for the performance of those things which are commanded by
God, for accidental causes and circumstances; which if they concur not, yet
GOD may be honored as well by such as omit them, as by those that perform
them, so they be omitted, or performed of faith, which causes the person to be
reconciled unto God, and makes the doing or omission of all indifferent
actions, to agree and stand with the Will of God.

20 The Error, is (...).

21 They insist. Whatsoever is done of faith, Object. 4.
and pleases God, is the Worship of God.

Ceremonies and Ecclesiastical rites (as some men say) are done of faith, and
do please God.

Ergo. They are the Worship of God.

22 ANSWER. The Proposition is particula^: Answ.
For it is not a sufficient Definition of Worship, That Ceremonies are not
Worship.
that some thing please God: seeing Indifferent actions also may be done of
faith and please God, albeit far otherwise, then Worship does, properly so
termed.

23 For this so pleases God, so as the opposite or contrary thereunto does
displease him, and therefore cannot be done of says.

24 But Indifferent things so please God, NW.
as that the contrary thereunto do not displease him; and therefore both may be
done of faith, which makes both the work and the person accepted before God.

25 The Error, is (...) in Theologia. And, an imperfect and lame Definition of
Worship.

26 They insist. All actions, rites and Ceremonies, Object. 5.
which are performed in the public Worship of God, are Worship.

But the Ecclesiastical Constitutions, whereof there is such Contention in the
Church of England, are actions, rites and Ceremonies, which are performed in
the public Worship of God.

Ergo, Such Constitutions of the Church are Worship.

27 ANSVNERE. To the Proposition. Answ.
That Ceremonies are not Worship.
The Proposition is an assertion both atheologicall and alogicall. For all such
Constitutions of our Church, are instituted, either for Order and Decency
sake, or for institution and discipline sake: wherefore they are not, nor ought
to be termed, WORSHIP OF. GOD; but are only exercises attending upon, or
serving to the performance of Divine Worship; as namely, the Sacraments,
Prayer, faith, repentance etc. which verily are Worship.

28 The Error, is twofold, 1. (...) in Theologia. 2. (...).

OBJECTION II.
29 Secondly, Object. 6.
they Object. It is not lawful for any Church, to institute Significant
Ceremonies.

Ergo. Neither is it lawful for the Church of England so to do.

ANSWER.
To the Antecedent.
30 I. Answ.
The Antecedent is an in idle figment, worthy rather to be exploded with
laughter, That the Church has power to ordain significant Ceremonies.
than seriously to be refuted by any Scholasticall congresse. For it is most
certain, that Ceremonies ought not to be idle, ridiculous or unprofitable, but
conformable unto the Word of God, and fitted for the use of the Church, to
provoke and stir up men's affections to devotion, to piety and the worship of
God; and by their signification, to lead us unto Christ.

31 II. Apostolical Ceremonies signisicant.
Let us examine some of the apostolical Ceremonies, and see whether they were
SIGNIFICANT and leading unto PIETY or not? (1. Cor. 11.4.5.) The Apostle
instituteth, that Women in the Church should pray covered, and Men bare-headed.
Wherefore? Namely, that every one by that Ceremony might be warned of his
duty, that the Man might know, that he is head of the Woman; and that the
Woman might acknowledge her subjection unto the Man.

32 Again (1. Cor. 11.33.) He ordains, that for celebrating of the Lords
Supper, all should meet together, and that one should tarry for another: to
wit, that this external Ceremony of meeting together might serve the
Internal Worship, faith, charity, and the union of minds.

33 Furthermore (2 Thessalonians. 2.13.14.15.) We ought to give thanks always to God
for you, Brethren beloved of the Lord, because that God has from the beginning
chosen you to salvation, through sanctification of the Spirit, and the faith of
truth: Whereunto he called you by our Gospel, to obtain the Glory of our Lord
Jesus Christ. Therefore, Brethren stand fast, and keep the instructions, which
you have been taught, either by Word, or by our Epistle. In which words the
Apostle teaches, what manner of Constitutions and Traditions, he commends
unto the Thessalonians, and which they received of him: namely, such as whereby
they could have been moved more fully to obey GOD, and receive greater profit
in sanctification of the Spirit, in the faith of the Truth, and in acquisition
of the glory of our Lord JESUS CHRIST. Hence therefore we gather, that all
Traditions and Ceremonies Ecclesiastical ought to serve, for promoting
sanctification of the Spirit, faith of the Truth, and the acquisition of the
Glory of Christ.

34 Moreover (1. Cor. 55.) The Apostle teaches how Excommunication ought to be
exercised, against that Incestuous person: that he, being made ashamed
according unto the flesh, might be more forcibly provoked to repentance, that
his Spirit might be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus. Therefore those
Ceremonies and Traditions, whereby men are the more provoked unto repentance,
are Apostolical and good.

35 Also, The same Apostle (2. Cor. 7 8.9.10.) does allow that sorrow, whereby
men are excited and provoked to repentance. For albeit (says he) I made you
sorry with a letter, I repent not etc. I rejoice that you sorrowed to
repentance, etc.

36 Lastly, The holy Kiss (Romans 16.16. 1. Cor. 16.20. 2. Cor. 13.12.) which S.
Peter calls (...), the Kiss of love, (1. Pet. 5.14.) was a sign and
testimony, most usual in the Primitive Church, of mutual love, of humanity,
of civility, of shamefastnes and candor.

37 The Mean to be observed in Ceremonies, is to be referred unto three
things: 1. Paucitie in number, 2. Facility in observation, 3. Dignity in
signification, which also consists in perspicuitie, ( Calvin. Institut. lib.
4. cap. 10.. 14.) Is not this fault worthy reprehension? namely, that they
(the Papists) do propose Ceremonies not understood, as if they were but an
histrionicall Scene, or Magical incantation? For this is certain, that all
Ceremonies are corrupt and hurtful, EXCEPT that by them men be directed to
Christ. But such Ceremonies, as are used in the Papacy, are separated from
Doctrine, that they might detain men in signs destitute of all SIGNIFICATION,
( Calvin. Jastitut. lib. 4. cap. 10. 15.) But lest any man should calumniate us
to be peevish and scrupulous about external things, who precisely take away
all liberty: Here I would have it KNOWN unto the Godly Readers, that I DO
NOT CONTEND, about such Ceremonies, as serve only for Decency and Order, or
also are the signs and incitations of that Reverence, which we owe unto God, (
Calvin, in Tractat. de Optimo Ecclesias reformandi genere. cap. 6. De Cultu Dei
and Bonis operibus) It is necessary that Ceremonies be the exercises of piety,
and lead us with an even hand unto Christ, ( Zanch. in Compend. loc. 16. page
638.) Ceremonies are the exercises of piety, which by their SIGNIFICATION do
lead us unto Christ, Zanch Ibidem, page 639.
Hereunto would I adioyne the grave Judgment of those most bright Startes of
the fifteenth Age since Christ, CALVINE and ZANCHIVS; but that I had hitherto
purposely abstained from citing any Humane Testimonies. And I am not ignorant,
how little the Ministers esteem Humane authority; and how ungrateful it is
unto them, to be pressed with the judgment, yea of the most learned Divines.

38 The Error is twofold: 1. A shameful Begging of Question. 2. (...) in
Theologia.

OBJECTION III.
39 Thirdly they Object. Object. 7.
All the monuments and instruments of Idolatry ought utterly to be taken away
and destroyed.

Ergo, The Churches wherein Masses have been said, the Surplice, and
Consignation of the Cross in Baptism, are utterly to be abolished.

ANSWER.
I. To the Antecedent.
40 I. The Antecedent is not vniuerfally true. For then, Answ.
all instruments of Idolatry and Superstition, Of abolishing of things abused
to Idolatry.
are utterly to be a bolished, when they are rather hurtful, then profitable
unto Piety; and not simply, nor of themselves, nor at all places and times.

41 And this, 1. Because it is not prohibited in the holy Scriptures unto
Christians, to Worship God in all places and times, Ioh. 4.21. Malach. 1.11. 1.
Tim. 2.8. 2 Because every Creature of God is good, and the earth is the Lords
and the fulness thereof. 3 Because whatsoever is in the world, we may use it for
the glory of God and the profit of the Church. 4 Because, as no meat is
unlawful unto a Christian, so it be received with thanksgiving: so also no
Creature, no place is prohibited unto a Christian, so that all things be taken
from thence, which repugne the Law of God. 5 Because it is lawful for a
Christian, to eat things sacrificed unto Idols, if there be no offense yielded
unto the weak, nor any occasion of Idolatry, nor the Adversaries confirmed
therein: seeing an Idol is nothing in the world, and that meat does not
commend a man unto God, (1. Cor. 8. and 9. and 10.) and in the new Testament,
Unto the clean, all things are clean. 6 Because as it is lawful, to convert a
man, being an Idolater, abolishing only the vicious affections of the mind, and
the Idolatrous Worship which he used: So also is it lawful, to convert the
Instruments of Idolatry, unto the godly use of the Church; the abuse only
being taken away. 7 Because Almighty GOD himself commanded, that all the gold
and silver, and brass should be taken out of Ierico, and put into the treasure
of the house of the Lord, Josh. 6.24.


42 Two most certain Rules teaching what we ought to do in this case The FIRST.
II. But that no man be deceived herein; these two most certain and infallible
Rules, are diligently to be observed and remembered: whereof the first is, If
there be any thing in any place, unprofitable and idle, or not very convenient
and necessary, which has bin abused, specially to Idolatry; that together
with the abuse ought to be taken away, albeit it be not impious of it self.

43 So Ezechias took away the Brazen Sarpent, that all occasion of evil might
be removed.

44 So also the Apostle says, that we must abstain, not only from all evil,
but also from all appearance and show of evil, that is, from all occasion of
evil.

45 And Christ himself says, ( Matthew. 5.29.) If thy right eye cause thee to
offend, pluck it out, and cast it from thee; that is, Thou ought to take
away and cast from thee, all things, yea though they be most dear unto thee,
which are an offense and hinderance, that thou canest not follow Christ, and
make progress in piety.

46 The SECOND.
The second Rule is, If any thing seem profitable and commedious for
Edification, that may be still retained and used in the Church, the abuse being
refuted by the Doctrine of the truth, and abolished. As appears out of that
place, Let no man judge you in meat, or drink, or in the part of an holy day,
etc. Coloss. 2, 15.

47 III. The Error, is (...).

48 Object. 8.
The Ministers insist. God plainly commands (Deuteronomy. 7.25.26.) The graven
Images of their Gods shall ye burn with fire, and covet not the silver and
gold, that is on them, nor take it unto thee, lest thou be snared therewith:
for it is an abomination before Jehovah thy God. Bring not therefore
abomination into thine house, lest thou be accursed like it, but utterly
abhor it, and count it most abominable, for it is accursed.

Ergo. Not only the abuse is to be taken away, but also the thing abused it
self, is utterly to abolished.

49 ANSWER. God forbids not, Answ.
The Commandment of taking away the gold etc. of Idols, how it is to be
understood.
but that the gold and silver of Idols, and such like things of value, may be
converted INTO THE USE OF THE HOUSE OF GOD; but only, that they be not
converted INTO PRIVATE USE, and that we do not HONOR them; as evidently
appears out of the Text, Take not UNTO THEE, lest THOU be ensnared therewith:
Bring it not into THINE HOUSE.

50 The Error, is (...)

51 Again, they insist. Object. 9.
But it is an express precept of God, (Numb. 33.52.) Ye shall drive out all
the Inhabitants of the Land (of Canaan) before you, and destroy all their
pictures, and break asunder all their Images of metal, and pluck down all
their high places.

Ergo. All the monuments and instruments of Idolatry are to be utterly be
abolished.

52 ANSVV. I. Answ.
Christians are not tied unto the Political Laws peculiarly given unto the
Israelites. Of things abused to Idolatry.
Now that Commandment appertains unto the Israelites only, and speaks
only of the temporal land of Canaan, as is plainly manifest in the Text.

53 II. Before the coming of Messiah, GOD would that there should be but one
Temple only amongst his people, the mystery whereof is not unknown:
wherefore he commands by law, that there should not one of the Temples of the
Gentiles be permitted to stand, but ought to be battered and made even with
the ground: which law now in the Christian Commonwealth has no place.

54 III. The Error, is (...): And (...).

55 They insist. Object. 10.
The godly Princes in the old Testament are commended, because they not only
took away the Idols out of Judah; but also destroyed all the high places, and
Temples, and Altars of the Idols. Contrariwise, many Kings, being otherwise
godly, are reprehended by the Holy Ghost, because they did not take away the
high places.

Ergo, etc.

56 ANSWER. Answ.
I. We ought not to live by Examples, but by Rules and Laws. Of abolishing the
instruments of Idolattie.


57 II. The Kings of Israel were bound and tied by the Law of God utterly to
deface, destroy and burn all the high places, and all Idolatrous groves:
wherefore what they did, was but their necessary obedience and duty: and such
as did not overthrow the high places, sinned.

58 III. With Christian Princes the case is otherwise; for they are tied by no
other Law, but the Law of piety and charity, whereby they are bound to do
those things, which are more conducible and profitable for promouing of piety,
the Glory of God, and salvation of the Church.

59 IV. The Error, is (...). And, (...).

II. To the Consequence.
60 The Cosequence deceives by the Fallacy (...). For this Argument does not
follow: All Instruments of Idolatry are to be taken away and abolished Ergo,
The Churches, Surplices, and the Consignation of the Cross in Baptism, are in
like manner to be destroyed and abolished. These are no Instruments of
Idolatry.

OBJECTION IV.
61 Fourthly, Object. 11.
they Object. But it is a Scandal to favor the Papists, and to confirm them
in their Idolatry.

Ergo, etc.

ANSWER.
62 I. But to oppugn the Pope, Answ.
is not only to oppugn his Name, Who are the Authors of Scandal in the Church
of England.
or some petie accidental circumstances supposed to be Popish, but to convince
him of false Doctrine in the very principles of Religion. Neither does it make
any thing for the Papacy, to retain Ceremonies, which were commonly used in
the Church, even in the Apostles times, before the Papacy was hatched.

63 II. We do not obey the Papacy, or any way favor it: because we do
faithfully (by the grace of GOD) keep, and openly profess all necessary
heads of Doctrine, and the lawful use of the Sacraments.

64 III. It is verily a Scandal, to forsake the Churches for little or no
cause; and rather yield cause unto the censure and judgment of the Common
people, who exclaim, that by our obstinacy we move contention, and trouble
the peace of the Church; than to give any supposed occasion unto others, to
calumniate our moderation. And verily to contend and strive so much, for mere
indifferent things, or for things that do not at all appertain unto the
matter of Religion, has neither precept, nor example in the holy Scriptures,
or in the Church of God.

65 IV. Those things that are propounded and decreed in the Church of England,
concerning Rites and Ceremonies, do appertain specially for preservation of
unity in Doctrine, and uniformity in the Discipline and Ceremonies of our
Church; and not any way to confirm the Papacy.

66 V. And that the Papists are encouraged by our domestique Contentions, and
made more insolent, this verily is very lamentable; but the whole fault
resideth in them, who contend so hotly for not necessary, rather then
necessary things, and shamefully forsake their Churches.

67 It were convenient, that these importunate fellows did consider, that we
also do unfeignedly love the sincere Doctrine of the Gospel (for whose sake,
it may be, we do suffer, and are ready to suffer (if need shall so require)
more labor, and more afflictions, then they do, or (for ought that I know)
are about to suffer:) and not so calumniously to slander us, with suspicion and
touch of Popish heresy, which we, even with all our hearts, exsecrate and
detest, as the pit of hell.

68 Nay, this rather is a new Popedom, that this insolsnt kind of people, do
labor to compel all men, to assent to their phanatique assertions; and
horribly condemn all such as approve not their conceits.

OBJECTION V.
69 Fifthly, Object. 12.
Many do profess. We could with a safe conscience yield unto, and use all the
Rites and Ceremonies of the Church of England, excepting only the Consignation
of the Cross in the Sacrament of Baptism; yea there is not any thing that
does so offend us, as that Consignation of the Cross.

ANSWER.
70 But let us not flatter our selves, Answ.
Of the Cross in Baptism.
nor pretend infirmity for simultation. Many call themselves infirm and weak,
when indeed they are preuaricators and obstinate: which is irrefutably euinced
out of those false interpretations and unheard glosses, wherewith these men
deceive themselves, and which our Church does altogether abhor and detest.
Namely, That the Cousignation of the Cross is the Worship of God; that without
it the Sacrament is not perfected; that it is an invention of Antichrist added
unto Baptism; that the Church of England attributes the same efficacy unto
the Consignation of the Cross, which properly belongs unto Baptism it
self. Away with mad Calumniations!

71 Yet we will answer unto every one particularly: 1
It is not the Worship of God.
I. The Consignation of the Cross is not the Worship of God, but a token and
sign, whereby men are put in mind, that they ought not to be ashamed OF CHRIST
CRVCIFIED: which Rite does serve to the Internal Worship, to provoke to the
love of Christ; and also to the External, for free confession, etc.

72 II. 2
It adds nothing to Baptism.
The Consignation of the Cross is an Indifferent act, which adds nothing
unto the substance and efficacy of Baptism, being adhibited; nor takes any
thing away, being omitted.

75 III. Neither is it that the Ministers should contend, 3
It is not an invention of Antichrist.
that this Ceremony was invented by Antichrist and added unto Baptism; seeing
mention is made thereof every where in the ancient Fathers; which even
Impudency it self cannot deny.

74 Yea and in the Consignation of the Cross, our Church expressly and by
name adds a manifest reprehension and reiection of all Popish errors and
abuses.

75 IV. Nor yet do we attribute unto this Ceremony, 4
It has no effectual virtue.
that virtue and efficacy, which properly belongs unto Baptism: because
Baptism is the lauar of Regeneration, whereby we are vindicated into the
grace and favor of God, and delivered from the wrath of God, from the power of
darkness, and from the tyranny of Satan. This efficacy ought in no wise to be
attributed to the Consignation of the Cross. Neither is this Ceremony
adhibited at all in that action, before that the Infant be baptized.

OBJECTION VI.
76 Sixthly, The Ministers Object; Object. 13.
No man ought to do any thing against the dictate of his own conscience.

Ergo, Those Ceremonies which a man does not allow, are unto him unlawful.

ANSWER.
77 Answ.
Of a doubtful and erring Conscience.
It is certain that we must attempt nothing in all our actions, whereof we
are not certain, that it pleases GOD: whatsoever is done otherwise, does make
us guilty before God. The Apostle says, Blessed is he that condemns not
himself, in that which he allows. Whereupon it comes to pass, that he
that judges and condemns any thing, and yet admits it, or puts it in
practice, he is damned, because he does it not of faith.

78 Conscience has that virtue and power; that, if some Work being of it own
nature Indifferent, if the Conscience be good, it makes the work also to be
good: and contrariwise, if the Conscience be evil, it makes the work also
evil.

79 NW.
But yet nevertheless it cannot be, that any Work being evil in it own
nature, may by our conscience be made good. For whatsoever conscience thou
have, yet when thou do forswear thy self, or when thou committest
adultery, thou do grievously sin. Wherefore the force of conscience has
power only in Things indifferent, and also in those actions, which of their
own nature are good.

80 Some thing may seem to be against the Conscience two ways.
And amongst these things, somewhat may seem to be against a man's conscience,
or unlawful two ways. First, Uncertainly and doubtfully, without full assent,
persuasion or resolution; namely, when a man doubts or is uncertain, whether
some thing be lawful, or not. Secondly, Determinately and absolutely, with a
resolved persuasion, to wit, when a man is certainly persuaded, that some thing
is simply lawful, albeit by error of conscience, or upon false and erroneous
grounds.

81 If any thing appears to be unlawful unto a man Uncertainly and
doubtfully, he is to abstain from doing of it of himself, so long as he is
at his own free choice and liberty, till his doubts be removed.

82 But if a certain commandment of a lawful Magistrate comes and commands
it, then the Subject is bound to obey; for his doubting upon uncertainty ought
not to withhold his due obedience, according to that ( Heb. 13.17.) Obey, and
submit your selves; obey with persuasion, and yield though you be not persuaded.

83 Every commandment of the Magistrate, NW.
either it is certain that it is Just and good, and then the Subject ought to
obey. Or it is certain that it is Vntust and evil, and then the Subject ought
not to obey. A Rule in case of doubt.
Or peradventure it is Doubtful, and in case of doubt, this Rule is to be
followed, Tene certum, relinque incertum: Keep that which is certain, leave
that which is uncertain. Now it is CERTAIN, that we must obey the Superior
Power, if it does not command those things which are manifestly unjust. And
verily the Subjects are worthily to be excused, when in a doubtful case, they
obey their Prince. How a man may be perplexed in conscience, and how he may be
rid from such perplexity.


84 If any man's conscience, albeit erroneous, being lead by false and supposed
grounds, does dictate unto him Determinately and absolutely, that some thing is
unlawful; that man should sin, if he should do any thing against such a
conscience. Because it is a common axiom, Conscientia errans obligat, An
erroneous conscience binds a man, though not to do according unto the same,
yet not to do any thing against it: for he that does any thing against his
conscience, is convinced to have a will to sin.

85 If any man's Conscience does absolutely command him, necessarily to do,
that which of it self is evil, and forbidden by the law of God: or if it
forbids him to do, that which of it own nature is good and necessary, and
which God or the Magistrate does command him; It is a Sin, both to do what
his Conscience commands him, and also not to do it. For the Conscience has a
man so tied and bound, that he can decline into neither part without sin:
except he depose the error of his Conscience.

86 NW.
For it is a Rule confirmed by the consent of all Divines: that The dictate of
an erroneous Conscience in a vicious matter, determined by precept or
prohibition, does so bind a man, that his conscience standing so, he cannot
do any thing neither according to his conscience, nor against it.

87 Yet is he not, in such a case, to suspend his consent, no not for never so
little time: but is presently bound, to depose his erroneous conscience, and to
know that such a thing is not prohibited, but commanded.

THE CONCLUSION, UNTO THE BELOVED BRETHREN in Christ, the Ministers, who
conform not themselves unto the Discipline and Ceremonies of the Church of
England.
HItherto, beloved Brethren, have we handled those things which seemed to
appertain unto the true and lawful use of Things indifferent, that so we
might more thoroughly understand the Nature thereof. Wherein, I presume, I have
fully satisfied ALL SVCH as are Christianly affected, who truly walk according
unto the Spirit, and yield unto the Truth, embracing the same simply,
sincerely and constantly: In so much that in this Controversy, I dare undergo
the censure and judgment of all the Learned and good men throughout the whole
world; who (I hope) will allow of this my counsel; and easily perceive, that
I have not disputed concerning these so important matters, with other men's
affections, nor with any desire of attaining the favor of any man, nor with
the endeavor of dissenting from others, nor for the love of Novelty, nor of
pertinacious obstinacy, nor yet of any other evil and inordinate affection or
desire: but that I have, to my poor ability, served the necessity of the
Church. For when I had understood, that in the first Visitation of the Right
reverend father in God, the L. BISHOP OF LONDON, there were many dissonant
clamours of unlearned men, contending about many things, specially about
Ecclesiastical Rites and Ceremonies; I have gathered the Sum of the Doctrine
concerning THINGS INDIFFERENT, delivered by Calvin, Melancthon, Bucer,
Zanchius, Vrsinus, Beza, and other learned and approved Divines, in their
several Volumes of Comentaries, Sermons and other Tractats, as it were into
one Body, whereby any man might plainly see at the first blush, as in a Table,
what is to be held, and what to be avoided, in this whole business. And I will
that Writing to be understood rightly and ingenuously, without cauilling,
without calumniations.

It is certain, that in this so great infirmity of men, The Militant Church
never perfect.
the Church can never be so pure, but that there will be some abuses therein.
And it is certain also, that we must dissemble and bear with some abuses,
for maintaining of public peace and concord. NW.
Which must be understood of those abuses, which by reason of infirmity arise
among us, the Doctrine of truth being safely preserved: and not of such, as
overthrow the necessary Articles of faith, or are Idolatrous, or compel men
to manifest sins and impiety. Hereupon some men most grievously sin, both
against themselves, and against the rest of their Brethren, who are contentious
and turbulent for every little moale or blemish, and so trouble both their own
and other men's consciences, as if all Christianity were in danger to be lost
and wholly overthrown. Neither do I speak this, as if I thought that any
corruption ought to be winkt at and tolerated (Nay rather, let the Earth
swallow me up, or the Sea stop my breath, before that I defend any corruption
of the celestial Doctrine, or contend with the Church of God, wherein I
desire, as in an eternal School after this life, to see and behold the Son
of God, the Patriarchs, Prophets and Apostles, and to enjoy their doctrine and
familiarity:) but because I judge that those things, that are to be pardoned
and yielded unto Christian charity, are wisely to be distinguished, from such
as be execrable and wicked; and that by the wisdom, not of the flesh, but of
the spirit. And verily it is not a small impiety, to imagine, that the whole
virtue of Religion is placed, either in contemning, or in observing only
Ceremonies: seeing all learned men, who understand of our dissentions and
iarres, smile in their bosoms, and account it great folly, to be much
troubled of either side concerning Ceremonies.

Wherefore, my reverend and beloved Brethren. I humbly pray and beseech you,
even for His sake, whose Glory it is meet should be preferred before all
other things whatsoever without exception; that you would vouchsafe to convert
all your endeavors and studies to this end specially, that there may be some
fit remedy speedily provided against that so great mischief, that breeds
all this unkindness amongst us. Alas! We have Adversaries enough abroad, against
whom the Son of God commands that we maintain unity and concord. But we
contrariwise, cease not even to eat up our own shoulders and arms: and the
frame of our Church being shrewdly shaken, our whole building threatens
downfall. Even as in times past, whilst Eusebius Bishop of Cesarea and Basil
the Great contended amongst themselves, the Arrian Heresy took deep root, and
was dispersed far and near: so at this day, whilst the members of the true
Church do mutually war the one against the other, we do not only cease to
be a terror unto our common Enemies, but also for our intolerable petulancy
and pride, in coining new opinions, and dispersing the same abroad with all
impunitie, to the greatest Scandal of all Churches, against the ancient
orthodoxe Sanctions, and the most strict and severe prohibitions of our own
Laws, we are publicly exposed to the censure and scorn of all men. We hope,
Brethren, that you are not so ignorant of all things, that you know not the
judgments of others concerning these our controversies; nor so without common
sense, that you alone do not see our dangers: nor yet so inhumane and cruel,
that you are nothing affected with those miseries which we feel and sustain.
You know that the common Enemies of the Church of England will become more
terrible and fearful unto us, if they shall set upon our Church being tired
and distracted with intestine hatred and contentions: neither are you ignorant,
that domestique Distentions have always been a very mortal and deadly bane
even unto great Churches. How much better therefore is it, that you bend all
your forces to this, that you may comfort and cherish our afflicted Church, as
much as safely you may, and provide that the sincere Doctrine of all necessary
things being faithfully taught, may be propagated unto all posterity. Unto
which duty, first of all your piety and devotion toward GOD, unto whom we
wholly owe whatsoever we are, ought to excite and provoke you: Then your Zeal
toward the holy faith and religion, and the conscience of your Vocation and
calling, ought specially to inflame you: That I speak nothing, what your
obedience toward the Kings Majesty and other Magistrates requires; what the
state of the Church of England (your own loving Mother) which now seems to be
sick of a consumption, challenges at your hands; and lastly, what your duty
toward your Country, parents, children, kindred, friends and neighbors, does
expostulate: All which being put together, ought more than sufficiently, not
only to move and excite you, but also to force and compel you, that by your
common help and means these Domestique fires be thoroughly extinguished. Oh,
think with your selves, and consider diligently and seriously, how much
honester is your godly submission and conformity in Things indifferent, than
is your superstitious pride and arrogancy in forsaking your Churches!

But if under pretense of purity, and the Gospel, you intend still to indulge
and serve your own partial affections (which GOD graciously forbid) yet in
these so great dissipations, and distractions of minds and men, the Godly may
have this special comfort: N. best of all. What a godly man ought to do in
these domestique tumults and contentions of the Church.
That where they hear the vncorrupt voice of true Doctrine, and see the
lawful use of the Sacraments, and perceive that Idols and errors, repugnant
unto the voice of the Son of God, are not defended: there let them know, that
they are assuredly in the society of the true Church; neither let them doubt,
but that such assemblies are the Temples of the living God, and that GOD is
there present in the Ministry of the Gospel, and that out of such societies
the Son of God, our Lord and Savior, gathers his eternal inheritance,
according unto that, Wheresoever there are two or three gathered together in my
name, there am I in the midst of them. This LORD I most humbly beseech, that
he will mitigate the sorrows and heal the wounds of his Church, that he will
save some remnants for himself, and cleanse the Sons of Leui, that is, that
he will stir up every where true Treachers, who, as Bees carry their labors
into the hiue for the common good, may in like manner, all of them, confer
their studies and duties to the salvation and peace of the Church; that all
dissentions being taken away, they may hereafter, with joint minds and wills,
painfully spread abroad the true Doctrine of the Gospel, diligently edify the
Church of God, perspicuously and constantly refute all errors and heresies, and
faithfully deliver the true state and uniform sentence of the Controversies of
our times unto all posterities to the worlds end.

APOCAL. 7.12. Amen. Praise, and Glory, and Wisdom, and Thanks, and Honor,
and Power, and Might, be unto our GOD for evermore. Amen.


FINIS.
A REIOYNDER unto the MILD DEFENSE, IVSTIFYING THE CONSIDERATION OF the
silenced Ministers Supplication unto the high Court of Parliament.

WHEREIN IS PLAINLY Discovered the vanity of the Ministers Arguments for
their Restitution; and they irrefutably euinced to be properly SCHISMATIQVES,
Unworthy to be restored again to the use and liberty of their Ministry;

By GABRIEL POVVEL.

G. P.

Let there be no strife, I pray thee, between thee and me, for we are
Brethren, Genes. 13.8. The Mild Defender.

The words of his mouth were softer then butter, yet war is in his heart: his
words more gentle then oil, yet were they swords, Psalm. 55.21. G. P.

Judge not, and you shall not be judged, (Luke 6.37.) Though they show me all
extremity, yet will I not cease to love them, and to seek their good, August.
AT LONDON, Imprinted by Felix Kyngston, for Edward VVhae.

TO THE RIGHT HONORAble the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, the Knights,
Citizens and Burgesses of the high Court of Parliament.
IT is a remarkable speech, Right Honorable, that was often used by a reverend
and judicious Prelate of our Church, Doctor Aylmer of happy memory, sometimes
Lord Bishop of London, whom for honor sake I nominate, a man both for wisdom
and learning not inferior unto any in his time; that two sorts of men troubled
the peace of our Church, Papists and Apists: both which, as much as in them
lies, labor to disioynt the frame of Ecclesiastical Policy, and to
overthrow the whole building, that so happily was settled by our Fathers, and
bequeathed unto us. The one sort assault our bulwarks on the left hand; and
the other on the right. The one, hating to be reformed, endeavor by all vile
and exorbitant means to reenter, from whence they have bin disseised, and to
retain still their Idolatry; the other, imitating foreign Novelty, upon
extremity of hatred toward the Church of Rome, do strive to be as unlike like
the Papacy as is possible, disdaining even the Apostolical practice and
discipline of the Primitive Church, lest they should seem in any thing to be
imitators of them, whom they so much abhorred. The one losing their gamme by
short-shooting; and the other by ouer-shooting. Finally, the one being the very
plague and bane, and the other the disgrace and shame of Reformation.

Incredible have bin the practices of both sorts, for the aduantaging and
advancing either of them their own part. The former, like a cruel Tygre, or
savage Bear, have not ceased from continual plotting of bloody designements,
to accomplish their mischievous intendment: and the later, like a wily Fox,
creeping into the bosom of their favorers, under pretense of farther
reformation, have labored to raise jealousy and suspicion against the Kings
sacred Majesty, and the reverend Governors of our Church, whereby, setting all
States by the ears, they might the more easily bring in their deformed
Discipline, and anarchicall ataxie. But the more the waves and billows beat
against the rock, the more are they broken, and turn into a vain foame or
froath, and yet the rock never the weaker: so the more the malice of our
Adversaries, on both sides, rages against us, our rock is impregnable, hurt
themselves they may, but cannot harm us.

To speak no more in this place of the former sort, against the traiterous and
rebellious fury of whom, your Honors have given the Church of God good hope of
rest, by the just laws that were enacted against them, at your last Session of
Parliament, to the perpetual eternizing of your worthy names among al
posterity. I am now enforced once again, even before the bar of your most
judicious Court, to maintain the just and holy quarrel of our Mother Church,
against the restless malice, and importunate cauils of her own superstitious
and turbulent Children, our factious Brethren.

It may please your grave Wisdoms therefore to call to mind, that at the last
Session, there was a Supplicatorie Pamphlet directed unto your H H. by the
Apists, (that I may so term them with that worthy Bishop) of the concision,
to provoke you, either to become Suitors and Suppliants unto his excellent
Majesty in behalf of their Cause, or else to determine of it your selves:
wherein also the Auctor (presuming belike he could never be discovered, being a
Cimmerian brood) both undutifully, and untruly accused the Christian
Magistrates, and the reverend Prelates of our Church, of rigorous and cruel
dealing, and so mainely cried out, as if the Gospel of Christ Jesus were
banished out of this kingdom, Gods worship profanely adulterated, and our
whole Ministry strangely corrupted, to the eternal destruction of many
thousand souls. Against which libell containing so manifest sycophancie and
palpable untruths, I have opposed an equal (I hope) and just Consideration,
dedicated in like manner even unto your most wise and grave Assembly. But
behold, as there is nothing so sincerely spoken, but some cauilling wit or
other, will be ready to carpe at: so has there stepped up another bird of the
same Cimmerian nest (as he would seem to be) an abettor and auoucher of that
most slanderous libel, who has undertaken the Defense thereof against the
Consideration; having indeed worse provided for the credit of their cause, the^
his Auctor had done before him, by how much he is the more intemperate and
immodest, not sparing any man whom he conceiueth not to be of his own private
strain and spirit, throughout the whole course of his Defense, producing every
man at his pleasure, upon the theater of envious diffammation, notwithstanding
he would seem to appear under the cloak and title of a Mild and just
Defender; yet he never cease, traducing the right hand of holy Justice, armed
of GOD with a punishing power against all evil doers, and namely against
schismatic procurers, and factious frequenters of private conuenticles and
unlawful assemblies: and complaining of great extremities with tragical
speeches, as if the like rigor had never been heard of in the world that they
suffer, only (as he says) for their conscience sake forsooth, which cannot
conform it self unto the ancient Discipline, and approved Ceremonies of our
Church: Both in the Epistle Dedicatorie of the Mild Defense and also page
30.40, 58. etc.
yea, and malepertly slandering the Christian Assembly of Parliament, to be a
party with them, to favor their factious schism, and to have intermedled and
dealt for them already, thereby laying himself open to the just reproof and
condemnation of all Readers. For what English man will not now condemn both
these Sycophants, for false witnesses against the Church of God, the Christian
Magistrates, and all the noble States of this kingdom, when they shall read or
hear them in so many things, to be so foully diffamed, contrary to the
knowledge of all the land.

Against this infamous rhapsodie therefore, I have once again presumed by your
Honorable leave and favor to stand in the gap, and penned this ensuing
Reioynder, not in mine own defense, for I freely forgive them, and wink at
all such indignities and disgraces as are offered me in particular; but lest I
should seem to forsake so holy and just a quarrel, in maintaining, to my
weak ability, the Glory of GOD, in the necessary defense of his Church and
the honor of our reverend Bishops in their most lawful, equal and moderate
proceedings, against the schismatic disturbers both of Church and
Commonwealth. All which I willingly submit unto the judicious censure, as of
all indifferent Readers in general, so of your HH. in particular, who, I hope,
will be satisfied better with that which may be rather sure for defense, than
fair for show; both for the grave Wisdom GOD has endued you with, and for
the accustomed favor you are wont to show, to all such as to their power do
endeavor faithfully to serve the Lord.

And now because it lies in your power, to stay these false and slanderous
exclamations, and to put a final end to all quarrels amongst Brethren, by
enacting some just and straight LAW, for punishing the wilful and obstinate
Superstition of the factious Schismatique, as your Honors have already
worthily done against the idolatrous Recusant: may it please your Wisdoms to
consider that the benefit thereof, through the blessing of God, must needs be
inestimable, both to the present state of the Church, in composing our
home-Controuersies, and recovering those our poor Brethren, who now (alas!)
are enstranged and alienated from us, that there may be but one flock and one
fold, as there is but one Shepherd Christ JESUS: and also to all posterity,
who having the holy Doctrine and Sacraments of Christ uniformly taught, and
delivered according to the truth of the Gospel, as an inestimable treasure,
left and committed unto their trust, to be delivered over from age to age to
the end of the world, should have infinite cause to glorify and praise God,
for so unspeakable a benefit, and reverently to keep with all honor the
famous names of their so Christian and noble progenitors and predecessors in
everlasting memory.

Which so honorable an ACT, for the service of GOD and infinite commodity of
the Church, though I be not worthy upon my knees to make any such motion unto
your Wisdoms yet apprehending the benefit thereof to be such as I have
declared, with your gracious favors, as kneeling before the bar of your most
noble Court, in all humility and reverence, I most humbly beseech your Honors
for the zeal you bear to God and to his only Son Christ Jesus; for the
love you have to the faith and doctrine of the Gospel; for the pity you must
needs have to behold the contentions and ruptures of our Church; and finally
for the happy example and direction, not only of your own noble children, and
childrens children, but of all the posterity of Christendom, to whom the
knowledge hereof may happily come; that it would please your Wisdoms to be
the Honorable means under his excellent Majesty, who (I know) cannot but
Royally assent to what you shall decree herein, to undertake so Christian and
famous an enterprise, and to see so worthy an ACT performed, to the great
Glory of almighty GOD, and the perpetual settlement and quietness of our most
flourishing Church and kingdom. Which work of immortal fame to all
posterity, if your Honors shall effect, the Church of God shall pray for you
and bless you, and the Lord JESUS shall abundantly reward you for it. Thus,
leaving this most humble Suite, not of one, though offered by my unworthy
hand, nor of a few, but of the whole CHVRCH of Christ unto your Honors godly
Wisdoms, and the same unto the happy direction of Gods holy Spirit; I come
now to join with my Antagonist.

A REIOYNDER UNTO THE MILD DEFENSE, Justifying the Consideration of the
silenced Ministers Suplication to the Parliament.
THe maine Proposition of this Defense, The Defenders Proposition.
tends to the vindicating and clearing of the Arguments of the silenced
Ministers, in their Supplication unto the high Court of Parliament, against the
just exceptions taken against them in the Consideration thereof. But how well
the Defender quitteth himself, and justifies his Cause against all exceptions,
shall (God willing) be manifest in the sequel.

The Title of the Supplication.
Certain Arguments to provoke the present high Court of Parliament to zeal,
for the Ministers now silenced. Supplication.

ANSWER.
The exception here generally taken in the Consideration, was that all these
XIIX. Reasons urged by the Suppliants, were

Common Arguments (excepting one or two) Answer.
and might be urged for Popery, That the Suppliants Arguments are Common
Arguments.
or for any other Heresy whatsoever, which the learned know to be an
intolerable fault in a Scholar, and were a sufficient answer unto them all,
etc.

The Defender replieth, that they are not Common Arguments: Reply.
Are Popish, or other heretical Priests (says he) Ministers of Christ, in
grace and favor with him? Do the Angels so long after and rejoice in their
Ministry, as in ours? Do they as truly interpret the mysteries of God to
eternal life, as Joseph interpreted dreams for this life? The like may be
said of the other Arguments.

But the question is not, Reioynder.
what either these, or they of the Defenders faction, are indeed: but what every
one of them esteems and takes himself to be. There is not one of these
named by the Defender, but will affirm, that he is the Minister of Christ, in
grace and favor with him, that the Angels long after, and rejoice in their
Ministry, that they truly interpret the mysteries of God to eternal life,
and so of the rest, as bodlly and as confidently, as any of the Refractarie
Ministers will. Wherefore, if all these will infill in, and produce the very
same Arguments, for confirmation of their heresy, and to procure grace and
favor unto their party, as well as the Suppliants do: how is it, that they may
not be termed, Common Arguments?

The Defenders fallacy in his impertinent instances, is (...); for he changes
the state of the Question. Wherefore the Defenders Epiphoneme, which here he
has vauntingly and triumphantly inserted, may be returned into his own
bosom; This beginning shows, what we are to look for in the rest of the
Defense.

I. ARGUMENT.
The Ministers supplicated for, Supplicat.
are the Ministers of Christ, sent by God, and in grace and favor with God. Not
to speak for them, is to spare speech for God himself, for Christ Jesus, and
for the everlasting salvation of many thousand Souls.

Ergo, The honorable and high Court of Parliament ought to intercede with his
Majesty for them.

ANSWER.
I. To the Antecedent.
I
WE willingly grant that the Refractary Ministers are indeed the Ministers of
Christ in the ministration of his Gospel, Answer.
that they are brought in question: and we hope also, that they are sent by GOD,
and in grace and favor with GOD. Yet must they remember, that their
Sanctification being in part, they have but their measure of gifts and graces:
for our knowledge is but in part, as the Apostle testifies; and therefore that
they may be ignorant and ouerseene in some things, wherein they ought not to
flatter themselves, but by all means labor to come to understanding, that
they may attain unto the knowledge of the truth.

The Defender replieth. Here is a mnaifest contrariety. Reply.
He that is refractarie, cannot be such a Minister of Christ. He that is in
grace and favor with God, Reioynder. In what sense the refractarie Ministers
may be good Men.
ought not to be disgraced and molested by men.

But I wonder the Defender is so Eagle-sighted, that he can spy a
contrariety, where there is none at all. He that is Refractarie, cannot be
such a Minister of Christ. Well. Neither do I say that he is such, as he is
Refractarie, but in the ministration of the Gospel, which words the Defender
has purposely, if not maliciously, omitted in my answer, lest his cunning
might have bin espied at the first blush. Aaron was the Priest of almighty God,
in grace and favor with him; but not in that he made the golden Calfe, ( Exodus
32.4.) Peter was the Apostle of Jesus Christ, in grace and favor with him; but
not as he went not the right way to the truth of the Gospel, ( Galat. 2.14.)
So the refractarie Ministers may be the Ministers of Jesus Christ, and in grace
and favor with him, but not as they err, or are schismatic or Refractarie.
Where is the contrariety? Ad populum phaleras: the Defender disputes not ad
idem. His error is twofold, 1. (...). 2. (...).

But, he that is in grace and favor with God, ought not to be disgraced and
molested by men. True, they ought not to be molested, in or for that thing
which procures them grace and favor with God: which must be so restrained.
Otherwise the Defender must needs plead for immunitie and freedom for any
transgressor and disturber of civil society, to do what he lists,
uncontrolled by the Magistrate; or deny that any such is in grace and favor
with God, which I think he will not do. The Error, is the same with the
former.

II.
It is true also, Answer.
that not to speak and take pains for the Ministers of the Gospel, for such
things as properly belong unto their Ministry, or are requisite unto the
performance thereof, is to spare speech for GOD, and for Jesus Christ,
according unto the places quoted in the Argument, and also to hinder the
salvation of Gods people.

Here the Defender, Reply and Reioynder.
as if he had lost himself in some inextricable labyrinth, idly discourses of
the terms, proper and necessary, and says that I confound both, which any
man, though but of mean capacity, may easily see I do not: adding moreover,
Note, the Defenders absurd Position.
that the Liberty of preaching does not properly belong to the ministry of
the Gospel; as if it were lawful for Cobblers and Tinkers to preach the
Gospel, which is absurd and scandalous. The error, is Pu^ida (...), and (...)
in Theologia.

II. To the Consequence.
If the Suppliant had prayed your high Court of Parliament to entreat in their
behalf, Answer.
for matters which had necessarily concerned the Gospel of Christ, or their
Ministry thereof, or the Salvation of many thousand-Soules, then had your
Honorable Assembly some reason to mediate for them: But seeing it is but only
to free them from the Cross and Surplice, and such other laudable Ceremonies
of the Church, commanded for order and decency sake, which may well stand with
the purity of the Gospel, seeing The kingdom of heaven stands not in meat
and drink, etc. Then have these importunate Suppliants greater reason to bear
that burden in the diligent applying their vocation and calling, then to
trouble your Wisdoms with such perie and small matters.

The Defender omitting the weight of Reason in this answer to the Consequence,
Reply.
snarleth only at certain words and phrases; replying, 1. If Cross and
Surplice be lawdable Ceremonies, then when or where the Sacraments are
celebrated without them, there wants some lawdable ceremonies. This is absurd
and impious. What would further follow hereof, I need not to write.

This is neither absurd, nor impious, Reioynder.
neither can the Defender show the least inconvenience that follows hereof:
for there is no doubt, but the Sacraments may be administered without either
these, or diverse other lawdable ceremonies, and yet no sin committed, neither
in the omission, nor in the use of them, if the particular circumstances and
occasions so require.

And that the Defender may see, Of the Ceremonies of the Lords Supper.
that this is so, as I affirm, I will insist only, for example sake, in the
ceremonies of the Lords Supper. And because happily he does not know (so gross
his ignorance seems to be throughout this whole Defense) what the learned
mean by Ceremonies of the Lords Supper, it may please him to understand, that
thereby they mean all the whole external action of that Sacrament, namely
whatsoever is the object, either of the eyes, of the ears, or of the hands,
whether it be an element, or gesture, or words spoken by the Minister.

These Ceremonies therefore are of two sorts: Ceremonies of the Lords Supper
twofold. 1. Essential,
Some be Essential; and some Accidental. The Essential Ceremonies are these;
that Christ had, 1. his Disciples gathered together, 2. a fit table, 3. true
bread, 4. natural wine, 5. that he gave thanks, 6. brake the bread, 7.
distributed it, 8. declared the use thereof, 9. that his Disciples took, ate,
and drunk, 10. and so declared the Lords death. These Ceremonies are so proper
and necessary unto the Lords Supper, that without them, a man could not
communicate rightly according unto the institution, commandment and example of
Christ.

The Accidental Ceremonies, 2. Accidental.
are that Christ celebrated his Supper, 1. in the evening, 2. in a chamber
prepared, 3. after meat, 4. together with his twelve Disciples, 5. sitting at
the table, 6. with unleavened bread, 7. so apparelled, etc. NW.
These Ceremonies do not properly and necessarily belong unto the action of the
Supper, because they do not signify any mystery, neither did Christ say, Do
this, after meat, or with such a number of communicants, or sitting, or so
apparelled, etc. Wherefore herein every man ought to follow the determination
and practice of that Church wherein he lives: otherwise none but Ministers
ought to participate this Sacrament; and where should we find the same chamber
prepared? the same table? the same cloth? the same dishes, etc. And who should
be Christ? who Judas the traitor? who John that leaned on Christ's breast? such
as were in that Supper. To imitate these things, were apish, childish and
foolish. The Defenders error, is (...) in Theologia.

2 Because I had said, out of the Apostle, Reply.
The kingdom of heaven stands not in meat and drink, the Defender replies,
The kingdom of heaven consists as well in the ABUSE of outward things as of
other matters.

Good Lord! Reioynder.
What is become of the Defenders reason and sense? Did ever any man hear the
like horrible speech uttered by a man of common sense, Another Position of the
Defenders.
much less by a Divine; The kingdom of heaven consists IN THE ABUSE of
outward things! I profess ingenuously, I cannot imagine what he would say, he
speaks so absurdly and grossly, yea so blasphemously: for I am sure, this
proposition is truer in Divinity, The kingdom of HELL consists in the abuse
of outward things. O me, that it was my hard hap, to have such an ignorant
senseless man, to become my antagonist! What? had not the refractarie
Ministers one Scholar amongst them, to defend their cause? Why then have they
made choice of this man to do it, who in true Theology knows not his right
hand from his left? The Error is a monstrous and blasphemous (...) in
Theologia.

II. ARGUMENT
The Ministry of the Gospel is not only for earthly men, Supplicat.
but also for heavenly Angels. To speak for the Ministry and Ministers
thereof, is to speak not only for God, but also for the Angels.

Ergo, The high Court of Parliament is bound to plead for the Ministers:
otherwise by Sparing Speech, they shall provoke both the Lord himself, and also
the whole host and army of heaven against them.

ANSWER.
THe Defender, disdaining to follow the resolution which I had made of this
Argument, and understanding not his Auctor, thus inspidely and unfitly
gathers the Reason. By the Ministry of the Gospel, the Angels of heaven
receive divine revelation to their farther joy. Ergo. To speak for the
Ministry and Ministers of the Gospel, is to speak for Angels. To say
nothing how he gathers this Antecedent from the Suppliants Reason; what is
this Conclusion to the Court of Parliament? how does it enforce them, to speak
for the schismatic Ministers? or are the Angels so distressed, that they
need intercessors? But I answer, as in the Consideration.

I. To the Antecedent.
I.
That the Ministers of the Gospel is for Angels, Answer.
is an ambiguous and perplexed speech, and savors of a Paradoxe. For how will
the Suppliants understand this saying? Is the Ministry of the Gospel, so
ordained for Angels, that they should be Ministers thereof? Impossible. Is the
Ministry ordained to convert them, and to preach repentance unto them?
Absurd. Seeing they never sinned. Or is it because thereby they might learn
and know the Wisdom of God? But so do they also by all other the creatures
and actions of God.

The Defender replieth: No paradoxe at all. Reply.
Neither had the Answerer any cause, to make the first two questions. That
which he opposes to the third, against the knowledge of the Wisdom of God by
the Gospel, may as well be opposed to men's knowledge of the Wisdom of God by
his word: for they are also taught the Wisdom of God by his creatures and
works.

But I never denied, Reioynder.
that the Angels understood the Wisdom of God by the preaching of the Gospel,
as appears manifestly by my words; wherefore vain and idle is this needless
defense. Yet the Defender at last, leaving his Auctor lying flat upon his back
in the plain field, to shift for himself, says, The further meaning of this
argument, in any special manner differing from other, I leave to the Auctor
himself: who is able, no doubt, to defend his meaning, or to yield better
reason to the contrary. To the contrary of what? to the contrary, that the
Auctor cannot defend himself? I know not what the Defender should mean by
these last words, to the contrary: but whatsoever his meaning be, he
confesses plainly, that he is not able to defend the Auctor of the
Supplication, and so leaves him to our mercy.

II.
What can this make for the Suppliants? Answer.
The Controversy between them and us, is not concerning the Ministry of the
Gospel, but touching a few petie accidental circumstances: for which, if any
man forsake the necessary function of his Ministry and calling, he has the
more to answer for.

The Defender, Reply.
faining that this second answer has received sufficient satisfaction
already; (but where?) adds. Whereas he charge us, to forsake our
Ministry for a few petie accidental circumstances, therein he discovers
the nakedness of the Prelates, in inflicting so material and substantial
punishment, for so few petie accidental circumstances. For justice requires a
proportion betwixt the offense and the punishment. But we acknowledge no
offense.

Very well. They acknowledge no offense. Therefore, Reioynder.
they do not offend. A found consequence, I warrant you. As touching the
Prelates, I answer, that in inflicting the punishment he speaks of, they do
but their duty, by executing the laws upon offenders, in obedience toward
the superior Magistrate, for the peace and quietness of the Church: and let all
the World judge, whether it be more meet and fit, that these self-conceited
refractaries should dutifully conform themselves, or that the Magistrate, to
satisfy their wrangling and restless humor, should dissolve the whole frame
of so well settled government.

III.
Every man is bound to promote the Ministry of the Gospel to his power,
Answer.
and also to help and further a Minister thereof, as he is a Minister, not as
he is in error, or carried away with faction.

The Defenders reply is, Reply.
In his third answer, he proclaims again, but proves not our error and
faction. If we err, or be factious, let us in that respect be punished (so
notwithstanding that the people be not punished with us) and let us be helped,
as we are Ministers.

I have proved so much as the Defender desires already at large, Reioynder.
in my book De Adiaphoris, neither was I in the Consideration to make any idle
digressions, but to keep my self strictly to the point and question in
controversy there handled. The refractarie Ministers are punished, only as
they are in error, and factious, as every man knows, and have as much favor
as they can desire, as they be Ministers. And for the people, neither are they
punished with them, nor for their sakes: but both are and shall be sufficiently
provided for, without their help, seeing they do so undutifully forsake them.

II. To the Consequence.
I
It does not follow, Answer.
that because the wise and judicious assembly of Parliament justly refuse to
intermeddle in the quarrel of Schismatic Ministers, farther then to admonish
them to desist from their singularity and turbulent dealing, that therefore they
shall provoke the Lord of Hosts, and all the Angels and Saints in heaven
against them. But rather it follows on the contrary.

II.
If that Honorable Court should take part with Schismatikes, and intercede for
them, to detain both them and the people still in faction and error, then
certainly they should provoke the wrath of God, and the whole Host of heaven
against them, Psalm. 50.17.18. etc.

What says the Defender to this? Reply.
I reason from your own words against you. The wise and judicious Parliament
will not intermedle in the quarrel of Schismatic Ministers, further than to
admonish them to desist from their singularity. But the Parliament has
further intermedled for us. Ergo, We are not Schismatic.

I answer. To let pass the form of this Syllogism; Reioynder.
the Assumption is a foul and slanderous imputation malepertly and unjustly
laid upon the high Court of Parliament: The Defender slandereth the honorable
Parliament.
most impudently charging and challenging that honorable Assembly, not only
to favor their seditious faction, but also, as a party in their schism, to
have intermedled and dealt in their behalf, contrary to the knowledge of the
whole kingdom. For what has the Parliament done? what have they spoken for
them? where is their decree and statute? Are two or three, the whole
Parliament? What reward the Defender deserves for this bold slander against
the Parliament house, I leave to their wise consideration and censure, whom it
concerns and more nearly touches. His error is, Crimen falsi.

III. ARGUMENT.
It is a sin not to recompense a good turn received.

Ergo, The refractarie Ministers are to be regarded and spoken for.

ANSWER.
I.
IT is true: Answer.
good deeds must be rewarded, specially the Ministers faithful labors. The
Apostle says (1. Cor. 9.11.) If we have sown unto you spiritual things, is
it a great thing etc.

II.
But in that the refractarie Ministers have looked back, and withdrawn their
hands from the plough ( Luke 9.62.) making a manifest Schism, and disturbing
the peace of the Church, this deserves no recompense.

Here the Defender bestirreth himself, Reply.
and produces all his forces, Whether the refractarie Ministers be Schismatiques
to prove that the refractarie Ministers are not Schismatiques. I say first of
all (says he) that this accusation of us to be Schismatiques, is a most
beggarly begging of the Question, most unjust, untrue and uncharitable, never
yet proved, neither able to be proved; until they prove the matters in
controversy, to be merely indifferent to such uses, as whereto they are
imploide and urged by them, yea good and laudable ceremonies, matters of
decency and order in the Church: yea that we also refuse to conform our
selves unto them, more of stomach, than of conscience.

Two things the Defender says must be performed by us, The Defenders first
Reason, that the Ministers are not Schismatiques, overthrown.
before the refractarie Ministers will acknowledge themselves to be
Schismatiques; 1. That we prove the matters in controversy to be indifferent.
2. That we euince them, to refuse conformity rather of stomach, then of
conscience. Touching the first, we have already in diverse Books and Treatises
purposely written to that end, more then sufficiently proved the things in
controversy, to be merely indifferent, both in their own nature, and to such
uses as the Church allotteth and appoints them. And for the Second, I know
not well what the Defender means thereby. What? shall a thief be a thief,
notwithstanding that to steal be not against his conscience? shall an heretic
be an heretic, albeit he thinks he holds nothing but truth? and must not
a Schismatique be a Schismatique, unless he be convinced to sin against his
own conscience? Note, the Defenders absurdity.
What Schismatique will ever confess, that he is such even against his
conscience? By this means no man shall ever be convinced to be a Schismatique.
But we know, that obstinate contumacie against the Church in things lawful, is
a schism, whatsoever a man's conscience be. Consciences are of two sorts. 1.
Too large. 2. Too strict.
Consciences are of diverse and sundry sorts; there is one Conscience that is
too large and profane; and another Conscience too strict and superstitious; a
Popish Conscience; and a Precise Conscience, I mean in the extreme. So then
the first part of this Argument being abundantly proved by us; and the second
being atheologicall and ridiculous, what remains but that the Defender labor
the refractarie Ministers, to acknowledge their oversight, and to yield to
conformity.

The Defenders second Reason, Reply.
to prove that the refractarie Ministers are not Schismatiques, is this. There
is nothing here objected against us, wherewith our ancients and betters have
not been charged in former times. Eliah was charged with troubling Israel.
Michaiah might have been charged with singularity and Schism, for dissenting
from the 400. Prophets. Jeremy was accused by the Priests and Prophets, to
have spoken against the State of the City. Amos was charged with conspiracy
against the King. The enemies of Daniel framed the like accusation against him
to Darius. Our Savior himself was blasphemed by the name of a seducer and
deceiuer. Paul was accused, that he taught against the Law and the Temple. Such
also have been the accusation of all Martyrs by the common Adversaries the
Paptsts. And such are the Prelates accusations against us.

I answer. Reioynder. The Defenders 2. Reason overthrown.
As for Michaiah, because the false Prophets did not accuse him of singularity
and schism, the Defender becomes their Advocate, and does as much for them: by
what right, let himself look to it. But who will not detest the impudency of
the Defender, in that he dares equal the refractarie Ministers case, with the
condition of the Prophets and Apostles, of the blessed Martyrs, yea of CHRIST
himself? But, not to particularize, I answer, in general. The difference
between the examples alleged and their case, is very great, and easy to be
discerned. 1. Those holy men did nothing contrary to their vocation; these do.
2. They taught nothing but the truth of God, necessary to be received; these
teach their own fancies. 3. They never oppugned the lawful authority of the
Magistrate in Ecclesiastical causes, and Things indifferent; these do. 4. They
were unjustly accused by the false Church for doing their office and duty;
these are justly taxed by the true Church (as themselves cannot deny) for
hateful schism and faction. 5. The Error is, (...).

His third Reason, Reply.
is: Do we vary from the sincere doctrine of the Scriptures? Nay, rather many
of them do much more swerve from the same; touching general grace, and the
death of Christ for every particular person; against particular election and
reprobation; for Images in Churches for devotion; touching the manner of
Christ's presence in the Eucharist; that the Pope is not the Antichrist, whereby
they hinder the zeal of Christian Princes from executing that against him in
general, and against his members in particular, which the Word partly
foretells, and partly commands to he done; concerning the necessity of
Baptism; touching auricular confession; for ignorance in the people. Who can
lay any such points to us, or to any of us?

I answer, Reioynder.
1. The Defenders report of our doctrine, is utterly vntrne: The Defender
slandereth our Church for false Doctrine.
for we derest and abhor even all and every of the particular points, he
says we teach. Wherefore let him either justify these things to be true, out
of the Confession of the faith of our Church (which he ought to do, if he
challenge us for Doctrine) or by any writer of ours of credit in the Church: or
let him fear without repentance and satisfaction for it by confessing his
ignorance, and malice in thus slandering the Church of God, the just
condemnation of Liars and false witnesses, whose portion is with hypocrites. 2.
His Argument is this, The Defenders 3. Reason overthrown.
The refractarie Ministers do not vary from the sincere doctrine of the
Scriptures. Ergo, They are not Schismatiques. To let the Antecedent pass; for
I have not observed, that any of them err in any fundamental or material
point of doctrine (which we thank God for, praying farther for their
preservation unto the end, in the unity of faith with us) albeit I know that
many amongst them have their particular fancies in some smaler points: I deny
the Consequence; for a man may be a Schismatique, and yet hold the entire and
sound profession of the saving truth of God, as shall be manifest presently.
The Eiror is, (...). The Defender seems not to understand what Schism is. His
returning of the Schism upon us, is ridiculous, and not worthy the answering:
for Schism is a contumacie or separation of the paits from the whole, not of
the whole from the parts.

The fourth Reason is, Reply.
Have we made any departure from the Church? We are deprived of our
Ministry, and so thrust out of our livings perforce against our wills, as
any man leaves that which is vielently taken away: but though we be thus put
from our Ministry and livings by our Prelates, yet do we not for sake the
communion of the Church.

The argument is briefly thus: Reioynder.
The Defenders 4. Reason overthrown. Schismatiques of two sorts. 1.
Separatists. 2. Factious men.
The refractarie Ministers have not for saken the Communion of the Church of
England. Ergo, They are not Schismatiques. I answer, Schismatiques are of two
sorts; 1. Such as separate themselves from the Church; and that either from the
whole Catholic, or from any particular Church. 2. Such as raise contentions
and stir up factions in the Church, and are contumacious and disobedient
toward their Governors: Of which sort are the refractarie Ministers. Touching
that the Defender says, they leave their charge, as a man leaves that which
is violently taken away from him: that does not extenuate their fault any whit,
seeing they by their obstinate superstition, disable themselves from doing that
good in their places, which they ought to do; and so disturb the peace of the
Church, that for preservation of unity, the Magistrate is compelled to thrust
them out of their places.

The fifth Reason, Reply.
is: Have we loitered in the work of the Ministry? have we heaped benefice
upon benefice? have we eaten and drunk, and beaten our fellow-seruants? have
we sought our own, and not that which is Jesus Christ's? have we made our
bellies our God? have we minded earthly things? Whereas the word Schism in the
Greek language signifies a renting; and the word Sedition in the Latin,
signifies seorsim ire, to go aside, or a going aside; we have proved that in
these significations, we cannot be charged with Schism.

I answer. Reioynder.
The Defen. ders 5. Reason overthrown.
This Reason is parallel unto the next going before. I marvel the Defender
braggeth of the refractaries diligence in their Ministry, seeing they
wilfully abandon their calling. If at any time they have been diligent, I would
God they had not looked back, but continued their diligence still. As for
plurality of benefices; what difference is there, between heaping one benefice
upon another, and one benefit upon another? their gifts and beneuolences are
not unknown. Is not reuiling and slandering their fellow-seruants, to beat
them? Do they not wilfully refuse their charge, because they may not be
tolerated in their superstition and faction? Do they not refrain to labor in
Gods service, to serve their own appetites and affections? and yet, Ignorance
of the Defender.
lo, they mind no earthly things! And for the Defenders philosophy, touching
Schism and Sedition, it is no marvel (the rest of his book being suitable unto
this) he is ignorant, that Sedition is that in the Commonwealth, which Schism
is in the Church; for he consounds both.

The sixth and last Reason, is: Reply.
All Schismatiques are abomination to the Lord. The Ministers pleaded for are
not abomination to the Lord, but in grace and favor with him. Ergo, The
Ministers pleaded for, are no Schismatiques. The Proposition is Salomons. The
Assumption is the Answerers.

I answer, 1. The Proposition is true, with this restraint, Reioynder.
The Defenders 6. Reason overthrown.
to wit, as they be Schismatiques: otherwise (questionless) diverse elect and
holy Children of God, by reason of the infirmity of their nature, may fall,
as well into the sin of Schism, as unto any other sin, except that against
the holy Ghost. 2. The Assumption may be understood two ways; 1. The Ministers
are not abomination to the Lord, to wit, as they be Ministers of the Gospel,
or holy men, which is the sense that I granted it in; and so it is true: but
then the middle term is not spoken ad idem with the Proposition, for there
are four terms (as the School speaks) in the Syllogism, contrary to the
law of true reasoning, and so concludes nothing. 2. It may be understood thus,
The Ministers are not abomination to the Lord, to wit, as they be schismatic
and factious, which is the sense of the Proposition, never granted by me; and
so the Assumption is utterly false: for the Ministers, as they are
schismatic, sin; and so are an abomination to the Lord. The Error, is
(...).

Having refuted the Defenders Reasons, That the refractarie Ministers are
properly Schismatiques
whereby he labored to clear the refractarie Ministers from the just
imputation of Schism, I think it not impertinent (seeing the Defender has
referred this point to be here discussed) to speak something of SCHISM, and
to make it plain and evident unto all men, that the refractarie Ministers are
indeed and properly SCHISMATIQVES; which we will (God willing) irrefutably
euince out of the true definition and nature of Schism: and the rather, to
stop their mouths, that hereafter, when we shall term them (as they are
indeed) Schismatiques, they may not except, that we beg the Question.

SISA Schism, Of SCHISM.
is properly a renting, dividing, or cutting in sunder of a solid body, such
as is the cleaving of wood, which divides and separateth the united parts of
the same.

This word is metaphorically retained in the Church, and used by Divines, to
signify such as raise contentions and disquietnes in the Church, or separate
themselves from the same, or institute or frequent private conuenticles and
assemblies.

Schism therefore is a wilful breaking of the unity of the Church, Schism
defined.
either by separation from the same, or by raising contention within it, or by
refusing to submit and yield obedience to the lawful Pastors and Guides
thereof.

Thus the Corinthians were Schismatiques, in that they divided themselves into
factions, and caused dislentions in the Church, whereby the society of the
faithful was disturbed and divided into sundry partial Sects, the one
holding of Apollos, the other of Paul, and the third of Cephas, 1. Cor.
1.10.11.12. 1. Cor. 3.3.4.

Yea in Rites and Ceremonies they dissented one from another, and avoided one
another communion, as damnable. 1. Cor. 11.16.17.18.

And the Defender confesses, that he that rayseth up dissension among
Brethren, is a Schismatique, though he does not separate himself from the
Church. Mild Def. page 48.

As for Separation, Separation twofold.
it is twofold: for a Man may separate himself, either absolutely from the
whole Militant Church, being carried away with error of mind; and such is not in
the Church. Or, by reason of some infirmity, or perturbation of mind, because
of offenses, he may separate himself from this or that particular Church: Such
may be of the Church, seeing he is but rent from this or that member, not from
the whole body.

It is one thing to be cut off from the Body, NW.
and another thing to be cut from a Member of the body. He that is cut from the
Body, has nothing common with the body. He that is cut from a Member, may be,
both formally by the Spirit, and also materially by touch and cohesion of some
other member, joined to the body. Now every particular Church, is a member of
that Catholic body.

Also, Unity considered two ways.
the Unity of the Church may be considered two ways: for either it is
Internal and formal by the Spirit of Christ, in faith; or it is External and
material, in the prosession, exercises and signs of faith. The former may
really consist without the later; but not contrariwise, the later without the
former. For a Schismatique may break the external Union, without breaking the
Internal.

Neither do I speak this, N.
any way to excenuate the crime of this kind of Schism: for certainly even this
is a most pernicious Sin; because such a Schismatique, as much as in him
lies, destroys both himself and the whole Church also.

Which that we may the better understand, we must call to mind the
Philosophers distinction of the WHOLE, WHOLE twofold.
which is of two sorts. There is one WHOLE, every part whereof is (...), alike
or of the same kind; as earth, water, blood, salt, milk, etc. If division be
made of any of these, the powers of the whole do after a sort perish: for by
that separation and plucking in sunder, it is much weakened; yet in the parts
the nature of the whole is preserved; for every part of earth is earth, of
water water, etc. There is another WHOLE, every part whereof is (...), of
unlike or diverse kind; Such be all living creatures and plants, made of diverse
members and parts. If a man divide these, then neither the Whole, nor the parts
can remain. A man being drawn asunder into parts, cease to be a man.

Now the Church, NW.
being a body composed of diverse parts, when it is divided, both it self after
a sort is ruined, and the parts thereof being distracted do perish.

Schism is twofold, Pure; or Mixedwith Heresy. Schism twofold. 1. Pure.


Pure Schism, is that whereby the Unity of the Church is broken, either by
separation, or other contumacie; notwithstanding that such retain an entire
profession of the truth of God. 2. Mixed with Heresy.


Schism mixed with Heresy, is that wherein together with the departure or
contumacie, there is joined some error in matters of faith. Which likely
happens in the end of all Schisms; every one being desirous to justify his
disobedience and contumacie, or departure from the rest of Gods people.

Schism differs from Heresy. The difference between Schism and Heresy.


1 Because Heresy holds some false point of doctrine: Schism breaks
society to defend it.

2 Heresy overthrows the sincerity of faith: Schism hurts the bond of
peace.

3 Heresy in the beginning thereof holds some perverse opinion: Schism in
the end brings forth Heresy.

4 Schism is as it were the general kind: Heresy the special kind. For
every Heresy is a Schism; but not contrariwise, every Schism an Heresy.

5 Schism is a certain disposition: Heresy an indurate habit.

6 Heresy may be kept secret a long time: Schism is presently discovered.

Again, Schism may be, 1. In External things. 2. In prosession.
Schism is either in External things, as in the choice of Bishops, or other
Governors and Pastors of the Church. Or in the Profession of life, as the
diverse orders of Monks and Friars, wherein every Sect follows a diverse rule
or way to attain eternal life, condemning all other different from it. 3. In
Ceremonies, 4. Jn phrases and words.
Or in Rites and ceremonies of religion, as that of the keeping of Easter. Or
in Phrases and strife of words, as is that concerning the real presence among
the Reformed Churches, and of Christ's Passion and Descent into hell with us.

Furthermore, NW.
Schism even from the original thereof proceeds from evil. For all good is
united, not divided: and GOD, the auctor of all good, is one, simple, without
division.

Amongst Schismatiques, Some Schismatiques greater sinners, then others.
some are greater sinners than other: neither are all induced to be such, upon
the same grounds and reasons.

For, Some are carried with hatred toward their brethren: with which vice the
Donatists seem to have been infected in Augustines time.

Others are lead by ambition and desire of rule: Many such schisms have
happened in the Synagogue of Antichrist, at what time there were two, or three,
or four Popes together at once.

Others are carried with blind affection and favor toward men's persons: such
were the Corinthians in the Apostles time; and such at this day are those fond
Preachers that, not caring for truth, labor to please men.

Others follow factions of mere ignorance of the truth, who are the more
tolerable, if their ignorance be not wilful and affected: such were the people
in Christ's time ( Ioh. 7.12.40.41.42.43.) For some said of Christ, He is a good
man. Other said, nay, but he deceives the people. Some said, Of a truth this
is that Prophet. Other said, This is that Christ. And some said, But shall
Christ come out of Galile? etc. So there was (says John) a Schism among the
people.

Others are puffed up with admiration of their own virtues, or with a vain
persuasion of their own holiness: Such were the Catharists or Puritanes in
the days of Tertullian, who sought for pure assemblies.

Others fly out by reason of discontentments and want of preferments: of which
sort we have too many examples in our days.

I need not particularly to apply these things, either unto the Brownists,
who have separated themselves from us; or unto the refractarie Ministers, who
are disobedient unto their lawful Governors amongst us, and disquiet our
Church with Contentions. These grounds, which I have laid, are so plain and
easy; that (I think) there is not any man so simple, but may manifestly
discern how, and in what sense they are, and may be rightly termed
Schismatiques.

If it be demanded; How Schism may be excused.
Whether in any case Schism may be excused?

I answer; It may so, in some special cases.

I. Necessity excuses Schism: namely when good men are publicly expelled
and banished, and violently put out of their Churches, so that they can have no
place left them, neither among the Teachers, nor among the hearers. As at this
day we see whole families and assemblies compelled to fly out of their own
country, and to live in exile for Religion sake.

II. When the sincerity of faith is so corrupt, that wholesome doctrine (as the
Apostle speaks) can be neither taught, nor learned; the godly may depart.
For agreement and unity is commendable only in the truth: if truth be away,
we ought to make no question of agreement and unity.

III. When the Sacraments are so corruptly administered, that there is not
scarce any step to be seen of Christ's institution; There is no doubt but a man
may lawfully separate himself from that society which retains not true
Doctrine and the lawful use of the Sacraments.

But here both the Separatists and the Refractaries step in, Objections of the
Brownists and Refractaries.
and labor to defend their Schism, alleging; 1. That we live not according
to our dostrine neither Ministers, nor people. 2. That whereas we abound with
wickedness yet we admit every one promiscuously unto the Lords Supper, without
further censure or discipline. 3. That we use Popish ceremonies in the worship
of God.

I answer, Answ.
generally: These are no just and sufficient causes, to make a Schism, as
appears in that the truth of doctrine and purity of faith, consist not in
these things: which whilst they grant unto us, they condemn themselves in
that they have inconsideratly made a schism from us without just cause.

Neither is it any hard matter, to answer all their arguments in particular
excepting the first.

Touching the Munisters therefore; It is most certain, Of Scandalous Ministers
that a faithful Minitier of Christ ought not only to know the will of God
but also to do thereafter. What Paul spoke of the Law, that not the hearers,
but the doers thereof should be justified, ( Romans 2.13.) that Christ speaks
of his Disciples, ( Ioh. 13.17.) If you know these things, happy are you if
you do them. But it cannot be denied but that some Ministers offend this way,
which how they will answer before God, let themselves look unto. For my own
part, I can say no more of such Ministers, than what Christ says of the
Scribes and Pharisees, ( Mat. 23.2.3.) They sit in Moses chair: All therefore
whatsoever they bid you observe, that observe and do; but after their works do
not; for they say and do not. It ought to content us, that they teach true
doctrine; and that they live not thereafter, it hurts not me, for they shall
carry their own burdens. The doctrine is ours; the life is theirs: let us
take the doctrine, and leave the manners. I had rather have a sincere Preacher
of Gods Word, that will declare Christ unto me purely, rebuke my sinful living,
comfort me with the sweet promises of the Gospel, show me how I ought to
frame my life according to the will of God, etc. albeit his manners be somewhat
corrupt, and dissent from his preaching; then to have a wicked Heretic, a
pestilent Pharisie, or a superstitious Hypocrite, who outwardly shall pretend a
certain gravity, and a pure manner of living, and yet corrupt the holy
Scriptures, lead the people into superstitious errors, slatter the hearers,
preach for lucre, mangle the doctrine of Christ, and obscure the way of truth.
Of such Christ warns us to take heed saying. ( Matthew. 7.15.) Beware of false
Prophets which come to you in sheep clothing, but inwardly are ravening
wolves. These things our Schismatiques know very well; but not contented
herewith, they urge; Such a man was unworthy to be admitted, and now being in
the Ministry, be ought to be put out; which I leave to the Magistrates and
such as be in authority to consider of.

As for the People: Of Scandalous People.
the Separatists and Refractaries do limite and hedge in the Church too
narrowly and straightly. It is very lamentable indeed, that the doctrine of
truth is not heard with more fruit; yet do they offend, who look for pure
assemblies in earth, without spot or blemish. Christ compares the Gospel unto
a net, that contains fish and filth: and the Lords field has in it both good
corn and tares; which yet must not be weeded out, until harvest be come.
Vainly therefore do they labor to seek pure assemblies; albeit if they
would look into their own societies, it may be they might find therein as
many Sinners as are in ours. But these men ought to content themselves, as the
godly have ever done, that the wicked being known cannot hurt the saithfull;
who either have no authority to curb them, or cannot otherwise provide for
public peace, then by tolerating such. And yet there want not in the mean
time public Laws and penalties to restrain and bridle such as be notorious
offenders.

That which they speak concerning the Communion, Of promiscuous admission to
the Communion.
is very inconsiderate also and foolish: seeing neither Christ, nor the Apostle
Paul, did ever speak any thing at all, concerning the censuring and examining
of others; But command only that every man should examine himself. Christ
celebrated his Supper with his weak Disciples, and admitted Judas to be
partaker thereof, as many excellent Divines do hold. Paul expressly
commands, that every man examine himself. It is my duty to look unto my
self, and thine unto thy self, and of every other unto himself. So that a
faithful Minister seems to have sufficiently discharged his duty, if he
shall diligently admonish the Communicants hereof, and not curiously pry into
the secrets of other men. Concerning manifest crimes the Church has prescribed
Laws of admonition, of Counsel, etc. If any list to communicate contemning
these; I see not how any man may exclued those from the Communion, whom God the
Father, and Christ Jesus admit their ghuests: neither do thou know what God
may work in a Sinner, even in that very hour. It is not a sign of an
ingenuous and charitable mind, to depart because of Sinners, whom Christ
inuiteth to come unto him. The Apostle says. (2. Tim. 2.20.) In a great house
there are not only vessels of gold and silver, but also of wood and of earth,
etc. we must endeavor, that we may be vessels of gold and silver: God only is
to break the vessels of earth in pieces.

As touching that we use Popish Ceremonies in the Worship of GOD, that appears
otherwise, in my book De Adiaphoris, whereunto I refer the Reader.

Many men move this Question. Whether Schismatiques may be compelled.
Whether Schismatiques ought to be compelled to unity? I answer; Compulsion
seems to be hard, specially in such things as ought to be voluntary.
Augustine confesses, that he was once of mind, that neither Schismatiques, nor
Heretics ought to be compelled. ( Lib. Retract. cap. 5.) But afterward
having by use and experience learned what good a little discipline would
effect, he altreth his opinion, and plainly defends, that Schismatiques ought
by all means to be compelled to concord and unity.

Yet herein great moderationought to be used: we must otherwise deal with the
Auctors of Schism, and such as be stubborn and wilful; than with such as of
mere ignorance and preposterous zeal of piety, are Seduced by others. But I
leave this unto the grave and religious consideration of the wise Magistrates.

IV. ARGUMENT.
Such whom the Lord has made his instruments, Supplicat.
for the spiritual deliverance of many thousands from spiritual enemies, are
to be respected and recompensed.

Ergo, The refractarie Ministers are to be remembered and restored.

ANSWER.
I
THis Argument is parallel unto the former, Answer.
and is there fully answered.

II.
The Ministers, in delivering thousands from spiritual enemies, did but their
duty, for which they deserve love of the people, and commendation of all men:
but they should still have continued faithful in their Ministry, and not
shamefully have forsaken their calling.

The Defender replies. Reply.
If men should always be so answered, when in their necessities they should
require some help and comfort in regard of some former kindness; would not
men condemn such Answerers of great ingratitude and inhumanitie? viz. thus to
be answered, That which you have done, was but your duty?

But with what conscience does this man write; The Defenders malicious dealing.
that instead of the second answer unto this Argument, lays down only these
words, The Ministers did but their duty etc. suppressing the rest of the
Answer, and then shapes his Reply in most bitter manner, to persuade all men,
that I had neither common humanity, not compassion, not feeling of their
misery: whereas the Lord knows, my heart many times yerneth for sorrow, when
I think of our domestical controversies, which would GOD I might appease and
reconcile, that so the Church might enjoy rest and quietness, though it were
with the effusion of my dearest BLOOD. In the mean time, I feel oftentimes
such inward pangues and grief, that (I think) the Defender has never bin
acquainted with the like. Neither could my compassionate affection toward the
refractarie Ministers, be altogether unknown unto this wrangling Advocate, if
he had not already made shipwreck both of ingenuitie and conscience. For even
in this very Answer, which he mangleth and curtolizeth at his pleasure, he
might have seen, that I acknowledge, that for their labor and diligence in
the Ministry, the Ministers deserve love of the people, and commendation of
all men. Also in the Argument going before, It is true, Good deeds must be
rewarded, specially the Ministers faithful labors, etc. And lastly (to omit
diverse other places) in the Conclusion, I cannot but grieve in my very soul,
when I hear the Ministers complain of their poverty, and want of the
benefits of this life, etc. And again, Lo the malice, the envy and spite,
which we, whom they term their Accusers, do bear unto them, GOD being
witness unto our consciences, that we wish them all the good that may be.
These things whilst the Defender dissembleth, how is he as good as his
promise, where he says, I will collect his words with such faithfulness, that
the Answerer shall have no just cause to complain of the said collections, as
unjust, or not agreeing to his own words (Mild Defense page 1.) What justice
is it, to take only a piece of a sentence, and to rack that upon the
tenture-hooke of malicious construction, directly against the Auctors meaning?

III.
Ionathans example, alleged by the Suppliants, Answer.
is unlike unto the Ministers case. For Saul in deep hypocrisy, had made a rash
vow, that whosoever did taste any food, etc. (1. Sam. 14.24.) should be
accursed, and die the death, wherefore the people justly rescued him from the
fury of Saul. But the actions of our dread Sovereign are not so exorbitant,
they are not rash and headie, but advised and just, intended for unity and
quietness in the Church, to prevent and repress phanaticall giddiness,
schism, factions and innovation.

The Defender replies. Reply.
See how wise the children of this world are in their kind? The auctor
altogether wisely and purposely (as it seems) concealed the name of Saul in
the Argument, that so the work might be generally and simply respected in it
self, without any particular eye unto Saul, out of whose hands the people
delivered Jonathan. If the Israelites justly rescued Jonathan, as the Answerer
confesses they did justly, much more just is it, that many Ministers should be
relieved in their troubles.

Reioynder.
I think the Auctor of the Supplication is but little beholding unto the
Defender, for ranging him amongst the Children of this world, a phrase in
Scriptures properly belonging unto the Reprobates. But I answer unto the
Reason. The fallacy is, (...). For he makes that less, which is not less:
there was greater reason for rescuing of Jonathan, being the auctor of so great
deliverance, from the fury of Saul, who hypocritically without warrant from
God, had vowed that whosoever should taste any food etc. should die the death;
than there is for the rescuing of the refractarie Ministers from the just
execution of Law upon them: as well because by their wilful obstinacy in
perseuering singular and forsaking their calling, they are not the auctors of
deliverance, but rather of destruction to Gods people; as also because the
punishment inflicted upon them, is not unjust and undeserved, as Ionathans
should have been, but just and deserved for their schismatic carriage, etc.

V. ARGUMENT.
Many spoke earnestly; Supplicat.
yea and some have adventured their lives in behalf of the Church of God, as
Nehemiah, Hester: so also did Joseph of Arimathea, and Nicodemus for Christ's
body.

Ergo, So should the high Court of Parliament do for the refractarie Ministers
and for whole Christ.

ANSWER.
I. To the Antecedent.
THe zeal and courage of such as have been earnest, Answer.
or adventured their lives and estate in Gods cause, for defense of his eternal
truth and Church, is certainly much to be commended and imitated (to their
utmost power) of all such as desire to be called, and be indeed members of the
Church of God: but it would be wisely considered, that it were rashness and
foole-hardinesse, for any to adventure hazard, or manifest danger, by
intermedling in a frivolous and unnecessary quarrel, and much more for such
cause as cannot be justified by any probable reason.

The Defender replies. Except by a frivolous quarrel, Reply.
and a cause not justifiable, you mean not the cause of the Ministers; you
speak nothing to the purpose. If you mean that (as needs you must) then do
you not speak to us poor Ministers alone, but also to the Parliament, and to
all other (Noblemen, or Gentlemen) that have intermedled, or shall intermedle
in our cause. Yea, them do you not cunningly, but openly and plainly, charge
all such with rashness and foole-hardines.

What should move the Defender, Reioynder.
to imagine that I mean any other Cause, but the Ministers? I mean no other
indeed; and yet it follows not, that therefore I censure the Parliament
house, etc. or charge them with rashness and foole-hardines. For the Parliament
house is not of their faction and strain, as we have noted before. What they
deserve for this their continual insolency and malepertnes in slandring the
high Court of Parliament, I refer unto the religious censure of that noble
and wise Assembly.

II. To the Consequence.
I
Answer.
This Consequence has no coherence with the Antecedent. For there are great ods
between these examples proposed, and the refractarie Ministers case.

The Defender replieth. Reply.
There should be such ods. For the Auctor reasons not a similibus, or
paribus, from likes or equals, but from the less to the greater.

But the odds are such, Reioynder.
that they make the Argument to be plainly inconsequent: for the Auctor of the
Supplication makes that less, which is every way greater, as shall appear in
examining the particulars.

II.
In the time of Nehemiah, Answer.
the Church of the jews, having been long captiuated, was in great affliction
and reproach, and the walls of Jerusalem were broken down, (Nehem. 1.3.)
which was not so in the days of their Fathers. But our Church having (by the
mercies of God) now long continued in prosperous and flourishing estate, is
(God be thanked) glorious still, yea more now, then ever it was in the days of
our Fathers. Furthermore, Nehemiah, after he had wept, mourned, fasted and
prayed, (Nehem. 1.4.) spoke unto King Artashaste, an Heathen and profane man,
and finding grace in his eyes, obtained leave to build up Jerusalem. ( Nehem.
2.6.) But Sanballat, Tobiah, Geshem and others deriding and despising the
Jews, labored to hinder the work, but prevailed not ( Nehem. 2.19. and
4.7.15.) Then Nehemiah prayed, My God, remember thou Tobiah and Sanballat,
according unto these their works. (Nehem. 6.14.) So even in the very beginning
of our religious Sovereigns reign, many worthy Nehemiahs finding grace in his
eyes, have moved his Majesty for the continuance of the prosperous estate of
our Church, as it was in the days of our late blessed Queen, albeit his
Highness was more ready to grant their request, then they to ask it. And
now so many Sanballats, Tobiahs, and Geshems, as there be refractarie Ministers
and Papists, deriding and despising us, labor to hinder our Ministry,
blaspheming the same, either to be none at all, or adulterate and very corrupt,
but (God willing) shall not prevail. And we still thinking that most of them
do sin of ignorance, cease not to pray unto God: O Lord, open the eyes of
these men, and lay not this sin to their charge.

The Defender replies. Reply.
All things being granted that you say (concerning the glory of our Church)
does not hinder, but further the cause. The more the Church flourishes, the
more easy it is to grant that, which the Arguments plead for. Ministers also
of the Word are as necessary for preserving and increasing of the glory of
Churches, as for the procuring thereof at the first.

Not hinder? Reioynder.
If our Church be glorious and flourishing both in the entire and sound
profession and practice of Gods truth, in the exercises, means, and signs of
faith, (which is the true and principal glory of the Church) and also in the
outward state, Discipline and Government thereof (which Glory is secondarie
and depending of the former) how can it be, but that giddie innovation, the
utter overthrow of Ecclesiastical policy, and the bringing in of the
Presbyterian prelacie, even almost equalizing Papal tyranny, should be a
maine blemish, and incurable maime unto the GLORY of our Church? It is true
indeed: that the Ministers of the Word are necessary for preserving and
increasing of the glory of Churches; but are there no Ministers, but such as
be refractarie? Have we not store (God be praised) of sufficient religious
Ministers already? And are not the Universities able continually to afford
farther supply?

But alas, Reply.
says the Defender, I would God our Church did so flourish, as you pretend:
Indeed it has many rich mercies, God be blessed for them; but he that sees
not what the Church wants, does not rightly acknowledge that which it has.
We want some of those Officers, that Christ has commended by his Apostles to
the Church, What Christian heart is so stony, that it does not mourn; what
eye so blind, that it does not gush out with tears, to consider and behold the
misery of our supposed glorious Church, by the spiritual nakedness, blindness,
and poverty thereof? I mean the great ignorance, the super ficiall worship of
God, the fearful blasphemies and swearings in houses and streets, the
direful cursings, the open contempt of the Word and Sacraments, the wicked
prophanations of the Lords dates, the dishonor of superiors, the pride, the
cruelty, the fornications, adulteries and other uncleannesses, the drunkenes,
the covetousness, the vsuries, and other the like abominations; almost as
grievous, as either heretofore in the time, or now in the places of Popery,
when and where there was no preaching at all of the Gospel? O behold and
pity the woeful and lamentable state of our Church in these things!

What marvel is it, Reioynder.
that the Owl cannot SEE, in a clear Sun-shining day, whose only delight is to
flutter, and to roue about in the profound darkness of the night? And can any
man think it strange, that the Defenders eyes dazzle at the Glory and goodly
order of our Church, when nothing pleases him, but the Aerian or Presbyterian
confusion? Oh, but there want some Officers in our Church, which Christ
commended unto us, by his Apostles. What Officers be those? o they are the Lay
Presbyterian Aldermen. Hinc illae lachrimae; here lies the soar a bleeding.
We want the supposed Apostolical Senate of Aldermen; and for this cause, we
are spiritually naked, and blind, and poor, and miserable, and what not? But
when will the Defender prove, that either Christ, or his Apostles commended any
such Aldermen unto us? Shall we believe him on his bare word? What other proof
brings he, or any other of the faction? And yet upon this most beggarly
Supposition, never granted by us, because never proved, nor able to be proved
by them; he opens his foul mouth, The Defenders slanders against the Church.
most wickedly traducing and slandering the Church of GOD, as guilty of great
ignorance, of superficial worship of GOD, of blasphemies, swearings, direful
cursings, and many other horrible and monstrous enormities, which my pen does
even blush to relate after him. We read (1. King. 22.21.22.) of a wicked
Spirit, that liberally promised his service in seducing King Ahab, by being a
lying Spirit in the mouth of all his Prophets: Except this foul fiend has
entered into the Defender, and wholly possessed him; I cannot possibly imagine,
how his pen could so leasingly rave against our whole Church. I beseech the
Lord, that he would vouchsafe, to rebuke the evil Spirit, and to give the
Defender grace to repent him in time, by confessing his malice against the
Church of God. But let us hear what he says further.

But to return, herein you err not a little, Reply.
in that you confound the state of the Church, and of the Commonwealth of the
Jews. The Commonwealth was indeed at that time in much misery. But was the
Church also amongst them, for such things as wherein chiefly consists
misery, in as bad condition?

Do I confound the Church and Commonwealth of the Jews? Was not the CHVRCH
in distress, Reioynder
being but lately returned from the Captivity of Babylon? Can the Commonwealth
be in extreme misery, and the Church have no feeling thereof? Was not the
Temple at Jerusalem the special place of Gods worship, which now, by reason
of the desolation of the City, was but little regarded, and the laws not
executed? Did not Nehemiah, after his return from Artashaste, reform many
things as well in the Church, as in the Commonwealth? It seems the Defender
cares not what he writes, so he contradicts my sayings. But he proceeds.

The ods that before he spoke of, Reply.
now he makes likes. Is this to dispute ad idem, and to the purpose?

As I said before, Reioynder.
so I say still, that there is GREAT ODS between the example of Nehemiah, and
the refractarie Ministers case. And do I now make those ODS LIKES? Nay
contrariwise, I make Nehemiahs case to be OURS, and the refractarie Ministers,
Tobiahs, Sanballats and Geshems. Is not this adidem, and to purpose? Where is
the Defenders understanding?

Touching his Worthy Nehemiah ( whom he compares to ancient good Nehemiah)
let this be observed, Reply.
that although he spoke of the prayer and fasting of the ancient Nehemiah, yet
he speaks not of the prayer and fasting of his new Nehemiah. What may be
suspected or noted herein, I leave to the consideration of the wise and
judicious Reader, that remembereth What oppositio^ many of the Prelates have
always made to true fasting.

I spoke not of ONE, Reioynder.
but of MANY worthy Nehemiahs: neither needed these to have fasted and prayed,
the Church being not then afflicted, as it was in ancient Nehemiahs days: and
(I think) the Defender is not ignorant, that Similitudes run not with four
feet, as the Proverb is. As for the Opposition of many of the Prelates to true
fasting, it is utterly untrue that any Prelat ever opposed himself against
true fasting, except it were peradventure against the disordered conuenticles,
and presumptuous practices of some harebraind Refractaries, contrary unto all
good Discipline and order.

Touching the Tobiahs, Reply.
Sanballats, and Geshems (whom feign he would have to be those that he calls
refractarie Ministers, as well as the Papists) let him not deceive himself
herein. For the wise and Christian Readers, are able to discern them to be
most worthy of these names, that strive most for men's precepts, that study
more to please men then God, that preach not themselves, and hinder them that
would: whose chief work is not to increase God his kingdom, but to uphold
their own, fearing nothing more, then the downfall thereof: which also feed
not the Lords people, with the bread of eternal life, but their own bodies
with the meat that perishes, and with carnal delights, etc. but the
righteous Lord in the end shall plead our cause, if not in this life, yet in
the world to come, when some of our adversaries (without repentance in the
mean time) shall be thrown into the place, Wherein is Weeping and gnashing of
teeth.

Cease your rash judgment, (...)
and restrain your censuring and lying Spirit, if you can awhile; and turn the
backside of the wallet before you: then consider, that they most aptly resemble
Tobiah, Sanballat and Gesoem, who by tooth and nail labor to let the building
of the spiritual Jerusalem, by withdrawing their service, breaking unity,
and disturbing the peace of the Church; of which sort are both the refractarie
M^^^sters and the Papists, who are as guilty herein, as were Tobiah,
Sanballat, and Geshem, for hindering the building of the material Jerusalem.

Moreover whereas I had said, that I thought that most of the refractarie
Ministers and Papists did sin of ignorance, the Defender replieth, See how
this man tumbleth up and down and how he contradicts himself? Has not he
before expressly charged all of us, to do that which we do for carnal
respects? I mean in his Preface.

See how the Defender iugleth up and down! (...) on.
1. Are no^ my words spoken as well of the Papists, as of the refractar^
Ministers? 2. What is in my Preface contrary to what I a^ firm here; or
rather, does not the Defender by some iugling trick, suppress some words in
my Preface, whereby, deceiving his Reader, he might persuade a contradiction?
The words are these;

It cannot be denied, but that the Ministers presumptuously and wilfully
contend with the Magistrates, impugning his auctority in Things indifferent,
and sovereignty in Ecclesiastical causes, which all of them do for carnal
respects: Some because they know not otherwise how to be maintained, but by
depending upon that faction; some to gratify their benefactors and patrons,
and to please their friends; some for coffeehouse and want of preferment;
some for giddines of innovation; some for pride of heart and self love; some
for hatred of order and restraint of their liberty; some still to retain the
opinion of constancy in perseuering singular; and others OF MERE IGNORANCE,
which yet is wilful and affected, seeing they will not learn the state of the
Controversy, which they are bound to know, and therefore cannot be excused.

What? Have not I named IGNORANCE here amongst the rest? and is not Ignorance
carnal? Where then is the Contradiction? Let the Reader judge.

III.
In the days of the noble and renowned Queen Hester, Answer.
all the Jews should have been swallowed up by the tyranny of Haman, had not
that virtuous Queen, by aduenturing her own life, delivered her people from
destruction. But I hope the Suppliants do not think our Church to be in so
desperate a state, neither outwardly, nor spiritually: and if they do, yet none
can be so foolish as to believe it.

The Defender replieth. Reply.
May we fear nothing to our whole Church and Kingdom, for the hard dealing of
the Prelates toward the souls of many thousands of our own Nation? Let no man
deceive us with vain words; Ephesians. 5.6. Prou. 28.14.
Blessed is the man that fears always. There is danger in security, there
is much more safety in a godly fear. As for the spiritual danger of the
Church, it appears by the decay of the spiritual beauty, and by the
increase of the spiritual deformity, that is, of ignorance and of impiety in
those places already which are deprived of their good Ministers.

But what is this, Reioynder.
to prove that the example of Q. Hester was rightly alleged by the
Suppliants, to provoke the high Court of Parliament, to speak for the
refractarie Ministers? The danger of the Church in Hesters time was very great
and imminent: The danger of ou^ Church (GOD be thanked) is but an exstaticall
imagination of the Suppliants and Defenders brains. Oh, but the hard dealing
of the Prelates toward many thousand Souls, ought to cause us to fear
continually. What? Is the removing of SCHISMATIQVES, and the stopping of the
mouths of such clamorous wranglers, as stir up dissension and discord in the
Church, hard dealing toward men's souls? Who will say so, besides the
Refractaries, and their abettors, the Brownists? But how does this Elymas
pervert that saying of Scripture, Blessed is the man that fears always,
(Pro. 28.14.) Is this fear meant of the fear of punishment? Nay, let him
remember, that GOD will send FEAR upon the wicked, where no fear is: that
such as observe not Gods commandments, shall fear day and night, ( Deuteronomy.
28.66.) that the same which the Wicked fears, shall come upon him, ( Prou.
10.24.) As for his slandering our Church with decay of Spiritual beauty in
those places, which are deprived of their good Ministers; if it be so, then woe
unto them by whom the offense comes, that so easily gave place unto the
Wolf: But I marvel he was not ashamed, so impudently to auerre that, which
all the Land and daily experience testify to be an impious Calumny.

IV.
The examples of Joseph of Arimathea and Nicodemus, are altogether impertinent:
Answer.
for neither had Pilate any reason, to deny the burial of Christ's body being
dead: nor is the Ministers request, concerning Cross and Surplice any thing of
such importance, as was the burial of Christ's body. For it is not true that
they contend about Whole Christ Jesus, and the Ministry of the Gospel, as
the Suppliants here suggest.

The Defender replieth. The Argument speaks of the honorable burial of
Christ's body: the Answerer only of the burial, leaving out honorable; is not
this Sophistry?

Is not this Sophistry? Nay, is not this Knauerie? The very words of the
Argument are these ( page 7. of the Supplication) Further to add one other
example briefly: If fearful Joseph of Arimathea went boldly to Pilate, and
ASKED THE BODY OF JESUS. And if Nicodemus ( before as fearful as the said
Joseph) joined with him in the honorable burial thereof, etc. Did Joseph of
Arimathea desire of Pilate, that he might HONORABLY bury the body of Jesus?
This indeed is the Defenders dreaming, or rather doting conceit; which
neither the Auctor of the Supplication does affirm; nor can be proved by
Scriptures. Search the text ( Matthew. 27.57. Mark. 15.43. Luke 23.52. Ioh.
19.38.) and you shall find that Joseph of Arimathea asked the Body of Jesus;
but not a word spoke he to Pilate, of the BVRIALL thereof, much less of
HONORABLE BVRIALL.

The Defender urges. Reply.
If the Ministers request concerning Cross and Surplice, be not of such
importance, as the burial of Christ's body, this weakeneth not, but adds
strength to the Argument. For the less it is, the more easily it may be
granted, and the more easily it may be granted, the more boldly it may be sued
for.

Yes, it so weakeneth the Argument, that it overthrows it altogether. For the
less that the thing desired by the Suppliants is, the more ought they to be
ashamed, in being so troublesome unto the honorable Court of Parliament to
intercede for them in so needless and small a suite.

VI. ARGUMENT.
Many Congregations, Men, Women, Supplicat.
Children, Masters and Servants, of all ages and conditions, are in great
heaviness for their Pastors, and do make lamentable moan for them.

Ergo, The States of the Parliament must needs be Suitors unto his Majesty for
restoring of them again.

ANSWER.
I. To the Antecedent.
I.
IF the Antecedent be true, Answer.
as the Suppliants seem confidently to affirm, then surely the more hard
hearts have those cruel Tyrants, rather then shepherds, that having no pity,
nor compassion upon those silly sheep, desperately forsake their flocks,
over whom the Lord had made them overseers; and relinquish their vocation for
little or no cause at all.

The Defender replies two things. 1. Reply.
We must have pity and compassion on our sheep, that we wound not our own
souls. We must (as has been said) eschew evil, and do good: not commit
evil, to do good. As gold may be bought too dear, so may the good of our
people.

As if dutifully to obey the ordinances of our Church, Reioynder.
were to commit evil. Whereas indeed rebellion is as the sin of witchcraft,
and he that resists the Magistrate shall not be guiltless. The Error is
(...).

2. By the like Reason, Reply.
a Thief may complain of the hardness of his heart, that had rather lose his
purse, than have his throat cut.

The Reason is not like; Reioynder.
for there is great ods between wearing a Surplice, and having ones throat
cut, as every man knows. How does this reason argue? As he has an hard
heart, that had rather lose his purse, than have his threate cut: So he has an
hard heart, that had rather lose his living, than wear a Surplice. The error,
is (...). And, (...).

II.
Those Congregations, Answer.
Men, Women, Children, etc. may cease to mourn any longer, and comfort
themselves herewith, viz. that seeing their unfaithful and ungrateful
Pastors, have dealt so unkindly and undutifully with them; yet (God be thanked)
the Lord has store of good and faithful Servants, which he will send forth
into the Harvest, who both can and will break the bread, and power out the
water of eternal life unto them, and perform the duties of faithful
Shepherds, that will never forsake them, nor run away when they have most
need of their help.

The Defender replies. Reply.
Those that will not run away, Where are they to be found? What net may one
have to catch them? what keep to hold them? For do not the FORMALISTS daily
run away from their people? Do they not take another Living, and keep the
former also, leaving one to some tourney man fit for all companies? Yea both
Master and man, oftentimes leave both flocks to the Wolf: yea I know some
that forsake their own charges, and are Curats elsewhere under other. And to
whom do some of them leave their own? To one that all the week long goes to
hedging, ditching, threshing, and other day labor for his living: Who on the
Lords day, is at Church with a white Surplice to read Service, etc.

If the Formalist be such a man, Reioynder.
as the Defender paints him out in this place; would GOD our Church were fairly
rid, as well of the Formalist (if any such be amongst us) as of the refractarie
Minister; seeing the one is as negligent and slothful, as the other is
schismatic and factious; and both of them pernicious unto Gods people. And
let the Defender inform the Governors of the Church of any such in the
Ministry, and I doubt not but he shall see all such persons either speedily
reformed, or turned out of the Church. But if the Defender means by
Formalists, all such Ministers, as be regular and obedient unto the government
and discipline of our Church, then has he entered again into his Common place
of Calumniation and lies, which needs no further answer.

II. To the Consequence.
The Consequence follows not from the Antecedent, but this rather; Ergo,
Answer.
The Pastors must needs have pity upon their miserable aistresse, and obeying
the wholesome ordinances of the Church, return again and comfort them.

The Defender replieth. Reply.
We will return again to our people and comfort them, when the Ordinances of
the Church, are proved by Gods Word to be wholesome.

If your consciences be not yet persuaded of the wholesomenes and lawfulnes of
our Churches ordinances; Reioynder.
wherefore do not you object any thing against our Books written purposely of
that Argument? But I fear me, it fares with many of you, as it does with most
part of the Papists in other things; to wit, that your wills and affections
ought to be beaten down, and terrified with Gods threatenings against
co^temptuous and wilful impugners of the known truth, rather then your
judgments reformed or rectified in these controversies. I pray GOD forgive you
your wilful obstinacy and contempt, and incline your hearts to embrace peace
and unity; that at length we all may be one, as GOD the Father, and CHRIST
JESUS are one.

VII. ARGUMENT.
To regard the refractarie Ministers, Supplicat.
is to regard the whole land, the States of Parliament, their Wives and
Children, the King and Kingdom.

Ergo, If the high Court of Parliament love the safety, peace, wealth, and
glory of King and Kingdom, and of themselves and theirs, they must speak and
do what they may, for the Gospel and the Ministry thereof.

ANSWER.
I
WHat can a sensible man make of this Enthymeme? Answer.
The refractarie Ministers are the safety of the whole land: Ergo, The Court
of Parliament must speak for the Gospel.

The Defender replieth. Reply.
The title REFRACTARIE omitted, he is a senseless man that can make nothing of
that Enthymeme: especially these Ministers pleaded for being proved true and
faithful. For though the Gospel and the Ministers thereof be distinct, yet he
that speaks for one, speaks for both, and he that speaks for both,
speaks for the Land, the safety whereof depends upon both.

The Defender speaks so resolutely and confidently of this Enthymeme,
Reioynder.
Note the Defenders skill in Logike
that he should seem to be some very profound and acute Logician. But let us
examine his skill a little. Suppose that which is most false, to wit, that the
Schismatic Ministers are not refractarie, yea that they are not
Schismatic, that they are not disobedient unto their lawful Governors, nor
stirred up dissension amongst us; which is more, that they are good and
faithful Ministers. Suppose (I say) all this; What can a SENSIBLE Logician
(not such a one as the Defender is) conclude out of this Enthymeme? The
Ministers (whereof we speak) are the safety of the whole Land. Ergo, The
Court of Parliament must speak for the Gospel. How many terms has this
Enthymeme? Let us reckon them. 1. Ministers, 2. Safety of the Land, 3. Court
of Parliament, 4. The Gospel. Can this Enthymeme be reduced into a Syllogism,
having four terms? Here we want some of the Defenders skill to help us. Yea
but, He that speaks for the Gospel, speaks for the Ministers thereof. The
Consequence is not necessary. But grant it so. Are there no other Ministers,
but such as be Refractarie? The error, is (...). And, (...).

II.
The Antecedent is very improbable, Answer.
if not altogether false; both because there be thousands of Godly faithful
Ministers in the Kingdom, which are not of their faction, that are as Charets
and Horsemen: and also because the Ministers are therefore termed Charets and
Horsemen, because they are Gods instruments for gathering of his Saints by the
exercise of their Ministry. But these men refuse to exercise their
Ministry; they have relinquished and forsaken their calling: wherefore they
can, by no reason, be termed Charets and Horsemen. And so far are they from
being the Safety of the Land, that would God they were not the Sores of the
Church, and Sowers of sedition, I mean Schism and faction.

The Defender replieth, Reply.
Generally throughout the whole Land, there are Six reading Ministers, for one
Preacher; at the least, by practice. For there are some that are licensed to
preach, that never did, are, or were able to preach. Many also that can preach,
seldom do preach. Some also that do preach (and that often) do it so
Popishly, or otherwise so corruptly; so foolishly and ridiculously, to make
sport rather than to edify; so vainly and unprofitably, that it were better
to hold their peace, then so to preach.

I defend not ignorant or negligent Ministers, Reioynder.
neither also such as preach Popish, corrupt, or foolish doctrine: but heartily
wish, that al such were either reformed or removed. But sure I am that this
speech of the Defenders, is a calumnious and lying Hyperbole, which if he were
enforced to prove by particular Induction, he would come far short of his
reckonning. Whosoever in his Sermons taxes their singularity and schism,
these men will presently calumniate him to preach Popish, corrupt, foolish and
ridiculous doctrine. The Error, is (...).

III.
For the Consequence, Answer.
I am sure it is from a Topique place called A baculo ad angulum, from the
Staff to the corner: for it has not the least coherence with the Antecedent,
except the Suppliants mean that these words, Refractarie Ministers, the
Gospel, the Ministry of the Gospel, be conuertible terms: which is absurd
and impossible.

To this the Defender Replieth NOTHING.

IIX. ARGUMENT.
The Magistrate ought to execute justice and judgment, Supplicar.
and to deliver the oppressed.

Ergo, Much more ought the high Court of Parliament to do so, and to deliver
the refractarie Ministers.

ANSWER.
To the Consequence.
THe Consequence has two parts. 1. Answer.
That the Honorable Court of Parliament is to execute justice and judgment;
which I grant. 2. That they ought to deliver and restore the refractarie
Ministers. That rests to be proved still: because they have not yet justified
their cause, and declared that they are unjustly oppressed, nor can ever do.

The Defender replieth. Reply.
That the Ministers have not yet in Law (whereof the present question is)
justified their cause, and declared that they are unjustly oppressed, nor can
ever do, is not for want of matter of Justification, or for want of the truth
of unjust oppression: but I. Because they have not been admitted to appeal,
Grieuances and Oppression pretended by the ^efractarie Ministers.
and to prosecute the Justice of the Land, nor to call in question the
proceedings of their Ordinaries, upon a pretense of a Canon lately made, II.
Because some Ordinaries in their Sentences, have unjustly and leasingly charged
some Ministers, with the denial of the Oath to the Kings supremacy: and
stuffed their sentences full of general crimes, contrary to the right form of
Judgment. III. Because upon notice given unto the Patron of the auoydance of
the Church, they have not only instituted new Clerks, but also intimated, that
the possession of the Church was kept, per vim Laicam, whereby the party
appellant, has been removed out of his possession. IV. Because sundry
Ordinaries upon appeals made before them, have taken order with their
Registers and Notaries, not to deliver to the parties appellant, any note or
copy, of any act or sentence made or given before them. V. Because sundry
Sentences of deprivation have been given, a Iudicibus non suis, namely by such,
whose jurisdiction was suspended and shut up by the Archbishop of Canterburies
Commission, and his Archiepiscopall Visitation. VI. Because the whole power and
jurisdiction by sundry Diocesans was committed in solidum for term of life,
unto their principal Comissaries, Officials, or Vicars general, which they
could not resume at their pleasure. VII. Because Sentences have been ginen,
nullo iuris ordine seruato, but omni iuris ordine spreto and neglecto. IIX.
Because some Sentences have been given in some private Chamber of some common
Inn or Tavern, and not in publico and competente foro. IX. Because some
Sentences have been given, not upon inquisition, information, or accusation,
according to the Statute, but only upon process, ex mero Officio. X. Because
some Ministers have been deprived only for not subscribing to the three
Articles mentioned in the 36. Canon.


Scriptures and Reasons not succeeding to the Suppliants and Defenders wish,
Reioyner. Of the lawfulnes of the proceedings against the refractarie Ministers.
nor sorting to that effect they purposed; now they have entered a more
politic course, challenging the proceedings against the refractarie
Ministers, in the Ecclesiastical Courts, not to be justifiable by Law, and
pretending that they are dealt with, and grievously oppressed (forsooth)
contrary to Law, as if they did carry a principal and zealous care to have all
his Majesty's Laws duly observed.

For my own part, I go not about to defend the fact and proceedings of
particular men in this case of Deprivation, because I know not the
circumstances whereby they were induced so to determine; neither have I the
leisure and means (at this instant) to enquire thereof: and I doubt not but
the grave and wise Personages here traduced by the Defender, are able to
answer for themselves, and sufficiently to justify their proceedings against
this Calumniator. Only I am (according to my poor ability) to maintain the
general equity of the proceedings, ordained and practiced by the prescript
and determination of our Church and State, against these factious Ministers.
Wherefore I answer to these particular Grieua^ces, or branches of supposed
Oppression.

To the 1. I. Factious Appellants, Answ. to the 1. Grieuance, Of factious
Appellants.
are denied prosecution of their frivolous and unjust appeals, because they
are notorious perturbers of the peace of the Church: and the CANON made
thereupon, seems to have reference unto a local Statute of the University
of OXFORD, whereby Nightwalkers, incontinent livers, and such as commit any
corporal violence, to the disturbance of the common quietness of the
University, are termed perturbers and breakers of the public peace, and
therefore are not permitted to prosecute the ordinary course of appeals
granted to others in Civil and Ecclesiastical causes; with which kind of
people, the refractarie and incorrigible Ministers are justly to be rancked, as
men that are not by the Judge ad quem permitted to make their appeals, nor
have the ordinary times and terms of prosecution allowed them. For as by the
Statutes of the said University, the Iudices inhibitionum are the Proctors,
who are to tie the hands, and to shut the mouths of all Judges from proceeding
or annulling such Sentences as are by them given, if they in their discretion
shall think it fit, and by the Statutes are lawful: So is the Archbishops
Judge ad quem, by the Decrees of the Convocation, confirmed and ratified by the
Kings authority, prohibited, as the Proctors of the University are, to give
pass to such factious Appellants. The equity of which restraint is apparent by
the reason thereof, inserted in the prea^ble of the Canon (98.) cited by the
Defender, Because they who break the Laws, cannot in reason claim any
benefit or protection by the same. II. Conformable hereunto, it is decreed both
in the Civil and Canon Laws: In the Civil Law it is said. ( ff. lib. 49.
tit. 1. de Appellationibus, l. 16.) Constitutiones quae de recipiendis nec non
appellationibus loquuntur, vt nihil noui fiat, locum non habent in eorum
persona quos damnatos statim puniri public interest, vt sunt insignes
latrones, vel seditionum concitatores, vel duces factionum. Stirrers up of
sedition, and leaders of factions ought not to be permitted to appeal, but
must be presently punished. ( Vide Bartol. ad lib. 49. Digest. de appellat. l.
16. Constitutiones.) Also ( Cod. lib. 7. tit. 65. Quorum appellationes non
recipiuntur. l. 2.) the Emperors Constantius and Constans decree, that
Confessus non auditur appellans: but the refractarie Ministers do not only
CONFESS, that they are such, but also wilfully PROFESS that they will NEVER
be conformable, and submit themselves unto the Kings Ecclesiastical Laws and
ordinances. Wherefore then should they be permitted to appeal? Again in the
Canon Law it is decreed, Si vero publicus est and notorius (eorum excessus)
appellationis obtentu non praetermittas, quin eos excommunicatos denuncies.
(Decr. Greg. lib. 2. tit. 28. de appellationibus, cap. 13. Peruenit ad nos.) If
the Appellants crime or excess be public and notorious, they are not
permitted to appeal. (Vide Glossam in verse. Notorius.) Moreover Durandus
says, In delictis notorijs non admittitur appellatio, (Durand. Speculi lib. 2.
part 3.. In quibus autem casibus. nu. 13.) and Maranta, Quarto principaliter
limita, non procedere (appellationem) in factis notorijs, quia in illis non
admittitur appellatio, (Rob. Maranta Speculi aurei part. 6. Versic. Et quando
appellatur. nu. 293.) Now every crime is NOTORIOVS by Confession ( Sext. Decr.
lib. 2. tit. 15 de Appellat. cap. 3. Romana Ecclesia.. Si autem. in Gloss.
Verse. Vel de quo.) Nec potest negari crimen per confessionem fore notorium. In
like manner Panormitan writes, Si vero Subditus commonitus a Praelato
appellauerit, si eius excessus euidentia rei, vel ipsius confessione, vel alio
modo legitimo fuerit manifestus appellations deferatur: cum appellationis
remedium non fuerit institutum ad defensionem iniquitatis, sed ad praesidium
innocentiae, (Panormit. de appellat. cap. 61. Cum speciali.. Porro.) Also
Durandus, Appellatio non debet esse praesidium iniquitatis, (Duran. Spec. lib.
2. part. 3.. In quibus autem casibus, nu. 13.) And Maranta, Septimo limita, non
procedere (appellationem) in Latrone insigni and fameso, item in Seditioso and
auctore alicuius factionis: quia quicunque damnatur de huiusmods criminibus,
vel altero ipsorum, non appellat, nec supersedetur executioni, (Marant. Spec.
aures. part. 6. Versic. Et quando appellatur. nu. 296.) The refractarie
Ministers are required to conform themselves, according to the order
established. They refuse: and being proceeded against, they appeal. To what
end? ad perseuerandum in malicia, to continue still in their singularity and
faction. Now who sees not that such appeals are unjust and unlawful; seeing
the remedy of Appeals was not ordained to be a cloak and defense for
wickedness; and Appellatio frustratoria nunquam est admittenda, (Durand. Spec.
lib. 2. part. 3.. In quibus autem casibus. nu. 33.) III. The proceeding against
the Ministers, is according to the express letter and meaning of the Kings
Laws and Statutes; and whither would they appeal from the King? Non
appellatur a Principe, (Durand. Spec. lib. 2. part. 3.. Videndum a quibus
appellari possit. nu. 15.) IV. It is the common course of all Justice, after
any contempt, first to obey the censure of the Court, and then to plead to the
unjust proceedings pretended: and therefore do the Archbishops Judges require
nothing, but what the Kings Ecclesiastical Laws do prescribe.

To the 2. There is not any man that will hastily believe, Answ. to the 2.
Grieuance.
that any Ordinary did ever unjustly, and leasingly charge any Minister with
denial of the Oath of Supremacy, as the Defender (perhaps) most leasingly
suggests, without particular instance of time or person. And touching the
Sentences, they are ever conceived in general terms, with relation to the
process, wherein are contained the particular crimes, In sententia definitiua
regulariter non requiritur expressio Causae, says Caesar Contardus, in l.
Vnicam. Cod. Si de momentanea poss. fuerit appellatum. page 110. Vide ff. de
appell. l. 2.

To the 3. Answ. to the 3. Grieuance.
The equity of the proceedings, depends upon the reasons alleged in the
Answer to the first Grieuance. Seeing the party deprived is dead in Law, his
appellation being void and of no effect, as is aforesaid, the Ordinary is
bound to give intimation, and notice unto the Patron of the auoydance of the
Church, whereupon he instituteth a new Clerk, being presented unto him, whom
if any shall resist, it is the ordinary course of Law he should be removed, by
the writ de vi laica remouenda: which writ the reverend and sage Judges of the
Common Law would never grant, except it were liable in such a case. And if this
course be to be held INIVRIOVS, then certainly, not the Ecclesiastical
proceedings, but the Common Law is to be blamed, for both the Intimation, and
the Writ de vilaica remouenda are Common Law,

To the 4. Answ. to the 4. Grieuance.
The fact is particular, if it be true. Neither are the Registers and Notaries
upon their oath, to deliver copies of the Acts made before them; but only to
write the same truly, without falsification, corruption or forgerie: albeit
the refusal of delivering copies, their fees being tendered them, is otherwise
punishable by the Canon.

To the 5. Answ. to the 5. Grieuance.
I. The Ordinary is the Archbishops Deputy, and exercises Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction, as from and under the Archbishop. II. The Archbishop his
inhibition, during the time of his Visitation, is in mouendis, non motis. III.
If the Bishop should do any thing against the Archbishops inhibition, it
follows not, that therefore his act should be void in Law, but his contempt
were punishable, etc.

To the 6. Answ. to the 6. Grieuance.
The Bishops grant unto his Commissaries, Officials or Vicars general, is no
otherwise but saluis iuribus Episcopalibus: neither can the Bishop so resign
his jurisdiction unto another, but that he may at his own pleasure advocate
any cause unto himself. No Comisarie or Official can deprive a man, for Eius
est destituere, cuius est instituere.

To the 7. It is a flat untruth, and a mere (...). Answ. to the 7. Grieuance.
Answ. to the 8. Grieuance.


To the 8. I. The question is not of the nullitie of the act, but whether the
Bishop did observe decorum, for simply the Ordinary may ius dicere in any
part of his jurisdiction. II. The parties consented to the place. III. The fact
is particular.

To the 9. Process made ex mero Officio, Answ. to the 9. Grieuance.
is made by INQVISITION, according unto the letter and meaning of the Statute:
for the Bishop may lawfully inquire ex Officio. Lyndwood says, Sieve scandalum,
sieve periculum, sieve suspicio grauis sint contra aliquem, Praelatus suus potest
procedere ad inquisitionem, vel si non inueniat probationes indicet purgationem
etc. Lynd. Constitut. Prouinc. lib. 5. cap. 1.. Compellant. in Gloss.

To the 10. The fact, if it be true, is particular, Ans. to the 10. Grieuance.
and needs no farther answer.

II.
In the mean time I would propound two or three Questions unto the Suppliants,
Answer.
wherein I would crave their resolution and direct answer.

I. Quaere. 3. Quaeres proposed to the refractarie Ministers.
Whether the Church under Christian godly Magistrates, has any Tribunal proper
unto it self, for deciding of Controversies, and punishing of such persons, as
shall refuse the ordinances thereof? II. Quaere. Whether so many judicial Acts
of deprivation of Bishops, Priests, Ministers, from their Benefices etc. since
the Conquest to the time of Magna Charta, and sithence that to this age, were
ever held to be contrary to the Laws of this Kingdom, and Magna Charta? III.
Quaere. Whether any Judge of this Realm, or any chief officer learned in the
Laws, be of opinion, that such Sentences of depriuatio^, as have lately passed
in due form, in any Ecclesiastical Court, be contrary to any, much less to
many Statutes?
At these 3. Quaeres, the Defender stands so astonished and amazed, as if
they were so many heads of Medusa. And knowing not whither to wind and turn
himself, lest he might seem to be altogether mute (as indeed he is for any
thing he answers to the purpose) he so inuolues himself, in such intricate
Labyrinths of obscurity, that any man may easily perceive, he labors of
purpose to decline the questions, babbling he knows not what, suspecting every
word, as if he feared a Scorpion under every stone. To the first Quaere he
answers.

Unto this Quaere, Reply.
when he shall distinguish, and make his so many Equivocations (contained in
the Quaere) perspicuous, and plain, to the understanding of every simple and
plain meaning man, I shall (God willing) make him a simple, plain, resolute
and direct answer. In the mean time, let him understand, first that we justly
doubt, what he means by the word Church; and namely, whether he means the
Universal Church, or a National, a Provincial, a Diocesan, an
Archidiaconall, a Decanall, a Capitular, or lastly a Parochial Church. For all
men (as we usually and commonly we speak) do understand, that every of these
Churches, has her proper name, after which she is called: as namely the
Church dispersed throughout the world, is called the Universal Church, the
Church within England, is commonly called the National Church of England; the
Church within the Province of Canterbury, the Provincial Church of
Canterbury, the Church of the Diocese of London, the Diocesan Church of
London etc. And lastly the Church of great St. Ellens in London, the Parochial
Church of St. Ellens in London. And therefore I crave a resolute and direct
answer, of what only persons you mean, that the Universal, this National,
Provincial, Diocesan, Archidiaconall, Decanall, Capitular, and Parochial
Church consists? Who only be the Christian godly Magistrates, under whom
every one of these Churches lives? Whether the same Christian godly
Magistrates may personally be present, give their express consents, and have
their decisiue voices, to and in making all and every decrees of every of these
Churches? What is the Tribunal proper to it self, of every of these Churches?
What only manner of Controversies, by every of these Churches may be decided?
What only kind of circumstances, every of these Churches may decree? What only
kind of subject, and with what only kind of punishment, and none other, every
of these Churches may punish the refusers of every their ordinances?

Our second maine scruple, touching this first Quaere, arises from these words
(under Christian godly Magistrates.) For if by these words etc.

Vanitas loquax, says St. Augustine; Reioynder.
and the Defender so behaueth himself in this kind, as if he were some fool in
a play. But that he may pretend no farther excuses, I answer, By the word
CHVRCH, I mean every Church that has power to make and ordain Laws, as
namely the Universal Militant, in a general Council; a National Church in a
national Synod; and a Provincial Church in a prouincial Synod; the Diocesan
and Parochial Churches have only power to celebrate Synodes and meetings, for
execution of the Decrees already made, not to ordain new Laws. What the
Defender means by Archiadiconall, Decanall and Capitular Churches, I know
not, but would feign learn of him, it should seem he is ignorant, NW.
that the Deane and Chapter, and the Archdeacon, are as it were the eyes and
hands of the Bishop in the government of the Diocese, for the better execution
and practice of the ordinances and decrees of the Universal, National, and
Provincial Synods, and do not constitute any particular Churches different
from the Diocesan. By CHRISTIAN GODLY MAGISTRATES, I mean the King in a
Monarchy, and others principal States in any other government, who are the
Keepers of both Tables. As touching that Question, Whether the Magistrate may
personally be present, give his express consent, and have a decisiue voice, to
and in the making of all the Decrees of the Church; albeit it be impertinent
for the satisfying of my Quaere, yet as I do not deny this, if the Magistrate
be so pleased, so I crave the Defenders resolution, and direct answer unto
this same question: for they of his faction are thought, so to commit the care
of these things unto their Presbytery, unto whom they subalternate, yea
subject the Civil Governors, that they utterly exclude the Christian
Magistrate, and give him no more power in Church matters, NW.
then if he were an heathen or Infidel, as indeed the Defender seems not
obscurely to insinuate in the later end of this very paragraph. Concerning the
rest of his interrogatories; The TRIBVNALL proper unto the Church, are the
Councels and Synods of the same. The CONTROVERSIES there to be handled, are
such as be of Ecclesiastical cognizance. The ORDINANCES there to be made, are
such as are declarations of the circumstances necessary, or profitable for
keeping of the first table of the Decalogue. The SVBIECT, are such as have
given their names to the Church, and vowed obedience. And the PUNISHMENT, is
admonition, suspention, sequestration, excommunication, deprivation, or such as
the quality of the crime deserves, and is by Law in that case provided. To
the Defenders tautologie, concerning the supposed equivocation in the words
(Under Christian godly Magistrates) I have answered already.

To the 2. Reply.
Quaere, he answers: To dance after your Pipe, (I will not say, what a
foolish and ridiculous Question, but) what an odd tune is this? For can a man
dance after a pipe, before the pipe be stricken up? So could acts done before
Magna Charta, and other Laws since made, be said to be contrary to them; This
is as much, as one should ask? Whether Adam, not Circumcising Caine and Abel,
did contrary to the Law given for Circumcision to Abraham many years after? Or
whether Ishmael persecuted Isaak, before Isaak was borne? Or whether stealing
of horses an hundredth years past, were punishable with death, before any Law
made for death in that behalf? One thing cannot be said contrary to another,
that is not, neither was extant in rerum natura.

Gross and palpable stupiditie! Reioynder.
Where is the Defenders wit and reason? Are not the Words [Lawes of this
Kingdome] in this second Quaere, to be referred to such acts of deprivation, as
were made since the Conquest, to the time of Magna Charta? And the words [Magna
Charta] to be referred to those acts, that were made since the time of the
great Charter, to this day? But this silly fellow, to cover his manifest
tergiuersation, will not understand plain English!

To the 3. Quaere, he says, Reply.
Though it were a sufficient answer to bid him go look, and himself to ask
the opinion of every Judge and learned Officer, yet will I not altogether yield
him so short and cutted an answer. And though it be a principle in
Philosophy, that Forma dat esse rei, yet to the being of every thing, there
must be matter, to which the form gives being. And therefore in this case,
besides due form, there must be also due matter, inserted in due sentences.
Wherefore I crave a resolute and direct answer, whether by those words (passed
in due form) he mean passed for matter and form, in due form? Or whether he
mean, passed without due matter in due form only?

To omit the Defenders Philosophy concerning Matter and Form, and to use his
own words; Reioynder.
I answer resolutely and directly, that by the words [passed in due forme] I
mean as the Defender says, passed for matter and form, in due form: neither
am I ignorant, that all the Judges and learned Officers in the Law, do approve
those Sentences of deprivation, so given in the Ecclesiastical Courts, which
causes me the more to marvel at the impudency and presumption of the
refractarie faction, that contradict all the Judges, and traduce all such
Sentences, as unjust, unlawful, etc.

That which follows, concerning the Statute of Magna Charta, and the
lawfulnes of the Deprivation of the refractarie Ministers for not conforming
themselves etc. requires no farther answer; seeing the Defender himself (
page 93.) confesses such deprivation to be just, and according to Law,
Deprivation for non-conformitie granted lawful by the Defender.
saying: Hereupon WE GRANT, that if the King have any Ecclesiastical Law of
the Land (which thing was never doubted by any man) for the DEPRIVATION of a
Minister from his liberty and freehold, for not subscription, perjury,
contempt of Canonical (so called) obedience, omission of rites and ceremonies,
not precise observation of the book of Common Prayer etc. then WE GRANT, that
the Ordinaries (being the Kings Judges Ecclesiastical) MAY RIGHTLY DEPRIVE A
MINISTER FROM HIS BENEFICE for these offenses.

Yet I can but wonder at the giddines of the Defenders Spirit, where he seems
expressly to deny what here he confesses. Notwithstanding (says he) I
affirm that all Judicial acts and Sentences (how many soever of deprivation
of Ministers, from their Benefices) had, made and given, by the Ecclesiastical
Judges, since the 25. of King Henry the 8. only according, or only by force,
and virtue of the said Ius Pontificium, or Bishop of Rome his Law, (the
Sentences given in the time of Queen Mary excepted) are, and ought to be
holden, not to be had, made and given, by the Laws of this Kingdom, or by the
Kings Ecclesiastical Law. And why? Even because the whole Ius Pontificium, or
Bishop of Romes Law was altogether (excepting the time of Queen Mary)
abrogated, annulled, and made void, by an Act of Parliament; and consequently
is but a mere Alien, Foreign and Strange Law, and no municipall Law of
England, and therefore not the Kings Ecclesiastical Law.

I answer, I. The Defender had been a good Anuocate for bloody BONER and
other Popish Prelates, that were deprived in the days of that renowned Prince,
King EDWARD the VI. and also in the beginning of the reign of our late noble
Queen: for all the Lawiers in England were not then able to epsy, what now
the Defender plainly sees, except his eyes deceive him. II. The Deprivation
of the refractarie Ministers, for non-conformitie is grounded, not upon the
Canon Law, but upon the express words of the Statute ( of 1. Eliz. cap. 2.)
All and singular Archbishops and Bishops etc. shall have full power and
authority by virtue of this Act etc. to punish by admonition, excommunication,
sequestration, or DEPRIVATION, etc. III. It is not true that the Canon Law was
every yet, How far the CANON Law is abrogated.
or is now altogether abrogated, annulled, and made void by Act of Parliament,
and so consequently it is not a mere Alien, Foreign and Strange Law, but is
the Law of the Land, yea and the Kings Ecclesiastical Law: as is manifest by
the very words of the Statute, which the Defender would have pointed at, (25.
H. 8. cap. 19. in fine.) Provided also, that such Canons, Constitutions,
Ordinances and Synodals provincial, being already made, which be not
contrariant, nor repugnant to the Laws, Statutes and customs of this Realm,
nor to the damage or hurt of the Kings prerogative Royal, SHALL NOW STILL BE
USED AND EXECVTED, as they were before the making of this Act. And in the 21.
Chapter more plainly, (25. H. 8. cap. 21. non long a princip.) Where this
your Graces Realm recognizing no Superior under God, but only your Grace,
has bin and is free from all subjection to any man's Laws, but only to such as
have been devised, made and ordained within this Realm, for the wealth of the
same, NW.
or To SVCH OTHER, as by sufferance of your Grace, and your Progenitors, the
people of this your Realm, have taken at their free liberty, by their own
consent to be used amongst them, and have bound themselves by long use and
custom, to the observance of the same, not as to the ordinance of the Laws of
any foreign Prince, Potentate or Prelate, but as to the CVSTOMED AND ANCIENT
LAWS OF THIS REALM, NW.
originally established as LAWS OF THE SAME, by the said sufferance, consents
and custom, and none otherwise. It stands therefore with natural equity
and good reason, that all and every such Laws humane, made within this Realm,
or induced into this Realm by the said sufferance, consents and custom, your
royal Majesty, etc. Thus far the words of the Statute. Both which Acts
being repealed by Queen Mary, were revived again by Queen Elizabeth (1.
Eliz. cap. 1. in princip.) and so stand in force at this day.

The Defenders long and tedious Digressions, touching the Oath ex Officio (a
point learnedly handled by M. Doctor Cosens, in his Apology, whereunto I
refer the Reader) and also concerning the Canons, it were to wearisome unto
the Reader here to refute; Neither have I such leisure to follow him in his
idle and adle discourses; but have determined precisely, to keep my self
within the bounds prescribed by the Suppliants. Linquo coax ranis, etc.

IX. ARGUMENT.
God does ever plentifully recompense any kindness showed unto his Children,
Supplicat.
specially unto the Ministers and disciples of Christ.

Ergo, The high Court of Parliament ought to show kindness unto the refractarie
ministers.

ANSWER.
To the Consequence.
I
Our Savior says, Answer.
He that receives a Prophet, in the name of a Prophet, shall receive a
Prophets reward, (Matthew. 10.41.) So shall he also that does any kindness unto a
Minister. But if a Minister do otherwise then he ought (as these Refractaries
do) what kindness then ought such to have done unto them?

The Defender replieth two things. I. Reply.
There is a secret contradiction in this Answer, for as a Mayor out of his
Office is no Mayor, so a Minister out of his Ministry is no Minister.

Was there ever heard such a Proposition uttered by any Divine! A Minister out
of his Ministeris is no Minister! Reioynder.
An absurd Position of the Defender.
Then belike as often as a Minister is silenced, or suspended, or deprived, if he
shall be restored again, or called into some other place, he must have a new
ordination. Impossible and absurd. Neither can the Office of a Mayor, being but
temporary, for a year only, be compared unto the Office of a Minister, being
perpetual. The Error, is (...) in Theologia: Also, (...).

II. Reply.
What a multitude of conformable Ministers are quite overthrown by this
Argument? For do not many of them otherwise then they ought?

But what aduantageth this the refractarie Ministers? Reioynder.
We do not affirm that such as do otherwise then they ought, whether
conformable, or refractarie, ought to receive any favor in that respect. The
Error, is (...).

II.
Let the refractarie Ministers dutifully serve GOD and his Church, Answer.
in their diligent and humble obedience, in the work of their vocation, and
then let them supplicate for kindness to be showed unto them.

The Defender replies. Reply.
What is that diligent and humble obedience etc? To put on a Surplice, ^o make
a v^nishing Cross, to read Service, to acknowledge the Prelates to have power
to make ordinances against Gods word, etc? How shall they supplicate? With a
100. or 200. in a bag? Then perhaps if they arise betimes, and ride a pase,
they shall have a pair of benefices, an Archdeaconrie, etc. yea liberty a
soto go whither they will, and never to come at any of their benefices.

This scorning and lying Spirit needs no other reproof, but The Lord rebuke
thee, Reioynder.
Satan.

X. ARGUMENT.
God threatens severely to punish the wrongs and injuries done unto his
Children and Servants, Supplicat.
even in their outward state much more the cruelty toward their Souls.

Ergo, The high Court of Parliament should neither proceed so hardly against
the Ministers, nor wink at others that do so proceed.

ANSWER.
To the Consequence.
I.
NEither did the honorable Court of Parliament, Answer.
nor the Magistrates of this Land, ever intend the least wrong to any Subject in
this Kingdom, much less to any Minister of the Gospel, no not in their
outward estate, much less toward the salvation of their souls. And certainly
it is an ungrateful, yea an ungracious part of these Suppliants, to tax that
honorable Assembly, or any Magistrate of this Land, so undutifully and
unchristianly, for unjust, cruel and merciless dealing.

The Defender 1. Reply and Reioynder.
Denies that any of his faction, ever taxed either the house of Parliament, or
any Magistrate; but only admonished them of those faults, which GOD forbids;
as if unjust admonition and reprehension, were not presumptuous taxing of men.
2. Retorteth the argument upon us, affirming that we, not they, tax the high
Court of Parliament, all which needs no farther answer. Let the discreet
Reader confer the Supplication and the Mild Defense together, and then judge
indifferently where the fault resideth.

II.
The refractarie Ministers were never proceeded against, for preaching the
Gospel, Answer.
or for opportune and sobcrexecuting their Ministerial function: but only for
giddie innovation and novelty, for faction, schism, and impugning the
Magistrates authority, for disturbing the peace and quietness of the Church.
And would they request these vile enormities to be left unpunished? An
unreasonable Suite.

The Defender replies. This is utterly untrue. Reply.
For some of us have been molested for preaching any thing tending against the
present Hierarchy, or any other corruptions: some also for confuting the
Popish doctrine of other, though they have done it never so soberly: and some
for other matters, which are points of the Gospel, as well as other.

Preaching against the present state and government of the Church, is not
preaching the Gospel. Reioynder.
Preaching against corruptions, or sober confuting Popish doctrine, was never no
cause of the refractarie Ministers trouble. By those OTHER MATTERS he speaks
of, he means the pretended DISCIPLINE, which every man knows is no point of
the Gospel. Here is nothing but a mere contradiction of what I say. It
should seem the Defender grows very barren.

XI. ARGUMENT.
Pharaoh provided for the Idolatrous Priests of Egypt. Supplicat.
And the Monks and Friars at the dissolution of their idolatrous Houses, were
provided for during their lives, though they never had done any good.

Ergo, Much more ought the refractarie Ministers to be provided for, having
done so great good in the Church of God.

ANSWER.
To the Consequence.
THe argument does not follow, Answer.
because of the dissimilitude that is in the instances or examples alleged,
and the Ministers case.

The Defender replies. Reply.
The Argument does follow the better, because of the dissimilitude of instances.

This will appear otherwise, Reioynder.
in examination of the particulars.

I.
Pharaoh ministered daily food unto such Priests, Answer.
whom he thought professed true Religion, and diligently obeyed him in the
function of their Office. A rare example of a bountiful and magnificent
Prince, though otherwise in error. But the refractarie Ministers, though
professing true Religon, yet do they obstinately, being blinded by
superstition, refuse to serve GOD and his Church, in the faithful and diligent
function and exercise of their Ministry.

The Defenders reply is. 1. Reply.
As Pharach was in error touching the religion and obedience of his Priests, so
are our Prelates, touching our refractarines and Superstition.

Not so. Pharaoh was indeed deceived, and in error: Reioynder.
but our Prelates are not; neither touching the Ministers Refractarines, as daily
experience testifies; nor touching their Superstition, seeing they account
that sin, which is no sin.

2. Our obedience toward his Majesty is as good, Reply.
as of the best of their side. That man's obedience to a Mayor of a town, or to
any other inferior Office of a Prince, is always the best, that is most
agreeable to the pleasure of the Prince himself. In like manner, that
obedience is best unto Princes, that does best agree with the pleasure of the
Prince of Princes, and King of Kings. To obey the Inferior, without due regard
of the Superiors pleasure, is but flattery and fawning, not good obedience.
So to obey Princes, without due regard to our duty to God. For it is more
prejudicial and hurtful, then beneficial and profitable to such Princes.

Well. Your obedience to his Majesty is good. Reioynder.
You say so. But your deeds prove the contrary: for you daily kick against his
Majesty's authority, and will not be reduced to obedience. Neither is there
any thing here spoken, but the Papists will say as much for themselves. You
limite how far you are to be obedient unto the King: so do the Papists; for
neither of you will serve God, under his Majesty's government, according unto
the Religion established. You say you are as dutiful and obedient, as any of
our side: so will the Papists pronounce of themselves, if they might be their
own judges. But in the mean time, the Defender does not justify Pharaohs
example rightly alleged, to procure compassion toward the refractarie
Ministers. Let us come to the next instance.

II.
The Monks and Friars were deprived of all, Answer.
against their will, for Sodomie, Heresy, and Idolatry, which they had
embraced in time of their ignorance. But the refractarie Ministers are
willingly deprived, for obstinate superstition, in refusing sincerely to preach
the Gospel of Christ with us, not being conformable unto the Christian Laws
of our Church and Magistrates.

The Defender replies. Reply.
The more justly that Monks and Friars were put out, the stronger is the
argument for us, to be provided for, that are put out unjustly.

It is true, Reioynder.
if you were VNIVSTLY put out: but in saying so, you beg the Question; prove it,
if you can.

III.
The Monks and Friars could not have retained their places and possessions,
Answer.
not not by submitting themselves: But the refractarie Ministers may, if they
will but conform themselves unto the lawful Ordinances of our Church.

The Defender replies. Reply.
I know no condition of submission offered to Monks etc. Touching the rest, we
thank you for nothing. This is the courtesy of the Prelates, to make us pay
dear for our livings, even to buy them with sinning against God.

What needed there be any condition of submission offered to Monks, Reioynder.
when they could not have kept their places by any submission they could make?
For the rest, you show your desperate resolution, still to continue in your
schism and faction, and that under such a pretense, as will never stand before
the tribunal seat of God to excuse you. The Lord soften your hard and stony
hearts. The Error in both the instances, is (...).

XII. ARGUMENT.
The Prayers of faithful Ministers of the Gospel, Supplicat.
are very effectual in behalf of Christian assemblies.

Ergo, The high Court of Parliament, even for this cause, ought somewhat to
regard the refractarie Ministers.

ANSWER.
To the Consequence.
I.
NEither are the Prayers of Schismatiques much to be regarded: Answer.
neither will the honorable Court of Parliament altogether neglect the
refractarie Ministers, but will labor by all good means for their recalling:
neither can the refractarie Ministers in Charity, but still pray for that high
Court, yea in case they did not satisfy their desire.

The Defender replies. Reply.
As for the Prayers of Schismatiques, it is not much to be denied, if men be
schismatiques in deed, and not only in name: but neither the Answerer, nor all
the Prelates in the world, shall ever prove vt Schismatiques and Refractaries,
as they unjustly term us.

That the refractarie Ministers are PVRE SCHISMATIQVES, Reioynder.
has been abundantly proved before ( in the Reioynd. to the Defense of the 3.
Arg. page 116. and seqq.) I will not add a word more until that be answered.
Only I desire I may not be mistaken in this point, to wit, that the Prayers of
Schismatiques, are not much to be regarded, I mean, as they are SVCH;
otherwise the Prayers of Gods Saints are very behoouefull and necessary for us.

II.
If they had still made conscience of their duty in their Ministry, Answer.
their Prayers had been much more effectual.

The Defender replies. Reply.
Behold what conscience these men make of Subscription, Cross, Surplice,
Conformity, and other particular obedience; that make no conscience of
preaching, etc. Is it not strange also, that Surplice and cross should add
such efficacy to prayer?

It is true, Reioynder.
we make conscience of obedience. Do they of the Defenders faction, make no
conscience thereof? But that we make no conscience of Preaching etc. also, that
Cross, Surplice, etc. add any efficacy to prayer, is a palpable untruth. The
Error is (...).

XIII. ARGUMENT.
Our Savior wills al to pray the Lord of the harvest, Supplicat.
that he would thrust forth laborers into his harvest.

Ergo, No man ought by head and shoulders to thrust laborers out of the
harvest.

ANSWER.
I.
I Grant the whole. Answer.
If the Suppliants will insist, Why then do you silence and deprive the
Ministers?

II.
I answer. They are not such Laborers, whom our Savior means: neither are
they thrust forth of the harvest, for laboring, but for laboring as they
ought not, for sowing the tares of sedition, Schism and faction, for
disturbing the peace of the Church, and for molesting other sincere and
faithful Laborers.

The Defender replies. Reply.
Touching the sowing of the tares of sedition, schism, faction, and disturbing
of the peace, has bin often answered. All which do rather belong to them that
teach that a true justifying faith may be lost, that there is no certentie of
Salvation, that plead for ignorance and an ignorant Ministry, and such other
like things.

When the Defender has nothing to say for the refractarie faction, then he
falls a railing, Reioynder.
or to slander our Church: for what other thing does he, seeing we are so
far from defending any of these blasphemies he speaks of, as any man of
their side. The Error is perpetua (...).

XIV. ARGUMENT.
Every man ought freely to confess Christ before men, Supplicat.
in the time as well of trial and persecution, as of truce and peace.

Ergo, The high Court of Parliament ought earnestly to speak for Christ and
his Word.

ANSWER.
I Grant the whole again. Answer.
What can this advantage the refractarie Ministers? It follows not, that
therefore their Honors should speak for them. For they are neither Christ, nor
his Word: neither is their quarrel and contention, either for Christ, or for
his Word, as has been declared before.

The Defender replies. Reply.
They that strive against humane Ceremonies in Gods worship, and for the
ordinances only of Christ Jesus, do strive also for Christ and his Word.

But the Ordinances which the refractarie Ministers contend for, are not the
ordinances of Christ Jesus: neither do they strive for Christ, or for his
Word, but for the supposed Senate of Lay-Aldermen, and their own fantastique
conceits. The Error is (...).

XV. ARGUMENT.
It is necessary that there be provision made of sufficient able Ministers,
Supplicat.
one in every Congregation, to instruct the people in the truth, to confute the
Papists etc.

Ergo, The refractarie Ministers must needs be restored.

ANSWER.
I
AS if there were not able Ministers enough (God be praised) in both the
Universities, Answer.
and other parts of this Kingdom (if competent maintenance could be procured
for them) sufficiently to furnish every Congregation, to instruct the people in
religion, to refute the Adversary etc. but that the small handful of
Schismatic Ministers must needs be entreated to make up the number. Reply.


The Reply unto unto this Answer, consisting of mere tautologies,
contradictions of what I say, Reioynder.
scoffs and bitter slanders against our Church and Ministry, deserves no
other Reioynder, but Thou lie, Satan.

II. Answer.

Suppose there were not able Ministers enough, for this purpose: have not the
Refractaries then greater reason, to join with they Brethren, in preaching the
Gospel, confuting the Papists etc. then superstitiously to quarrel about
Cross and Surplice, and to forsake their necessary vocation and function?
Reply.


The Defender replieth. Nay, have not the Prelates the more reason, to suffer us
still in the work of the Ministry with them? We are all willing so far to
join with any in preaching the Gospel, as we may do nothing against the
Gospel, to craze the peace of our own conscience. Reioynder.


Have the reverend and wise Prelates any reason, to admit such to labor in the
Ministry; who they know will disturb the peace of the Church? yea who
plainly profess that they will never be conformable unto the Discipline
established? None at all. Especially seeing the superior Magistrate has
reposed such trust in their fidelity and diligence, that they would carefully,
to their utmost ability, endeavor to preserve pure Religion and unity among
his subjects. If the Refractarie Ministers were permitted to labor amongst us;
why then, their Consciences (forsooth) would not suffer them to perform,
either faithful scruice unto their Brethren, or loyal obedience to his
Majesty. Better it is for the Church of God, that such Ministers, and such
Consciences should have no part in our society, than that all States should be
set together by the ears about idle and needless questions.

XVI. ARGUMENT.
The Matters in question, Supplicat.
viz. Subscription, Ceremonies, the strict observation of the Book, and other
Conformity, are not of any necessary use, but are causes of division, and
bones of contention amongst us.

Ergo, They both conveniently may, and ought to be taken away.

ANSWER.
To the Antecedent.
I.
IF the matters in question between us, Answer.
be but Subscription, Ceremonies etc. as here the Supplia^ts ingenuously
confess; wherefore have they hitherto mainely cried out, that their contention
was about the CAUSE OF GOD, and his WORD, WHOLE CHRIST and his GOSPEL, the
MINISTRY thereof, and SALVATION of the people?

The Defender replieth. Reply.
The least transgression of Gods Word, and the least obedience to Gods Word, is
the Cause of God, as well as the greatest.

But the Defender ought first to have proved, Reioynder.
that wilful contemning and kicking against the government and rites
established in our Church, is OBEDIENCE TO GODS WORD: also, that dutiful and
peaceable conformity, and exercising of the said ceremonies and rites
established, is TRANSGRESSION OF GODS WORD; and then he had said somewhat. But
that will neither the Defender, nor all the pack of the faction, be never able
to do.

II.
Albeit we also do not hold Subscription, Answer.
Ceremonies etc. to be absolutely necessary to salvation, nor to be imposed
upon every Church (for why should not other Churches use their own liberty?)
yea and our Church also has power to alter these particulars: yet we know that
some Ordinances and Ceremonies, are necessary for gathering of assemblies,
establishing of a Church, and to be as it were the bonds and lincks of society.

The Defender replies. Reply.
How does the first point of this Answer agree with that, that some of the
great Prelates hold, that their authority is Apostolical, and the Ceremonies
matters of order and decency? Are not things Apostolical and decent, common
to all Churches? Or may our Church alter that, that is Apostolical? Or why
should these Ceremonies, be more necessary for our Church, then for other
Churches? Or not decent for other Churches, and yet decent for ours?

I answer particularly. 1. Reioynder.
There is no contratietie between what I writ, and what the Defender says
others of our side do hold: for the calling of Bishops is Apostolical, who
denies it? 2. The Ceremonies we use are matters of order and decency. 3. There
are many things both Apostolical and decent, which all Churches at all times
are not bound unto. 4. The particular occasions, and circumstances of our
Church may be such, that some things may be decent unto us, which are not so
for other Churches. All which are perspicuously laid down and proved by
instances and examples in my Book de Adiaphoris, which here need not be
repeated, unto which I refer the Reader.

III.
Yea even these particulars, Subscription, Answer.
Ceremonies etc. being imposed by the Church, and commanded by the Magistrate,
are necessary to be observed under pain of sin, seeing he that resists
authority, resists the ordinance of God. Romans 13.

The Defender replies. Reply.
What if they be commanded only by the Christian Magistrate, not imposed by the
Church? Or imposed by the Church only, the Magistrate being an Infidel, or a
persecutor of the Church? Can pain of sin also be without pain of
damnation? Are not those things that are to be obeyed under pain of damnation,
necessary to salvation? Hence also it follows, that things once commanded by
the Church or Magistrate (especially by both) are as holy, as the immediate
Commandments of God. The particular inconveniences and absurdities hereof are
infinite. What also is here said, that was not wont to be said by the Papists
against the Martyrs?

The Magistrate cannot impose any thing upon the Church, Reioynder.
without the consent thereof: but the Church may impose any indifferent
ordinance upon it self, without the consent of the Magistrate, if the
Magistrate be an Infidel, or a Persecutor; which cannot be wilfully
transgressed under the penalty of Sin, and so consequently of damnation,
without repentance for it. Yet it follows not, that such Decrees are as HOLY,
as the Ordinances of God, the reason hereof is apparent in my book De
Adiaphoris. The Popish ordinances and rites are not things indifferent, or
lawful in themselves; ours are. The Error is, (...).

IV.
And that they are things Indifferent in themselves, Answer.
and may be used without sin, we have proved at large, in a peculiar Book
written of that Argument. Lib. de Adiaphoris.

The Defender replies. Reply.
Alas M. Powel, make not such account of your Book de Adiaphoris, then which,
there never came more simple stuff from any man reputed learned. You had need
recant your blasphemous point therein, against the authority of Christ Jesus
for making laws in his Church. Verily you might as well have denied him to be
a King, and a Redeemer.

As by writing that Book DE ADIAPHORIS (a work not voluntarily undertaken by
my self, Reioynder.
but imposed by Authority) I never regarded to please Man, at whose hands I
look not for my reward; but labored to serve the necessity of Church, unto
whose service I owe my self: So now being written and published abroad, I weigh
not what any private Spirit, being ouerruled by inordinate passions of love or
hatred, will censure or account thereof, for friends will flatter, and
adversaries rail; but wholly refer it unto the judgment of the CHVRCH of
God, at whose grave and judicious sentence, I stand, or fall. And touching the
general doctrine of the Protestants, that CHRIST IS NO LAVVGIVER, which you in
your deep ignorance term BLASPHEMY; object against it, and you shall (God
willing) be answered. But you profess ( page 156.) that you will leave that
Book to other to show my childish weakness therein. You do very well; for by
so doing you provide the better for your own credit: for that Book is written
in Latin, and you cannot write true English.

V.
Now that they are become the Bones of contention, and Causes of division among
us, Answer.
is very much to be lamented, seeing the free course of the Gospel is somewhat
troubled, and the common enemy aduantaged thereby. But the fault rests on
them, who of mere superstition and gross ignorance, cannot find in their
consciences to embrace the wholesome Ordinances and Constitutions of the
Church, not any way prejudicial unto the Gospel, nor repugnant unto the Word
of God, but most agreeable and consonant unto the same.

The Defender replies. Reply.
That these things are become bones of contention, is only the fault of the
Prelates, that strive with might and maine for them. They acknowledge that they
have power to alter and remove them, and they see great reason so to do:
neither can they give any reasons but childish for continuance of them; and yet
to the great dishonor of God, and to the grief of thousands of the godly,
they retain them.

It is not the fault, Reioynder.
but the duty of the Prelates, to labor to reduce Schismatiques and factious
persons to unity and concord: neither do they strive with might and maine for
Ceremonies, but for the peace of the Church: neither can the Prelates, without
direction from the Christian Magistrate, and the consent of the Church, alter
or remove the Ceremonies now used: neither if they could, were they, in
policy, to institute any importune innouations, which would be a special
scandal to many, both within, and without the Church.

XVII. ARGUMENT.
IN this Argument the Suppliants, Supplicat.
heaping (as themselves profess) many things together, and contriuing many
Arguments into one, do certainly very worthily and Christianly discourse, as of
sundry other things, so especially concerning the Lords great mercies, in the
miraculous deliverance, as of you honorable House of Parliament, so also
consequently of the whole State and Kingdom, thereby redeeming both our Bodies
from corporal, and our Souls from spiritual intended captivity of that
bloody Man of sin, the child of Perdition. Which verily should provoke every
good Christian, to special thankfulness unto our heavenly Father, to repentance
for our former transgressions, to present diligence in our several vocations,
and ever hereafter to keep a more vigilant and watchful eye, over the
perfidious and treacherous Adversaries. But let us examine, how the Suppliants
apply these things to their purpose.

But before we come to the particular examination of the REASONS of this 17.
Argument, the Defender spieth something herein, which makes much for them of
his faction.

Reply.
In these words (says he) let the contrariety of the Answerer, to almost in
his whole Answer written, be observed. For he being a Scholar, his words must
be Scholerly interpreted. Because therefore we are not to doubt, but that the
Answerer remembers, as well what he has learned in the Ethiques, as in the
Elenkes of Aristotle: may it please the Reader to understand, that Aristotle,
in his said Ethiques, makes great difference betwixt Bonum and Been, good and
well; Iustum and Just, just and justly. Good and just things may be done by
evil and unjust men; but only Good and just men can do things Well and
justly. Because the Answerer therefore does here testify, that the Suppliants
discourse, not only of many Worthy and Christian points, but also Worthily
and Christianly: how can this agree with all the reproachful terms he gives
them, of Schismatiques, Refractaries, wilful contenders with the Magistrate,
presumptuous censurers etc.

But what makes all this against me? Reioynder.
or wherein does it contrary any thing that I have written? I have ever thought,
and do at this present think (as charity binds me) that many of the
refractarie Ministers, are indeed good Men (though not as they are
schismatic) and in grace and favor with God, as was said before ( in the 1.
Arg. page 107.) But may not GOOD MEN offend in some things? Is our regeneration
perfect in this life? Do not we all amiss in some things? Can any man say,
he has no sin? What needed all this Defense therefore of a thing that was
never denied?

I. REASON. of the 17. Arg.
God sent lately amongst us a mighty and fearful Pestilence, Supplicat.
for the omission of some duty which should have been performed.

Ergo, The high Court of Parliament is presently to restore the refractarie
Ministers, specially seeing the plague does still houer over our heads.

ANSWER.
To let the Antecedent pass, Answer.
which yet is not so fully and warily laid down, as it ought to have been. Who
does not see the weakness of the Consequence* For does GOD plague us, because
of the proceedings against the refractarie Ministers? and not rather for our
horrible Sins of security, pride, unthankfulness etc. This is certain: and
that rests to be proved still.

The Defender replies. Reply.
I have told you of your mistaking Logike before. The Auctor disputes not
particularly of the sins that moved the Lord to visit us; but of the
general end wherefore he did both correct us, and also magnify his mercy
toward us: The which he applied to the particular point of favor for the
Ministers molested. Notwithstanding, to answer your question, though it cannot
be denied, that for other sins the Lord has so heavily scourged us, yet why
should the suppressing of the Ministry of the Gospel be excluded?

Have you told me of my mistaking Logike, Reioynder.
who cannot tell (as appears by this a logical Defense) what Logike means,
and are as fearful of meeting a fallacy, as you are of a fury? All your
clamor was raised only upon the Correctors mistaking. The words in the written
coppie (which yet is to be showed) are these. They mistake the End; as those
Gentiles did the Efficient, who affirmed they were plagued, because of the
Christians contempt of their Gods. You take all the advantage you can, and
allow us no time to Answer your LIBELS. The Auctor divulged his Supplication,
even almost in the latter end of the last Session of Parliament, and I had not
above four or five days to write the Consideration; which I was compelled,
through the straightnes of time, to commit unto the press, as fast as I could
write it: wherefore I could not intend to correct it my self; which was the
cause as well of this error you exclaim against, as also of breaking the Series
of the Alphabet, in the Marginall glosses of this 17. Arg. and of some other
typographicall escapes. Neither have I much more time allowed me to write this
REIOYNDER, but am constrained (for lack of time) to put part of it to the
press, before the whole can be finished. If I listed to take exception to what
I think is the fault of the Printer in this your Book, I might exclaim as
much, and as justly as you do: but I hold it no ingenuitie to catch at
syllables and letters.

But to return to your Reply. I say again, that the END wherefore the Lord
does correct us, is not the Restoring of the refractarie Ministers; but rather
he does it, to recall us from our sins, of security, unthankfulness, pride,
etc. The repressing of the Schismatic Ministers (not the Suppressing of the
Ministry of the Gospel, as you speak) is excluded from that End; because it
is no sin to labout to recover them, and to reduce them to unity and
obedience. The Error is, (...). The rest, which the Defender adds, is true,
not of such as he is, but of the faithful Ministers of the Gospel.

II. REASON of the 17 Arg.
Supplicat.
God has lately delivered the House of Parliament, and the whole Land from a
bloody intended Massacre.

Ergo, That honorable Court specially ought to testify their thankfulness
unto God, by restoring the refractarie Ministers.

ANSWER.
AS if there were no other means, Answer.
whereby that honorable Court might testify their thankefulnes, but by
restoring Schismatic Pastors unto the Church, the more to disturb the peace
thereof.

The Defender replies. Reply.
We deny not but that there are other means whereby that honorable Court may
testify their thankfulness: yet this hinders not, but that this also may be
one.

But the other means differs from this ex toto genere. Reioynder.
That other is the true exercise of piety and charity: this is horrible sin,
which would provoke GOD the more to punish us. That which he adds concerning
mercy and cruelty toward men's souls, is mere fopperie, which has been
answered already.

III. REASON of the 17. Arg.
Many of the honorable Lords, Supplicat.
and other members of the Parliament, are very ancient and stricken in years:
and therefore never again like to be of any other Parliament.

Ergo, They ought to do good now, by restoring the Deprived and Silenced
Ministers.

ANSWER.
But it has not been yet proved, Answer.
that to restore the refractarie Ministers, is to do Good, and not rather to do
hurt, and to SIN, by being cause of nourishing faction and dissension in the
Church.

The Defender replieth NOTHING, but says that this is Answered already. But
where?

IV. REASON of the 17. Arg.
Supplicat.
The refractary Ministers would be very glad, if they were comforted, restored
and let alone.

Ergo, They ought so to be.

ANSWER.
So would all Schismatiques, Answer.
Heretics, Papists, Atheists; yea all malefactors, murderers, thieves,
cutpurses, be very glad, if they were comforted, delivered, and let alone.

The Defender replies. Reply.
In the bitterness of his Spirit, he reckons us up with all Schismatiques,
Heretics, Papists, murderers, thieves, cut-purses.

That my SPIRIT IS BITTER, Reioynder.
such as have any familiar acquaintance with me, know to be the ERROR of your
judging and censuring Spirit, a fault too common unto the men of your stamp. I
do not parallel you with Heretics, Papists, Atheists, murderers, thieves,
cut-purses; only I show the absurdity of the Suppliants reason, seeing all
these would be as glad to be let alone, as you would.

V. REASON. of the 17. Arg.
Supplicat.
The House of Parliament by their mercy showed to the refractarie Ministers,
shall not only treasure up comfort unto themselves against the day of their
death, but shall also make their Old Age the more honorable, and their names
memorable amongst all posterity.

Ergo, They ought so to do.

ANSWER.
I.
IF by Mercy, Answer.
they mean their reclaiming from Schism and faction, I grant the whole.

II.
But if they mean, their restoring again, they continuing still the same men
they are now: then is the Antecedent a foul Begging of the Question, and the
Argument inconsequent.

III.
For contrariwise it may be concluded: The House of Parliament, by Restoring
Schismatic Ministers, to disquiet the peace of the Church, shall not only
attract guilt and remorse of conscience; but also prejudice their honorable
Age, and make their names reproachful amongst all posterity.

The Defender replies. Reply.
Only herein the Answerers censure of the Parliament, if they should restore
us, is to be obserned, viz. that they shall not only attract guilt and remorse
of Conscience, but also prejudice their honorable Age, and make their names
reproachful to all posterity. This touches not only the Lords of the upper
house, and body of the Commons in the nether house, but also his most excellent
Majesty, without whose Princely authority nothing can be done by the other.

I censure not the honorable Court of Parliament, Reioynder.
neither the upper, nor the lower House, much less do I censure his Majesty,
because I know they will never RESTORE SCHISMATIQVES to disquiet the peace of
the Church. My words are plain; I speak upon supposition of doing that, which
(I assure my self) will never be done, to retort the Supplians Reason upon
themselves. Is this censuring the Parliament and King? No no, that trade is
proper unto the Defenders faction, and unto their catercozens or
fellow-censurers, the Papists. This fellows malice, seems to exceed his
learning.

VI. REASON of the 17. Arg.
Supplicat.
As Jsrael was blessed above other women dwelling in tents, for driving a nail
into Siseraes head: So should these Parliament men, be blessed above many
former, if they utterly took away all the Whore of Romes Ornaments yet
remaining etc.

Ergo, They ought to do so.

ANSWER.
THe instance is altogether different. Answer.
For Sisera was a special enemy of the Children of Israel, and of the Church
of God ( Judge. 4.2.) But the Ornaments the Suppliants speak of, are the good
creatures of God, having no hurt or ill in them.

The Defender replies. Reply.
I. Was not Sisera also the creature of God, and in that respect may it not be
said, that he had no evil in him? And is not the Pope also an enemy to the
people and Church of God, as well as Sisera was?

Sisera was indeed the creature of GOD, Reioynder.
but an hurtful enemy unto the Israelites: the Ornaments we speak of are
creatures in like manner, but without hurt in them. What (says the Defender)
is not the Pope also an enemy to the Church of God? as if these Ornaments were
the Pope.

II. Reply.
What does the Answerer say for the Ornaments, that might not have been said
for Images?

Yes forsooth. Images are hurtful; Reioynder.
so are not the Ornaments. We are prohibited to MAKE Images: but not to USE the
Ornaments. The Error is (...).

II.
Neither were the Popish Idolatrous Priests ever decked with our Ornaments;
Answer.
neither are they now.

III.
Neither were our Ornaments ever worshipped or abused to Idolatry; neither are
they yet.

IV.
Neither if they had bin, is it absolutely necessary to destroy the Substance
of them, together with the abuse: but the abuse is to be abolished, and the
true use restored. The reasons hereof, and cautions to be used in this point, I
have laid down in another place. Cap. 11. lib. de Adiaph.

The Defender replies. I. Are you sure, Reply.
there is never a Surplice now in England, that was abused to Idolatry
publicly in Queen Mary's time, or secretly since that time? If it be true
of Surplices, are you sure it is true of all Coapes?

I am not sure, I think so. Reioynder.


II. Have you forgotten the distinction of Idem specie, Reply.
and Idem numero?

I remember it well: but this is, Reioynder.
as if it were unlawful to use gold in the Temple at Jerusalem, because Aaron
framed his Idolatricall Calfe of gold.

III. By this reason, Reply.
we may erect new Images in the Churches, and say that these Images were never
worshipped or abused.

Nothing less: Reioynder.
We are expressly forbidden to MAKE an Image, as has bin noted before.

XIIX. ARGUMENT.
Supplicat.
The high Court of Parliament is bound specially to open their mouth for the
dumb, to judge righteously, to judge the afflicted and the poor, to give
strong wine to him that is ready to perish; and not to contemn the judgment
of the meanest Subject.

Ergo, They are bound specially to restore the refractarie Ministers.

ANSWER.
I.
THis Argument is parallel, Answer.
and the very same with the 8. Argument before, and is there answered.

II.
In one word. I grant the Antecedent, and deny the Consequence: because the
refractarie Ministers are not such, as are specified in the Antecedent, as is
often declared before.

The Defender replies. Reply.
This is the Conclusion of all, which the Notarie and Answerer unaptly call a
distinct Argument. Neither is there any thing here answered requiring reply,
then has been already made.

Reioynder.
I have followed the Auctor of the Supplication in numbering his Arguments, who
in the beginning of this Argument or Conclusion (term it what you will for me)
page 28. of the Supplication, lays down this number [18.] and so goes on
with the Paragraph, as he had done in all the Arguments before, adding their
proper number. And had not I reason to take it for a distinct Argument, being
so laid down by the Auctor? But let it be, as indeed all the rest are no
Arguments, a goodly CONCLUSION forsooth, the Defender sees nothing in the
Answer worthy a Reply, nor I any thing in the Reply worthy a Reioynder.

AND thus have I encountered with IGNORANCE it self, joined with extreme
MALICE, passions wherewith the Defender seems to be notoriously qualified.
First, his IGNORANCE is palpable, in that he has neither Art to dispute, nor
Style to discourse, nor Judgment to discern such matters as he handles: al
which are evidently confirmed, I. By his immethodicall and euil-featured
thapsodie, being full of vain tautologies, and farsed with much frivolous and
idle talk, as it were of a discrasied brain, lest his Book (forsooth) might
be termed a TRIOBOLAR PAMPHLET, or a TVVO-LEAVED LIBELL, as himself seems to
confess ( page 17.) II. By his senseless Periods, and gross Solecismes even
in the English tongue: as ( page 38) The Auctor is able to defend his meaning,
or ready to yield better reason TO THE CONTRARY; also ( page 46.) The Cause
why we are put out, is not FOR RESPECT of our selves, but FOR FEAR of sinning
against God; and ( page 58) Except you mean NOT the cause of the Ministers;
and ( page 150.) Let the contrariety of the Answerer, to almost IN his whole
Answer written, be observed, etc. III. By his absurd Paradoxes, which no
Divine ever maintained before him: as ( page 34.) The Kingdom of heaven
consists in the ABUSE of outward things; also ( page 36.) The liberty of
Preaching does NOT PROPERLY belong to the Ministry of the Gospel; and (page
120.) A Minister out of his Ministry, is NO MINISTER: there are many more
such examples, but I labor to be short.

Secondly, his MALICE is apparent in every page, yea almost in every line of
his Defense, wherein he scorneth, and reproacheth, and slaundereth, not only
my poor self (whom he extremely hates for no other cause, but because I am
not of his faction) but also all the reverend Prelates and Magistrates of this
Land, yea the whole Church of God amongst us, as we have heard already.

When I had first perused over this vile and disgraceful Libell, I could but
marvel at the impudency of the Defender, that in so learned an age, durst
presume to publish so fillie a work: Whereupon I purposed to have passed it
over with silence, as disdaining to accept so Ignorant a Man for my Antagonist,
and to encounter with such, as with an Adversary, whom it were fitter to
instruct, as a Schoole-boy. But when I had better considered the humor of the
refractarie faction, who embrace every Sentence proceeding from their RABBINES,
as an ORACLE, be it never so absurd; and perceived the Book it self, to be
prejudicial to his Majesty's authority and Laws, to the peace of GODS
Church, and propagation of the Gospel, I was persuaded (for this once) to take
a little labor to show the Defe^ders folly in his weaker Defense of so weak
Arguments; which I have done as briefly as I could: for why should I speak
much of a Discourse so little worth?

And here I openly testify, and plainly profess, both unto the Defender,
and to all others of his strain; that if hereafter any of them shall set upon,
or attempt any thing against any Book or Writing of mine; if they shall do it
in the common Idiome of the English, I will pass it over with silence, and not
vouchsafe them any Answer: and this, 1. Because it is not fit and convenient
that this Controversy, being moved only amongst Scholars, and no way
concerning the Lay People, should be vulgarly handled, to the increase of
factions and part-takings in the Church. 2. Because that, having other
employments more necessary for these times, by this means I shall be free
from being troubled with the tedious prating, the clamorous and scornful
gybing of every DVNSE, that can but chatte English.

Wherefore I require and adjure you (my reverend Brethren) as you tender the
quietness of the Church, yea and your own honest reputation, that hereafter (if
you be not yet satisfied) you will write in the LATIN tongue, which is the
tongue of the Learned, and not in the ENGLISH, to fill the Common-peoples heads
with idle and vain questions: Which reasonable request, if you shall refuse to
yield unto, surely it will be thought that all you do, is but ad faciendum
populum, and also that you are but ignorant and unlearned men, not able to
write in Latin, as indeed all the DISCIPLINARIANS in English are reported to
be: I speak not this of all that stand out for the Ceremonies, among whom
there are some whom I reverence for their gifts; but of the giddie
Presbyterians, such as this simple Defender is, who could be contented these
twelve months, to suffer my Book De Adiaphoris, to pass unanswered, because
it was written in Latin, but no sooner came there any thing under my name in
English, but presently he set upon it, according unto the Proverb, Who more
bold, then blind Bayard?

The Lord heal the wounds of his Church, appease this intestine dissension
among Brethren, and grant that we may do all things to the glory of his holy
Name.

APOCAI. 7.12. Amen. Praise, and Glory, and Wisdom, and Thanks, and Honor,
and Power, and Might, be unto our GOD for evermore. Amen.


FINIS.

