A TREATY of Justification.

Found among the writings of Cardinal Pole of blessed memory, remaining in
the custody of M. Henry Pyning, Chamberlain and General Receiver to the said
Cardinal, late deceased in Louaine.

Item, certain Translations touching the said matter of Justification, the
Titles whereof, see in the page following.

Proverb. 4. Ne declines neque ad dexteram, neque ad sinistram.
Turn not aside to the right hand, nor to the left.
printer's device of John Fowler (not found in McKerrow), which the Pitts
Theology Library Digital Image Archive describes as featuring "fowl...gathering
in a tree and the young chicks being fed by the divine hand" with the printer's
initials on either side of the tree's trunk. Device surrounded by an oval frame
bearing the inscription "RESPICITE VOLATILIA COELI, ET PULLOS CORVORUM" ("look
at the birds of the air and the chicks of the ravens"). RESPICITE VOLATILIA
COELI, ET PVLLOS CORVORVM.


LOVANII, Apud Ioannem Foulerum. Anno. 1569.

CVM PRIVILEGIO.

Beside the Treaty of Justification, in this Volume are comprised these
Translations.
First, the Sixte Session of the General Council of Trent, which is of
Justification, with the Canons of the same Session. Item, a Treaty of S.
Augustine that famous Doctor, by him entitled: Of Faith and Works. Item, a
Sermon of S. Chrysostom, Of Praying unto God. Item, a Sermon of S. Basil, Of
Fasting. Item, certain Sermons of S. Leo the Great, of the same Argument. Last
of al, a notable Sermon of S. Cyprian that blessed Martyr, Of Alms deeds.
All newly translated into English. by Thomas Lord Coppley.

The Preface to the Reader.
AS all Scripture inspired by God is profitable to teach and instruct in
rightuousenes, 2. Tim. 3.
to the end that a godly man may be perfect, instructed to al good works:
so is there no point or article thereof more expediente for a Christian man to
seek, more necessary to find and know, more comfortable rightly to understand,
and more profitable to remember and practice, then is the true and right
knowledge of his Justification, and the manner how the same is atteined. We are
sure by the Scripture, that a wicked man and his wickedness both like are
hateful unto God: Neither can there be looked for any other thing, Sap. 14.
then heavy punishment and just damnation, where the anger and displeasure of
God is vnpacified once justly deserved, and not taken away by some means to
his contentation. We doubt not also, but that all men are borne naturally the
children of anger, that is to say, Ephesians. 2.
in Gods displeasure and indignation, as branches of a condemned stock, a
thral kind and bond race of one man, Romans 5.
by whom sin entered into the world, and by sin death, and so went through
all, in whom all have sinned. And what can be so pleasant to a captive, as to
understand truly the way and means of his deliverance, or so comfortable to
a person bond and thrall, as to know, not only how he may be made free, but
also how he may be brought in special favor with his Lord, by whom only he
must live, or else perish? Finally how he may be made a child, a son, Ephesians.
2.
and heir to him, unto whom he was a stranger before.

And because no man, 1. Joan. 1.
be he never so rightuouse and just, Aug. de ciuitate Dei. li. 21. cap. 16.
Galat. 5. Joan. 5. Cypria. de Elcemos.
lives here without sin, and few there are of that happy estate, that fall
not into damnable and mortal sin, the doers whereof shall not possess the
kingdom of God: since also a law is appointed us by our Physician, that once
made us hole, who said: Thou art made hole, now sin no more: we were, as
S. Cyprian says, driven to ^ ^arowe strait, having a precise law of
innocence prescribed unto us, neither could the weakness of man's frailty,
tell what to do, if God of his mercy had not appointed a way and mean, how
man, that by sin falls from justice after his Baptism, may be restored to
righteousness and justice again. Further it suffiseth not a Christian man to be
made rightuouse, and to be set in the state of justice, unless he continewe
and persevere in the same: Matthew. 24
for he shall be saved, that continues unto the end. Also he must increase in
rightuousenes: Apoca. 22 Leo Sermon. 8. de passio. Do.
for so the Scripture teaches us: Let him that is just, be yet justified: for
trewely is it said: Quantumlibet quisque iustificatus sit, habet tamen dum in
hac vita est, quo probatior esse possit and melior: Qui autem non proficit,
deficit: and qui nihil acquirit, non nihil perdit. Every man, be he never so
much justified, yet may he while he is in this life be more tried and better:
and who so increases not, fails and goes backward, and he that gets
nothing, loses somewhat. For which causes it behooves us, not only to know
how we are made just and rightuouse, but also how we be restored to Justice
when we fall: and how we may continewe and increase in rightuousenes, when we
be restored: and finally attain to salvation and glory, which is the end of
Justification, and without the which all Justification in this life avails
nothing, but rather turns to a heap and increase of our damnation: because
as Oecumenius says, Oeco. in 2. cap. Iaco.
Like unprofitable servants we receive our masters money, and make no gain
thereof: that is to say, we receive his grace in vain.

This being understood, 2. Cor. 16.
how necessary and profitable the knowledge of this Article is, and seeing also,
that a man, run he never so fast, yet if he run out of the way, he never
comes to the right end of his journey, to the intent thou be not induced to
judge amiss in so great a matter, and to thee so necessary, I have (Christian
Reader) with the hope of Gods help endeavored my self to lay before thine
eyes particularly as briefly and plainly as I could, the manner of our
Justification in Christ with the circumstances belonging to the same. Grounding
my self chiefly in all points through the Treaty upon the Scripture and holy
Word of God. 2. Petr. 1. Aug. lib. Confess. 12 cap. 25.
And because the same neither is, nor ought to be of any man's private
interpretation, (for he that goes about to draw it to his own private sense,
shall be deprived of it) I have taken such construction thereof, as the holy
Ghost has delivered and taught his Church, and such as the ancient Fathers
of sundry ages and places agreeing togethers have learned in the Church and
uttered in their writings to teach other. Among whom I have especially and
most of all other followed the authority of S. Augustine, as well for that he
has written most largely of this matter, as also because such as be of the
contrary part in most credit, Luthe. Philip. Melan. Calui. Institut. cap.
18. 1. Tim. 3.
and have written in this time, confess, that in the Doctrine of the Church
he is a most faithefull declarer of antiquity: Intending thereby to discharge
my self, as teaching nothing but that I have learned in Gods Church the
state and pillar of truth, and geeuing thee thereby good occasion I trust,
readily to believe that thou shall here read.

But as I have declared unto thee, that the right knowledge of this point
concerning our Justification, is to a Christian man most necessary and
comfortable: so must (...) advertise thee, that the mistaking and wrong
understanding thereof, Aristo. Ethic.
is most dangerouse. For as the Philosophers say, that every virtue is besette
of each side with a vice contrary to it: so S. Augustine writes, that the true
Doctrine of Justification, Aug. in Praesa. Psalm. 31.
has of each side of it, a deep and dangerouse fall, so that who so goes out
of the straight way thereof on the right or left hand, falls down hedlong,
and casts away him self.

Into the one danger, and of the one side they fall, that presume of
themselves, thinking to be justified by them selves, by their own strength and
righteousness, without the help and grace of God. August. supra.
Of them he says: Si se in audaciam quandam, etc. If a man lift him self up
unto a boldenes of presumption, and presume of his own strength and justice,
and purpose in his mind to fulfill justice, and to do all that is commanded
in the law, offending in nothing, and think to have his life in his own
power, that he slide no where, fail no where, stumble no where, see darcke and
dymme nowhere, and attribute this to the power of his own will, although
peradventure he fulfill al things that seem just in men's sight, so that
nothing be found in his life that may be blamed of men, yet God condemns
the very presumption and vaunting of pride.

The other hedlong fall is on the contrary side, and into it such men fall, as
pretending their own infirmity and weakness do no good deeds, and trust and
presume only to be saved by Gods grace and mercy though they live ungodly, of
whom also S. Augustine says in the same place: Si se infirmitati, etc.
August. vbi supra.
If a man yield himself up to his own weakness fully and wholly, and bend
himself to this cogitation to say, because the mercy of God is ready for all
sinners unto the end, in what so ever sins they continue, if they believe
that God delivers, God forgeueth, so that no wicked men that have faith and
believe, shall perish, that is to say, none of them shall perish, that say to
them selves, what so ever I do, with what so ever outrages and shameful deeds
I be distained, sin I never so much, God of his mercy delivers me because
I have believed in him: he then that says no such men perish, by that evil
thinking is moved to sin freely. And the just God, unto whom mercy is song
and judgment, not mercy only, but judgment also, finds man ill presuming
of him self, and abusing Gods mercy to his own destruction, and of necessity
such a one must be damned. And somewhat after that he says: Quid igitur fit?
What shall we then do? If a man justify him self, and presume of his own
justice, he falls. If a man considering and thinking upon his own
weakness, and presuming of the mercy of God, have no care to cleanse his own
life of his sins, and drown him self in all the goulfe of lewd doings, he
falls also. Presumption upon his own justice, is as it were the right hand.
The thinking that sins escape vnpunnisshed, is like the left hand Let us
hear the voice of God saying to us: Turn not aside to the right or left hand.
Prouer. 4.
Presume not to come to the kingdom by thine own justice, presume not to
sin through the mercy of God.

These be, good Christian Reader, the two perilouse and deadly dangers, that
men may fall into, if they do not rightly understand the true doctrine of
Justification. Which falls being so dangerouse, God grant all men carefully
to eschew. Wherein to help thee judge uprightly, I have taken in hand this
travail, trusting by Gods grace, so to lead thee Via Regia, that is, in the
true and high way, that thou shall not need to fall of either side, if thou will uprightly way, and with the fear of God consider such things, as thou
shall find here alleged.

And because I can not hope to atteine any good, much less so great a good,
but by his giving of whom comes al good, I will begin with the prayer, which
S. Augustine intending to preach of the same matter made, desiring thee to
pray for me, as he did his hearers for him self. Primum infirmitatem meam,
etc. First of al says he, I commend my weakness to your prayers, Ephesians. 6.
as the Apostle says, that words may be geauen me in opening my mouth, so to
speak unto you, as it be not perilouse for me to speak, and may be wholesome
for you to hear.

And this request I make unto thee, Gentle Reader, not only for mine own
sake, who need the same, but for thine also, that thou may perceive, how
great help and assistance thou need at Gods hand for thy part, if thou will profitably read or speak of this matter, of which so virtuous and
excellently learned a Bishop thought him self not able nor meet to speak,
without the healpe of godly prayers.

A BRIEF TREATY OF MAN'S JUSTIFICATION. THE FIRST BOOK.
What is meant by the word of Justification. And what degrees perfect
Justification and salvation has in it. THE FIRST CHAPTER.
RIGHT order of teaching requires, that since mine intent is, to show how a
man is justified, I should first declare what is meant by the word of
Justification, Three degrees of Justification in Scripture. Romans 4.
of which the holy Scriptures seem to speak after three sorts and manners.

The first kind is called the Justification of a sinful or wicked man, of
which S. Paul speaks, saying: Credenti in cum qui iustificat impium reputatur
fides ad iustitiam. Faith is reputed for justice unto the party that believes
in him which justifies the wicked. Which words S. Augustine expounding,
says: To justify the wicked, In exposi. quarund. propos. ex epistola ad Romans
Aug. in Psalm. 7. and in ep. 120. Romans 8.
is as much to say, as to make of the wicked a godly man. And in an other
place he says: When a wicked man is justified, of wicked he is made just. And
since all Justification comes of God, Deus est qui iustificat, It is God that
justifies: of these places, and many other that might be alleged to this
purpose, we may gather and say, that Justification in this kind, is the gift
of God, whereby a wicked or sinful man is made godly and rightuouse.

Apoc. 22.
saying: Qui iustus est, iustificetur adhuc. Let him that is just, be justified
yet. And let him that is holy, be yet made holier. And in an other place: Non
impediaris orare semper, and ne veteris vsque ad mortem iustificari, Eccle c. 18
quoniam merces Dei manet in aeternum. Let nothing let thee to pray ever, and
let nothing forbid thee to be justified unto thy death, because Gods reward
abides for ever. By which words it is not meant, that a wicked man, in whom
no goodness is, should be made rightuouse and godly, but that a good and a
just man should be made iuster and better. For as we say truly, that water
is warmed, not only when it is of cold made luke warm, but also when it is
of warm made hotter: so says the Scripture, that a man is justified when he
increases in justice, and of good and rightuouse is made iuster and better.

Romans 2.
Of a third degree of Justification it is said: Non auditores legis iusti sunt
apud Deum, sed factores legis iustificabuntur. The hearers of the law be not
just before God, but the doers of the law shall be justified. Where the word
of iustifiyng does neither signify the coming to justice, which makes a
wicked man rightuouse and just, neither the increase of justice, whereby a
good man is made better: but an end and perfection of justice, whereunto by
Gods just judgment (of the which S. Paul there speaks) such shall atteine, as
keeping them selves in the state of justice once received, or recovering the
same by penance, continue and persevere in doing justice unto the end.

This is the full and perfect Justification of man who being borne in sin, is
called to the state of justice: and increasing therein by continuance, is at
the end perfited in justice in life everlasting. For neither does it avail him
to begin well, if he do not continue and increase, neither is it enough to
continue for a time, if afterward he fall away. For then does he lose the end
and perfection of his justice, without the which the beginning and middle
avails not.

In this sort does S. Augustine speak of man's Justification: For concerning
the two first degrees thereof he says thus: Aug. contra ^ulia. lib. 2. (...)
de ciuita. Dei li. 21. cap. 16.
Iustificatio in hac vita etc. Justification is given unto us in this life by
these three things: first by the wasshing of regeneration, whereby al sins
are forgeuen: after that by fighting with vices, from the gylte whereof we were
discharged and assoyled. Thirdely while our prayer is heard, wherein we say:
forgive us our offenses.

In which words is comprised not only the entry and beginning of our
Justification, which he calls Baptism, but also the increase of virtuous
and godly life, which he terms a conflicte and fighting with vice, whereunto
he joins prayer for the forgiveness of sin, when we fall. And this calls
he our Justification in this life, saying further in an other place: Lib. 21.
de ciuit. Dei cap. 16.
Quisquis cupit etc. Whosoever ever desires to escape the pains everlasting,
let him not only be baptized, but also be justified in Christ. We doubt
not, but that such as are baptized, be also justified. For where S. Paul
says: Abluti estis: ye are washed clean, 1. Cor. 6.
he says also: iustificati estis: ye are justified. And yet says S.
Augustine, that beside Baptism, a man must be justified, meaning by
Justification, the continual conflicte with vice, wherein consists a godly
and a virtuous life, and increase of justice.

Of the third degree, which is the end and perfiting of our justice, Aug
epist. 106 (...) sermo 61. le ver. Do^.
he says: Complebitur spes nostra etc. Our hope shall be fully accomplisshed in
the resurrection of the dead: and when our hope shall be fulfilled, then shall
our Justification be fulfilled and accomplished.

Thus does our Justification rightly understood, as it is co^plete and
perfect, comprise in it self a beginning of justice, an increase, and an end.
In this sort do the Scriptures in sundry places speak of it. Note the Authors
Intent.
For this cause, I have in all this Treaty, to make the matter playner to
understand, deduced three degrees of Justification, comparing the same with S.
Augustine to a perfect buylding, which beside a foundation, has lodging to
dwell in. And to a fruiteful tree, which has not only a root, but fruit also
coming of the same.

And albeit al these three degrees make but one absolute and perfect
Justification in every man that is saved, yet does the Scripture in sundry
places speak severally and in diverse manner of words: sometime of the
beginning and entree, sometime of the increase, sometime of the end and
perfection of our justice: whereof may grow obscurity and occasion of error
to such as understand not, nor mark not this diversity in degrees of justice.

Mark this diversity.
For it is not one thing that God requires of him that first comes to his
service, and of him that continues his servant, and in the end trusts to be
rewarded by his service. By mean of which difference it is truly said in the
Scripture, Romans 3. Jacob. 2.
a man is justified by faith without works, and also it is truly said, a man
is justified by works. For as a sinner is called and set in the state of
justice by grace, without any deserte of works done before: So no man can
continue in Christ, increase in justice, and comme to the perfection thereof in
life everlasting, without good works, as in process of this Work more
plainly shall appear.

What is meant by the name of faith, and how many kinds of faith there be.
THE II. CHAP.
Because in all this discourse of Justification, I shall be occasioned often times
to speak of faith, I think it necessary, as I have already showed what is
meant by the word of Justification, so likewise to declare briefly, what is
meant by the name of faith, to the intent that when the Reader shall see any
thing alleged concerning faith, he may the better judge of it.

S. Augustine says there be two kinds of faith: one, whereby we believe that
which is said to us: An other, whereby we keep promise in that we say to
other. August. de spirit. and lit. ca. 31.
De hac fide nunc loquimur, quam adhibemus, cum aliquid credimus: non quam
damus, quum aliquid pollicemur. Nam and ipsa dicitur fides. Two kinds of
faith.
We speak now of the faith which we use, when we believe any thing, not of
the faith which we give when we promise any thing. For that also is called
faith. But it is one thing when we say, he gave no faith nor credit unto me,
and an other when we say, he kept not faith with me. For the one is as much
to say, He believed not that which I said: the other, he did not that which he
said. By this faith, whereby we believe, we be faithful unto God: by the other,
whereby that is performed which is promised, God also is faithful unto us. For
so says the Apostle. God is faithful, who does not suffer you to be tempted
further then you are able. 1. Cor. 10.


Seeing therefore, there be but two kinds of Faith, to wit, the faith of God
toward man in keeping his promise, and the faith of man toward God in
believing his word, and seeing also that of Gods faith there is no question nor
doubt: it follows, that when so ever mention is made in the Scripture of man's
faith, alone and in his own kind, that faith is understood, whereby man is
faithful unto God: Chrysostom. hom. 31. in Genesis
that is, as S. Chrysostom says, Whereby man gives credit unto his saiyngs
and words. For expounding these words: Credidit Abraham Deo, Abraham believed
God, he says: Credidit dictis Dei, He gave credit to Gods words and
sayings. In this sense S. Augustine says: August. de verb. Apostol. s^m. 16.
De spiri. and lite. cap. 31.
Ad fidem quid pertinet? Credere. What appertains to faith? To believe. And
because a man might ask also, what it is to believe, to put that out of doubt,
he says in an other place: Quid est enim credere, nisi consentire verum esse
quod dicitur? What is it else to believe, but to consent, that the thing which
is said is true? By this rule as many in all ages, as have believed the Gospel
after the right and true understanding of the Catholic Church, keeping
themselves within the same Church, Vincent. Lyrinen. aduers. haeres.
have been called faithful and Catholics. Ille est verus and Germanus
Catholicus, qui veritatem Dei, qui Ecclesiam, qui Christi corpus diligit, etc.
He is a true and right Catholic, says Vincentius Lyrinensis, that loves the
truth of God, that loves the Church, that loves the body of Christ, Who is a
true Catholic.
that estemeth nothing more then Gods religion and the Catholic faith, no not
the authority and love of any man, father, husband, or whatsoever, not wit,
eloquence, nor philosophy, not welthe, riches, or honor, but despising al
these things and remaining fast and stable in faith, what soever he shall know
that the Catholic Church has holden from ancient time universally, does
determine to hold and believe only that. Such then are faithful and
Catholics, that believe the Catholic and ancient faith universally received,
as Vincentius says, that believe God and give credit to his words, as S.
Augustine, and S. Chrysostom say. And if they be also of life good and
virtuous, then be they called boni Catholici, August. in Praefatio. Psalm. 31.
and Ser. 31. de verb. Apost.
good Catholics: if they be of ill conversation, they be called fideles iniqui,
unjust faithful, mali Catholici, ill Catholics: faithful and Catholics,
because they have faith: ill because their life is ungodly: if they forsake the
faith as Iulianus did, they be called Apostates. But as long as they keep the
Catholic faith of Christ's Church, Note.
though their life be wicked, and they damnable, yet be they not called
infideles, but faithful and believers. And since no man can be called faithful,
but he that has faith, and it is faith, to believe, and to believe, is but to
assente unto truth: by this it is proved, that the property of faith in his
own kind, is to believe the Gospel, and to assente unto the truth of God. S.
Augustine says: Euchiri. cap. 6. 7. 9.117. Faith in his own nature. August.
in Praefatio. Psalm. 32.
A man does learn by the Creed, what is to be believed: by the Pater noster,
what is to be hoped: and by the commandments, what is to be loved. And
albeit faith and charity must be both in a good man, yet as he says: Quod
credit, fidei est: quod operatur, charitatis est, it is the property of faith
that a man believes, and of charity, that he works.

Faith in his own kind may be alone and parted from charity and hope. Jacob.
2. Enchirid. cap. 8. Ser. 4. de Collect.
For not only evil men, but even Devils do believe and tremble, but as S.
Augustine says: They neither hope nor love. And Leo says: Multis quibus
auferre non potuit fidem, sustulit charitatem. From many has the Devil taken
away Charity, from whom he could not take away Faith. In this sort does
the Scripture many times speak of faith, as it is in it self and in his own
nature, Heb. 11.
saying: Fides est substantiarerum sperandarum. Prima. in cap. 11. ad Heb.
Faith is the substance of things that are to be hoped for. It is called the
substance of them, says Primasius, because unto such things as be taught by
the word of God, though they be not seen, yet faith gives a being in our
soul assenting unto them, and believing them as well to be true, as though
they were seen with our bodily eyes. In the same place it is said: By faith
we understand, that the world was set in order by the word of God. And
this is faith in his own kind, that is to say, a believing and assenting unto
truth.

Sometime the Scripture speaks of faith as it is accompanied and joined with
other virtues, and geeueth unto faith the properties of such virtues as are
joined with it: So is it said, Heb. 11.
that, by faith Abel offered Sacrifice, Noe feared God, Abraham obeyed, Moses
suffered affliction, not that these are the properties of faith in his own
nature, Faith joined with other.
but because the Fathers beside faith had these virtues also: Abell the virtue
of religion, Noe the fear of God, Abraham obedience, Moses patience. So it is
likewise said of charity: Omnia suffert, oi^a credit, oi^a sperat. She
suffers al things, believes al things, hops al things. And yet says S.
Austine truly: In Prafa. Psalm. 31.
Quod credit, fidei est. It comes of faith that a man believes. And likewise
of patience, that he suffers, and of charity, that he loves and works well.

True it is, that none of these virtues alone and by it self makes a good
man. For it is a rule in Philosophy, that virtues be linked together. And yet
as true it is, that every virtue has her own natural property whereby she
works somewhat in a good man, So faith believes, hope trusts, charity
loves, prudence chooses, fortitude bears, temperance refraineth: whose
properties joined together with other like, make up an absolute and perfect
goodness. But because both faith and also the Scriptures were given to men,
Joan. 5.
to thintente they should have life everlasting by them, knowing and doing the
will of God, S. Paul commends specially the faith, that does not only rest
in opinion and believing of truth, but that is active and working through
charity toward that end, saying: In Christ Jesus, neither circumcision, Gala.
5.
nor to be without circumcision avails ought, but faith that works through
charity: declaring thereby, Leo ser. 7. de Epipha. A notable Rule. De fide and
oper. c. 14 De spiri. and lit. ca. 32. Epistola. 105. Enchir. cap. 8. De Gra.
et lib. arbi. cap. 7.
that faith of it self is not able to work the effect of salvation for which
purpose it serves, unless it be accumpanied with charity the Mother of al
virtues: of which words S. Augustine gathers a rule, that when we find in
the Scriptures faith commended for Iustificacion or salvation, we should ever
understand it meant of faith which works through charity: saying. Hanc fidem
definiuit Apostolus. etc. This faith has the Apostle defined and determined to
be it. And in that sense both S. Augustine and other aunciente fathers call that
many times, the true faith, the Christian man's faith, and the faith in
deed. The true faith in respect of the end which is salvation, not because
the faith whereby we only believe the Scriptures is not a true Faith. For we
say in the Creed of Athanasius, that the Catholic Faith is a full, perfect
and inviolable Faith. A believing faith and a saving faith.


But it is perfect in believing, not perfect in saving. And therefore it is
not said in the end, who so believes it, shall be saved, but unless a man
believe and keep it inviolable, he shall without doubt be damned. For though he
believe the Scriptures in profession, and keep them not in deed, that is, if
he believe them in word and mouth, and trangresse them in act and deed, he
shall not be saved. Faith alone and of it self may be perfect for believing,
but the faith that is true and perfect for saving, is ever accompanied, never
alone. It is one thing then to have true faith in assente and opinion, which
is faith in his own nature, and an other thing to have faith in obedience of
heart and affection, which is faith accompanied with charity and other
virtues: of which difference I only put the Reader in remembrance, because
I will more largely speak thereof in the. 7. Chapter of the second book, to
the which I refer him.

Thus have I thought good to open unto the Reader, what is properly meante by
the name of faith alone, August. de Trinitate. Lib. 15. cap. 18. and in
Euchirid. cap. 8.
and what it takes of other virtues: Sine quibus esse potest, sed prodesse non
potest. Without the which it may be, but it can not avail nor attain to the
life everlasting.

Faith properly is to believe, and to believe is to assente to truth. This faith
the age of S. Augustine, S. Chrysostom and Vincentius Lirinensis did know and
teach, willing men for their salvation to join unto it charity with other
virtues. If any man devise an other faith beside this, he brings us not the
consent of Antiquity, but an invention of novelty.

As concerning the faith whereby miracles and wunderous acts are wroughte, it
is none other but the Catholic faith, whereof I have spoken, Joan. 20,
which to advance and commend, God does miracles in some that profess it,
through his name. Which faith as both a good and ill man may have, so may both
a good and ill man do miracles, as appears plainly by the words of Christ
in S. Matthew and by S. Paul to the Corinthianes. Math. 7. 1. Cor. 13.
the one saying, that many having done miracles shall be shut out of the kingdom
of heaven: The other affirming, that a man may be able to remove mountains,
and yet lack charity, without the which he is nothing.

Wherein the controversy of Iustificacion rests, and what is the rediest
way to know how the same is wrought in us. THE III. CHAP.
THERE is among parties at this time no great controversy touching the
original cause of our Iustificacion. For the Scriptures plainly show, and al
men agree, that it is God that justifies. Rom 8.
But the controversy rests specially in two points: the first point.
first what our Justification is, and wherein it stands: whether it be only
a forgeuenes of sins paste, or whether there be also required in it a change
of the man and a newnes of life. the second point.
The other point is, how our Justification is wrought in us, to wit, albeit
God justify us, yet how he works it in us, and by what means we comme to
it, by faith alone, or by faith joined with other virtues and Sacraments:
which doubts I think shall be much cleared, if we consider our own corrupt
and sinful estate, and the cause thereof: which is our carnal Birthe and
descente from Adam: By whom sin entered into the world, Rom 5.
and by sin death, and so went through all, in whom all have sinned. Seeing
then that his fall was our fall, and the cause of our injustice, if we
understand, in what case he was created, and what was in him lost, wounded
and weakened by sin (co^traries being known by one rule and teaching) we
know also what our Justification is. Aristotle.
For, the repairing of that which was in him lost, is our restoring, and the
saluing of that which was in him wounded, is our health: the changing of the
old estate, wherein through him we were borne, is our renewing: And our
restoring, healing and renewing is our Justification. Esai. 53. Luc. 19.
For Christ that came to justify sinners, came to seek and save that which
was lost, and to make whole that which was wounded.

What was lost in Adam by sin, and what is restored by Christ in our
Justification: the comparing of Christ with Adam: And in what things our
Justification stands. THE IIII. CHAPTER.
IT is a matter of undoubted trewthe, and confessed of all right beleuers, that
God created Adam in most excellent and perfect estate. For the Scripture says
in the person of God: Genesis 1.
Faciamus hominem ad imaginem and similitudinem nostram. Let us make manne
after our image and lykenes. Wherefore as God him self is wisdom, truth,
rightuousenes, temperance, love, strength, virtue, and in goodness most free:
so made he manne wise, true, rightuous, and just, temperate, strong, endued
with perfect love, virtuous, and to all goodness willinge and free. Psalm. 48.
But man understanding not when he was in honor, abusing his liberty to ill,
and transgressing Gods commandment, did not only lose that perfect estate
and beauty of virtues, but brought him self also into a base, mortal and
miserable condition, fell into vices contrary to the former virtues, and
became displeasant and hateful unto God: his body condemned to death, and his
soul, unless mercy had delivered him, to endless damnation. And albeit it
might suffice to say that he lost all the virtues, wherewith he was by God
endued, yet to express, some part thereof particularly, Prosper Aquitanus
says: Perdidit primitus fidem, etc. Contra Collatore^. cap. 10.
He lost first and chifely faith. He lost continence, he lost charity, he
was berefte of wisdom and understanding. He was left without counsel, and
strength, he drank the poison of all vices, and with the drunkenness of his
intemperance wetted through and soked the whole nature of man: he lost
profitable and effectual faith: for he believed not God, nor kept that faith
which S. Cyprian calls, fidem mandati, De simplicitate pralator.
the faith of his commandment. It was said unto him by God him self of the
tree of knowledge of good and ill: Thou shall not eat, what day soever thou
eat of it, thou shall assuredly dye. He disobeied that commandment, and did
the contrary.

He waied so lightely the sovereign love which he owed unto God above all
things, Aug. de Ciuit. Dei lib. 14. cap. 13.
that either for his own pleasure, or for the contentation of his wife, he was
soon induced to follow his own will, and to leave Gods will undone.

He cast aside the hope that he should have reposed in God, Genesis 3.
and began to put affiance in him self, harkening to the serpents words:
Eritis sicut Dij, ye shall be like Gods.

He lost the virtue of temperance, desiring the meat that was forbidden, and
thereby unlawful for him to eat.

And hereby was he berefte of wisdom and understanding, falling into such
ignorance, that of him self he was not able to know the highest and true
good. Prosper vbi supra. Aug. de Corrept. and great. cap. 11.
He was left without counsel and strength, and fell into such weakness, that
where by his creation he was of so free and strong will, that it was in his
power to continewe in grace, if he had and would, and not to sin, except he
would, thorough his faull he was made weak and unable of him self to do any
good. Thus drank he the poison of all vices, infecting and poisoning his own
nature, and thereby all that descended of him. Romans 5.
Per vnum hominem peccatum: for by one man sin came into the world, and by
sin death, and so went it through all men in whom all sinned. Ephe. 2. Romans
6.
Thus were al men by birth made naturally the children of anger. And by sin,
the enemies of God.

Seeing therefore that this is man's estate and condition of his own nature,
and since also we know, that the Son of man came to seek and save that
was lost, Luc. 19.
to repair that was in man decayed, to renew and restore him again to the
estate of justice, if we will dispute, what things are requisite in him that is
to be justified, we must of consequence say, Romans 4.
that he is made just and rightuouse, unto whom first God pardons sin. And
further unto whom of his bountiful mercy he restores the good and heavenly
qualities that were planted in Adam: unto whom he inspireth faith, continency,
charity, wisdom, and understanding, counsel and strength, with other virtues
which Adam lost: in whom God restores his image and likeness, which by sin
was defaced and decayed.

To make the matter more plain, let us lay before our eyes the example of a
man deadly sick in all the principal parts of his body, as the heart, the
head, A Similitude.
the liver and the lunges: whom if a physician cure of the pain in his head,
and of the passion of the heart, yet can he not be called a whole man, unless
the other parts be cured also. For he may else die nevertheless by
obstruction of the liver, or putrefaction of the lunges. Even so the soul
being generally infected and mortally wounded in all her principal parts and
powers, requires likewise a perfect cure of each part, without the which it
can not be said unto man touching his soul: Joan. 5.
Ecce sanus factus es: Lo thou art made a whole man.

There be among others two principal and sovereign powers of the soul, Two
powers of the soul.
the one called reason and understanding, the other will, by the which the
image of God is specially represented in man, for that he has them singularly
and alone above all beasts and other creatures: so long as the same be rightly
ordered, that is to say, so long as he understands without error, and wills
nothing but good, all his doings be godly, and him self a heavenly creature,
and a lively Image of God.

Both these were infected and corrupted in Adam: his reason and understanding
yielded to think it good for him, to take his pleasure of a vain and
corruptible meat forbidden by God, though he should die for it: his will
assenting thereunto struck the stroke and put it in execution.

Both the same therefore must be healed in man, before he can be recovered of
that plage. For neither can he do good, unless he be rightely informed and
taught to know what is good, neither is it enough for him to know what is
good, unless he have a right and good will to do it.

See the 2. Chapter. How the Image of God is restored in man. Aug. de Ciuitat.
Dei li. 14. cap. 9. Ethic. 1. cap. 1. Aug. de Ciuita. Dei. li. 11. cap. 28.
The medicine to heal man's corrupt reason and understanding is right faith.
For if reason be subject to faith, and the understanding ruled by it, there
can be no error in his judgment. But the salve to cure man's will and
affection, is specially right love, which is called Charity. Quia rectus est
amor eorum, omnes affectiones rectas habent, says S. Augustine. Because their
love is right, they have all affections right. For sith man's will and
affection naturally desires good, if it can be induced to love that which is
trewely good, it is made perfect and straight: if it love amiss, it is
crooked and ill. For as S. Augustine says: Ita corpus pondere, sicut animus
amore fertur, quocunque fertur. So the body is carried with weight, as the mind
is carried with love, whether so ever it is carried. For what he loves, he
wills: and what he wills, being not enforced or let, that he does.

Neither can it be trewely said, that reason and understanding being healed by
faith, Luca. 12.
makes the will whole. For we know by the words of Christ, that a servant may
know the will of his Master, and yet do it not. And the cause why he does it
not, Aug. de Ciuitate Dei. li. 11. cap. 28.
knowing it, is but the lack of will to do it. Neque enim vir bonus merito
dicitur qui scit quod bonum est, sed qui diligit. Neither is he worthily called
a good man, which knows that is good, but which loses it. And thereby do
we see, that will and affection may be diseased and disordered, when reason and
vnder^tanding is healed. And so the man not whole, when reason by faith is
healed.

If I should say no more then is already said, yet might the Reader well
perceive, what is required to the Justification of a sinner. I have declared
that Adam being created in perfect justice, by his sin lost the same, and ^l
other men in him, Rom 5. 1. Cor. 15. Luc. 19.
and that Christ as a new Adam to satisfy for the offense of the old, came
to seek and save that was lost, and to repair that was by him decayed. And
then as Adam lost Faith, Continence, Charity, Wisdom and understanding,
Counsel and strength, Prosp. supra.
hope and humility: so must all that company of virtues with ^ther by him
lost be restored in such as Christ of his especial grace renews and
justifies. For as Christ says of one man whom he healed, so is it true in all whom he restores, that he heals not one part, but the whole man. Joan. 7.
Deuteronomy. 32. Esai. 53.
His works are perfect, and neither lacks he power to cure all our griefs
being God, neither will to do it, who for that cause became man.

And as a man diseased deadly in all the principal parts of his body, is not
called a sound and whole man, until the parts be al cured: So the soul
corrupted and made old in Adam, decayed in grace, and bereft of Justice, can
not be called a new creature, until the salues of these virtues by the hand of
our Physician be laid unto it and show their operation in it.

For it is not said, as many of you as have been baptized in Christ, have
believed in Christ, thought upon him, or heard of him, Galat. 3.
but it is said: Christum induistis, ye have put on Christ, that is to say,
have taken into you the virtues of Christ, as before ye had the qualities and
conditions of Adam. Ephesians 4.
For that, says S. Paul, is the true receiving of Christ and his Gospel, to
put of the old man and old conversation, and to be renewed in spirit and
mind, putting on the new, which was created after the Image of God in justice
and holiness. Libro. 1. cap 9. de pec. meri. and remiss.
Christ, says S. Augustine, Dat sui spiritus occultissimam fidelibus gratiam,
Gives unto his faithful a most secret grace of his spirit, which privily he
powers even into babes, As Adam by a secret infection of carnal concupiscence
infected and consumed, all that came of his race. He says in the same book.
Legimus iustificari, Ibid. c. 10.
etc. We read that such be justified in Christ, as believe in him through a
secret geauing and inspiring of spiritual grace, whereby who so ever cleaves
unto our Lord, is made one spirit with him.

What Justification is.
By all this we understand, that our Justification imports not only an
assente of mind and faith to believe the Gospel of Christ, neither stands
only in remission of sins past, which God mercifully forgeueth, but
requires also a renewing of spirit and mind, a change of life and conditions,
^it. 3.
that as in Adam we were disobedient, seruinge sundry lusts and pleasures,
leading our life in malice and envy, hateful, hating one an other: So in
Christ forsaking ungodliness and worldely desires, Tit. 2.
we must live soberly, justly and godly, putting on us as the chosen of God
holy and beloved, Coloss. 3.
the bowels of compassion, mercy and gentleness, humility, modesty and
patience. This it is to leave of Adam, and put on Christ, which is our
renewing and Justification.

The kingdom of heaven is like unto leaven, Matthew. 13
which a woman takes and hides in three measures of flower until the whole
be leauened. But as the whole paste is not leauened as long as any part thereof
remains in his old tallage and taste, even so is not man translated from
death to life, nor made a new creature, 1. Joan. 3. Galat. 6. 2. Cor. 5.
until the whole estate of his soul be reformed. And surely until he be made
a new creature, he is not justified. Sicut fuit vetus Adam, etc. As the old
Adam was powered through the whole man, and possessed the whole: Bernard. sermon.
5. de Aduent.
So now let Christ have the whole, who has created and redeemed the whole,
and shall glorify the whole, who in the Sabbath day cured all the whole man.

The old man was sometime in us that transgressour of Gods commandment, he
was in us, as well in hand and work, as in mouth and heart. But now if
there be any new creature in him, the old is past, and contrary to lewdnes
in hand, there is innocente life: in the mouth contrary to arrogante pride,
there is the word of confession: in the heart contrary to fleshly lusts,
there is charity: contrary to worldly glory, there is humility. By which
words of Saint Bernarde we see set before us a true description of our
Justification, by comparing together the corrupt estate of man in Adam, and
the repairing of the same through the Mediator of God and men, 1. Timo. 2.
the man Jesus Christ.

For this repairing of man's corrupt estate Christ is often times in the
Scripture compared with Adam, and called an other Adam and the last man. Rom 5.
1. Cor. 15.
Not an other Adam like unto the first, but an other contrary to the first:
such as came to restore that which was lost by the first. Romans 5.
For as by the disobedience of one man many were made sinners, so by the
obedience of one many shall be made just. And as in Adam all men die, so in
Christ all shall be reliued. And as by the sin of one, all men came to
damnation: so by the Justice of one, all come to the Justification of life.

But as we were all condemned in Adam, because we were naturally borne of him,
and thereby took his conditions: so to be saved by Christ, we must also be
new borne in him, and put on us his qualities. And so do we see, that our true
Justification, is the recovering of that which we lost in Adam, and what that
was, I have showed before. The which Christ has fully restored in such as
truly take a new birth of him, In the second book the.xviij Chapter.
as I shall show toward the end of this work, where place shall serve to
speak of the virtue and strength of our Justification by Christ. It is now to
be showed particularly, how such as are borne in sin, come to be justified in
Christ, what the causes of our Justification be, by what mean God works it
in us, and how we receive it.

Of the causes of our Justification. The V. CHAPTER.
Joan. 3.
THE chief and principal cause of our Justification is the great love that God
bears unto man, who so tendered the world, that he gave his only begotten
Son. Galat. 4.
And to make us his children, sent the spirit of his Son into our hearts:
that is, the holy Ghost, wherewith he has sealed us up, Ephesians. 1.
and given it as a pledge of our inheritance. And this has he wrought, Tit. 3.
not for the works of justice that we did, but according to his own mercy.

The cause that deserved this owre Justification at his hands, was the death
of his son Jesus Christ, Romans 5. Coloss. 1. 1. Timo. 1. Ephesians. 1.
who when we were sinners, died for us, and when we were enemies, reconciled
us, pacifying him by his own blood, and paying our ransom, in whom God
accepted us to his favor.

The mean and instrumente whereby God woorketh Justification in us, is the
Sacrament of Baptism, Tit. 3.
by the wasshing whereof and renewing of the holy Ghost, we are saved.

Through these causes there is wrought in us the justice of God, by the which
we be and are trewly called just. Qui facit iustitiam, iustus est: 1. Joan. 3.
for he that does justice, is just. It is not the justice of God, whereby he
him self is just: neither is it our own as of our selves, but ours coming
from him. Cum ero iustus, August. in Psalm. 70.
in tua iustitia erit etc. When I shall be just, says S. Augustine, it shall be
in thy justice. For that I shall be just by justice given me from thee, and in
such sort shall it be mine, that it shall be thine also, that is to wit, given
me from thee. Which words declare, both that there is true justice in man
wrought in his Justification, and also that the same comes not of him self,
but is given him from God.

The final cause and end of our justification, is: Tit. 3. Ephesians. 1.
vt haeredes simus secundum spem vitae aeternae in laudem gloriae gratiae Dei,
That by hope we may be inheritors of life everlasting to the praise and glory
of his grace.

And thus having briefly declared, what the causes of our Justification be, I
shall now show, how, and by what mean the same is wrought in us.

That the Sacrament of Baptism is the instrumente and mean whereby God
justifies us. THE VI. CHAP.
AS God justifies sinners through such causes as have been rehearsed: so has
he appointed the Sacrament of Baptism as an instrumente and mean, to work
his justice in them: for which cause S. Paul seems to take it for all one,
to be baptized, and to be justified, saying: 1. Cor. 6.
Abluti estis, sanctificati estis, iustificati estis. Ye have been washed
clean, ye have been made holy, ye have been justified. And in an other place he
says more plainly: God has saved us by the wasshing of regeneration and
renewing of the holy Ghost. Tit. 3.


And because no man should think, that he might be otherwise justified or
saved, Christ says: unless a man be newborn by water and the holy Ghost,
Joan. 3.
he can not enter into the kingdom of God. S. Ambrose says: The beginning of
true life and true justice lies in the Sacrament of regeneration, Amb. li. 1.
ca 5. de voca. om. gent.
that where a man is new borne, there also the true virtues should begin.
And note here by S. Ambrose, not only that Baptism is the beginning of our
justice, but also that we have therein a beginning of true virtues and true
justice. Augu. lib 2 contra Julian.
I have recited the words of S. Augustine before, where he says, that
Justification is given unto us in this life by three things, whereof he makes
Baptism the first. And to prove the same by a reason taken out of the
Scriptures: See the 1. Chap.
Our justification stands specially in two points, in forgiveness of
sins past, and newnes of life in time to come. For as S. Paul says of such
as be justified: Romans 3.
that God has pardoned them their former sins: so says he for the time to
come, that they must walk in newnes of life. Romans 6.
In Baptism al our sins be forgeuen. Prorsus verum est, etc. Augu. ser. 2.
de ver. Apost. Tit. 3.
It is verily true, In holy Baptism al sins were put away, words, deeds,
thoughts, al were blotted out. In Baptism also newnes of life is given. For
which cause it is called a new birth, the wasshing of regeneration, and
renewing by the holy Ghost.

Wherefore seeing that all that apperteineth to Justification, is wrought in us
by the Sacrament of Baptism, we may beside the authority of Scriptures and
ancient Fathers, even by reason conclude, that Baptism is the instrumente and
assured mean, whereby a sinner is justified.

Of the Justification of infantes by the Sacrament of Baptism. THE VII. CHAPT.
But as the benefit of Justification is al one, so it is not received of al
after one manner. For such as are borne in sin, and by mercy called to the
state of justice, either they be called and christened in their infancy, as
it is now used throughowt the Christian world: or else they be called to it
in their perfect age, as it was used when the Gospel was preached to them
that were borne and brought up in infidelity.

The estate of infantes asks most favor and mercy: for as S. Cyprian
says: Lib. 3 epistol. 8. and Augu. ser. 14. de ver. Apost.
Infans recens natus etc. The infant newly borne has not offended, but that
taking his carnal birth after the nature of Adam, he has drawn into him by
his first birth, the infection of the oulde death, who commethe to receive
forgiveness of sins the more easily for so much as there be pardoned unto
him not his own, but other men's sins. And for that cause as S. Augustine
says: Augu. ser. 10. de ver. Aposto. and sermo. 14.
Accommodat illis matter Ecclesia: The Church our mother lendethe them other
men's feet to come, other men's heart to believe, other men's tongue to say
yea, that forasmuch as their syckenes and grief comes by an other man's
sin, they may be saved by the confession of other that be healed.

And albeit they be neither able to answer nor do for them selves any thing
toward their own benefit, yea and so much as in them is, resist the same:
yet God brings them by virtue of that Sacrament from the power of darckenesse
to the kingdom of his Son: Coloss. 1. Augu. lib 1. ca. 9. de pec. meri. and
remiss.
powers into them the secret grace of his spirit, and makes them true
faithful, and Christian sowles. S. Augustine says: Inter credentes. Thou
shalt reckon and account babes that be christened, among the believing:
neither shall thou by any means be so bold as to judge otherwise, Ser. 14 de
verb. Apo.
except thou will be an open heretic. For yeuen by the aunciente canonycall
and most suer grounded custom of the Church, Babes once christened are called
faithful and believers. Aug. ibid.
And in an other place speaking of the state of infantes christened if they dye
before thage of discretion: So great, says he, is the mercy of God toward
the vessels of mercy, Aug. li. 21 cap. 16. de Ciuit. Dei.
that even the first age of man, to wit infancy: etc. If it have received
the Sacraments of the mediator, though it end his life in those years, for
that it is taken out of the power of darkness and brought to the kingdom of
Christ, Colo. ca. 1.
is not only not appointed pains everlasting, but shall not so much as suffer
any purgatory torments and pains after death. Purgatory pains.
For the only spiritual regeneration suffiseth, that so much as the carnal
generation intermedled with death, be not prejudicial nor do it any harm.

By which sayings we see, first that infantes have sins

This is the graciouse and most free Justification of infantes, which they
atteyne unto, not only without any good doing of their own, but also without
any consent. Yea though they strive against it, through the free mercy of him,
that came to seek and save that was lost. Luc. 19.


And hereby do we not only see the happy estate of al such as be borne in
Christian regions, who by and by after their birth be baptized and thereby
justified: but also we perceive, how nedelesse it is, to dispute of the
beginning and entree of our Justification, which is wrought in us freely by
grace without our selves, before we be able to understand how great the
benefit is.

And therefore concerning the Justification of al men that live this day in
Christian contries, there is nothing so needeful as to understand, how such as
fall after Baptism may be reconciled to God, and restored to the estate of
justice again, whereof I shall speak hereafter.

Of the Justification of such as were christened being of perfect age, and
what was required of them. THE VIII. CHAPTER.
BUT of such as borne and brought up in infidelity, and being of perfect age
came to be justified, and of wicked made rightuouse, because they be not only
guilty of original sin, but also of many actual sins committed by their
own thought, word and deed, more is required, and an other order appointed
unto them, whereby they prepare the way to receive the justice of God. It is
required of them first to believe. For he that comes to God, Hebr. 11. Marc. 1.
must believe. So Christ began to preach unto such: Poenitemini, and credit
Euangelio: Repent and believe the Gospel. And forasmuch as believing the Gospel
there is reveled and opened unto them the anger of God from heaven upon all
wickedness and injustice: Romans 1.
They are stricken with a good and profitable fear of Gods judgment, Act. 2.
as they were that heard S. Peter his preaching, and of that fear they
conceive, and as it were travail and bring forth the spirit of health. Esai.
26.
Yet do they not rest in that fear, but learning that Christ came to save
sinners and died for such as were his ennemies: 1. Tim. 1.
Hearing him also say: Confide fili: be of good comfort son, Romans 6. Matt. 9.
thy sins be forgeuen: They conceive hope of mercy: and thereby begin to
love him, by whose mercy they trust to enjoy so great a benefit. And for
the love of him deteste and abhor their former sinful life. And because it
is said unto them: Act. 2.
Poenitentia^ agite and baptizetur vnusquisque vestrum: Do penance, and be
baptized each of you, they willingly and heartily repent their former sins,
which is all the penance that the Church of God requires before Baptism. And
so disposing them selves they receive the Sacrament of Baptism, and therewith
according to the promise of God made by S. Peter, Matt. 28. Act. 2.
remission of their sins and the gift of the holy Ghost, to keep Gods
commandments, which is their Justification.

And this is the order whereby a sinner, being of perfect age, is justified,
that is to say, called to the estate of justice, and of wicked made rightuouse.

The first and principal cause thereof is the love and mercy of God: thorough
the merit of Christ's death. Justice is wrought in us by grace: and atteined
by faith with the fear of Gods judgment, hope of his mercy, love of his
goodness, and by penance thorough the Sacrament of Baptism.

All which are so necessary to the accomplishing of our justice, that where
any of them fails, true justice also does fail. Hebr. 11.
For as without faith it is impossible to please God, and he that believes not
is already judged: So he that is without fear, can not be justified. Eccles. 1.
He that hops not, despeireth. Neither can any man love that he hops not.
And who so lacks hope and love, Aug. Enchi. ca. 8.
can not be justified by faith. Nam and Daemones credunt. For even the Diuelles
believe and tremble, and yet do they neither hope, nor love, but rather by
believing, are afraied that that shall come which we hope and love.

Such as will be justified, must not only believe the Gospel but do penance, Mar.
1. Luc. 13. Gal. 3.
and such as will not do penance are assured al to perish. Finally who is not
baptized, puts not on Christ: and therefore is neither renewed nor
justified.

This manner of Justification is not only testified by the Scriptures, but
also expressed in the ancient usage of the Church, by such order as was
exercised upon them that received baptism, when they were of perfect age,
even from the Apostles time, which thing we may perceive by the words of S.
Paul, where he says: Intermittentes inchoationis Christi sermonem. Hebr. 6.
etc. Leaving aside the words of our young beginning in Christ, Let us draw
to a perfectenes, not layinge again the foundation of penance from dead
works, and of faith toward God of the teaching of Baptism, and also of
laying on hands, of the resurrection of the dead and judgment everlasting, al
which things (says S. Augustine) apperteyne to thadministration of Baptism:
Aug. in expo. ad To. incho. and de fid. and oper. cap. 11.
whereby we understand, that of such as were baptized in perfect age, there
was not only required faith, in professing tharticles of the Creed, but also
they were required to do penance from dead works of sin. And to show some
outward token thereof, there was appointed unto them before their baptism, a
time to fast and pray: As is testified by such as lived nigh unto the
Apostles time. Justinius Martyr says: Apolo. 2. pro Christian.
After what sort we have offered and dedicated our selves unto God being new
made through Christ, we will declare. As many as be persuaded and believe,
that the things are true which be taught and said by us, and promise that
they be able so to live, they be taught to pray, and by fasting to ask at
Gods hands forgiveness of former sins committed by them. Tertullian
expressing the same custom says further, that they made also a confession of
their former sins. Ingressuros baptismum. etc. Tertullia. De Bapti.
Such as will come to Baptism, must by often petitions, fastinges, kneelinges
and watching, and with confession of all their former sins use prayer. S.
Augustine declaring the order of his time, says, De fide and oper. ca. 6.
that such as intended to take baptism, certain days before gave their names
in writing, and were purged and cleansed, by abstinence, fasting, exorcismes,
forbearing the company of their laweful wives.

And by these do we understand, that such as were christened being of
perfect age, were not only instructed in faith, but also taught to do penance,
to fast, to pray, to promise that they would live according to Christ his
teaching, to fear God, to love him, and to hope in him, al which things were
contained in their instruction and doctrine of Baptism, whereof S. Paul
makes mention. Hebr. 6.
And being in this wise prepared, they received that Sacrament, and therewith
their Iustificacion. If any would not profess amendment of life, but
continewe in damnable vice, or in any ungodly kind of living, believed they
never so well, they were not admitted to be christened, as S. Augustine says.
Meretrices. etc. Common harlottes, and stage plaiers, De fide and oper. ca. 18
and other what so ever occupiers of common lewd doings, unless they undo
and break such bands, be not suffered to come to the Sacraments of Christ.
But this the Reader may see at large in the book it self of S. Augustine
entitled, of faith and works, which is translated into english, and set
furthe herewith. The chief argument whereof is to declare, that it suffiseth
not him that will be baptized and justified, to believe, unless he have faith
that works by charity, and unless his life be agreeable to that holy
Sacrament. Cap. 2^. Cap. 15. Cap 16.
For where any of both fails, says he, there neither ought nor can any
promise be made of life everlasting. And thus have we seen, how they received
their Iustificacion, who came to be christened and justified, when they were of
perfect age.

That our Justification and the virtues whereby we receive it, be the gifts of
God, and come of grace. THE IX. CHAP.
Of Grace.
BUT as a sinner is brought to the state of justice, by faith through fear of
God, hope, love, penance, and the Sacrament of Baptism: so is it trewely to be
said, and faithfully to be acknowleged, that it is the free grace of God that
works al these virtues in him, without the which he is not able of him self
to atteine, not only to the state of justice, but not so much as to right
faith and love of God, or any other gift perteining to his salvation. Cum sine
gratia Dei. Council. Arausica. Cap. 19.
etc. For seeing that man's nature was not able to keep salvation which it
received without the grace of God: how can it be able to repair that it has
lost, without the grace of God? As many then as are made members of Christ by
the Sacrament of Baptism, or falling afterward be restored by penance, are
moved and stirred thereunto, not by their own deserts but by the free mercy
and grace of God, whose gift both true penance and also Justification is.

And therefore although it be said to sinners: Acto 2. Zacha. 1. Exposi.
Episto. ad To. incho.
Agite poenitentiam: do penance. And, Conuertimini ad me: Turn ye to me: Yet
as S. Augustine says: Poenitentiae meritum gratia praecedit, quod neminem
peccati sui paeniteret, nisi admonitione aliqua vocationis Dei. Grace goes
before the merit of penance. For no man would repent him of his sin, were it
not by some admonition of Gods calling. The wastefull son said: Surgam and
ibo ad patrem meum. I will rise and go to my Father. Aug. Epistola 106.
Quam cogitationem bonam quando haberet, nisi and ipsam illi in occulto pater
misericordissimus inspirasset? Which good thought when should he have had,
unless his most merciful Father had inspired it into him?

As many as sin, sever them selves and straie from God: and sure we are, it
can not be false that truth said: Nemo venit ad me nisi fuerit ei datum a
patre meo: Joan. 6.
no man comes to me, unless it be given him of my Father. What thing so ever
man thinks, hears or sees, whereby he is moved to good, that motion
comes of God. Visorum suasionibus agit Deus: God works in us, De spiri. and
Lit. Cap 34. 2. Cor. 3.
says S. Austine by persuasion of such things as we see, not only to will,
but also to believe: he works it either outwardely by exhortacions of the
gospel, or inwardly. For that no man can choose what shall come into his mind,
The Churches sound doctrine, of Gods grace. De spirit. and Lit. Cap. 7.
but it is in his own will to consent or disagree. Without this help of grace
no man is able so much as to think any thing that may please God. As this
commendacion of grace is plainly set forth in the Scriptures, so has it ben
in all ages faithfully tought by the Church: Because as S. Augustine says: Hac
cogitatio sancta. etc. This holy thinking keeps the children of men under the
defense of Gods wings, this thought brings no pride. The Church commends
good works, but it sets grace before them, Council. Arausi. cap. 8.
saying: Debetur merces. etc. Reward is due to good works if they be done,
but grace that is not due, goes before, that they may be done. It teaches
that man's Iustificacion is the effect of grace. Per ipsam gratiam
iustificatur. De spiri. et lit c. 10.
etc. By grace man is justified freely: that is to say, no merits of his
works going before. Otherwise grace is not grace. It teaches, that no man
does good works before he have received grace, thereby to deserve Gods grace,
but that God gives his grace first, whereby man does good works afterward,
which thing S. Augustine declares by two apt similitudes. Non vt ferueat,
Li. 1. ad Simplicia. Quaest. 2.
calefacit ignis. The fire does not heat, to be made hot it self, but
because it is hot. Neither does the whele run well thereby to be made
round, but because it is round. Even so no man works well, that he may
thereby receive grace, but because he has received it. For how can he live
justly that is not justified, but grace does justify, that a justified man
may live justly. And further to show, how necessary Gods help and grace is
to every man and at all times, the Church teaches, that God does not give his
grace only once, and then leave man to him self, Aug. Epistola. 106. de
Council. Palest.
but assisteth him in every good act that he does: fateantur, gratiam Dei and
adiutorium etiam ad singulos actus dari: Let them confess, that Gods grace
and help is given even to every good act and deed.

I do more willingly recite the words of S. Austine in this point, because
the most learned in all ages since, have followed the same judgment and manner
of teaching, not only Presper Aquitanus in Italy, Fulgentius in Africa, and
S. Bid in this our country of England, The teaching of the Church concerning
the grace of God in all ages.
but also the most learned schole men: As Hugo de sancto Victore, S. Thomas,
Bonauentura, and other. Whereby the Reader may understand, what has benne
the teaching of the Church in all ages concerning the grace of God.

As this grace of God is it whereby man is moved to al things that he does
well, so it is also the cause that works in him true penance, and thereby
Justification. For shyning upon the soul of a sinner and giving light to
that darcknes, it moves the same to prepare him self and to receive the
working of God in such manner, as I have showed before.

By grace God inspireth faith into our hearts, which no man can have without
his special gift. Joan. 6.
No man can comme unto me, says Christ, Augustine. Tract. 27. in Joan.
unless it be given him from my Father. Of which words S. Augustine
gathers: Ergo, and credere datur nobis. Then even faith is given unto us.
When S. Paul preached in Macedonia, God opened the heart of a woman called
Lydia to give heed unto such things as were said by him. Act. 16.
Many other heard S. Paul as well as she, but God gave her the grace to believe
his words: To you it is given, says S. Paul, Philip. 1.
for Christ's sake, not only to believe in him, but also to suffer for him.

And as these and other sayings prove that faith is Gods gift, so of the
fear of God, it is said by the Prophet: Timorem meum dabo in cord eorum,
Ierem. cap. 32.
vt non recedant a me. I will give my fear in their heart, to the end they
shall not go from me. David knowing that it is the gift of God, prays for
it, saying: Psalm. 118.
Confige timore tuo carnes meas: Pearce my flesh through with thy fear. If
hope were not the gift of God, it should not be said: Tu Domine singulariter
inspe constituisti me. Psalm. 4.
Thou Lord haste placed me in hope singulerly. Neither would S. Paul have
said: 2. These. 21
God our father has loved us, and given us comfort everlasting and good hope
in grace. 1. Joan. 4 Romans 5.
Charity comes of God., powered abroad in our hearts, through the holy Ghost
which is given us. What shall I say of penance, which God gives unto sinners
to know the treuth, 2. Tim. 2.
and to amend and get out of the snares of the Devil, of whom they be holden
captive at his pleasure. It is God that gives a new heart, and puts a new
spirit in the midst of us, that takes away the hard stony heart, and
gives a soft heart and tender as flesh. Ezec. 36.
And what is that great change of heart and mind from evil to good, but
repentance? And to commend his grace and make it appear as it is very grace
in deed, he says: non propter vos ego faciam. This will I do not for your
sakes, but for my holy names sake.

Here it may be said. If our Justification, and what so ever apperteineth unto
it, A doubt.
be the gift of God, and proceed of grace, what part has man therein, and
what is there left for him to do? To this question I shall answer in the next
chaptre.

And hereby may the Reader understand, that the grace of God is neither
hydden, nor obscurely preached by the Church in the Doctrine of Justification,
seeing that both our Justification it self, and the means whereby we comme unto
it, be truly ascribed specially unto grace.

That man has free will which being helped by grace works in our
Justification: and what it works. THE X. CHAPTER.
GOd works man's salvation by his grace, Of free will.
but he works it in him by hi^ self, that is to say, with his own consent
and by his free will He works in all his creatures causing the earth to bring
forth grass: the trees their leaves and fruit: the beasts to do according
to their kind. But these effects he works in them by his own power without
them, that is, without any consent of them. And this is the difference between
beasts that want reason, between the insensible creatures, and man: Man, as
S. Augustine says, Sermon. 11. de verb. Aposto. Iren. li. 4. cap. 72. In the 4.
Chapter.
Nec vt pecora factus est was neither made as beasts were, nor made like a
tree, nor made like a stone, but was made after the Image of his Creator. That
is as I showed before, endued with reason and will: And therefore although there
may be in man corrupt will and deceived reason, yet whatsoever he does, he
woorketh it thorough will and reason. Iren. li. 4. cap. 71.
Liberum eum fecit Deus ab initio: says the aunciente Father Ireneus: God
made man free even from the beginning having as well his own power, as his own
soul, to do Gods will and mind voluntarily and willingly, not compelled
by God. For there is no force used of Gods part. The wooman when she had
offended, framing an answer to excuse her self, said not: Serpens coegit
me, Chrysosto. Hom. 17. in Genes.
the serpente forced me, and I eatte: but what said she? The serpente
deceived me, there is no necessity nor violence, but will and arbitreme^t.
August. de great. and lib. arbit. cap. 2.
And because no man should doubt hereof, Reuelauit nobis per Scripturas suas
sanctas: God him self, says S. Augustine, has reveled unto us by his holy
Scriptures, that there is free will in man. And how he has reveled it I put
you in remembrance, not by man's saying but by Gods word. First because
the very commandments of God, could do man no good, unless he had free
will, by the which he might do them, and atteyne to the rewards that be
promised. And in the same place. Further there be so many commandments,
which do in a manner by name speak unto our will: Romans 12. Psalm. 31.
Prouer. 1. Prouer. 3.
as that: Noli vinci a malo. Will thou not be ouercomme of ill. Be not made
like a horse and a mule, in whom there is no understanding. Forsake not the
counselles of thy mother. Be not wise in thine own conceyte: and after many
other Scriptures there alleged, he concludes thus. Surely where it is said:
will not this, and will not that, and where in the admonitions that God gives,
the work of man's will is required, to do somewhat, or not to do it, man's
free will is sufficiently proved. If I said no more, this place of S.
Augustine might suffice. For what man would not rather confess free will,
then say either that God has given his commandments in vain, or that so
many Scriptures be void and untrue?

Man's will then is ever free from compulsion and necessity, Bernar. de gratia
and lib. arbit.
though it be not ever good: Manet libertas voluntatis etc. The will remains
free; even where the mind is captive, as full in the evil, as in the good, but
more orderly in the good. A worse man, and a greater enemy of Gods people is
not found in the Scripture, then Pharao And yet was not he without free will,
says S. Augustine. Necideo auferatis, etc. De gratia and li. arbi. cap. 23.
Take not away free will so much as from Pharao, because in many places God
says: I have hardened Pharao, or I have or will harden Pharao his heart: for it
follows not therefore, that Pharao himself did not harden his own heart. For
of him this is read also: When the dogged fly was taken away from the
Egyptians, the Scripture says, Pharao made his own heart heavy. If Pharao
the^ had free will, and that proved by the Scripture, what man is without it? Si
no^ est liberu^ arbitriu^, quo modo iudicat, etc. August. epist. 46.
If there be no free will, how does God judge the world? For if men do nothing
but by compulsion and force, neither is it Justice to punish their vices, nor
to reward their well doings and virtues. If there were no free will in
sinners, what came Christ to save? He came to save sinners, and no man sins
but by his will, and therefore S. Bernard says: De great. and liber. arbit.
Toll liberum arbitrium and non erit quod saluetur. Take away free will, and
there shall be nothing to be saved. And this much I have said to let the
Reader understand, what inconveniences come by deniyng free will, which who so
denies, does as we see deny in effect Gods justice and judgment, deny the
fruicte of Christ his coming to save us, deny a number of plain Scriptures
affirming it. And since man's free will is as well his own as his soul, he would
have man without a soul. Finally, he makes man that was created after the
Image of God, no better then an unreasonable beast, or insensible stock.

The cause of their error is, that they can not, or will not discern and make
a difference between a free will, and a will strong and able of it self to do
good. Al men be they good or il, have free will, but he that has will without
grace, Aug. cont. epist. Pel. lib. 2. c. 5.
is weak and unable to do well. We do not say, that free will was lost and
perished out of man's nature by the sin of Adam. But we say, that in men
subject to the Devil, it is of force enough to sin. Marie to live well and
godly it is not strong enough, unless the will of man be delivered, and made free
by grace, and helped to all good, in deed, word, and thought. If free will
then, was not lost by the sin of Adam, as S. Augustine says, it was never
lost. But as it was made weak and feeble by his sin, so is it by grace in
our Baptism, Council. Arausic. cap. 13.
made whole and strong again. The freedom of will, which in the first man
was made weak, can not be repaired, but by the grace of baptism. That which
was lost, can not be restored, but by him that could give it. Aug. De Ciuit.
Dei li. 14. c. 11 Joan. 8.
Whereupon truth it self says: If the Son make you free, then shall you be
free in deed. By this we see, that as free will by sin was made weak and
feeble, so was it never lost by sin, and was also made strong again by our
baptism. For strength in goodness it was, and not freedom

And hereby may the Reader judge, what ground they have, who contrary to the
manifest Scriptures, and authority of al ancient writers have turned the
term of free will, unto bond and thrall will. Let al men concerning this point,
keep the high way. Let no man go to far on the left hand, and say that
there is no free will: Let no man turn to far on the right hand, and think
that freewill without grace may suffice him to live well. Manicheus took on the
left hand, Pelagius on the right. But a Council of Bishops assembled in
Palestina against Pelagius kept the high way, giving out this rule for him to
follow: August. epist. 106
Fateatur esse liberu^ arbitrium, etiam si diuino indiget adiutorio. Let him
confess that there is free will, although it have need of Gods help. And here
note, that albeit Pelagius did attribute to much to free will, and the Bishops
contrarying him said, that free will without grace suffised not, yet did they
never say, man had no free will. Whereby we perceive, that it was ever a
truth received in the Church, that man had free will, and they would not pull
down one ttueth to set up an other.

This Decree of theirs made in Asia, was allowed by S. Augustine and the
Bishops of Africa: confirmed by Innocentius, Zozimus and Bonifacius Popes, with
the Bishops of Europa: and so is one of the things, as S. Augustine says
there, Quae semper tenet Catholica Ecclesia. August. epist. 106.
Which the Catholic Church has ever holden.

It remains now to show, what free will (which no man can with reason and
truth deny) woorketh in our Justification. Which to resolve, it is truly
said: First, Bernard. De great. and liber. arbit.
that free will is saved: Next, that free will once healed by Christ, and
helped by his grace, is strong and able to do all good, and to work
together with Christ in our Justification. Romans 8.
As it is God that by his grace justifies so does he justify no man, but by
his own will and consent. S. Augustine says: Esse potest iustitia Dei sine
volu^tate tua. The justice of God may be without thy will: Sermon. 15. de verb.
Aposto. and in Psa. 44
But in thee it can not be, but by thy will: he that has made thee without thy
self, does not justify thee without thy self. He made thee without thy
knowledge, he justifies thee by thy will.

And in an other place he says further. That Christ's work in our
Justification is our work. That Christ woorketh it not without us, that we
work together with Christ our own Justification and salvation: Credenti in
eum qui iustificat impium. Tract. 72. in Joan.
To the beleuer in him that justifies the wicked, faith is accounted for
justice. In this work we do the work of Christ: For the very belief in
Christ, is Christ his work. This he works in us, Philip. 2.
but assuredly not without us. And alleging the place of S. Paul, that
wills us with fear and tremblinge to work our own salvation, he says:
Operante in se Christo. By Christ's working in man, together with Christ, man
works his own salvation everlasting and Justification.

Eusebius Emisse. ho. 9. de Pasc.
And this God works in us, not only to commend his mercy, but also to show
his justice: Iusto ordine, qui per calliditatem, Just order requires, says
Eusebius, that man who by the subtle craft of the malitiouse serpent was not
forced, but seduced to his destruction, should be again by the wisdom of a
loving redemer not compelled, but lead to salvation: and he that seemed to have
fallen by his own will, should be repaired again by his own will, that there
might be place for virtue and reward. Therefore he pulls him not away by
force, but rather by just good will inuiteth and instructs him to life: for
the loving gentleness of the prouoker, longs for the merit of the agreer: and
the favor of the most curteouse Physician requires the consent of his sick
patient.

What can be more plainly said then this? Man is justified by his own free
will. He gives his assente and agreement unto it. He gets merit and
reward by his assente.

This is the right teaching of Christ's Church, neither to derogate from
Gods grace, nor to pull away man's service in our salvation. The holy Ghost
says, Philip. 2.
it is God that works in you both to will, and to do. The holy Ghost faith
also in the same place, with fear and trembling work your own salvation. Non
est volentis, Romans 9.
neque currentis. etc. It is not in the willer nor in the runner, but in God
that takes mercy. And yet says S. Augustine. Enchiri. cap. 32.
Proculdubio si homo. etc. Without doubt if a man be of such age, that he is
once able to use reason, he can not believe, hope, nor love, unless he will:
neither can he come to win the price of the high calling of God, unless he
run with his will. How is it then neither in the willer, neither in the
runner, but in God that takes mercy, but after this sort, because the very
will it self, as the Scripture says, is prepared by God?

By this order is our salvation wrought. Neither God works it alone without
man, neither man without God can atteine to any degree thereof: God first
prepares the will and makes it meet to serve him, and the will directed and
helped by grace, is able to do all good. And by this rule, faith and works,
says S. Augustine, are both the gifts of God, and faith and works are both
the doings of men: Retract. Li. 1. ca. 23
Vtrumque nostrum est propter arbitrium voluntatis, and vtrumque tamen datum
per spiritum fidei and charitatis: vtrumque ipsius est, quia ipse praeparat
voluntatem, and vtrumque nostrum, quia non fit, nisi volentibus nobis. Either
of both is ours for free wills sake, and yet either of both is given by the
spirit of faith and charity. Either of both is his, because he prepares the
will, and either of both is ours, because it is not done but by our will. Psalm.
134.
Though God by him self do all that likes him in heaven and in earth, yet
has it pleased him to advance man to that dignity, as to make him a worker
together with him in his own salvation. 1. Cor. 3. Aug. in Psalm. 77.


Non solum operatur remissionem peccatorum. The grace of God does not only
work remission of sins, but also makes the spirit of man a worker with him
self in the doing of good works: Quando enim cum spiritu Dei operante. etc.
For when with the working of Gods spirit the spirit of man works together,
then is that fufillled which God has commanded.

And by this do we see, what free will works in Justification.

God stands at the door knocking, and it opens. God opens the ear, Aug.
de spiri. and Lit. ca. 30. Apoca. 3. Esai. 50. Ephesians. 2. 2. Cor. 5.
and it does not gainesaie him nor goes backewarde: God inspired good
thoughts, and willingly it executes them. God prepares good works, and it
walks in them, It lives not now unto it self, but Christ lives in it,
and it lives unto him that died to save it.

And thus far have I spoken of Justification, which is the reconciliation of
a sinner, whereby as S. Paul says, we have access to God, and of wicked are
made rightuouse especially by grace, through the Sacrament of Baptism and
other gifts of God before rehearsed, without any works of justice going
before to deserve the same.

That such as fall into sin after Baptism, be justified by penance again,
and what penance is required of them. THE XI. CHAP.
IF such as have received the Sacrament of Baptism, Of Penance.
and thereby remission of all sin, could keep them selves in that happy
estate of innocence and vprightnes, there were no need to say any more in this
argument. For all men that live this day in Christian Regions, were christened
in their infancy, and by their Baptism made heirs in hope of everlasting
life. Tit. 3.
But if there had been none other provision made for man, but once to say unto
him: Ecce sanus factus es, Lo thou art made whole, Joan. 5. Cypria. de elcemo
Genesis 8.
now sin not, lest some worse hap fall unto the. We had been driven to a
narowe strait, neither could man's frailety tell what to do, who being prone
to ill even from his youth, was in danger by sin to lose Gods grace, and
then to stand without hope of remedy. For this cause God has provided
penance. Chrysostom. Ho. 27. in Genesis
Quam humano generi nostro ob ineffabilem misericordiam suam concessit. Which
through his unspeakable mercy, says Chrysostom, he has granted unto
mankind, which benefit he accompteth so great, that in an other place he
reckeneth it among the most excellent gifts, that ever God bestowed upon man,
saying: Chrysostom. Ho. 34. in Genesis
God has delivered his Son for our sins, he has granted the gifts of
Baptism, he has given remission of our former sins, he has opened unto us
the way of Penance.

By this remedy such as fall into sin after Baptism, may be restored again
to the state of justice. For to such as do penance, God has promised grace and
reconciliation, Ezech. 18.
saying by the Prophet: Si impius egerit. etc. If the wicked man do penance
for all his sins that he has committed, he shall assuredly live and not die.
The like promise he has made in the new Testament by S. Peter. Acto 3.
Poenitemini and conuertimini, vt deleantur peccata vestra Do penance and
turn, that your sins may be blotted out. But unto such as fall and will
not do penance, God threateneth damnation. Ezech. 33.
Si impius no^ fuerit conuersus a via sua. etc. Ipse in iniquitate sua
morietur. If the wicked be not turned from his way, in his wickedness shall he
die. And in the new Testamente Christ him self says: Luca. 13.
Nisi poenitentiam egeritis, omnes similiter peribitis. Unless ye do penance,
ye shall perish all after like sort. By which words put together we
understand, that as penance is the sure and undoubted way to restore a sinner
again: so without the same there is no hope of his reconciliation. As this
order is commanded by the Scriptures, so has it in all ages ben practiced by
the Church of Christ, that sinners should be reconciled and justified by
penance. Clem. lib. 2. ca. 45. Constitu. Apost. Tit. 3.
Clement S. Peter's scholar and successor, compares penance with the Sacrament
of Baptism, saying to the Bishop: Quemadmodum gentilem per lauacrum. etc. As
thou receiuest the heathen by Baptism after that he is instructed, so shall
thou restore this man that is the penitent to his old estate, when he is
cleansed by laying hands on him as by penance, all men praying for him, and
the laying of hands shall be in stead of Baptism. He says that penance
stands in stead of Baptism, because, as by Baptism the sinner is saved,
even so by penance his sins be forgeuen: for Christ has said: Quorum
remiseritis peccata, remittuntur illis. Joan. 20.
Whose sins you forgive, they be forgeuen them. S. Augustine making the same
comparison, says: Quae autem Baptismatis, eadem reconciliationis est causa. De
adulter. co^iug. li. 1. ca. 28
The like respect is to be had of reconciliation and absolution, as of
Baptism, if it happen the penitent to fall in danger of death: for the
Church our mother ought not by her will to suffer them pass cut of this life
without the pleadge of their peace. He calls absolution the pleadge of our
peace, as whereby our sins be forgeuen and conscience quieted. He makes
penance as necessary to a sinner after Baptism, as Baptism it self to him
that is heathen. S. Leo says: Peccata Baptismi aquis et poenitentiae lachrymus
abluu^tur. Ser. 11. de quadrag. and ser. 9. de Pasch.
Sins are washed away by the water of Baptism and by the tears of penance.

And as men enter into the Church and be made members of Christ by Baptism,
so if they fall away again by sin, they may return, says S. Cyprian, by
penance. Cypria. li. 4. epist. 2.
Nam cum scriptum sit. etc. For since it is written, God made not death, neither
is delited to have the living cast away, undoubtedly he that wills none to
perish, desires that sinners should do penance, and by penance return to
life again. Pacianus faith, that God has provided this remedy for men. And
in the same sentence: Idem stantibus praemia, qui iacentibus remedia largitus
est. Pacia. epi. 1. ad Sym pronia.
Even he has given rewards to them that stand, who has granted remedies to
such as lie and are fallen.

And thus we see it proved by authority of Scriptures and ancient Fathers,
that the right and assured remedy to heal a sinner after Baptism, is penance.
And that the Sacrament of penance by the promise of Christ has virtue to
reconcile and justify a sinner. For which cause it is compared with the
Sacrament of Baptism, and called a returning to life: by S. Clement, a
restoring By S. Augustine, a pleadge of our by S. Leo, a wasshing away of by
Pacianus, the remedy of such as are fallen. And to the cure and by the plain
term, Justification. Contritionem vult cordis: Chrysostom. ho. 20. in Genes.
God will have, says he, contrition of heart, remorse of mind, confession of
the fall, a continual care and diligence, and gives not only the curinge of
wounds, and cleanses from sin, but even him that was before laden with
innumerable burdens of sins, he makes a just man.

And hereby also may the Reader perceive, how good cause the ancient Bishop
Pacianus, Pacia. epi. 1. ad Symproniae. Hiero. ad Pamma. and Ocea.
and S. Jerome had, to call penance a board to save him that had suffered wreack,
or a second board after wreack, that is to say, a second refuge, when the
first help is lost. And also he may see how little ground they have, who
against authority, truth, and reason, mislyke that manner of speech, seeinge
that by penance a sinner may be reconciled and saved, which without the same
should perish, as has been proved.

How a sinner comes to true penance, and by what means he receives his
Justification, I have declared before, Cap. 8.
and shall for the Readers remembrance only repete the same here.

It is grace first that moves him to amendment, and to say: Surgam, and ibo
ad patrem meum. Luc. 15.
I will rise and go to my father: through which grace faith being stirred to
believe the Scriptures, and the threatninges of God uttered therein against
sinners, strikes into him a fear of Gods just judgment: and further
because he should not despair, moves him to conceive hope of mercy, for that
God is full of compassion and mercy, Psalm. 102. 1. Tim. 1. Aug. in Psalm. 114.
and came to save sinners and that hope being once entered, engenders a love of
God, as S. Augustine says: Quia credidisti, sperasti, quia sperasti, iam
dilexisti: Because thou have believed, thou haste hoped, because thou haste
hoped, now have thou loved. Charity taking root in the heart, brings forth
a loving fear and care, loath to offend God, and such as makes all penance,
be it never so sharp, to seem easy and light. And these be the five points
apperteining to true penance: faith, a dreadful fear of Ninevites, and such
as the 2. Cor. 7.
who speaking of the Corinthians repentance, says, Lo, even this godly sorrow
how great a care it works in you, yea a defense, yea an indignation and
displeasure, yea a fear, yea a desire, yea an emulation, yea a reuengement.
The grace of God working in them, made them to believe S. Paul's words, and so
to see their sin, wherein they showed faith, they conceived

To apply the same by mo examples: The Ninevites through grace believed the
preaching of Jonas, and upon fear which they conceived, Ion. 3.
they proclaimed a general fast, they were not without hope of Gods mercy,
saying: who can tell whether God will be turned and forgive?

Luc. 15.
The wastefull son had such a reuerente love toward his father, that he was
ready to suffer more penance for his misbehauor then his father would lay upon
him, saying: Iam non sum dignus vocari filius tuus, fac me sicut vnum de
mercenarijs tuis. I am no longer worthy to be called thy son, make me as one
of thy hired servants.

Luc. 7.
I doubt not but that the Reader can apply the rule in like manner to the
example of Marie Magdalene, in which woman there shines as it were a glass
and mirror of true penance.

But as it is true that no man is justified without penance, so is it not one
manner of penance, that is required of him that comes to be christened, and
of him that after his christendom commits mortal and deadly sin. Of him
that is of perfect age and to be christened, Ambro. in cap. 11. ad Romans
no straight or painful penance is required: for as S. Ambrose says: Gratia
Dei in Baptismate non quaerit gemitum, aut planctum, aut opus aliquod, nisi
solam ex cord professionem. The grace of God in Baptism requires not sighing
or mourning, or any work, but only a profession from the heart. Because the
party not having enioied, any benefit of Christ his grace, whereunto he was
not yet called, his sin and unkindness is the less. Heb. 6.
But such as have benne once brought to the light and have tasted the
heavenly gift, and benne made partakers of the holy Ghost, Tit. 2.
being called to adorn and set forth the doctrine of our Savior in all
things: if they be ungodly, 2. Cor. 6.
first they be unkind to God, whose grace they receive in vain. Ephesians. 4.
Secondlye, they do wrong to the holy Ghost, whom they grieve. Thirdly, as
the Prophet said unto David: 2. Reg. 12. Esai. 52. Romans 2.
Blasphemare fecisti inimicos nomen domini. Thou have made the enemies
blaspheme the name of the Lord: So may it be said unto them: Nomen Dei per vos
blasphematur inter gentes. By your means the name of God is blasphemed among
the Heathen.

For these and other causes, a greater penance is and ever has been required
of such offenders in the Church.

And that according to the just rule of Christ, who says: Omnicui multum
datum est, multum quaeretur ab eo: Luc. 12.
and cui commendauerunt multum, pius petent ab eo. To whom so ever much is
geauen, much shall be required of him, and to whom they have committed much,
they will ask the more of him.

After this rule, says Theodoretus: Theodor. Epito. Diuino. Decreto. c. de
poeniten.
Sunt ergo medicabilia etiam quae post baptismum fiunt vulnera. Even such
wounds as are made after Baptism be curable. Marie curable, not by forgeuenes
given by faith only as once it was: but by many tears, weaping and wailing,
fasting, praying, and labor, measured after the quantity of the sin
committed: for such as be not so disposed, we have not learned to admit nor
receive.

In which words we see the difference of penance appointed by the Church to
both sorts of men. Such as came to be christened were cured, says he: by
only believing, In cap. 11. ad Romans
which S. Ambrose calls a profession only from the heart, without either good
works going before, or painful penance for sin past, of them that were
christened before, and then fell into great sin, there was required weeping,
wailing, fasting, prayer, and other labor, according to the quantity of the
sin, which unless they would do, they were not received into the Church.

Sermon. 31. de verb. Dom.
Of such penitentes S. Augustine says: Quia agunt poenitentiam in sordibus
agunt, si tamen intelligunt, and veraciter agunt. They that do penance, do it
ugly and mournfully, if they have understanding and do it truly. Whereby we
learn, that such as for great sin do light penance, or none: neither have
understanding of their own estate, nor do penance truly. For as S. Cyprian
says: Dominus longa and co^tinua satisfactione placandus est. Lib. 1.
epistola. 8.
Our Lord must be pacified by long and continual satisfaction. And in another
place he says: Orare oportet impensius and rogare, etc. justice operibus
incumbere, Cyprian. de lapsis.
quibus peccata purgantur, elecmosinus frequenter insistere, quibus a morte
animae liberantur. Such must pray earnestly and ask, they must apply just
works, whereby sins are purged, they must often times give alms, whereby
sowles are delivered from death. And a little after: Poenite^ti, operanti,
roganti, potest clementer ignoscere. Tob. 4.
God can mercifully pardon him that does penance, him that works, him that
prays. This straight and paineful penance the Church learned to enjoin for
great sin committed after Baptism, by the example of S. Paul, who delivered
the Corinthian that had abused his fathers wife, to the Devil, 1. Cor. 5.
the body to be punisshed and pinched, that the soul might be saved. And
because that he says, that he did it in the name of Christ, and by the holy
Ghost that spoke in him, we know, 1. Cor. 7.
that straight penance practiced in the Church, is not the invention of men,
but the teaching of the holy Ghost. And where he says: he would have his body
pinched and punished, we know what penance God judges due unto great sin
Whereupon Pacianus alleging these words of S. Paul, said unto such as were in
penance: Quid dicitis poenitentes? Vbi est vestrae carnis interitus? What say
you that be penitents? Pacia. de Poeniten. and confess.
Where is the pinching of your body? And albeit this penance seem to the flesh
heavy and straight, yet does faith, with the fear and love of God, make it
easy and light: especially, because we are fure to escape the heavy and
punishing hand of God. For so S. Paul says: Si nos ipsos diiudicaremus, non
vtique iudicaremur. 1. Cor. 11.
If we would judge (that is to say) punish our selves, we should not be judged.

Thus have I showed, that such as fall after Baptism into great and deadly
sin, are restored again and justified by penance, which has that virtue,
by the word and promise of Christ. Ioani 20.
I have also declared how a sinner is brought unto true penance. And further,
I have showed the difference between penance, that is required of such as
being of age, come to be christened, and of such as fall after Baptism, wherein
it has been proved, that sinners after Baptism, are restored again to the
estate of justice, Theodor. sup. Paul. 2. Cor. 7.
by doing the worthy fruits of penance, and not by Faith only. And seeing that
al Christian men now living, were baptized in their infancy. This is the
Justification that we ought specially to look unto, by knowledge to learn, and
to practice by deed. As for the Justification of faith alone, how so ever it
serve for such, as are to be christened, In the viij. Chap. of the second book
whereof I shall speak hereafter, it serves not for us that are christened
already.

Of the increase and perfiting of our Justification, wherein it is truly said,
that we be justified by good works, and not by faith only. THE XII. CHAP.
IT is not enough for the obteining of life everlasting, that sinners be
justified, and made of wicked righteouse, Psalm. 83. Tit. 2.
unless they continue also and increase in justice, go from virtue to virtue,
and live soberly, justly, and godly. For as S. Cyprian says: Parum est
adipisci aliquid potuisse. Cyprian. li. 1. ep. 5.
It is a small matter to be able to get a thing. It is more to be able to keep
that is once gotten: as in faith it self and the healthful birth, it is not
the receiving, but the keeping of it, that geaueth life, neither is it by and by
the attaining, but the perfiting, that preserves a man to God. This our Lord
taught by his own instruction, Joan. 5.
when he said: Lo thou art made a whole man, now sin not, least some worse
hap fall unto thee. Christ gave him self for us, says S. Paul, to the
intent he might redeem us from all iniquity, Tit. 2. 2. Cor 6.
and cleanse unto him self a singular and special people, a follower of good
works. If this effect follow not, in vain has Christ geauen him self to
death for us, in vain do we receive his grace and Justification. And not
only in vain, but to our great danger and peril. 2. Pet. 2. Luc. 11.
Augustine. epist. 106.
Better were it for them, says S. Peter, never to have known the way of
justice, then after the knowledge of it to turn back again from the holy
commandment that was delivered unto them. He that is justified, is ryd of the
unclean spirit, and his heart like to the swepte house. But if the same
stand empty, not inhabited by the holy Ghost, nor filled with the fruits of
justice, the unclean spirit does not only return again, but also brings
with him seven other worse then him self, who enter and dwell there, and the
later doings of that man becomme worse then the first were. For as to him
that has, Math. 25.
there shall be given and he shall have abundance: so from him that has not,
even that he seems to have, shall be taken away. To have the gifts of God is
to use them, as Theophilacte writes upon that place. Theophil. in ca. 25.
Math. Math. 28
And he uses Gods grace, that does good works, to the which end grace is
given. Christ sent his Apostles to christen all Nations, and to teach them
to keep all that he had commanded them. He would not only have a people to
know him, Luc. 1. Joan. 15.
but such a people as should serve him in holiness and justice. He says to his
Apostles: Ego elegi vos, and posui vos, vt eatis, and fructum plurimum
afferatis, and fructus vester maneat. I have chosen you, and placed you, to
the intent you should go and bring forth fruit, and to the intent your fruit
should remain. And in the same chaptre he says: in hoc glorificatus est
pater, Joan. 15.
vt fructu^ plurimu^ afferatis and efficiamini mei Discipuli. Hereby is my
Father glorified, that you may bring forth much fruit, and be made my scholars:
giving us to understand, that they be Christ's scholars, that show the fruit
of his teaching, and that God is glorified, not only in our calling, but also
in the fruit that comes of our calling. For this cause the Scripture says
to such as are already called to the state of justice: Apoca. 22 Eccle. 18.
Math. 5.
Qui iustus est, iustificetur adhuc. Let him that is just, be justified yet.
And also: Let nothing let thee from continual prayer, and let nothing forbid
thee to be justified unto thy death: for Gods reward abides for ever.
Blessed are they that hunger and thyrst after justice, says our Savior.
Apertissime nos instituens, etc. Most evidently teaching us, Beda in solen. om.
Sancto.
that we should never think our selves just enough, but ever more love and
desire a daily increase of justice. For true it is that Leo says:
Quantumlibet quisque iustificatus sit, Leo ser. 8. de Passio. and Aug. ser. 15.
de verb. Apo. Why increase of Justice is called Justification.
etc. Be a man never so much justified, yet while he is in this life, he may be
better and more tried: but he that increases not, decays and goes
backewarde, and he that gets nothing, loses somewhat.

And because, as in all arts use makes the artificer more skilful, then he
was: so the continuance and practice of justice makes a good man readyer, and
more able to do well, and thereby iuster then he was, the Scripture calls it
Justification: that is to say, an increase of justice, and declares in sundry
places, how the same is obtained. S. James says: Jacob. 2.
videtis, quod ex operibus etc. You see, that a man is justified by works, and
not by faith only. And he that says: Eccles. 18.
let nothing stay thee from continual prayer, nor forbid thee to be
justified to thy death, teaches, that prayer is a mean to justify, which
Chrysostom expresses in more plain words, Chrysostom. Tom 5. de orand.
saying: vtiampiam ac cultu Dei dignam miris modis oration conciliat,
conciliatam auget: Prayer does meruelously win and get a good life, and
increases it when it is a gotten. Christ him self calls prayer, fasting and
asmosedeede, our justice, and sure we are, that he is just, who does justice.
Math. 6. 1. Joan. 3.
And so much the iuster, the more justice he does. By the same rule Leo
speaking of almose, says: Leo. ser. 3. de ieiun. mensis. 7. Leo ser. 8. de
ieiu. men. 10. Jacob. 2. Genesis 22.
Hoc pio impendatur operi, etc. Let that be bestowed upon godly work, that
can justify the heart and wasshe the conscience. And in an other place: Gods
will is, says he, to justify the poor by patiente suffering of labor, and
travail, and the rich by the work of charity. Abraham was justified by
works, offering up his son: by works, I say, of obedience, because he
obeyed the voice and commandment of God. The Scripture says of Moses: In
fide and lenitate ipsius sanctum fecit illum. God made him holy, by faith, and
mildenes. S. Bernarde says as much of humility: Bernard. ser. 1. in die natal.
Sectamini illam, quae sola potest saluare animas vestras, follow her, which
alone is able to save your souls.

Finally, Leo ser. 6, de Quadrages.
al good works done in faith bring with them a Justification: Quia hac quaeper
se sunt vilia, fides efficit pretiosa: and quae ab infidelibus ministrantur,
etsi fuerint sumptu magna, omni tamen iustificatione sunt vacua: faith makes
those things pretiouse, which of them selves be little worth. And such as are
done by infideles, though in cost they be great, yet be they void of al
Justification. If the works of infideles be void of Justification, because
they be done without faith: then Christian men's works done in faith may
justify.

By these places of the Scripture, and ancient Fathers, it is proved, that
good works done in faith justify the doers. And because no man can do such
works, unless he be him self a good man ( Sequuntur enim iustificatum, Aug
de fide and open. ca. 14.
no^ pracedunt iustificandum, for they follow him that is made just, they go
not before him that is to be justified) we must confess, that beside the
Justification of the wicked, whereby a sinner of ungodly is made righteouse,
^om. 4.
there is an other degree of justice, which both the Scripture and Fathers, as
I have showed, call Justification: that is, an increase of justice, whereby a
just man is made iuster. Which to make the thing more plain, The second
Justification.
I call the second kind or degree of Justification: because it comes after
the Justification of a sinner, which is the first degree of justice. And this
kind of Justification, which is an increase of justice, Lib. 2. co^tra ^ulta
supra ca. Oecom. in c. 2. Iaco.
is obtained and gotten by godly life, by fighting with vice, says S.
Augustine, by works of faith, without the which after baptism faith avails
not, but makes us also gyltie of greater sin, receiving the talente, and
bringing no gain of it.

By this mean it is truly said, that a wicked man is justified, that is,
reconciled to God by grace through faith, hope, charity, penance, and the
Sacrament of Baptism, without any works of merit going before. And truly
is it said also, that such as be already just, may be yet justified, that
is, increased in justice by good works. So is it true that faith without
works justifies, and true also, that a man is justified by works, and not by
faith only: the one being meant of man not yet baptized, the other of such,
as are baptized or christened.

And further, works of faith do not only increase a good man's justice in
this life: but also procure unto the dooers life everlasting. Romans 6.
Which S. Paul calls our end, And S. Augustine the perfiting of justice,
Ser. 61. de ver. De. et ep. 106.
saying: Complebitur spes nostra, our hope shall be fully accomplished in the
last resurrection of the dead, and when our hope shall be fulfilled, then shall
our Justification be fully accomplisshed. And because our justice, be it never
so well begone and continued here, yet before that time is never perfect, and
without that end, avails not, I call that with S. Augustine the perfiting of
our Justification, or the third degree and end of our justice. To the which
the Scriptures plainly declare that we must comme by works of faith: Romans 2.
Psalm. 61.
Reddet vnicuique secundum opera eius: God shall render unto every man
according to his works. What things a man sows, Gala. 6.
the same shall he reap: for he that sows in flesh, of flesh shall reap
corruption. But he that sows in spirit, of spirit shall reap everlasting
life. Our sowing is our works, of which if they be ill, we shall reap
damnation: if they be good, we shall receive life eternal.

And because it is said in sundry places of the Scripture, 2. Tim. 4. Epist.
105. and lib de gra. and libe. arbi. ca. 8. and 9.
that God will render life everlasting to good works, and that as a just
judge: we gather with S. Augustine, that life everlasting is the reward of
good works: whereof I shall have occasion to say more, when I come to speak
of that matter. Lib. 2 cap. 13.

In the mean time we see, that as a man is called to the state of justice by
faith without works, which is Justification: so can he neither be increaced,
nor perfited in justice, but by faith and good works, which is also called,
Where is then faith alone?
Justification: So can he neither comme to the beginning, but by faith, hope,
and charity, as has been showed, neither to the middle, nor the end, but by
faith and good works joined together. And this difference marked and rightely
applied, does not only give light to sundry Scriptures seeming otherwise
darcke, but also takes away the difference imagined, In the 10. chap. of the
2. book.
to be between S. Paul, and S. James, S. Peter, and S. John, concerning the
doctrine of Justification, whereof I shall speak more largely in an other
place.

What good works be, and how they be called ours. THE XIII. CHAPTER.
Three kinds of works in Scripture.
THE great commendation and price which the Scripture gives to good works,
moves me briefly to declare, what works they are that we call good, where
with God is so highly pleased. We find in the Scriptures three kinds of
works named, Gala. 5.
whereof some are called works of the flesh, other the works of the law.
Joan. 6. Gala. 5.
The third kind, the works of God, and the fruits of the holy Ghost. The
works of the flesh are fornication, uncleanness, unchaste life, and other like,
the doers whereof shall not enioie the kingdom of God. Gala. 5.
The works of the law, be such as a man does by him self, presuming of his
own power and strength without the help of God, Aug. ser. 15. de ver. Apost.
Philip. 3.
by commandment of the law for fear of punishment, and not for love of
justice. Of which S. Paul says: I take them all as hinderance and loss, and
account them as durte so that I may gain Christ. Leaving then aside these
two kinds of works, whereof the one is damnable, and the other unprofitable:
there remain the works which the Jews called the works of God, Joan. 6.
saying to Christ: Quid faciemus, vt operemur opera Dei? what shall we do, to
work the works of God? These works be such as be done by the motion and
inspiration of God. Christ says: Joan. 3.
Qui facit veritatem, He that does vprightely and trewly, comes to the light,
that his works may be showed, because they are done in God, that is, by the
inspiration and help of God. These works S. Paul calls the fruits of the
holy Ghost, because the holy Ghost brings them forth. Gala. 5.
Such are charity, joy, patience, gentleness, suffera^ce, m^^^nes, faith,
modesty, continence, chastity. These works as al Christian men are willed to
do, so no man does them without the grace of God preventing him and moving his
will to mind them, and following and working with him to do them. Neither does
the Scripture and the Church of God teach us, that faith is Gods gift, Aug.
epist. 105.
and charity with good works our own, as of our selves. Al are the gifts of
God: of al and singular it is said: Sine me nihil potestis facere, Joan. 15. 1.
Cor. 4. Romans 8. Aug. epist. 105. 2. Cor. 8.
without me ye can do nothing. What haste thou that thou receiuedst not? We
know not what to pray, as we ought to do, but the holy Ghost does ask for
us, that is to say, does teach us, and make us to ask. S. Paul calls almose
the grace of God. And briefly of all good works he says: we be made and
framed in Chriiste Jesus, to do good works. Quae praeparauit Deus, vt in illis
ambulemus: Ephesians. 2.
which God has prepared for us to walk in. Whereupon S. Augustine says:
fingimur ergo etc. we be made and fashioned, that is, De great. and lib. arbit.
cap. 8.
we are fourmed and shaped in good works, which we have not been the preparers
of, but God has prepared them for us to work in. By this rule S. Augustine
says: our good life is nothing else, but the gift of God. Quisquis tibi
enumerat vera merita sua, Aug. confess. lib. 9. cap. 13.
quid tibi enumerat, nisi munera tua? Whosoever reckeneth up unto thee (o
Lord) his true merits, what does he reckon up, How good works are called
outes Aug. in Joan. tractat. 72. 1. Cor. 3. Bernar. de great. and lib. arbit.
but thy gifts?

Here it may be said: what part have we then in our good works, and why be
they called ours, if they be the gifts of God? I answer: God works all that
is good in us, but as S. Augustine says, not without us. And therefore as they
be the works of God who inspireth them, so be they the works of man that does
them. Dei adiutores sumus, we be the helpers and workers with God. Dei sunt
proculdubio munera, tam nostra opera, quam eius praemia: ad quae tamen condenda
merita, dignatur sibi adhibere creaturarum ministeria: without doubt they are
Gods gifts, as well our works, as his rewards: and yet to make them merits,
he vouchesafeth to use the service of his creatures. And because he uses
man's service in the doing of good works, he calls them in the Scripture
our works. Retract. li. 1. ca. 23
So does S. Augustine say of faith and good life: vtrunque ipsius est, Each of
both is his, because he prepares our will: and either of both is ours,
because it is not done, but by our will. Although much might be said in this
place, yet I shall take one place of S. Augustine instead of many, Psalm. 55.
who expounding the words of David, says in this manner: In Deo laudabo
sermones meos: In God will I praise my words. Aug. in Psa. 55. ib.
Si in Deo, quomodo meos. etc. If in God, how mine? Both in God, and yet mine:
in God, because they come from him: mine, because I have received them. He that
gave them, would have them mine, because I love him whose they are: because
they comme to me from him, they are made mine: Matt. 6.
for whence comes this? Give us this day our daily bread? How call we it
ours, and how say we, give? If thou call it not thine, thou have not received
it: again if thou call it thine after that sort, as though it came of thy
self, when thou call it thine own, thou losest that thou had received:
because thou art unkind to him, at whose hand thou had received it.

There needs no more to be said. Good works, if we do them, be ours,
because we have received them. They be Gods, because he gives them. They be
not ours as of our selves, they be not ours to be proud of: for then we lose
them, because we be unkind to the giver. But they be ours, when meekely we do
them, and acknowledge the geuer of them. They be ours, to shine before men,
Matthew. 5.
that they may see them, and glorify our Father that is in heaven. Finally
they be ours, because God so calls them.

S. Paul knew, that faith, charity, prayer, Colos. 1. 1. These. 1. 2. These.
1. Romans 15. 2. Tim. 1.
and good works were the gifts of God, and yet writing to the Colossians, and
Thessalonians, he commends their faith and their charity, desired the
Romans to remember him in their prayers, and prayed for Timothee in his own:
He says to the Hebrews: 1. Cor. 15.
God is not unjust to forgette your work: He was not ignorant, that it was
the grace of God that wrought with him, and yet he says: I have wrasteled well
for the game. I have finished my race, 2. Tim. 4.
I have kept my faith.

As he that has an hundred pound lands given him by the Prince, has lands,
and yet has none of him self, but of the Princes gift, and were well worthy
to lose them, if he would brag of his possession against the giver, and say
he gave him none: even so the godly and faithful have good works, not of
them selves, but of Gods giving, not to be proud and vante them selves, but
humbly to serve him that gave them, to do good to them selves and others by
them. Aug. in Psalm. 85.
Arguens superbiam Apostolus, The Apostle rebuking pride, does not say, thou
haste not, but he says, what haste thou, that thou receiuedst not?

These be the works that we commend and set forth in Christian men, not the
works of the law, not such as men do of them selves, or through vain
glory to please men, but the works of God, the fruits of the holy Ghost done
only for Gods sake, such as God by his inspiration and help works in men,
wherein men are workers together and helpers with God. To these we geeue
commendation, and that none otherwise, then the holy Scriptures and ancient
Fathers do.

The Catholic doctrine slau^dered.
And hereby the Reader may see, how untruely it is said, that the Catholic
Doctrine teaches men to presume of their own works, or to think they be
able to do well without the grace of God: yea how far they are, that so
say, from knowing what good and godly works are.

A brief rehersall of so much as has been hitherto said, in this Treaty of
Justification. THE XIIII. CHAPTER.
IN the Preface of this treaty, after that I had showed, how profitable and
necessary the true knowledge and doctrine of Justification was: I did by the
words of S. Augustine put the Reader in mind of two great dangers, In Psalm.
31.
which that most learned and godly Father calls hedlong falls, saying: that
who so speaks of this matter, unless he keep the straight high way, going
neither to far on the right hand, nor on the left, may easily fall him
self, or bring his hearer into one of them. The one peril is, the
presumption of man's own justice, to think, that he may be justified, and
live godly, without the help of grace: which danger he says is as it were on
the right hand. The other peril is, the presumption upon Gods mercy, to
think, that a man though he live ill, doing no good works, yet shall be saved
by faith: that peril, he says, is as it were on the left hand. To show the
good Christian Reader, who desires to go the straight way, how he may avoid
both dangers, the falling into either whereof is the loss of life
everlasting, I have taken this travail in hand, wherein I trust I have now
said enough to keep him from the daungerouse fall on the right hand, having
declared at large, how little cause man has to presume of his own justice:
who descending of the corrupt race of Adam, borne in sin and in danger of
the devil, has no hope to aspire to the state of justice, which Adam lost
to him self, 1. Timo. 2.
and for all us, but only by mercy of the mediator of God and men, the man
Jesus Christ, who gave him self a ransom for all, by whose grace we are
freely justified, Romans 3. Ephesians. 2.
without respect of any good works going before, or deserving that mercy at
his hands.

I have showed, that the chief and original cause of our Justification was the
exceeding love of God, Ephesians. 2.
who when we were dead in sin, gave us life again in Christ. The cause
that procured unto us the benefit of our Justification, to be the merit of
Christ's death, Romans 6.
who died for us when we were sinners, Colos. 1.
pacifiyng by the blood of his Cross all that is in heaven or in earth. I have
declared, that our Justification is wrought in us by grace, and atteined by
faith through the fear of God, hope, charity, penance, and the Sacrament of
Baptism. And this much have I said of the first degree of our Justification,
To. 5.
whereby we have access to comme to this grace: making with the Scripture and
aunciente Fathers, for plainer understanding three degrees of our Justification
and salvation.

The second and third degrees of our Justification, which are increase of
justice in this life, and perfiting thereof in the life to comme: I have proved
to be gotten and obtained by faith and good works. I have also declared, that
not only faith, the fear of God, hope, charity, and penance, but also our good
works, and all things any way helping to our Justification, be the gifts of
God, and made ours by the assent and working of our free will, which is first
healed and made strong by grace and the special help of God.

And because no man lives without sin, and few without great and mortal
crimes, whereby the grace of Justification is lost, I have showed, that the
way to recover it again, is by the Sacrament of penance, which is also the
gift of God, for that he moves a sinner to change and amend his life, Math.
3.
and to do the worthy fruits of penance: without the which motion no man
ever did profitable penance.

And thus have I proved, that all Justification in every manner comes from
God, and is received and wrought in man through grace, 1. Cor. 3.
by his own will and consent, whom it has pleased God to have a worker
together with him, not empeyring thereby, but much auancing his own glory,
for that he is meruelouse, Psalm. 67.
not only in him self, but also in his holy. Romans 3.
And so have I truly and faithfully excluded al boasting of man in him self,
giving glory to God. For I have so set forth the free will of man, and commended
good works, that the indifferent Reader may truly say: Omnia ex Deo. 2. Cor. 5.
All is of God: to the end that who so vanteth and boasts, 1. Cor. 1.
may vante and boaste in God.

THE SECOND BOOK DECLARING THE SECOND DANGER.
How daungerouse it is for a man to presume only upon Gods mercy, and to do
no good works. THE I. CHAPTER.
August. in prafatio. Psalm. 31.
HAVING thus showed the way to avoid the one danger which is on the right
hand, and plainly declared that no man is justified by him self, nor has to
presume of him self, because it avails a man nothing to eschew one peril,
and to perish by an other contrary to it, that is, as the Poet says, to
escape Charibdys, and be drowned in Sylla: Augu. de fid. et operib. c. 14.
Iam illud videamus, etc. Let us now consider that other point, which must
be shaken out of good and religiouse hearts, least putting cock in the hoope
by an ill security and carelesnes, they lose their salvation, if they think
faith only fufficiente to obtain it, and take no care to hold them selves
in Gods way by doing good works. By which words S. Augustine month us to
avoid the other danger on the left hand, of presuming in Gods mercy alone.
Willing no man to think, he may be saved by faith and believing only, if
having time thereunto, he neither live godly, nor do good works.

And this peril is so much the more to be wayed, and carefully to be
eschewed, because as he says in the same work, that is the most
daungerouse opinion of all, August. de fid. and opeca. 27.
whereby men are made believe, that live they never so lewdely and
shamefully, yea and continue in that kind of life, yet if they do no more but
believe in Christ, and receive his Sacraments, they shall come to everlasting
life.

I call this with S. Augustine the most daungerouse opinion of al, because it
is the greateste enemy of godly life and good works, without the which no
man shall be saved. For he that puts affiance in good life, and thinks he is
able to atteyne unto it of him self, albeit he never reaches thereunto,
August. in praesation. Psalm. 31.
and loses the hope of al his travail, because he presumes of him self, and
God condemns even that presumption: yet has he a desire to live well, and a
care to do good works. But who so is persuaded, that faith only suffiseth to
obtain both Justification and salvation, let him be well ware, lest he fall
into the goulfe, and say: Aug. ibid.
Faciam ergo quicquid volo. I will do then what I list, for though I have no
good works, and do no more but believe in God, my faith shall be reputed to
me for justice. If he have so said and determined with him self he is fallen
in, and drowned. If he be yet but thinking thereof and wavering, he is in
danger.

Further, if it be true that the Philosopher says, Aristote. Ethic. lib. 2.
cap. 8.
that of two vices contrary to one virtue, the more daungerouse and greater
vice is that, whereunto men are more given: We doubt not but the greater
number of men is rather prone and content of them selves to believe only, and
put the rest in Gods mercy, then desirous to lead a severe and strayte life,
and pain them selves with good works. Which thing the devil well knowing, has
in sundry ages gone about to put this opinion in the heads of such as he could
abuse, Ca. 12.
as I shall show hereafter. Wherefore to avoid this goulfe, which is most
perillouse, I will declare, that faith alone suffiseth not in any sort of true
understanding, to our Justification or salvation. In the first Chap.
as I have showed before.

Whence the opinion came, that only faith justifies: and of diverse kinds of
mainteyning the same. THE II. CHAPTER.
August. de gratia and liber. arbit. c. 7. Romans 3. Gal. 3.
THE opinion that moved some men to think only faith sufficient to
salvation, took his first ground of misconstruing the words of S. Paul:
Homines enim non intelligentes. etc. For men, says S. Augustine, not
understanding these words of the Apostle, we think a man is justified by
faith without works of the law, thought he said, that it is sufficient for a
man to have faith although he live ill, and do no good works. But God forbid
the chosen vessel should be of that opinion.

And upon this, and other places of Scripture, Aug. in praefat. Psa. 31. and
de fid. and oper. c. 14.
which also they misconstrued, they persuaded them selves, that a Christian
man needed not to do any good works, for that he might be saved by faith,
though he lived ungodly.

Others, when they saw the Scriptures so evidently Calvin. in instit. ca. de
iustific. ca. 10. Brent. in confess. VVirte^ber. de bonis operibus.
and setting forth the necessity of doing them, being ashamed to maintain
that they were nedelesse to be done, have said: that men must live godly, to
testify and declare their faith, but yet that their good works deserve no
reward of life everlasting, neither can stand in the judgment of God.

And to minse this matter more finely, some have yet gone further: And whereas
the Catholic Church following the manifest Srciptures, has ever taught, that
a sinner

Into these three kinds of dangerous errors, men have fallen by teaching and
believing the Justification of faith alone, not only barring the necessity of
doing good works and penance, but also abasing the worthiness of hope and
charity, and th'estimation and dignity of Christ his Sacraments.

Against the first opinion, S. Augustine both preached and disputed in sundry
places of his learned works, and namely, wrote his book of faith and works
against the same, which thou have here (gentle Reader) together with this
Treaty translated unto thee.

In the 2. Chapt of the first book.
I have said somewhat before, and plainly proved, that good works do not
only keep and increase our justice here, but shall be rewarded also in the end
with life everlasting, whereof I shall say more hereafter. In the. 13. Chapter.




And here must I advertise the Reader, that this third opinion is new and
lately come out of the forge, never heard of to my knowledge, before these our
days. For as there has been in sundry ages, carnal men, which thought them
selves, August. de fid. and oper. c. 27
and went about to persuade others, that faith and the Sacraments of Christ,
might save a man without good works, so have I not read of any, that plainly
said, faith without hope, charity, and the Sacraments of Christ, can justify
a man. And therefore, as diverse, or rather all the ancient Fathers, have in some
places of their works, gone about to pull the one opinion out of men's
heads, so do I not find, that they make any mention of the other, and much
less, that any one of them before this our age, has affirmed it to be true.

That Faith excludes not Charity in our Justification, that is to say, Faith
alone justifies no man, without the help and woorking of Charity. THE III.
CHAPTER.
AND now to begin with the most excellent virtue that is in a Christian
man, Of Charity.
Faith alone justifies no man, without the help and working of charity. It
has been declared before, In the. 4. Chapter.
that our Justification in Christ, is but the restoring of that which was
lost by Adam. And as Adam sinned, not only by lack of faith, but rather and
much more, by lack of good will and right love, so is not a man once fallen,
restored again by recovering only right faith, unless he recover also
right love. The sin of Adam was chiefly a perverse desire and lust,
through a love settled where it should not be, pulled from God and delight
heavenly, and settled on him self and things transitory. And as that
perverse love, which is called lust, made him of good and righteouse, August.
in Praefat. Psalm. 31. August. in Titul. Psalm. 64.
evil and sinful: so in all that descend of his race, ill love and lust
makes an ill man: and good love, which is called Charity, makes a good man.
Interoget se quisque quid amet, and inueniet vnde sit Ciuis. Let every man
ask of him self what he loves, and he shall find whereof he is a Citizen.
That is to say, whether he be of the City of God, or of the Devil. Charity
yt is that alters and changes the heart, and the heart is it that
changes the works. Muta cor and mutabitur opus. August. Sermon. 12. de verb.
Dom.
Change the heart, says S. Augustine, and the work will be changed. And how
the heart is changed, it follows: Extirpa cupiditatem, planta charitatem.
Root out lust and ill desire: plant charity, for as lust is the root of
all ill, so is charity the root of all good.

No man is justified, but he that is made a good man, and charity it is that
makes a man good. Aug. Enchi. c. 117
For when the question is asked, whether any one be a good man, it is not
demanded what he believes, or what he hops, but what he loves. For who so
loves rightly, without doubt he believes rightly. Al men will confess, that no
man can be justified,

To prove the first and second point, S. John says: Every man that loves,
1. Joan. 4.
is borne of God, and knows God. He that loves not, knows not God, for God
is charity. The third point he proves by these words: 1. Joan. 3.
Nos scimus: We know, that we are translated from death to life, because we
love our brethren: he that loves not, remains in death. August. in expo.
epist. ad Galat.
Of the fourth point, S. Augustine says: formatur Christus in eo qui formam
accepit Christi. Christ is formed in him, that has received the form and
shape of Christ, but he it is that receives the shape of Christ, who cleaves
fast to Christ by a gostely and spiritual love. The fifte point is proved
by S. Paul, who takes it for all one to be made a new creature and to have
faith that works through charity. For as he says: Galat. 5.
In Christ Jesus neither circumcision, Galat. 6.
nor to be without circumcision avails ought, but faith that works through
charity. So he says: Neither circumcision nor to be without circumcision
avails ought, but the new creature. This being proved, that man knows God,
is borne of God, translated from death to life, new fourmed in Christ, and
finally made a new creature by Charity, it is also proved consequentely, that
man is justified especially through Charity.

I go not abowte here to abase the excellent gift of faith nor to say,
charity only justifies, excluding faith, which is the foundation of all
rightuousenes. my intent is only to show, how shameful a divorce they
make, that part these so well agreeing virtues in the act of our
Justification, which God has joined together. Matthew. 19 Leo sermon. 7. de
quadrag.
For trewely it is said. Charitas robur est fidei, fides fortitudo est
charitatis. Charity is the force of faith, faith is the strength of Charity,
and then is the name true, and true fruit of both, when each remains sure
and fast knitte to other. Seeing then that Justification is the greatest fruit
that can come of faith, it follows, that the same can not be had without thaid
of charity. Faith may be in a man without charity, but it makes no man
rightuouse and just, but by charity. S. Augustine says, A man may believe
that Christ is Christ, by faith without hope and charity: but he can not
believe in Christ, which is as much to say, as to be united and made a
member of Christ, without hope and charity. Aug. Ser. 61. De ver. De.
Qui credit in Christum. etc. who so believes in Christ, by his believing,
Christ comes unto him, and by some means he is made one with Christ, and a
member of his body, which can not be done, unless hope and charity be joined
also.



Faith can not only justify no man without charity, but as S. Bernarde
says, dies, if charity be pulled from it. Bernar. Ser. 24. super Canti.
Mors fidei est separatio charitatis. It is the death of Faith to be parted
from charity. And he that divides them, says he, is fideicida, a murderer
of Faith.

A dead faith can not give life to the soul. Mortuam Apostolus definit
eamesse. Iaco. 2.
And the Apostle S. James determines that faith to be dead, that works not
by love. Quasi non habens animam ipsam dilectionem. Bernar. Epist. 42.
Because she has not love which is her very soul. If faith when she is
without charity, wants her soul and life, without the which she can do no
act, how should she without charity work that great act of our
Justification?

To make the matter plain, we shall need but one argument grounded upon the
words of S. Paul. Gala. 5.
In Christ Jesus neither circumcision, nor to be without circumcision avails
any thing, but faith that works through charity. If that be the Faith that
avails, which works through charity, then faith alone destitute of
charity avails nothing. If it avail nothing, much less does it work our
Justification: For that is not only somewhat, but it is as S. Augustine and
Prosper Aquitanus say, Aug. tra. in Joan. 72. Prosper de promis. part. 2. cap.
30. l'e fide and oper. cap. 14. De gratia and lib. arbit. cap. 7. Epist. 107.
Enchi. c. 8. Aug. de fide and oper. ca. 14
a greater work, then to make heaven and earth, or to bring a dead man to
life again. The argument is not mine, but such as S. Augustine uses, and
repeteth almost as often as he speaks of Justification: Saying that S. Paul
by these words has decided and determined the matter: Non quamlibet fidem qua
in Deum creditur. etc. It is not every Faith whereby a man believes in God,
that the Apostle determines to be healthful and Evangelical, but that is the
Faith, says he, which works through charity: whereupon he avouches that
the Faith, which some take to be sufficient for their salvation, avails
nothing: in so much that he says: If I have all Faith, in such sort that I
be able to move hills out of their places, and have no charity, I am nothing.

I would seek a plainer decision, if any thing could be more plainly
spoken. He says, S. Paul has defined, that there is but one Faith
auailable, to wit, the faith that works through charity. He says, Ser.
15. de ver. apost. De fide and oper. c 14.
all other Faith what so ever it be, avails nothing. He says, and that
very often, that Faith destitute of charity may be not only in evil men,
but also in the devil him self. And calls it fidem damoniorum, the faith of
diuelles.

And lest any man should say, that albeit good works are done by charity,
yet is all to be imputed to faith, which is the cause that works al, Note
well
S. Paul says on the other side, that faith it self takes her doing and
working of charity. For as they know that understand the Greek tongue,
nergoumne is a participle of passive signification, and rightely should he
translate the words of S. Paul, who should say, That faith in Christ Jesus
is auailable, which is made active and doing thorough charity. For if we will
speak of the nature of faith as it is by it self, it is undoubtedly, In the
2. Chapt.
to understand and assent unto truth, as has been showed before.

And because all knowledge be it of the Scriptures, or the articles of our
Creed, may be, not only in il men, but in devils also: Faith is not able of
her self to make a man just and righteouse, unless she take unto her hope,
and charity, and so be made active and doing: by the one to hope in God, by
the other to love God and man. which conclusion concerning charity S.
Augustine makes. In Praefa. Psalm. 31.
Ergo si nihil mihi prodest fides sine charitate. etc. If faith then avail me
nothing without charity, and charity wheresoever it be, must needs be
working, faith it self by charity has her working.

Reason in man is the thing that makes the difference between him and al brute
beasts: which be called brute, because they lack reason. For which cause,
Reason, as the principal power of the soul is called of the Philosopher
entelcheia, the form and perfection that makes a man.

In like manner charity is the thing that makes the difference between faith
and faith, between the faith of a good and an ill man, between the faith of
good Christians, and unclean diuelles. As S. Augustine says at large in a
learned and godly Sermon able to satisfy any indifferente Reader, not only in
this point, but in the whole matter of Justification. Quid pertinet ad fidem?
Aug. ser. 16. De ver. Aposto. Iaco. 2.
Credere. What belongs to faith? to believe: But let there yet further be a
difference made between this faith, and the faith of unclean Diuelles. For the
Apostle S. James says, the Diuelles also believe and tremble: if thou do but
only believe, and live without hope, and haste no charity, the Diuelles
believe also and tremble. And a little after, first therefore make a difference
between thy faith, and the Diuelles faith. Whereby will thou make the
difference? Mar. 1. Matt. 8. Luc. 4.
The Diuelles said, Christ was the son of God, through fear. S. Peter said
it through love: Put hope then to faith. And what hope is there, without some
good conscience? put unto hope it self, charity. And somewhat after that:
Therefore make a difference of your faith, then are ye of the predestinates of
the called, and of the justified. And in the same Sermon to conclude, he says:
Gala. 5.
Therefore if there be in you faith that works through love, now belong you
to the predestinates, to the called, and to the justified. Let that faith
therefore grow in you that is working by charity: for faith working by
charity can not be without hope.

Now if charity be it, that makes the difference between faith, and faith, as
S. Augustine proves, and if that which makes the difference between any one
creature and al other, be the perfection, life, and soul, of that creature:
Then is charity not an instrument to serve faith, but the life and soul of
faith, without the help and moving whereof, faith neither justifies, neither
works any good act in the beleuer.

The Evangelist says: Ex principibus multi crediderunt in eum, Joan. 12.
sed propter Pharisaeos non confite bantur, vt e synagoga non eijcerentur:
dilexerunt enim gloriam hominum magis quam gloriam Dei. They had faith,
without right love
Many of the chief rulers believed in him, but they confessed him not, because
they would not be cast out of the Synagoge. For they loved the glory of men
more, then the glory of God. The scripture says, they had faith, and yet no
man I think will say they were justified, who neither confessed Christ, and
also loved the world better then God. And what lacked there in them, Ser. 16.
de ver. Apos.
to make them belong to the predestinates, to the called and justified, as S.
Augustine says, but only right love, to make that faith active and strong to
love the glory of God more then the glory of men, which unless God gave them
afterward, that faith nothing auailed them.

Only charity rather then only faith
Wherefore if a man were disposed to make a divorce between faith, hope, and
charity, which no good man ever did, he might say by these and other reasons,
that charity alone rather justifies, and have S. Augustine to say with him,
whose words these are: Charitas inchoata, De natura and gra. cap. 70.
inchoata iustitia est, etc. An imperfect charity, is an imperfect justice: a
well increased charity, is a well increased justice: a great charity, is
great justice: perfect charity, is perfect justice. And in the same book he
says of charity: Ca 38. ib.
Qua vna vere iustus est, quicunque iustus est. By the which only he is trewly
just, who so ever is just. But to declare, that his mind was not to make any
such separation, Ib. cap. 70.
he says, it is the charity that comes from a pure heart, a good conscience
and unsained faith. He might allege for him the authority of S. Ihon
th'Euangelist, who being required by his scholars a little before his death, to
teach them some perfect lesson, Hier. li. 3. com. in epist. ad Galat. cap. 6.
whereby they might live well and have cause to remember him, said: my
children, love one an other. And when they looked for more, he repeted the same
again, and said: It is our Lords commandment, and if there be no more done
but that, it is enough. He should have Prosper to say for him: De vit.
conte^pla. li. 3. ca. 13
Charity is a summarie and abbridgement of all good doings, of the which every
good work takes his life, without the which never man pleased God. S. Bid
would say, Homi. aestiua in lita. maio. Ser. 7. de Epipha. Chrysostom. tom. 1.
fol. 176.
Charity is the principal virtue, in so much that without that virtue, other
principal virtues can not be. Leo would call her the mother of all virtues,
and Chrysostom the mother of all goodness. And thus have I proved, not only
that faith without charity justifies no man, but also that charity has a
souereine working in the act of our Justification, without the which faith
avails nothing, and so does not faith alone justify, nor exclude charity.

An answer to objections that be made, to prove that faith alone justifies
without charity THE IIII. CHAPTER.
BUT lest the mainteiners of Justification by only faith should seem to be
without all ground, and to exclude charity without color of reason, they
frame one especial argument, which for the readers better satisfaction, I will
put forth and answer here. The argument is this.

We be justified by faith without all works of the Law.

Charity is a work of the Law.

Ergo, we be justified by faith without charity.

To the which I answer with S. Augustine, that their second proposition
deceives them, for that charity is not only a work of the law, but also
the gift of the holy Ghost in the new testament. Rom 5.
S. Paul says, the charity of God is powered abroad in our hearts through the
holy Ghost that is given us. 1. Ioha. 4.
And S. John says: Most dearly beloved, let us love one an other, for love
comes of God. Upon which words S. Augustines answer is: De great and li.
arb. cap. 18.
Cum dicitur, diligamus inuicem: lex est. Cum dicitur, quia dilectio ex Deo
est, gratia est. When it is said: Let us love one an other, it is the law:
when it is said, for love comes of God, it is grace. He makes this the
greatest difference between the old and new testament, that where as in the old,
God lead his people by terror and fear, in the new he gives them plenty of
his charity and love. Contr. Adiman. cap. 17. De spirit. and lit. cap. 17.
Item cap. 21. ca. 16.
Haec est breuissima, etc. This is the shortest and plainest difference of both
testaments: fear, and love. Ibi in tabulis lapideis. There the holy Ghost
wrought in tables of stone, here in men's hearts. And what be the laws of God
written by God him self in men's hearts, but the presence of the holy Ghost who
is the singer of God, by whose presence charity is powered abroad in our
hearts, which is the fulfilling of the law. Thus do we see, that charity is
not only a work of the law, but also the fruit of the holy Ghost, the
special token of the new testament, wrought in our hearts by the holy Ghost.
And so has S. Augustine answered this argument xi. hundred years before they
were borne that lately have made it.

And whereas it is said, that faith only justifies, What it is truly to
apprehe^d Christ.
because faith only apprehends Christ: I ask, what is meant by the term
of Apprehension? If it be to believe only that Christ died for sinners, that
alone justifies no man, for the Diuelles believe it, and tremble, Jacob. 2.
because they hope not to be partakers of that benefit, nor love him that
purchased it: If to apprehend Christ be understood, to dwell in Christ, and
to have him dwell in us, it is not true that Christ is apprehended in that
sort, by only faith without charity. For it is said: 1 Joan 4.
God is charity, and he that dwells in charity dwells in God, and God in
him. And Christ him self says: Si quis diligit me, Joan. 14.
sermonem meum seruabit, and Pater meus diliget eum, and ad eum veniemus, and
mansionem apud eum faciemus: If a man love me, he will keep my saying, and my
Father will love him, and to him will we come, and make our abode with him. By
these words let the Reader learn, what it is truly and profitably to
apprehend Christ.

He apprehends Christ truly, Aug. ser. 61. de ver. Dom. and tract. in Joan.
29.
that is united and made a member of Christ, which as I have proved in the
last Chapter, can not be done without hope and charity. He apprehends Christ
truly, that cleaves unto Christ, and the glue whereby the soul is fastened
unto Christ, says S. Augustine, is charity: Ipsum gluten est charitas: In
Psalm. 62
If it be said, that faith apprehends the promise: Christ has promised life
everlasting to such as become his friends. Joan. 15. Heb. 5.
And they be his friends that keep his commandments. He is made a cause of
life everlasting, but, to such as obey him. The promise is made to the children
of Abraham, that is to such as have the faith and obedience of Abraham,
whereof I shall speak at large hereafter. Chapt. 23.
And so is it true, that faith alone neither apprehends Christ, nor his
promise profitablie, unless hope and Charity be joined unto it.

That Faith excludes not Hope in the act of our Justification. THE V. CHAPTER.
Of Hope.
AS God requires of such as come to his service, that they steadfastly believe
in him, and with all their hearts love him: So does he also require of them,
to repose al hope and affiance in him only, saying by his Prophet: Iere. 17.
Maledictus homo qui confidit in homine. Cursed is the man that puts his
trust in man. And by the same Prophet: Iere. 9. 1. Cor. 1. Psalm. 107. Psalm. 33.
Let not the wise brag in his wisdom, neither let the strong boast in his
strength. Nor let the rich glory in his riches: But let him that
boasts, boast in our Lord. Wherefore, as man's power to save is vain, and he
unhappy that trusts in it: so happy is the man, that trusts in God. Of so
great force is a right and constant hope in God, that nothing perteining to
salvation, can be available to him that wants it. Aug. Enchi. cap. 8.
No true charity can be without it. No faith can justify, but by the help
and direction of it. A good man's faith is the substance of things that are to
be hoped. Hebr. 11.
Take away hope then from faith, and faith must needs fainte and quail. The
thing that kept the Fathers, of whom S. Paul speaks, so faithful to God,
was, that they had a strong hope and trust to enjoy his promises. And that
which was said of Moses, may be truly said of them al: Hebr. 11.
Aspiciciebat ad remunerationem. They looked to the reward, which can not be
without hope. The Diuelles believe and tremble, Aug. Enchi. cap. 8.
but as S. Augustine says, they neither hope, nor love. In like manner evil
Christians may believe, and yet remain still ungodly, and void of justice,
because they want hope and love.

I have proved before, that faith without charity justifies no man: Propter
quod Apostolus Paulus, Aug. ibid.
For which cause the Apostle Paul commends the faith, which has her
woorking through charity. Quae vtique sine spe esse non potest. Which can in
no wise be without hope. For since a man may believe, that which he hops not
for: what avails him to believe, 1. Timo. 2.
that Christ is the Savior of all men, unless he hope also to be partaker of
that salvation? Or how should he be moved to love him for the benefit of our
redemption, if he trust not to enjoy it? And therefore says S. Augustine: Nec
amor sine spe, Euch. c. 8
nec sine amore spes, nec vtrumque sine fide. Neither is there love without
hope, nor hope without love, nor both without faith. And so does faith work
our Justification through hope and love. So is it true, that fides, spes,
August. epist. 121.
charitas, ad Deum ducunt, faith, hope, and charity lead us to God, to whom
we are assured not to come, if either of the three want in us. And therefore as
it is said, Ephesians. 2. Romans 8.
by grace are ye saved through faith: So is it also said: Spe salui facti
sumus. By hope are we saved. Hope joining with faith and charity, inge^dreth an
affiance in God, and makes a strong hoping faith, unto which affiance
everlasting life is promised: Qui habet fiduciam mei, haeredit abit terram,
Esai. 57.
and possidebit montem sanctum meum. He that has affiance in me, shall
inherit the earth, and possess my holy Hill. So does S. Paul call hope the
safe and sure anchor of the soul. Heb. 6.
Whereunto as many as flee for refuge, have a most strong comfort. For as the
ancor staieth the ship, so does hope the soul: faith would be weak, and
charity cold, if hope maintained and stayed them not. S. Paul says to the
Colossians: Coloss. 1.
Gratias agimus Deo and Patri. We give thanks to God and the Father of our
Lord Jesus Christ, ever praying for you. For that we hear of your faith in
Christ Jesus, and of the love you bear toward all the holy. Propter spem
quae reposita est vobis in coelis. For the hopes sake that is laid up for you
in heaven. He makes the end of our hope the mark, whereunto both faith and
charity have their respect. And if the Philosophers sayings be true, that
the end is it which is last done, Hope by some reason, is the principal
worker in our Justification
and first in our intent, a man may reason upon this place, that in the act
of our Justification, Hope does not only work, but has the chief place and
principal woorking. Because his obiecte is the end, whereunto faith and
charity refer all their dooinges, and consequently, the cause that moves
faith to believe, and charity to love: without the direction of hope, faith
and love may be fruitless. A man may have faith and do good works, August.
in Praefat. Psalm. 31.
and yet lacking a right hope, he shall not be a good man: For says S.
Augustine: Quid si de ijs omnibus bonis operibus, etc. What if by all these
good works, either thou hope for that is to be hoped, but not at his hand of
whom it should be hoped, or hope after that is not to be hoped, though it be
at his hand of whom everlasting life is to be hoped. To put an Example: For
thy good works, thou hopest to get thy self a worldly felicity. Thou art a
wicked man. And therefore he says in the same place: Corrige fidem, dirige
fidem. Correct thy faith, direct thy faith. And what is the direction of
faith, but to refer and apply it to life everlasting? which we ought to hope
and trust for in all our doings. If faith then can not justify, unless it be
rightly directed, and direction of faith is hope: how should faith justify
without hope? Ser. 16. de ver. apost.
Add ergo fidei spem: Therefore put hope to faith, says S. Augustine. And
what hope is there without some good conscience? put charity then also to
hope: These three jointly together begin to work our justice: These three
increase our justice. These three bring us to the reward and perfection of
justice: faith, hope and charity lead us to God: fide, spe, and charitate
colendus est Deus. By faith, hope and charity God must be served. Et nos
fide, spe, Aug. epistol. 121.
and charitate cum capite nostro sumus in coelo. By faith, hope and charity we
be in heaven with Christ our head: Ench. ca. 2 and 6. August. in Psalm. 26
enarr. 2.
let us make no divorce between these virtues, whom God has so joined to
work our justice and salvation.

But as we be assured, that without hope the act of our Justification is not
wroughte, so it behooves us to understand, how hope must be nurisshed and
mainteyned. The lesson is short, but of great proffite, uttered by him that
had good experience thereof. August. in praefation. Psalm. 31.
Cupiditas refrenetur, charitas excitetur. Let lust be brydeled, let
charity be stirred up. The very charity of a man that works well gives him
the hope of a good conscience. For good conscience is it that bears hope. As
an ill conscience is all in despair, so the good conscience is all in hope. We
see then that it is charity and godly life which fostereth and mainteyneth
hope. And as without hope faith suffiseth not, for which cause it is said by
S. Augustyne: Put hope unto faith: Augu. ser. 16. de ver. Apost.
so hope without charity will not be had. For what hope is there without some
good conscience? Put charity then to hope also. Thus is faith directed and
stayed by hope: hope mainteyned by charity: and a man made acceptable to God
by all three. For if these be in us, Ser. 16. de ver. apost.
then do we belong to the predestinate, to the called, and to the justified.
Which is also expressed by the words of S. Paul, where he says: Finis
praecepti est charitas, 1. Tim. 1.
etc. The perfyting and ending of the commandment is charity, that comes
from a clean heart, De doctr. Christian. lib. 1. c. 40
from a good conscience, and an unfeigned faith. In which place S. Augustine
says: The Apostle puts in good conscience in stead of hope. Wherefore if
the commandment be given to make man perfect, in such perfection as he may
have in this life, and the end and perfecting of the commandment lies in
these three virtues: the greatest perfection that man may reach unto in this
life is gotten by faith, hope and charity. And our greatest perfection in this
life is, our Justification: for our glorifying apperteyneth to the life to come.

That faith excludes not the working of Sacraments in our Justification. THE
VI. CHAPTER.
Of the Sacraments.
AS faith does not bar hope and charity from working our Justification, so
does it not exclude the SaSramentes of the Church instituted by Christ in the
new Testamente. Which Sacraments be not only requisite to the justifying of
a sinner, but do work also in him remission of sin, bring and restore him
to righteousness, and give life everlasting. Baptism, says S. Peter, 1. Pet.
3.
saves us. Concerning the Sacraments of the Altar, Christ says: He that
eats my flesh, Joan. 6.
and drinks my blood, shall live for ever. He says also of the Sacrament
of Penance: whose sins you forgive, Joan. 20.
they be forgeuen them. The like may be said of the rest, of which S. Augustine
makes this general rule, putting a difference between the Sacraments of the
old and new Testament: Sacrament a noui Testamenti dant salutem, August. in
Psalm. 73.
Sacrame^ta veteris Testamenti promiserunt Saluatorem. The Sacraments of the
new Testamente give salvation: the Sacraments of the old Testamente promised
a Savior.

S. Bid, whom I allege for honors sake, both because he was a singular light
of our Country, and also because he was in all his writings an exquisite and
most diligent follower of S. Augustine, says: Bed. Hom. in feri. 3. Pascha.
The Apostles were sent, Qui cunctis per orbem nationibus, etc. Who should
both preach the word of life to all nationes through the world, and
minister the Sacrament of faith, by which men might be saved, and atteyne to
the joys of the heavenly country.

The reason why so high and excellent a virtue should be in the Sacraments,
August. in Psalm 56. et idem in Psalm. 103.
is because they take their force of Christ his Death and Passion. Percussum
est latus pende^tis de lancea: and profluxerunt Ecclesiae Sacramenta: The side
of Christ hanging on the Cross, was stryken with a spear, and the Sacraments
of the Church came flowing out.

And as they issued and flowed out of his side, so do they apply and give
unto us, the benefyte of his blood and passion. Augu. exposit. epist. ad Roma.
inchoat. Such as were christened Were signed with the Cross.
Illud Sacrificium etc. That Sacrifice, to wit, the whole Sacrifice of our
Lord, which, after a manner is then offered for every one, at what time he is
christened and signed, if he sin again, can not be offered. S. Augustine
says, that the Sacrifice which Christ made for all upon the Cross is offered
after a sort for every one particularly, when he is baptized. For as he died
for all, and paid the price and ransom of his blood sufficient for all: so
is his passion auayleable and applied unto such as receive the healthful
Sacraments of his passion. Augu. ad. arti. falso sibi imposit. artic. 1
Cuius mors non sic impensa est humano generi: His death was not so bestowed
upon man kind, that even they that never should be regenerate or christened,
should also be partakers of his redemption, but in such sort was it given,
that it which was by one only example and pattern done for all in general,
should by a special Sacrament be celebrated and done in every one by him
self. Let no man therefore assure him self of his Justification by faith or
other means, The Sacrament of penance.
without the help and benefit of the Sacraments, which God has provided
first to apply his death and passion unto us, as we have seen proved: and
next he has also provided them to be bands to bind and roll up our wounds
in this life, to stay and ease the ruptures and breaches of our soul. August.
in Psalm. 146.
Alligamenta medicinalia, etc. The Sacraments used here for the time, by which
we have confort, be medicinal bands of our contrition and rupture. Perfecta
sanitate detrahentur. When our health shall be perfect, which shall be in heaven,
they shall be pulled of, but we should not atteyne and comme to that, were we not
rouled and bound up.

S. Augustine says, that the Sacraments for the time of this life be our
medicines and salues to keep us in health, and for the life to comme so
necessary, that no man should atteine thereunto without them.

Here some man will say, faith God purifieth and makes clean the hearts of
men? Act. 15. Ephe. 2. Joan. 6.
Is it not in S. Paul, by grace are ye saved through faith? Did not Christ him
self say, he that believes in me, has life everlasting? With many like
sayings, wherein faith is commended, without any mention made either of hope,
charity, or Sacraments? Yeas verily, he that believes in me, Joan. 6.
has everlasting life: so do we likewise believe it to be true: If I have
all faith, and have no charity, I am nothing: 1. Cor. 13. Romans 8. Joan. 3.
as true do we think that also: by hope are we saved: and no less true:
Unless a man be borne again by water and the holy Ghost, he shall not enter
into the kingdom of heaven. As true do we take that to be: Luc. 13.
unless ye do penance, ye shall all perish, after a like sort.

After this manner does the Scripture sometime speak of faith, and attribute
Justification unto it, Note well.
making no mention of hope, charity, or penance. Sometime it seems to give
the like preeminence to charity, mentioning neither faith, nor any of the
rest, sometime to hope, sometime to Baptism or penance without the rest:
sometime it promises reward of life everlasting to faith without mention of
good works: sometime to good works, saying nothing of faith: and yet is there
no one of them meant to be excluded or left out. And therefore the godly reader
wisely meek, and meekely wise, when he sees life everlasting promised to
every one of these particularly, A rule for the right understanding of the
Scriptures.
remembering that every word of God is like true, joins them al together,
and truly believes, that to the perfiting of our Justification and Salvation
there is required grace, faith, the fear of God, hope, charity, together with
the Sacraments of Baptism and penance, and also good works, as has been
showed before. It is not the manner of the holy Ghost, nor of the Catholic
Church by affirming of one treweth, to deny or take away an other, but to join
all truth together. S. Paul the true and earnest commender of faith, preached
in Asia publicly and privately. Act. 20.
Testificans Iudaeis atque gentibus in Deum poenitentiam, and fidem in Dominum
nostrum Iesum Christum. Protesting to the Jews and Gentiles penance toward
God, and faith in our Lord Jesus Christ, and there joined he faith and penance
together. S. Augustine often times teaches, that we are saved by Baptism,
intending not to exclude faith in such, as be of perfect age: and therefore
says: Baptismus, qui semel adhibetur, Ser. 30. de ver. Do.
per fidem mundat: Baptism that is given but once, Note.
cleanses by faith. If this rule were marked and put in ure, we were at a
point, not only in this matter, but in many other.

The Euchites waying the great commendation that Christ in the Gospel gives
unto prayer, Matt. 7. Luc. 11.
saying: Petite and dabitur vobis. Ask, and it shall be given you: And what so
ever things ye ask in prayer, Mar. 11.
believe ye shall have them, and they shall come to pass unto you, were of
opinion, Theodor. li. 4. here. fabul. et hist. eccle. li. 4. ca. 11.
that prayer alone was sufficient for a Christian man. They did set light by
Baptism, and said the holy Sacrament of the altar did neither good, nor
harm. Whereby they took no fruit of their prayer, and lost the benefit of
the Sacraments, and their own salvation. Let them be taught by this
example, who seeming to extolle faith, make light not only of hope, charity
and good works, but also of the very Sacraments ordained by Christ for our
salvation. Let them take heed, lest beside losing the benefit of Christ's
Sacraments, they be not found void of true faith also. For what faith can we
say that they have, or how do they believe Christ, Matt. 20. 2. Cor. 12. Act.
8.
who being taught by his own words to be Baptized, if they be Hethen, and by
the words of S. Paul, and S. Peter, after Baptism to do penance, when they
have sinned, be careless to do the one, or the other?

It has been declared before, In the 6. chapter.
that sins be forgeuen and we justified by the Sacraments of Baptism and
penance. It has been showed also, In the 11. chapt.
that faith is one of the parts of true penance, and therefore penance can not
exclude faith, neither faith, if it justify, exclude penance.

For faith is either unfeigned, lively and profitable, De fid. et oper. ca. 16
such as S. Augustine terms, fidem Christianorum, Christian men's faith, or
else it is naked and dead, such as because the Devil may have, he calls,
fidem Daemonioru^, Iaco. 2.
the Devils faith. The naked and bare faith justifies no man: for if it could,
the Devil might be justified. The lively and Christian man's faith believing al
scripture to be true, and seeing penance not only commended, but also commanded,
can not pass it over, but by prayer obteineth it, and so justifies. Penance
is the reviving of a soul that is dead by sin. Aug. de trinit. lib. 4. cap.
3.
Anima Deo deserente, moritur, the soul dies when God forsakes it:
Resuscitatur per poenitentiam: It is raised up again by penance. Ho 20. in Genesis
And because penance is the mean to receive Gods grace, Chrysostom says,
that upon contrition of heart, remorse and confession, God does not only give
the healing of wounds, but makes him a just man that was before loded with
innumerable burdens of sins.

Constitu. Apost. lib. 2. ca. 23.
Seeing therefore, the holy Ghost has so provided for us, that as S. Clement
says, the Church of God is our peace, and a quiet and calm haven, unto the
which sinners may be restored, Joan. 20.
by absolution: Seeing also that Christ has made that favorable promise,
saying, whose sins you forgive, they be forgeuen them: De adulter. co^iug.
li. 2. ca. 9.
whereby as S. Augustine says, Per claues regni coelorum non dubitatur fieri
remissio peccatorum: There is no doubt, but through the keys of the kingdom
of heaven sins be forgeuen: Let no man presume through Justification by
faith, to misprise or contemn the Sacrament of penance. Let no man leave the
sure for the doubtefull and uncertain. For as in case of necessity men may
enjoy the invisible grace of God, Aug. super Leuiti. Quaest. 84.
without the visible Sacraments, so is not the visible Sacrament to be
despised when it may be had. Nam contemptor eius sanctificari nullo modo
potest. For the dispiser of it can by no means be sanctified inuisibly. Faith
can not only justify no man, where the contempt of Christ's Sacraments is,
but further, that very contempt makes a man profane and wicked, as S.
Augustine says. Sacramentorum vis inenarrabiliter valet plurimum, Contr.
Faust. lib. 19. cap. 11.
and ideo contempta facit sacrilegos: impie quippe contemnitur, sine qua no^
potest perfici pietas. The virtue of Sacraments is of great and unspeakable
force, and therefore if it be despised, it makes men profane and wicked. For
wickedly is it despised, without the which godliness and piety can not be
perfited.

Seeing then that the Sacraments by the death of Christ have that singular
virtue whereby sins be forgeuen, the passion of Christ applied unto us, our
wounds and ruptures tied up and rowlled by them, as by medicinal bands,
without the which we could not atteine to perfect health: how can it be
said, that faith alone can justify, or exclude the virtue of them in our
Justification?

What is the true meaning of these words in the Scripture: we are justified
by faith, or saved by faith: with other like. THE VII. CHAPTER.
BUT seeing that all words of the Scripture be the words of God, Of faith
Iustifiing. Romans 3. Galat. 3. Joan. 6. Lucae. 7.
written by inspiration of the holy Ghost, and therefore undoubtedly true, if
Faith can not work our Justification without charity and other virtues, how
is it then said that, the justice of God comes through faith of Jesus Christ
into al, and upon all that believe in him? And in an other place. By Faith God
justifies the gentile:? What is meant by these words of Christ? He that
believes in me, has life everlasting. Thy Faith has saved thee, with many
other like? Whereunto I answer. There be two causes why it is said, through
faith, Two Causes why faith is said to justify.
and by faith we are justified.

To begin with the first, Faith is the beginning of justice, the root of
good works, the foundation whereupon godly life is builded: Aug. de
praedesti. Sanct. c. 7.
Ex fide au^t ideo dicit iustificari hominem, For this cause S. Paul says a
man is justified by Faith, not by works, for that Faith is first given,
whereby other which properly are called good works (by the which men live
justly) may be obtained.

Without the direction of Faith no man can live well, nor do good works. Aug.
de fide and operib. cap. 7.
Nisi praecedat fides, vita bona sequi non poterit. etc. unless Faith goo
before, good life can not follow, for what so ever a man shall do with show
of well doing, except it be done for piety and duties sake toward God,
Cyril. in Joan. li. 4. cap. 9. 1. Cor. 3. Augu. de fide and operib. c. 16
it can not be called righteouse nor good. Ianua and via in vitam fides est.
Faith is the gate and way to enter into life. Faith is the foundation
whereupon the whole building of a Christian and godly life is laid. Si autem
Christus, proculdubio fides Christi. etc. If Christ be the foundation,
undoubtedly the Faith in Christ is the foundation, for by Faith Christ dwells
in our hearts. For that cause the Bishops assembled at Magunce to reform the
state of the Church, and to direct the people to a Christian and godly life,
Council. Magun. cap. 1. Romans 5. Ephesians. 3.
said: Initium actionis nostrae de fide esse decreuimus. etc. We have
determined, that the beginning of our doing is of Faith, which is the
foundation of all good: for without Faith we can not please God. By Faith it is
that we have access to Christ. Faith is a mean to obtain and get our
Justification. Aug. de Spiri. et Lit. ca. 29
Iustificatio autem ex fide impetratur. etc. Justification is obtained by
Faith. And by what mean, S. Augustine does there express. Per fidem
impetratio gratiae contra peccatum: Aug. de Spiri. and Lit. ca. 30.
Per gratiam sanatio animae a vitio peccati. By Faith grace is obtained against
sin and by grace the soul is healed of that is amiss by sin.

Because therefore Faith is the gate and entry to life, the root of good
works whereof all justice takes his beginning, the foundation whereupon godly
life is builded, the mean to obtain Justification and good works, without
the which nothing pleases God, the Scripture says, that by Faith a man is
justified: for of Faith it may be said: Haec porta Domini, iusti intrabunt
in eam. Psalm. 117.
This is our Lords gate, the just shall enter into it.

And here the Reader must be advertised, The Catholic Faith. Vincentius
Lyrine^sis.
that by faith is understood the true Catholic faith, which holds and
believes only that, that the Catholic Church has holden from Ancient time
universally. And what so ever it shall understand to be brought in, afterward
of any one beside or against all the holy, it accompteth that not to perteine
to religion, but to temptation. To this Faith is all promise made and
preeminence given in the Scripture. This faith is the foundation of justice. If
any other be brought in contrary or diverse from this, No^ est fides, Cyril.
supra.
sed perfidia. It is not faith, but falsehod: not the foundation of justice and
gate of life, but the way to destruction. Symbol. Athan. Aug. Euchi. cap. 1.
De fide and open. ca. 14. Epist. 105. De spiri. et Lit. cap. 32. Aug. de fide et
oper. c. 16.
For we sing in the Creed: Unless a man hold the Catholic Faith sound and
inviolable, he shall without doubt be lost for ever.

An other cause why the Scripture so speaks, is, that wheresoever it is said
a man is justified by faith: there is not meant a bare, naked, or solitary
faith, but that faith that works through Charity. And therefore S.
Augustine, where he says, that faith is the foundation whereby Christ dwells
in our hearts, immediately after adds these words: Porro fides Christi illa
vtique etc. But that is verily meant the faith of Christ, which the Apostle
determined, that has her working through Charity. Iaco. 2. Mar 1. Lucae. 4.
Matthew. 8.
For it is not the Faith of devils, though they also believe and tremble, and
confess Jesus to be the Son of God, that may be taken for the foundation:
and why so? but because it is not the Faith that works through Charity, but
such as is wroong out through fear. The Faith then of Christ, the Faith of
Christian grace, that is to wit, the Faith that has her working through
charity, if it be laid in the foundation, suffers by which words it
appears, that Faith may be without charity, but such a Faith can not make
Aug. Epistola. 105. Jacob. 2. Mar. 1. Lucae. 4. Matthew. 8.
and the devil may not. Illa quippe fides est Christianorum, non daemoniorum:
That which works through Charity, is the Christian, and not the devils
faith: for devils also believe and tremble: but do they likewise love? If they
had no belefe, they would not have said, thou art the Holy of God, thou
art the Son of God: had they love, they would not have said, what have we
to do with thee? Other says then this S. Augustine commends not, as able to
justify: Illa est laudabilis fides, August. sermon. 13. de verb. Apostol.
ipsa est vera gratiae fides, quae per dilectionem operatur. That is the praise
worthy faith, that is the true faith of grace, which works through charity.

That faith it is that Christ requires of us, which if we have not, we shall
die in our sin. They be his own words: If you believe not that I am, Joan.
8.
ye shall die in your sin. And let us not think, says Cyrillus, Cyril. in
Joan. li. 5. ca. 23.
that God made this threat only unto the Jews: Eadem enim nos quoque manet
damnatio si non in Christum fide per per dilectionem operante crediderimus. For
the like damnation remains for us also, if we believe not in Christ by faith
that woorketh through charity. To teach us this difference of faith and
believing, Christ says in an other place: Joan. 7.
Qui credit in me sicut dicit scriptura, flumina de ventre eius fluent aquae
viua. He that believes in me, in such sort as the Scripture says, fluddes of
lively water shall flow out of his belie. By fluddes of lively water, as there
S. John says, is meant the holy Ghost, which they should receive that
believed in him. Christ said not, who so believes in me, but he that believes
in me as the Scripture says: for that is the true pointing of the sentence,
Note.
as Theophilactus notes there. And who doubts, but that the Scripture beside
faith, teaches us also to love Christ, to hope in him, to do penance, to
receive his Sacraments, and to live godly? If no man then be justified without
the holy Ghost, who powers charity into our hearts, seeing the holy
Ghost is given to such only, who believe in Christ as the Scripture says,
the Scripture bidding us not only to believe in Christ, but also to love him,
it follows that they only be justified, who have faith working through
charity. Theophil. ibi. in cap. 7. Joan.
Multi enim se putant credere, sed non vt dicit Scriptura, etc. For many think
they believe, but they believe not as the Scripture says. And so have they
followed their own sects, such as all heretics be: but he says, the rivers
shall flow out of his belie, that is the true faithful beleuer.

Although this place alone might suffice, to teach the indifferent Reader,
what faith it is that pleases God, yet do other Scriptures in sundry places
put us in mind, that a bare and solitary faith suffices not. As Christ
said to Marie Magdalene: Luc. 7.
Fides tua te saluam fecit, Thy faith has saved thee, so said he there of her
also, sins be forgeuen her, because she has loved much. And what is that to
say, but that she was saved by faith through charity? Beside that, she
showed by her tears a great penance, and by coming to Christ being so
notable a sinner she declared a great hope. Math. 9.
The woman that was healed of the blooddy flyxe, had not only a faith, but
also so earneste hope, that she trusted she should be whole, might she but
once touch the skyrte or hemme of Christ's garment. Math. 15.
Christ commended in an other woman faith, but a great faith, Hom. 34. in Gene.
saying: O woman great is thy faith, because, says Chrysostom, he saw in
her such a constancy and perseverance that could not be wearied. And as S.
Augustine says: De fide and oper. c. 16.
He that looks into the heart, saw that she was changed and become a new
woman: and therefore whereas he had before called her dog, he said not then:
O dog, but o woman, In Joan. li. 10. c. 16.
great is thy faith: Cyrill says, that they be the faithful who by sincere
faith are graffed in Christ as branches in the vine. And to declare what he
means by sincere faieth, he says: It is not enough for our sanctification,
unless we clean still fast unto Christ by charity. Oecomenius requires in
our Justification a faith in deed: (...): a true faith, In cap. 2. Jacob.
such as can not be in an unclean man, a faith not only in assente, which
rests in believing truth, but a faith in affection that stands in love. S.
Hierome says, Math. 9.
that both in the woman that was healed, and in the petie captain or Centener,
Deuota Deo suo anima approbata est. A devout soul to their God was allowed,
Aduer. Luciferianos
such a faith as is hardely found in them that believe well. Be it unto thee,
says God, according to thy faith: that saying would not I hear, for if it be
done to me according to my faith, I shall perish. And yet surely I believe in
God the Father, I believe in God the Son, I believe in God the holy Ghost.
By which words we understand, that S. Hierome thinks it not enough to
believe, but requires also with faith a great and earneste devotion, which
can not be without a great and earnest love.

S. Paul advancing faith with singular commendation, Heb. 11.
and saying, that all the Fathers were allowed and pleased God thereby,
commends that faith, wherewith not only charity, but all other virtues
were joined. By faith Abel offered sacrifice, Enoch lived godly, Noe feared
God. Ambulauit cum Deo.
Abraham obeyed God forsook his country, and offered up his son. Moses was
content to suffer affliction, Raab received the messengers sent to spy. By
faith the holy did work justice, suffered scorning, and whipping, yea chains
and prison, were stoned, cut in pieces, and dyed by the sword. Such a faith
does S. Paul commend, a faith joined with religion and duty toward God,
with fear of God, with obedience of Gods commandment, with patience, with
justice, with suffering of al grief and pain, yea death it self for Gods sake.

According to the same rule our Creed requires a sound and Catholic faith.
S. Augustine, the faith of Christ, the faith of christian grace, a faith of
Christian men, not such as may be in Diuelles. Cyril, a sincere faith. S.
Hierome, a faith full of devotion. Oecumenius, a true faith, not only in
opinion, but in heart and affection.

All which things are comprised by S. Augustine in these few words. It is
the faith that has her woorking through charity, that makes a just and a
good manne. Abac. 2. Romans 1. August. de spirit. et. li. c. 32
Haec est fides, ex qua iustus viuit: This is the faith whereby the just man
lives, this is the faith whereby men believe in him that justifies the wicked.
This is the faith whereby vaunting and boasting is shut out. This is the faith
whereby abundance and largess of the holy Ghost is obtained. This is the
faith whereby they are saved, to whom it is said, Ephe. 2. Galat. 5. Abach.
2. Romans 1. The true meaning of those words, The just man lives by faith.
Leo ser. 5. de collect. Bed. in die natal. Do. ad Sum. Miss.
by grace ye are saved through faith. Finally, to conclude, this is the faith
that woorketh through charity. In which words beside other things it is to
be noted, that the faith whereby we are saved, and the faith whereby the just
man lives, is none other but the faith that works through charity. Which
virtue, says Leo, by her mixture and tempering, gives life even to very
faith, whereby the just man lives. For the just man lives by faith, says
S. Bid, not by that faith that is uttered only by confession of the lips,
but by that faith that woorketh through charity.

And thus may we truly understand, what the Scripture means, as often as it
is said, by faith we are saved, or through faith we are justified.

That S. Paul teaches not Justification by only Faith, excluding charity,
etc. And in what sense the Fathers sometime say, Faith alone justifies. THE
VIII. CHAPTER.
BUT yet this satisfies not all men. An Objection. Romans 3. Galat. 3.
For some think still we are justified by faith alone, for that S. Paul
saying, we are justified by faith, and putting to it, without works of the
Law, seems to them, to say as much, as we are justified by faith alone. And
that opinion they enforce the more, because diverse of the ancient Fathers
have used these words: Faith alone justifies. The Answer.
To the which I answer, that neither S. Paul, nor any of the Ancient
Fathers ever meant it in that sense which they have taken it, that is, to
exclude from Justification Charity, hope, penance, or any virtue and gift of
God. S. Paul his words by them alleged, be in the Epistles to the Romans
and Galathians. Aug. ad Simplicia. li. 1. qu. 2. Et in exposit. epist. ad Romans
inchoat. Primas. in Praefa. epist. ad Romans Aug. in Exposi. 4. ca. ad Gal.
The Argument and intent of his whole Epistle to the Romans, as S. Augustine
says, is this: Vt de ipsorum meritis nemo glorietur, etc. That no man boast
nor vaunt him self of the merit of his works, of which the Israelites were
bold to make their boaste that they served the Law which was geauen them, and
thereby had received the grace of the Gospel as a debt due unto their
deserts, because they served the law, for which cause they would not have the
same grace given to the Gentiles as unworthy of it, unless they would receive
the Jewish Sacraments.

The Galathians, to whom the Gospel had been preached, were moved and
solicited by Jews, whose desire was to bring them to carnal obseruances of the
Law, Aug. in Exposi. 4. ca. ad Gal. Prima. in argu. ep. ad Galat. Romans 4.
Galat. 3.
as though salvation lay in the same. To answer unto both these, boasting of
them selves, and of the works of the law, and exacting them of other, as
necessary to salvation, In both these Epistles S. Paul says, no man is
justified by the law, proouing the same by Abraham, who was justified before
circumcision was commanded, and long before the law was given, and thereby does
bar and put of al works of the Law from our Justification, as nothing
auailing toward the same.

But what the works of the law be, it is not a matter so plain to all men.
Beside the rites and ceremonies commanded by Moses, S. Augustine calls all
such the works of the Law, as a man presumes to do of him self, of his
own power and strength, without faith and the help of God: August. de spirit.
et. li. c. 29
Adhuc dubitamus, quae sunt opera legis, quibus homo non iustificatur, si ea
tanquam sua crediderit, sine adiutorio and dono Dei, quod est ex fide Jesus
Christi? Do we yet doubt what the works of the Law are, by which no man is
justified, if he take them as his own without (...) help and gift of God,
which comes by the faith of Jesus Christ? These be the works of the law,
Sermon. 15. de verb. Apostol.
which in another place he calls also the justice of the law: Lege Dei
proposita, etc. When the law of God is laid before us, whosoever is proud and
thinks he is able to fulfill it by his own power and strength, if he do that
the law commands, not for the love of justice, but for fear of punishment:
this man concerning the justice of the law, is a man without blame. In both
places, he calls al such the works of the law, and the justice of the
law, that a man does of him self presuming of his own strength without grace
and help of God. Ex lege, quia in mandatis: Aug. ibid.
sua tanque de viribus suis: It is the justice of the law, because it is
commanded. It is a man's own because it comes as of his own strength. Now as S.
Paul does truly bar and shut out from the procuring of our Justification al
rites and ceremonies of the law, and also all moral works, that we do of
our selves, without faith and help of God: So if a man would reason that he
barreth likewise charity, hope, penance, and the Sacraments of the Church,
because a man is justified by faith without works of the law, he should show
him self ignorant of the Scriptures and of S. Paul's meaning.

These be no works of the law. For not only charity, Galat. 5.
joy, peace, patience, mildenes, and faith, but briefly al works of charity,
when they be done by faith, by help of grace and the gift of God, are fruits
of the holy Ghost, not works of the law. Lex spiritus and vitae. Romans 8.
They be the law of the holy Ghost, and of life, perteining not to the letter
that kills, but to the spirit that gives life. August. de spirit. et lit. c.
17
Ad prudentiam carnis terrendam. etc. When the works of charity are written in
tables to make the wisdom of the flesh afraied, it is the law of works, and
the letter that kills the transgressour: but when charity is powered into the
beleuers heart, it is the law of faith and the spirit that gives life to the
beleuer. S. Augustine says, works that be done for fear only, by
commandment of the law, are called the law of works, and the killing
letter: but when they be done by charity, which through the holy Ghost is
powered into our hearts, they be called the Law of faith, and give life to the
doers. They be called the law of faith, and works of faith, because they are
geauen by faith and with faith. Aug. ibid. cap. 30.
Per fidem impetratio gratiae contra peccatum, etc. By faith grace is obtained
against sin, by grace the soul is healed from sin.

Wherefore, when S. Paul says: a man is justified by faith without works of
the Law, Romans 3.
he says nothing else, but that a man is justified by grace, and not by him
self. For as he says here, Ephesians. 2. Romans 3.
by faith a man is justified, so says he else where, by grace ye are saved:
As he says in this place, non ex operibus legis, Ephesians. 2.
not by works of the law: So he says there: Non ex vobis, Dei donum est:
Not by your selves, it is the gift of God. Romans 4.
So does he say: Abraham was not justified by his works, he deserved not Gods
grace and his Justification by his own doings: he was not able to crake
against God, nor to presume of him self. He had it not secundum carnem, by
flesh, and of him self: but by promise and by faith from God. And thus it
appears plainly that S. Paul by Justification of faith without works of
the Law, does not exclude charity, hope, penance, nor any virtue or gift of
God given by faith, but only barreth man's own presumption and pride, man's
own doings without God, with rites and ceremonies taught by Moses.
Otherwise, if it had been his intent to exclude the gifts of God, virtues and
works of faith, we might say with S. Augustine: August. in praefatio. Psalm.
31.
Quomodo dicit Apostolus iustificari hominem, etc. How does the Apostle say,
that a man is justified by faith without works, seeing that he says in an
other place, that is the faith which woorketh through charity: we need not
then set the Apostle James against Paul, but Paul himself against Paul.

And this much may suffice concerning the right understanding of S. Paul's
words, who as S. Augustine says, If he should mean that faith alone
justifies, he should not only speak against S. James, but against him self
also.

For even as God, when he says, Deuteronomy. 32. A very apt similitude
Videte quod ego sim solus. etc. See, that I am alone, and there is none other
God beside me, spoke not the same in the person of the Father only, meaning
thereby to exclude the Son and the holy Ghost, as the Arrians understood it,
but did exclude only creatures, and all that is not God: in like manner, when
it is said, by faith we are justified, there is no virtue or gift of God
barred: nothing is excluded, that is joined and given with faith, but that
only is shut out, which is repugnante, contrary or strange unto Faith.

That which I have said of S. Paul, serves also for the true understanding
of the ancient Fathers, who when they say, Faith alone justifies, exclude
some one thing, which is repugnante, or, in the sense that they meant, not
necessary to Justification. Basil. concio. de humilita.
S. Basil writing in the commendation of humility, says: Haec est perfecta
and integra gloriatio in Deo. etc. This is the perfect and sound boasting in
God, when a man does not vante him self of his own justice, but knows him
self to be needy of true justice, and justified by only Faith in Christ. He
barreth as S. Paul does the presumption of our own justice, boasting and
vanting of our selves, not hope, nor charity, which be Gods gifts: which
plainly to declare, a little after he says these words. Quid extollis te, dic
mihi? etc. Tell me, why doste thou extol thy self, as it were for thine own
good doings, whereas thou should render thanks to the geuer for his
gifts? Faith then justifies us without our own works as of our selves,
Ephesians. 2. In cap. 9. Epistola ad. Romans
but not without charity and the works which God has prepared for us to walk
in. S. Ambrose says: Sublatis omnibus neomenijs. etc. All the festiual days of
the new moan, the sabbath day and Circumcision, the law of meats and offering
of beasts taken away, faith alone is placed for our salvation. He excludes
the rites and ceremonies of Moises, as S. Paul does, saying that faith alone
without them saves. The same answer serves to the words of Chrysostom, who
expounding the place of S. Paul, where he forbids men to avoid Jewish
fables, Hom. 3. in Epist. ad Tit. The Word, Sola, Alone, is not in the Greek.
says: Si fidei credis. etc. If thou credit faith why bring thou in other
things beside, as though faith alone were not enough to justify: why do
thou subject thy self to voluntary bondage, and put thy neck under the yoke
of the law? He says not, why do thou match with faith, hope or charity,
but why do thou put thy neck under the yoke of the law? And in an other
place he says: Hom. 27. in cap. 8. Matthew.
vt iam neminem fugere possit. etc. So that no man can now be ignorant, but
that it is declared by these words, that salvation everlasting is given to men
through faith, not by the works of the law: he says by faith, and yet not
alone excluding only the works of the law.

Arnobius writing upon the Psalms, and reproving the Nouatians heresy, who
said that such as were once christened, In Psalm. 106. Baptism is called
redemption, because there by we be partakers of Christ his redemption.
if they did fall afterward, could not be helped nor restored again by
penance, has these words: Thou saiste that such as be not yet redeemed and
Christened, they through penance may attain to pardon: we say they obtain
pardon by Faith alone. But such as be redeemed and christened come to enjoy
the mercy of their redemer, not by Faith alone because they have already
believed, but by penance. Of such as came to the Faith and desired baptism, the
Church required not severe nor strait penance, such as was usually inioined to
sinners that after Baptism fell again, and therefore he says such were
pardoned by faith alone, that is to say, without that kind of sharp penance.
But how there was in them Faith alone, the Reader may know by that I have
said in the eighth Chapter, where it is declared by Justinius Martyr,
Tertullian, and S. Augustine, that the custom of the Church, as well before
as after Arnobius his time, was to receive none to Baptism, but such as asked
pardon of their former sins, Ibidem. Iusti. Mar. Tertullia. August. Epito
Diuino Decreto. de poeniten.
promised a new life, and for certain days before their Baptism, used
fasting and prayer: The like words, and in the like argument uses
Theodoritus, saying: wounds that are made after Baptism, are curable. Mary
curable not by forgeuenes through Faith only, as once it was, but by many
tears, weping and wayling, by fasting, prayer and labor measured according to
the quantity of the sin committed. To these I will join S. Ambrose, because
he agrees with them in words and matter: Gratia Dei in Baptismate. In ca. 11.
ad Romans
etc. The grace of God in Baptism requires not sighing or morning, or any
work, but only a profession with heart: And in that sense he says:
Iustificati sunt gratis. In cap. 3. ad Romans
They are freely justified, because working nothing, nor making no recompense,
they are justified by Faith alone thorough the gift of God. Quemadmodum autem
etc. In cap. 4. ad Romans
But how can it stretch or apperteine to the person of such as do penance,
when he says, Blessed they are whose sins be covered, sith it is a matter
well known, that penitente persons get remission of their sins by labor
and sighing? Arnobius, Theodoritus, and S. Ambrose say, that some men are
justified by only Faith, that is to say, without penance: they say it not
of all men, but of such as come newely to the Faith and be baptized. Further
their mening is not, that they are justified without al penance, for then
should they gainesaie Christ's preaching, which was: Mar. 1. In the 6. Chap. of
this book. Ambros. supra. De fide and oper. c. 26.
Poenitemini, and credit Euangelio. Repent and believe the Gospel: and I have
showed before, that true Faith can not be without penance: but they say, in
Baptism such are justified without sighing or morning, that is to say without
sharp and laboriouse penance, as in the Church they did who properly were
called penitentes, as S. Augustine says.

Therefore, as for our selves to whom all this question must be referred,
being baptized in our infancy, when they say, Note. Faith alone.
that such as fall after Baptism, can not be justified by Faith alone, but
by penance, They plainly say, towching us already baptized, that no man is
nor can be justified by Faith alone, and so by them is this question ended
concerning us.

But some man will say, how may it be plainly understood, that by
Justification of faith only, which the ancient Fathers seem in words to
affirm, their meaning was not to exclude and bar hope, charity and works
of faith? Sum. Moral. 80. cap. 22.
To that they shall answer for them selves severally each by their own words.
S. Basil asks: Quid est proprium Christiani? What is the peculiar property
of a Christian man? fides per dilectionem operans: faith that works through
charity. And toward the end of the same chapter: Matthew. 5.
What is the property of a Christian man? that his justice abunde in all
points above the Scribes, and Pharisees according to the doctrine in our
Lords Gospel: what is the property of a Christian man? to love one another as
Christ has loved us. By S. Basil then faith alone is not enough to make either
a just or a good Christian man.

S. Ambrose declares his meaning in sundry places, but of many to take one he
expresses it in these words. Sine fide impossible est placere Deo etc. In
ca. 4. epist. ad Hebre.
Without faith it is impossible to please God, but faith alone suffices not,
it is necessary for faith to work through charity, and to use conversation
worthy to be allowed of God. Chrysostom says. Ne fideles sola fide, etc. Hom.
70. in Matt. cap. 22.
Because the faithful should not trust they might be saved by faith alone,
Christ speaks of the ill men's pains: so does he move the infideles to
faith, and the faithful to good life. And in an other place he says. Ad agenda
opera festinemus, Hom. in Genesis 47.
neque enim aliter saluari nos possibile, etc. Let us make haste to do good
works, for otherwise it is not possible for us to be saved.

Theodoritus in like manner says: Epito. Diuino. Decre. de seruato incarna. In
Joan. li. 10. ca. 17.
Et post Seruatoris aduentum, Even after the coming of our Savior all atteine
not to salvation, but such as believe and frame their life according to his
divine Laws.

Christ plainly teaches, says Cyrillus, that such as go away from him,
whether it be, that they fall in faith, or in keeping of his commandments,
shall not only bring forth no fruit, but shall also suffer everlasting fire.
And further he says, if only faith were enough, Cyril. in Joan. lib. 10. cap.
18.
the multitude of Diuelles should not perish. Assure thy self good Reader, a
whole book much bigger then this treaty is, could not suffice to hold the
sayings of the ancient Fathers, like unto these. But seeing that in the mouth
of two, Matt. 18.
or three witnesses, stands every word: I may say either these witnesses
suffice, or I know not what may suffice.

The opinion is such as ought to be removed out of all Christian hearts: De
grati. and lib. arbit. ca. 7.
which as S. Augustine says, has none other ground but the misconstruing of
S. Paul's words, of which he him self says there: God forbid, that the
Apostle should be of that mind: It is such as no man can hold for true,
unless he will make many and evident Scriptures false. For granting it to be
true that only faith suffiseth, falsa erunt illa quae obscuritatem
ambiguitatemque non habent, Aug. de fid. et open. cap. 15. 1. Cor. 13.
etc. Those sayings of Scripture shall be false, which are neither dark nor
doubtefull. If I have all faith, in so much as I be able to remove mountains
out of their place, and have no charity, I am nothing: what shall it avail,
my brethren, Iaco. 2.
if a man say he has faith, and have no good works, can faith save him? And
alitle after, if thou will come to life, Matt. 19.
keep the commandementes. These (says S. Augustine) with other there alleged,
shall be false.

Which inconvenience because no man can bear, I will apply unto faith
touching our Justification, the words that Chrysostom uttered of prayer.
Chrysostom. To. 5. li. 1. de orand. Deum.
Neque sola temperantia, etc. It is neither temperance alone that can save a
man, if other virtues lack, neither careful provision for the poor, nor any
other thing that is vertuousely done: but all must concur and come together
into our souls. Marie prayer is laid under all the rest, as the root and
foundation to bear them up: Even so it may be truly said, faith is the
root of all good works, and the foundation that is laid under godly life. And
yet can neither faith, nor hope, nor charity alone justify. All must concur
and comme together into our sowles, and then is that excellent and divine work
of our Justification accomplished, and not otherwise.

How Abraham was justified. What his faith was, and who be the true children
of Abraham. THE IX. CHAPTER.
THE readiest and plainest way to open matters doubtefull and to clear that
which is dark, is to teach by examples. Seeing therefore the Scripture
commends often unto us Abraham for an example and pattern of Justification,
and says: Esai. 51.
Attendite ad Abraham patrem vestrum: Look to Abraham your father, there is no
better way for us rightly to understand that matter, then to consider how
Abraham was justified, and how he atteined to that singular prerogative to be
commended by the holy Ghost, Romans 4.
and called the father of all faithful and believing, and inheriter of the
world. The Scripture says of him: Credidit Abraham Deo. Genesis 15. Galat. 3.
Abraham believed God, and it was accounted unto him for Justice: but as
Abraham was justified by faith, which all men confess, so is it to be
considered, what faith that was, whereby he was justified, and so singulerly
pleased God. Primasius says: Abraham quia credidit Deo, etc. In cap. 11.
epist. ad Hebrae. Iaco. 2.
Because Abraham believed God, it was accounted unto him for justice, and he
was called Gods friend. But this faith is so to be taken, that it be believed
in heart, confessed in mouth, and garnished in works. And here it is well to
be noted, that the Scripture commending Abraham's faith, says not, Abraham
believed there was a God, but: Credidit Abraham Deo: Hom. 31. in Genesis
Abraham believed God: that is, as Chrysostom says: Credidit dictis Dei: He
gave credit unto Gods words and sayings. Many evil men, Iaco. 2. Mar. 1.
yea the Devil him self believes that there is one God, but neither evil men,
neither the Diuelles give credit to God nor his words to obey them. And this
is the difference, between the good and ill man, yea between a good man and the
Devil: the one believes the Scripture and obeieth it not, Psalm. 102.
the other is mindful of Gods commandments to do them. So does the
Scripture teach us to believe: Eccl. 32.
In omni opere tuo creed ex fide animae tuae: hoc est enim conseruatio
mandatorum. Qui credit Deo, attendit mandatis: In every work of thine, believe
and use the faith of thy soul, for that is the keeping of the commandments.
He that crediteth God, gives head to the commandments. Eccl. 33.
The wiseman does credit the Law of God, and the Law is true unto him. Then
to credit God and the Law, is to believe Gods words to be true, and to obey
the commandementes of God and the Law. For to him is the Law true, who does
not show by his life that he thinks it false.

So did Abraham believe and credit God in every work of his: Genesis 12.
God said unto him: Egredere de terra tua, etc. Go out of thy country, from thy
kindred from thy fathers house, and come into the land that I shall show thee.
He was in years, Hebr. 11.
he went, as S. Paul says, he knew not whither, he might have used many
excuses, as a man loathe to leave his native country, his kindred and friends,
which naturally all men love. Chrysostom. hom. 31. in Gene.
But as Chrysostom says: Nihil horum vel in mentem, etc. He thought it not
his part so much as to take any of these thoughts into his mind, but as a
willing seruante obeyed, at the only bidding, and asked no curiouse question.
And what was it that made him so to do? Omnia leuia and facilia. etc.
Chrysostom. ibidem.
His love that he bare toward God, made all things appear light and easy to
him. This was Abraham's faith. To believe God, that is, to credit his words,
and through a singular love to obey his commandment. God promised him a
child, Genesis 15.
when both his wife and he by course of nature were paste hope of issue, he
believed the promise hoping again hope. Romans 4.
Many years passed before it was fulfilled, his faith decayed not, he still
perseuered constantely believing it. Genesis 22.
God bid him offer in sacrifice his only son whom so dearly he loved: Hom.
47. in Genesis
without all douting or question asking he obeyed the commandment. O
religiosam animam, etc. O religiouse soul (says Chrysostom) O strong heart
and mind. O great desire. O reason passing the nature of man. He showed not
his faith only in believing Gods promise, but also in keeping his
commandementes. Credidit suscepturus filium. Credidit occisurus, etc. Aug. ser.
72. de tempo. Chrysostom. ho. 24. ad Hebre. Hom. 42. in Genesis Hom. 36. in Genesis Romans
4. Gala. 3. Chrysostom. hom. 36. in Genesis Genesis 15. Genesis 12.
He believed when he should have a son, he believed when he should kill his
son. In all points faithful, in nothing cruel. He had not only faith and
good belief, but, as Chrysostom says: Possedit iustus ille omnes virtutes:
That just man had all virtues. He notes in him, fortitude, magnanimity,
excellent faith, good and godly conversation, singular modesty, meruelouse
dispisinge of riches. Worthily is he called the father of many nations:
Sufficit enim vnus ille iustus vt omnes nos erudiat. For that one just man is
enough to teach us all. What faith was in him, that believed Gods promise
concerning his issue against the course of nature? what obedience? who being
but once spoken unto, forsook his country, his inheritance, his friends and
kindred? Yea was content to forgo his own and only son? Genesis 22.
How constante hope that never mistrusted Gods promise, were it never so long
delaied? Romans 4. Genesis 1^. Romans 4. Genesis 23.
What charity, almose, and hospitality? who used to sit at his door to wait
for strangers, and Pilgrims? What humility, who being inheritor of the
world bowed and kneled to the heathen people of the land? Ibidem.
what justice, that would not take a grave to bury his wife in, before he had
paid for the ground?

This is our pattern, by comparing our selves with him, we know whether we be
the children of Abraham, Galat. 3. Joan. 8.
and to be blessed with the faithful Abraham or no. Christ said to the Jews:
Si filij Abrahae estis, opera Abrahae facite. Cyril. Hieroso. Cate che. 5.
If ye be the children of Abraham, do Abraham's works: Quem idmodum ille
iustificatus est, and tu iustificeris. As he was justified, so be thou
justified.

And here it is to be noted, that God among al his faithful and holy, has
chosen him to be our example and pattern, who at his commandment forsook his
native country, kindred and inheritance, to teach us thereby, that such be the
true children of Abraham, Note S.
that deal with the world (when Gods honor or commandment so requires) as
he did with his country and inheritance.

Genesis 12. Esai. 52. 2. Cor. 6.
God said unto him: Go out of thy country and kindred. He says unto us: Exite
de medio eorum and separamini: Goo out of the middle of them, and depart from
them. Abraham with a sincere faith and mind, Chrysostom. hom. 37. in Genesis
obeyed the commandment: hunc and nos imitemur: Let us follow him, and in
ready mind and heart, Let us get out of the business of this present life
(especially when it draws us from God) and go into heaven. Hebrae. 11. Romans 8.
Abraham knew not the place whether he should go: We hope for that we see not,
and by patience look for it. Hebrae. 11.
By faith Abraham dwelled like a stranger in the land of promise: we are
required like strangers and Pilgrims, 1. Pet. 2. Genesis 22.
to abstain from carnal desiers that war against the soul: God said to
Abraham, offer in sacrifice thy only son whom thou love. Christ says unto
us: If a man come unto me and do not hate (that is to say, Luc. 14.
cannot be content to leave and to lack for my sake) his father and mother,
wife and children, brothers and sisters, yea and his own life also, he cannot
be my scholar. Hom. 36. in Genesis
Discamus et nos obsecro a Patriarcha Dei credere dictis. Let us I pray you
(says Chrysostom) learn of the patriarch to credit Gods words.

The Prophet Esaie says of Christ: Dominus iudex noster, Dominus legifer
noster, Esai. 33.
Dominus Rex noster ipse saluabit nos. The Lord is our judge, the Lord is our
law maker, the lord is our king, he shall save us. He is then not only a
promiser and savior, but he is also a judge, a law maker, and a king. As a
savior he redemeth and promises. As a law maker he appoints orders. As a
king he gives co^mandementes. As a judge he threateneth malefactors. Who so
believes him as a savior, and believes him not as a law maker, as a king, and
as a judge, he believes one part of Christ, but not the whole. Abraham believed
his promise that in his seed all nations should be blessed, Genesis 15. Gala. 3.
Genesis 17.
wherein he took him for a redemer. He believed him as a lawemaker, taking
circuncision by his appointement. He believed him as a king, leaving at his
commandment his country, kindred and inheritance: he took him for a judge,
saying, Genesis 12.
Qui iudicas omnem terra^, nequaquam facies iudicium hoc. Genesis 18.
Thou that iudgest all the earth, will not do this judgment. Let us learn to
trust his promise. He says: 2. Cor. 6.
I will dwell among them, I will walk among them, I will be their God, Romans 8.
Joan. 6.
and they shall be my people: if God be for us, who shall be against us? He that
believes in me, has life everlasting. Let us believe him as a Law maker,
receiving the Sacraments and rites of the new testament, as Abraham received
circumcision: Genesis 17. Matt. 19. Joan. 15.
Let us believe his commandementes also: he has said: If thou will come to
life, keep the commandementes, you be my friends if you do such things as I
command you: Let us believe his menasses and threateninges. Matthew. 3.
He has said: Every tree that bears not good fruit, shall be cut down and
cast into the fire. Ser. 16. de ver. Do.
Non times ne te iudicet Deus? vbi est fides? Art thou not afraied says S.
Augustine, that God will judge thee? where is faith?

If we believe his promises, and not his orders, not his commandementes, nor
threateninges, that is, believe him in some things, and discredit him in other:
we be not the right children of Abraham, who was euerywhere, and in all things
faithful, but rather bastard sons such as the Scripture speaks of, Deuteronomy.
32.
infideles filij, unfaithful children. S. Cyprian will say unto us: How can he
say that he believes in Christ, De simpli. Praelato.
who does not that Christ has commanded him to do? or how shall he come to
the reward of faith, that will not keep the faith of the commandment? Basil.
in consti. exercit. ca. 1.
S. Basil will say: Nos fidem non habemus ipsi: We believe him not, as one not
able to reliue, we shun to take upon us that good and light yoke of his: we
shun to enter into the kingdom of God by the narowe gate: He believes not
nor crediteth Christ, says S. Basil, that flees his yoke, and will not
enter by the strait gate. And yet he may believe, that Christ is God and man,
the Savior and redemer of the world: but he believes him not as Abraham did,
lovingly and willingly to obey him. Imitare fidem Abrahae. Basil. ibid. A nevve
Faith.
Follow Abraham's Faith, says S. Basil. If a man imagine and frame unto him
self a new devised faith, persuading him self assuredly and undoubtedly, that
all his sins be forgeuen in Christ and for his sake, Esai. 53.
for that he has taken our sins upon him, further assuring him self, that
for this faithes sake he is the Son and heir of God, Romans 8.
and heir partener with Christ, although he neither suffer with him, to be
glorified together with him, nor die with him, to live together with him, it
may trewely be said of such a one: Credit Christum, no^ credit Christo he
believes that Christ is, but he crediteth not Christ: he has a faith of his
own, but he has not Abraham's faith: for if he had, he would as well be
content to crucify the lusts and vices of his body, as desire to live with
Christ: as well suffer, Gala. 6.
as reign with him. Fidelis sermo: It is a true saying, 1. Tim. 1.
and by all means worthy to be imbrased, that Christ Jesus came into this
world to save sinners. Fidelis sermo: It is also a true saying. If we have
died with him, we shall live with him, 2 Timothy 2. Mark this well.
if we suffer with him, we shall reign with him, if we deny him, he will
deny us, if we believe not, he remains true, he can not deny him self. Who
so believes one of these Scriptures, and cares not for the other, he has not
Abraham's Faith, nor is his child. For Abraham believed God, that is, as
Chrysostom says: Credidit dictus Dei. Gave credit to Gods words, obeying
and following them, not one, but all. Will thou know good Reader, what
Abraham's Faith was, and how thou maiste be made his child? Learn by example
of him, whom truth it self declared to be the true Son of Abraham.

Zacheus standing before Christ, at what time he came into his house, Luca 15.
said: Lo I give the one half of my goods to the poor, and if I have
deceived any man in ought, I restore him four times as much, because he
believed the words of Christ, Date elemosinam. etc. Give alms, and all is
clean to you. ^sal. 5.
He said: I give the one half of my goods to the poor. And because he believed
that God hates all unjust dealers, he said, if I have deceived any man in
ought, I render four for one. And believing these things, which to a carnal
man seem hard, and doing them so readily for Christ his sake, we doubt not
but he believed likewise all other points of Faith as readily. Whereupon Jesus
said unto him: Luca. 19.
This date health and salvation is come to this house, because he also is the
Son of Abraham. And how he was the Son of Abraham, Cypriae. de Elemos.
S. Cyprian tells. Nam si Abraham credidit Deo. For if Abraham credited God,
and it was accounted to him for justice, doubtless he that according to Gods
commandment gives alms, does credit God: and he that has the true faith,
keeps the fear of God.

Thus have I showed, that the Faith which was reputed unto Abraham for justice,
was that faith whereby he did credit undoubtedly, and obediently follow, the
words of God, were they promises, or were they commandementes, as faithefull
in the one, as faithefull in the other. By this Faith Abraham was made the
Father of the believing: by this faith Zacheus was made the child of Abraham:
Gala. 3.
by the same rule, Qui ex fide sunt, benedicentur cum fideli Abraham. As many
as be faithefull, by this Faith, shall be blessed with the faithful Abraham.

If all other Scriptures towching this matter were doubtefull and dark, yet
might the example of these two men so plainly set forth in both Testamentes,
suffice the meek and godly Christian man trewely to understand what
apperteineth to Justification.

That there is no contrariety between S. Paul and S. James, concerning the
doctrine of Justification, and how they are to be understood. THE X. CHAP.
Because S. Paul says: Romans 4. Jacob. 2.
Abraham was justified by faith and not by works: And S. James writes, that
Abraham was justified by works, and not by Faith only, some have thought
there was a contradiction employed in the words of the two Apostles: but the
holy Ghost, who ruled both their pens, and is never contrary to him self,
meante one thing in them both, and by them both uttered one truth well agreing
with it self.

For the plain declaration whereof it is to be understood, 1 Cor. 4. Aug. in
Praefa. Psalm. 31.
that our Justification is compared unto a perfect building, or unto a
fruitful tree. For as in building there must be a foundation to bear up the
house, and the tree must have a root owte of the which the leaves and fruit
may spring: and yet it is to no purpose to lay a foundation if a man build
nothing upon it, neither is it enough in a fruitful tree to have the root
withowt branches, leaves, and fruit: See the first Chap. of this treaty.
even so is there in our Justification, as it were a foundation and root, and
a perfect building and fruit. The foundation and root is Faith, whereby we
have access to God, and be made of wicked rightuouse: Romans 5. Ephesians. 2. Gala.
5.
when I say, Faith, I mean not Faith alone, but accumpanied with charity as
S. Paul does. The building up or fruit of our Justification, is the
continuance, increase, and perfection of justice, whereby such as are once
justified, be made more just, and in the end perfited in justice, that is to
say, saved: Of al which I have said sufficientely before.

Of the root and foundation, which is the entry and first degree of Christian
justice, S. Paul speaks. Of thincrease and perfection S. James. Rom 4. Iaco.
2. Romans 5. Ephesians. 2.
S. Paul says, we are justified by Faith declaring what he means by
Justification: Habemus accessum per fidem in gratiam istam. We have access and
coming to this grace through Faith. And when he says through faith, he
means especially through grace and through mercy, Ephesians. 2.
whereby Faith is given. Tit. 3.
It was not for the works of justice, that we did, but through his mercy he
saved us. All men are borne sinners, called when they be sinners, by grace
called, by grace justified, and made of sinners rightuouse. Before our
Justification, In Praesa. Psalm. 31.
S. Augustine his words may be said to every one of us: Attenduntur opera
tua: and inuentuntur omnia mala. Thy works are looked on, and they be found
all evil. Rom 6.
If God should render unto these works that is due, he should condemn thee.
For the wages of sin is death. So was neither Abraham, nor any man justified
by works: Works done without Faith.
Neither Abraham, nor any other could deserve Justification by his works. For
works done without Faith, and before God give his grace in some degree,
deserve not at Gods hand either grace or reward of life everlasting. And thus
do we see, in what sense S. Paul said, Abraham was justified by faith, and
not by works. He was first called by mercy, and by grace, without any
deserte of his works going before. The like he says generally of al men,
that by grace they are called, Romans 5. Ephesians. 2.
and by faith have access to God, and be planted in Christ, and so justified
by faith, and not by works.

But here let the Reader take heed that he deceive not him self. For as before
the grace of God, Of works don with faith, and after God has given his
grace. 2. Timo. 3. Luc. 1.
no man is able to do any work good and profitable toward the life
everlasting: so as many as are called, received to Gods favor, and justified,
be made able and meet to do all good works. And as God calls al men
without justice and holiness: So does he call them to serve him in justice and
holiness. And as he found al men of them selves without good works: so did he
suffer, Tit. 2. Galat. 5. Joan. 3. 1. Cor. 3.
to cleanse unto him self a people that should follow good works. And such
good works, being the fruits of the holy Ghost, works of faith, done in
God, God working in man, and man working together with God, through the
bountiful and liberal promise of God, are rewarded with increase of grace and
justice here, and in the life to come with perfection of justice, that is, life
everlasting. Apoca. 22 Eccles. 18. See the 12 Chapt. of the first book.
Jacob. 2.
And because the Scripture calls increase of justice Justification, S. James
says: Abraham was justified by works, that is to say, made more just then he
was, strengthened and increased in justice by works. In this sense he says:
you see that a man is justified by works, and not by faith only.

And thus says S. Paul truly, a man is called to justice, has access to
God, and is made of wicked righteouse by faith deserving it not by works. And
S. James as truly says: A man is justified by works, that is, a man
already just, is by works made more just, strengthened and increased in
justice.

Oecom. in ca. Iaco. 2
There is faith, says Oecumenius, that requires no works that goes before
Baptism. And there is faith that must be coupled with good works: and that
is faith after Baptism, after which sense certain of the Greek Fathers
(says he) understood S. Paul to speak of faith before Baptism, which
brings a sinner to Chsist, and justifies him without respect of any works
going before, and S. James to speak of faith which is in a Christian man after
Baptism, Aug. ad Simpli. li. 1. quaest. 2. August. ad Simpli. ib. de fide. and
oper. c. 14 August. ser. 61. de ver. Dom. Ephesians. 4.
which must be joined with good works, as Abraham's faith was, or else
justifies no man: Grace goes before, says S. Augustine, but good works
follow.

Every man that will be saved, must be made a member of Christ, which is done
through faith, hope, and charity: and of this incorporation speaks S. Paul:
but it is not enough for us to be made members of Christ, unless being knitte in
the body, we increase in all things in Christ, who is our head. Of this
increase and growing, speaks S. James: It is not enough for us to be called
and justified, we must also be glorified, Romans 8.
and that shall not be, unless we be conformed and made like unto the Image of
Christ by godly life, which S. James speaks of.

All this is comprised in our perfect Justification. As it is necessary for our
salvation, that we be made members of Christ (which S. Paul calls our
Justification) so is it necessary for the same end that we do good works,
which S. James calls our Justification. In praefat. Psalm. 31.
If Abraham had offered his son without faith, says S. Augustine, the work
had nothing auailed him, what so ever it were. If he had kept his faith and
not offered his son when God bad him, his faith without works had been dead,
and should have remained like a root barren, and dry without fruit.

When S. Paul had taught that we are justified by faith, meaning thereby as
has been declared: Such as understood him not, thought he had said, faith had been sufficient for a man though he lived ill, and did no good works. And
because this opinion was then sprung up, Aug. de fid. et oper cap. 14.
the other Apostles, as S. James, S. Peter, S. John, and Jude in their
Epistles, directed their intent, specially against the same, earnestly
affirminge, that faith without works avails nothing. So did S. Peter
exhort men to piety, 2. Pet. 3.
and good conversation against the coming of Christ, warninge them, that
there were many things in S. Paul's Epistles, dark and hard to understand,
which the unskillful and unstable did peruerte to their own damnation: saying
further, that who so lacks good conversation, 2. Pet. 1.
is blind and gropinge with his hand. Therevppon did S. James call him a
vain manne that thought faith without works might save him, Jacob. 2.
and called faith without works, a dead faith, and the Diuelles faith.
Therevppon did S. John speak as much in the commendation of Charity, as S.
Paul had done of Faith: saying: He that loves not, remains in death: 1.
Joan. 3.
not that these Apostles did teach contrary to S. Paul, but because that S.
Paul was misconstrued: Their preaching was one: For as S. Paul does say,
Rom 3. Ephesians. 2. Jacob. 1.
by faith a man is justified, and by grace are ye saved, not of your selves:
So says S. James: Every good thing that is geauen, and every perfect gift
comes from above. And seeing that Faith, Hope, Charity, and good works be
the gifts of God and the fruits of grace, Ephesians. 2.
S. James saying that we are justified by works, disagreeth not with S.
Paul, that says we are saved by grace: Ephesians. 2. 1. Joan. 3.
And when S. John says: charity comes of God, and we know we are
translated from death to life, because we love our brothers, he says no more
then S. Paul does, Galat. 5.
that in Christ Jesus neither circumcision, nor to be without circumcision
avails aught, but faith which works through charity. So did S. Paul, S.
Peter, S. James, and S. John, being moved to speak by one spirit, agree in
one mind, concerning our Justification. S. Paul commends the foundation,
root, and beginning of it. S. James the increase, the fruit, and perfection of
the same, without the which, the foundation should be void, and the root
barren and dry.

Jacob. 2. Galat. 3.
God grant us to begin with Abraham's faith, and to increase with Abraham's
works: that faith may join with our works, and by works our faith may be
perfited, that we may be blessed with the faithful Abraham.

That Faith alone without good works saves not. And what it is to be
justified freely by grace. THE XI. CHAPTER.
BY this it is evidently declared, that as faith in the beginning of our
Justification and coming to Christ, excludes not hope, charity, penance,
nor baptism so in our continuance, and growing in Christ, and salvation, it
excludes not good works, but must have them joined with it, as time and
opportunity may serve the beleuer to do them: or else the hope of his salvation
is presumptuouse and vain.

For if Abraham's faith, except he had offered his son, when he was bid,
August. in praefation. Psalm. 31.
should have been dead like unto a baren and withered root, as S. Augustine
says, he being the example and pattern of our Justification: what can we look
for, if we have faith and care not to do good works, which God commands?
He that hears my words, Math. 7.
and does them not, says our Savior, shall be lykened to a fool that has
builded his house upon the sand. They are the dooers, not the knowers, whom he
calls happy. If you know these things, you shall be happy, Joan 13.
when ye do them. They are not the hearers of the law, Romans 2.
that are just before God, but the dooers shall be justified. If faith would
serve without good works, they should not be rejected, who shall say at the
day of judgment: Math. 7.
Lord in thy name we have preached, in thy name we have cast out diuelles,
and in thy name we have done many great wounders, which can not be done
without faith. Math. 25.
Neither should the five foolish virgins be shut out at the marriage: and
therefore says Cyril: Cyril. Cateche. 15.
Trust not upon that thou haste a lamp only, but keep it burning: trust
not upon this alone that thou haste faith, but keep thy faith burning, that
thy light may shine before men through good works, lest for thy sake Christ
be blasphemed. And a little before: How shall we get, says he, into the
kingdom of heaven? I was hungry, says Christ, and thou gaueste me meat to
eat. Learn the way, for here needs no allegory: If thou do these things,
thou shall reign, if thou do not, thou shall be condemned: begin therefore
now to do these works, and continue in faith: Leo. Ser. 3. de Epiphan.
Cypria ad Quiri. lib. 3. cap. 96. Aug. Ser. 31. de ver. Apost.
by right faith and good works we attain to the kingdom of God, says Leo.
Factis, non verbis operandum, etc. We must work by deeds, not by words,
says S. Cyprian, for the kingdom of God stands not in talk, but in virtue.
Omnes mali Catholici, etc. Al evil Catholics confess Christ in words, and
deny him in deeds: therefore be not ye as men careless because ye have faith,
join good life to right faith.

And to understand the more plainly, what justice it is, to have faith without
good works, let us take the advertisement of S. Augustine. August. de fid. et
open. cap. 26.
Christ said: Nisi abundauerit iustitia vestra, etc. Unless your justice be
more abundant then is the Scribes and Pharisees, ye shall not enter into the
kingdom of God: Iustitia eorum est dicere, and non facere. etc. Their justice
is to say, and not to do, and hereby he would have our justice surmount and be
more abundant then theirs is both to say and to do. If that be not, there
shall be no entrye into the kingdom of heaven. The Phariseis justice.
S. Augustine makes this difference between the Pharisee and the good
Christian man: The Pharisee says well and does it not, he believes, and works
not, the good Christian man does both.

If it be true that the Scripture says: faith without works is dead, Jacob.
2. August. de fid. et open. cap. 14. Rom 3. Romans 11. In the 10. Chaptre. Ambro.
in cap. 3. ad Romans
Quousque fallu^tur, qui fide mortua sibi vitam perpetuam pollicentur? How
long will they be deceived, that promise them selves everlasting life by a
faith that is dead? But here it may be said: we are justified freely and by
grace. And if it be by grace, then is it not by works, otherwise grace is not
grace. I answer: We are called to faith, reconciled, planted in Christ and so
justified, by grace without respect of any works going before, as has been
said: So says S. Ambrose, Iustificati sunt gratis etc. Men are justified
freely, because woorking nothing, nor making no recompense they are justified
by faith alone, through the gift of God. He calls the gift of God our
calling ad coming to faith, and our Baptism, which as he says in an other
place, Ambro. in cap. 11. ad Romans August. de spirit. and lit. ca. 10.
requires not sighing or moorning, or any work but only a profession with
the heart. In the same sense says S. Augustine: Per ipsam gratiam
iustificatur gratis, id est, nullis suorum operum precedentibus meritis: By
grace is a sinner justified freely, that is to say, no merits of his own
works going before: And note that he terms his own works, and works
going before, What is to be justified freely.
By his own works he understands such as a man does him self, without
Gods help. He calls such works going before, as a heathen or synnefull
man does, before he has received the grace of God: without these works,
Note
S. Paul says a man is justified freely, and by grace: that is to say,
called to faith, planted in Christ, and made of wicked rightuouse.

But how is the just man made more just and justified yet? for so must he be,
or else he loses his justice. How is he saved? Verily by grace, and yet not
without good works: for of them that have received the faith and be justified,
it is said: Reddet vnicuique secundum opera sua. Romans 2.
God shall render unto every man according to his works. How then does S.
Paul say? Gratia Dei vita aeterna. Romans 6. Objection Answer. August. de
gratia and lib. arbit. cap. ^.
Everlasting life is the grace of God. How may these two stand together, a
man to be saved by grace, and yet by good works? I answer with S. Augustine:
They stand well together: Life everlasting is the grace of God, and life
everlasting is given as a reward to good works: because our good works
perteyne to the grace of God: that is to say, be the grace of God: and so being
saved by good works, we are saved by the grace of God: the words of S.
Augustine be these: Aug. epist. 105.
Ipsa vita aeterna, quae vtique in fine sine fine habebitur, and ideo meritis
praecedentibus redditur, tamen quia eadem merita quibus redditur, non a nobis
parata sunt per nostram sufficientiam, sed in nobis facta per gratiam, etiam
ipsa gratia nuncupatur, non ob aliud nisi quia gratis datur, nec ideo meritis
non datur, sed quia data sunt and ipsa merita, quibus datur. The very life
everlasting, which in the end shall be had without end, and therefore is
rendered unto merits Merits.
that go before, yet because the same merits, whereunto it is requited, were
not prepared of us by our own ability, but made in us by grace, even it
self is called grace, for none other respect, but because it is freely given.
And yet it is given to merits, because the very merits them selves, Ca. 1.
and. 9
whereunto it is given, were also given. The like resolution he has at large
in his book entitled of grace and free will.

So is it true concerning the entrye and beginning of our Justification, Romans 3.
that we are justified freely by grace without any works going before: for
our works before grace could not be good. Note Well
And in the continuance, and perfyting of justice, which is life everlasting,
we are also justified and saved freely by grace, and yet not without works,
because our works be not only made good by grace, but be also them selves the
very grace of God.

And here let the Reader learn of S. Ambrose, and S. Augustine, what it is,
truly to be justified, freely and by grace to the commendation of mercy which
God gives, not to the derogation of good works which God also gives.

Wherefore if faith without good works can save no man, that has time to
do them, The justification of faith alone.
as has benne proved, it is no where true (as they mean it) that faith alone
justifies. It is not true in the entry of our Justification and first coming
to Christ, that faith alone, without hope, and charity justifies. If it
were, Jacob. 2. Aug. Enchi. cap. 8. 1. Cor. 13.
then might the Devil be justified, who believes, but neither hops, nor
loves: then should this Scripture be false: If I have all faith, and have no
charity, I am nothing. It is not true in the continuance and increase of our
justice that faith may serve without good works: Math. 7. Joan. 13. Romans 2.
Math. 25. Romans 2.
for if it might, then were all the Scriptures false, which a little before I
alleged. It shall not be in the perfyting of our justice and salvation, that
faith alone may save: for then should it be false, that God shall render unto
every man according to his works: then were the sentence, that God shall
geeue, false, wherein he shall say: Matt. 25.
Come unto me you blessed of my Father, receive the kingdom prepared for you.
And he will show the cause, Chrysosto. Hom. 41. in Gene. August. Sermon. 49. de
verb. Dom.
for that they have done the works of mercy there rehearsed. But because
neither all these Scriptures, nor any one syllable of them can be false,
therefore it is false, that faith alone justifies, meaning by faith alone, to
shut out either hope, charity, penance, the holy Sacraments, or virtuous
life, and good works, from our perfyte Justification.

What they were, who in sundry ages have taught, that men should be saved
without good works. THE XII. CHAPTER.
IF nothing else could make us think, that godly life were n^cessarily required
in a Christian man, and works of faith a great and singular help to the
atteyning of our salvation, the diligente practice of the Devil were
sufficient to make us believe it: who beside his particular travail and
persuasion which he uses severally with every man to turn him from well
doing, has also in sundry ages moved such as by his sleyghtes he could abuse,
to teach and openly persuade in derogation of good works, that the same were
not auayleable, August. de fid. and open. cap. 14. De praedestin. Sa^ct. cap. 7.
Eusebius Eccles. histo. lib. 2. ca. 1 and cap. 13. Theodore. here fabis. compen.
lib. 1. Iren li. 1. cap. 20.
or not necessary for a Christian man's salvation.

When S. Paul was most diligent to sow the good feed teaching the right
faith of true Justification, the Devil was as busy to intermengle his cockle
and darnel among it, making men that understood not S. Paul, believe, that he
said it was sufficient for a man to have faith, though he lived ill, and did
no good works: Simon Magus who was taken for a God, taught his followers, to
care little for the Prophets, nor to fear the threatninges of the law, but
bad them like free men to do what them lysted, for they should atteyne
salvation, not by good doing, but by grace. Whereupon such as were of his
sect, boldelye gave them selves to all lust and intemperate life.

Carpocrates said, men should be saved by faith and love, Theodo. ib. Iren.
li. 1. cap. 24.
as for all other things, they were of them selves indifferent, and by opinion
of men sometime were taken for good, sometime for ill, but nothing was naturally
evil.

Valentinus and his scholars say, Theod. vbi supra. Iren. li. 1. cap 1.
they need no works, for that, knowledge may suffice to salvation, and
therefore, such as be among them most perfect, without all care, and fear,
do what so ever is by Gods law forbidden.

It is said of Eunomius, August. de here. ad Quodvult De. ca. 54
that he was so far an enemy to good conversation, that he plainly avouched,
no man should take hurt by any sin what soever he commmitted or continued
in, so that he were partaker of the faith that he taught.

Even in S. Augustines time the enemy of good life persuaded carnal and
dissolute men to think, Note.
August. de fid. and open. cap. 1. and cap. 27.
that lived they never so il, continuing in great sin, and not so much as
professing amendment, yet if they believed in Christ and received his
Sacraments, they should be saved.

But as the serpente in all these times went about by his crafty to seduce,
whom he could, 2. Cor. 11. Joan. 17.18.
so did not the holy Ghost withdraw his care and help from the Church,
moving at the first S. Peter, S. James, and S. John to redress by their
Epistles the error, which unstable heads had falsely gathered of S. Paul's
true preaching: and afterward inspiring the learned Bisshoppes of every age
to note and condemn the heretics above named: moved also S. Augustine
against the corrupt opinion of sundry in his age to write this learned Book,
Of faith and works, which is delivered thee herewith, to put thee in
remembrance of the enemies crafts, and sleightes. For as by envy of him,
death came into the woorlde, Romans 5.
so by the same envy to turn Christian men from life everlasting, Ephesians. 2.
he has gone about in sundry ages and yet does, to pull from them good
works, which God has prepared for us to walk in. His desyer is specially to
take from us faith and the professing of Christ, but because he dares not
attempt that by plain and open means: Leo. ser. 4 de collect.
Sciens Deum non solum verbis: etc. Knowing that God is denied, not only by
words, but also by deeds, he has taken charity from many men from whom he
could not take away faith. Note.
He understands to well, that as charity is the life and strength of faith,
so pulling away the one, he shall be able, either to draw the other after, or
else to make it dead and unprofitable to him that keeps it. Which if he may
obtain, and make us believe that faith alone justifies, taking away hope,
charity, penance and the virtue of Christ's Sacraments from woorking our
Justification, and good works, from helping our salvation: what does he else
but bring the Gospel, which S. Paul calls the strong and mighty power of
God, Romans 1.
to a naked and bare name?

Therefore seeing we know his slyghtes, and have learned them not only by
report of other ages, 2. Cor. 2.
but also by the lamentable experience of our own, let us to resist him put
on all the whole armor of God, Ephesians. 6. 1 Thessalonians. 5.
that we may be able to stand against him that lies in wayt for us. Let us not
only take in hand for our defense, the buckler of faith, but also to save the
whole body, put on the lack of faith and charity, and take for an helmet hope
of salvation, not leaving of the breaste plate of justice, Ephesians. 6.
nor the gyrdle of truth. For he that goes to that fraye, having but a
buckler, may take a deadely wound, for lack of a helmet or breast plate: and
if he so do, he may be found guilty of his own death, because he was warned
to arm him self in all parts, and to put on a complete harness.

The cause why good works are done, and that they are rewarded in this life
with increase of grace, and in the world to come with life everlasting. And
why they be so rewarded. THE XIII. CHAPTER.
AS I have showed that good works must necessarily be done of such as will be
saved: so will I now declare for what end they should be done, and what fruit
and profit they bring to the doers. Vt curent bonis operibus praeesse qui
credunt Deo. Tit. 3.
To the intent that such as believe God, may have a care to be chief doers of
good works.

The holy Ghost says of them: Haec sunt bona and vtilia hominibus. They be
good and profitable for men. Tit. 3.
If we ask to what end, he says: Pietas ad omnia vtilis est, 1. Tim. 4.
promissionem habens vitae quae nunc est, and futurae: Godliness is profitable
to al purposes, having promise of the life that now is, and the life to come.
In this life godliness Joan. 7.
If a man will do his will that sent me, says Christ, he shall know of
my doctrine, whether it be of God, or I speak of my self. Jacob. 2. Eccles. 7.
Good works make faith perfect. Thou see, says S. James of Abraham, that
faith was joined with his works, and They confirm and Be not loathe to visit
the sick, for by such doings shalt thou be made strong in love. Eccles. 7.
Good works breed in us a strong hope and affiance in God. Alms shall be a
great affiaunce before God the highest, Tobi. 4.
unto all that do it. He says not, it shall be only a declaration of faith
before men, but a great affiance before God. 1. Tim. 3.
Deacons that serve well, get them a good degree, and much affiance in
faith, which is in Christ Jesus. Whereby we understand, that good works do
not only nurrishe hope but also strengthen faith. And as S. Augustine says:
Ser. 16. de ver. Apos.
Quae spes, nisi de aliquae conscientiae bonitate? What hope can there be, but
upon some goodness of conscience? So a conscience used and confirmed in well
doing, is full of affiance and hope. S. Paul says to the Hebrews, who had been charitable to such as were imprisoned, and also lost their own goods
for Christ's sake: Hebr. 10.
Lose not your confidence and affiance which has great reward. He says, that
their good works had not only bredde a strong hope and affiance to them,
but also that the same should have a great reward.

And here let the Reader learn, how strong hope and affiance in God is to be
gotten. Prayer is but one of the works commended by Christ, of which
Chrysostom vitam piam oration conciliat: conciliat am auget. Prayer brings a
godly life, Chrysostom. Tom. 5. de ^r^^d. Deu^
and increases it when it is gotten: fasting, watching, and prayer, make us
stand and persevere Haec sunt nobis arma coelestia, Cyprian. lib. 1. ep. 1.
etc. These be unto us heavenly armor that make us stand and persevere
strongly, these be spiritual municions and weapons geauen of God, which
defend us. Alms, an other of the works which Christ commends, is a
bulwark and defense both of faith and hope: Solatium grande credentium, etc.
Wholesome woorking is a forte of our safety, Cyprian. de elemo.
the buckler of hope, the defense of faith, the medicine of sin: Fasting,
alms, and prayer joined together, be means to heal our sores, to get the
favor of God, to put away the penalty due to sin, to avoid the Devil.
Curandis laesionibus Leo ser. 4 de ieiu. 10. men.
To cure the hurtes which often they fall into, that with the invisible enemy
have conflict the medicine of three remedies is specially to be laid. In
earnest prayer, in chastisment of fasting, in liberal alms. When these be
exercised together, God is made favorable, gilte and fault is put out, and
the tempter is beaten down. These ancient Fathers said not thus much of their
own heads: but as they had learned of the Scripture, so they spoke. Daniel
said to Nabuchodonosor: Peccata tua eleemosynis redime: Dan. 4.
and iniquitates tuas misericordijs pauperum. Ransom thy sins with alms,
and thine iniquities by showing mercy to the poor. By mercy and faith, sins
are purged: Prouer. 15. and. 16. Tobi. 4. Luc. 11.
by mercy and troth iniquity is ransomed: Alms delivers from all sin and
from death, and suffers not the soul to go into darkness. Give alms, and
all things are clean unto you.

Neither does God hereby take away his own prerogative, which is to remitte
sin, but provides for man's weakness many remedies, Note.
and by sundry ways inuiteth him to enjoy remission of sin, of all which
remedies God him self is the Author and geuer. And so have we not many
Saviors, but one Savior, which gives many helps and ways of salvation.

To such as do works and use the grace of God, increase of grace is
promised: Matthew. 25 Theophilact. ibid.
Omni habenti dabitur. To every man that has (that is to say, that uses his
gifts) there shall be given. There is no difference noted between the good and
ill servant, but that the good increased in that he had received: The
slouthful and ill, had no more at the time of the account, then he received
the first day.

2. Pet. 1.
Satagite vt per bona opera, etc. Earnestly endeavor by good works to make
sure your calling and election. By good works we grow and increase in Christ:
Ephesians. 4.
veritatem facientes, etc. By doing truth in charity, let us grow in all
things in him who is Christ our head. 1. Pet. 2.
Deponentes omnem malitiam, etc. Laying aside al malice, and all guile, false
semblance, envy, and detraction, as children newly borne, covet after
reasonable and spiritual milk, that thereby ye may grow to salvation. S. Paul
and S. Peter say, that by true and charitable doing, by leaving vice, and
following a new and innocent life, we increase in Christ, and grow in salvation.





Every man, faith our Savior, that shall leave house, Matt. 1^.
or brothers, or sisters, or father, or mother, or wife, or children, or lands
for my names sake, shall have again an hundred times as much, and shall
inherit life everlasting. Esai. 56.
God promises by his Prophet, that who so ever keeps his leage, he will
bring him to his holy hill. And in the Euangeliste Christ says of his
commandments: Hoc fac, and viues: Luc. 10.
Do this and thou shalt live. He bids us give almose, saying: make you
selves friends of the mucke of iniquity, Luc. 16.
that when you shall fail, they may receive you into everlasting tabernacles.
Bid the rich men of this world do well, says S. Paul, to be rich in good
works, easily to bestow, 1. Tim. 6.
to give part, to lay up a good foundation against the time to come, to the
intent they may get the true life. In all which places and many like God
promises to such as leave their friends or lands, to such as keep his
commandementes, or give almose for his sake, life everlasting.

And to declare more plainly, Aug epist. 105. De great. and lib. arbit. cap. 8.
that he gives it in respect of well doing, and to recompense good works:
life everlasting (says S. Augustine) in many places of holy Scripture is
called a reward: Christ says to his Apostles, be glad and rejoice, because
your reward is plentuouse in heaven. And who so ever gives one of the least
of these a cup of cold water to drink, only in the name of a Disciple, Matt.
5.
verily I say unto you, he shall not lose his reward. Matt. 10. Mar. 9.
When thou make a feast, call the poor, the feeble, the lame and blind,
and happy shalt thou be that they be not able to requite thee. Luc. 14.
For it shall be requited thee in the resurrection of the just. By the word of
requital, he promises reward, and by the resurrection of the just, the
Kingdom of heaven.

The sentence that Christ shall give in the latter day suffers us not to
doubt, but that the kingdom of heaven shall be given as a reward for good
works: for he shall say to them that stand on his right hand: Matthew. 25
Come you blessed of my Father, receive the kingdom that was prepared for you
from the beginning of the world. Quibus meritis: Aug. Ser. 49. de ver. Dom.
Chryso. Hom. 41. in Genesis
says S. Augustine. For what deserts? And Chrysostom: Cuius gratia, and
propter quid? Why, and wherefore? For I was hungry, and you gave me meat to
eat. etc. If Christ make good works a cause of our salvation, and geeueth
the kingdom of heaven in respect of them, who shall be heard speaking to the
contrary? Hebre. 11.
He that comes to God must believe that he is, and that to such as seek him
he is a rewarder. The way to seek him, Chryso. hom. 22. ad Hebr. Moral. Aug.
in Psalm. 76. Note well
say Chrysostom and S. Augustine, is by deuont prayer and good works. If we
must then as well believe that God is a rewarder, as that he is God, since he
rewards nothing but virtue and well doing, he that denies him to be a
rewarder of good works, believes not in effect that he is God. For if he be
God, he is true of his promise, and then will he reward good works as he has
promised. Why good works be revvarded. Lucae. 12.
And this being so, no man needs to ask how the works of a Christian man
should come to that estimation with God to be rewarded with life everlasting.
For as Christ said to his Apostles: Complacuit patri vestro dare vobis
regnum. It has pleased your Father to give you a kingdom, Mark well. God
promises to reward good vvorckes.
even so has it pleased him to promise reward of that kingdom for good
works. And he has promised it that can not lie.

Upon this ground stands all that is said and taught in the Catholic Church
in commendation and reward of good works. Not that we of our selves can
claim of him or challenge him for our debtor, because we have first given him,
but because he has promised us: Debtor factus est. etc. God is become our
debtor, Aug. Ser. 16. de ver. Apost. and in Psalm. 32. conci. 1
says S. Augustine not by taking any thing of us, but by promising that which
it pleased him: for it is one thing when we say to a man, thou oweste me such
things as I have given thee, and an other thing when we say, thou oweste me
because thou haste promised me: Non possumus ergo ei dicere. etc. Ser. 31. de
ver. Dom. Romans 11.
We can not then say unto God, render that thou haste received, for who gave
him first to be requited again? We can not say: Render that thou haste
received, but plainly we say: Render that thou haste promised: Upon this
promise S. Paul said, I have wrasteled well for the game, 2. Tim. 4.
I have finished my race, I have kept my faith: For the rest the crown of
justice is laid up for me, which our Lord shall render unto me in that day
as a just judge. Although it came of mercy, that God called S. Paul, Galat.
1. 1. Tim. 1.
and gave him grace to do good works, and to keep his Faith, yet when S.
Paul has so done, he said, that God of his justice would render him the
crown. Upon this promise Ezechias, and Nehemias prayed God, 4. Reg. 20 2.
Esdr. 5.
to have respect to their life, and to remember their well doing: not as
proud men presuming of them selves: but meekely acknowleging, Psalm. 144. Psalm.
83.
that God is faithefull and true in all his words, and where he gives grace,
he will also give glory and reward. Matthew. 2^
As he says unto the laboroures: Go into my vineyarde: So he says also,
that which is just, I will give you. No man goes unless he be called, and
yet who so ever labors faithfully and trewly, when he is sent, is assured
of wages, because it was promised: Leo sermon. 4. de Collect.
upon this promise Leo said: Cibus egeni, regni coelestis est pretium: and
largitor temporalium hares efficitur aeternorum. The meat given to the needy
is the price of the kingdom of heaven, and the geuer of things temporal,
Matthew. 13. Cypria de Elemo.
is made heir of the eternal. S. Cyprian says, that Christ by the parable of
the merchante who sold all his goods to bie a preciouse pearl, teaches us,
that with the quantity of our patrimony we should purchase and bye everlasting
life. August. in Psalm. 147.
And S. Augustine says: Viduae suffecerunt duo minuti nummi. etc. Two little
pieces of coin were enough for the wydowe to do mercy, two pieces of coin
were enough to purchase the kingdom of God. A small price, a man might say,
for so great a Jewel, were not the bounty and liberality of God the owner:
who being Lord of all, has set such a price upon it, and by his gratiouse
and free promise has bound him self to perform it.

This is the true commendation, which the Scripture and ancient Fathers geeue
unto good works, and these be the causes why Christian men should do them.
They that say good works serve to give testimony and make declaration of our
Faith, and be commendable, but have no reward of grace here, nor value of
everlasting life, albeit they exhort men to live godly, they may commend and
set forth good works in words, but they hinder the doing of them in deed.

Note.
Nouatus his heresy was, that such as fell into deadely sin after their
Baptism, could not be absolved by the priest, Cyprianus lib. 4. Epistola. 2.
neither restored to the Church again, but must be left unto Gods
judgment: and yet did he exhort men to do penance and satisfaction, to
wail and weep night and day for their sins. S. Cyprian says of him, that
he was Misericordiae hostis: Cypria. li. 1. epist. 1.
interfector poenitentiae. The enemy of mercy, the killer of penance,
because, though he exhorted men to satisfaction and penance, yet, says he:
Cypria. li. 4. epist. 2.
He took away the medicine and remedy that came of satisfaction. Operari tu
putas rusticum posse? etc. Think thou the husbandman can work, if thou say
to him. Trim thy ground with all skill of husbandry, plie thy tillage
diligently, but thou shalt reap no corn at harvest, thou shall have no
vintage, thou shall take no profit nor fruit of thy oileyearde, thou shall
gather no apples of the trees. As such an exhortation to husbandry were
enough to discourage the good husband from his travail: And as they killed
penance, says S. Cyprian, that took away the fruit of it: Note.
even so do they hinder now a days the doing of good works, that commend
them in words, and take away the reward of them in deed: Nemo enim sine
fructu imperat laborem: Pacia. epistol. 1. ad Sympronia.
for no man (says Pacianus) enioineth labor without profit. Neither is there
any profit or reward that a true Christian man passes upon, if it perteine
not to life everlasting: for this life and all that belongs unto it, he is
taught to set little by.

Therefore the Church exhorts al men to do good works, but it keeps not
back the liberal promise of life eternal which Christ has annexed to them.
S. Paul says, be ye steadfast and immovable, ever plentiful in every work
of our Lord. And why? 1. Cor. 15.
Scientes quod labor vester non est inanis in Domino. Knowing that your labor
is not idle in our Lord: And when he says, in our Lord, he means no
temporal nor worldely reward: It is not only a comfortable saying, Chrysostom.
ho. and 8. in Genesis
but a truth taught by the Scripture, that a Christian man should direct all
his doings to serve God in hope of life everlasting: Let us not fainte and
be weary of well doing, Gala. 6.
says S. Paul, for we shall reap it in his time, without fainting.

Heb. 11.
This cogitation makes men quietly and contentedly to bear adversity. Moses
did chose rather to suffer affliction with the people of God, then to have a
pleasure of sin for the time. But what made him content so to do? Aspiciebat
enim in remunerationem. He looked to the reward: Prima ib. in cap. 11. ad Hebr.
Ita quando quisque aduersi aliquid patitur. Even so every man when he
suffers any adversity, should call to remembrance, what reward he shall
receive thereby at Gods hand.

The lack of this cogitation makes us many times to fainte in well doing.
Chrysostom. hom. 22. ad Hebr.
Omnia nobis difficilia videntur. All things seem heard to us, says
Chrysostom, because we have not the remembrance of God.

This cogitation makes men content to take upon them a painful kind of
life, which otherwise, they would flee. De adulter. co^iug. lib. 2. cap. 20.
Note.
S. Augustine says, that diverse being sodeinly taken and required to be
Priests, whereby they must live chaste all their lives, were content to do
it. Sperantes se illustrius in Christi haereditate fulgere. Trusting to shine
the brighter in Christ's inheritance.

This cogitation caused Martyrs willingly to sustain all pain and tormente:
Confessors, to lead a virtuous and strait life: Virginnes, to despise
worldelie pleasures: of all which it may truly be said: Aspiciebant in
remunerationem: They looked to the reward: This hope makes servants do
good and true service to their masters, in which sense S. Paul says:
Quodcunque facitis, ex animo operamini, etc. Coloss. 3.
What so ever ye do, do it hartelly as it were unto our Lord, and not to men,
knowing that of our Lord you shall receive the reward of inheritance. And
when I speak this much of good works, and of the reward due unto them: what
works I commend, thou know good Reader, by that which I have said in the
13. Chapter of the first Book.

An answer to certain objections made against the reward of good works. THE
XIIII. CHAPTER.
BUT all this notwithstanding, yet some let not to say, that the works of
faith, which Christian men do, can not deserve reward of life everlasting,
neither stand in Gods judgment, as well because Iaco. 2.
and then is it written: Who so offends in one, is made guilty of all: and
thereby say they: all our works be infected, and consequentely excluded, from
that great reward.

To the first point I answer. Note well these two kinds of perfection in
justice.
There be two kinds of perfection in justice, the one such as is in God, the
Angels, and that happy company of men, who being present with God, enjoy
the sight of the Deity: Job. 15.
Ecce inter Sanctos eius nemo immutabilis: and coeli no^ sunt mundi in
conspectu eius. Lo among his Saints and holy none is immutable, and the heavens
in his sight be not clean. Mar. 10.
So is it understood, says S. Augustine: Nemo bonus, nisi vnus Deus: quia
omnia quae creata sunt, etc. No man is good, August. de perfect. iustitiae.
but only God, because all things that be created, though God have made them
very good, yet if they be compared with the Creator and maker, they be not
good, with whom if they be compared, they be not. In the same sense is it said:
Non intres in iudicium, etc. Enter not into judgment with thy servant,
because no man living shall be justified in thy sight: This is meant by it, says
S. Augustine, Aug. vt supra.
enter not into judgment with thy servant. Noli me iudicare secundum te, qui
es sine peccato: Judge me not after thy self, who art without sin. And
where he says, no man shall be justified: he referred it to that perfection of
justice, which is not in this life. In the same manner does S. Hierome expound
the place. Li. 1. dialo. cont. Pelagia.


But as no man is just in comparison of that excellent justice of God, of the
Angels, and Saints: so yet says S. Augustine: De spiri. and lit. cap. 36.
Dici potest quaedam iustitia minor huic vitae competens, qua iustus ex fide
viuit, quamuis peregrinus a Domino: It may be said, that there is a lesser
justice, meet for this life, whereby the just man lives through faith, though
he be yet a Pilgrim from God.

S. Basil expounding these words of the Psalm: Iudica me Domine secundum
iustitiam meam. Psalm. 7.
Judge me Lord according to my justice, says: Est quaedam Angelorum iustitia
humanam trangressa, etc. Basil. in Psalm 7. Ibidem.
There is a justice of Angels that passes man's justice. And if there be any
power above Angels, it has an excellency of justice, answerable to his
greatenes, and there is the justice of God him self, that excedeth all
understanding of mind, being unspeakable and incomprehensible to all mortal
nature: Judge me therefore Lord according to my justice, that is to say,
according to that justice which men may atteine unto, Note.
and which is possible to such as live in flesh. No thing can be more plainly
spoken, to prove, both that there is a justice in God and his Angels, which
surmounteth man's nature, and also that there is a justice that man may
atteine unto: And so be all good men's works and their justice imperfect, if
they be compared with God and his Angels, and yet perfect according to the
estate and nature of man. It is said: Diliges Dominum Deum tuum, Matt. 22.
ex toto cord, etc. Thou shall love thy Lord God with all thy heart, with all
thy soul, with all thy mind. And yet says S. Augustine: De spirit. and lit.
cap. 36.
Neque si esse non dum potest tanta dilectio, etc. If the love of God can not
yet be so great, as unto that full and perfect knowledge of heaven, is due, it
is not now to be taken for a fault.

Note Reader: he says, although man's love toward God want of that
perfection that shall be in heaven, yet it is not accounted a sin nor fault.
S. Paul speaking in his own person, Philip. 3.
as he confesses he wanted one of these perfections, so does he signify, that
he was not without the other. Non quod iam acceperim, aut iam perfectus sim:
Not that I have already received it, or am already perfect, etc. And in the
same place: Quicunque ergo perfecti sumus, hoc sentiamus: As many of us then as
be perfect, let us be of this mind: he says he was not perfect, and yet that
both him self and others were perfect: which words S. Augustine expounding,
Aug. contra. 2. epi. Pelagia. li. 3. ca. 7.
says: Si secundum hominus mortalis capacitatem pro huius vitae modulo
perfecti sumus, ad ipsam perfectionem hoc qucque pertinere intelligamus, vt
Angelica illa, quae in Christi manifestatione nobis erit iustitia, nondum nos
perfectos esse sapiamus. If we be perfect after a mortal man's capacity,
according to the measure of this life, let us understand this also to be one
point of perfection, not to think our selves perfect after that Angelical
justice, which we shall have when Christ shall show him self. And in an
other place declaring the same words he says: Perfecti, Ser. 15. de verb.
Apost.
and non perfecti: perfecti viatores, nondum perfecti possessores: and vt
noueritis quod perfectos viatores dicat, qui iam in via ambulant perfecti
viatores sunt: We be perfect, and not perfect: perfect waifarers, not yet
perfect possessours: and to th'intente ye may know he calls waifarers
perfect, they that now travel by the way, be perfect waifarers.

And here I may admonish the Reader to consider with him self, how well such
as now a days do condemn all man's good works for imperfection, do agree,
first with S. Paul, and then with S. Basil, S. Augustine, S. Hierome, with
others that I might here allege. They say: All our justice and good works can
not help toward the kingdom of heaven because they be imperfect. S. Paul
says: As we lack one perfection, so have we an other. S. Basil says, we
lack such justice as is in God and Angels, but have a justice which man's
nature may atteine unto, and may be judged thereby: S. Augustine says, we may
be perfect after the capacity of mortal men, and after the measure of this
life, though after that Angelical justice which we shall have in heaven, we
be not now perfect: he says, we be perfect as waifarers, but not perfect as
possessours, because we be not yet in heaven. They say, because our love is
imperfect, it is sin. S. Augustine says, although it want of the heavenly
perfection, yet it is neither accounted sin, nor fault: They say, no good
works may stand and abide Gods judgment, for that no man living shall be
justified in the sight of God. S. Basil says: Lord, judge me according to
my justice, not like an Angel, but like a man. S. Augustine and S. Hierome
say: It is not meant thereby, that there is no justice in man, but that man may
not be judged after the rule of God, who is without all sin: and that no man
living here shall be justified in Gods sight, that is to say, found just
after such perfect justice, as is in heaven.

And thus may the Reader also perceive, that such as condemn all man's good
works as imperfect under color of an heavenly perfection, go about to take
away all perfection, such as may be in earth. Note.
And because men in this world can not be Angels, they would not have them
so much as just men: Matt. 5.
And where Christ has said, Estote vos perfecti: Be you perfect, they say,
no man is perfect: Matt. 6.
And where as he calls fasting, prayer, and almoes our justice, and promises
reward to the same, they say there is no justice in us, that can deserve any
such reward. Romans 2.
If no good works may stand in the judgment of God, how shall he in his
last and just judgment render unto every man according to his works? Or
how is it true: Opera illorum sequuntur illos? Their works follow them? To
what end do the good men's works follow them, if there be no reward for
them? And this much concerning the first part of the objection.

Jacob. 3.
To the second I say: although it be true: In multis offendimus omnes, In many
things do we all offend, because as S. Augustine says, Aug. contra Iulia.
lib. 2.
fight we never so manfully against vice, we are men, yet God of his goodness
has provided a remedy: the remedy, I say, of penance, whereby such as fall,
may rise again, and be restored to the estate of Justice: Aug. ser. 29. de
ver. Aposto.
Habet Ecclesia maculas and rugas: sed confessione ruga extenditur, confessione
macula abluitur. The Church has spots and wrinkles, but by confession the
wrinkle is stretched forth and made smothe, by confession the spot is washed
out. Penance does not only help and release a sinner in the judgment of the
Church, but also takes away the offense in the judgment of God. Leo. ser. 12.
de Quadra.
For as S. Leo says: Non remanet iudicio condemnandum, quod fuerit in
confessione purgatum. That, that is purged by confession, remains not to be
condemned in the judgment. De adulter. co^iug. lib. 2. cap. 6.
S. Augustine says, that Baptism or penance is able to salve adultery, in so
much that the party afterward shall not be taken for an adulterer: Cur enim
adhuc deputamus adulteros, quos vel Baptismate ablutos, vel poenitentia
credimus esse saluatos? Why do we yet still take them for adulterers, whom we
believe to be either washed by Baptism, or healed by penance? And as by true
penance a sinner is discharged of his sin, even in Gods judgment, Prove.
24. Hiero. To. 1. Epistola ad Rusticum.
so a just man falling into sin, and rising again by penance, loses not
the name of a just man. Septies cadit iustus, and resurgit: si cadit quomodo
iustus? Si iustus, quomodo cadit? Sed iusti vocabulum non amittit, qui per
poenitentiam semper resurgit: Seven times falls the just man and shall rise
again, If he fall, how is he just? If he be just, how does he fall? But
he loses not the name of a just man that ever rises again by penance. God
says by his Prophet: Ezech. 33.
Impietas impij non necebit ei in quacunque die conuersus fucrit ab impictate
sua. The wickedness of the wicked shall not hurt him what day so ever he shall
be turned from his wickedness: he that thinks there can be no justice
acceptable to God, where any sin is committed, 1. Joan. 1.
does not understand the Scriptures. For as it is said: Nemo mundus a
peccato. No man is clean from sin. And if we say, we have no sin, we
deceive our selves, and there is no truth in us: So it is said: Sunt iusti,
and sapientes, Eccles 9.
and opera eorum in manu Dei. There be just men and wise, and their works in
the hand of God. It is said by God him self of Noe: Te vidi iustum coram me.
Genesis 7. Lucae. 1.
Thee I have seen a just man before me. Zachary and Elizabeth were both
just, not only after men's judgment, but before God. Christ calls Abell,
a just man. And yet, says S. Augustine, Math. 23. De nature. et gra. ca. 36.
ca. 38.
neither Abell, nor any man or woman, whom the Scripture calls just, except
the Virgin Marie, that bare Christ, was without sin. David committed, not a
small sin, such as weakness can not avoid, but adultery and murder: yet
did God upon penance not only pardone his sin and restore him to justice,
2. Reg. 12.
but for his sake benefited a whole city. 4 Reg. 19
Protegam vrbem hanc and saluabo eam propter me, and propter David seruum meum.
I will defend this city and save it for mine own sake, Note.
and for David my servants sake. Therefore albeit the just man be not without
all sin, yet if he do true penance for his sin, he may not only still
be called a just man, but also atteine to a perfection of justice such as is
in this life, and his good works acceptable and pleasant in the sight of God.
Prouer. 20
Quamuis scriptum sit, quis gloriabitur castum se habere cor? Although it be
written, says Leo who shall crake that he has a chaste heart, Leo. Ser. 12.
de Quadrag.
or that he is clean from sin, yet is not th'atteining of a pure life to be
despeired, which, while it is ever desired, is ever received: neither does
that remain to be condemned in the judgment, that is by confession purged.
Wherefore if the sin of a just man be purged by confession, and pardoned by
true penance what remains then, (his sin being forgeuen) but that,
Iustitia eius manet in seculum seculi: His justice abides for ever, and ever?

What assurance of his Justification and salvation a Christian man may have
in this life. THE XV. CHAP.
Matthew. 5.
Christ said unto his Apostles: Beati qui esuriunt and sitiunt iusticiam.
Blessed are they that hunger and thirste after justice. Philip. 2.
And S. Paul wills us with fear and trembling to work our salvation:
where by as we are taught ever to desire increase of rightuousenes, fearfully
and carefully to work, so do we not learn to assure our selves of our
justice and salvation: for he that hungreth and thirsts, confesses, that he
is not satisfied of that he thirsts after. And fearful trembling, can not
stand with security. Nothing can be more daungerouse to a Christian man
passing through the perilles of this life, Job. 7.
which is it self a tentation, then to think him self owte of danger, and
to conceive a careless security, that he is undoubtedly in Gods favor, and
suer of his salvation. For as S. Leo says: Haec est perfectorum vera
iustitia, Leo. Ser. 2 de Quadrage.
vt nunquam praesumant se esse perfectos, ne ab itineris nondum finiti
intention cessantes, ibi incidant deficiendi pericuculum, vbi proficiendi
deposucrint appetitum: This is true justice of them that be perfect, never to
presume them selves to be perfect, lest while they leave the intent to goo on
their journey, that is not yet ended, they fall in danger of failing even
there, where they leave the desire of going forewarde. What greater perfection
can there be in this life, then for a man to believe without all doubt, and to
be able to assure him self that his sins be forgeuen, that he is just, that
he is the heir of God, and an heir partener with Christ? How then can any
man stand assured thereof, if this be the true justice of the perfect, never
to presume of such perfection? With Leo S. Augustine agrees, saying: Aug. in
Psalm. 69.
Quantumcunque hic vixerimus. etc. Live we never so long here, profit we never
so much here: let no man say, I have enough, I am just. He that so says,
staieth by the way, he can not come to the iournies end. Look where he
says, 1 Aug. Ser. 5. de ver. Aposto.
I have enough, there he sticks fast. And in an other place he says.
Semper tibi displiceas quod es, si vis peruenire ad id quod nondum es. Ever
mislike in thy self that thou art, if thou will come to that which yet thou
art not. For where thou haste liked thy self, there have thou stand still.
But if thou say I have enough thou art lost. Increase ever, ever go on, ever
profit: In both places he alleges the words of S. Paul, Philip. 3.
saying of him self: Fratres, ego me non arbitror comprehendisse. Brothers I
do not think that I have atteined and gotten to it: Aug. Ser. 15. de ver.
Apostolo.
Ne forte surrepat vobis, quia vos aliquid est is, qui seipsum putat aliquid
esse. etc. Lest it creape into your heads, Gala. 6.
that you are somewhat: he that thinks him self to be somewhat when he is
nothing, seduceth him self, and he that thinks he knows somewhat, 1. Cor.
8.
does not yet know after what sort he must know: Thus do we see by the
words of S. Leo and S. Augustine, yea and of S. Paul, how daungerouse the
opinion is for men to put them selves in assurance of justice and salvation.
They say it is the mean to make us fall from justice, to stay by the way
and never to come to the end of our journey. S. Augustine says, that S.
Paul was not of that mind, Math. 24
nor would any of his scholars to be. Our Savior says, he that holds out
to the end, shall be saved. Whereby we know there is no hope of salvation
without perseverance. Aug. de bon. perseue. cap. 1.
And as S. Augustine says: Vtrum quisquam hoc munus acceperit, quamdiu hanc
vitam ducit, incertum est. Whether any man has received this gift as long as
he lives here it is uncertain. It appears by him in the same book, that it
is not Gods pleasure, that men should pe put in that suertie, his words be
these: Aug. De bon persevere an. c. 8.
Deus au^t melius esse iudicauit, miscere quosdam non perseueraturos, certo
numero sanctoru^ suorum vt quibus non expedit in huius vitae tentatione
securitas, non possint esse securi: multos enim a pernitiosa clatione reprimit
quod ait Apostolus: 1. Co. 10.
Quapropter qui videtur stare, videat ne cadat. God has thought it better, to
mingle some that would not continewe emonge the certain number of his holy,
that for as much as it is not expediente for them in the tentation of this
life to be in security, they should not be without care. For that saying of
the Apostle: Let him that seems to stand, take heed he fall not, stays
many from a perniciouse pride. If it be S. Paul's counsel, that such as
think them selves to stand, 1. Cor. 10.
should take heed they fall not, of like such as stand may fall, and if they
may fall, Note.
seeing that the risinge again by penance is the gift of God, how can manne
either assure him self to stand still, or promise him self Gods grace to
rise again at his pleasure, when he is fallen? And therefore as Chrysostom
says: Hom. 22. in Genesis
Omnes nos vigilare and sobrios esse oportet, and nunquam in securitate esse:
We must al watch and be sober, and never be without care, for though we stand
now, yet are we mutable, and not assured so to continewe. S. Augustine says;
Aug. De Ciuit. Dei li. 11. c. 12.
Licet de perseuerantiae praemio certi sin^, de ipsa tamen perseuerantia sua
reperiuntur incerti. Quis enim hominum se in action profectuque iustitiae
perseueraturum vsque in f^nem sciat, nisi aliqua reuelatione ab isto fiat
cortus? Though men be assured of the reward of perseverance, yet of their own
perseverance be they found uncertain. For what manne can know that he shall
continewe in the doing and increase of justice to the end, unless he be
certified from God by some revelation? He says men be assured, that such
as continewe to the end shall be rewarded, but whether he him self shall so
continewe, no man can tell, unless he understand it by special revelation
from God. Math. 24
For the revelation of the Scripture is general and only this, that such as
continewe to the end shall be saved. If it be Gods predistination that makes
us presume of this assurance, hear what S. Bernarde says: Bernar. in
septuages.
Quis potest dicere, ego de electis sum? etc. Who is able to say, I am one of
the elect? I am one of them that are predestinate to life? I am of the number
of the children? Who is able to say these things? Seeing the Scripture cries
to the contrary, Eccles. 9.
a man can not tell whether he be worthy of love, or hatred. Certain
assurance we have not, but an affiance of hope does comfort us, because we
should not utterly be grieved with the perplexity of this doubt. No man,
says he, can assure him self that he is elect, that he is predestinate, we
have no certain assurance of our salvation, affiance and hope we have to
comfort us.

An easy matter is it for a man to deceive him self, and as the Civil Law
says: Institut. quibus ex causis manumittere no^ licet
that a man often times trusts his goods to be more worth then he finds
them, so comes it many times to pass, that a man thinks him self to be
better and stronger in good, then he is. S. Peter said unto Christ: though I
should die with thee, I will not deny thee. Mar. 14. Aug. in Psalm. 39. and. 41.
But as S. Augustine says: Nemo se comprehendit, nemo de se praesumit:
Nunquid comprehendit cord suo cor suum Petrus, qui dixit tecum vsque ad mortem
ero? In cord erat praesumptio falsa, in cord latebat timor verus. Nouerat in
illo Deus, quod ipse in se non nouerat. No man conceiueth nor comprehends him
self. No man presumes, of him self. Did S. Peter with his own heart,
conceive his own heart, who said: I will be with thee to the death? There
was in his heart a false presumption, there lay hidden in his heart a true
fear. God knew in him, that which he knew not in him self. And in an other
place generally of all men he says: Plaerumque homo putat se posse, quod non
potest. Aut putat se non posse quod potest. Aug. in Psalm. 43.
Accedit ad illum interrogatio ex Diuina dispensatione, and per interrogationem
notus fit sibi. Commonly a man thinks him self able to do that which he
is not, or thinks he is not able to do that he is able. A trial comes
unto him by Gods ordering, and by the trial, he knows him self. How does
man then take upon him to judge and pronounce of him self, if he neither
conceive nor know him self, nor understand what is in him self? If he will
say true, he may say with S. Augustine: Aug. in Psalm 36. concio. 3.
that he knows him self better then other men, but what he is in deed, God
knows better then he.

When Christ said to his Apostles: vnus vestrum me tradet: One of you will
betraie me: they were all sad. Leo ser. 7 passio De.
Contristati sunt non de conscientiae reatu, sed de humanae mutabilitatis
incerto, timentes ne minus verum esset, quod in se quisque nouerat, quam quod
ipsa veritas praeuidebat. They were sad (says S. Leo) not for any gilte of
conscience, but for the uncertain state of man's mutabilitie, fearing that
might rather be false, which every man knew in him self, then that which
truth it self did forsee. Out of what school comes this assurance, which
neither other Apostles, neither S. John that was in Christ's bosom, had
learned? Upon this uncertainty and bottomless depth of man's heart, S.
Paul said: Nihil mihi conscius sum, sed non in hoc iustificatus sum: qui
autem me iudicat, 1. Cor. 8.
Dominus est. I know not my self guilty of any thing, but I am not thereby
justified: it is God that justifies me.

If then S. Peter knew not his own estate, but promised more of him self then
was true, if God know more of man, then he does of him self, if the Apostles
finding them selves not guilty of the mind to betraie Christ, were yet sad,
fearing least it might be: if no man commonly know him self but by trial,
which may ever alter and change while he lives, if S. Paul would not be his
own judge, touching his conscience: what manne should presume to assure him
self of his justice and salvation, unless, as S. Augustine says, he be
certified thereof by some revelation? When S. Paul bids us with fear and
trembling to work our own salvation, he shows a cause of that saying,
which is well to be considered: for says he, it is God that woorketh in you,
both to will, and to work. Leo ser. 8. De Epiph.
Et haec sanctis causa est tremendi atque metuendi, ne ipsis pietatis operibus
elati deserantur open gratiae, and remaneant in infirmitate naturae. And this,
says S. Leo, is cause for the holy to tremble and fear, least while they be
proud of the very works of piety, the help of grace forsake them, and they
remain in the weakness of nature. A man may assure him self of that which
is in his own power, so far as he is not enforced nor let: but of that
which depends of God, as well willinge, well woorking, justice, and
salvation does, no man without his revelation does assure him self, but he
that is disposed to deceive him self.

The Angels who were created most perfect, had not the assurance to continue
in that happy estate of good Angels: For, as we know, a great number of
them fell from it. De ciuita. Dei lib. 22 cap. 1.
In summo bono permanentibus caeteris vt de sua sine fine permansione certi
essent, tanquam ipsius praemium permansionis dedit: God gave unto the rest,
who remained in the higheste good, even as a reward of their remayninge, that
they should be certain, of their continuance without end. S. Augustine
says, that God has given it as a special reward unto Angels to be assured
of their estate, and that unto such as remained with him when the rest fell:
Luc. 20. Math. 22.
And albeit such as shall be compted worthy of that world and the resurrection,
shall be equal unto Angels, and then consequently in assurance without fear,
yet because earth is not heaven, while we live here, S. Augustine says: Aug.
Ser. 12. de ver. Apost.
Adhuc in via sumus. We be yet in the way, and therefore it is said to us:
Seruite Domino in timore, Serve God in fear. He says in an other place,
there be two ways to bring us in danger, to much hope, and to little. Ex
vtraque part periclitamur, and sperando, and desperando. Ser. 47. de ver. D^.
et Ser. 59.
Of both sides we fall in danger, by hoping, and by despairing. To keep us
therefore from presuming in hope, it is said: Serve the Lord in fear And
with fear and trembling work your own salvation. Psalm. 2. Philip. 3. Bernar.
in Septuage.
To keep us from despair S. Bernarde says: An afficiance of hope does
comfort us, to the end we should not be utterly perplexed and doubtefull. And
S Paul says: Tribulatio patientiam operatur, etc. Trouble works patience,
and patience trial, Romans 5.
trial woorketh hope, and hope confounds not. By which words we learn,
How true hope is gotten.
not only that hope keeps us from despair and confusion, but also, how true
hope is gotten: that is to say, by trial and patience, joined with charity, as
is there expressed: And therefore the more every man is tried by patience, and
the greater his charity is, the greater also and surer his hope is: and such
as be perfect, though they have no certain assurance, yet have they a great
and strong hope of Gods grace and their salvation.

Wherefore leaving the perfection of Angels, which is all in assurance, to
the world to comme, let us speak of our selves, 2. Cor. 5.
as of men that be yet Pylgrimes from God, trauayling in the way, besette on
every side with tentation, ever praising God: that among so many dangers, we
may say with the Prophet: Psalm. 93.
Factus est mihi Dominus in refugium: and, Deus meus in adiutorium spei mea:
The Lord is made my refuge, and my God the healpe of my hope. Aug. ibid. in
Psalm. 93
Quamdiu enim hic sumus, in spe sumus, nondum in re: For as long as we be
here, we be in hope, not in thing it self: Ephesians 4. Colos. 3.
Let every man be renewed from day to day, put of the old man, and put on the
new, forsake Adam, and flee to Christ. But as S. Augustine says: no man
ought to assure him self, De ciuita. Dei lib 21 cap. 15.
that he is passed from the one to the other, but when he shall be there, where
no tentation shall be.

Of the fruits and end of our Justification, and what strength in well doing
God gives thereby, where it is truly received, and effectually put in ure, and
the way to come to it. THE XVI. CHAPTER.
AS all things naturally are done to some end and purpose, so is not our
Justification wrought of God vain, but to the intent we should enjoy the
fruit and end thereof. What that is, S. Paul expresses in these few
words written to the Romans, who as long as they were heathen, lived
ungodly, but after that they were turned to Christ and justified, he says
unto them: Nunc vero liberati a peccato, Romans 6.
serui autem facti Deo, habetis fructum vestrum in sanctificationem, finem vero
vitam aeternam. Now that ye are delivered from sin and made servants to
God, ye have for your fruit holiness, and for your end life everlasting.
Whereby we understand, that the true fruit of Justification, is to lead a
godly and virtuous life here, and the end, to enjoy life everlasting. To
work this effect Christ gave him self for us, to ransom us from all
iniquity, Tit. 2.
and cleanse to him self a special people, that should follow good works.
To this end was his grace showed unto al men, teaching us to renounce
wickedness and worldely desires, Ibid.
and to live soberly, justly, and godly in this world, looking for the
blessed hope and coming of our Savior. Math. 4. Math. 19.
This effect was wrought not only in Christ's Apostles, who at his calling
through grace, forsook all that before they looued in the world, but also in
sundry others, mentioned in the Scripture: of whom it may truly be said,
that being once brought to Christ, Gal. 5.
and made his, they crucified their flesh, Gal. 2.
with the vices and concupiscences, lived to Christ, and Christ in them.

Marie Magdalene, of an unchaste wooman was made so virtuous and constant in
God, that when Christ his Apostles forsook him, she went not away. And after
his ascension, as probable histories testify, as well she, as Lazarus, Joseph
of Arimathia and others forsaking Judea sailed into other countries, where they
did continually lead a solitary, Tit. 2.
severe, and strayte life, looking (as S. Paul says) for that blessed hope,
and coming of our Savior.

The multitude of the believing (which were as we know thousands) agreed all in
one heart and one mind: Act. 4.
Were so full of charity and true love, that such as were possessioners,
sold their lands and houses, to help them that had need.

The fruit of Justification was so great, and wrought so great a change
generally in Christian men, 1. Pet. 4.
as S. Peter says, that such as remained still heathen maruayled at them that
they would not do as they did, in banketting, dronkenes, and confusion of riot.

Euse. li. 3. Eccles. histor. c. 32. Plinius in epist.
Plinius secundus, being a heathen man and Lieutenant in a province where he
saw many Christian men martyred, was by the good example of their life, moved
to write to the Emperor, and to signify: that there was none offense found
in them, other then that they song Hymns early before day to Christ their
God: but as for whoredom and other like crimes, he said, they took them for
unlawful, and utterly eschewed them.

Tertullian writing in the defense of Christian men in his time against the
heathen, says in sundry places of that book, that the magistrates being
heathen, neither did nor could charge the Christians with murder, inceste,
adultery, sorcery, conspiracy against Princes, or other notoriouse crimes,
but only laid to their charge, that they were Christians: Bonus vir, Caius
Seius, sed malus tantum, Tertulli. in Apolog.
quia Christianus: Such a one is an honest man, but he is naught, only
because he is a Christian. And a little after: Quae mulier? quam lasciua, quam
festiua? Qui iuuenis? Tertul. ibi.
Qui Lucius, quam amasius facti sunt Christiani? ita nomen emendationi
imputatus: What a woman, how wanton, how pleasante, what a young man? What a
Lucius, how amorouse, are become Christians? So the very name is accounted for
amendment. S. Augustine says, it was seen in his time, that common harlottes
and stage players, suddenly converted, proved such, Ad Simplician. li. 1.
Quaest. 2.
that they passed the cold Christians, not only in patience and temperance,
but also in faith, hope, and charity. By all which examples, we see, that the
grace of Justification, where it is truly and unfeignedly received, is that
Leaven whereof Christ spoke, Math. 13.
which being put into three measures of meal, leueneth the whole, that is to
say, gives it a new tallage and taste other then it had before: Romans 6. 1.
Pet. 4.
Qui enim mortuus est iustificatus est a peccato: for he that is dead, is
justified from sin, and he that is justified, is dead from sin. By these
examples, we see it true that S. Paul says: The Gospel is the power and
might of God: Romans 1.
for that the Gospel wherein Justification is preached, being truly and
effectually received, makes them that so receive it, strong: and so strong,
that as S. Augustine makes the comparison, August. de correp. and great. c. 11.
and 12.
many Martyrs have showed them selves to have more perfect faith, hope,
charity, better and more strong freedom of will, then Adam had: for he had
received the power not to sin, unless he would, neither to forsake God,
unless he would, but he had not the perseverance nor will to continewe in any
of both: and therefore he forsook the good, and became sinful. These
received by grace not only the power to resist sin, but also the
perseverance and will so to continue. Aug. ibid. cap. 12.
Denique ille Adam, and terrente nullo etc. Finally Adam when no man put him in
fear, yea and against the commandemente of God that did put him in fear,
using his free will, stood not fast in so great felicity, in so great
facility and ease of not sinning. These Martyrs, when the world did (I will
not say) put them in fear, but cruelly rage that they should not stand,
stood fast in faith. Whereas Adam saw present before him the goods that he
should leave, these did not see the goods that they were to receive.

This is the strength in well doing, which the grace of Justification truly
received and faithfully put in ure, gives unto Christian men, by the which
Christ is strong in us. Seeing therefore that Christ Jesus is all one
yesterday, Heb. 13.
and this day, and for ever: how is it, that we find not in our selves the
strengeth in well doing which we commend in them? Neither the fruit of
Justification, which S. Paul commends in the Romans, that is, holiness
and virtuous life: such as Pliny being a heathen man, and Tertullian even by
the confession of the heathen says was commonly found in Christian men?
What shall we say, but that God offers it, 2. Cor. 6. See the 7. chapt. of
this.2. Book. Cypria. de simplicit. Praelator.
and we will not receive it. We receive the grace of God in vain, we give not
the credit to Gods words that they did: we have not the faith of Abraham
faithfully to believe, and obediently to do all that God bids us to do. We
believe his promises, and care not for his commandments, and therefore be
faynte in faith, and without hope and charity. To redress this, let us first
begin with the foundation, and believe concerning our Justification as they
did. Tertullian says, that only Christian men were the innocente and godly
lyuers, and shows the cause. Nos ergo soli innocents, quid mirum si necesse
est? Tertull. in Apologe.
Enimuero necesse est, innocentiam a Deo edocti and perfect eam nouimus, vt a
perfecto magistro reuelatam, and fideliter custodimus, vt ab incontemptibili
dispensatore mandatam: We alone be the innocente lyuers, what maruayle if it
must needs be so? In deed it must of force be so. We that have learned of
God innocence and good life, both know it perfectely, because it is reveled
by a perfyte Master, and we keep it faithfully, because it is commanded by
an officer that may not be despised. Take this lesson, Christian Reader,
learn of Christ for thy Justification, not only to believe, but also to live
godly and virtuously, which lesson, as thou seeste they kept, whom thou can
not but commend, and so shalt thou be like them whom thou doeste rightely
commend.

Thou know by that which has benne said before, in the twelth chaptre of
this second Book, what a false and dissolute doctrine concerning Justification
is able to do. When Simon Magus, Carpocrates, and Valentinus had taught, that
men might be saved by grace, faith, and knowledge, without good works,
their scholars gave them selves to lust and licentiouse life. To avoid that
mischief believe assuredly this godly and learned saying: Non dormie^tibus
prouenit regnum coelorum, Leo. ser. 2. in Epipha. and ser. 5. ibid.
sed in mandatis Dei laborantibus, atque vigilantibus. vt si dona illius irrita
no^ fecerimus, per ea quae dedit, mereamur accipere quod promisit. The kingdom
of heaven comes not to sleapers, but to such as labor in Gods
commandementes, and watch to the end that if we make not his gifts idle and
void, by such things as he has given, we may deserve to receive that which
he has promised.

The right and assured way to come to this fruit of Justification, Miche. 6.
is to follow the counsel of the Prophet: To do justice, to love mercy, to
walk carefully in Gods sight. Circu^spiciat se omnis anima Christiana. Leo.
ser. 1. de Qua. drag.
Let every Christian soul, says S. Leo, look about it self, and by strait
examination discuss the inward thoughts of her heart, let it see that no
debate cleave there, that no covetousness settle, let chastity drive away
incontinencie, let the light of truth drive away the darckenesse of lying. etc.
Let pride assuage, let humility be taken in, let anger amend, let vengeance
cease, and wrongs be forgotten. Aug. Ser. 15. de ver. Apost.
The like counsel gives S. Augustine: Proficite fratres mei. etc. Increase my
brethren, search your selves ever without guyle and flattery Especially follow
one short rule which he makes for every man, Augustine. Tract. 6. in epistol.
Joan.
saying: Interroga cor tuum si est ibi dilectio fratris. Examine thy heart
whether the love of thy brother be there: Si inueneris te habere charitatem,
habes spiritu^ Dei. If thou find that thou haste charity, thou haste the
spirit of God: And then, if his spirit that raised Jesus from the dead dwell
in you, Rom 8.
he that raised Jesus from the dead, will also give life to your mortal
bodies.

And thus do we see, that the way to examine and try our selves, and thereby
to judge of our Justification, is not only to search whether we have faith, but
also whether we love, 2. Cor. 7.
and live godly. Perficientes sanctificationem in timore Dei. Doing holiness
in the fear of God.

The Conclusion and end of the Work.
THVS have I now by Gods help, finished the second part of this Treaty,
wherein mine intent has been to advertise the Christian Reader, See the
Preface.
how to eschew the second great, or rather most dangerouse fall, on the left
hand, which S. Augustine wills all that teach or speak of Justification,
to beware of. Aug. in praefat. Psalm. 31.
The peril is for men to presume only of Gods mercy, doing nothing them
selves, toward their own salvation: which opinion, he says, if any man
follow, leads him undoubtedly to everlasting ruin of soul and body.

And because the only or readiest mean to lead a man to that fall, is, to
think that faith alone may suffice to justify and save us: I have at good
length proved, that faith alone is not enough to bring a sinner from sinful
estate to Gods favor, nor of wicked to make him righteouse, without the
woorking and help of hope, charity, penance, and the Sacraments of Christ:
wherein I have been the longer, because this opinion is lately crepte into the
world, and now spread far and wide. For albeit in times past, some thought
they might be saved without good works, yet did they not say, they might be
saved without the Sacraments: De fide and oper. c. 27
As by this book of S. Augustine thou may see. And so all be it they waded
deep enough to drown them selves, yet went they not so far into the
bottomless goulfe, as sundry have done in this our age, who say, that
nothing woorketh in the act of our Justification, but only faith. And
therevppon have brought in, this proposition, and made it a common speech
among them selves and theirs, Faith alone justifies, excluding thereby from the
act of our Justification, not only hope, charity, and penance, but also the
very Sacraments. For if faith alone justify a sinner, and make him of wicked
rightuouse, then is there none of these requisite or necessary for that
effect, which never any aunciente man learned, that I have seen, did
maineteine.

I have further declared, that faith alone can continue no man in the state of
grace, much less increase him in justice, and least of all, bring him to the
end and perfection of justice in life everlasting without the help of good
works. And so is the opinion of Justification by only faith in truth and
deed disprooued, and found untrue, in no sense maintenable, as they take it:
I say as they take it. For although certain aunciente Fathers sometime used
these words, Faith alone justifies: yet do they not mean thereby, as these
do, to exclude any of the virtues before named, or Sacraments, as I have
plainly showed. In the.18. Chapt. of this second book.


I have according to my promise, in this whole Treaty affirmed nothing of my
self: that which I have said, I have proved by euidente Scriptures,
following every where the interpretation of such as God has placed in his
Church, Ephesians. 4.
to be Pastors and Doctors, to the perfiting of the holy, and to the
building up of Christ's body, which is his Church.

The labor has been bestowed, to the end that the godly man, which is the
Christian man, might be perfect and sownde, 2. Timo. 3.
ready and instructed to all good works. Which God grant thee, and me
with thee good Reader: Once the best exhortation and right encouragemente to
do good works, See the.23 chapter.
is truly to think and believe, that no man having time and opportunity to
do them, shall be saved without them.

Thus ends the Second Book of this Treaty of Man's Justification.
The Prayer of the Church.
Omnipotens sempiterne Deus, da nobis fidei, spei, and charitatis augmentum,
and vt mereamur assequi quod promittis, fac nos amare quod praecipis.

Almighty everlasting God, give us increase of faith, hope, and charity: and
to the intent we may deserve to come to that which thou promisest, make us love
that, that thou commaundest, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

TO THE READER.
TO the intent, Christian Reader, thou may understand, both that, the
doctrine of Man's Justification, declared unto thee in this Treaty, is
consonant and agreeable to the assured and undoubted doctrine of Christ's
Catholic Church, by long and mature deliberation, by most exact and diligent
About this only matter, the Bisshops and Doctors, had lxxx. several meetinges
and conferences, before they concluded.
travail, expressed and set forth to the world, in the late General
Council holden at Trent: and also that the said most Reverend and Learned
Assembly of Bisshops, Doctors, and Fathers, defined nothing in this matter,
but such as most expressly agrees with the holy Scriptures, and consent of
the Ancient Fathers, here in this Treaty laid before thee: to this intent I
say, and for these causes, thou haste here to this Treaty annexed, the Sixth
Session of the said Council, with the Canons of the same, translated into
English, word for word: In the which, the whole doctrine of Justification, is
most exactly, plainly, and withal shortly, taught, declared, and comprised.

THE SIXTH SESSION OF THE GENERAL COUNCEL OF TRENT HOLDEN THE THIRTENTH DAY OF
IANVARIE, IN THE YEAR OF OUR LORD 1547.
A DECREE TOUCHING Justification. The Preface.
FOR so much as there is at this present a certain erroneous doctrine sown
in diverse and sundry places concerning Justification, not without the loss of
many sowles and grievous decaie of unity in the Church: to the praise and
glory of Almighty God, tranquillity of the Church, and salvation of sowles,
the Holy, Oecumenicall, and General Council of Trent, lawfully assembled in
the Holy Ghost, the right Reverend Lords John Maria de Monte, Bishop of
Preneste, and Marcellus Priest by title of the holy Cross in Jerusalem,
Cardinals of the holy Church of Rome, and Legates Apostolic de Latere, being
in it Presidentes, in the behalf of our most holy Father in Christ and
Sovereign Lord Paulus by the providence of God the third Pope (of that name)
intends to set out to all the Faithful of Christ, a true and sound doctrine
of Justification, Heb. 12.
which Jesus Christ the Son of justice, the beginner and ender of our Faith
has taught, the Apostles have delivered, and the Catholic Church, by
suggestion of the holy Ghost, has continually kept: straightly forbidding,
that no man from hence forth be so bold as to believe, preach, or teach
otherwise, then is ordained and declared in this present Decree.

Of the insufficiency of our nature and of the Law toward Justification.
THE I. CHAP.
FIRST of all, the holy Council declares, that to understand the doctrine of
Justification well and sincerely, it behooves every man to acknowledge and
confess, that, after what time all men had in the preuarication of Adam lost
their innocence, and were made unclean, Romans 5. Ephesians. 2.
and (as the Apostle says) by nature the Sons of wrath (as it is expressed
before in the Decree concerning original sin:) they were so much the
bondslaues of sin, and in such subjection to the devil and death, that they
could not be delivered or rise again out of it, neither the Gentiles by the
strength of nature, neither yet the Jews them selves by the letter of the law
of Moses: albeit that free will was not utterly quenched in them, though the
strength of it were much weakened and decayed.

Of the dispensation and Mystery of the coming of Christ. THE II. CHAP.
Whereupon it came to pass, that the heavenly Father, the Father of mercies,
and God of all comfort, when that blessed fulness of time was come, sent unto
men Christ Jesus his own Son, Galat. 4.
who was declared and promised unto many holy Fathers, both before the law,
and in the time of the law: to the end that he should redeem the Jews,
which were under the law: and that the Gentiles, which followed not justice,
Romans 9. Ephesians 2. 1. Joan. 2.
might lay hand on justice, and that all men might receive the adoption of
Sons. This Jesus, has God set forth an appeacer by Faith in his own blood
for our sins, and not only for our sins, but also for the sins of the
whole world.

Who they are, that are justified by Christ. THE V. CHAPTER.
HOwbeit, although he died for all men, yet do not al men receive the benefit
of his death, but they only, to whom the merit of his passion is
communicated. For as in deed, men should not be borne unjust unless they were
descended and borne of the seed of Adam: for so much as in that descente they
do gather by him an unrighteousness of their own, whiles they are conceived:
even so they should never be justified, except they were borne again in
Christ: because in that second birth, by the merit of his passion, grace is
geauen unto them, by the which they are made just. For this benefit the
Apostle exhorts us to geaue thanks at all times to the Father, which has
made us worthy to be partakers of the lotte of Saints in light, Colos. 3.
and has delivered us from the power of darkness, and has transposed us into
the kingdom of his well-beloved Son, in whom we have redemption and remission
of sins.

A description of the Justification of the wicked, and the manner of it in the
state of grace. THE IIII. CHAPTER.
BY the which words is described and declared the Justification of the wicked,
that it is, a translation from that state, in which man is borne the son of
the first Adam, into the state of grace and adoption of the sons of God by
the second Adam Jesus Christ our Savior: The which translation, after the
publishing of the Gospel, can not be made, without receiving the water of
Baptism, or the purpose to receive it, as it is written: Joan. 3.
Except a man be borne again by water and the Holy Ghost, he can not enter
into the kingdom of God.

That it is necessary for such as be of age to prepare them selves to receive
Justification, and from whence Justification comes. THE V. CHAPTER.
THE holy Council declares moreover, that the beginning of Justification, in
such as be of age, is to be taken of the preventing grace of God through Christ
Jesus, that is to say, of his calling, whereby they are called without any
their own merits: that they, which were turned away from God through sins,
may, by his stirring and helping grace, be disposed to convert them selves,
unto their own Justification, by yealding their consent freely, and woorking
together with the grace of God: in such sort, that, when God touches the heart
of man by giving unto it the light of the Holy Ghost, neither may the man him
self do nothing at all, when he receuieth that inspiration (for he has power
also to cast it away, and refuse it) neither yet can he without the grace of
God, of his own free will, move him self to justice before God. Whereupon in
the holy Scriptures, when it is said: Be you turned unto me, Zacha. 1.
and I will be turned unto you: We are put in mind of our liberty. When we
answer, Turn us, O Lord unto thee, Thren. 5.
and we shall be turned: we do confess, that we are prevented by the grace of
God.

The manner of our preparation. THE VI. CHAPTER.
UNTO this same justice are men disposed, whiles, being stirred up and helped
by the grace of God, they conceive faith by hearing, and are freely moved
toward God, believing such things to be true, as are by God reveled and
promised: and that especially, that the wicked is justified by God through his
grace, through the redemption, which is in Christ Jesus. And when they
understand them selves to be sinners, turning them selves from the fear of
Gods justice (wherewith they are profitably shaken) to consider the mercy of
God, they are raised up into hope, trusting, that God will be merciful unto
them for Christ's sake: and so begin they to love him, as the fountain of al
justice, and therefore are moved against sins, through a certain hatred and
detestation, that is, through such penance, as is behouefull to be done
before Baptism: finally when they purpose to receive Baptism, they are moved
to begin a new life, and to keep the commandments of God. Of this
disposition it is written, Hebr. 11.
he that comes unto God, must believe, that he is, and that he is a rewarder
to those that seek him. Matthew. 9.
Again: Be of good comfort son, thy sins are forgiven thee. Eccle. 1.
Again: The fear of God drives out sin. Again: Actor. 2.
Do you penance, and let every one of you be Baptized, in the name of Jesus
Christ, to the remission of your sins, and you shall receive the gift of
the holy Ghost. Again: Luc. 24.
Go ye therefore and teach all nations, Baptizing them in the name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost, teaching them to keep what
so ever things I have commanded you. 1. Reg. 7.
Finally: Prepare your hearts unto God.

What the Justification of the wicked is, and what the causes of it are. THE
VII. CHAPTER.
AFter this disposition or preparation, the Justification it self follows:
which is not only the remission of sins, but also a sanctifying and
renewing of the inward man through the voluntary receiving of grace and
gifts, whereby man is made, of unjust, just: of an enemy, Ephesians. 1.
a friend: that he may be the heir of life everlasting according to hope.

The causes of Justification
Of this Justification the causes are these. The cause final is the glory of
God and of Christ, and life everlasting. freely cleanse and sanctify, sealing
and anointing us with the holy spirit of promise, Ephesians. 2.
which is the pleadge of our inheritance. The cause meritorious, is his most
dear the for the exceeding great charity, wherewith he loved us, has deserved
Justification for us, through his most holy passion on the tree of the Cross,
and has made satisfaction unto God the father for us. The cause Jesus Christ
are communicated, yeat in this Justification of a wicked man it is done, whiles
by the merit of the said most holy passion, Romans 5.
through the holy Ghost the charity of God is powered abroad in the hearts of
those, that are justified, and cleaves fast in them. Whereupon in
Justification, man receives with the remission of sins all these things,
faith, hope, and charity powered in him together by Christ, in whom he is
ingraffed. For faith, unless hope come unto it and charity, neither does it
perfectely unite a man unto Christ, neither does it make him a lively member
of his body. By reason whereof, it is most truly said: that Faith without
works is dead and idle. Jacob. 2. Gal. 5.
Again In Christ Jesus neither to be circumcised, nor to be without
circumcision avails any thing, but Faith, that works by charity. This Faith
do the Catecumens require of the Church according to the tradition of the
Apostles, before they receive the Sacrament of Baptism, when they require that
Faith, that geaueth life everlasting: the which life faith can not geaue
without hope and charity. Whereupon they hear this saying of Christ,
forthwith pronounced unto them: If thou will enter unto life, keep the
commaundmentes. Matthew. 19
And thus do they receive a true and Christian justice: the which, being
geauen unto them by Christ Jesus as the first stole, in place of that, which
Adam lost both to him self and to us, through his disobedience, such, as are
regenerated in Baptism, are by and by commanded to keep white and unspotted,
that they may bring it before the judgment seat of our Lord Jesus Christ,
and so receive life everlasting.

How it may be understood, that the wicked is justified by Faith, and
freely. THE VIII. CHAP.
Romans 5. Gratis.
NOW whereas the Apostle says, that man is justified by faith, and freely:
those words are to be taken in that sense, which the continual agreement of
the Catholic Church has always holden and expressed, which is: that, we be
said to be therefore justified by faith, because faith is the beginning of
man's salvation, the foundation, and root of all Justification: Hebr. 11.
without which it is impossible to please God, and to come unto the fellowship
of his children: And that we be said, to be therefore justified freely, because
none of those things, which go before Justification, whether it be faith, or
works, deserves the grace of Justification. Romans 11.
For if is be grace, then is it not by works; otherwise, as the same Apostle
says, grace were not then grace.

Agaiast the vain affiance of Heretics. THE IX. CHAPTER.
AND although it be necessary to believe, that sins neither are, neither
have been at any time forgeuen, otherwise then freely, by the mercy of God for
Christ's sake: yet must we say, that sins neither are, nor have been forgeuen
to any man, that boasts of an affia^ce and certainty of the forgeuenes of
his sins, and rests upon it only: For so much as this affiance (which is
vain, and far wide from all godliness) may be, and is in our time emo^gest
heretics and schismatikes, set forth and maintained against the Catholic
Church, yea and that with earnest contention. Neither is that opinion to be
holden, that such, as are truly justified, must without all doubt in the
world make them selves assured, that they are justified, and that no man is
absolved from his sins and justified, but he, which believes certainly, that
he is absolved and justified, and that absolution and Justification is made
perfect by this belefe only, as though he that believed this, doubted of the
promises of God, and of the efficacy of the death and resurrection of Christ.
For as no godly man ought to doubt of the mercy of God, of the merit of
Christ, and of the virtue and efficacy of the Sacraments: so every man, when
he looks upon him self, and considers his own weakness and indisposition,
may stand in doubt and fear of his own grace, for so much as no man is able
to know by certainty of faith (such as is infallible) that he has atteined
the grace of God.

Of the increase of Justification, after it is received. THE X. CHAPTER.
Ephesians. 2. Psalm. 13. 2. Cor. 4.
THEY therefore, that are thus justified and made the friends and of the
household of God, going from virtue to virtue, are renewed, as the Apostle
says, from day to day: that is to say, by mortifying the members of their
flesh, and by yelding them, as the armor of justice to sanctification, by
keeping the commandments of God and of the Church, they grow in this
justice, which they received by the grace of Christ, faith woorking together
with good works, and so they are justified more and more, as it is written: He
that is just, let him be further justified. Apoc. 22. Eccles. 18. Jacob. 2.
and again: Be not ashamed to be justified even unto death, and again: You
see, that man is justified by works, and not by faith only. This increase of
justice does the holy Church ask of God, when she prays thus: Geaue us, O
Lord, increase of faith, hope, and charity.

Of the observation of the commandments. Of the necessity and possibility
thereof. THE XI. CHAPTER.
NO man, be he never so much justified, ought to think him self to be
discharged from the keeping of the co^mandementes: no man ought to use that
talk (which is both rash and forbidden of the holy Fathers under pain of
excommunication) Note.
that the commandments of God are impossible to be kept of a man being
justified. For God commands not things impossible: but by commanding, he
warns thee both to do, what thou can, and to ask of him, what thou can
not do, and so does he help, that thou may be able to do, 1. Joan. 5. Matthew.
11.
whose co^mandementes are not heavy, whose yoke is sweet, and burden light.
For they, that are the sons of God, do love Christ: Joan. 14.
and such as do love him, do (as he him self witnesses) keep his words, the
which thing undoubtedly they are able to perform with Gods help. For although
men in this mortal life, be they never so holy and just, do some time fall at
the lest into certain light and daily trespasses, which are also called
venial sins, yet do they not for that cease to be just. For this is the
voice of just men, both humble and true: forgeaue us our trespasses. Matt. 6.
Wherefore the just ought to think them selves so much the more bownd to walk
in the way of justice, to the end that being now delivered from sin, and
made servants unto God, Tit. 2.
they may live soberly, justly, and godly, and so go foreward by Christ Jesus,
by whom they have had access into this grace. For God forsakes not such as
are once justified by his grace, unless he be first forsaken of them. No man
ought therefore to flatter him self in only faith, thinking that he is made an
heir, and that he shall obtain the inheritance for faith only, although he
suffer not with Christ, that he may be glorified with Christ. Hebr. 5.
For even Christ him self (as the Apostle says) for all that he was the
son of God, yet did he learn, by such things as he suffered, obedience: and
when he was perfited, he was made to all such as were obedient unto him, the
cause of everlasting salvation. Wherefore the Apostle warns such as are
justified, saying: 1. Cor. 9.
Know you not, that such as run in the race, they run all together, but
one receives the price? So run ye, that you may lay hand on the game. I
therefore do so run, not as for an uncertainty, I do so fight, not as one
that beats the aier: but I do chastise my body, and bring it into bondage:
lest peradventure, when I have preached unto other men, I may become a cast
away my self. In like manner speaks the chief of the Apostles S. Peter: 2.
Pet. 1.
Do your endeavor to the uttermost, that ye may by good works make your
calling and election certain: for in so doing you shall not sin at any
time. By the which places it is evident, that those men do impugn the Doctrine
of the true and Catholic religion, which say, that the just man sins in
every good work at the lest venially, or that he does (which is more
intolerable) deserve everlasting damnation. It is also manifest, that they do
impugn the true and Catholic doctrine, which do determine, that the just do
sin in all their works, if in the same good works in stirring up their
own sluggishnesse, and in cheering them selves to run in the race, they do
principally respect this, that God may be glorified, and withal do look upon
the everlasting reward: for so much as it is written: Psalm. 118.
I have inclined my heart to do thy iustifications, for the rewards sake, Hebr.
11.
and the Apostle says of Moises, that he looked upon the reward.

That the rash and presumptuous opinion of predestination is to be eschewed.
THE XII. CHAP.
NO man, so long as he is in this mortal life, ought to presume so far of the
secret mystery of Gods predestination, as to say assuredly, that he is in the
number of the predestinate: as though this were true, that a man being once
justified, either could not sin any more, or else, if he do sin, that he
should assure him self of amendment: for (unless it be by special
revelation) it can not be known whom God has chosen unto him self.

Of the gift of perseverance. THE XIII. CHAPTER.
THE like may be said of the gift of perserance, whereof it is written: Matthew.
^0 and 24.
who so perseuereth until the end, he shall be saved: the which thing can not
be had from any other, then from him, which is able to stay him, that
stands, that he may continually stand, and to set him up again that
falls. No man may promise him self any thing of certainty, with an
absolute certainty, although all men ought to settle and repose a most sure
hope in the help of God. For God, (except they do not their part according
to his grace) as he has begone a good work, Philip. 1.
so will he end it, woorking in them to will, 1. Cor. 8. 1. Cor. 10. Philip. 2.
and to make perfect. How be it let them, that think them selves to stand,
take heed, that they fall not: And let them with fear and trembling work
their salvation, in labors, in watchinges, in almesdeedes, in prayers and
offeringes, in fastinges and chastity. For, knowing that they are regenerated
in hope of glory, and not as yet in glory, they have cause to misdoubt of the
battle, which remains with the flesh, with the world, and with the devil:
in the which battle they can not be conquerers, unless with the grace of
God they obey the Apostle, Romans 8.
saying: We be debtors, not to the flesh, to live according to the flesh: for
if you live according to the flesh, you shall die: but if you shall mortify
the deeds of the flesh by the spirit, you shall live.

Of them, that are fallen, and of their recover. THE XIIII. CHAPTER.
NOW such, as are through sin fallen from the grace of Justification, which
they had received, may be justified again, if, when God stirs them to
rise, they will procure through the merit of Christ to recover the grace
lost, by the Sacrament of Penance. For this manner of Justification is the
recovering of him, that is fallen, which the holy Fathers aptly termed the
second board after shipwreck of grace lost. For in deed, for them that fall
into sins after Baptism, Joan. 20.
Christ Jesus has instituted the Sacrament of Penance, when he said: Take ye
the holy Ghost: whose sins ye forgeaue, they are forgeauen them: and whose
ye retain, they are retained. Wherefore it is to be declared, that the penance
of a Christian man after his fall differreth very much from that, which is
done before Baptism: and that in this penance is contained, not only a ceasing
from sins and a detestation of them, or a contrite and humbled heart, but also
a Sacramental confession of the said sins (at the least in purpose, and to
be made at time convenient) and the absolution of a Priest. There is also
contained in this penance a satisfaction, by fastinges, almesdeedes, prayers,
and other godly exercises of spiritual life: not for the pain everlasting,
which is forgeauen either by the Sacrament, or else by purposing of the
Sacrament together with the offense, but for the temporal pain, the which
(as the holy Scriptures teach us) is not always forgeauen wholly (as it is
in Baptism) to such, as being unthankful for the grace of God, Ephesians. 4.
which they have received, have sorrowed the holy Ghost, and have not ben
afraied to violate the temple of God. Of this penance it is written: be
mindful from whence thou art fallen, Apocal. 2. 2. Cor. 7. Matthew 3. Luca 3.
do penance, and do the former works. And again: That sorrow, which is
according to God, woorketh penance toward a stable salvation. And again: Do
ye penance, and do ye the worthy fruits of penance.

That by every mortal sin grace is lost, but not Faith. THE XV. CHAP.
AGainst the crafty wits of certain men, which through sweet talk and
fair words do seduce the hearts of innocents, Romans 16.
it is to be holden, that the grace of Justification once received is lost, not
only by infidelity, by the which Faith it self is lost, but also by any
other mortal sin, although faith be not lost. Herein do we defend the
doctrine of Gods law, which excludes from the kingdom of God, not only
Infidels, but also the faithful, 1. Cor. 6.
being fornicatours, adulterrers, wantonness, buggerers, thieves, couetouse,
drunkerdes, euillspeakers, extorcioners, and al others, which do commit mortal
sins: from the which they may with the assistance of Gods grace abstain,
and for which they are separated from the grace of Christ.

Of the fruicte of Justification, that is to say, of the merit of good
works, and of the consideration of merit. THE XVI. CHAP.
WHEN men therefore are by these means justified, whether they do continually
keep the grace once received, or whether they do leese it and recover it
again, the words of the Apostle are to be set before them: Abound ye in
every good work, Hebr. 10.
knowing that your labor is not void in our Lord. For God is not unjust, that
he will forget your work and love, which ye have showed in his name. And: 1.
Cor. 15.
Leese not your affiance, which has a great reward. And therefore to such, as
work well to the end, and hope in God, we ought to set forth life
everlasting, both as a grace mercifully promised unto the Sons of God through
Christ Jesus and as a wages faithfully to be paid, according to the promise of
God him self, to their good works and merits. For this is that crown of
Justice which the Apostle said, 2. Tim. 4.
was laid up for him after his conflicte and running, which he said, should
be rendered unto him by the just judge: And not only to him, but also to all
them, that love the coming of Christ. For seeing that the self same Christ
Jesus does continually send down by influence into them, that are justified,
as the head into the members, and as a vine into his branches, a virtue, the
which virtue goes before, accompanies, and follows their good works,
without the which their works could not possibly be acceptable to God and
meritorious: we ought to believe, that there lacks nothing else in such as are
justified, wherefore they may not be thought, by their good works, which are
done in God, to have satisfied the law of God, (so much, as the state of this
life requires) and truly to have deserved life everlasting, which they shall
enjoy, when the time comes, if so be that, they depart out of this life in
grace: for so much as Christ our Savior says: Joan. 4.
If any man shall drink of this water which I shall geaue him, he shall not
thirst for ever: but it shall be made in him a fountain of water springing to
life everlasting. And thus, neither is our own proper justice so taken to be
our own, as though it proceeded from our own selves, neither is the Justice of
God either unknown, or resused. For that Justice, which is called ours,
because we are justified by it cleaving fast in us, the self same is the
Justice of God, because it is powered into us by God through the merit of
Christ.

Neither is that to be omitted in this place, that although there be so much
ascribed unto good works in the holy Scriptures, that Christ promises even
to him, Matthew. 10.
that shall geaue a draught of cold water to one of his little ones, that he
shall not lack his reward: and the Apostle witnesses, that that tribulation
of ours, which in this present life is but short and light, 2. Cor. 4.
woorketh in us an everlasting weight of glory high above measure: yet God
forbid, that a Christian man should either trust, or glory in him self, and
not in our Lord, whose goodness is so great toward all men, that he will have
those things to be their merits, which are his own gifts. And because we
offend all in many points, every man ought to have before his eyes, like as
his mercy and goodness, even so his severity and judgment: neither ought any
man to judge him felfe, although he know nothing by him self: because all the
life of men is to be examined and judged, 1. Cor. 4.
by the judgment not of man, but of God: who shall bring to light the hidden
things of darkness, and make manifest the counsels of hearts: Matthew. 16 Romans 6.
and then shall every man have his commendation from God, who, as it is
written, shall render to every man according to his works.

After this Catholic Doctrine touching Justification, the which unless
every man receive faithfully and firmly, he can not be justified, it has
pleased the holy Council to adioine hereunto these Canons; to the intent all
men may know, not only, what to hold and follow, but also, what they ought
to avoid and flee.

THE CANONS OF THE SAME SESSION TOUCHING JUSTIFICATION.
THE FIRST CANON.
Note Reader, the doctrine of the Catholic Church is not, as heretics do
slander it.
IF any man say, that a man may be Justified before God by his own works,
which are done, either by the power of man's nature, or by the doctrine of
the law, without the grace of God through Jesus Christ: Accursed be he.

THE SECOND CANON.
IF any man say, that the grace of God is geauen through Jesus Christ to
this end only, that man may with the more facility live justly, and deserve
life everlasting, as though he were able by free will without grace to
perform both the one and the other: (thowgh hardly and with difficulty)
Accursed be he.

THE THIRD CANON.
IF any man say, that man is able without the preventing inspiration of the
holy Ghost, and aid of the same, to believe, to hope, to love, or to repent
(so as it behooves) that the grace of Justification be given unto him: Accursed
be he.

THE FOVRTH CANON.
IF any man say, that man's free will moved and stirred of God, woorketh
nothing together with him by assenting unto God, stirring and calling, whereby
he may dispose and prepare him self toward the obteining of the grace of
Justification, and that he can not dissent, if he will, but that being as a
thing without life, he does nothing at all, but bears him self, as a thing
that suffers only: Accursed be he.

THE FIFTH CANON.
IF any man say, that man's free will is lost and extinguished after the
sin of Adam: or that it is a thing of a title only, or rather a title without
a thing: finally if any man say, that it is a devise brought into the Church
by Satan: Accursed be he.

THE SIXTH CANON.
IF any man say, that it is not in the power of man, to make his ways evil,
but that God woorketh evil works even so, as he does the good, not only by
permission, but also properly and by him self, in so much, that the treason of
Judas be no less the proper work of God, then the calling of Paul: Accursed
be he.

THE SEVENTH CANON.
IF any man say, that all works, which are done before Justification, by
what means so ever they be done, are verily sins, or that they deserve the
hatred of God, or that a man, the more earnestly he endeavors to dispose him
self to grace, the more grievously he does sin: Accursed be he.

THE EIGHTH CANON.
IF any man say, that the fear of hell, by the which fear we do flee unto
the mercy of God, in sorowing for our sins, or else abstain from sinning, is
sin, or that it makes sinners the worse: Accursed be he.

THE NINTH CANON.
IF any man say, that the wicked is justified by faith only, meaning thereby,
that there is nothing else required, which should work withal toward the
atteining of the grace of Justification, and that it is in no wise necessary,
that he be prepared and disposed by the motion of his own will: Accursed be he.

THE TENTH CANON.
IF any man say, that men are justified without the justice of Christ, by
which he has deserved for us, or that they are just by the same justice [of
Christ] Formaliter.
formally: Accursed be he.

THE ELEVENTH CANON.
IF any man say, that men are justified, either by the only imputation of
Christ's justice, or else by the only remission of sins, excluding grace and
charity, which is powered in their hearts by the holy Ghost, and is inherent in
them, or also that the grace by the which we are justified, is only the favor
of God: Accursed be he.

THE TWELFTH CANON.
IF any man say, that the justifying faith, is nothing else, but an affiance
of the mercy of God forgeauing sins for Christ's sake, or that that affiance
is the only thing, by the which we are justified: Accursed be he.

THE THIRTENTH CANON.
IF any man say, that, to atteine the remission of sins, it is necessary
for every man to believe assuredly, and without casting any doubt of his own
infirmity and indisposition, that his sins are forgeauen him: Accursed be he.

THE FOVRTENTH CANON.
IF any man say, that a man is absolved from his sins, and justified for
that, that he believes assuredly, that he is absolved and justified, or that
no man is truly justified, but he, which believes him self to be justified,
and that by this belief only, Absolution and Justification is perfited:
Accursed be he.

THE FIFTENTH CANON.
IF any man say, that a man being borne again [by Baptisme] and justified,
is bownd by faith to believe, that he is assuredly in the number of the
predestinate: Accursed be he.

THE SIXTENTH CANON.
IF any man say, of an absolute and infallible certainty, that he shall
assuredly have that great gift of perseverance until the end, unless he have
learned it by special revelation: Accursed be he.

THE SEVENTENTH CANON.
IF any man say, that the grace of Justification comes not, but only to such
as are predestinate to life: and that all others, which are called, are only
called, but do not receive grace, as who were by the power of God predestinate
to evil: Accursed be he.

THE EIGHTENTH CANON.
IF any man say, that the commandments of God are impossible to be kept,
even of a man that is justified, and in the state of grace: Accursed be he.

THE NINETENTH CANON.
IF any man say, that there is nothing commanded in the Ghospel besides
faith, that al other things are indifferent, neither commanded, nor yet
forbidden, but free: or that the ten commandments do nothing apperteine to
Christian men: Accursed be he.

THE TWENTETH CANON.
IF any man say, that a man being justified, and never so perfect, is not
bound to the keeping of the commandments of God and of the Church, but
only to believe: as though the Gospel were a bare and absolute promise of
life everlasting, without any condition of keeping the commandments:
Accursed be he.

THE XXI. CANON.
IF any man say, that Christ Jesus was geauen by God unto men, (only) as a
redeemer, whom they should trust, and not also as a law maker, whom they
should obeie: Accursed be he.

THE XXII. CANON.
IF any man say, that a man being justified, either may without the special
help of God persevere in the Justice received, or that with the said help he
can not [perseuere]: Accursed be he.

THE XXIII. CANON.
IF any man say, that a man being once justified can sin no more, nor leese
grace, and therefore say, that he, which falls and sins, was never truly
justified, or contrariwise, that he may in all this life avoid al sins,
even venial [sinnes] unless it be by special privilege of God, as the Church
holds of the blessed Virgin Marie: Accursed be he.

THE XXIIII. CANON.
IF any man say, that justice received is not conserved, and also that it is
not augmented before God by good works, but that the Works them selves are
the fruits only and signs of Justification [already] gotten, and not a cause
of the same to be augmented: Accursed be he.

THE XXV. CANON.
IF any man say, that the just sins in every good work, at the least
venially, or, (which is more intolerable) mortally, and therefore deserves
everlasting damnation: and that he is not damned for that only, because God
does not impute those works to damnation: Accursed be he.

THE XXVI. CANON.
IF any man say, that the just ought not, for the good works, which have been done in God, to look and hope for the everlasting reward from God, through
his mercy and the merit of Jesus Christ, if they shall continue even until
the end in well doing, and in keeping the commandments of God: Accursed be
he.

THE XXVII. CANON.
IF any man say, that there is no sin mortal, unless it be [the sinne] of
infidelity, or that grace once received is lost for none other sin, be it
never so grievous and enormeouse, except it be by the sin of infidelity:
Accursed be he.

THE XXVIII CANON.
IF any man say, that, when grace is lost by sin, faith is always lost
withal: or that faith, which remains, is not true faith, although it be, not
lively faith: or else that he, which has faith without charity is not a
Christian: Accursed be he.

THE XXIX. CANON.
IF any man say, that he, which has fallen after Baptism, can not rise
again by the grace of God: or that he may [rise againe] but so, that he
recover the justice lost by only faith, without the Sacrament of penauncee,
as the holy, Roman, and universal Church, taught by Christ our Lord and
his Apostles, has til this day professed, kept, and taught: Accursed be he.

THE XXX. CANON.
IF any man say, that after the grace of Justification received, the fault is
so forgeauen to every penitent sinner, and the gilt of the everlasting pain
taken away in such sort, that there remains no gilt of temporal pain to be
paid, either in this world, or else in the world to come in purgatory,
before the way may be set open to the kingdom of heaven: Accursed be he.

THE XXXI. CANON.
IF any man say, that a man being justified sins, whiles he woorketh well
in respect of everlasting reward: Accursed be he.

THE XXXII. CANON.
IF any man say, that the good works of a man instified, are so the gifts
of God, that they are not also the good merits of him, that is justified: or
that he, which is justified, does not, by good works (which are done by him
by the grace of God, and by the merit of Jesus Christ, of whom he is a
lively member) verily deserve increase of grace, life everlasting, and the
atteining of the same life everlasting (so that he depart out of this life in
grace) yea and the increase of glory also: Accursed be he.

THE XXXIII. CANON.
IF any man say, that, this Catholic doctrine touching Justification,
expressed by the holy Council in this present Decree, does in any wise derogate
from the glory of God, or from the merits of Jesus Christ our Lord, and does
not rather set forth the truth of our faith, and finally the glory of God,
and of Christ Jesus: Accursed be he.

AMEN.
A TABLE OF THE CHAPTERS OF THE TREATY OF Justification. Wherein the
Arguments and the principal matters of the whole Treaty are contained.
In the First Book.
Chap. 1 What is meant by the word of Justification. And what degrees perfect
Justification and salvation has in it. Fol. 1. a. Chap. 2 What is meant by
the name of Faith, and how many kinds of Faith there be. Fol. 3. a. Chap. 3
VVherin the controversy of Justification rests, and what is the readiest way
to know how the same is wrought in us. Fol. 6. a. Chap. 4 What was lost in
Adam by sin, and what is restored by Christ in our Justification. And in
what things our Justification stands. Fol. 6. b. Chap. 5 Of the Causes of
our Justification. Fol. 10. b. Chap. 6 That the Sacrament of Baptism is the
instrumente and mean whereby God justifies us. Fol. 11. b. Chap. 7 Of
Justification of Infantes by the Sacrament of Baptism. Fol. 12. a. Chap. 8 Of
the Justification of such as were christened being of perfect age, and what
was required of them. Fol. 13. b. Chap. 9 That our Justification and the
virtues whereby we receive it, be the gifts of God, and come of Grace. Fol. 15.
b. Cha. 10 That man has free will, which being helped by grace, Cha. 11 That
such as fall into sin after Baptism, be justified by penance Cha. 12 Of the
increase and perfiting of our Justification, wherein Cha. 13 What good works
be, and how they be called ours. 29. b Cha. 14 A brief rehearsal of so much as
has been hitherto said, in
In the Second Book.
Chap. 1 How dangerouse it is for a man to presume only upon Gods mercy, and
to do no good works. Fol. 33. b. Chap. 2 Whence the opinion came, that only
Faith justifies. And of diverse kinds of mainteining the same. Fol. 34. b.
Chap. 3 That Faith excludes not Charity in our Justification. 36. a Chap. 4 An
Answer to Objections that be made, to prove that Faith alone justifies
without Charity. Fol. 40. a. Chap. 5 That Faith excludes not Hope in the act
of our Justification. Fol. 41. b. Chap. 6 That Faith excludes not the working
of Sacraments in our Justification. Fol. 43. b. Chap. 7 What is the true
meaning of these words in the Scripture: We are justified by Faith, or saved
by Faith. Fol. 47. a. Chap. 8 That S. Paul teaches not Justification by only
Faith, excluding Charity. And in what sense the Fathers sometime say: Faith
alone justifies. Fol. 51. a. Chap. 9 How Abraham was justified. What his
Faith was: and who be the true children of Abraham. Fol. 56. a. Cha. 10 That
there is no contrariety between S. Paul and S. James, concerning the Doctrine
of Justification. Fol. 60. a. Cha. 11 That Faith alone without good works
saves not. And what it is to be justified freely by Grace. Fol. 62. b. Cha. 12
What they were, who in sundry ages have taught, that men should be saved
without good works. Fol. 65. b. Cha. 13 The cause why good works are don: and
that they are rewarded in this life with increase of grace, and in the world to
come with life everlasting, and why they be so rewarded. 67. a Cha. 14 An
Answer to certain Objections made against the reward of good works. Fol. 72.
a. Cha. 15 What assurance of his Justification and salvation a Christian man
may have in this life. Fol. 75. b. Cha. 16 Of the fruits and end of our
Justification, and what strength in well doing God gives thereby, where it is
truly received, and effectually put in ure, and the way to come to it. Fol.
80. a.
FINIS.
CERTAIN TREATIES OF THE ANCIENT HOLY FATHERS, TOUCHING THE DOCTRINE OF good
works.

Namely, A Treaty of S. Augustine, which he Entitled: Of Faith and Works.
Item, a Sermon of S. Chrysostom, of Praying unto God. Item, a Sermon of S.
Basil, of Fasting. Item, certain Sermons of S. Leo the Great, of the same
matter. Last of al, a notable Sermon of S. Cyprian, of Alms deeds.


Al newly translated into English. by Thomas Coppley esquier

Tobia. 12. Bona est Oration cum Ieiunio, and Eleemosyna, magis quam Thesauros
auri recondere. Quoniam Eleemosyna a morte liberat, and ipsa est quae purgat
peccata, and facit inuenire vitam aeternam.

Prayer is good with Fasting, and Alms, better then to hide up treasures of
gold. For Alms delivers from death, and she it is which purges sins,
and makes to find life everlasting.

LOVANII, Apud Ioannem Foulerum. Anno. 1569. CVM PRIVILEGIO.

The Translatour to the Reader.
THE love that naturally men bear to peace and quiet is so great, that there
can fall no controversy among such as be of the better sort, but they seek
means ever to compounde and pacify it. Either they refer the decision of it
to the Judge ordinary of the law, or if they mistruste the execution thereof,
either because the judge does not fully understand the matter, or else for
that they think him partial of either side, they seek the arbitrament and
sentence of some good man, whom they think both to understand perfitely
right and justice, and take him to be affectionate of neither part. In which
doing they flee not from the law, but seek the true and right understanding
thereof without affection at his hands. I considering this order (Christian
Reader) and moved with the Charity that should bind us all, 2. Cor. 5.
waying with my self the great controversy that has benne in this age about
sundry points of Religion, namely in the article of our Justification: seeing
also that the matter tends not to the loss of patrimony or lands, but to
the plain disherison of life everlasting, and that among us, who all profess
to be the children of peace: I have been desirouse to propounde some mean of
Pacification. And because I see the travail that sundry men have taken as it
were pleading in this cause, has not ended the controversy, either because
the doers were thought to be parties of the one side, and thereby affectionat:
either because being borne in this age, and living in the time of the
controversy, they had not the authority and credit of Judges: I have thought
good to move all such as find in them selves either controversy or doubt
concerning that matter, to put their own opinion in arbitrament and
compromisse. Not calling them hereby from the holy Scriptures, which as a
Sovereign law the divine wisdom has left unto us, but leading them to the
true understanding of the holy Scriptures, uttered by such as God has placed
in his Church, Ephe. 4. Danie. 12.
to be Pastor us and teachers to instruct many to righteousness.

I offer for Arbitrators, not men of this age such as may be thought any way
partial or suspected, but such as in all men's judgments, and for all
respects, be or should be without exception. For the principal point of
Justification, I offer S. Augustine, a reverend and most learned Bishop in the
Catholic Church, not only in high estimation in all Christian Regions, among
all estates and degrees during his life, but also for his excellent virtue
worthily after his death taken for a Saint, and for his singular learning and
knowledge in holy Scriptures, taken for one of the four Doctors, and that the
principallest of the Latin Church, as one meet, whom all learned men
should follow as a lantern and light in decision of matters of greatest
weight. Who also in expounding of the holy Scriptures, may be the more safely
trusted, for that he had in all his writings a special care, not to seek his
private and singular opinion in the understanding of them, Lib. Confess. 12.
cap. 25.
as appears by his own words, saying, that God has terribly given us
warning, that we should not draw his truth to our own private construction,
lest we were deprived of it. Luther. in Sermon Germa. ad mulieres partus
Infelicita. afflictas. Phi. Melanc. in decla. de S. Augustino. Caluinus
Institut. cap. 18.
And therefore having his opinion, thou art sure to have the opinion of that
most learned age, that he lived in. Again, because that time framed unto it
self no new doctrine, thou know also by him, what was the opinion of the
Church before his time, even from the Apostles unto his age. And because he
has not ben contraried in that matter of any godly and learned, before this
our age, yea and in this our age is highly commended of such as have been of
greatest credit, even of the contrary side: thou know by him what has been
the opinion of the Church in all times touching the question of our
Justification. Which he decideth thus far, to wit, whether faith without good
works may save a Christian man, or no. The occasion of S. Augustines Treaty
of says and works.
Where unto he was moved by a corrupt opinion of some men in his time. For
whereas whole countries then, were not yet fully converted to Christ, and
therefore diverse of al ages as they were brought to the faith, came yearly to
be christened: some were of opinion, that as many as would believe the right
faith, though they lived ungodly, yet might be received to Baptism, and be
saved through faith and the Sacraments, without good works. Against whom he
wrote this godly and learned Book entitled: De Fide and operibus, of faith
and works, proving therein at large, that faith without good life can save no man.

And because the value and estimation of good works has been, and yet is,
called in question, to wit, what account God makes of them, and whether any
reward be given unto them especially of life everlasting, and whether they be
necessary and able to healpe us to attain the same: I have also chosen
certain Arbitrators touching the especial and chief works commended by
Christ, as Prayer, Fasting, and Alms deeds. And those such men, that in
their hands thou may without danger put thine opinion and judgment. For
Prayer I have chosen S. Chrysostom: for Fasting S. Basil and S. Leo: for
almose deeds S. Cyprian, and S. Leo again. The first and second Confessors,
but so living for certain years, that they daily looked to be Martyrs. The
third also a Confessor, but such as in his life by a General Council of 630.
Bishops was called S. Leo, and since his death has been so taken of the
Church, Council. Chalcedo. Sess. 3.
and has also for his most excellent learning been surnamed Leo the Great.
The fowrth, a flower of the world in his life for virtue and learning, and in
his death a most constante and undoubted Martyr. S. Cyprian and S. Augustine,
lived in Africa: S. Basil in Asia: S. Leo in Europa: S. Chrysostom part of
his life in Asia, part in Europa. And so by these do we hear, as it were
speaking in them, the voice of the whole Catholic Church, 1. Tim. 3.
which is the pillar and stay of truth: against the which no man well
advised will frame him self a singular opinion. For unto the Church is the
holy Ghost the teacher of al truth promised, Joan. 15. and 16.
which promise no private man has. Their Antiquity is such, that the latest
and lowest of them al lived within 400. years after Christ. Peruse and way
without affection (gentle Reader) the Treaties of these holy Fathers. I might
require thee also to stand to their decision, because there is no exception to
be taken against them. But that I leave to Gods gracious working, and thine
own good will: because I take not upon me to be Judge of the cause, but a
motioner toward peace: Only this much I say of them, that whereas Judges
should be void of hatred, freendshippe, enmity, and pity, Salust. de bell.
Catil.
these men are such. For as S. Augustine says of them and of others like:
Nullas nobiscum, Aug. contra. Iulia. Lib. 2.
vel vobiscum amicitias attenderunt, vel inimicitias exercuerunt: Neque nobis,
neque vobis irati sunt: neque nos, neque vos miserati sunt: Quod in Ecclesia
inuenerunt, tenuerunt: Quod didicerunt, docuerunt: quod a patribus acceperunt,
hoc filijs tradiderunt: They neither regarded friendship, nor were at enmity
with us, or you: they were neither angry with us, nor you: nor took compassion
of us, or of you. Look what they found in the Church, that they held: such
as they learned, they taught: what they received of their Fathers, that
delivered they to their children.

Take therefore Christen Reader, if thou be a child of the Church, these thy
Fathers lessons. Ask thy Fathers, says the holy Scripture, and they will
show thee: Deuteronomy. 32.
enquire of thy Elders, and they will tell thee. These be thy Fathers, these be
thy Elders. These are such, of whom Christ said, he that hears you,
hears me, Lucae, 10.
he that dispiseth you, dispiseth me. These are the high Pastors of Christ's
Church, of whom Christ said, Matthew. 18.
he that hears not the Church, let him be to thee, as an Heathen and
Publicane. These are the lights of the Church, of whom Christ said: You are
the light of the world: Matthew. 5. Acto. 13.
whose predecessors said also of them selves, that they were placed to be a
light to Nations, to work salvation even to the uttermost of the earth. Of
whom also an other said: He that knows God, harkeneth unto us. 1. Joan. 4.
He that is not of God, harkeneth not unto us. In this we try the Spirit of
Truth, and the Sprite of Error. If thou will then be lead by Truth, and not
seduced by Error, harken to these holy and learned Fathers, all Bishops and
chief Pastors in the Church of Christ, in that time and age, which the
Adversaries them selves account for the purest. Let these hardely be thy
Arbitrers in decision of these present controversies. They lacked no learning
to know the Truth. They wanted no uprightness to write as they knew. They
can not be partial: They knew neither parties. They lived, taught and
flourished in the time of Truth by the Adversaries own Confession. To speak
farther in the commendation of these most holy and learned Fathers, it were but
a vanity. There needs no candle, when the day light shines. Where good wine
is, there needs no garland to hang out. These Fathers commends them selves.
All the Christian world reuerenceth them, and crediteth them, as holy Fathers,
as most learned Doctors, as singular lights of the Church of Christ, both
Greek and Latin. To whom this public testimony of all Christendom suffiseth
not, to him nothing will suffice.

Read therefore, Christian Reader. Use, and peruse. And reading these,
remember that thou read not any writer of late years, any private learned
man, any particular Judgment or doctrine. But that thou read in these the
doctrine of the primitive Church, Ancient and generally approved Fathers,
briefly the public Testimony and common voice of all Christendom. And that
not certain of their sayings, culled out from the whole, but their whole and
full Treaties, word for word as they wrote them, laid before thee. Last of
all, not any such writings, as they wrote by way of controversy as against
an Adversary, but partly a settled and deliberated doctrine, such as S.
Augustines Treaty is, partly Homelies and sermons made and pronounced to the
whole people (such as all the rest are) in which kind of exercise the
Pastor of Gods people, will be most advised what he speaks, and much more
what he writes. To make an end: Thou have hitherto heard learned men proving
and debating matters now in controversy, by certain of the Fathers sayings,
gathered together, with their own devise and industry. Now thou hear the
Fathers them selves to tell their own tales. Thou see the manner of their
writing, Thou learnest by their own talk, what their faith was. Only I have
made them to speak in English, as faithefully, as truly, and as familiarly, as
I could possibly do, not swaruing one jot from their words and meaning.
Accept my poor labor in good part, which I have taken to edify many, to
offend none. And our Lord of his mercy give both to thee (gentle Reader) and
to me, of his holy Grace, that we may follow and practice in works, that which
these holy Fathers do teach us in words. That as sin has been the cause
of this horrible schism and manifold heresies that now reign, so amendment
of life may be a mean to stay the raging course thereof, and to call us home
to unite again, to the honor of God, and peace of his Church. Amen.

A TREATISE MADE BY THAT BLESSED ANCIENT FATHER, S. AUGUSTINE, BISshoppe of
Hippo in Afrike in the year of our Lord, 380. Which he entitled: Of Faith and
Works.
Against them that did admit all men to Baptism without any difference. THE
FIRST CHAPTER.
SOME be of opinion, that all persons, An old error.
without any difference, should be admitted to the font of regeneration, which
is in our Lord Jesus Christ, although they have no will to change, their
lewd, and filthy life being infamouse with notoriouse crimes: yea and though
by open protestation they profess, that they mean to continewe therein. As
for example: If a man keep a harlot, he should not be commanded first to
depart from her, and then to come unto Baptism, but that even remaining with
her, and meaning still so to do, he should (notwithstanding that his
presumption) be admitted and baptized, and should not be stayed from being a
member of Christ, though he continue the member of an harlot: but should
afterward be taught how evil a thing that is, and so being baptized, should be
instructed to amend his manners. For these men think it a perverse and
preposterous thing, first to teach them how a Christian should live, and
after to baptize them. But in their judgment the Sacrament of Baptism should
rather go before, that the doctrine of life and manners may after follow.
Which if the baptized will keep and observe, he shall do it with profit: If not,
but retaining the Christian faith (without the which he should perish
everlastingly) he persevere in all wicked and sinful living, yet shall he be
saved, as by fire: even as he which upon the foundation (which is Christ)
builds not gold, 1. Cor. 3.
silver, or pretiouse stones, but wood, haie, and stooble, that is to say, not
just and chaste conversation, but wicked and unclean. The cause of this their
imagination and opinion is that that they see such are not admitted to
baptism, who being men, and putting away their wives, marry others. Or
being women, and forsaking their husbands, marry others. And that because our
Lord Christ does testify these to be, without al doubt, adulteries, and not
marriages. For these men, when they could not deny that to be adultery, Matt.
5.
which the truth it self does without al question pronounce, and confirm to
be adultery, and yet had a desire to help them to the receiving of baptism
whom they saw so entangled in that snare, that if they were not admitted to
Baptism, they had rather live, yea and die to, without any Sacrament at al
then to be delivered of that snare, with breaking their bond of adultery: they
were moved with a certain human pity and compassion, so to consider of
their cause, that they thought meet to admit unto baptism, not them only,
but also all manner of lewd and shameful livers: though they were neither
rebuked with any prohibition, nor corrected with instruction, nor amended by
any penance: as thinking except that were done, they should perish
everlastingly, but if it were done, though they still continewed in those evils,
yet should they be saved through fire.

That the Church indureth the Commixtion of evil persons together with the
good, and yet does not omit the severity of discipline. THE SECOND CHAPTER.
TO which sort of men for answer: first this I say. Let no man so take those
testimonies of Scriptures, which either declare a commixtion of both good and
evil in the Church presently, or foretell it to come assuredly: let no man,
I say, being (not taught by those Scriptures, but) deceived by his own
opinion, so take them, as to think therefore, either severity of discipline,
or diligence in noting and punishing of vice is to be omitted or taken away.
Number. 23.
For all be it Moses the servant of God most patiently suffered that
commixtion in the first people: yet so was it that he punished also diverse with
the sword: And Phinees the Priest did with the revenging sword thrust through
both the adulterers being found together. Degradations
Which thing verily was signified should be also done by degradations and
excommunications in this time when in the discipline of the Church the visible
sword should cease. Neither the blessed Apostle, 2. Cor. 11. Ad Phil. 1
albeit he most patiently lamented amongst false brethren, 1. Cor. 1.
yea and suffered some being driven forward with devilish pricks of envy to
preach Christ, did yet think meet to spare him which took his Fathers wife:
whom he commanded (the Church being assembled) to be geauen over to the
Devil, 1. Tim. 1.
into the destruction of his body, that his soul might be saved in the day
of our Lord Jesus Christ: or did him self therefore let to deliver up
others to Satan, 1. Cor. 5.
that they should learn not to blaspheme. Neither did he in vain say: I have
written to you in mine Epistle, that you should not keep company with
fornicators: I mean not with fornicators of this world, or couetouse persons,
or extorcioners, or such as serve Idolles, for then you should have gone out
of this world: but now I have written to you, not to keep company with any
such of your brethren as is known, and named, to be a fornicator, a seruer of
idolles, a couetouse man, a slaunderour, a dronkerd, or an extorcioner, no not
so much as to take meat with such: for as of them which be without, how can
I judge? But of them which be within, do not your selves judge? Of them
which be without, God shall judge. Take away the evil from among your selves.

Which words [from among your selues] some do understand, that each man
should take away, and remove the evil out of him self, that is to say, that
he him self should be good. But how so ever it be understood, either that
lewd persons should by severity of the Church be rebuked, and thrown out by
excommunications or else that every man by taking up and correcting him self,
should remove the evil out of him self: yet that which is before said, has no
doubt, or ambiguitie, where he forbids us not to accompany those brethren,
which are noted of any of those vices before named: That is to say, be
infamouse, and notoriouse offenders in any of them.

How and after what manner sinners are to be rebuked and corrected. THE III.
CHAPTER.
BUT with what mind and with what charity, this merciful severity should be
used, he showed not only in that place, where he says: that his soul may be
saved in the day of our Lord Jesus Christ, but also very evidently in an other
place, where he says. 2 Thessalonians. 3.
If any do not harken unto our word, note him by your Epistle, and do not
company with him, that he may be a shamed: not yet esteeming him as an enemy,
but rebuking him as a brother. And our Lord him self being a singular example
of patience whereby even among his twelve Apostles he suffered and endured a
Devil, even til his passion, who also says, Joan. 6.
suffer both to grow up unto the harvest, least while you go about to gather
the cockle, Math. 13.
ye also root up the corn therewith, and fore showed, that those nets
drawn in a similitude of the Church unto the shore, that is, unto the end of
the world, should have in them both good and evil fisshes, with such like,
wherein either openly or by similitude he spoke of the commixtion, and
entermeddlie of the good and the evil: did not yet think therefore the
Discipline of the Church to be omitted: but rather admonished it should be
used, where he said, Math. 18.
Take head to your selves: if thy brother sin against thee, go and rebuke
him secretly between him and thee: if he hear thee, thou haste gained thy
brother, but if he hear thee not, then take with thee one or two, that in the
mouth of two, or three witnesses all your talk may rest, that if he do not
hear them, then tell the Church, but if he will neither harken unto the Church,
then let him be unto thee as an heathen and publican. And immediately he adds
a most grievous terror of that severity, Math. 7.
saying in the same place: what so ever you lose in earth, shall be losed also in
heaven: and what so ever you bind in earth, shall be bound also in heaven. He
also forbids that which is holy to be given to dogs. Neither is the
Apostle, 1. Tim. 5.
when he says: rebuke the offenders before all, that the rest may be afraid,
contrary therefore unto our lord, where he says: rebuke thy brother between
him and thee. For both is to be done, even as the diversity of their weakness
(whom we mean not to destroy, but to correct and amend) does require: and one
is to be cured in one sort, and an other in an other sort: even in the same
sort, there is a manner and order also of tolerating, and bearing of evil
persons in the Church: And there is again a like consideration to be had in
chastising, and rebuking: in not admitting, or absolute excluding and removing
from the Communion and fellowship of the Church.

Of such as understand the Scriptures amiss. THE IIII. CHAPTER.
BUT men do err in that they keep not measure, and when they have begone
easily to be inclined to one side, they do not regard other testimonies of
divine authority, whereby they might be called back from that mind, and stay
in that truth and moderation which is tempered of both: and that not in this
thing alone whereof now the question is, but also in many other things. For
some beholding the testimonies of the divine Scriptures, witnessing unto us one
God only to be served and worshipped have thought the same which is the son,
to be also the Father, and the holy Ghost: Others again being as it were
sick of the contrary disease, while they attended those things whereby the
Trinity is declared, and could not conceive in their brain how there should
be but one God, since the Father is not the Son, nor the son the father: nor
yet the holy Ghost, either the father or the son: thought hereupon, that
diversity also of substances was to be affirmed and mainteyned. Some beholding
in the Scriptures the praise of holy Virginity, have condemned marriage. Some
again following those testimonies whereby chaste marriages are commended, have
made wedlock equal in worthiness with Virginity. Some when they did read. It
is good (my brethern) not to eat flesh, Romans 4.
or to drink wine, have thought some other like creatures of God, and some
meats in their fantasy to be unclean. Other some reading that every creature
of God is good and nothing to be cast away, or refused, which is received
with thankesgeuing, have fallen into glottony and dronckennes: not being able
to escape one vice, but that they fell on the contrary side, to a greater. Even
so in this matter which we have now in hand, some having an eye to the
precepts of severity and straightnes, whereby we are admonished to rebuke the
unquiet: not to give that is holy unto dogs, to repute the despiser of the
Church, as an heathen: to pull away from the knot and unity of the body, that
member which causes scanlder or offense: do so trowble the peace of the
Church, that they go about before the time to separat the cockle: and so
blinded by this error do rather separate them selves from the unity of
Christ. And such is our cause against the schism of Donatus. And this not
with them that knew Cecilianus (who is charged not with true, but with
sclaunderous crimes) nor with them that stand stubbornely and impudently in
charging him still: but with them, to whom we say: Put the case they were
evil men, for whose sakes your selves be not in the Church, yet ought you by
bearing with them, whom ye could not amend or put away from you, have remained
notwithstanding your selves in the Church. But again some perilously
aduenturing on the other side (when they see the mingling of good and evil in
the Church showed or foretold, and have learned the precepts of patience
which do make us so strong, that although there seem to be cockle in the
Church, yet should not our faith or charity thereby be hindered, or at lest
for that cockle, which we see in the Church, we should not therefore our
selves depart from the Church) do think, that both the Church and Discipline
is to be new instituted: geeuing unto the Prelates, and rulers thereof a
certain most peruers security, as though to them appertayned only to tell us
whereof we should beware: or what we should do: but not to care what in deed
any man does.

That for evil men's sake we should not depart from the Church, and after what
manner the evil should be either corrected, or suffered in the Church. THE V.
CHAPTER.
BUT we think it to apperteine unto sound doctrine, by both these testimonies
and allegations of holy Scripture, to take a moderate and middle way. As thus.
That both to keep peace in the Church, we suffer dogs within the Church:
Math. 7.
and yet when the peace of the Church may otherwise be kept, not to give that
which is holy unto dogs. When therefore we find evil persons in the Church,
either through negligence of the Prelates, or by some excusable necessity, or
by close and covert surreption crept in, whom we can not correct or bridle by
Ecclesiastical Discipline: then lest that wicked and daungerouse presumption
might arise in our minds, whereby we should think it needeful to separate our
selves from such sinful persons (thinking that otherwise we should be defiled
with their sins, and so go about to draw after us a company as it were of
clean and unspotted Disciples, broken of from the knot of unity: under color
of avoiding evil company) let us call to remembrance those parables, those
divine oracles, and most evident examples out of the Scriptures, by which it is
showed and forespoken, that evil persons shall be mingled in the Church with
the good, even to the end of the world and day of last Judgment: and yet shall
not therefore, in the unity and participation of the Sacraments, hurt the
good which do not consent unto their doings. But when the Pastors and
Prelates of the Church are able without the breach of common peace, to
exercise and execute dew discipline against lewd and wicked persons, then
again lest through dulnes and slowth we fall a sleep, we are to be waked and
stirred up with other spurs of precepts which perteyne to severity of
correction. That so by both manner of testimonies and sayings of holy
Scripture directing our steps in the way of our Lord, he being our guide
and helper, we neither wax dull under the name of patience, nor yet cruel
under the pretense of diligence.

When, and to what persons Baptism is to be given. THE VI. CHAPTER.
THIS moderation then according to sound doctrine being kept, let us look to
that whereof we now entreat. That is: Whether men are so to be received to
Baptism, as that no care or regard be had therein, least that which is holy
be geeuen unto dogs: so far forth, that not so much as open committers of
adultery, yea and professing a continuance therein, should seem meet to be
kept from a Sacrament of so great holiness. Whereunto without doubt they
should not be admitted, abstine^ce, fasting, and exorcismes, preparatories, to
receive baptism.
if during those very days in the which (after their names geeuen, and
preparing them selves to receive that grace) they are with abstinence,
fasting, and Exorcismes, purified and purged, they should profess to lie with
their true and lawefull wives, and would of this one thing (being at any
other time lawefull) for those few solemn days, deny the forbearing. Which
being so, how should an aduouterer refusing amendment, be admitted to those
holy things, whereunto even a lawefull married man, refusing but a little
abstinence, is not admitted?

But (say they) let him be first baptized, Catechizing.
and holden in suspense of very religion, he requires to have the Sacrament of
salvation? Are we so far alienated from our senses, that either we remember
not our selves, how diligent, and how attent we were to that, which was
commanded unto us by them which first entered, and instructed us in the faith
at what time we required the Sacraments of that font, and were also therefore
called Competentes are they, that stand to be baptized together, and cause
their names to be taken for that purpose.
Competentes: or else that we mark not others, which every year run to
this font of regeneration, how they behave them selves for the time of those
days wherein they be instructed, exorcised and examined, how carefully and
diligently they come together, with what a desire they burn, and in what
great expectation they depend? If that be not a time to learn, what life most
agrees with so worthy a Sacrament, as they then desire to take, what time will
there be for it? What? when they have received it? remaining yet in so many,
and great crimes, and being even after baptism not new men, but old
offenders? so as with strange preposterousnes, it should be first said unto
them, put on the new man, and when they have put him on, it should then after
be said unto them, Colos. 3.
put of the old? Not so the Apostel. Who keeping right order of speech:
says, first put of the old, and then put on the new? Math. 9.
Yea our Lord him self cries, No man sows new clothe to an old garment,
ne does any man put new wine into old bottelles. And what else I pray you,
do they all that time, when they stand in rewe, and bear the names of
Cathecumenes, but harken what should be the faith, and life of a Christian man?
That when they have proved them selves, 1. Cor. 11. The blessed Sacrament
ministered together with Baptism.
then they may eat of our Lords table, and drink of his cup? Because he
that eats unworthily, eats and drinks judgment unto him self. But that
thing which is done in all that mean time, in the which by right good order
of the Church, they which come to profess Christ's name, do first take the
degrees of Cathecumenes: the same is much more diligentely, and more instantly
done in those days, wherein they are called Competentes, when (I say) they
have already given in their names, to receive Baptism.

That such as are to receive Baptism, must be taught as well the works of
Faith, as Faith. THE VII. CHAPTER.
WHAT, say they, if a maid unwitting, An objection.
marry her self unto the husband of an other woman? Forsooth, if she never
know it, in our Lord his City, in his holy hill, Matrimony a Sacrament.
that is the Church, where not only the bond of Marriage, but the Sacrament
thereof is so commended, that it is not lawful so much as to the husband him
self, to grant his wife unto an other man. Which thing yet in the Romain
commonwealth, it is said, Cato did, not only without blame, but also
commendably.

But I need not dispute any farther in this point, since they them selves, to
whom now I answer, dare not affirm that this is no sin, nor yet deny it
to be adultery, lest they should be convinced manifestly to gainesaie our Lord
him self, and his holy Gospel. But whereas they are of opinion, that such
should be first admitted to the Sacrament of Baptism, and to our Lords
Table, although with open mowth they refuse correction, yea rather that no
admonishmente should at all be given them of this fault, but that afterward
they should be taught, that if they will take upon them to keep the
commandments, and to amend their fault, they should be accounted among
the good corn, but if they contemn the same, they should be tolerated among
the cockell: in this saying they show plainly enough, that they do neither
defend these crimes, neither yet esteem them as light, or no crimes. For
what Christian manne is there of any towardness, that will esteem adultery as
a small, or as no crime? Notwithstanding, they persuade them selves, that the
manner and order how these faults and crimes in others, may either be
corrected, or tolerated, they have found out in the holy Scriptures, when
they say: thus did the Apostles: bringing forth for that purpose out of their
writings, some testimonies, where they find, that the Apostles first taught
the Doctrine of Faith, and afterward delivered the precepts of manners.

Whereupon they gather and infer, that only the rule of faith must be
showed, and opened to them, which come to receive Baptism: but the precepts
of good life must be given after Baptism: As though they read some of the
Apostles Epistles, disputing of only Faith, written to such as were not yet
baptized, and some other Epistles disputing of good life, written to such as
were already baptized. But now whereas it is well known, that the Apostles
wrote their Epistles only to Christians already baptized, why yet do their
Epistles then contain both these precepts? I mean, precepts towching
faith, and precepts towching good life? But wherefore should they not so do?
Think these men (trow we) that to such as come to be baptized, we ought not
to geaue both, and to such as are baptized we must geaue both? Which if
they think absurdly spoken, then let them confess, that the Apostles in
their Epistles gave their doctrine perfect, of both those points: but
therefore to have most commonly begun with Faith, and then to have followed
with that which apperteineth to good life, because that in man him self,
unless faith go before, good life can not follow.

For what so ever man seems to do as well, onelesse it be referred to
piety, which is to God, it must not be called a good work.

Now if some foolish and unskillful persons would think the Epistles of the
Apostles to have benne written to Cathecumenes, and such as are not yet
baptized: truly then must they withal confess, that precepts of good manners
agreeable with faith, are together with the rules of faith to be opened and
taught unto such are as not yet baptized. Unless perhaps by this their
disputation and reasoning, they will have us to say, that the former parts of
the Apostles Epistles, wherein they spoke of faith, were to be readde of the
Cathecumenes, and the latter parts, wherein precepts are geauen how
Christians should live, to be readde of the faithful. Which is to fond a
thing to be spoken of.

Their Doctrine therefore has no proof out of the Apostles Epistles, nor
argument to persuade us to think that those which are to be baptized should
be instructed in faith only, and those that be baptized, instructed in good
life, by reason that in the former parts of their Epistles, they commended
faith, and after consequently exhorted the faithful to live well. For
although, that be in the first place, and this in the later place, yet are
both, by one undivided manner of speech, most often to be taught: both to the
Cathecumenes: both to the faithful: both to them that are to be baptized, and
both to them that are already baptized. To the one, that they may learn: to
the other, that they forgette not what they have learned. To the one, that they
may profess: to the other, that they may continewe in most holsesome and
sound doctrine. To the Epistles then of Peter, and of John, out of the which
they bring certain testimonies, let them add both the Epistles of S. Paul,
and of all the other Apostles, and understand them all, so to be written, as
that they would have first faith, and then manners to be jointly spoken of. And
this to be their meaning, I have (if I be not deceived) evidently declared unto
you.

That it behooves men not only to know, but also to lead a good life, before
they come to receive Baptism. THE VIII. CHAPTER.
An Objection.
BUT in the Acts of the Apostles (say they) Peter spoke in such sort to the
three thowsandes, which hearing his word were in one day baptized, as that
it may appear he preached unto them only the faith, whereby they should
believe in Christ. For when these men had said unto Peter, What shall we do?
Actor. 2.
He answered them: Do ye penance, and be ye baptized every one of you, in the
name of our Lord Jesus Christ, into the remission of sins, and ye shall
receive the gift of the holy Ghost. Do ye penance? For therein is expressed a
throwing away of the old life, that they which be baptized, may put on a new.
But to whom is that penance, which is done from dead works fruitful and
available, if he persevere in adultery, and other wickedness, wherein the
love of this world is wrapped?

But he meant (say they) that they should only do penance for their
infidelity, An objection.
because they believed not in Christ. Ephesians. 4.
Do ye penance, they will think the only acts of infidelity are spoken of,
since that in the Doctrine of the Gospel it is plainly taught, that the old
life must quite be changed into a new. In which place also, and even in the
same sentence the Apostle says: Let him that did steal, steal no more, and
so forth: where more at large he prosecuteth the same matter, teaching what it
is to put of the old manne, and to put on the new. Ephesians. 4.
And yet if they would have marked, but these very words of S. Peter, which
they allege, they might have had good cause, better to consider of the matter.
For when he had said: Do ye penance, Actor. 2.
and be ye baptized every one of you, in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ
into remission of your sins, and ye shall receive the gift of the holy
Ghost: For to us is this promise made, and to our children, and to all, as
many as it shall please our Lord God to call, be they never so far of. He
that wrote the book, immediately added these words: And he testified this in
many other words, saying: Withdraw your selves from this wicked world. And
they most greedily receiuinge and embracing his words, believed, and were
baptized, and three thowsande sowles gained and won in that one day.

Now who sees not here, that in those many other words (which the writer
of the Acts (S. Luke) for length omitteth) S. Peter earnestly labored, that
they should withdraw them selves, from this wicked world? For even the
sentence it self is briefly showed for the enforcing and persuading whereof S.
Peter used those many other words? For the sum and effect of his whole
persuasion is plainly set down, when it is said: Withdraw your selves
from this wicked world. But how this thing should be done, Peter gave
proof in many other words. In which words (no doubt) was comprised the
condemnation of deadde works, which the lovers of this world wickedly do
commit: and the commendation of good life, which they should observe and
follow, that withdraw them selves from this wicked world. Now therefore, if
they think good, let them persuade us, that he withdraws him self from
this wicked world, who believes only in Christ: yea though he purpose to
persevere in such vices as he likes, even to the very open profession of
adultery. Which if it be abominable to say, then let them which are to
be baptized, not only hear what they ought to believe, but also how they
may withdraw them selves from the works of this wicked world. For at that
time and place must they learn, how they ought to live, after they do
believe.

What it is to preach Christ: And of the Baptism of the Eunuche. THE IX.
CHAPTER.
THE Eunuche (say they) whom Philip baptized, An Objection. Act. 8. Answer.
said nothing else: but I believe that Jesus Christ is the Son of God. And
in this profession he was presently baptized. What? Will you therefore that
men should only make that answer, and so be baptized forthwith? Is there
nothing to be asked by the instructor, or to be professed by the believer,
touching the holy Ghost? Nothing touching the holy Church? The holy Church
professed in the Creed, by the Catecumenes.
Nothing touching the remission of sins? Nothing touching the resurrection
of the dead? Lastly, nothing touching Ihesus Christ him self, but that he is
the Son of God? Is there nothing to be learned or professed touching his
incarnation of the Virgin? His Passion, his death on the Cross, his burial,
Resurrection the third day, or of his Ascension and sitting on the right
hand of his Father? For if when the Eunuche had answered: I believe that Jesus
Christ is the Son of God, it seemed he had done that which was sufficient
to be presently baptized, and so to go his way: then why do we not follow
that only, and let pass those other things which we must needs express,
even when the straightness of time does urge present Baptism, by asking
questions, whereunto he that is to be baptized, must in all points answer:
yea though he have not ben able to know them without the book? But if the
Scripture forbear the reporting, and left to our supposing and understanding,
those other things which Philip did, with the Eunuche then to be baptized, and
in that it says: Philip baptized the Eunuche, would us to understand, that all
other things requisite thereunto, were first complete and finished (which
although for shortness sake they be not in the Scripture spoken of, yet by the
course of the tradition, Tradition, vvher Scripture fails.
we know they were to be fulfilled) then in like sort also, where it is
written, that Philip preached the Gospel and our Lord unto the Eunuche: We
can not doubt, but in that instruction, al was said unto him, that perteine
unto the life and manners of him that believes in our Lord Jesus. For to preach
Christ, is not only to tell what is to be believed concerning Christ, but also
what things are to be observed of him, who comes to the unity of his
mystical body: yea and thoroughly to open al things which are to be believed of
Christ, not only whose Son he is, of whom he was begotten, as touching his
Divinity, and of whom as touching his humanity, what he suffered, and
wherefore, what is the virtue of his resurrection, what gift of the holy Ghost
he promised and gave unto the faithful, but also what manner of members he
seeks to be head unto, to teach, to love, to deliver, and bring to
everlasting life and glory. When these things are opened at some time
briefly, and in few words, at an other time largely and amplely, then
Christ is preached. And yet not only that which pertains to faith, but also
that which concerns the manners and works of the believers, is declared.

What it is to know Christ crucified, and who loves God and his neighbor.
THE X. CHAPTER.
IN this sense also is that to be taken, An other Objection.
which they allege out of S. Paul, saying: I said among you, 1. Cor. 2.
I know nothing but Jesus Christ and him crucified. Which words they think to
have been so spoken, as though nothing else had been taught them, but that they
should first believe, and afterward being baptized, should learn al such
things as appertain to life and manners. This (say they) did at the full
suffice the Apostle, who said unto them, that: although they had many
schoolemasters in Christ, 1. Cor. 4.
yet had they not many Fathers, for he had by the Gospel begotten them in
Jesus Christ.

If then he which begat them thorough the Gospel, that he had baptized none
of them but Crispus, Gaius, and the family of Stephana, taught them no more
but Christ crucified: what if some man should also say they had never heard of
Christ his Resurrection when they were begotte thorough the Gospel? 1. Cor.
1.
Which if these men will not stick to grant to, then let them remember, what
he said in an other place to the very same his scholars. Thus he says: I
have first opened unto you that Jesus died according to the Scriptures, was
buried, and rose again the third day according to the Scriptures: Now if
they will say, that this point of Christ's Resurrection is contained in the
Doctrine of of Christ crucified, then let them also know, that in Christ
crucified, men do in deed learn many other things: Romans 6.
Namely this also, that our old man is crucified with Christ: that the body
of sin be brought to naught, and that we be no longer slaves unto sin.
Galat. 6.
And therefore thus says he of him self: but God forbid I should glory but in
the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, thorough whom the world is crucified
unto me, and I unto the world.

How we learn Christ crucified.
Let them then mark, and consider how Christ crucified is taught, and learned:
and let them understand, that this is one point of our lesson, when we
learn Christ crucified, that we in his body be crucified unto the world. In
which phrase is understood all manner brideling of our evil concupiscences.
Hereof it follows, that to such as have learned Christ crucified, open
aduouteries can in no wise be permitted. For the Apostle Peter does also
admonish us of the Mystery of Christ's Cross that is, of his Passion, that
they which, are consecrated therewith, should cease to sin: saying thus. 1.
Pet. 4.
Christ therefore having suffered in the flesh, arm ye also your selves with
the same mind: for he which is dead in the flesh, has ceased to sin,
that he may now live the rest of his time in the flesh, not after the lusts
of men, but after the will of God, etc. And so forth: Where consequently he
shows, that he truly appertains to Christ crucified, that is to say, has
suffered in his flesh, who being crucified in his body to all carnal lusts,
lives well according to the Gospel.

But what a thing is this, that all the law and the Prophets do depend:
Math. 22.
do confirm this their opinion, reasoning thus? God uttered first this
commandment: Deuter. 6.
Thowe shall love thy Lord God with all thy heart, with all thy soul: and
with all thy mind: Leuit. 19.
And after this he uttered the second like unto this: Thowe shall love thy
neyghhour as thy self: Ergo, the first perteyneth to him that is to be
baptized, where the love of God is commanded: and the second pertains to
them that are already baptized, where the order of conversation with men
seems to be taught. 1. Joan. 4.
For here they forgette clean that which is other where written: If thou love
not thy brother, whom thowe seeste, how canste thou love God, whom thowe
seeste not? And an other saying also in the same Epistle of S. John: If a man
love the world, the love of the Father is not in him. For whereunto belongs
all the wickedness of evil life, but unto the love of this world?

And hereof yt follows, that the first commandment, which they think
belongs to them that are to be baptized, can by no means be observed without
good works. I will not stand any longer herein. For if we mark well, we
shall find these two precepts so to depend the one of the other, that
neither the love of God can be in man, if he love not his neighbor: nor the
love of his neighbor, if he love not God. But to the matter now in hand this
which we have said of these two precepts suffiseth.

What is signified and meant by the coming of the Israelites out of Egypt.
THE XI. CHAPTER.
An other Objection. Exodus 14. Exodus 20. Answer.
BUT the people of Israel (say they) was first led through the red sea
whereby baptism is signified: and afterward received the law wherein they
should learn how to live. If this example helps them, then why do we
deliver so much as the Creed to such as are to be baptized, and make them to
render it us again? For no such thing (you wot) was done to them, when God
through the red sea, delivered them from the Egyptians. But again, if they will
have this their opinion to be signified by the Mysteries that went before,
Exodus 12.
as by the posts sprinkled with the sheeps blood, and by the sweet bread of
sincerity and truth, why do they not also consequently understand, that their
departing from the Egyptians signifies a departure from sin, which they that
are to be baptized do profess? For hereunto agrees well that, which was said
by S. Peter. Act. 2.
Do ye penance, and be ye baptized every one of you in the name of our Lord
Jesus Christ: as though he should say: Depart ye from Egypt, and pass through
the red sea. And therefore in the Epistle written to the Hebrews, when mention
is made of the first beginning and rudimentes of them which are baptized,
there is plainly expressed repentance from dead works. For thus he says:
Hebr. 6.
Wherefore letting pass the beginninges and rudimentes, whereby we were entered
into the knowledge of Christ, let us look, and have regard, to the end and
consummation: not laying again the foundation of penance from dead works,
and of the Faith, which we ought to have in God, the doctrine of the water of
regeneration, of the imposition of hands, of resurrection of the dead, and of
the last and eternal Judgment. All which things the Scripture there does
sufficiently, and clearly witness to apperteine to the entry of the nouices
in the faith.

But what other thing is penance from dead works, then a renouncing of such
things, which must be mortified in us that we may live? Of which kind if
adulteries and fornication be not, what is to be named among dead works? But
yet the profession of renouncing such works does not so suffice, except also
al sins past, which do as it were follow and pursue us, be taken away and
destroyed by the foont of regeneration: no more then it suffised the Israelites
to depart from Egypt, except the multitude of ennemies, which followed them,
had perished in the same waves of the sea, which opened them selves to the
passage and delivery of Gods people. He therefore that professes he will not
forsake his adultery, how may he be led through the red see, when he yet
refuses to depart out of Egypt? Again they do not mark, that in that Law
which after the passing of the red sea was geauen unto that people, the first
commandment is: Thou shall have none other Gods but me, thou shall not make
to thy self any Idolles, Exodus 20.
nor the leeknesse of any things which are in heaven above, or in the earth
beneth, or in the water, or under the earth, thou shall not adore nor serve
them, with the rest pertaining to that commandment. Let these men then
affirm (if it leeke them) against their own assertion, that even the
woorshipping of one God, and fleeing of Idolatry is not to be preached to them,
which are yet to be baptized, but to them which are all ready baptized: and so
let them no more say, that to them which are to receive Baptism, the faith
only which is to be had in God, is to be preached, and after the receiving of
that Sacrament they are to be instructed of good life, as of a second precepte
teaching that, which belongs to the love of their neighbor. For the law
which the people received after the passage of the read sea, as it were after
Baptism, contains both. Neither was the distribution of the commandments
so made, that before the passing of the readde sea, the people was taught to
beware of Idolatry: and after they were passed, were taught, that their Father
and Moother were to be honored, that they should not commit adultery, not
kill: and such leeke orders of a good and innocent conversation among men.

That such as will not change and amend their wicked life, are not to be
received to Baptism. THE XII. CHAPTER.
IF therefore any man so come to the requiring of holy Baptism, that he
profess, he will not depart from the sacrifices of Idols, except it be
perchance after when he list him self, and yet does presently requier
Baptism, and earnestly pray that he may be made the temple of the living
God, being not only an Idolater, but also a continuer in most wicked
sacrilege: I ask of those men, whither they would think him so much as to
be allowed for a Cathecumene? No doubt they will cry, he ought not. For we can
not judge otherwise of their meaning. Let them therefore render a reason by the
testimony of the Scriptures, (which they think so to be understood) how
they dare repel any from receiving Baptism, which will protest, and say
thus: I have learned, and I woorshippe Christ Crucified: I believe Jesus
Christ to be the Son of God: Differ me no longer. Acto. 8.
Requier no more of me. The Apostle would not them, whom he did begette
through the Gospel, to know any thing else for that time, but Christ
Crucified: And Philippe, after that the Eunuche had pronounced, that he
believed Jesus Christ to be the Son of God, did not delaie the baptising of
him. Why then do you forbid me the woorshipping of Idols? And why refuse you
to admit me to the Sacrament of Christ, except I do first depart from
Idols? I have learned to worship Idols from my childhood. I am rooted in it
by a long custom: I will leave then when I am able: and when it shall be
convenient: but though I do not, let me not yet end my life without the
Sacrament of Christ, lest perhaps God ask my soul at their hands.

What, think we, would they answer to such a man. Would they have him
admitted? God forbid. I do not believe them to be so far gonne. What then
will they answer to him that shall so say? Yea, and that shall add farther
that nothing ought to be said unto him (at the least before baptism) of
forsaking Idolatry, no more then that former people heard thereof, before their
passage through the red sea: because the law which they received, after
their delivery out of Egypt, taught them that.

Truly they would say to that man: Thou shall become the temple of God, when
thou have received Baptism. But the Apostle says, 2. Cor. 6.
what has the temple of God to do with Idolles? But why then do they not
see, that it is leekewise to be said: Thou shall become the member of Christ,
when thou have received Baptism? The members of Christ can not be the members
of an harlot. For thus says the Apostle also in an other place: 1. Cor. 6.
Err not, for neither fornicators, nor seruers of Idols, nor diverse others
which he there reckeneth up, shall inherit the kingdom of heaven. How then is
it that we exclude from baptism Idolaters, and think meet to admit
fornicators. When both to these, and to other evil livers, the Apostle says:
And truly such have you been, but now you are washed, sanctified, and
justified in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, and in the spirit of our God?
What is then the cause, that when it appears we have power to repel both
sorts, yet I permit the fornicatour coming to baptism to remain in his
lewdnes, and do not permit the Idolater? Especially when I hear it spoken
both to the one and to the other, this have you been, but now are you washed.

But the ground of these men's error is, that they think all such which
believe in Christ, The error, which S. augustine in this work co^futeth.
and have received the Sacrament of Baptism, are sure to be saved, but yet
through fire, though they be so negligent in correcting their manners, that
they live extreme wickedly. Whereof I shall by and by see by Gods help, what
is to be thought and judged according to the Scriptures.

Works of faith should go before Baptism. THE XIII. CHAPTER.
BUT as yet I will stand a while upon this question, wherein they hold, that
such as are baptized should be instructed in good life, and such as come to be
baptized, only to be instructed in the faith. Which if it were so (besides so
many things which we have said already) John Baptist would not have said to
them that came to his baptism: Generation of Vipers, Matt. 3.
who showed you to fly from the wrath to come? Do ye therefore worthy fruit
of penance etc. In which words he warns them not of faith, but of good
works. In like manner to the souldiars saying, what shall we do? He said not:
believe first and be baptized, and afterward ye shall know what you must do:
Luca. 3.
but he foretold them and forewarned them (that in deed like a forerunner he
might prepare and cleanse their life, against our Lords coming into their
heart) saying: Vex no man, sclaunder no man, content your selves with your
wages. Likewise to the Publicans asking what they should do: exact (says he)
no more then that which is appointed to you. Th'euangelist thus briefly
reporting these things (for he needed not at large to put in the whole
Catechismes) gave sufficiently to understand, The holy Scripture reports not
all things.
that it apperteineth to his duty, who instructs the person to be baptized,
to teach him and instruct him in good life. Now in case these men had
answered John flatly, we will not do worthy fruits of penance, we will
slander, we will vex, we will exact those things which are not dew unto us,
and yet notwithstanding after this their protestation, John had baptized them,
yet could it not therefore be said in this matter (whereof now our question is)
that when a man comes to be baptized, he should not be instructed to lead a
good life. But to pass over other things, let them remember and mark, what
our Lord him self answered when the rich man asked of him, what good he might
do to attain the life everlasting: Matt. 19.
if thou will (says he) comme unto life, keep the commandments: When he
had asked what commandments, our Lord rehearsed to him the precepts of the
Law: Thou shall not kill, Thou shall not commit aduoultrie, and so forth.
Whereunto when he had answered, that all these things he had done from his
youth, then did our Lord add farther the precept also of perfection: that
selling all that he had, and bestowing in alms on the poor, he should have
treasure in heaven, and follow the same Lord. Let them behold therefore and
mark that it was not said unto him, he should believe and be baptized (by
which only help these men think, a man may come to life) but the precepts of
manners and works were given unto him: which yet can not be kept or observed
without faith. Neither because our Lord seems here to have omitted the
insinuacion of faith, do we therefore prescribe and content our selves, that
only precepts of manners should be opened to them that desire to come to life.
For both be mutually knit together (as I said before) because neither the love
of God can be in a man that loves not his neighbor, neither the love of his
neighbor in him which loves not God. Therefore do we find, that the Scripture
does sometime mention the one without the other, now faith, now works, each for
a full and perfect doctrine, to the end we may thereby understand, that one of
them can not be without the other. For why? He that believes God, ought to do
that which God commands: and he that therefore does, because God
commands, must of necessity believe God.

That only faith does not suffice to salvation without good works. THE XIIII.
CHAPTER.
LET us now therefore look unto that point, The principal point of this
Treaty, and well to be marked.
which is to be beaten forth of all religious hearts, least by a lewd securite
they lose their salvation, if they think only faith to suffice to the
obteining hereof, and be negligent to live well, and to keep on in the way of
God by good works. For even in The Apostles time some not understanding
certain dark sentences of the Apostle Paul, thought him to say: Let us do
evil, that good may come: because he had said: the law entered, Romans 5.
that offense might abound, but where offense abounded, there was grace the
more abundant. Which saying of S. Paul is true in this sense, that men
receiving the law, and most proudly presuming of their own strength and
ability, to keep it: not by right faith calling upon the grace of God, to
overcome their evil concupiscenses and lusts against the law, were justly
burdened beside the transgressing of the law, with more, yea and more grievous
offenses. And so extreme gilt compelling them, they fled to faith. Psalm. 120.
Romans 5.
Whereby, they might deserve the mercy of pardone, and help of our Lord,
which made heaven and earth, that charity being, thorough the holy Ghost
powered in their hearts, they might do with love those things, which were
commanded against the concupiscenses and lusts of this world, Psalm. 15. Romans
7. How s. Paul is to be understood.
according to that which was foresaid in the psalm: their infirmities were
multiplied, and then they made have. Therefore where the Apostle says: He
thinks man to be justified by faith without the works of the Law: he
means not, that after faith received, and professed, the works of justice
should be contemned, but that every man may know, that he may be justified by
faith, This is meant of the first Justification See the Treaty before.
though the works of the Law have not gonne before. For they do follow him
that is justified, they go not before him, that is to be justified. Of which
matter I need not farther to dispute in this present work. Namely since I
have upon this question already set forth a large book which is entitled:
Of the letter and the spirit. Note, how old the heresy is of only Faith.


Because therefore this opinion was then even in the Apostles time spronge up,
the other Apostolical Epistles of Peter, John, James, and Judah, do chiefly
direct their intention and purpose against the same opinion: so far that they
plainly Therefore Luther thought good utterly to reject the Epistle of S James,
in his writings against king henry the viij. Galat. 5. 1. Cor. 13. Romans 13.
affirm, faith without works to profit nothing: as Paul him self also
defines, not every faith whereby a man may believe in God, but that to be the
healthful, and Evangelical faith, whose works proceed of Charity: that
faith (says he) which works thorough love or Charity. For which cause also
he shows, the same faith, which some men think to suffice unto salvation, to
be so far from profiting any whit, that he says: If I have all faith, so as
I may remove mountains, and yet have not Charity, I am nothing. But where
this faithful Charity woorketh, there without doubt is good life. For, the
fulness of the Law is Charity. Wheruppon to make the matter plain, Peter in
his second epistle, where he exorteth unto holiness of life, and works, and
foreshewed, that this world should pass away, but new heavens, and new earth,
was to be looked for, which shall be given to be inhabited of the just: that
they might hereby take good head how they lived, to become mete and worthy of
that habitation, knowing that out of certain dark sentences of S. Paull some
lewd persons, had taken occasion, to be careless of well living, Note.
as being sure of their salvation which is in faith, said: that certain
things there were in S. Paul's Epistle most hard to be understood which men
did pervert eue^ as they did other scriptures, to their own destruction:
(whereas yet the same Apostle Paul thought (no doubt) of the everlasting
salvation (which is not geauen but to good livers, even in such sort, as the
other Apostles did): Peter, I say, knowing, this, 2. Pet. 3.
says as follows: All these things then perishing, of what sort ought ye
to be in holy conuersations, and works of piety, expecting and hastening to
the presence of the day of our Lord, by the which the heavens burning shall be
losed, and the elements by the heat of fire dissolved. But we look for
according to his promises, new heavens, and a new earth, wherein justice
inhabiteth. Wherefore (most deerly beloved) sins you look for these things,
labor that ye may be found before him sound, and without spot, in peace: and
think the patient expecting of our Lord to be healthful unto you, even as our
dearest beloved brother Paul wrote, unto you, according to that wisdom, which
was given unto him, speaking of these things, in manner in all his Epistles,
wherein are some things hard to be understood, which unlearned, and
wavering persons do pervert, even as the rest of the Scriptures, to their own
destruction. You therefore (deerly beloved) now foreknowing these things, be
ye ware lest being seduced into the errors of such as be false, ye fall from
your strength. But increase in grace, and the understanding of our Lord, and
Savior Jesus Christ: to him be glory both now and for ever.

James. 2.
But James is vehemently offended against them which conceive faith to be of
value unto salvation without works, in so much that he compares them even
with diuelles, saying: Thou beleuest that there is one God: Thou do well,
and the diuelles also believe so, and tremble thereat. Marc. 1. Matt. 16.
What could be said more truly, more briefly and more vehemently? Verily we
read in the Ghospel, that the diuelles said no less, confessing Christ to be
the son of God: which saying yet in them was rebuked, though in Peter
praised and commended. Iac. 2. Note.
What shall it profitte you (my brethern) says James, if a man say he have
faith, but have not works? can faith save him? He says also in the same
place: that faith without works is dead. How far then are they deceived,
that by a dead faith, promise unto them selves everlasting life?

Faith and good works together are required for the attaining of salvation.
THE XV. CHAPTER.
WHEREFORE we must diligently consider, how that sentence of the Apostle Paul,
which in deed is hard to be understand, ought truly to be taken: where he
says: 1. Cor. 3.
for other foundation can no man lay, but that which is laid, which is Christ
Jesus. But if a man build upon the foundation, gold, silver, precious stones,
blocks, hay and stubble, every man's work shall be showed: for the day of our
Lord shall declare it, because it shall be revealed in fire, and the fire shall
try what every man's work is. If the work that any man has builded
thereon, do tarry, it shall receive reward, but if any man his works do
burn, it shall receive hurt, but him self shall be saved, so yet as by fire.
Which words of the Apostle some do so expound, that they be said to build
upon this foundation, gold, silver, and precious stones, who do add good
works unto the says, which is in Jesus Christ: and they to build hay,
blocks, and stubble, who having the same faith, do evil works. Whereupon
they think, that through certain pains of fire, these later kind of men
may be purged and made meet to receive salvation, through the merit of the
foundation, whereupon they build. If this opinion be true, then we grant, that
these men upon a charitable consideration, do labor that al persons should
without difference be admitted to baptism: not only men and women that be
adulterers, pretending false marriages, against Gods ordinance, but also common
harlottes persisting in their most filthy profession: whom surely no Church
(how meanly so ever it were governed) has used to admit, unless they first
forsook that shameless prostitution of them selves. But by this their opinion,
why they should not absolutely be admitted, I see not. For who had not rather,
that such as laying first the foundation, though they heap thereon blocks,
hay, and stubble, should not (though with somewhat the longer fire) be purged,
then to perish everlastingly? But then should those textes be false, which are
clear, and have in them selves no darcknes, or ambiguitie at all: If I have
all faith so as I may remove mountains, 1. Cor. 13.
and yet have no charity, Iac. 2.
I am nothing. And what shall it avail (my brethern) if a man say he have
faith, and yet have no works: can his faith save him? That also shall be false,
where it is said: Be not deceived, 1. Cor. 6.
for neither fornicators, Idolaters, Adulterers, effeminate persons, offenders
against kind, nor thieves, covetous persons, Dronckards, sclaunderers, or
extorcioners, shall inherit the kingdom of heaven. Gala. 5.
Then also is that false: Manifest are the works of the flesh, which are,
fornications, uncleanness, lechery, idolatry, witchcraft, enmite, contentions,
emulations, stomaking, dissension, heresy, envy, dronckennes, glottonie, and
such like, which I foretell you, even as I have done heretofore, that they
which do such things, shall not possess the kingdom of heaven. These
places, I say, by their opinion shall be all false. For if they only believe
and be baptized, though they persevere in such evils, they shall be yet saved
thorough fire: say they. And so they that are baptized in Christ, yea though
they do such things, shall possess the kingdom of heaven which S. 1. Cor. 6.
Paul denies. Again in vain is it said: such have you been, but you are now
whasshed, if they that be washed and baptized, remain yet such. In vain also
may that seem to be spoken by Peter: 1. Pet. 3.
Even so in like manner does baptism save you, not the laying down of the
filth of the flesh, but the testimony of a good conscience. For by them,
Baptism saves even those which have the worst consciences, and full of al
wickedness and iniquity: yea though they be not changed by any penance, from
those evils. For thorough the foundation, which in the same Baptism is laid,
they shall be saved: (say they) though it be by fire. Neither do I see to
what purpose Christ said: If thou will come to life, keep the
commandments: Matthew. 19 Nota.
or why he taught those things that pertain to good works, if without
keeping them a man may come to life, Jacob. 2.
by only Faith, which without works is dead. And how shall that be true, that
to them which he will put on his left hand he shall say: Go ye into everlasting
fire which is prepared for the devil and his angels, where he blames them,
Matthew. 25
not because they did not believe, but because they did not good works. For
truly lest any man should promise unto him self eternal life, by faith, which
without works is dead, therefore did he say he would call out and separate all
nations, Nota.
which being mingled together did feed as it were in one and the same pastor,
that it may plainly appear, those they are, that shall say unto him: (Lord,
when did we see thee suffer such and such things, and did not minister unto
the?) who believing in him, did not care to work good works: as though by
their dead faith, they should come to everlasting life. But what? Shall they
(trow we) go into everlasting fire, which leave the works of mercy
undone, and shall not they go, which have taken away other men's goods, and
have been unmerciful again them selves in corrupting within them selves the
temple of God? as though the works of mercy did profitte any thing, without
Charity, considering that the Apostel says: 1. Cor. 13.
If I give all my good unto the poor, and have not Charity, it avails me
nothing. Or may a man love his neighbor as him self, which does not love him
self? Psalm. 10.
For he that loves iniquity, hates his own soul. Neither can that be said
here, which some do say, and so deceive them selves, that it is termed
everlasting fire, but not everlasting burning. For they think, that they to
whom for their dead faith, they promise salvation by fire, should pass
through a fire that shall be of it self everlasting, but that their burning,
that is the operation of the fire upon them, should not be everlasting. For
this also our Lord forseeing, Matt. 25.
concluded thus: So shall they goo into everlasting burning, but the Just into
everlasting life. Their burning therefore shall be everlasting, even as the
fire is, and the truth it self says, that they shall go into this fire, in
whom he has showed not faith, but good works to have failed. If therefore
all these places and others innumerable which may be found, spoken without
any ambiguitie, throughout all the Scriptures, shall be false: then may that
understanding be true of blocks, hey, and stubble, that they shall be saved
through fire, which holding only faith in Christ have neglected good works.
But if these sayings be true, and clear, then without doubt an other
understanding must be searched out, in that sentence of the Apostle, which may
justly be placed among those, which Peter said to be in his writings hard
to be perceived: which men must not pervert to their own destruction, by
assuring the wicked of salvation, against these most manifest testimonies of
the Scriptures, namely where they do most obstinately continue in their
wickedness, and be not turned by amendment or penance.

What faith it is that saves a man, and what it is to believe in Christ,
also the exposition of the place of S. Paul. THE XVI. CHAPTER.
HERE perhaps it may be demanded of me, what I my self think of this
saying of S. Paul the Apostle, and how I think it to be understood. I
confess, I had rather hear in this point men of more learning, and
understanding, that might so expound and lay forth the same, that all those
places of holy Scripture, which I have before alleged, might remain true,
certain and undoubted: and even so of other textes also not by me rehearsed,
whereby the Scripture does most evidently witness, that no faith profits,
but only that which the Apostle defines: to wit, that, which woorketh
through love and Charity: Galat. 5.
and that the same faith without works, can save no man, either without fire,
or by fire. For if it may save by fire, then yet it saves: but it is
absolutely, Jacob. 2.
and plainly said: what avails it a man to say, he has faith and yet
wants works? can his faith save him? Yet will I say, as breefely as I
can, what I my self think of this sentence of the Apostle, which is hard
in deed to be understood. My former protestation always reserved, where I
said I had rather hear, and give place to my betters. 1. Cor. 3.
Christ is the foundation in the work of the wise and circumspect builder.
This needs no exposition. For it is plainly said: Other foundation can no
man lay, besides that is laid, which is Christ Jesus. But if Christ be the
foundation, then without doubt the faith of Christ is the foundation. Ephesians. 3.
For, Christ dwells in our hearts by faith, as the same Apostle says. Now
the faith of Christ is none other, then that which the Apostle defines, to
wit, that which woorketh, through love and Charity. For the faith of the
devils, wherewith they believe also, yea and tremble, and confess Jesus Christ
to be the Son of God, can not be taken for the foundation. Why so? Because
that is not a faith which woorketh through love: but is a faith wrested out by
fear. The faith therefore of Christ, the faith of Christian grace, that is to
say, the faith, which woorketh through charity, being laid in the
foundation, suffers no man to perish. But now what it is, to build upon this
foundation gold, silver, precious stones, and blocks, hey, and stubble: if I
shall labor exactly to expound, I fear least the very exposition it self
will become somewhat hard also to be understood. Yet will I endeavor, so
far as our Lord shall geeue me grace, both breefely, and as plainly as I
can, to open that I think. Behold, he that sought to learn of the good
Master and teacher, what good he might do to come to everlasting life, had
this answer, Matthew. 19.
if he would come unto life, he should keep the commandments. And when he
asked further, what commandments? It was said unto him, Exodus 20.
Thou shall not kill. Thou shall not commit adultery: thou shall not steal.
Thou shall not geeue false witness. Honor thy Father and Mother: Love thy
neighbor as thy self. To the end that doing these things, he might hold
the faith of Christ: that faith no doubt, which works through love. For he
could not love his neighbor as him self, except he had received the love of
God, without the which he could not love him self. But if he would further
do that, which our Lord there added, saying: If thou wilt be perfect, go and
sell all that thou haste, and geaue to the poor, and thou shall have treasure
in heaven, come and follow me: then should he have builded upon that
foundation, gold, 1. Cor. 7.
silver and pretiouse stones. For he would not then have thought, but of those
only things that pertain to God: how he might please God: and these
thoughts to please God, are as I think, gold, silver, and pretiouse stones.
But now if he had yet a certain carnal affection and love toward his
richesse, though he gave great alms thereof, and neither would for the
increase thereof, attempt any fraud or extortion, or for fear of diminishing
or loosing them, Take heed Reader, least thou leese the foundation, by loving
to much vvorldly things,
fall into any lewd or wicked doing (for by so doing he should quite leese
the foundation it self) but if (for the carnal affection, which as I said
before, he bare to those goods) he could not without grief and sorrow lack
them, then should this man build upon that foundation, heie, blocks, and
stubble. Especially, if he had also a wife, and used her in such sort, that
he would for her sake think the more earnestly of those things which
appertain to the world, and how he might please her. Seeing then, that these
goods loved with a carnal affection, are not lost without sorrow, for that
cause they which so have and possess them, as long as they keep in the
foundation that faith, which works thorough Charity, and do not by any
means, or covetousness prefer those worldly pleasures before the love of
God, do by susteyning hinderaunce in the loss of them, attain yet by a
certain fire of sorrow unto salvation. From which sorrow and loss a man is
so much the more safe, and sure, by how much the less he has looued those
things, and enjoyed them in such sort, as though he had not had them. But he
that either for the keeping, or for the getting of wordely riches commits
murder, adultery, fornication, Idololatrie, and such like, shall not because
of the foundation, be saved through fire, but loosing quyte the foundation,
shall be tormented with everlasting fire.

Wherefore that also which they allege out of the Apostle (thinking to prove
thereby that only faith profitteth) where he says: 1. Cor. 7.
If the infidel party depart, let him, or her, depart: for a broother, or a
sister, is not in such things subject unto bondage: The duty to God is to be
preferred before the bond of vvedlocke
that is to say, that for the faith of Christ, even the very wife coupled in
lawful Matrimony, should without fault be forsaken, if she will not tarry
with a Christian man, only for this cause because he is a Christian: they
mark not withal, that by the same saying of the Apostle she may very well, and
lawfully be dismissed and put away, if she say unto her husband, I will not be
thy wife, unless thou heap riches unto me by theft, or except thou (now thou
art a Christian man) use thy accustomed robberies, wherewith thou did
furnish our house: or any other kind of lewdness or wickedness, that her
husband before had used wherewith she being delighted did either satisfy her
lust, or get her living easily, or go the more gaily apparelled. For then he
to whom his wife shall thus say, if he have truly done penance from dead
works at his coming unto Baptism, and have in his foundation faith, which
woorketh through love, without doubt he shall have more regard to the love of
the grace of God, then to the voluptuousnes of the flesh, Gal. 5.
and will strongly cut away the member that does offend him: and what soever
sorrow of his heart he do by carnal affection to his wife, endure, by such
separation, that lo is all the hurt that he shall suffer, that sorrow is the
fire, by the which his heie being burned, he shall be saved. But if he so
enjoyed his wife, as that he kept her not for concupiscence, but for charity
and pity, to see if perhaps in time he might win her to the faith, yelding
rather, then requyring, the duty of wedlock, truly he shall not be carnally
sorry, when he is separated from such marriage. For why? he did not, though
married, purpose any other thing, then godly, 1. Cor. 7.
and how he might please God. Math. 5.
And by this means look how much the more he builded by such godly
purposes, gold, silver, and precious stones, so much the less loss should he
sustain: and so much the less could his buylding, which was not now of
heie, but of substantial gold and silver, be burned with any fire. And thus
whether men do suffer such things in this life only, or that after this life,
some such Judgments do follow, the saying of S. Paul thus expounded, does
not (I trow) vary from reason, or truth. How be it, if there be any other good
exposition thereof, that my hap is not to chose or to light on, yet so long
as we hold this, we are not forced absurdely to say unto unjust persons, 1.
Tim. 1.
rebels, traitors, the lewd and defiled killers of their fathers or
mothers, murderers, fornicatours, offenders against kind, thieves, bribers,
liars, perjured persons, or such like, which are contrary to the sownde
doctrine, which is according to the Gospel of the glory of the blessed God: if
ye do no more but believe in Christ, and take the Sacrament of his Baptism,
though ye do not forsake your most wicked life, yet shall ye be saved.

Neither can herein the woman of Chananee prescribe against us, because our
Lord gave her at the first, that she asked, Mat. 15.
when he had said before: It is not good to take the bread of children, and
geaue it unto dogs. For he being the searcher of the heart, saw her changed
within, whom he praised by word of mouth. And therefore he said not: O
dog, great is thy faith, but, O woman, Mat. 15.
great is thy faith. He changed his term, because he saw the affection
changed in her, and knew that of such his rebuking of her, was grown good
fruit. But it were in deed to be maruailed at, if he had praised in her, Iac.
2.
faith without good works, that is to say, a dead faith, and not such a
faith as might work through love: which S. James was not afraied to call a
faith not of Christians, but of Diuelles. Finally, if they will not understand
this woman of Chananee to have changed in her heart, her wicked works, and
manners, when Christ by contempt and reproach rebuked her: then, whom so ever
they shall find only to believe, and yet not only not to hide their wicked
life, but freely to profess it, and never mean to change it: let them on
Gods name heal their children if they can, as the daughter of that woman of
Chananee was healed, but let them not make them members of Christ, which will
not forbear to be the members of an harlotte. In deed they do not amiss
understand, that he does sin against the holy Ghost, and is without pardon,
guilty of eternal sin, which till the very end of his life will not believe
in Christ. But this were true, if they rightly understood what it were to
believe in Christ. For it is not, to have the faith of Diuelles, which is
rightly called a dead faith: but to have that faith which works through love
and charity.

Such as obstinately continue in lewd and ungodly life, should be put back
from Baptism, and what it is to hide our Lord his money. THE XVII. CHAPTER.
WHICH things being so, when we do not admit such unto Baptism, we go
not about to pull up the cockle before the time, but we are loathe to go
farther and sow cockle as the Devil does. Neither do we let or keep of
him that is willing to come unto Christ: but by their own profession we
convince them, that they have no will to come unto Christ. Neither do we
forbid them to believe in Christ, but we plainly show, that they will not
believe Christ, who do either say that it is not adultery, which he says is
adultery, or else do believe that adulterers may be his members, who (as he
teaches us by his Apostle) shall not inherit the kingdom of heaven: but are
enemies to the sownde doctrine, Gallat. 5. 1. Tim. 1.
which is according to the Gospel of the glory of the holy God. And therefore
these men are not to be accounted among them, Luc. 4.
which came unto the marriage feast, but among them that would not come. For
when they dare most openly gainesaie the very Doctrine of Christ, and
contrary the holy Gospel: they are not repelled when they come, but them selves
refuse to come.

But as for them who renounce the world, at the the least in words, though
not in deeds: they come and are sown among the wheat, they are heaped up
in the flower. They are numbered among the sheep, they are entered within the
compass of the nets, and mingled emonge the Gheastes. But whether they be
hidden and unknown, or whether they appear and be seen, so they be within:
then shall there be a reason to bear with them, when there is no mean or
ability to amend them, and when we may not presume to separate them. But God
forbid we should so understand, Mat. 13.
that which is written: They whom they found, were browghte in to the
marriage feast: both good and evil, that it should be thought, they
brought in such as professed they would still continue evil. For then the
very servants of the Master of the house, did sow cockle. And so should
it be false which is written: but the enemy which sows the same, is the
Devil. But because this can not be false, therefore that the servants
brought in both good and badde, is to be meant that they brought in such as
were either secret and unknown naught, or else after they were brought and
let in, appeared to be naught. These words, good and badde, may also be
meant to have been spoken in respect of common conversation of man's life: in
which respect such as have not yet believed, are sometime either praised, or
dispraised. And in this consideration our Lord admonished his Disciples, whom
he first sent forth to preach his Ghospel: Mat. 10.
that into what City so ever they came, they should enquire, who was there
worthy, that they might dwell with him, till they departed thence. For who
shall be that worthy, but he that by the estimation of his own neighbors
shall be counted good? And who unworthy, but he that is known among them for
evil? Of both these kinds there come unto the faith of Christ. And so there
are brought in both good and badde, when those that be evil do not refuse
penance from their dead works. But if they refuse, then are they not
repelled, being desirouse to come in: but they them selves do by open denial,
depart from entering in.

Neither shall that servant be blamed or condemned among the slowthfull that
would not bestow his Masters talente upon such as these are. Mat. 25.
For upon these he would have employed it: but they would not receive it. Of
them that hide Gods talent.
For this parable was propownded for them which will not take on them the
office to be Gods Minister or Steward in his Church, pretending a slowthfull
excuse, that they will not make an account for other men's sins, which
hear, and do not, that is to say, which receive, and render not.

But when a faithful and diligente steward ready in laying forth, and
most desirouse of his masters gain, says to the Adulterer, be no more an
Adulterer: if thou will be baptized, believe Christ which says, that this,
which thou do, is adultery: if thou will be baptized, be not the member
of an harlotte, if thou will be the member of Christ: and if he answer I
will not obey, I will not so do, this manne will not take our Lords true
money, but rather will bring in to our Lords treasure, his own forged and
counterfaite coin. But if he would profess and promise to do it, and did it
not, nor would be afterward by any mean corrected, there would be found,
what to be done with him, least he be unprofitable to others, which could not
be profitable to him self: to the intent that if there were an ill fissh
within the good nets of our Lord, yet should it not entangle our Lords
fisshes in his naughty nets: that is to say, though he lead in the Church
an evil life, yet should he not there institute an evil doctrine. For when
such persons do defend such their evil deeds, or openly professing,
that they will continewe therein, are admitted to Baptism, they seem to
teach plainly, that fornicatours and adulterers, yea though they continue in
their wickedness to their lives end, shall possess the kingdom of God, and
that they shall come to life and eternal salvation, Iac. 2.
by merit of faith, which without works is dead. These are the naughty
nets, which the fisshers ought chiefly to beware of, if at the least, by
that parable of the Gospel, Bisshops and other inferior rulers of the Church,
are meant by the word fisshers, Mat. 4.
because it was said: Come ye, and I will make ye fisshers of men. See the
fruit of evil doctrine.
For in good nets may both good and ill fisshes be taken: but in evil
nets good fisshes can not be taken. For in good doctrine, both he may be
good, that hears and follows, and he evil, which hears and follows not.
But in evil doctrine, both he that takes it for true, although he do not
obey and follow it, is evil: and he that obeys and follows it, is worse.

It is no new Doctrine, that such should be kept from Baptism, who openly
say, that they will continue in their lewd living. THE XVIII. CHAPTER.
THIS truly is to be maruailed at, that our brethren which are otherwise
minded, then we now defend, whereas they ought to depart from this so
perillouse an opinion, be it new or old, do yet say, that this is a new
doctrine, whereby wicked men openly professing without shame, that they will
persevere in their wicked deeds, are not admitted unto Baptism. As though
they were wandering in some strange country, I know not where, and saw not,
that harlottes, plaiers, and other such like professors of public
filthiness, are not suffered to come to the Sacraments of Christ, till those
their bonds be first losed, and broken. The ancient custom of the church
Yet should such kind of people by these men's opinion be all admitted. But
it is well, that the holy Church has kept and continewed this ancient and
firm custom descending of that most clear truth, whereby it is assured, that
those which do such things, shall not possess the kingdom of heaven. Hence
it is, that they which refuse to do penance from those dead works, are not
suffered to come unto Baptism. And if any have crept in, unless they
afterward being amended do penance, they can not be saved. But if drunkerds,
couetouse persons, and sclaunderers, or committers of the like damnable
vices, can not by their open deeds be convinced or reproved, yet are they
sharply corrected, with precepts, instructions, and Catechismes. And then all
such changing their wills into a better purpose, are seen to come unto
Baptism. But if they have perhaps seen and noted some negligently, in some
places to have usually admitted adulterers, Exodus 20.
whom not man's law, but Gods law condemns, that is to say, which keep
other men's wives as their own, or women, which company likewise with the
husbands of other women, they ought by those good vsages of the Church
endeavor to refourme such evil doings, that is to say, provide that neither
these offenders be admitted, and not by these evil doings to deprave the good
and right order: by thinking it not meet or necessary so much as to instruct
such, as desire Baptism, of the correction and amendment of their manners:
and so consequently to admit all the professors even of those public
villainies, that is, harlottes, Baudes, swoorde players for life and death, and
such like, yea though they continewe in their euilles. For concerning all
those vices which the Apostle numbreth up, concludinge that such as do
those things, Galat. 5.
shall not possess the kingdom of God, they which have dew and earnest care
of their charge, do (as is seemly and meet) blame and sharply rebuke such
things when they be opened unto them: and such as do resist, and profess
to continue therein, they do not admit at all to the receiuinge of Baptism.

Of the false opinion of them, that say three only vices are to be punnished
by excommunication, and all other to be recompensed by alms deeds. THE XIX.
CHAPTER.
BUT some there be, that think that all other sins are easily recompensed by
alms: and only three to be deadly, and to be punnished by excommunication,
until by a more severe penance they be healed: to wit, unchaste life,
idolatry, and murder.

It is not now needful to dispute what opinion this is, and whether it be to
be corrected, or allowed, least we draw this work which we have now taken
in hand, to much in length by reason of this question, which to the
finishing of our work in hand, is not now necessary. It suffiseth also,
that if all vices do exclude from being admitted to the Sacrament of
Baptism, among those, al adultery is comprised. And if there be but three
only to be excepted, then is yet of those three, adultery one: whereof this
our disputation was first moved. But for so much as the manners of evil
Christians, which have been before time very evil, seem yet not to have
proceeded so far as to this vice, that men would marry other men's wives, or
women the husbands of other women, it is like that hereby this negligence has
crept into some Churches, that in the Catechesing or instruction of such, as
required Baptism, these vices were neither required of, nor reproved. And
thereof came to pass that men began even to defend them, which yet are
rare and seldom seen among them that are christened, if by remiss negligence
we make them not defensable. For such negligence in some, want of experience
in others, and in others ignorance we may probably judge, that our Lord
signified by the sleep in man, where he says: Mat. 13.
But when men slept, the enemies came and ouersowed cockle. And it is an
argument to think, that those vices have but now of late appeared in the
manners of the woorst Christian men: S Cyprians sermon De lapsis.
because that S. Cyprian in his Sermon made of such as were fallen in time of
persecution, when lamenting and reproving vice, he had remembered many things
unto them, whereby he said the indignation of God was justly moved, to suffer
his Church to be scourged with intolerable persecution: he does not at all
mention there, any of these vices forenamed. And yet does he not pass over in
silence, but earnestly auouche, that it was a point of evil manners, for
Christians to join in marriage with Infidelles: which says he (in that
place) is naught else, but with shame to prostitute the members of Christ to
the Gentilles. Yet now in these our days, this is scant thought to be a sin,
because there is nothing in deed commanded thereof in the new Testament. And
therefore have some other thought it lawefull, or else leaft it as it were in
doubt. A.
And even so, is that doubteful, See the Notes following after this Chapter.
whether Herod married the wife of his broother living, or else after he was
dead. And therefore is it not very plain, what it was that John said, was
unlawful for him to do. Likewise there may be some doubt, whether a
Concubine professinge that she will never know other manne if she be put
away from him to whom she is subject, should not be allowed to the receiving
of baptism. B.
And farther it may seem, that he which puts away his wife taken in
adultery and marries another should not be wayed in equal ballaunce with
them, that put away their wives without cause of adultery and marry others. C.
And that point seems so dark in the divine Scriptures, whether he who may
without doubt, for adultery put away his wife, should be yet accounted an
adulterer, if he marry an other, as that (I think) to be deceived in the
understanding of that point, were a venial sin. Wherefore such as are
manifest crimes of shameless unchastity, are utterly to be rejected from
Baptism, unless the parties by changing their minds, and by penance be
amended. But for such as are doubtefull, it is to be labored, and foreseen
by all means, that such conjunctions be not made. For what need is it for a
man to put his head under so great danger of doubt, and ambiguitie? D.
But if any such matches or conjunctions fortune to be made, I can not
certainly say whether such persons as make them, should by like reason be
thought unmeet to be admitted to Baptism.

Necessary annotations for the better understanding of this xixth. Chapter, in
some doubtefull places which by misunderstanding may perhaps minister some
cause of Error or scruple to the Reader.
A.
[Euen so is that doubtful.] The doubt which S. Augustine finds here in the
word of S. John the Baptiste unto Herod concerning his marriage, is by him
self resolved, after the writing of this Book, in a Sermon that he preached
to the people, upon the. 140. Psalm, where he has these words. In Psalm. 140.
Occiditur ab Herod, qui dicebat ei: non licet tibi habere vxorem fratrit tui:
Neque enim frater eius sine posteritate decesserat. He is slain of Herod,
which said unto him: It is not lawful for thee to have thy brothers wife. For
his brother died not without issew. He says it was not lawful for him to marry
his broothers wife, and adds the cause, for that his broother had issue of
the same wife.

B.
[And farther may seme] How that case is to be weighed he resolves plainly and
directly determining in the Books, which he wrote long after unto Pollentius
of unlawful marriages, Tom. 6. li. 1. cap. 9.
saying: Maius adulterium quis esse negat, vxore non fornicante dimissa,
alteram ducere, quam si fornicantem quis dimiserit, and tunc als ram duxerit,
non quia and hoc adulteriu^ non est, sed quia minus est, vbi fornicante
dimissa, altera ducitur: who denies it to be a greater adultery, for a man
having put away his wife not fall in fornication by her committed, to marry an
other, then if putting her away for fornication, he then marry an other? not
because this is not also adultery, but for that it is the less, then the
first, where the wife being put away for fornication, an other is married. And
in the same Chapter he farther says: Ambos enim, licet alteru^ altero grauius,
moechos tamen esse cognoscimus. We know both of them to be adulterers, though
the one more grievous then the other. And so we see that though not in equal and
even balance, yet are they both weyed in one balance of adultery.

[And that point seems to dark. C.
] In the books before alleged which he wrote to Pollentius, To. 6. li. 1. ad
Polle^t. cap. 9.
it was unto him a matter so evident and plain, that being out of al doubt
thereof, he doubted not to say: That whether a man put away his wife that has
committed no adultery, or her that has been taken in adultery, if he mary an
other, he commits not a small or venial offense, but manifest adultery, which
is a mortal, and dedly sin, saying: vtrosque moechos esse minime dubitamus.
We nothing doubt but that they be both adulterers. And in an other place of
the same work speaking of them, who for unchaste life put their wives out of
their company, he says: To. 6. li. 2. ad Polle^t. cap. 19. To. 7. de Nupt. and
Concupis. lib. 1. c. 10
Non alia quarant coniugia, quia non erunt coniugia, sed adulteria. Let them
not seek other marriages: for they shall be no marriages, but adulteries. To the
same effect in an other work, which he wrote also, after this book, he
says, that who so ever, in that case marries again: Lege Euangelij, reus
erit adulterij: By the law of the Ghospel, he shall be guilty of adultery.

[But if any such matches fortune to be made I can not certainly say.] Touching
this point also, D.
he says in an other place, in the person of his adversary, yet as a truth in
both sides granted. Quod videlicet qui dimittit, and viuere permittit
adulteram, Tom. 6. de Adulterinis Coniugijs ad Pollent. li. 2. ca. 16.
si altera^ duxerit, quamdiu prior illa viuit, perpetuus adulter est, nec agit
poenite^tiam fructuosam a flagitio non recedens. Nec si Catechumenus est: ad
baptismu^ admittitur, quonia^ ab eo quod impedit non mutatur. That he which
puts away his wife for adultery, and suffers her to live, if he marry an
other, as long as that former wife lives, he is a continual adulterer: neither
does he any fruteful penance, as long as he continues in that wicked act.
Neither if he be a Catechumen, can be admitted to Baptism, because he leaves
not that, which lets him from baptism.

Thus much have I thought good to say here (good Reader) to the end that
neither thou should misconstrue S. Augustine, neither doubt of his mind and
opinion in these points, which albeit he does not resolve here, yet as thou
see, he does in other and later Books, by him written, clearly define, and
plainly teach.

What they ought to do that are to be baptized, and what benefit they take in
baptism. THE XX. CHAPTER.
THerefore to show now what is the sownd and true doctrine, lest a dangerous
security be geeuen to any deadly sin, or else a more dangerous authority
granted: this is the order of the cure and remedy thereof: That they which
are to be baptized, do believe in God the Father, the Son, and the holy
Ghost, in such order and sort as the Creed is delivered, that they do
penance from their dead works, and doubt not but that they shall receive in
Baptism a full and perfect remission of all their sins paste. Not yet so,
that it shall be now lawful for them to sin. But that it shall be no more
hurtful to them, that they have before sinned. And that it is a remission of all that is past, not a permission to do the like any more. Then may it truly be
said even spiritually, Joan. 5.
behold thou art made whole: now sin no more: which our Lord therefore
said, of the bodyly health, because he knew, that to him whom he healed,
that pain and disease in the flesh was happened, by the desert of his sins.
But to him that enters an adulterer to be baptized, and being baptized, goes
forth an adulterer, I marvel how these men can think it may be said,
behold thou art made whole. For what can be a grievous and deadly disease, if
adultery shall be accounted health?

It is not to be thought, that the Apostles admitted to Baptism such as lived
in great and heinous sin. THE XXI. CHAPTER.
BUT in the three thousands (say they) whom the Apostles Baptized in one
day, Acto. 2.
among whom the Apostle preached, and filled with the Gospel the whole
countries between Jerusalem and Slauonie, Romans 15.
it is leeke there were some men cowpled with other men's wives, and some
weemen with other wives husbands, whereupon the Apostles should have made a
certain rule, which should from thence forth, have been kept in the
Churches, whither such should not be admitted to Baptism, except they had
first forsaken and corrected their adulterous lives. withdraw your selves from
this wicked world. Acto. 2.
For who doubts adultery to appertain to the wickedness of this world, and
those especially which choose to continue in that iniquity? But in like manner
may it be said of common harlotes, (which no Church admits to Baptism,
till they be delivered from that filthy life) that among so many thousands
then of believers, among so many nations, some such might be found, and that
the Apostles should have given for the rules of their receiving, or of their
repelling. But by some smaller matters, we may well gather conjecture, of the
greater. For if the Publicans coming to the Baptism of John, were forbidden,
Lucae. 2.
to exact any more, then was appointed and taxed unto them, I marvel if
adultery could be permitted to such as came to the Baptism of Christ.

Jacob. 2. Galat. 5. Luca. 17.
which has faith in Christ: not a dead faith without works (which is also
found in the devils) but the faith of Grace, which woorketh through love.

This is the faith, whereof it is said: The kingdom of heaven is within you.
For this do they break into, which do violence by believing, and obtaining by
prayer the Spirit of Charity, Romans 13.
in the which the fulness of the law consists: and without the which, the law
in the letter, made them gilty, even of the transgressio^ and breach thereof.
It is not therefore to be thought, Math. 11.
that for this cause it was said: the kingdom of the heavens suffers
violence, and they which do the violence, break in to it. for that even lewd
parsons only by believing, and yet living wickedly, do come into the kingdom
of heaven: but because that the same gilte of transgression (which the only
law, that is, the letter, without the spirit, made by commanding) is by
believing loosed: and by force of faith the holy Ghost is obtained, Romans 5.
by whom Charity being powered into our hearts, the law is fulfilled, not for
fear of pain, but for love of Justice.

What it is to know God and that it is not sufficient for salvation to have
faith only, without good works. THE XXII. CHAPTER.
LET not therefore a rechelesse mind be deceived in thinking it self to know
God, if he with a dead faith, that is without good works, do after the
manner of devils confess God. Let no man think him self upon only faith in
Christ assured to come unto everlasting life, because our lord says: this is
life everlasting, John. 21.
that they may know the one true God, and Jesus Christ, whom thou have sent. For
he must also call to remembrance, that it is written: In this we know him, 1.
John. 2.
if we keep his commandments: who says that he knows him, and keeps
not his commandments he is a lier and truth is not in him. And least any man
should think, that Gods commandments appertained to only faith (allthough
yet no man has presumed so to say) chiefly because him self named
commandments, in the plural number, and lest by that number men should
imagine and think of many mo, he comprehended them all in two, saying: Math.
22.
In those two depends the whole law, and the Prophets: and although it
might in soome sense rightly be said, the commandments of God are included
in only faith, Galat. 5.
if not a dead faith be understood, but a quick, which woorketh thorough
love, 1. John. 3.
yet S. John him self afterward opened his whole meaning, when he says:
This is his commandment, that we believe in the name of his Son Jesus Christ,
and love one an other. This therefore profits, to believe in God, with a
right faith, to honor God, to know God: to thentent that both we may have
help from him, to live well: and if we sin, we may deserve of him,
indulgence and pardon: Psalm. 40.
not continuing recklesse in evil works which he hates, but departing from
them, and saying unto him: I have said Lord have mercy on me, heal my soul,
because I have sinned against thee: which they can not say unto him, that do
not believe him: and in vain do such say it, who being so far from him,
are utterly strangers to the grace of the mediator.

Sapien. 15.
Hereof also be those words in the book of wisedoome, which I know not how
these men's pernicious security does interpret. And if we sin, yet be we
thine. For how is this true? Forsothe because we have, a good and a great God,
which will and can heal the sins of the penitent, but not such a one, as
fears to destroy them that remain in their wickedness. Therefore the same
Writer when he had said, we be thine, he added, knowing thy power. verily
such a power as, the sinner can neither withdraw nor hide him self from. And
therefore following, he adds further: but we have not sinned knowing that we
be deputed to be thine. For who worthily thinking of the habitation, that is
with God (wherein by predestination all be deputed, which are called according
to his purpose) will not labor so to live, as may be aunswerable, and
sitting, to such an habitation? That therefore which S. John says: These
things have I written unto you, to the end ye sin not, and if any have
sinned, we have an advocate with the father Ihesu Christ the righteous, and he
is the intercession for our sins: He says not to the end we should sin,
with security and carelessness, but that deparing from such sin as we have
committed, we should not despair of pardon, having that advocate which the
Infidels have not.

That by this word, Judgment, in the holy scripture, is meant eternal
damnation, not any easier pain or punnishment. THE XXIII. CHAPTER.
THERE is not therefore any such favorable condition promised by these places
alleged, that men believing in God, may remain therefore in their evil
works. And much less of those words, where the Apostle says: they which
have sinned without law, Romans 2.
shall perish without law, but they which sinned in the law, shall be judged
by the law: as though in this place there were some difference, between
perishing, and being Judged. For here by diverse words, one and the self same
thing is signified. For the scriptures use to put Judgment even for eternal
damnation, Job. 5.
as in the Gospel our Lord says: The hour shall come, wherein all they
which are in their graves, shall hear his voice, and they which have done
well, shall come forth to the resurrection of life, but they which have done
evil, to the resurrection of Judgment. And mark that it is not said there:
this for them which have believed, and that for them, which have not believed:
but this, shall they have, which have done well: and that, Gal. 5.
they which have done evil. For good life can not be parted from faith, which
works thorough love. Nay rather that faith is good life it self. We see
therefore that our Lord used this word, resurrection of Judgment, for
resurrection of eternal damnation. For of all them that were to rise again, in
which number no doubt were also those which believe not at all (for they also
were in their graves) he made but two parts, whereof the one he declared should
arise into resurrection of life, and the other, into resurrection of Judgment.

Now if they will say that those are not meant there which believe not at al,
but those which shall be saved by fire, because they believed, although they
lived ill, thinking thereby, that by the name of Judgment, their transitory
pain is signified (although this should be most impudently said, seeing that
all, who without exception shall rise again, among whom, no doubt, the
unfaithful shall also be, our Lord has divided only into two parts, to wit,
life and Judgment, meaning thereby that the Judgment should be understood
eternal, as well as the life, though he did not there add that word: for
neither says he there, into resurrection of eternal life, though he would not
have it any otherwise understood): yet let them then consider, what they will
answer to that, where he says: But he which believes not, Johan. 3.
is already judged. For here (no doubt) they must either understand, Judgment,
for eternal pain, or else presume to say, that infidels shall also be saved
thorough fire. For, says Christ: He which believes not, is already judged,
that is to say, is already destined and appointed to Judgment. And then where
is that, which they promise for a singular benefit, to such as believe, and
yet live wickedly, since that they also which believe not, shall not be damned,
but judged? Which if they dare not to affirm, then let them not presume to
promise so favorably unto them, of whom it is said, they shall be judged by the
Law. For now it appears, that eternal damnation, is also termed Judgment.

But now as touching those that wittingely sin, what if we find them not
only not to be in more easy, but to be in much worse and harder case? Verily
these be they chiefly, which have received the law. For (as it is written):
Where there is no law, Romans 4.
there is no transgression. And to this end also is it said: I had not known
concupiscense, except the law had said, Romans 7.
thou shall not lust. Sin therefore, taking occasion of the law, has
wrought in me all concupiscence: with many other such like which the same
Apostle speaks of this matter. But from this most grievous gilt does the
grace of the Holy Ghost, deliver us through Jesus Christ our Lord, Romans 5.
which Grace, Charity being powered into our hearts, does make us to delight
in justice, by the which immodederate concupiscence is ouercommed. Hereby
therefore is it proved, not only no easier, Romans 2.
but much more grievous pain to be maent to them, of whom it is said, they
which sin in the law, shall be judged by the law, then to them, which sinning
without the law, shall perish without the law. It is proved also hereby, that
Judgment in this place is not meant, for tra^sitory pain, but for the eternal
pain, whereby infideles shall be also judged. For they that use this sentence,
to give hope of salvation by fire, to them which even believing, do live
most lewdely, saying to them, they which have sinned without the Law shall
perish without the law, but they which have sinned in the law, shall be judged
by the law: as though it were said, they shall not perish, but be saved
thorough fire: could not see, that the Apostle spoke this both of them which
sinned without the law, and of them which sinned in the law. For The Apostle
there in deed treated both of the gentiles and of the Jews: showing that the
grace of Christ whereby they might be delivered, was not only necessary to the
Gentiles, but to the Jews also. All which, that very epistle to the Romans
does evidently show. Therefore let them now (if it like them) promise eue^ to
the Jews also, sinning in the law salvation through fire, though the grace of
Christ deliver them not. For of them also it was said, By the law, they shall
be judged. Which if they do not, then speak they against them selves who
confess, that they are tied, with the band of the most grievous, and heavy
crime of infidelity. Why do they then apply to Infidels, and to the faithful
a like (in a thing appertaining to the faith of Christ) that which was spoken
of them, that sin without the law, and of them which sin in the law
sith, all this was spoken (not of the faithful, but) of the Jews and the
Gentiles, inuiting them both to come to the faith of Christ?

Of the liberty of a Christian man, and what Christian liberty is, if it be
rightly understood. THE XXIIII. CHAPTER.
FOR it was not said, they which have sinned without faith, shall perish
without faith: and they which have sinned in faith, shall be judged by faith:
but the words are: without the law, and in the law, Romans 2.
that it might plainly appear, that matter was touched, which was in hand
between the Gentiles, and the Jews, not between good and evil Christians. And
yet if in that place they will needs by the word, Law, understand faith
(which were to unreasonable and to absurd) yet may they read the sentence of
the Apostle Peter, which is in this matter most open and plain: speaking of
them, who took to maintain their fleshlines, and to cover their nawghtines,
that, which is written: we which appertain to the new Testament, be not the
sons of the handmaide, Gala. 4.
but of the free woman, by that liberty whereby Christ has made us free:
thinking that hereby was meant they might live freely, take all things as
lawful, whatsoever liked them, being now put in security by so great a
redemption: not marking withal that which was said: Brethern, Gala. 5.
ye are called into liberty: only make not that liberty an occasion of
carnalitie. Whereupon S. Peter him self also says: Free, 1. Pet. 2.
not as having liberty, for a cloak or cover of naughtines. Of the which sort
also he speaks in his second Epistle: 2. Pet. 2.
These are dry springes, and clouds driven with an hurlewind, to whom a
miste of darcknes is reserved: for speaking proud things of vanity, they
allure in concupiscences unto uncleanness of the flesh, those which were escaped
a little, being conversant in error, promising unto them liberty, when them
selves were the bondmen of corruption. For of what soever a man is overcome, to
the same is he become bond. For if fleyng back from the filthiness of the
world into the knowledge of our Lord and common Savior Ihesu Christ, they
being again wrapped, and entangled in them, be overcome, the latter are
become to them, worse then the first: for it had been better for them not to
know the way of Justice, then knowing it, to return back from the holy
commandment once geeuen unto them: for in them is the proverb truly
verefied, The dog returned to his vomit, and the sow being washed, to
wallowing in the mier. Why then is there yet promised against this most manifest
truth, a better state unto them, which have known the way of Justice, that is,
our Lord Christ, and live naughtely, as though they had not known him at all,
when it is most clearly said: It had been better for them not to have known
the way of Justice, then knowing it, to return back from the holy
commandment delivered unto them?

It is more dangerous for a man, that has received the faith, to live ungodly
therein, then though he had never come to the knowledge of it. THE XXV. CHAPTER.
FOR the holy Commandment in this place is not to be understood that
commandment whereby we are commanded to believe in God, though in that all
be contained, if we mean that faith of beleuers, which woorketh through
love? Gal. 5.
But he openly expresses there, what he called the holy Commandment. For
since that, whereby we are commanded, that departing from the uncleanness of
this world, we should live in chaste conversation. For thus he says: 2. Pet.
2.
If having gone from the filthiness of this world, into the knowledge of our
Lord Jesus Christ the Savior of us all, they being again wrapped, and
entangled therein be ouercomed, the latter are become to them, worse then the
first. He says not, departing from the ignorance of God, or departing from
the infidelity of the world, or such like, but, from the filthiness of the
world, wherein verily is comprised all uncleanness of filthy vices. For of
these speaking before, he says, Banqueting together with you, and having
their eyes full of adultery, and of continual sin. Therefore also does he
call them, Dry springes, that is to say: springes, because they had received
knoweledge of our Lord Christ: but: Dry, because they lived not
accordingely. Judas the Apostle, speaking also of such, says: Iudae.
These be they which do without fear banquet together with you, feeding them
selves, being spotted, in your Charitable almoese Feasts: clouds without
water etc. For those whom Peter names, Banqueters together with you, having
their eyes full of adultery: those does Judas call spotted persons, without
fear, banqueting with you, and feeding them selves in your Charitable almoese
Feasts: For they are mingled with the good in the banquetes of the
Sacraments, and in the almoese geeuen to the poor. And that which Peter
calls a dry spring, 2. Pet. 2. Iudae. Iac. 2.
that does Judas name clouds without water, and that does James term, a
deadde faieth. The transitory pain of fire therefore, is not promised to
such as leeue filthilie and wickedly, because they have known the way of
Justice. For the infallible scripture witnesses: Matt. 12. Luke 11.
It had been better for them not to have known it. For our Lord also
speaking of such, says: And the last of that man, shall be worse then the
first, because that not receiving the holy Ghost, which should have dwelt in
the house of his cleansed soul, he made the unclean spirit return thereinto
with more company. Except perhaps these of whom we now treat, be to be
accounted better, because they did not return to the uncleanness of adultereis,
from the which they never departed, neither being purged, did again defile
them selves, but refused to be purged at all. For neither do they vouchsafe
(that they may enter into Baptism with a lightened conscience) so much as to
cast out by vomit, their old uncleanness, which after the manner of dogs, they
may take up again: but stubbornly contend to keep their vndisgested
wickedness, in their raw stommake, even amidde the holiness of the funte of
Baptism. Neither do they with so much as a feined promise hide the same, but
belk it forth by impudent profession and auowing thereof. Neither do they
goinge forth of Sodom, Gene. 19.
look back again like Lothes wife, but utterly disdain once to go forth of
Sodom, nay they labor with the iniquities of Sodom, to enter into Christ.
Paul the Apostle says: I which was before a blasphemer, 1. Tim. 1.
a persecutor and an injurious person: but I have gotten mercy, because in
incredulity and unbelief, I did it ignorantly. But to these it is Even so is
it likewise tought in these our days bie Luther Calvin, and the rest of the
nevve Religion.
now said, then chiefly shall ye get mercy, if being even in the faith, ye
do wittingly live ill. It is to long, and almost an infinite matter, to
gather all the testimonies of scriptures, whereby it appears that their case,
which lead wittingly a lewd and wicked life, is not only not more easy or
likely to find pardon, then they which do it ignorantly, but also even for
that cause, much more perilous and grievous. Therefore let these suffice.

The life of a Christian man ought to be aunswerable unto his Baptism, and
stands not only in saying, but also in doing. THE XXVI. CHAPTER.
LET us therefore diligently take heed with the help of our Lord God, that we
make not men lewdly careless, or secure, saying unto them, that if they be
baptized in Christ, how so ever they live in the faith, they shall come unto
eternal salvation. Neither let us so make Christians, as the Jews made
Proselites, to whom our Lord says: woe be unto you scribes and Pharaseis,
Matthew. 23 See, whether, men become not now Protestants as by the Pharisees
they became proselites. John. 3.
for ye go about sea and land, to make one proselite, and when ye have made
one, ye make him double more the child of hell, then your selves are. But let us
rather hold in both, the sound Doctrine of God our Master, and let a
Christian man's life be consonant to the holy Baptism: neither let eternal life
be promised to any man, if either of both want. For he that said: Except a man
be borne again of water and the holy Ghost, he shall not enter into the
kingdom of heaven, he said also: Matt. 5.
Except your righteousness do abound abooue that of the scribes and
Pharisees, ye shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven. For of them he
says: Matt. 23.
Scribes and Pharisees sit in the chair of Moises: do as they say, but not
as they do. For they say, and do not. Their righteousness therefore, is to
say, and not to do: and by this saying he would have our righteousness to
be abooue theirs: The difference between a Pharisee and a good Christian man
in his life.
that is, both to say, and to do. Which if it be not, there is no entry for
us into the kingdom of heaven. Not that any man ought so to extol him self, I
will not say, in boasting him self to others, but not so much as with him
self to presume to think, that he is in this life without sin. Verily if
there were not even among Christians some vices so grievous, that they were to
be pounished even with Excommunication, the Apostle would not have said:
Notorious and infamous Crimes. 1. Cor. 5. 2. Cor. 12.
Assembling your selves together, and my Spirit with you, geeue such a man
up to the Devil into the destruction of his flesh that his soul may be safe
in the day of our Lord Jesus. Whervppon he also says: I fear least I shall
be driven to lament, when I come, and to mourn for many of those which have
sinned before, and not done penance for their uncleanness, and fornication
which they have committed. Crimes mortal, but not infamous.
Again, if there were not certain sins, which need not to be healed by
such humility of penance, as is geeuen in the Church to them which are
properly called Penitentes, but by some other medicines of rebuking by words,
our Lord would not say: Tell him his fault between him and thee alone: if he
harken to the, Matt. 18. Venial sins.
then thou have won thy broother. Finally, if there were not some faults
without the which this life is not lead, he would not have given us a daily
remedy, in the prayer which him self taught, wherein he willed us to say,
forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespase against us. Matt. 6.


The Conclusion, with a learned recital of all that has been said before.
THE XXVII. CHAPTER.
NOW have I sufficiently laid forth (I suppose) what I think of that whole
opinion, wherein three questions have risen. One of the mingling in the church
of good and evil, as of wheat, and cockle. Wherein we must take heed, that
we think not these parables and similitudes propounded to that end (whether
it be that of the unclean beasts within the Arc, or what so ever such like
which signify the same) that Ecclesiastical discipline should therefore
sleep (whereof it was said in the figure of that wooman, Prouer. 2.
Severe are the conuersations of her house) but that unadvised, and rash
temeritie, rather then diligent severity, should not so far proceed, that it
presume as it were, to separate the good from the evil, by wicked schisms. For
neither by these similitudes, parables, and foreshewinges, is there geeuen to
the good, any counsel of sloth or slacknes, whereby they should neglect that,
which they ought to forbid: but of patience, whereby (preserving alwaie the
doctrine of truth) they may suffer and bear that, which they can not amend.
Nor yet because it is written, that there entered also unclean beasts into the
Arc to Noe, Genes. 7.
therefore the Prelates should not forbid, and stay, if any most lewd and
unclean persons will presume to enter to Baptism, as light dawncers, which
were verily less ill, then filthy adulterers: But by this figure of a thing
done, it was foreshewed, that unclean persons should be in the church, by
mean of toleration, not by corruption of doctrine, or dissolute breaking of
discipline and good order. For the unclean beasts came not in, where, and of
which side them listed, the fast frame of the Arc being in any part broken,
or sundered: but the same being whole and sound they entered all at one only
door, which the woorkman had made.

An other question is upon that it seemed good unto them, that only faith
should be preached to them that were to be Baptized, and that after Baptism,
they should be taught, of works and manners. But if I be not deceived, it
has been sufficiently showed, that it does then chiefly appertain to the
care and dewty of the ouerseer, when all they which desire together the
Sacrament of the faithful, do most intentiuely and carefully harken, to all
that is said then, expressly and plainly to open the pain, which our Lord
threateneth to them that live ill: least they become gilty of most grievous
crimes, even in the Baptism it self, whereunto they come to have the gilt of
all their former sins remitted.

The third question is the most dangerous of al. Of the which (being
slenderly considered, and not handled according to the word of God) is risen
(as to me seems) all that other foul opinion, wherein there is promised to
such as live most lewdely, and shamefully, yea though they continue in such
living, if they only believe in Christ, and receive his Sacraments, that
they shall come to eternal life and salvation. Which doctrine is against the
most manifest saying of our Lord, who to him that desired eternal life, Matt.
19.
answered: If thou will come unto life, keep the commandments: and showed
farther, what commandments: such truly, wherein those sins are forbidden,
whereunto eternal life is now (I know not how) promised thorough faith:
Jacob. 2.
which without works, is dead. Of these three questions I have (as I think)
sufficiently disputed, and have showed that the evil are so to be tolerated in
the Church, that Ecclesiastical Discipline be not neglected. That they which
desire Baptism are so to be instructed, that they may not only hear, and
take upon them what they should believe, but also how they should live. That
eternal life, is so promised to the faithful, that no man may think he may
come thereunto through a dead faith, which without works can not save. But
by that faith of grace, which woorketh thorough love. Note the Conclusion.
Gal. 5.
Let not therefore faithful Stuardes be blamed. Let not their negligence or
slougthe, be reproved, but rather the froward stubernesse of some, which
refuse to take our Lords money, and which compel the servants of our Lord,
to bestow and distribute their own counterfeit coin, while they will not at
the least be of that sort of evil men, as S. Cyprian speaks of: In Ser. de
lapsis.
renouncing the world only in words and not in works. For these men will not
so much as in words, renounce the works of the devil, but with open mouth
will profess, that they will continue in there adultery. If there be any thing
else that they do affirm, which I perhaps have not here touched in this my
disputation, I suppose it to be such, as whereunto my answer was not
necessary: either because it apperteined not to the matter now in hand, or else
for that it was such a trifel, as might of every man easily be confuted, and
reproved.

Thus ends the learned Treaty of that ancient and Blessed Father, S.
Augustine, Of faith and Works.
A SERMON MADE BY S. CHRYSOSTOM PATRIARCH OF CONSTANTINOPLE, IN THE year of
our Lord. 400. Of praying unto God: Extant in the fifth Tome of his Works.
THE servants of God are for two causes worthy, not only to be extolled with
high praises, but also to be regarded, and looked upon with admiration.

First, for that they did set the hope of their salvation in devout and holy
prayers: and next for that they suffered not to grow out of memory, those
lauds, and other service, which with joy and trembling they used to offer
unto God: but have been content, that being committed to writing, they should
remain. Whereby they might power forth their treasure upon us, as it were by
succession of inheritance, and by that mean provoke and stir the whole
posterity, to a desire, of following and of laboring, to be like unto them.
For it is well sytting and convenient, that both the manners of the teachers
do flow and descend, to such as use their company, and that the scholars
of such Masters be seen also to follow and express in life, the virtue of
their Masters. But this shall we best bring to pass, if we live as men
virtuously addicted to continual prayer, to the service of God, and to
careful love of piety and virtue: thinking and esteeming, that, to offer our
prayers with a pure and sincere heart unto God, is the only life, the only
health, the only riches, and the only scope, and effect of all that good is.
For as the son geeueth light unto the body, so does prayer illumine and
geeue light unto the soul. If therefore it be a great lack and miss to a
blind man not to behold the son: how much greater loss is it to a
Christian man, if by continual prayer, he do not receive into his mind, the
light, and clear bright beams of Christ the Son of God?

But now who is there, that is not astonned, and does not wonder at so
bounteous courtesy, and singular kindness as God does herein extend and show
to mankind, in affording to mortal men so great honor, as to admit us for
worthy to talk with him self, and to lay down our prayers and desiers
before him. For of troth, Prayer a familiar talk with God
we do even truly talk with God, so often as we apply our selves to prayer.
By prayer also, we sever our selves as it were from that society, which
otherwise we had with brute beasts: and be in deed cowpled thereby with
Angels. For prayer is the work of Angels. Yea and it passes in some
respect their dignity, if to have present talk with God him self, be a
thing above the dignity of Angels. And that so it is, yea and a much higher
preeminence, they them selves do teach us, offering truly their prayers,
How and after what manner we should pray.
with much tremblinge: and geeuing thereby example unto us, to know and
learn, that who so ever presents him self before God, must do it with
much joy, and yet with great trembling. With trembling, while we fear
least we may seem unworthy by our prayers to have speech unto God. With
Joy, when we think of the greatness of the honor, which God of his so
great care over us, has vouchesafed to bestow on creatures of mortal kind,
that it may be lawful for us, continually to have the Joy and fruition, of
speaking with his Divine Majesty.

The fruit of prayer.
By which means we obtain also this, that we being mortal, and having
continuance but for a time, cease so to be. For though by nature we be mortal,
yet by this speech and familiar life which we lead with God, we pass over
to an immortal life. For of necessity it follows, that he which has
familiarity with God, gets to be over death, and over all such things as
are subject to corruption. And as it can not be, that he which enjoys the
light of the son beams, should be in darkness: so neither can it be by any
means, that he which uses to company with God, should still remain mortal.
For the very height and excellency of this dignity, does transfer us to
immortallity. For if they that have free speech with the emperor, and be
co^uersant familiarly with him, can not lightly be poor after that honor
gotten at his hand: much less may it be, that they which by prayer, daily, and
familiarly speak with God, should have souls subject to death. What the
death of the soul is.
For the death of the soul is impiety, and a life which is lead contrary to
the law of God. Whereof it follows, that the life of the soul, is the service
of God, and a life worthy of that service. But a virtuous life, and worthy of
Gods service, does prayer wonderfully win and procure unto us: and being
won, does increase and lay it up as a great treasure in our minds.

For whether a man be possessed with the love of virginity, or be it, The
virtue and force of prayer.
that he has inclination to embrace the honorable chastity of wedlock, or if
he study to bridle and restrain anger, and with mildenes to become familier:
or have he desire to be pure and void from the infection of envy: Finally, if
a man covet and labor to do ought else that tends or appertains to well
living, he shall by the guide of prayer preparing the way to such life, find
a co^modiouse and easy way to al virtue and goodness. For it can not be:
Chastity, justice, and other virtues, are obtained by prayer. Mat. 7.
it can not be (I say) that they which ask of God, chastity, justice,
mildness, and gentleness, should not obtain that they ask. For our Lord
him self says: Ask, and it shall be geauen unto you: seek, and ye shall
find: knock, and it shall be opened unto you. For who so ever asks,
receives: and he that seeks, finds: and to him that knocks, there shall
be opened. And again in another place Who is there among you (says he) of
whom if his son ask bread, he will give him a stone? Luc. 11.
Or if he ask fisshe, he will geaue him a serpent? If you then being evil, can
give good gifts to your children, how much more will your heavenly Father
geaue his holy spirit to such as sue to him therefore. With such sayings and
with such hope, has the Lord of al things stirred and invited us to prayer.

It behooves us therefore being obedient unto God, continually to pass our
whole life in prayer, and in praising of God: and to have much more care of
the service of God then of our own life. For so will it come to pass, that
we shall lead a life such as is meet for a man. For who so ever does not
pray unto God, nor has desire to enjoy the delight of daily talking with
God, that man is dead, wanting life, and of a sick and deseased mind.

For even this is a most euidente argument of a frantic and fond mind,
not to understand the great excellency of this honor: not to love and
delight in prayer: and not to know, that then the soul is dead, when it is
not with all love and humility, laid prostrate before the feet of God. For
even as this our body, if the soul and life be away, is truly dead and
stinking: even so the soul except she raise and stir her self up to
prayer, is dead, wretched, and of very evil and unpleasant savor. And to the
end we may truly conceive this, and think it in deed a more heavy and
sorrowful thing then any death, to be depraved of the benefitte of prayer, A
notable example.
that Prophet Daniel does well teach us. Who did chose rather to suffer death,
then only by the space of three days to be kept from praying: for the King of
Persians Darius, Daniel. 6.
did not require of him to commit any wicked act: only this he observed, if
any manne within three days should be taken with asking owght of any God or
man, save of him self only. But the Prophet endured not to forbear prayer so
much as for that little space. For why? He knew that if God be not entreated
and made favorable unto us, no good thing can enter into our sowles. But God
being entreated and made favorable unto us, our labors are furdered, our
doings do prosper, and merueilousely go forewarde. But then is God
entreated, when he sees we love to pray, and continually to sue unto him,
fervently expecting all good things at his hands, and of his goodness.

Therefore for mine own part, Note well
when so ever I see a man that does not love prayer, or delight therein, or
that is not as it were possessed with a vehement desire and fervent
mindefulnesse thereof: by and by it is a manifest token unto me, that such a man possesses no great good gift of grace in his mind. Again, when I see
any man vnsaciably cleaving and fixing him self to the service of God, and to
account it one of his greatest losses, if he do not continually pray: then
do I probably conjecture such a one to be steadfastly geauen to think of all
virtue, and to be a very true temple of God.

For if a man's apparraile, if his gate and manners of going, if his gyrning
or fond countenance show what a man is (as the wise Solomon has said) much
more is prayer, and the service of God, Eccles. 19
a sign and clear token of all righteousenesse: How prayer bevvtifieth the
mind.
For prayer is a spiritual and Divine ornament, procuring unto our minds a
singular beauty and comeliness. It frames a man's life, and suffers not
any filthy or absurd thing to have dominion in the heart. It persuades us to
fear God, and to yield unto him the honor which we owe unto him. It teaches
us to repel all the sleigtes and deceites of the wicked spirit, driving away
all vile and unseemly thoughts.

Finally, it confirms a man's mind in the contempt of all vain
voluptuouse pleasure. A Christian pride.
For this kind of pride only becomes them which serve and honor Christ,
to disdain in any sort to be thrall and bond to any filthiness, and to keep
their minds free in liberty and uprightness of life. And thus I think it is
manifest to all men, that it is impossible for a man simply without the help
of prayer to pass his time, and to lead out his life in virtue. For how may
it be, that a man may exercise virtue, except he do continually repair
unto, and humbly fall down at the feet of him, who supplieth and gives all
virtue unto men? Again how may it be, that any man can desire to be
temperat, just, and virtuous, except he willingly talk and company daily
with him, who requires at our hands these and many other such things?

Yet thus much in few, will I further open unto you, that al be it prayer do
find us even stuffed with sins, yet does the same lightly purge and make us
clean thereof. Prayer cleanses from sin.
What thing then, more high, more excellent, or Divine, may be applied unto us
then prayer, since we find and plainly know the same to be a present
medicine to our sick and diseased minds? The example of the Ninevites
First therefore let us consider the Ninevites, whom it is manifest by the
mean of prayer to have obtained remission of their manifold sins, and much
wickedness, wherewith they had provoked against them the wrath of God. For so
sone as they were entered into the love and zeal of praying, the same did sone
draw them unto righteousenesse and virtue: presently amending, and as it were
transfourming that City which before exercised it self in all wantonness and
lewdness, and which (to be short) lead altogether a lawelesse and most
abominable life. For prayer being mightier, and of more force then was their
long and inueterat custom of sin, filled that City of theirs, with heavenly
laws, and drew also with her into the same City, temperance, gentleness,
mildness, and care of the poor. For prayer does not endure without these
virtues to dwell or company amongst us poor mortal men: but in whose
hearts so ever she chooses unto her self a seat, those does she fill
with all righteousness, teaching and excercising them to all virtue, and driving
forth al malice and inclination to evil. If therefore a man, who before had
well known that City of the Ninevites, had then entered thereunto, truly he
would not have known it. So suddeinly was the same turned from most filthy
life to piety and virtue. For even as a man seeing a beggarly woman which was
wont to be clothed in vile, and ragged, and filthy clowtes, suddenly decked
up in garments of gold, could not lightly know that woman: So if a man had
before known that City, being poor and beggarly, that is to say, void of
al treasure of virtue and godly behavior, sure he would not have known what
city that had been, seeing it then so altered and changed by the mighty force
of prayer, from lewd and dissolute, to sober and virtuous. Marie Magdalene.
But now let us further cast our eyes to that woman, who having led her
whole life in wantonness and unchastity, so sone yet as she had thrown her
self down at Christ's feet, obtained health and salvation.

Yet is not this only the virtue of prayer to purge from sin, Prayer
preserves from dangers and troubles.
but she repelleth also and drives away exceeding great dangers and imminent
perilles. For David that King and wonderful Prophet, did by the help and
force of prayer, put to flight many and mighty fierce enemies: not trenching or
fortifiyng his Host with any other weaponnes or municions, then Prayer: and yet
by the mean thereof, delivered unto his soldiers an unbloody victory. And
some other Kings have used to repose the hope of their safety in the skill of
their soldiars, in the art of war, in Archers, in men of arms, and in
light horsemenne, so that great King David, in steed of a wall and rampire,
trenched and backed his Host, with holy and devout prayers: not making account
of the fierceness of his Chiefetaines, Marshalles, Centurions, or other
Capitaines, nor gathering masses of money, nor providing armure or weapons, but
by prayer obteining and bringing down from heaven the armor of God. For a
heavenly armor in deed is Prayer plentiousely powered forth before God. And
that alone is a sure hold and a safe defense, to them which have with assured
confidence committed them selves to God. For as for the strength and skill of
men at arms, experience of Archers, and slight in betraiyng the enemy,
many times those are deluded and prove to nothing even by a countenance only
and show of the contrary battle, stoutnesse of the enemies, or by many other
accidents and occasions that fall out. But Prayer is an invincible armor, and
a most sure defense that never deceives: overthrowing as easily innumerable
thowsands of enemies, as it does one poor soldier. For by prayer, not by
weapons and armor, did that David of whom we spoke before (a man woorthily
to be wondered at) overthrow that huge Goliath, 1. Reg. 7.
when like a terrible devil he furiousely set upon him. Such a strong and
a puissaunte armoure is Prayer, eauen to Kings against their enemies in
battle. Yea and an armor of like strength is it to us against diuelles.

3. Reg. 19.
By this mean also Ezechias the King had the better hand in that battle,
which was made upon him by the Persians, at what time he armed not his Host,
but only fronted the great multitude of his enemies with prayer. He also
escaped death, when with such reverence and religion as became him, 3. Reg. 20
he did prostrate him self before God. Where also only prayer obtained for
the King that he might recover.

But now that Prayer does also readily purify and cleanse the soul being
indaungered to sin, Luc. 18.
that Publican does plainly teach us, who besowght of God remission of his
sins, and presently obtained it. The leper also clearly shows us, Matt. 8.
who so soon as he fell down at the feet of God, was made clean. Now if
God did so lightly heal the body infected and corrupted with sickness, much
more readily and kindly will he heal the soul which is diseased. For look
how much more pretiouse is the soul then the body, so much the more dear
is it likely to be unto God. Innumerable are the examples that might be recited
both old and new, if a man were disposed, to report all them that have been
preserved and saved by the benefitte of prayer.

But some men perhaps, of the number of those who being given over to
slowth and dullness has him self no list earnestly and heartily to pray, will
go about to persuade, that against prayer God spoke these words: Not every
one that says unto me Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of heaven,
Matt 7.
but he who does the will of my Father which is in heaven. In deed if I believed
only Prayer to suffice to our salvation, a man might seem not without
cause, to obiecte that place against me. But now when I profess Prayer to be
the head and chief of all good things, the foundation and root of a
fruitful life, there is no cause why any man should abuse those words to the
excuse of his sluggishnesse. For neither can temperance alone, bring salvation
to a man, if other good things be failing, neither care over the poor,
neither benignity, nor any other of those things which are virtuously done.
But it is necessary they do all concur together in our sowles: Yet Prayer
(I say) as the root and grownde, is the foundation to them all. For as in a
ship or house, that which is first vnderlaied, does make the same strong,
and holds it together, that it fall not a sunder, so does diligence and
continuance in prayer hold together our life, and make it sownde, firm, and
well defended on every side: in so much as without that, there can no good fall
unto us, or owght that may avail us to salvation.

For these causes does S Paul so earnestly and so often exhort us hereunto,
saying: Be ye instant in prayer, watching therein with thanks geauing. Colos.
4.
And in an other place he commands us, that we pray incessantly, without
intermission, 1. These. 4.
geauing thanks in all: for this is (says he) the will of God. And again in
an other place: 1. These. 5.
Pray (says he) at all times, watching thereunto in spirit, with all
instance and diligence. So with many Divine and heavenly words does the
Prince of the Apostles stir and provoke us to continual prayer. It becomes
us therefore being taught by him, to lead the course of our life in prayer,
and therewith diligently to moist and water our minds. For hereof have we
mortal men, no less need, then trees have of the moisture of water. For
neither can they bring forth fruit, except their roots receive some moisture,
nor yet can we be laden with the excellent and preciouse fruits of piety,
except our minds be watered, and refresshed by prayer. the times of Prayer.


Wherefore we must both early forsaking our beds, prevent with our serving of
God the rising of the son: and even so when we come to our food, and when
we betake our selves to the nights rest: nay rather we ought every hour to
offer unto God a prayer: that the course of our prayer might make even with the
course of the day. But in the winter time it becomes us also to bestow the
greatest part of the night in prayer, and on our knees with much trembling,
to continue instantly thereat: thinking our selves therein happy, and blessed,
that we may bestow our time in the Service of God.

Tell me, (I pray thee) with what face can thou behold the son, if thou do
not first adore him, who geeueth unto thine eyes, that most comfortable light?
How can thou feed on that is set before thee, except thou do first
woorship him, who does give and supply so many good things unto thee? With
what hope can thou betake thy self to the night? With what dreams think
thou, thou shall be vexed, if thou do not first defend thy self with prayer,
but geeuest thy self to sleep unguarded and without protection? Verily thou
shall yield thy self as an abiecte, and easy to be taken of wicked sprites,
who continually walk about, laying weight for us, that they may suddenly
catch up, whom so ever they find unarmed of the defense of prayer. But if
they find us fensed with prayer, by and by, they be gone: even as thieves and
lewd persons, when they see the souldiars sword shaken, and threatened over
their heads. And if it happen any man to be naked, void, and destitute of this
munition of prayer, surely he being pulled out, and as it were torn of, is
carried away with devils, and thrown into many calamities and sundry
mischeifes. It behooves us therefore, that fearing al these things, thus
truly laid before us, we do continually rampar, and enuironne our selves about
with Hymns and Prayers: that God having compassion of us may make us worthy of
the kingdom of heaven, through his only begotten son Jesus Christ, to whom
be all glory and rule for ever and ever. AMEN.

Thus ends the Sermon of Prayer, made by S. Chrysostom.
A SERMON OF FASTING MADE BY THAT MOST LEARNED AND HOLY FATHER S. Basil,
surnamed the great: Archebisshop of Cesarea in Cappadocia, in the year of our
Lord, 360. Translated into English, and diligently conferred with the Greek
Original.
BLOW out (says the Prophet) and sound with the trumpet in the new moan in
the notable day of your mirth, and rejoicing. Leuit. 23.
This is a commandment uttered by the Prophet. But to us do the lessons,
Psalm. 80.
and readinges out of holy Scripture show the singular joy and festiual
solemnite of these days more openly and distinctly, then any trumpet, and more
clearly then any musical instrument. For we have learned the grace and benefit
of fasting out of the Prophet Esaias, who rejected the Iewishe manner of fasting,
and gave to us a pattern of the true fast. Esaias. 58.
Fast not (says he) to contention and variance by suit of law, but lose the
bond of iniquity. And our Lord him self says: Math. 6.
Be not of sad and heavy contenance, but wash thy face. Let us therefore be so
affected, as we be taught, not making show of sorrow in our faces in these
fasting days at hand: But let us be cherfully disposed in them, as becomes
the holy. No man is crowned, that is of an abject mind. No man erecteth a
monument of victory with a sad and a heavy cheer. Be not sad when thou art
cured. It is an absurd thing to be sad against the alteration of meats, and
not to rejoice when the soul is healed, and so to seem thereby to be more
addicted to the voluptuousnes of the beally, then to the cure of the soul. For
full feeding pleases the belly, but fasting purchases gain unto the soul.
Rejoice, that there is by the Physician geeuen unto the a medicine that takes
away sin. For even as worms breed in the bowels of children, are killed, A
similitude.
and avoided, with strong and sharp medicines, even so fasting, searching even
to the very soul, does kill sin deeply rooted and dwelling in us, to the
bottom: and therefore is truly most worthy to be termed an healing medicine.
Annoint thy head, and wash thy face. This speech does call thee to high
mysteries. Math. 6.
He that has oynted other, him self is anointed. He that has washed, is
cleansed. Transfer this precepte to thy inner parts. Wasshe thy soul from
sins. Annoint thy head with holy oil, that thou maiste be made a partaker of
Christ, that is, of the anointed, and in that manner come to thy fast.

Do not darken thy face, as hypocrites do. The face is darkened, Joan. 13.
when the inward affection is drawn over with an outward counterfeit show,
The property of an Hypocrite.
and covered with a false veil. He is an Hypocrite, that in a stage, takes on
him an other man's person, as the servant often does his masters, and the
subject his Kings. So in this life as in a stage, or show place, of the
course of our life, many give forth a disguised show, carrying in their heart
one thing, and geeuing forth to men a superficial show of an other. Do not
therefore hide thy face. Appear such as thou art. Transform not thy self
to sadness, thereby to hunt after glory, because thou show thy self
abstinent. Finally neither is there any profit of the alms, made known by
the sound of the trumpet, nor any gain of the fast, which is taken, to the
end it should be published, or openly known. For those things which are
done for ostentation, do not strech their fruit to the world to come, but as
they respect chiefly the praise of men, so do they end therein. Run
therefore freshly and with a ioifull cheer to the gift of fasting.

Fasting is an old and ancient gift, The antiquite of fasting.
yet not wearing, not growing old, but ever wexing young, and ever flourishing
as it were in the best age. Think you I draw the antiquity thereof from the
law? Naie: I say: Fasting, is more ancient, then the law it self. And if
thou will tarry a while, thou shall find my saying true. Think not the day
of propitiation, Leuit. 23.
which was commanded to Israel in the seventh month and the tenth day of
the month, was the beginning of fasting. Go to then: follow the history,
and search forth the antiquity thereof. For it is no new or latter
invention. Antiquity to be had in Reverence.
It is the treasure of the fathers. And what soever excels in antiquity, is
venerable, and to be had in reverence. Honor the ancient and hoar hears of
fasting. For fasting is as old, as mankind it self. In Paradyse was it
instituted. The first commandment that Adam received, was, see that you eat
not of the tree of knowledge of good and bad. This word, Eat not, Genesis 2.
is a commandment of fasting, and abstinence. If Eve had forborne, and fasted
from that tree, we should not now, have needed this fast. For the sick,
not the sound, have need of the Physician. We are sick and diseased through
sin. Let us then be healed thorough penance. Matt. 9. Genesis 3.
But penance without fasting is vain. The cursed earth shall bring thee
forth thorns and brambles. Thou art commanded, to endure pain and sorrow,
not to lead thy life in delicacie. By fasting therefore purge thy self to God.

But even the life it self in Paradyse, is an image of fasting. Not only
because manne being a companion and fellow dweller with Angels, did by
being content with few things, attain to be leeke unto them: but also
because what so ever things the sharpenes and finenes of man's wit, did
afterward find out, were not yet devised of them that lived in Paradyse. For
neither the drinking of wine, nor the kylling of quick and living things, nor
ought else that troubles the mind of man, were there as yet then practiced.
Because we fasted not, therefore we fell out out of Paradyse. Let us
therefore fast, that we may return again thereunto. Do thou not see
Lazarus, Luca. 16.
how by fasting he entered into Paradyse?

Follow not the disobedience of Eve. Take not again the serpent for thy
counselor, appliyng thee with meat to the pamparing and pleasing of the
flesh.

Clooke not the matter by the Infirmity and weakness of thy body. Fasting
not hurteful to the body, but healthful.
For these pretenses and excuses thou do not tell to me, but to him that
knows the truth. Else tell me, I pray thee, can thou not fast, and yet
canste thou glutte thy belly with meat, and wearye thy body with the burden of
those things, thou have eaten? Verily I have known, that Physicians have
commanded even unto sick men, not variety of meats, but hunger and
abstinence. How then may he which can do these things, excuse him self,
that he can not do the other? Is it not much easier for the belly, with
thynnesse of diete to bear quietly the night, then to lie laden, with
superfluitee of meats? Yea and not to lie neither, but rather to be tossed,
and tormoiled all night, panting and groaning for pain? Except perhaps thou will say, A Similitude.
the shippemaister can better rule his vessel being ouerfraihgted, and
ouerladen, then when it has his light and just peyse? For that which is
oppressed with abundance and weight, a little raging of the water drowneth: But
that which is moderately frawghted, does easily get above the waves, while
nothing lets it to rise a lofte. Even so men's bodies being laden with
continual full feeding, are lightly overwhelmed with infirmities. But those,
which use a spare and thin diete, do both escape that evil, which is by
sickness looked for, as it were a tempeste beginning to rise, and also
repulseth that grief which is already come, even as it were the meeting of
some raging wave in the sea.

But it seems by you, that it is more paynfull to rest, then to run: and
to be at good ease, then to wrestle: if you say it be more convenient for
sick persons to fare deliciously: then to feed sparingly. Verily the animal
virtue governing the life, does easily concocte, and disgeste, that which is
but scarce and sufficient, and does well apply, and appropriat it, to that,
which is to be nourisshed. But when she is charged and accumbered, with
diversity of meats curiously dressed, the same not being able to stay it,
till being kindly digested, it may be conveyed orderly to the parts, which
are to be nourished, bredeth sundry kinds of diseases.

But now let us go forward with the history, prosecuting the antiquity
of fasting: and how all holy men have kept the same, as an inheritance
received of their Fathers: the father still delivering it to the Son, as it
were from hand to hand. Whereby this possession has also benne continued, even
to us by succession. There was no wine in Paradyse: there was no killing of
quick things: there was not yet any eating of flesh. After the floodde came
wine, after the flood ye fell to eating all things, as commonly as before
herbs. When perfection was dispeired of, then was fruition of those things
granted. A clear proof that wine before the flood was not known, appeered
in Noe, who was utterly ignorant, of the use of wine. For it was not yet come
to the use of man's life, nor known at all among men. When therefore he
neither had seen any other drink it, nor had tried it him self, Genesis 9.
he was unawares hurt thereof. For Noe planted a vine, and drank of the fruit,
and was made drunk.

Not that he was a great drinker, or given to be drunk, but because he was not
acquainted with the measure, that was to be taken thereof. So we see, that the
drinking of wine, was a latter invention, then Paradyse. And so is the
Authority of fasting of more Antiquity.

But we have also learned, that by fasting Moses came unto the hill: Exodus 19.
For he durst not have adventured (the top of the hill smoking) to have entered
into the dark cloud, if he had not benne first armed with fasting. The
effects and fruits of fasting.
By fasting he received the Commandments written with the finger of God in
plates of metal. So was fasting the cause of the law making above, but
glottony, the cause of falling to mad woorshipping of Idolles beneth. Exodus
32.
For the people sat down to eating and drincking, and rose up to play. One
drunken fit, marred and defeated, the constant Continuance of God his servant,
in fasting and praying, by the space of forty days. For the tables written
with the finger of God, which fasting had received, drunkenness lost: the
Prophet thinking it unseemly, that laws should be delivered from God to a
drunken people. In one moment of time, that people which was taught from God,
and traded by woonderful miracles, was thorough glotony thrown down into the
beastly woorshipping of the Egyptian Idols. Compare now both together: and
see how fasting leads to God, and how deliciousnes, loses salvation. And
being now entered into the way, descend forward to later times. Gene. 25.
What defiled Esau, and made him the servant of his brother? Was it not one
only eating, for which he lost the prerogative, of being the first borne? But
did not prayer with fasting, 1. Sam. 1.
get and gene Samuel to his mother? What made that great Conqueror Samson,
to be invincible? Was it not fasting, wherewith he was conceived in his mothers
womb. Fasting nourished him, in steed of a nurse. Fasting made him a man. For
that was commanded to his mother by the Angel in these words: Iud. 13.
What soever proceeds out of the vine, let him not eat, ne let him not
drink wine, or strong hot drink: that is to say, any drink that may make
droonke. Fasting bredeth Prophets, strenghtheneth the mighty, and teaches
wisdom to lawemakers. It is a good bulwark to the soul, a sure companion of
life to the body, a target to them that do valiantly, an exercise to such as
strive for the game. This remoueth temptations, this annointeth to piety. This
is the companion of sobriety, the woorker of temperance. This teaches to do
manfully in battle, and instructs to deal quietly in peace. This
sanctifies men dedicated unto God, and makes perfect the Priest. For it may
not be, that a man without fasting should presume to celebrate sacrifice, not
only now in the mystical and true service of God, but not so much as in the
figurative sacrifice, brought in by the Law.

Examples of fasting.
This fasting made Elias, with his eyes to behold a great miracle. For when he
had by the space of forty days purged his soul by fasting, 3. Reg. 17.
he was made worthy in the den in Choreb to see our Lord, so far as it
was possible for man to see him. He by fasting restored to the widdowe here
son, showing him self by fasting strong and mighty even against death. The
voice goinge forth from his mouth having benne long fasting, did for three
years, and six moonethes, close the heaven from the people living against the
Law. For, to mollify the untamed hearts of that stiff necked people, he was
content to condemn him self also to affliction and penury. 3. Reg. 17.
So sure (says he) as our Lord lives, there shall be no water in the earth,
but by my mouth.

And thus he forced upon all the people, a fast thorough famine, to the end he
might thereby correct their iniquities grown of their delicate, and dissolute
life. But what manner of life did Eliseus lead? How did he use him self when
he hosted at the Sunamites house? 4. Reg. 4.
Or how did he receive and welcome the Prophets? Did not wild herbs of the
wood, and a littell meal furnishe his table? At the which time also such as
had eaten of the Coloquint, is an herb, which after some men's opinion, may
be called, a vvilde goorde.
Coloquintes, were in danger to have died thereof, if by the prayers of him
being purged, and made acceptable thorough fasting, the poysone had not
benne dissolved. In few, it is easy to find that fasting had leadde, as it
were by the hand, all the holy Fathers to a divine wisdom, and to a heavenly
kind of life.

There is a certain stone, or substance, which we Grecians Vide de hoc lapide
Dioscoride^ lib. 5. cap. 147.
call Amianthon, of that nature, that it is not with fire to be consumed. For
being put in the flame, it seems to be burnt unto coals, but being taken out
of the fire, it appears more pure, as does water being clarified. Such were
the bodies of those three children in Babylon, having thorough fasting, the
vnconsumptible nature of the Amianthon. For in the great flame of the fornaice,
they, being as of the nature of gold, did overcome all the force of the fire.
Yea they appeared to be of much more excellency, then gold. For the fire did
not mealt them, but preserved them whole. Yea and that, Naphtha apud Dioscor.
lib. 1. cap. 99.
when nothing in the world did stay or keep back the flame. But contrary,
Naphtha, a kind of natural, and unquenchable lime, pitche, and small
twigs, did so nourrishe it, that it was spread the length of xlix. cubits,
and so feeding round about, consumed many of the Chaldeans. The children then
being entered, with bodies purified by fasting, did tread under their feet,
and ouercomme that deadly fire, breathing a moiste air, as it were a sweet
dew, upon that vehement fire: which yet durst not touch so much as their
hear, because the same had been bred and nourished by fasting.

Dani. 9.
Daniell also the man of God specially beloved, whoo in three weeks neither
eat bread, nor drancke water, being put down into the den, taught also even
the lions to fast. Dani. 6.
For as though he had been made even of stone, or brass, or some other harder
substance, the lions could not once enter their teeth into him. So had fasting
hardened the body of the man, as steeled iron, and made it invincible to the
lions. Nay they could not so much as once open their mouth against that
holy man.

Fasting quenched the force of the fire. Fasting stopped the mouths of the
lions. Fasting sends prayer up to heaven: being as it were a winge thereunto,
to carry it upward. Fasting is the wealth of the house: the mother of health:
and the schoolmaster of youth. Fasting is an ornamente to old men: a good
companion to wayfaring persons: a safe, and trusty conuictour to such as dwell
together. The husband suspecteth not to be deceived by his wife, when he sees
her delight in fasting. The wife fretteth not with jealousy, when she sees her
husband geeuen to fasting. Who ever saw a house decaie by fasting? Vewe what
things are at this day within thy house, and surueie them again hereafter,
and thou shall find nothing thereof wanting, through fasting. No beast or other
live thing lamenteth his death. No blood is seen in thy house. No heavy
sentence of death, geeuen by the insatiable belly against the poor beasts.
The cooks knife is at rest. The table of the faster is content with such
things, as voluntarily do rise and grow of the earth. The Sabbath was geeuen
to the Jews: Exo. 20.
That thy beast (says God) and thy servant may be at rest. Let thy fasting be
a rest of continual labors, unto thy servants, that serve thee all the
year. Suffer thy cook to be quiet. Give rest unto thy Sewer. Forbear the
hand of thy cupbearer, and butler. Let him have some repose, who prepares thy
manyfold Iouncats and bancketting disshes. Let thy house sometime be quiet
from those innumerable tumultes, from smoke, fulsom savor of roast, and from
the running up and down of them that do naught but minister unto the belly,
as to a dame, that can never be pleased. Even exacters of tributes do sometime
afford some liberty to the subjects. Let the belly likewise give some truce
to the mouth. Let that which is ever craving, and never ceasseth: which
receives to day, and forgets to morrow, give us truce for five days. When
it is full, then it disputes of abstinence. When the meat is a little passed,
then it forgets quite all such doctrine. Fasting knows not the nature of
death. The table of the faster does not sauer of usury. The fathers vseries
do not strangle the little child of the faster, in his nonage, winding about
him like serpents. And truly besides all this, sometime to fast, is a mean
to the increase of pleasure and delight. For as thirst makes drink to seem
pleasant, and as hunger gone before, does make the furnished table the more
delight some, right so does fasting increase the gladsome lyking of meats.
For that putting it self between, and thereby interrupting in part the
continual glut of delicacies, shall make the receiving thereof again, the more
pleasant, even as of a friend returned from far countries. Wherefore if thou will make unto thy self thy table pleasant, take unto thee sometime a change
by fasting. But thou that art excessiuely possessed with the love of
deliciousnes, do not perceive that thou diminishest much of thy delight, by
continual usage thereof: and for love of pleasure lesest in deed the chiefest
pleasure. For nothing is so pleasant, but that by continual fruition it
waxes fulsome. But of those things which are rarely had, the fruition is
delightsome.

A Similitude.
Even in this sort, he which has made us, has devised: that by change and
orderly return of things in this life, the pleasure of those things which
he has granted us, might still remain with delight unto us. Do thou not
see how after night, the son is more bewtiful? And waking more pleasant
after sleep? And health the more desired, and esteemed, after feeling of
sickness and adversity? Even so after fasting, is the table also the better
welcome both unto rich men, and such as have it well furnished, and also to
poor folk, which have but from hand to mouth, that which the earth yeldeth.

Luc. 16.
Fear the example of the rich man. Deliciousnes of life brought him to the
fire. For he was not broiled in the flame of the furnaice, because he was
accused of any injustice, but for his soft and delicate life. We have therefore
need of water to quench that fire. And fasting is not only profitable for the
time to coome, but also presently very healthsome unto the body. For the best
health, and state of man's body, being grown up to the highest, falls
back, and decaieth of it self, very nature failing, and not being hable to
bear the burden of so great strength. Beware least thou which now spittest
water, do not hereafter with the rich man, desire and long after a drop of
water. No man ever surfeted of water. No man's head did ever ache, and was heavy
with water. No man passing his life with drincking of water, had ever any need
of an other man's feet. No man's legs have been bound, no man's hands made
unprofitable by drinking of water. For the default about disgestion (which
necessarily happens to such as live delicately) does bring unto their bodies
vehement diseases. The color of the man that fasteth, is reverent: not
flowring up to an unshamefast readnes, but adorned with a temperate palenes.
His eye is gentle: his gate humble: his face modest: not disgraced by fond
lawghter: his speech moderate: his heart sincere and pure.

Call to thy remembrance the Saints and holy men that have been from the
beginning: of whom the world was not worthy: Hebr. 11.
They walked in sheep skins and goats skins, they were forsaken, pressed
with many vexations, and hardly afflicted. Follow their life, if thou seek
after their portion. What brought Lazarus to rest in Abraham his bosom? Was it
not fasting? Mat. 3.
The life of John Baptist what was it, but as it were one continual fast? He
had no bed, no table, no land to plowe, no drawing ox, no corn, no baker
of his bread, nor any other of these temporal things. And therefore rose
there never among the children of weemen a greater Matt. ^1.
then John Baptiste. Fasting also did carry up to heaven S. Paul with
others, 2. Cor. 6. and 11.
which he does him self recite among the glories that he had over his trobles
and persecutions. But our Lord, the head of all those before remembered, Matt. 4.
when by fasting he had prepared and fortified the flesh, which for our sakes
he took upon him, did then sustain therein the assaults of the Devil: to
the end he might thereby both teach us by fasting to arm and exercise our
selves to the conflictes of temptations, and also by his famine and poverty,
encourage and geeue occasion to the adversary to come unto him. For he was not
to have been approached of him by reason of the height of his Godhed, if he had
not first by hunger brought him self down to the weakness of man's estate.
But ascending into heaven, he took meat, to show and persuade thereby the
true nature of his body which was risen.

But thou wretched manne ceasest not to pamper and to fat up thy body,
staruing in the mean time thy mind with hunger and famine, not having any
care of healthsome instructions, which geeue life thereto.

Know thou not, A very apt Similitude.
that as in a battle to be fought, succor coming to the one side, weakeneth
the other, and makes it the more easy to be ouercomme: so he which helps
and increases the flesh, weakeneth the spirit? And on the other side he that
increases the strenghth of the spirit, brings the flesh into subjection.
For these two are opposite, and contrary the one to the other. Wherefore if
thou will make thy mind strong, tame thy flesh by fasting.

For this is it, whereof the Apostle speaks, saying: By how much the
outward man is decayed, 2. Cor 4. 2. Cor. 12.
by so much the inward is renewed. And again: When I am weak, then am I
mighty. Will thou not then despise these corruptible meats? Will thou not
hunger after that heavenly table, which fasting in this life does procure and
prepare unto thee? Do thou not know, that by immoderate full feeding, thou
do breed unto thy self a fat worm to gnawe thee? For who in abundaunce of
meat, and continual delicacie, has been partakener of the graces and gifts
of the Spirit? Exodus 34.
Moses receiving the second time the tables of the law was of necessity
driven to a second fast. John. 3.
If the brute beasts had not also fasted with the Ninevites, they had not
escaped their threatened destruction. Whose limbs and carcases were those that
fell in the desert? Were they not theirs, that sought after the eating of
flesh? They, so long as they were content with Manna, and water out of the
rock, overcame the Egyptians, made way thorough the sea, and there was not
one sick of all the Tribes. Mum. 11.
But after they had ones made mention of their fleshpottes of Egypt, and
lusted to return thither again, they never came to see the land of promise.
Do thou not fear this their example? Do thou not abhor now insaciable
feeding, lest it exclude thee also from the good things, that thou hopest for?
But neither had Daniell seen the visions, if by fasting he had not illuminated,
and made more clear and bright his soul. For of gross nurriture, smoky
vapors mount up: which like a thick cloud do intercepte and stop the
bright beams of grace, that are sent and derived from the holy Ghost, into
our hearts. And surely if there be any meat proper unto Angels, it is bread,
Psalm. 77.
as says the Prophet. Man has eaten the bread of Angels: not flesh, not
wine, not those things, which are exquisitly sought out by them that serve
their belly. Fasting is a Target for the war against devils. For some kind
of devils does not go forth, Matt. 17.
but by prayer and fasting.

Lo what a number of commodities grow by fasting. But sacietie, and fulness in
feeding, is the grownd and beginning of all misdemeanour. For with delicates,
dronkennes, and many kind of sauces provoking glottony, presently enters al
kind of brutish and insolent behavior. Hereof men are made, as it were,
mad and furious horses toward weemen, by the beastly outrage engendered in
their minds thorough such deliciousnes. Yea, drunkardes change nature, and
go against kind. But fasting does make known even the honest measure of
wedlock work, chastising the immodest usage even of those things which are
permitted by law: That, grawnteth leisure by mutual agreement to either
party, to attend unto prayer.

Yet may thou not limite the goodness of fasting, to consiste only within
the compass of abstinence from meats. For the true fast The true fast.
is the forsaking of evils and vicious doings. Lose all bond of injustice,
remitte to thy neighbor all trouble, forgive him his det: fast from suits and
contentions. Thou forbearest eating of flesh, but yet eatest thy broother. Thou
abstainest from wine, and yet do not temper thy self from doing of wrongs.
Thou tarriest till night before thou will take thy food, and yet spendest thy
day in the law courts, in sewtes, and contentions. Esaie. 29.
Woe be to you (says the Prophet) that be drunk, yet not with wine. For
wrath is also a drunckennes of the soul, bringing the same out of the way
even as wine does. Heaviness likewise is a dronckennesse, which drowneth the
mind. So is fear also an other dronckennes, when it is, where it ought not to
be. Psalm. 16.
From the fear of mine enemy (says the Prophet) deliver my soul, O Lord. In
few, every passion, disordering the mind, is rightly termed by the name of
dronckennes. Anger, a kind of dronkenesse.
Consider the angry man, how he is dronken in that passion, and is not him
self master of him self. He knows not himself. He knows not them that be
present. He stryketh all, as one that fights in the night. He offends all.
He triumphs over all. He speaks unadvised things. Hardely can he be
tempered. He reuileth, he beats, he threateneth, he swears, he cries out,
and tormenteth him self. Flee from this drunckennes. But beware also of that
which comes of wine.

Do not by much drincking of wine, Against those, that glut in one day, to
fast an other.
make thy way to drincking of water. Let not dronckennes lead thee to the
holiness of fasting. There is no entry into fasting by dronckennes, nor to
justice by avarice, nor to temperaunce by riot, nor (to conclude in few) is
there any entry by vice, unto virtue. There is an other gate into fasting.
Dronkennes makes way to insolent behavior, but convenient sufficiency unto
fasting. He which is to try for the best game, does exercise him self
before hand: He which fasteth, must first exercise and prepare him self by
abstinence: lay down glottony five days before, not as one that would thwart
the ordinary days, or deceive the law maker. For fondly do thou labor, to
weary thy body, and yet not to mitigat nor to release thy crime and evil
appetite. A false storehowse is that body. Thou drawest into a bottomless
barrel. For the wine passes, and runs his natural way. But thy sin and
insatiable lust remains within thee. The servant runs away from his
master that beats him: yet thou remainest still with wine, which daily
beats thy head. The best measure of the use of wine, is the necessity, and
the lack that the body may have thereof. But if thou exceed those bounds,
to morrow thou will come complaining of the heaviness of thy head, yaning, gyddy,
and smelling yet of the undigested wine. Al thing will seem to move, al thing
to go rownde with thee. For drunkenness as it makes men sleep, as if they were
dead, so it makes men to wake, as if they were in a dream.

Do thou not consider whom thou come to receive by this fasting? Even him
which promised to come unto us, saying: I and my Father will come, and make our
dwelling with him. Why therefore dooste thou by drunkenness prevent his coming,
and close the entry against our Lord? Why do thou allure and take in thine
Enemy, to take possession first of thy munitions? Drunkenness does not receive
our Lord. Drunkenness drives away the holy Ghost. A Similitude.
For as smoke drives away bees, so does surfeting and belly cheer put to
flight and drive away al spiritual graces. Fasting is the ornament of the
City. The strengthening of the place of Justice. The peace of our howses: and
the saving and preservation of our gooddes and possessions. Wilt thou see the
beauty of fasting? Then compare me the evening of this festing day, with the
evening of to morrow being fasting day. Thou shall see the City changed from
tormoyle and tempesteous waves of great stir, to a sure calm and quiet
tranquillity.

But I wish that both this day may be like unto to morrow in holiness and
modest comeliness: and that to morrow may want nothing of the mirth, and joy
that is this day. And further I beseech our Lord, who has by the course and
revolution of the year, brought us about to this time, that it may please him
to grant unto us being as it were tryers for the mastery, that by these
excercises, we may show forth the firmness and strength of our constancy:
and that we may come to the day appointed for the receiving of our crowns: Now
by daily recording of that healthful Passion suffered for us, but then in the
world to come by receiving retribution and reward, according to our life lead
here, and that in the just judgment of Christ him self, to whom be all
glory for ever. AMEN.

Thus ends the Sermon of S. Basil, made of fasting.
THE THIRD SERMON, MADE BY S. LEO, SVRNAMED THE GREAT, AND POPE OF Rome in the
year of our Lord. 450. Upon the Fast of the tenth Month, and of the alms to
be done in the same. How Gods field is with faith to be fenced, and enclosed,
with Fasting to be tilled and tempered, with alms to be sown, and with
prayers to be donged, and made fruitful.
The fast of the tenth month, is the imber fast which is kept in the month
of December.
IN our Lords field, whose laborers and workmen we be (most deerly beloved) we
must prouidently, and diligently exercise the spiritual tillage: to the end
that we with continual industry, foreseing and doing that, which is at every
season, duly and orderly to be done, may joy in the plentiful increase of our
good and virtuous works. Which if thorough sluggish idleness, or dull lasynes,
they be neglected, our ground can bring forth no worthy spring, no good
grain, nor holesom fruit, but being ouergrowne with thorns and brambles,
shall bring forth nothing worthy to be laid up, and kept in storehowses, but
such things only as are meet to be burned and consumed with fire. This
field (deerly belooued) by the sweet dew of the grace of God falling
therein, is first enclosed and fenced by faith: tilled, tempered, and seasoned,
by fasting: sowed with alms deeds: donged and made fruteful by prayers, to
the end that in our ground thus husbanded, no bitter or unwholesome rote spring
therein, nor sap of any noisome stock rise up: but that (al seed of vice being
killed, and distroyed in us) the worthy corn of virtue, may joyfully and
plentifully grow up together.

To which diligence, the master and teacher of piety, does in all times
exhort us, but in these days, which are more specially appointed to this
work, we must stir up in our selves a more cowrage and fervent care
hereof, least it be found a wickedness in us, to neglect that, being taught
and instructed, which virtue and piety would us to do, though we were not
commanded. We do therefore exhort and admonish you, that this Fast of the
tenth month, (whereunto we know your charity with a religious intent and
disposition is prepared) we celebrating with one mind by the help of Christ,
may every of us shine in good works, according to the measure and proportion of
the ability, which he has received of God. And that the more fervently,
because our enemies, The devil is most busye when men are best disposed.
which are grieved and vexed at our sanctification, do in these days, wherein
they know us disposed to a better attendance of our dewty, are most fearce upon
us, and with more craft and subtelty, lie in weight for us: To the end that, by
fearing some, with doubt of poverty which may grow by their liberal giving of
alms, and putting into others a heaviness, and repining at the pain of
fasting, they may draw many from the virtuous fellowship of this devotion.
Against which temptation (most deerly beloved) let there be kept waking in us
the zealous intent of a charitable heart. And let these thoughts of mistrust,
be far repelled from Christian minds. For it is a small thing, which to a poor
man is enough. Neither is his diet, or apparel chargeable. Poor food is it,
that he hungreth after: Math. 20.
poor drink it is, that his thirst will be quenched with: His nakedness needs
to be covered, and asks not to be decked. And yet our Lord is so kind a
Judge of our works, so loving an esteemer thereof, that even for a cup of
cold water, he will not fail to geeue reward. And in that he is a Just
beholder of our minds, he will not only recompense the charge of our work,
but also reward the workers affection, thorough Christ our Lord.

THE FOVRTH SERMON MADE BY THE SAME S. LEO UPON THE SAID FAST OF THE tenth
Month, and of the Alms to be done in the same. Of what value against sin
fasting is, which in both Testamentes is observed.
WE do with good cowrage and confidence (most dearly beloved) exhort you to
the works of piety, because by experience we perceive how gladly and
willingly you receive our exhortations. For you know, and by the teaching of
God him self be assured, that the observing of the Commandments of God,
does avail you to eternal joy. In the executing and keeping whereof,
because man's frailty does often wexe weary, and by her brittle infirmity,
offend in many things: our good and merciful Lord has geauen unto us
remedies and helps, by the which we may obtain pardon. For who could
possibly escape so many flattering allurementes of the world, so many crafty
deceites of the Devil, and finally so many perilles growing of his own
mutabilitie and frailty, unless the wonderful clemency of the eternal
King, had a will rather to repair us, then to lose us? For though we be
already redeemed, The war of Christians is continual 1. Joan. 5.
already regenerated and made the children of light, yet so long as we are
detained in this world (which is all set in wickedness) so long as
corruptible and temporal things do flatter the infirmity of the flessh, no
man can pass this life without tentation. Neither does there lightly happen to
any man so vnblouddy a victory, that among many enemies, and daily conflictes,
though his fortune be so good to escape death, he be altogether free from
wounds. To cure therefore the harms which they often fall into, that war
with the invisible enemy, these three remedies are for medicine chiefly to be
applied: Instance in prayer, chastising of our selves by fasting, and the
bountiful geauing of alms. Which three things, when they are together
put in ure and exercised, God is made merciful unto us, the fault is
blotted out, and the Tempter is repulsed. Of these helps truly owght a
faithful soul always to be provided and furnished: but chiefly and with
greatest care are they now to be exercised in these days which are most
properly and peculiarly appointed to those works of piety. Of which kind
and degree is also the solemn fast of this tenth Month. Which is not
therefore to be neglected, because it has benne taken unto us out of the
obseruaunce of the old Law: as though this were one of those things which
with the discerning of pure meats, from vnpure, the differences of wasshinges,
and the Sacrifices of birds and beasts did in the new Law end and cease.
For those things in deed which bare the figures of things to come, were
ended, when those things were accomplisshed, which they signified.

But the profitte of fasting, Fasting though it were observed in the old
testament is also to be kept in the new. Mat. 4. Matt. 22.
the grace of the new Testamente has not removed nor put away. But with
good and virtuous observation has still admitted continence and abstinence:
as things always profitable both to the body and the soul. For even as
there remain received and retained in the hearts of Christians these
Commandments: Thou shall woorshippe thy Lord God, and serve him alone: And,
Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self, and such other like Precepts:
even so that which in those books is commanded of the sanctification and
healing by fasting, is not made void, or frustrate by any interpretation. For
in all times, and in all ages of this world, fasting makes us the stronger
against sin. Fasting conquereth concupiscence, repelleth tentations, abaseth
pride, allayeth wrath, and all the affections of a good mind and disposition
it nurrisheth up to ripeness and perfection of all virtue. Especially, if it
be also joined with the benevolence and piety of charity, and do prouidently
exercise it self in works of mercy. For fasting without alms, is not so
much a purging of the soul, as it is an affliction of the flesh. And it is
rather to be reputed to be done for couetousenesse, then for continency, when
a man does so abstain from meat, that he also absteineth from piety and
good works. Let therefore our fast (dearly beloved) abownde with fruits of
liberality, and let them be plentiful to the poor of Christ, with
charitable gifts, and loving rewards.

And let not the mean and inferioure sort be stayed from this work,
because it is little that they can take out of their small substance and
ability. Our Lord knows every man his ability, and being a just looker on,
sees well out of what measure and portion each man geaueth. For substances that
be in equality unlike, can not give like alms. But many times is it made
equal in merit, which is unequal in charge. For the mind may be like,
where the rent and store is unlike. To the end therefore, that these things
may by the help of God be regarded with piety and devotion, let us fast the
fourth and the sixth day of this week. Wednesdaie, Fridaie, and Satterday the
ymber days, above a xj. hundred years ago
But on the Satterdaie let us celebrate Vigil and watching at S. Peter the
Apostles Church by whose prayers we being helped, may in all things merit and
deserve the grace of God.

THE FIRST SERMON MADE BY THE SAME S. LEO UPON THE FAST OF THE seventh
Month. Of the praise of Abstinence, and alms deeds.
The fast of the vij. month is the ymber fast kept in September.
WE know your carfulness (most dearly beloved) to be of such devotion, that
you do not only till and temper the sowles with the ordinary fastinges
appointed by the law, but also with voluntary abstinence. Yet have we thought
good to add to this your good disposition, our exhortation and warning. To the
end, that if there be any of you slack in this virtuous exercise, they do
obediently join them selves with the rest in this public, and general fast
appointed in these days. Wherein we must more attentively celebrate this most
holy custom, and virtuous usage, that by humility of fasting, we may merit
the help of God against all our enemies. For it is a principal work which
both by authority we charge you, and of charity we advise you, that the
liberty of eating being for a time restrained; we give our selves to the
chastising of our own bodies, and to the feeding of the poor, whom who so
ever refreshes, he feeds his own soul, and tourneth his temporal meats
into eternal delicates. In place therefore of evil and voluptuouse delights,
let there succeed in us the plentiful increase of holy desires. Let iniquity
cease: but let not righteousenesse be idle. Let some man feel him helping,
whom no man feels oppressing. For it is little, not to take away those
things which are an other man's, except thou do also give of thine own. We be
under the eyes of the just Judge, who knows what ability to well working he
has given to each man. He will not have his gifts idle or vnbestowed: Who so
distributed unto his servants the proportions of the mystical Talentes, Mat.
25. Luc. 19.
that to him that had liberally employed that, which was committed unto him,
he increased: And took away from him that had barrenly kept, and unfruitfully
hidden his Talent.

Sins therefore (dearly beloved) we are now to celebrate this fast of the
seventh Month, we earnestly advise and admonish your devotion, to fast with us
on the fourth and sixth day of this week. But the Satterdaie, let us watch
together at the Church of the blessed Apostle S. Peter, by the assistaunce of
whose merits, we may deserve to be absolved and losed of all our troubles,
through Christ our Lord. Amen.

THE THIRD SERMON MADE BY THE SAME S. LEO OF THE FAST OF THE Seventh Month.
How necessary fasting is, and of the public and private law of fasting,
prayer, and alms deeds.
HOW much religiouse fasting does avail (most dearly beloved) to the
entreating and obteining of Gods mercy and to the repairing of man's frailty,
it is made known unto us by the report and teachinge of the holy Prophets,
who do protest and geaue witness, that the indignation of Gods justice,
whereinto the people of Israel did often fall by just deserte of their
iniquity, could never be appeased but by fasting. Whereof the Prophet Joel
also geaueth warning, saying: Joel. 2.
Thus says the Lord your God: Turn you unto me with all your heart, in
fasting, weeping, and mourning: and cut your hearts, not your garments, and
be ye turned unto the Lord your God, for he is merciful, paciente, long
suffering, and of much mercy. And again: Keep holy your fasting, Ibidem.
This translation is according to the lxx. Interpreters.
proclaim the cure and healing, assemble the people, sanctify the Church,
etc. Which exhortation (dearly beloved) is also to be embraced in these our
days, for that the remedies and means of this curing, are now necessarily by
us also to be taught and openly preached: To the end that in the observation
of the old sanctification, that may be gotten by Christian devotion, which
was lost by the Iewissh transgression. The profit of public fasting.
For the reverence of the Divine Decrees has always this privilege and
pre-eminence above all private and voluntary obseruaunces: that it is of more
holiness, which by a public law is celebrated, then which by private
obseruaunce is performed. For the exercise of continence, which every manne
does of his own will and good disposition prescribe unto him self, is
profitable to one part and portion. But the fast which the universal Church
does with one consent celebrate, seuereth no man from the general
purification and cleansing wroughte thereby. And then is the people of God most
mighty, when the hearts of the faithful join together in the unity of holy
obedience: and that in the camp of the Christian warfare, there is on every
side alike preparation, on every side alike defense. Let the watchefull fury
of the blouddy enemy rore and rage, and let him on every side lay his secret
trains: yet no man can he take, no man can he wound, if he find no man
unarmed, no man slumbring, no man severed from this general work of piety.

To this might and puissaunce therefore of invincible piety (most dearly
beloved) does this solemn fast of the seventh Month inuit us: to the end we
may lift up unto our Lord, our minds free from worldly cares, and earthly
affairs. And because we can not always have this fixed intention of mind,
which were always necessary, and in so much as we do oftentimes through
human frailty, Why prescripte fast is used at certain times.
fall from heavenly to earthly things, let us at the least in these days
which are appointed unto us for most helthfull and medicinable remedies,
withdraw our selves from worldely occupations, and steal some time to the
increase of our heavenly riches, which shall never decaie. Jacob. 3.
For as it is written: We do all offend in many things. And al be it we be
by the daily grace of God cleansed from diverse blottes, yet do there stick
many times within our vnprouidente and vnwarefull minds, thicker spots and
of a grosser substance, which must be washed away with more diligente care,
and rooted out with greater charge. But a most full and perfect remission of
sins is obtained, when of the whole Church together there is in unity, one
Prayer, and one confession. For if our Lord have promised, Unity of prayer.
that unto two or three holy persons asking with virtuous consent, he
will grawnte what so ever they require, what shall be denied to many thowsandes
of people perfourming together one general obseruaunce, and humbly suing in
concord with one agreeing spirit? For it is (derely beloved) a great thing,
and very precious in the sight of our Lord, when the whole people of Christ
do together by uniform doing of their duties, instantly press unto him: and
when al degrees and al sorts of persons of both kinds and sexes, work
together with one affection, as well in declinyng from evil, as in doing good.
When in them all, there is one consenting mind, when God is glorified in the
works of his servants, and praise is geeuen by the humble yelding of many
thanks to him, being the author of all goodness.

The hungry are fed, the naked are clothed, the sick are visited, and no man
seeks his own, but the benefit of an other: while to the releeuing of an
other man's misery, each man is content with the portion that is competent for
him self. And easily it is to find a glad and willing geeuer, where
reasonable consideration of the ability, does temper and moderate the measure
of the work. 1. Cor. 12.
And by this grace of God which works all in all, the fruit of all the
faithful is made common, and common is the merit to all. For the mind of them
may be like, whose store and revenue is not like. And while each man reioyseth
at the liberality of an other, he is made equal in good mind and affection,
who could not be equal, in charge and distribution. There is nothing
inordinate among that people, nothing diverse or varying, where all the members
of the whole body agree with themselves by mutual consent, to one courageous
practice of virtue and piety. Neither is he confounded in his own meanness,
who glories in the abundance of others. For the beauty of the universal is the
excellency of each particular. And when we be al stirred forward by the
spirit of God, Romans 8. This is wrought through the communion of saints.
not only are those things ours which our selves do, but even those things
also whereof we rejoice in other men's doings. Let us therefore (most deerly
belooued) embrace the blessed soundnes of most sacred unity, and let us enter
this solemn fast, with an agreyng purpose and consent of well disposed minds.
Nothing is sowght of any man, which is hard or sharp: neither is ought
commanded unto us, which excedeth our forces, either in chastesing our selves
by abstinence, or in large bestowing of alms. Every man knows what he is
able, and what he is not able to do. Let them selves way their own ability:
let them selves tax themselves, as they think reasonable: to the end that
the Sacrifice of mercy be not offered with heaviness, or accounted among our
losses or hinderaunce. Let that be employed in this charitable work, which
may justify the heart, cleanse the conscience, and which finally may both
profit the taker, and geeuer. Happy truly is that mind, and with admiration to
be reverenced, which for the love of well doing does not fear the decay of
his gooddes, and mistrusteth not for his sake to give, of whom he received
that which he gives. But for so much as this magnanimity is proper to few,
and it is also godly, and full of piety, that no man forsake the care of such
as he is charged with, we, (not preiudicating, or meaning to hinder the more
perfect) do by this rule exhort you in general, that you accomplish the
commandment of God, every man according to his portion and ability. For it
becomes benevolence to be chereful, and so to temper it self in largess,
that both the refection of the poor may rejoice therein, and the household not
be grieved for want of sufficiency. But he that gives seed to the sower, 1.
Cor. 9.
will also give bread to eat, and will multiply and increase the grain of
your righteousness. Let us fast therefore the fourth and sixth day of this
week. But on the Satterdaye let us celebrate the Vigill together at the
Monument of the most blessed Apostle S. Peter, by whose merits and prayers we
confidently trust the mercy of our God shall be bestowed upon us, through
Jesus Christ our Lord, who lives and reigns world without end. Amen.

Thus end the Sermons of S. Leo, Pope of Rome.
A SERMON OF ALMS DEEDS MADE BY THAT BLESSED MARTYR S. CYPRIAN Bishop of
Carthage, in Afrike, in the year of our Lord. 230.
GREAT and manifold (most deerly belooued brethren) are the divine benefits,
whereby the large and abundant clemency of God the father, and Christ his
Son, has wrought, and yet daily does work for our salvation. As that the
Father for the saving and quickening of us, sent his son to restore us, and
that the son would be sent, and vouchesafe to become the son of man, to
make us thereby the sons of God. He humbled him self, to reise up the
people, The benefits which Christ has bestovved upon us.
that before lay overthrown. He was wounded to heal our wounds. He became
bond, to draw forth into liberty us that were bond. He endured to dye, that
dyeng, he might geeue to mortal men, immortality. Great and manifold are
these gifts of Gods divine mercy.

But yet what a providence is that, how great a clemency of Christ, that by
healthful mean, it is foreseen to our hand and provided, how man once
redeemed may the more fully be preserved? For when our Lord coming, Christ a
redemer and a law maker.
had healed the wounds which Adam had borne, and cured the old poisons of the
serpent, he gave a law to man being healed, and charged him to sin no more,
lest by sinning of new, worse might fall to him thereof. Then were we narrowly
beset, and brought into a great straight, by having Innocence prescribed unto
us. Then knew not the infirmity, and weakness of humane frailty what to do,
except the goodness of God, yet once again helping, had by teaching us the
works of righteousness and mercy, opened a certain way to keep and preserve
our health, and salvation (now gotten) by wasshing away with almose deeds,
all such what so ever filthe, we happen afterward to gather, or to bread.

The holly Ghost speaks in the Scriptures, and says: By almose deeds and
faith, sins are purged. Tobie. 4.
Not those sins which were before committed and grown upon us. For those are
purged with the blood of Christ and he means Baptism. Eccles. 3.
sanctification. Again he says: As water quenches fire, so does almose
quench sin. Here is it also showed and proved, that as by the washing in
the healthful water, the fire of hell is quenched, so by alms and just
works, the flame of our offenses, is alayde and suppressed. And for that
remission of sins is once geeuen in Baptism, diligent and daily well working
following, after the manner of Baptism, does again enlarge unto us Gods
pardon.

This also does our Lord teach in the Gospel: for when his disciples were
noted, that they eat, and did not first wash their hands, he answered and
said: Lucae. 11.
He which made that is within, made also that is without, but give you almose,
and behold all things are clean unto you. Teaching and showing thereby, not
so much the hands to be washed, as the heart: and the inward filth, rather then
the outward to be cleansed. For as much as he which has cleansed that is within,
has also made clean that is without: and the mind being purged, begins
also to be clean both in skin and body. But teaching and instructing
farther by what mean we may be made pure and clean, he added, that almose
must be don. Him self being merciful teaches and admonishes that mercy be
done. How wounds after Baptism may be cured.
And because he seeks to keep whom he has dearly bought, he teaches how
such as are defiled after the grace of Baptism, may again be purged. Let us
therefore (derely belooued brethren) acknowledge the healthful gift of Gods
savor, and to the clensing and purging of our sins, let us (who cannot be
without some wound of conscience) cure our wounds with spiritual medicines.
Neither let any man so flatter him self of his pure and unspotted heart, that
presuming on his innocence, he think him self not to need the applying of
any medicine to his wounds, considering that it is written: Who shall glory
that he has a chaste heart, or who shall glory him self to be clean from
sins? 1. John. 1.
And again when S. John in his Epistle allegeth and says: 1. Ihon. 1.
If we say we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and there is no truth
in us. But if we confess our sins, our Lord is faithful and just, who will
forgive us our sins. Now if no man can be without sin, and who so ever will
say him self to be blameles, is either proud, or foolish: how necessary, how
gentle and bountiful is the mercy of God, which knowing that even the healed
should not yet afterward want their wounds, gave helthful remedies to the new
curing and healing again of those wounds?

Finally (dearly belooued brethern) the word of God has never ceased, has
never been silent, but in the holy Scriptures, both old and new, always,
and in all places has stirred Gods people to works of mercy: the holy Ghost
still crying out and exhorting us, that who so ever is instructed to the hope
of the Kingdom of heaven, should do almose deeds. God wills and commanded
Esaie, saying: Cry out strongly, and spare not. Esaie. 58.
Lift up thy voice as a trumpet, and show forth unto my people their
sins, and to the house of Jacob their iniquitees. And when he had commanded
their sins to be vpbrayded unto them, and when he had uttered their wickedness
with full force of indignation, and had said that they could not with prayers
or fastinges satisfy for their sins, no nor appease the wrath of God, though
they should be wrapped in ashes, and shertes of hear, yet in the last part
showing that God might be appeased only by almose deeds, he added this, saying:
Ibidem.
Break thy bread unto the hungry, and the nedy wanting harborough, lead into
they house. I thou see one naked, cloth him, and the household of thy kin do
not despise. Then shall thy light break forth in timely season, thy health
shall soon appear, and justice shall go before thee, and the brightness of
God, shall compass the round about. Then shall thou cry out, and God shall hear
thee, and while thou art yet speaking, shall say unto the: Behold, I am at
hand. Thus we see, that remedies to win Gods favor were geeuen by Gods own
words. And what sinners ought to do, Gods instructions have showed and
taught.

Again, that by just works satisfaction is made to God, that sins are
purged by merits of mercy, we read in Solomon also: Eccles. 29.
Close up thine almose (says he) in the bosom of the poor, and he shall
pray and entreat for thee against al ill. And again. Prouer. 21
He that stops his ears not to hear the weak and needy, him self shall
call upon the Lord, and shall not be heard. For he can not deserve the mercy
of our Lord, which is not him self merciful, or obtain of Gods favor any
thing in his prayer, who is not gentill to the prayer of the oorep This also
does the holy Ghost declare, and prove in the Psalms, Psalm. 40.
saying: Blessed is he that has regard to the needy and poor. Our Lord
shall deliver him in the evil day. Which precepts Daniell having in mind,
Daniel. 4.
when the King Nabuchodonosor being feared with a terrible dream, boiled in
great anguishe of mind, he gave him remedy for the turning away, and
mitigating of those evils by obtaining God his help, saying: Therefore, o King
let my counsel please thee: redeem thy sins with almose deeds, and thy
unrighteous with mercy on the poor: and God shall be merciful over thy
sins.

To whom the King not obeying, suffered the terrors and adversities, which
he saw in his dream: which yet he might have escaped, and avoided, if he
would have redeemed his sins by alms deeds. Also Raphael the Angel does
witness the like, and exhorts, that alms be willingly and bountefully
geeuen, Raphael Angelus.
saying: Prayer is good, with fasting and alms: for alms delivers from
death, and it purges sins. He shows that our prayers and fasting, be of
the less force, if they be not helped with alms deeds: and that prayers
alone, are of littell efficacy to entreat, unless they be filled up, and
helped with the adjoining of deeds and works. Prayers without works, are
of small force.
The Angel does reuele, open, and testify unto us, that our prayers are made
effectual by alms deeds: that by alms life is redeemed from peril: by
alms, souls are delivered from death.

Neither do we (derely beloved Brethern) so avouch these things, but that we
shall with the very testimony of Truth it self confirm that, which the Angel
Raphael has said. In the acts of the Apostles we have good proof hereof,
and by a fact done we plainly find, that souls are by almose delivered, not
only from the second death (of hell) but also from the first (death of this
present life). Tabitha being a wooman much given and addicted to good works,
and doing of almose, when by sickness she had departed this life, Peter was
sent forth unto the dead carcas: whoo when readely and gently (as it becomed
the meekness of an Apostle) he was come thither, there stood about him a sort
of widows, weeping and entreating him, and showing unto him the clokes,
coats, and all other the clothing, which they had before received of her,
making suit for her being dead, not so much by their words, as by show of
her own works. The good intention helps much prayer.
Peter perceived that the thing in such sort sued for, might be obtained, and
that the help of Christ would not want at the suit of the widows, since him
self was also clothed in the widows. Therefore when kneeling down upon his
knees he had prayed, and as a fit advocate, had uttered and sent up unto God
the prayers, made unto him by the widows, and the poor, turning then to the
body, which being washed lay already upon a board, he said: Tabitha arise in
the name of Ihesu Christ. Neither did he fail Peter, but straight way gave
help, who in the Gospel had said, that what soever were asked in his name,
should be granted. Death therefore was suspended, life returned, and the
revived body restored quick to light, all the company much maruailing, and
being not a little astonnied thereat. Of such force were the merits of mercy,
of such value and power were good works. Merits of works.
She that to the needy widows had given relief and succor of life, deserved
at the prayers of the widows to be restored to life.

The teacher therefore of our life, and the master of our eternal salvation,
geeuing life to the people believing, and providing for ever for them ons
brought to life, does among his divine commandments, and heavenly precepts
in the Gospel, will and charge nothing more often, then that we should
continue, and persist in giving almose: that we should not lie and grouell
upon our earthly possessions, but rather heard up to our selves some
heavenly treasures. Sell your goods (says he) and give almose. And again,
Lay not up to your selves treasures upon earth, Luc. 12.
where mothe and rust spoileth and decaieth, and where thieves dig up, and
steal: but heap up unto your selves treasures in heaven, where neither
mothe nor rust does consume, and where thieves do not break up, and steal:
for where thy treasure is, there will also thy heart be. And when he would
teach one that had observed the law, how he should be perfect, he said: If
thou will be perfect, go and sell all that thou have, and give it to the
poor, and thou shall have treasure in heaven, and come follow me. He says
also in an other place, that he which seeks to purchasse the grace of
heaven, and to bye everlasting salvation, must with the quantity of his
patrimony merchant and bie the precious jewel, that is, eternal life,
precious by the blood of Christ. The kingdom of heaven (says he) is like
unto a merchant man seeking for good perles and precious stones, Matt. 13.
but when he had found a preciouse stone, he went and sold all that he had,
and bought it. He also calls them the children of Abraham, whom he sees to
be workmen in the helping and nurrishing of the poor. For when zachee had
said: Behold, Luke 19.
the half of my substance I geeue unto the needy, and if I have defrauded any
man of ought, I render unto him four dubble: Ihesus answered, and said: This
day is salvation made unto this house, for this man is also a son of Abraham.
For if Abraham believed God, and it was reputed unto him for justice, verily he
that according to God his commandment, does Almose, believes God: and he
which has the truth of faith, keeps the fear of God. But he which
keeps the fear of God, thinks of God, in showing mercy to the poor. What
it is to believe God and to think the scriptures true.
For therefore does he work, because he believes and knows those things
to be true, which are foreshewed by the words of God, and that the holy
Scripture can not lie, which teaches, That unfruitful trees (that is) Barren
and frutelesse men, shall be cut away, and thrown into the fire: but the
merciful shall be called unto the kingdoome. And therefore in an other place
also, he calls the woorkers, and the fruitful by the name of faithful
persons. But as for the unfruitful and barren, he says they have no faith,
by these words: If in the wicked Mammon, Lucae. 16.
ye have not been faithful, whoo will put you in trust, with that which
is true and sound? And if in the thing that is not yours, ye baue been
unfaithful, whoo will geeue you that which is yours? Pouetry is not to be
feared, for giving of alms.


If thou mystruste, and fear, least if thou begin to work bountifully,
thy patrimony being consumed by liberal woorking, thou may perhaps be
driven to poouertie, be in that behalf without fear, stand thou assured and
out of care. For that can not be wasted, out of the which, there is disbursed
to Christ his use, and by the which a heavenly work is done. And thus do I
not warrant thee upon mine own credit, but upon the faith and warrant of
the holy Scriptures. Upon the authority of God his promise, do I assure it.
Prove. 28.
The holy Ghost speaking by Solomon, says: He that geeueth to the poor, shall
never want: but he that turns his eyes from them, shall be in great penury:
showing thereby, that the merciful, and such as work, can never want, but
rather that the Niggardes, and fruitless do come in the end to poverty. And
the holy Apostle Paul also being full of grace of the heavenly inspiration,
says: He that sends seed to the sower, even he also shall geeue bread to
be eaten: 2. Cor. 9.
and shall multiply your sowing, and shall increase the yield of your
fruitful Justice, that you may be made rich in all thing. And again: The
administration of this duty and work shall not only supply in faith the
want and need of the saints, but shall also be plentiful in geeuing, with
much thankefulnes toward God. For when thanks for our almose and prayers are
by the Oraisons of the poor directed unto God, the substance of the woorker,
is by the reward of God, heaped and increased. And our Lord in the Gospel
even then considering the hearts of such men, and by his foretelling word
denouncing this unto the false hearted, and unto such as would not believe,
does protest and say: Matt. 6.
Do ye not take thought, saying, what shall we eat, or what shall we
drink, or wherewith shall we be appareled? For these things the Gentiles
seek after: but your Father knows, that you have need of all these things.
Seek ye first the kingdom of heaven: Ibidem.
and the righteousness thereof, and all these things shall be cast unto you. He
says, all things are cast unto them, and given unto them which seek the
kingdom and justice of God. For our Lord says, that those men shall (when
the day of Judgment comes) be admitted to receive the kingdom, which have been woorkers in his Church. But thou fear, lest thy patrimony perhaps will
fail thee, if thou begin of the same to yield bountiful works. And
know thou not, wretched man, that while thou fear the decaie of thy
household, thy life and salvation both do fail? And while thou art careful
that nothing be diminished of thy goods, do thou not see, that thy self
art diminished, being a loouer rather of Mammon, then of thine own soul?
Thus while thou fear lest thy patrimony should perish to save thy self,
thy self do perish to save thy patrimony. And therefore does the Apostle
well cry out, and say: Nothing brought we into this world: 1. Tim. 6.
neither truly may we carry ought hence, but having nourriture, and
coouering, let us be therewith content. For they that will becoome rich, fall
into temptation, into snares, and into many and hurtefull desires, which whelme
a man into perdition and destruction. Covetousness the root of al evils.
For the root of all evils is covetousness, which some seeking after have made
a wrack of their faith, and have plunged them selves into many sorrows.

But do thou fear still, least thy patrimony may hap to fail, if thou
begin to bestow plentifully thereof? Prove. 10.
Why? When was it seen, that the just man could want relief, sith it is
written: Our Lord will not kill with hunger the just soul? 3. Reg. 17
Helias was fed in the wilderness by the ministry and seruise of crows. And
to Daniell being by the kings commandment shut up in the den for a pray
to the Lions his dinner was from God provided. Danie. 14.
And yet fear thou, lest working and deserving at Gods hands, thou
should want nourriture? Remembrest thou not, that he him self in the
Gospel to the reproach of them which be of doubtful minds, and of little
faith, does protest, saying? Behold the fowls of the air: Matt. 6.
for they sow not, they reap not, they gather not into the barnes, and yet
your heavenly father nurrissheth them. Are not ye of more value, then these?
God feeds the foul, and even to the sparrowes daily food is geeuen: and
those things which have no manner sense of thing appertaining to God, lack
neither meat nor drink. And do thou think, that a Christian man, the
servant of God, geeuen to do good works, and dear unto his Lord and
master, shall want any thing? How may this be? Except thou will think, that he
which feeds Christ, shall him self not be fed by Christ? Or that earthly
things shall want to them, to whom divine and heavenly things are geeuen?

Whence comes this mistrustfull thought? Whence grows this wicked and
sacrilegious Imagination? What does such a faithless heart in the house of
faith? Why is he called and named a Christian, which does not altogether
believe Christ? The name of a Pharisee is more meeter for thee. For when our
Lord in the Gospel disputed of almose deeds, faithfully, and holesomely
forewarning us, that by provident woorkyng, we should of our earthly gains
make unto our selves friends that might afterward receive us up into
everlasting tabernacles, He is no Christian, but a pharisee, that will give no
almose for fear he shall lack.
after these things spoken the Scripture adds these words: But the
Pharisees (whoo were most coouetous men) hard all these things, and mocked
thereat. Soome such men do we see at this day in the Church, whose
stopped ears and blinded hearts do receive no light of spiritual and
wholesome admonitions: At whom we must not marueill, if they contemn a
servant treating of these things, Lucae 16.
when we see that our Lord him self was of such men despised.

What do thou please thy self with these fond and foolish thoughts? A
vehement exhortation against the peuish fear of vvorldlinges.
As though with fear and carefulnes of things to come, thou should be kept
back from doing of good works? Why do thou pretend such colors, toies,
and delusions of vain excuse? Confess that rather which is true. And because
thou can not deceive them that know, lay forth the secret and hidden
conceptes of thy mind. No, no. The darcknes of vnfrutefulnes has benumbed thy
mind: and (the light of truth being thence departed) the deep and thick mist
of covetousness has blinded thy carnal heart. Thou art a slave and bondsman to
thy money. Thou art bound with the bonds and cheines of avarice, and thou,
whom Christ had once losed, art now again come in bonds: Thou kepest thy
money, which being kept, does not keep thee. Thou heapest thy patrimony,
which with the weight thereof does burden thee. Thou do not remember what
God answered to the rich man, that with fond reioising boasted the great
plenty of his abundant store: Thou fool (said he) this night is thy soul
called for from thee: Luke 12.
Therefore whose shall those things be, which thou have gathered? Why do
thou study and travail to get riches for thy self alone? Why do thou to
thine own pain increase the weight of thy patrimony, whereby how much the
richer thou art to the world, so much the poorer thou art made toward God.
Divide thy rentes with thy Lord God. Part thy fruits with Christ. Make Christ
a partaker with thee of the revenue of thy earthly possessions, that he may
also make thee with him a ioyn their of the heavenly kingdoomes.

Thou errest, and art deceived, who so ever beleeuest thy self to be rich in
the world. Hear in the Apocalips the voice of thy Lord, with just rebukes
rating such men: Apocal. 3.
Thou say I am rich (says he) I am increased in wealth, I want nothing.
And thou know not, that thou art in deed a wretch, miserable, poor,
blind, and naked. I advise thee to bye of me, gold tried, and burnisshed in
the fire: that thou may be rich, and may put on the white garment, that
the filth of thy nakedness do not appear in thee. Anoint thine eyes with a
medicine that thou may see. Thou therefore that art welthy and rich, bye
unto thy self of Christ gold burnished and tried with fire, that (thy
filthiness being purged as it were with fire) thou may be pure gold, being
purged by almose deeds, and good works. Bye unto thy self a white garment,
that thou (which by Adam were before naked, quaking, and defourmed) may be
clothed with the white garment of Christ. And thou which art a rich and
welthy Gentlewoman, anoint thine eyes, not with the Devils Alabaster, but with
Christ's Medicine: that thou may attain to see God, with good works and
just desert meriting well at thy Lords hands. But thou which art such a one,
can not work in the Church. For thine eyes being ouercast with a dark
dimnesse, and blinded as it were in the night, have not beheld the needy, and
the poor. Thou being welthy and rich, beleeuest that thou celebratest our
Lord his Temple: yet do thou not one whit behold or regard the treasure
huche thereof. Thou come into the Temple without sacrifice: yea, thou take
part of the sacrifice, which the poor has offered. Behold in the Gospel the
widow, who being mindeful of the heavenly precepts did work even in the
midst of her own misery, and penury, putting into the treasury even those
two mites which only remained unto her. Whom when our Lord had marked and
seen, waying and esteeming her work, not by her liuelyhood, but by her heart
and mind, and considering not how much, but out of how much she had geeuen,
he aunsweared and said: Verily I say unto you, Lucae. 21.
this widow has given more into Gods treasure, then all these. For all these
have given unto God his treasure, of that which abounded unto them, but this
widow even out of her poverty, has put in all she had to live by. O very
happy and glorious woman, that even before the day of judgment, deserved to
be praised by the mouth of the judge. Let them that be rich be ashamed of
there own barreinnes and miserable niggishnes. A widow, and a poor widow, did
deal liberally. And whereas all that is given, is bestowed on the
succourlesse, and widows, she gives, who should have received: that we may
know, what punishment remains to the unfruitfully rich man, when by this
doctrine, even the poor them selves owght also to work. And that we may
understand that al such things are given to God, and that in doing these
things, we deserve and merit at Gods hand, Christ calls them Gods
treasuer, and shows that the widow had put her two mites into Gods stoare,
that it might be made the more manifest unto us, that he which has compassion
on the poor, does lend to God upon usury.

The Care of children ought not to stay from giving of almose.
Neither let any Christian man (dearly beloved brethren) think him self
excused from doing good works, upon respect to do for his children. For
we ought, in our spiritual expenses have an eye to Christ, who has
professed, that it is he that receives our almose. And so, in doing almose to
the poor, we prefer not the poor before our children, but we prefer
Christ before our children. He him self, so teaching and admonishing us:
Matt. 10.
Who so loves (says he) his father or mother, above me, is not worthy of
me, and who so loves his Son or daughter, above me, is not worthy of me.
Also in Deuteronomy, the like things are written to the strengthening of our
faith, and love toward God, Deute. 33.
in these words. They which say unto their Father or Mother, I know thee
not, and have not known their children, these have observed thy
commandments, and have kept thy testament. For if we love God with all our
heart, we ought not to prefer either parents or children before God. Which
thing S. John also shows in his Epistle, saying, that Charity and the love
of God is not in them; whom we see to have no regard to do good unto the
poor. He that has (says he) worldly substance, 1. John. 3.
and has seen his brother want, and has shut up his compassion from him, how
does the love of God dwell in him? For if God give usury for the alms that is
given to the poor, and that which is given to the least of them, is given to
Christ, there is no cause why a man should prefer earthly things, before
heavenly, or esteem man, more then God.

So did that widow, 3. Reg. 17
mentioned in the third book of the Kings, when after all her goods
consumed, A notable example.
in the great drought and famine, she had made her of a litell branne and oil
that was yet left, a lofe baked under the ashes, to eat with her children,
and so to dye, Helias came sodaynlie unto her, and desired some part thereof,
to be first given him to eat, and then she and her children to feed on the
rest. For she never sticked to fulfill his request, neither did she (though
she were the natural mother) any jot prefer her children, in that great
hunger and penury, before Helias. But that she did in the sight of God, which
might please God. Readily and willingly was that offered, which was required.
Neither of abundance a portion, but of a litell the whole was given. And an
other man was first fed, before her own hungry and steruing children.
Neither did she in that penury and famine, think first of her meat, and
then of the works of mercy: but contrary. To the end that while in a
healthful work the carnal life was contemned, the soul might spiritually
be reserved and saved. Helias was a figure of Christ.
Helias therefore bearing the figure of Christ, and showing that he renders to
each one for mercy bestowed a return of the like, answered and said: This
says our Lord, thy pot of meal shall not fail thee, neither shall the oil
in the cruse be diminisshed, until the day, wherein our Lord will send rain
upon the earth. And according to the truth of Gods promise, the things
which the widow gave, were increased, and multiplied unto her. And for her
merits, and good works of mercy, receiving increase and abondance, her
vessels of meal, and oil were filled full. Neither did the mother (in this
case) take from her children, that which she gave to Helias, but much more
profited her children, by doing such work of pity and mercy. Yet, did not
she know Christ, neither had she heard his Commandments. She was not redeemed
by his Cross, and passion, that she might for the shedding of his blood,
render him meat, and drink. Whereby it may appear, how much he which is of
Christ's Church sins, who preferring him self and his children before
Christ, does keep his riches, and does not communicate his plentiful
patrimony with the poverty of the needy.

A common and daily Objection soluted.
But thou will say, thou have a great many children in thy house, and the
number of thy children, perhaps does hold thee back from plentiful yelding of
good works. Verily I say, that for this self same cause, thou should
work the more bountifully. Note well
The more children thou art the father of, the more have thou to entreat for at
Gods hand. The sins of many are to be redeemed, the consciences of many to
be prayed for, the sowles of many to be raunsomed. As in this secular life, the
more children thou have to feed, and to sustain, the greater is thy cost and
charge, so in the spiritual and heavenly life, the more stoare of children
thou have, the more plentiful ought to be thy expense in good works. An
Example.
So did Job offer many Sacrifices for his children, and according to the number
of the children in his house, was the number of offeringes which he sacrificed
unto God. And because there could not want sin, that daily offends the
sight of God, daily Sacrifices did not want, whereby sins might be wiped
away. This does the Divine Scripture prove, saying: Job a true and a just
man had seven sons, Job. 1.
and three daughters: and he cleansed them, offering for them Sacrifices unto
God, according to the number of them, and for their sins, one caulfe. If
therefore thou do truly love thy children, if thou will yield unto them
abundant and fatherly sweetness of love and charity, thou ought the more
to work: to the intent that with thy just and good work, thou may
commend thy children unto God. Think not him to be thy chyldrens chief
Father, who is but weak and feeble and to continue but for a time. Win
rather unto them the favor of that Father, who is the firm, sure, and
everlasting Father of spiritual children. Assign unto him thy gooddes which
thou keep for thine heirs: Let him be the Tutor of thy children: Let him be
their Craynsire: Let him by his Divine Majesty be their Protector against all
the injuries of this woorlde. We should commit our patrimonye to God.
The patrimony that is committed to God, neither does the common wealth take
away, nor confiscation break into, nor false accusation or quarrel picte in
law overthrow. In saftie is the inheritance laid up, whereof God is made the
keeper.

This it is to provide for our dear children in time to comme. This it is by
fatherly piety to provide for our heirs, that shall be: as the holy Scripture
truly testifies, saying: Psalm. 36.
I have benne younger, and now any wexen old: Yet did I never see the just
forsaken, or his seed wanting bread. All day is he merciful and lends, and
his seed shall be blessed. And again: He whose conversation is without blame,
Prou. 20.
and in righteousness, leaves his sons blessed behind him.

How Fathers ought to provide for their childrne.
Therefore thou art a deceiuer, and a traitorous Father, except thou do
faithfully provide for thy children, except with true and religious piety,
thou do in this sort forsee to the preservation of them. Thou which laborest
by earthly inheritance rather to betake thy children to the devil, then by
treasure laid up in heaven to commend then unto Christ, do twice offend,
and committest a double fault: Both in that thou do not procure unto thy
children the healpe of God the Father, and also because thou teach them more
to love their patrimony, then Christ. Be rather to thy children such a
Father, as Tobie was. Geeue unto thy children profitable, An example.
and wholesome precepts, such as he gave unto his son. Geeue in charge unto
thy children, as he charged his son, Tob. 14.
saying: And now (my Son) I geeue thee in charge: serve God in truth, and
do before him that which pleases him, The precepts of Toby to his son.
Tob. 4.
and charge thy children, that they do justice, and give alms and be mindeful
of God, and bless his name at all times. And again: My most deerly belooued
son, have God in thy mind all the days of thy life, and transgress not his
Commandments. Do justice all the days of thy life, and walk not in the
way of iniquity. For if thou deal in truth, respect shall be had unto thy
works. Of thy substance do alms deeds, and turn not away thy face from
any poor man. So shall it come to pass, that the face of God shall not be
turned from thee. Geaue Alms (my son) according to that thou haste: If thou
have plentye of substance, geeue the more largely thereof, if thou have scarce
and but a little, yet geeue part even of that little. And fear not when thou
geeuest Alms: for thou layest up to thy self a good reward against the
day of necessity. Tob. 12.
For Alms delivers from death and suffers not to go unto hell. A good
work, is geeuing of Allmes unto all them, which do it in the sight of the
High God.

What a pageaunt or game is that (deerly belooued brethren) the setting forth
whereof, is honored with the present behoulding of God him self? If at such
largess and liberality, as the Gentilles bestowed upon shows, it seemed a
great and a gloriouse matter, to have present the Proconsules, or Generalles
of Armies, and great cost and charge was bestowed, by such men to please
great personnages: how much more noble, and greater is the glory of our
charge, where we have God and Christ the behoulder thereof. How much more
plentiful ought the preparation here to be, and how much more bowntifull
the cost, where all the virtues of heaven assemble, all the Angels meet to
the sight and beholding thereof? Where, to the defraver of the charge, not a
triumphant chariot, or Consulship is asked, but eternal life is geeuen: nor
the vain and temporal favor of the common people is sought, The fruit of
Alms deeds.
but the perpetual reward of the heavenly kingdom is received?

And that these dull, barren, and pinching penny fathers woorking nothing
toward the fruit of their salvation, may be the more ashamed of them selves:
that the shame of their reproach, and vileness, may stryke the deaper into
their filthy consciences, let each man set before his eyes the devil with his
guard, that is to say, let him imagine the devil with his traitorous people,
and children of death, to leap forth in presence, and even there (Christ him
self being present, and judging) to callenge with proud comparison Christ's
people, A lively Representation.
and to provoke and require, that an account and rekoning of both sorts may
be taken, saying in this wise: I, for these that thou see here with me, have
neither received buffets, nor endured scourging, nor suffered the Cross, nor
shed my blood, nor redeemed this my family, with the price of any Cross and
passion: No, neither do I promise them the kingdom of heaven, or restoring
them to immortality call them home again to Paradyse: and yet see how
sumptuouse games and pageantes, how great Treasures, what rare things long
and most chargeably sought, they provide for me? Yea laying to pleadge,
engaging, or selling outright all their goods and possessions to set forth
to the uttermost these games and pageants? Yea, and if the pageants frame not
handsomely to their honesty, they are with words of reproach, and hissing often
times driven out of the stage, yea and sometime almost stoned to death, with
the fury of the people. Now Christ let me see, such fetters forth of sightes
and shows of thy side. Show me these rich men flowing in abou^dance of wealth,
whether though thy self fittest aloft in thy Church, and look on them,
they make unto thee any such chargeable presents, by engaging or selling
their goods: Naie rather by changing for the better, the possession of them,
translating them into heavenly treasures. In these vain and worldly shows
before men, That which S. Cyprian speaks here of plays and pageants, may
be applied to banquetinges, excess in apparall, and such other not now common
every where.
nobody is fed, none clothed, none sustained with comfort of meat and
drink. All the charge between the madness of the setter forth, and the folly
of the beholder, through a prodigal and foolish vanity of disceiuing
pleasures, is lost and comes to naught. Yet among thine, thou art thy self
clothed and fed in thy poor and needy: and thou promisest eternal life to
such as work. All this notwithstanding thy people being thus honored by
thee, with Divine rewards and heavenly gifts, are scarce to be compared in
number with mine, that have at my hand for all their cost, no reward, but
damnation.

What shall we answer hereunto, dearly beloved brethren? By what means may
we defend the minds of the rich men overwhelmed with such a sacrilegiouse
barrenness, and as it were palpable darkness? By what excuse may we purge
our selves, who are fewer in number, then the Diuelles servants, who do not
repaie unto Christ for the price of his Passion, and blood, no not so much as
small trifles?

Christ has geauen unto us commandments: a revvard to such as work, and
punnishment to the idle
he has instructed his servants, what they have to do, he promises reward
to such as work, and threatens punnishment to the unfruitful. He has
uttered his sentence, and told us before what judgment he will give. What
excuse can there be to the negligent? What defense to the barren and nigarde,
but that to the servant who does not that which he is commanded, our Lord will
do that which he threatens, Mat. 25.
saying: When the Son of man shall come in his glory and al his Angels with
him, then shall he sit in the throne of his glory, and all Nations shall be
gathered together before him: and he shall divide them one from an other, as the
shepherd divides the sheep from the gotes, and shall place the sheep on his
right hand, but the gotes on the left: then shall the king say unto them which
shall be on his right hand: Come ye blessed of my Father, receive the kingdom
which has been prepared for you from the beginning of the world: for I have been
hungry, and you gave me to eat: I have been thirsty, and you gave me drink: I
have been harborles, and you led me in naked, and you clothed me: sick, and you
visited me: I have been in prison, and you came unto me. Then shall the just
answer him, saying: Lord when have we seen the hungry, and did feed thee?
Thirsty, and did give the drink? When have we seen the harbourles, and did
lead the in? Naked, and did cloth the? But when have we seen the sick and in
prison, and have come unto thee? Then the King answering shall say unto them:
Verily I say unto you, so long as you have don it to one of these my least
brethren, you have don it unto me. Then will he say unto them which shall be on
his left hand: Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire, which my Father
has prepared for the devil and his angels: for I have been hu^gry, and you gave
me not to eat, I have thirsted, and you gave me not to drink: I have been
harbourles, and you took me not in: naked, and you clothed me not: sick and in
prison, and ye visited me not. Then shall they answer and say, Lord when have
we seen thee hungry, or thirsty, or harborles or naked, or sick, or in prison,
and have not ministered unto the, and he shall say unto the^, verily I say unto
you, so long as ye have not don it to one of these little ones, ye have not don
it to me. And the unjust shall go into everlasting burning: but the just into
everlasting life. What could Christ say more unto us? How could he more provoke
us to the work of justice and mercy, then in telling us that to be don to him
self what so ever is don to the nedy and poor? And in showing him self to be
offended if we do not give help to the poor and nedy: to the end that he
which is not moved with the respect of his brother, a fellow member of the
Church, should yet be moved with the contemplation of Christ: and he which
co^sidereth not his fellow servant, being in need and poverty, might yet be
moved to consider our Lord and Master, present in him whom he despises. And
therefore (most derely beloved) let us that fear God, let us that (despising
and treading the world under our feet) have our minds lift up to divine and
heavenly things, let us (I say) with full faith, devout minds, and continual
good working, bestow our service to win our Lord and Masters favor. Let us
give to Christ earthly garments, that we may receive of him heavenly clothing.
Let us give our worldly meat and drink, that with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob,
we may be received to the heavenly feast. Let us sow much, We must provide for
our salvation. Galat. 6.
least we reap little. Let us while we have time, provide for our safty and
eternal salvation. For so Paul the Apostle admonishes us, saying: Therefore
while we have time, let us do good to al, and namely unto such as are of the
household of faith. But let us not faint in doing good: for at due time we shall
reap the fruit. Let us consider (dearly beloved brethren) how the faithful
people did in the Apostles time, when in the beginning the mind flourished with
greater virtues, when the faith of the beleuers was yet fervent with the new
heat of faith. Then did they sell their howses and lands, and willingly, and
largely offered unto the Apostles their gooddes to be distributed unto the
poor, transferring their possession (after their earthly patrimony, so sold
and distributed) unto that place where they should receive the fruit of
eternal inheritance: providing for them selves mansions there, where the^
should begin to dwell for ever. Such was their plentifulnesse in good
works, as was their vnifourme consent in love and charity, as we read in
the Acts of the Apostles in these words: Act. 4.
But the multitude of them which believed, wrought with one mind and with one
heart, neither was there among them any diversity, Al things were by charity
and mutual love, as it were common among the Apostles.
neither did they judge owght as their own, of the goods which they had: but
all things were to them common. This is by spiritual birth, truly to be made
the Sons of God. This is by the heavenly law to imitate the goodness of God
the Father.

For what so ever is Gods, is common for our use. Neither is any man repelled
from the use of the benefittes and gifts of God, but that all mankind may
equally enjoy the goodness and bountifulness thereof. So does the day give
light, the son brightness, the rain moisture, and the wind blow to all
alike. So is sleep alike and common to all them that take reast: the shining
of the stars and Moon is alike and common to them all.

By which example of equality* he that being a possessioner in earth divides
his rentes and revenues with his brethren in Christ, Things are not common,
but by voluntary liberality.
while by voluntary liberty, he being just, makes his goods common, is a
follower of God the Father. What a glory shall there be (most dearly belooued
brethren) to them that work?

How great and exceeding shall be the joy, when our Lord shall begin to take
vewe of his people, and shall render for our merits, and good works the
promised rewards: for earthly things, heavenly: for temporal, everlasting?
When for small, he shall geeue great, when he offers us up unto his Father,
to whom by his sanctification, he has restored us? When he shall give unto us
the eternity and immortality whereunto he has revived us, by the quickening
of his blood? When he shall lead us again into Paradyse, and by the faith and
surety of his promise, open unto us the kingdoome of heaven?

Let these things (brethren) cleave and stick firmly in our understanding.
An exhortation
Let them be conceived with a full faith. Let them be looued with our whole
heart. Let them be bought with the courageous perseverance of incessant well
doing. A beutifull and heavenly thing (deerly beloved brethren) is well doing:
The fruits of good works.
a great comfort to such as believe: a strong sauegarde of a quiet conscience,
a fortification of hope, a defense and shilde of faith, and a remedy against
sin. It is a thing set in the power of him that does it. It is a great
thing, and yet easy. A Crown of peace without peril of persecution. It is
the true gift, yea the greatest gift of God, necessary to the weak, and
glorious to the strong. With this a Christian being furnished, he shows
forth spiritual grace, he deserves well of Christ the Judge, and he makes
God his debtor.

To this price of healthful works let us willingly, and cheerfully
contend. Let us all run in the course and race of justice: God and Christ
looking on: And let us that have now begone to get above the world, and
these transitory things, not stay now our course by any covetousness, or
lyking of them, or of the world. If the day either of our departing, or of
persecution shall find us light, and free without burden, running in this
race of good works, our Lord will never fail to reward our merits. He
will geeue to such as overcome for their works in peace a white and pure
Crown: and to such as get the victory in persecution, he will geeue a dubble
Crown of purple color for their patience and suffering. Amen.

Thus ends the Sermon of that blessed Martyr and Bishop, S. Cyprian: Of Alms
deeds.
Opus istud de Iustificatione cum alijs in linguam Anglicam versis lectum et
approbatum est ab insignibus viris, sacrae Theologiae and Anglici idiomatis
peritissimis, quibus ideo tuto credendum esse existimo.

Cunerus Petri, Pastor S. Petri, Louani, indignus.
15. Ianuarij. An. 1569.
Faults escaped in the printing, of the Translations.
Leaf. Side. Line. Fault. Correction. 43. 2. 14. depraved deprived 45. 2. 1.
And And as 66. 2. 1. oorep poor 67. 1. 4. (death death( 67. 2. 11. heard
horde 76. 2. 28. liberty liberality


