MEDITATIONS UPON THE MYSTERIES OF OUR HOLY FAITH WITH the practice of mental
prayer touching the same, (...)

Composed in Spanish by the R. F. LVYS DE LA PVENTE of the Society of JESUS,
native of Valladolid.

AND Translated into English by F. RICH. GIBBONS of the same Society.

THE FIRST PART.

The contents of this work are to be seen in the page following.

ornament with sun SIT NOMEN DOMINIBENEDICTUM

IHS



Printed with privilege M.DC.X.

THE CONTENTS OF THIS WORK.
These Meditations go divided into six parts, which be correspondent to the
three ways, PVRGATIVE, ILLVMINATIVE, and VNITIVE: the first two parts for
Principiants in Virtue: the other two for those that Go forward: and the two
last for the Perfect. And all six do help for Preachers, and Masters of
perfection.

The first part, of Sins, and Last things of man, with Means of prayer to
purify the heart from vices.

The second part, of the Mysteries of the Incarnation, and Childhoode of JESUS
Christ our Lord, until his Baptism.

The third part, of the Principal mysteries of his life, Diuinitye, and
Miracles, unto the end of his preaching.

The fourth part, of all the Mysteries of the Passion.

The fifth part, of the Mysteries of the Resurrection, Apparitions, and
Asce^sion, till the coming of the holy Ghost, and publishing of the Gospel.

The sixth part, of the Mysteries of the Diuinitye, Trinity, and Perfections of
God, and of the Benefits, natural and supernatural that proceed from him.

According to the order of the historye there go inserted also meditations of
all the Life of our LADY, and of some Saints, of whom the Gospel, and the
book of the Acts of the Apostles make mention; of which, and of those that be
upon the Gospells of the Sundays, and holy days thoroughout the year, there
be Tables in the end of the whole work.

TO THE VIRTUOUS, AND DEVOVTE GENTLEWOMAN MISTRES CICILIE MORGAN, DAVGHTER to
the worshipful Mistres MARIE MORGAN.
SOme peradventure may, and will also, Virtuous Gentlewoman, marueil not a
little, what moved me to dedicate this book rather unto you, then to diverse
other persons of no mean calling in our nation, who might with great reason
have expected the same at my hands, especially I being, as they will suppose,
obliged to sundry of them for diverse respects. To whom, for satisfaction of my
part, and that this their woundring may cease, I answer in few words: that as
touching particular obligation to any person, I found none in my self, that
might with just cause have moved me to alter this my intended course, other
then that, Romans 13.8
to which the Apostle exhorts saying: Nemini quidquam debeatis, nisi vt
inuicem diligatis; Owe no man any thing, but that you love one an other. More
over, if any obligation there be toward others, certes it is most toward you,
for whom I have given my word in such sort, that I am bound by all the means
I possibly may, to further your spiritual good, and advance you in that kind
of perfection, to which you so much aspire. Whereunto I add, that if this my
labor, such and so much as it is, be aniwise due to those, which were the
cause I first took it in hand, I neither can, nor will deny, but that your
often, and fervent calling upon me, to aford you sufficient matter for
meditation, with the manner how to perform the same, in such sort as it ought
to be done; was the occasion, that having seen this work, I took in hand to
translate it, findinge it to be such, as in it self contained all that, which
either you with reason could require of me, or I think good to perform of my
part, as necessary for your spiritual instruction, and profit in this kind of
exercise. And here I wittinglie, and willingly leave to speak of your godly
and virtuous behavior; of your fervent affection in the service of almighty
God; of your holy desire to conform your self in all your words, thoughts,
and woorks, to his most holy will and pleasure; of your renouncing the world,
and the contentments thereof, with so generous a resolution; of the continual
mortification of your self with so invincible courage; which all, and many
more your rare virtues, unknown to others then to those, who of duty ougt to
know them, had been sufficient, without any further cause, to have presented
you these my small pains, such as they are; thereby to forward you in this
happy course of life, which you have undertaken, and to perfect you in the
same, as much as in me lies. As for my labor, if it may with Gods holy
assistance profit others then your self, let them con you thanks, who have been the motive thereto: but if it may further your own spiritual good, as I
nothing doubt, but with the grace of God, and your own virtuous endeavor it
will, if you persevere, and continue in the practice of meditation as you have
begun; I hope I shall not be defrauded of your good merits, and prayers, in
which I heartily desire to be remembered, wishing you all abundant increase of
grace and goodness in this world, that growing from virtue to virtue, Psalm. 83.8
you may at the length, as the Psalmist says, see the God of Gods in Sion,
that is, see his divine Majesty face to face, and enjoy him for ever and ever
in the world to come.

Your loving friend that wishes you all good RICH. GIBBONS.

THE PROLOGVE TO THE CHRISTIAN Reader.
SO proper it is to the Religious of our lest Society or Company of JESUS, to
procure, by Gods grace, not only our own salvation, and perfection, but also
our neighbors, that wanting health to exercise other duties, ordained to this
end: not to be wholely wanting to the end of my vocation, I inclined to
write this book, by means whereof, I might aid them to negociate their own
salvation, which is the final end of all Christians, and therewith also, the
excellency of Evangelical perfection, which is the speciallest end of such as
are Religious. And whereas all those which live in this great house of the
Church, of what estate, or condition soever they be, are called by God, to
pretend in some sort this sovereign perfection, for to all is intended or
directed that sentence of our Savior which says: Matthew. 5.48.
Be you perfect as also your heavenly Father is perfect: So likewise this
book I direct unto all, to teach (as S. Ad Coloss. 1.28.
Paul says) and to procure, that every man may be perfect in Christ; though
most particularly it is directed to those, who by reason of their Religious
estate profess this perfection, and pretend to attain thereunto by the
means of Prayer, and Meditation, whereof this book does entreat, wherein,
as well as I can, according to my poor ability, I desire to fulfill what S.
Augustine counsels us in his 3. sermon upon the 33. In illud Magnificate
Dominum mecum.
Psalm, saying; Si amatis Deum, rapite omnes ad amorem Dei, qui vobis
iunguntur, and omnes qui in domo sunt vestra. Si amatur a vobis corpus Christi,
id est vnitas Ecclesiae, rapite eos ad fruendum, and dicite: Magnificate
Dominu^ mecum, and exaltemus nomen eius in idipsum. If you Love God, attract
and draw to the Love of God, all those that are joined with you, and all those
that live in your house. If you love the body of Christ which is the unity
of the Church, attract them all to enjoy God, and say unto them with David,
Magnifye ye our Lord with me, and let us praise his name together: and herein
be not sparing, nor backward, but Rapite quos potestis hortando, portando,
roga^do, disputando, rationem reddendo cum mansuetudine, and lenitate. Gain
unto God as many as you can by all possible means according to your ability,
by exhorting them, by supporting them, by entreating them, by disputing with
them, and by giving them reason for all things, appertaining to Christian
Faith, and perfection with all Meekness, and Lenitye to the end that all
may magnify God with one, and the same spirit of love. For this divine fire
whose propertye is, Pro. 30.16.
never to say, enough, is not contented to inflame the heart of him whom it
possesses, that he alone, with all whatsoever is within him, should burn in
the love of his Creator, but without all trace of envy, it extends its
sparkles and flames to all his kindred, freindes, and neighbors, and to all
those that are any way joined unto him; but especially to those of his own
house, that live united with him in the same profession, that there may be no
one at all therein, but may love, and glorifye God with great feruor, in such
sort that inkindled with this fire, they may fasten it upon others, and those
others upon more, that so it may be dilated thoroughout the whole world,
fulfilling that desire wherewith our Lord JESUS Christ came from heaven, as he
himself declared it, Luc. 12.49.
saying: I came to cast fire on the earth, and what will I, but that it be
kindled? And this was my intention in writing these meditations, wherewith by
the virtue of Gods Spirit, Psalm. 38.4.
this celestial fire may be inkindled in our hearts. The form whereof,
with other Aduertisements how to make best proffit of them, I will set down in
the Introduction which follows, especially in the fourth, and last paragraph
^. And if it shall please our Lord that I attain to what I pretend, I beseech
the Christian Reader, that shall participate of this fire, to put in ure the
counsel of the Psalmist, Psalm. 33.4.
and of his Commentator S. Augustine, with me magnifying, and praising God the
fountain of all good, and procuring that this fire may be communicated to
others, to the end that all men both present, and to come, may love, magnifye,
and praise our Lord God, world with out end.

THE INTRODVCTION TO THESE MEDITATIONS Wherein is set down a Summarye of such
things as are comprehended in the practice, and exercize of Mental Prayer.
SO high, and sovereign is the exercise of Mental prayer, wherein we
meditate upon the mysteries of our holy Faith, and converse familiarly with
God our Lord, that the principal master thereof, can be no other but the
holy Ghost himself, who (as S. 1. Joan. 2 27.
John says) is the Unction that teaches all things: by whose inspiration the
holy Fathers learned it, and left us in writing many aduises, and documents of
much importance, how to exercize it with proffit, following the motion of that
principal master whom they followed: in imitation of whom, making my proffit
of their doctrine, and experience, I will here make a summary of the
principal things which mental prayer comprehends, which stallbee brief,
clear, and distinct, that all may understand it, and reduce it to practice,
omitting larger declarations, and discourses of what I shall say, to that
which other Doctors have written thereof. Nevertheless for the manifestation
of the truth, and authority of what I am to say, as well in this summary, as
in the meditations of this book, I will allege in the margent, the Fountains
from I whence I have drawn it, which are three. The first is the Sacred
Scripture, Joan. 5.39.
the principal Founte of this Spiritual Science, wherein is contained life
everlasting, and the most excellent means that are to arrive to have a taste
of it in this life, and full possession of it in the life to come. second
Fountain is the holy Fathers who were the masters of mystical Theology, or
divinity, making choice of the most ancient, and by God most illustrated or
lightened therein, such as were S. Dyonise, S. Basile, S. Augustine, S.
Chrysostom, Cassian, S. Gregory, S. Bernard, and such others; and with them I
will likewise take for my Guide our Father, and Founder Ignatius of glorious
memory, following the order, and form which he left us in his book, which
he made of Spiritual Exercises, the authority whereof is very great, as well
for that we believe, (and not without much foundation) that he wrotte it by
special revelation, and inspiration of God, as the holy Spirit interiourly
dictated unto him, and taught him these Exercises: as also for that it was
approved by Pope Paulus Tertius in a Bull granted the year 1548. which goes
in the beginning of the said Book, whose approbation experience has
confirmed with marvelous effects, which our Lord God has wrought, and daily
works in those, which exercize his meditations; as it is largely prosecuted
by Father Pedro de Ribadeneyra in the Historye, Lib. 1. cap. 8.
which he wrote of the life of this excellent man.

I will here add only concerning his book, that the kingdom of Heaven
which is comprehended in the Doctrine thereof, Matthew. 13.32.
is like (as is also the divine Scripture from whence he extracted it) to a
grain of mustard seed, which being the least of all seeds, grows to such
greatenesse, that it becomes as it were a tree, upon whose branches the
fowls of the air do repose: for if we behold but the outside, and
appearance of this book, it is little, and breife, and written in a plain, and
simple style: but if we regard what is contained within, it is effectual in
virtue, ardent in affections, lofty in sense, large in discourse, and ample in
the several manners of praying, and contemplating; in such sort that upon the
branches thereof, they may find rest, and spiritual food, who like the
fowls of the air soar aloft in contemplation, Ad Philip. 3.20.
having (as S. Paul says) their conversation and traffic in heaven. All
this shallbee clearly made manifest by that, which we shall point at in this
breife Introduction, and shall more amply discourse of in the six parts of
this book; which are as it were six branches of the tree of these sovereign
Exercises, Cant. 2.3. Apoc. 22.2. Cant. 2.5.
whose shadow shall be the refuge of such as are Tempted and afflicted; the
leaves thereof shall be the health of such as are Soule-sicke; the
odoriferous flowers thereof, shall comfort such as are Young beginners in
Virtue; the sweet fruits thereof shall fortifye such as are Proficients, and
do go formard therein; and the round cup thereof shall be the resting place of
such as are Perfect. For all shall find meditations, and forms of Praying,
accomodated to their Estates, as soon after shallbee seen.

And that it may appear how the Piety, and Soueraignety of mystical
Theology, is founded upon the rigorous verity of Scholasticall Divinity, the
third Fountain of what I shall say, shall be the Schoole-Doctors, of whom I
will only allege the Angelical Doctor S. Thomas, for that he alone is
available for ten thousand witnesses, whose Doctrine is sound, secure, and
well approved, and with the Verities of Scholasticall Theologye, he points
at the profoundest conceiptes, and highest sense of mystical Divinity, for
both of them are Sisters, and in both is notably excellent this glorious
Doctor, as was his master S. Augustine, and his Companion S. Bonauenture, of
whose Doctrine I shall likewise make use. And because that, notwithstanding I
have had so good guides, yet as a man I may err in what I shall write, my will
is that all, whatsoever, shallbee subject to the correction of holy mother
Church, which is the foundation, and pillar of Truth, from the which
whenever, either thorough ignorance, or negligence I shall depart, I forth
with revoke whatsoever I shall have said.

What Mental Prayer is. 1.
Mental Prayer (whereof we here entreat) is a work of the three interior
Faculties of the Soul, Memory, Understanding, and Will, Ex P. Ignatio in 1.
exer citio primae hebdomadae. Ex D. Tho. 2.2. q. 83. art. 1. and q. 180. art.
1. and 3. and 4. and 3. p. q. 31.
exercising, by Gods favor, their Acts about those mysteries and Truths,
which our holy Catholic Faith teaches; and speaking within our selves to God
our Lord, conuersing familiarly with him, begging of him his guiftes, and
negotiating all what soever is necessary for our Salvation, and perfection: in
such sort that the Substance of mental Prayer, consists principally in
these four things.

1. The first is, with the memory to be mindful of God our Lord, with whom
we are to speak, and to negociate; and to be mindful also, of the mystery
that is to be meditated, passing breifely thorough the memory, with
clearenesse, and distinction, that which is to be the matter of the meditation,
as it is taught by faith, and as it is divided into several points in the
form that hereafter we shall set down. And that this memory, or
recordation be not dry, it is good to join thereunto the Actions of Faith,
believing with the greatest liuelynesse that we can, the verities of that
mystery, because God, who is all Truth, has revealed them, making of Faith
a Ladder to mount up to perfect knowledge, Cap. 7. iuxta 70 D. Hier. ibid.
seeing that (as Isaias says) unless you believe you shall not understand.

2. The second thing is, with the understanding to make several discourses,
and considerations about that mystery, inquiring, and searching out the
Verities comprehended therein, with all the causes, proprieties, effects, and
circumstances that it has, pondering them very particularly. In such sort
that the Understanding may form a true, proper, and entire conceit of the
thing that it meditateth, and may remain convinced, and persuaded to receive,
and to embrace those Truths that it has meditated, to propound them to the
Will, and to move it thereby to exercize its Actions.

3. The third is, with Free will to draw out sundry Affections, or virtuous
Acts, conformable to that which the Understanding has meditated, some
ordained to himself, others ordained to God our Lord: as are Hatred of our
selves; Sorrow for our Sins; Confusion of our own misery: Love of God,
Trust in his mercy; Praises of God; Thanksgiving for benefits received;
Desire to obtain true Virtues; effectual Purposes to do good works, and to
change, and amend our Life; Resignation of our selves to the VVil of God,
offering to do, and to suffer whatsoever God shall ordain, and dispose, and
other such like: the which we call Affections, for that they are to be done
with the Affection, and Liking of the Will, moved by what the Understanding
has demonstrated unto it: and in these consists that which we call
substantial Devotion, from the which arises the spiritual peace, and
alacritye of the Soul. And to them (as says S. 2.2. q. 82 art. 3. and q. 180.
art. 7. ad 1. Lib. 3. de fide orthodoxa, cap. 24.
Thomas) is principally ordained meditation, and contemplation, and those other
Acts of the Understanding, which are exercized in Mental Prayer; for which
cause S. John Damascene said of it, that it is Ascensus mentis in Deum, an
Ascending of our Spirit to God, joining us with him by actual knowledge, and
Love.

4. The fourth thing is, to make Petitions to God our Lord holding speech, and
conference with him, in reason to ask of him what the Will has desired, and
the Understanding has seen, and all else that we have need of; wherein
consists that which we properly call Prayer, which is an humble, confident,
and fervent Petition of such things as are convenient for us, and we desire to
obtain of our Lord.

These Petitions, and colloquies or speeches, are to be directed sometimes to
the eternal Father; other sometimes to his only begotten Son Christ JESUS;
and other, sometimes to the whole most blessed Trinitye, alleging to them
Titles, and Reasons, that may move them to grant us what we demand.

These Titles may be taken from three parts; Ex D. Th. 2.2. q. 83. art. 17.
some from the part of God, as he is God, to wit asking him something for
his Goodness; for the Love that he bears us; for the Desire he has of our
good; for that he Commands us to ask him; for the Glory of his holy name,
that he may be praised by all his Creatures; and finally there may be made
as it were a Litanye of his Perfections, and Attributes, saying unto him;
Grant me, o Lord, what I require of thee, for thy own sake; for thy
Charity; for thy Mercy; for thy Liberallitye; for thy VVisdome; for thy
Omnipotencye; for thy Immensitye, and Eternitye, etc.

Other Titles there are on the part of Christ JESUS our Lord, true God, and
man, to wit; by his Incarnation, and Natiuitye: by his Circumcision, and
Presentation in the Temple: by his flying into Egypt: by his Fastings: by his
Hunger, Cold, and Nakedness: and by all the Labor, and Travel of his
Preaching. Again, by the Dolours, Ignominies, and Torments of his Passion, and
Death; alleging his Sweating of Blood; his Imprisoning; his Scourging; his
Crown of Thorns; his Nailing; his Gall, and Vinegar; and the rest: Sometimes
speaking to the eternal Father, beseeching him to hear me for the Love of
his Son; for the Services he did him; and the Pains that for his love he
endured. Othertimes speaking to the Son of God: alleging unto him the Love
that he bare us, the Office that he holds of our Redeemer, and Advocate;
and the great Price that we cost him. Othersome times speaking to the Holy
Ghost, begging of him the like, for the Love that he bears to Christ JESUS
our Lord, and for his merits. And here likewise we may make another Litanye,
of the Virtues of our Redeemer, alleging his Humillitye of Heart; his
Pouertye of Spirit; his Meekness; his Obedience; his Patience, his Mercy,
and his Charity, and all the rest.

Other Titles there are on the part of our Necessitye, and Miserye, alleging
before our Lord, like David, that we were conceived in Sin, Psalm. 50.7.
that we have terrible passions, strong enemies, very great occasions, and
dangers, and that with out him we are able to do nothing. Psalm. 118 73.
That we are his Creatures made according to his own Image, and Likeness,
and that for this cause the Devil persecuteth us to destroy us, and that
therefore it belongs to him to protect us. And in conclusion we may make
another Catalogue of our own Sins, and Miseries, counting them before God,
and exaggerating or amplifying them very much with Sorrow of our Heart; for
the more we shall exaggerate them, the more we provoke Gods mercy to remedy
them.

Besides this, men that are perfect, may in some case allege with Humillity,
their fore-passed services in Imitation of holy king Ezechias, 4. Reg. 20 3.
who asked of God prorogation or prolonginge of his Life, alleging unto him,
that he had walked before him with a perfect Heart. And the like did Christ
our Lord, when after the Sermon of the supper, he prayed to his Father, Joan.
17.4.
as in his place shall be seen.

These three kinds of Titles may be mingled one with another, Psalm. 24.11.
after the form that David said; for thy name o Lord thou shall be propitious
to my sin, for it is much.

These, and other such like reasons may be alleged in Prayer, rather to move
our own Heart to ask with Fervor, Devotion, and Confidence, then to move God
to hear us. For our Lord much more desires to hear us, Lib. de verbis
Domini. sermon 5. and 29.
and to give us the good Spirit that we ask, then we to receive him: seeing
(as S. Augustine says) God would not have commanded us to ask of him, if
he had not a will, and a desire to give us what we ask; and asking of him in
the manner aforesaid, we fulfill all that which the Apostle commands us
when he says, Ad Philip. 4.6.1. Ad Tim. 2.1.
That our Petitions should present themselves before God, not alone but
accompanied with three marvelous Actions, that is to say, with Prayer, which
may raise our Spirit, and the Affections thereof to the presence of God: Ex D.
Th. 2.2. q. 83. art. 17.
with Obsecrations that may allege Titles, to be heard; and with
Thanksgiving for benefits received, which may dispose us to receive those
which we ask afresh.

These are the principal things which mental Prayer comprehends, Lib. de
Spiritu, and anima. cap. 70. qui ei tribuitur
whose Order S. Augustine declared saying: Meditatio parit scientiam, scientia
compunctionem, compunctio deuotionem, deuotio vero perficit orationem. Frequent
meditation engenders science, and knowledge of a man's self, and of God:
knowledge engenders affections of compunction for our sins, and miseries:
compunction awaketh affections of devotion toward God for his greatenesse,
and mercies: and devotion perfecteth Prayer, making our Spirit to join it
self lovingly to God, and to ask of him things decent, and fitting, in such
manner as is convenient.

It rests that we explicate and declare the manner how every one of these
things is to be done, beginning with that which is most proper, and
essential to Prayer.

How we are to speak unto God in Mental Prayer.. 2.
BY what has been said, it appears that the essence or nature of Mental
Prayer, properly consists in speaking within our selves to God our Lord, for
two principal ends.

1. The first is, to praise him, and bless him for what he is: and to give
him thanks for the benefits, and rewards he bestows upon us, exercizing
that sovereign manner of Prayer which S. Paul counsels us, saying: Ad Ephesians.
5.19. Ad Coloss. 3.16.
Be filled with the Holy Spirit speaking to yourselues in Psalms, and
Hymns, and spiritual Canticles, chaunting, and singing in your hearts to our
Lord, giving thanks al ways for all things, in the name of our Lord JESUS
Christ to God and the Father. In the which words the holy Apostle points at
four divine affections, wherewith we may speak in our hearts to God our
Lord for the end aforesaid, that is to say, Psalms, Ex D. Th. lectio 7. in
ad Ephesians. 5.
Hymns, spiritual Canticles, and Thanksgiving.

Interior Psalms are Actions of the Love of God, with effectual desires, and
determinations to serve, and obey him, offering ourselves to keep most
perfectly his Commandments, and Counsels. This is that Music which David
calls the Psalter of ten strings: Psalm. 32.2.
for as he that plaieth on the Psalter, or Harp, handles all the ten strings
thereof, sometimes some of them, sometimes othersome, and sometimes all of them
together; so in Prayer making this music to God, we are to have fervent
desires to exercise the Virtues of Obedience, Humillitye, Patience, and the
rest, now one, then another, and sometimes alltogither: as likewise steadfast
purposes to keep Gods Commandments, and his Counsels, laying hands now
upon one, then upon another, and sometimes upon alltogither.

Hymns are Affections of the Praises of God, reckoning up all the
excellencies, and perfections that he has, and the works that he has
done, for the which he is worthily to be praised, and glorified of all
creatures. Sometimes I may say with the Seraphins, Holy, Holy, Holy, the Lord
God of Hosts, Isai. 6.3.
or in steed of this word Holy, I may put in other like words, saying: Good,
Merciful, Just, Wise, and Powerful art thou my Lord, and my God, and most
worthy to have thy Sanctity, and thy Greatenesse preached by the Seraphins.
Sometimes, with the Seniours in the Apocalips, Apoc. 5.12.
I will say, worthy art thou, o Lamb of God, who did dye for us, to
receive Power, and Diuinitye, and VVisdome, and Strength, and Honor, and
Glory, and Benediction for ever and ever. Amen. And othersome times with the
three Children of Babylon, Dan. 3.57. Psalm. 102 1.
that were in the furnace, I will inuit all Ceatures to praise, and glorify
God. And with David I will provoke mine own Soul, and all the faculties
thereof to bless our Lord.

Spiritual Canticles, are Affections of Spiritual Joy, and Alacrity,
rejoicing that God is who he is; and for the Infinite good that he has in
himself: and for the Glory given to him by the Saints in heaven; and for the
services done him by the Just upon the earth: and rejoicing within ourselves
for the hope of eternal good, and for the possession which the blessed do
enjoy, saying that of the Apocalips; Apoc. 19.6.
Alleluia, because our Lord God the omnipotent has reigned. Let us be glad,
and rejoice, and give glory to him, because the marriage of the Lamb is come,
and his wife has prepared herself.

Thankesgiuings, are Actions of thankefullnesse for the benefits we have
received of our Lord, recounting them all very often, and praising him for
every one of them: and I am not only to give him thanks for the benefits I my
self have received, but also for those which he has done to the Angels in
Heaven, and to all the men upon earth, and to the insensible creatures that
know not how to thank him; yea, and for those he has done to the Devils
themselves, and to the Damned, that have no will to be thankful unto him.

With these 4. Affections we may speak to our Lord in Prayer, to the end to
glorifye him, procuring (as S. Paul says) the holy Spirit to be the
beginning of our Interior speeches; the middle or Mediator, to be Christ
JESUS our Savior; and the end, and person to whom they be directed, to be
the Father everlasting, albeeit (as has been said) they may likewise be
directed to all the three Persons.

2. The second end why we are to speak unto God our Lord, is to require of
him new celestial guiftes, and graces, ordained to our own salvation, and
perfection, and to his Glory. These Petitions, and Colloquies, may be made in
many forms, according to the diverse disposition of him that prays, and
speaks to God.

Sometimes we are to speak unto him as a Son speaks unto his Father,
asking of him all such things as a good Son may, and ought to ask of a good
Father, with the Spirit of Love, and Confidence. And in this sort we speak
unto God in that prayer of our Pater noster, where Christ our Lord declares
what things we are to ask, as we shall see in the Meditation which shallbee
made upon that prayer in the third part.

Sometimes we are to speak unto God, as a poor wretch does to a rich, and
merciful man, begging of him an alms. Psalm. 24.16. and 39.18. Ad Romans 10.12.
With this Spirit prayed David very often, calling himself a poor wretch,
and a beggar, begging a spiritual alms of God, who (as S. Paul says) is
rich tovvard all that invoke him.

Sometimes we may speak to God, as a sick man speaks to a Physician,
declaring unto him his Infirmityes, and desiring remedy thereof: or as a man
that has a process, or one that is guilty speaks to a Judge, when he
informs him of his right and requires a favorable sentence, or pardon of
his Crime. And in this case our Colloquye must be accompanied with Affections
of humilliation, of Sorrow for Sin, of Purposes of satisfaction, and
amendme^t. Of the which we shall see forward many examples in the meditations
upon the Miracles, and Parables of our Savior Christ.

Finally other sometimes we may speak unto God with that Spirit that a
Scholar speaks unto his Master, requiring of him Light, and Instruction in
such things as we know not. Or as one friend speaks unto another, when he
talks with him of some weighty affair, asking him Counsel, Direction, and
Aid. And if Confidence, and Love shall so far imbolden us, our Soul may
speak unto God, as the Bride speaks to her Spouse in several Colloquyes,
wherewith the book of Canticles is replenished.

In all these sorts we may speak to our Lord in prayer, clothing ourselves
with the foresaid affections, sometimes with one, and sometimes with another,
for all are fitting unto us with our God, who is our Physician, our Judge, our
Friend, and the Spouse of our Souls. Truth it is, that the greatest
certainety in these Petitions, and Colloquyes, depends principally upon the
holy Spirit, Ad Romans 8.26.
who (as S. Paul says) requesteth for us with gronings unspeakable: for
with his inspiration he teaches us, and moves us to ask, ordering our
petitions, and rowzing up those Affections wherewith they are to be made. To
which purpose S. Sermon. 15. in Cantica.
Bernard said, that Devotion is the Tongue of the Soul, which whosoever has,
is very skillful in talking, and reasoning with the eternal Word. But this
notwithstanding we for our part must aid ourselves, and learn to treat,
and confer with God, observing the manner, and the affection wherewith men
speak one to another in the cases rehearsed.

Whereunto I add, that albeit Prayer is properly a speech, and Colloquy with
our Lord, we may not withstanding speak therein to ourselves, and have
conference with our own Soul. Sometimes, our selves (as S. Paul says)
exhorting ourselves, Ad Colos. 3.16.
and reviving ourselves in the affections, and petitions rehearsed. Other
sometimes reprehending ourselves for our faults, and for our want of zeal,
and being ashamed of our selves that we serve God so euilly.

In this sort David spoke many times to his Soul, saying: O my Soul, why
art thou sorrowful? Psalm. 41.12. and 42.5. Psalm. 61.6.
and why art thou troubled? hope in God, for still I have time to praise him,
and to confess that he is my Savior, and my God. Subject thyselfe to God, o
my Soul, for upon him depends my Patience. From these Colloquyes we must
make a step to speak to God himself, as did the prodigal Son, when he
spoke to himself saying: How many of my Fathers hirelings have abundance of
bread, and I here perish for famine? Luke. 15.17.
I will arise, and vvil go to my Father, and say to him, Father, I have
sinned, against Heaven, and before thee, I am not now worthy to be called
thy Son, make me, if it so please thee, as one of thy Hirelings.

Finally we may likewise in Prayer speak to our blessed Lady the Virgin, to
the Angels, and Saints for the same forsaid two ends; either to praise, and
bless them for their Sanctitye, and Virtues, and for the benefits which they
do us; or to require them to aid, and favor us in the business of our
Salvation. For the which we may likewise allege unto them, some of those
Titles which we laid down in the precedent. and other special ones beseeming
each of them. To the most sacred Virgin may be alleged, that she is our
mother, and the Aduocatrice of Sinners, and that for our remedy her Son gave
her this Office in charge: alleging also the Love that she bears him, and
her desire that all should love, and serve him, beseeching her to do for us
the office of a mother, and an Aduocatrice, and to demonstrate unto us, that,
her Love, and Desire, in obtaining for us what we request, that we may the
better serve him whom she so dearly loves. Also to our Angel Guardian may
be alleged, that he comply with the Office he holds, to present our
prayers unto God, and to procure a good dispatche of them: and that his honor
is interessed in our being good, and having a happy issue of our pretention of
Heaven: and that seeing the Devil sleeps not to tempt us, that he sleep
not, but be watchful to defend us. After this sort we may speak to the
rest of the Saints, that shall offer themselves in the matter of meditation,
or to whom we are devoted, rather to stir up devotion in ourselves, then to
move them thereby: for as they love us, and desire our Salvation, they are very
much inclined to solicit it.

Of the Virtues that accompany Mental Prayer, and of their Excellencies.. 3.
BY what has been delivered in the two precedent paragraphes, it follows
how excellent a thing Mental Prayer is, wherein are exercized so many, Lib. 2.
de orando Deo ad finem.
and so heroycall Acts of the most principal Virtues that are in Christian
life. For the which S. John Chrysostom said with very great reason, That as
when a Queen enters into a City, there enter with her in her Company many
Ladies, and Noblemen of the Court, beside her Guard, and Innumerable People
that follow her: so when Prayer enters into the Soul, there enter with her,
all the Virtues accompanying the Spirit of Prayer. Some Virtues go before
preparing the way, and disposing the Soul to pray as it ought, as are Faith,
Humillitye, Reverence, and Puritye of Intention, and others which hereafter we
shall speak of, according to that saying of the Wise Man, Eccles. 18 ^3.
Before Prayer prepare thy Soul, and be not as a man that tempts God. Other
Virtues go side by side with her, as are Charity, Religion, and Devotion, and
VVisesedome, and those other guiftes of the holy Ghost which illuminate the
Understanding, and aid meruailously to Prayer, as in the 27. meditation of the
fifth part of this work shall be seen. Innumerable other Virtues follow
after her, as are fervent Desiers, and Purposes of all that is good in matter
of Obedience, and Patience, of Temperance, Modestye, Chastitye, and the rest.
And as well the one, as the other inweaue themselves with Prayer, and among
themselves exercize diverse Acts, that are an Ornament, and Decking the one of
the other, for Humillitye joins herself with Confidence, and Charity: D.
Chri. lib. 2. de orando ^ Deo, and Homil. in Psalm. 4. Nilus ca. 13. de
oratione. Climacus gradu. 28
Charity with Religion, and Thanksgiving: Religion with Obedience, and
Resignation: and thus with a celestial, and divine Consort they make a music
of many voices. VVhereupon many holy Fathers say; That Prayer makes men like
Angels, not only for that it is a Work of the superior faculties, wherein
men are like them, but for that it communicates unto men an Angelical life
full of puritye, and Sanctitye. By Prayer when it is perfect, they participate
the ardent Love of the Seraphins, the fulness of knowledge of the Cherubins,
the peace, and quietness of the Thrones; the rule over themselves, of the
Dominations; the power against Devils, of the Powers; the Magnanimity for
marvelous things, of the Virtues; the discretion in government, of the
Principallities; the Fortitude in difficult and hard things, of the
Archangells, and the Obedience in all things of the Angels; and finally the
VVisdome, Chastitye, and Cleane-nesse, of the celestial Spirits. For there
can be nothing (says S. Chrysostom) more wise, nor more just, nor more
holy, then a man that speaks to God as it is meet for him, from whom he
receives most abundantly those g^^^^es, and graces, wherein consists true
VVisdome, and perfect Justice, and Sanctitye. The reason hereof is, because as
our Lord is very courteous, and gentle, and Inspireth us to pray, he speaks
to us when we speak to him; and conuerseth familiarly with those, that enter
into their heart to treat, and converse with him; and the conversation and
speech of God is not of words alone, but of works; Sermon. 45. in Cantica.
for (as S. Bernard says) Locutio verbi, est infusio doni. For God to speak,
is to communicate guiftes infusing his Graces, and Virtues upon them to whom
he speaks, filling them with that spiritual joy that cannot be expressed,
and with that peace that passes all Understanding. 1. Petr. 1.8. Ad Phil. 4.7.
Psalm. 84.9.
And hereupon said David, I will hear what our Lord God will speak in me;
because he will speak peace upon his People and upon his Saints, and upon
them that are converted to the Heart.

Hereupon it is that in Prayer we are in such sort to speak unto God, that
we be attentive to hearken, and to hear what he speaks unto us by his
Inspirations, to obey them; and to dispose ourselves to receive those guiftes
which thereby he pretends to communicate unto us; as we shall see in the
second part in the 26. meditation.

By what has been said appears the excellencye, and necessitye of mental
Prayer, of the which Cassianus says, Colla. 9. c. 1.
That it has such a connection with all Virtues, that neither they can be
perfectly obtained, nor conserved without Prayer, nor perfect Prayer be
obtained without them, for it (says he) is the end of all, and to it are
directed all the Labor, and Travel we take to gain them. Forasmuch as
Prayer, whereof we here treat, in its perfect degree embraces union with
God, by the mean (...) actual knowledge, and Love, with great Joy in
possessing him. Gradu. 28.
From whence it arises that God (as S. John Climacus says) in Prayer pays
in ready money a hundredth times double of that which is left, or labored for
his cause, besides great pledges of the last reward that is to be given in
the life everlasting. Many things I might say of this Sovereign Virtue, which
I omit, because this book is written for those that desire to exercise it,
in respect of the great estimation they hold of it. And in the Prologues, and
Introductions to every one of the six parts of this book, some thing shall
be spoken to discover the excellencye of this sovereign exercise, and the
good that proceeds of it.

Of the matter of Mental Prayer for Meditation.. 4.
THE matter of Mental Prayer wherein the three Faculties of the Soul,
(especially the Understanding) are to exercize their Acts, is all that which
God has revealed in the Divine Scripture, especially the principal mysteries
of our Faith, which therein are most expressed, and recommended.

These mysteries may be reduced in general to three Orders, Ex D. Dionys.
cap. 3. de Eccles. Hierar. and cap. 5. P. Ignatius in annot: annotatio. 10.
Jacob. 4.8. Psalm. 33.6.
accomodated to the diverse Estates of those that meditate: among the which
some are sinners that desire to get out of their Sins; or young Principiants
or beginners, that desire to mortifye the Vices, and Passions of their former
life: and these walk in the way which we call the Purgative way, whose end
is to purifye the Soul, of all these Vices, and to obtain Cleanness of
Heart. Others pass more forward, and be Proficients in Virtue, and these
walk in that way which we call the Illuminatiue way, of which the end is to
Illustrate or lighten the Soul, with the Splendor and brightenes of many
Verities, and Virtues, and to obtain great augmentation and increase thereof.
Others are already perfect and very much exercized, and these walk in that
way which we call Unitive, whereof the end is to unite, 1. Cor. 6.18.
and join our Spirit to God, in the Union of perfect Love.

Each one of these Persons, is to have matter of Meditation, accomodated and
agreing to his Estate, and Pretense, from the which he may easily draw out
the Affections, and Purposes that his necessity requires.

And albeit this matter may be reduced to three Orders of Mysteries, and
Verities, accomodated to those three estates, and ways which have been set
down, yet for the greater perspicuitye; and cleerenesse, we reduce it in this
book to six parts, assigning two to those that are Principiants or
beginners; two to those that are Proficients, and other two to those that are
most Perfect; in this form ensuing.

Sinners which desire truly to be converted, and to turn unto God, and to
change their life, are to take for the matter of their meditation their own
Sins, and all such things as may aid them to know the number, and
Greiuousnesse of them, or that may cause a detestation of them, and Sorrow for
having committed them. And forasmuch as Fear is usually the beginning of
Justification, whatsoever awaketh this Fear, is matter of meditation
accomodated to them; such are the last things of man, as Death, Judgment,
particular, and universal, Hell, and such other like things, which shall be
put in the first part, with certain forms of Prayer, accomodated for the
examination of the Conscience, for Confession, and Communicating, and for the
obtaining of perfect Justification, which is the end of the Purgative way.

Such as are already justified, and desire to horde up Virtues, and to increase
in them, are to take for the proper matter of their meditation, the mysteries
of the Humanitye of our Lord JESUS Christ, whilst he lived in this mortal
Life; for that his Life, and Doctrine; his Passion, and Death, was a most
perfect pattern of all Virtue, for all sorts of them that are just; Tract. 5.
super 1. canonic. Joan. D. Th. 2. 2. q. 24. art. 9.
albeit in a different manner: for (as S. Augustine says, and after him S.
Thomas) Charity when it is already engendered, and is borne by the means of
Penance, has those three Estates which have been mentioned, of spiritual
Childhood, of Augmentation or increase, and of Perfection.

The newly Justified which are the Principiants or Beginners, and as it were
Infants newly begotten in the being of Grace, are to take for the matter of
their meditation, the mysteries of the Incarnation, and Childehood of our
Savior JESUS Christ of the which we treat in the second part: and in those
meditations they shall find sufficient motives, as well to prosecute and
continue on the Journey of the Purgative Way, mortifying, and purifying
themselves from those Vices, and Passions, which have remained in them as
Dregs of their former life; as also to begin the journey of the Illuminatiue
way, storing up Virtues contrary to their Vices, and accomodated to their
Estate.

Such as are Proficients, and go onward increasing in Virtue, have two ways
to this: the one by Doing, and the other by Suffering: I would say, either by
exercizing of their own election diverse works of Virtue, which appertain to
the active and contemplative Life: or by suffering with great perfection
great Troubles, Persecutions, and Afflictions inflicted upon them by the hand
of another. And this way, though it be the sharper, is the most effectual to
increase in Virtues, and to attain to their perfection.

These twoe ways our Savior Christ walked with great Excellencye, In Psalm.
49.
of whom S. Augustine says, that his exercises among men were; Mira facere,
and mala p^ti^ To do marvelous things, and to suffer painful things: and
all for our Instruction, of which we treat in the meditations of the third,
and fourth part. For in the third we will set down the mysteries of what he
did, and said the three years of his Preaching, from his Baptism unto his
last entrance into Jerusalem; And in the fourth, the mysteries of his
Passion, and Death. And albeit both mysteries teach us to do, and to suffer,
yet the one is most resplendent and shyning in the first, and the other in the
last, which are the most prowerfull to move us to all kind of Virtue with
greater Excellencye, and Perfection.

Finally those which arrive to the Estate of Perfection, walking in the Unitive
way, have two other paths to attain to the perfect Union of Love. The first
is, by contemplating the gloglorious life of our Savior Christ, and the
wonderful works that he did after his Resurrection, sending upon his
Disciples the holy Ghost, which is the Spirit of Love: and of these mysteries
treats the fifth part. The other way is, by contemplating the mysteries of
the Diuinitye, and Trinitye of God, his Perfections, and Benefits, whereof the
sixth part entreats. And these two last parts are most proper to such, as
are perfect, according to the saying of David in the 103. Psalm. Psalm. 103 18.
Collat. 10 cap. 13.
The high mountains for hearts, the Rock a refuge for Irchins; giving to
understand in a mystical sense, (as Cassianus notes) that perfect men, who
like stags run lightly in the way of Heaven, feed themselves with the
consideration of the mysteries of the Diuinitye, and Glory of Christ, figured
by the high mountains: but men pricklie like Irchins, with the prickles of
their Sins, and Imperfections, or afflicted with Trauells, take for remedy
the consideration of their earth, and dust, and the mysteries of the
Humanity, and Humillitie of Christ JESUS our Lord figured by the Rock, in
whose wounds they repose, and with whose Doctrine, and Examples they sustain,
and proffit themselves.

By what has been said it ensues, that the meditations of these six parts
are as the six wings of the Seraphins which God has upon Earth, Isai. 6.2.
like unto those which the Prophet Isay saw; with the which they depart from
what is terrene, and earhlie, and fly to that which is celestial and
Heavenly: where after they have purified, illustrated, and perfected
themselves, they fly likewise to purifye, illustrate, and perfect others,
desiring to have all burn with the Love with which they burn: for that these
meditations are ayding to all these ends, and in all of them ought all men to
be exercised, yea even those that have most proffited, but with a different
end, and manner: And the reason is, because as in the three degrees of Souls,
to wit, the Vegetative proper to Plants; the Sensitive proper to brute
Beasts; and the Rational proper to Men, the Superior besides his own
works, does likewise the works of the Inferior, though after a more
excellent manner? so also (as S. 2.2. q. 24 art. 9. maxim ad 3.
Thomas says) in the three Estates of People that dedicate themselves to
Prayer, and to the Service of God: those which are Proficients or Goers
forward, are to exercize themselves in the meditations, and works of the
Beginners, or Principiants; and the Perfect in those of them both; but after a
more perfect manner, drawing out of them the fruit which they pretend with
more advantage, that is, more perfect mortification of themselves, and a more
excellent manner of Imitating our Savior Christ in his Virtues.

Besides this Experience teaches, that when a great Spirit or Affection of
any Virtue whatsoever, is predominant in a Soul, upon what thing soever it
meditateth, it takes occasion to feed, and augment it. If the Spirit of
Humillitye predominate, whither he meditate upon Hell, or upon Heaven; whither
he think upon his own Miseries, or upon the Divine Excellencies, he will
extract or draw out of all, Affections of Humillitye. And if in his Heart the
Spirit of Love do predominate, though he meditate upon Judgment, and Hell,
he conuerteth all into the Affections of Love. So likewise Prin^ipiants,
Proficients, and those that are Perfect, upon whatsoever they meditate, they
may draw out those Affections, and Purposes, that are fitting to their state,
and necessitye.

From hence it is, that albeit by the ordinary Law we are to observe the
Order propounded, yet need we not to be so tied to it, that it shall not be
lawful to change it: nay rather sometimes it is convenient, for some cannot
apply themselves to Considerations of Fear, who yet are easily moved with
meditations of Love; and other contrarily. Some find Devotion, and Proffit in
considering the mysteries of the Childehood of our Savior Christ: others in
considering the mysteries of his Passion: some in one mystery, and some in
another: and it is not good to force them overmuch, nor to draw them from
their consideration, to pass them to another, wherein they shall not find
what they desired. And for this cause our Lord has provided the matter of
meditation to be so copious, and ample, that every one may find some that is
fitting to his Purpose.

Of Entrance into Prayer.. 5.
IT is the Counsel of the holy Ghost before Prayer to prepare the Soul,
Eceles. 18 23,
for to go without preparation, is as it were to tempt God, pretending the
end, and fruit of Prayer, with out using the means ordained to obtain the
same. It is therefore necessary before we enter into Prayer, to carrye the
matter forseene which we are to meditate upon: for regularly meditation cannot
be attentive, nor recollected, if the matter be not first prepared, well
digested, and divided into points after that manner, that we here shall
prescribe. And yet for all this we hinder not, if our Lord by special
Inspiration shall move us to think upon some other thing, but that we may
occupye ourselves therein, omitting till some other time that, which before we
had premeditated, because Divine Impulsion or moving, is the principal cause
of this work, which we are to follow: but with this advertisement, that it
proceed not from lightness of mind, nor Instabillitye of Heart, to dashe out
of one matter into another without sufficient cause.

This being presupposed, before we begin meditation, we are to do these
things following. 1. First we are to lift up our Heart, and the Faculties of
our Soul to God our Lord, beholding him as he is there present with an
Interior, attentive, reverend, and loving aspect: for that if a man be to
speak with a Prince, it is necessary that he go to his Palace, or to the
place where he is, and present himself before him, for with one that is
absent we cannot speak: and seeing God is present in Heaven, and in Earth,
and in every place assisting all, and beholding all, when I am to pray, and to
speak unto him, I need not go seek him in any other place, but to quicken
my Faith, and to behold how he is there present, persuading myself, that
when I pray I am not alone, but that there is also with me the most holy
Trinitye, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, to whom I speak, who sees me, and
hears me, and is accustomed to answer within my heart with Inspirations,
and Illuminations, communicating the light of Truth to the Understanding, and
fervent affections of Devotion to the Will, and infusing guiftes, and Virtues,
and other Graces into the Soul, as before has been said.

Sometimes I may behold God as he is round about me, incompassing me on
every side, and myself within him, as the fishes are within the Sea.
Othertimes I may behold him as he is within me by Essence, Presence, and
Power, knowing what I do, and ayding me to do it. And in this manner is
fullfilled the saying of our Lord, christ: When thou shall pray enter into
thy chamber, Matt. 6.6. Ex D. Hilario can. 5. in Matthew. Amb. lib. 6. de sacra.
c. 3. Aug. come. 2. in Psalm. 33.
that is into thy Heart, and having shutt the door of thy senses, pray to thy
Heavenly Father in secret, and thy Father which is there and sees in secret
will repay thee, that is will give thee what thou ask.

This Truth of the Presence of God within me, and round about me,
wheresoever I am praying, I am much to quicken, that it may move me to
reverence, and confidence, and to due Attention. And if with this consideration
I shall perceive myself moved to these, and other like affections of Devotion,
I may well detain myself to enjoy this morsel, that God gives me, for the
time it will last, for this already is a Prayer, and a very good one. But the
ordinary shall be to detain myself in this Cogitation a Pater noster while,
albeit in all the time of my meditation I must not loose out of sight the
presence of God; according to that of David: Psalm. 18.15.
The meditation of my Heart is in thy sight alvvaies: but in the time of my
Petitions, and Colloquyes, I must fenewe it with more fervor, povvring out,
Psalm. 141 3.
(as David says) our Prayer in the sight of our Lord.

This done, secondly I am to make a great, and 2. Para. vlt. flecto genu
cordis mei.
profounde reverence to the majesty of God, bending before him the knees of my
heart, and of my body, once, and three times, as they do that enter into the
presence of kings: I am to adore him in Spirit, acknowledging him for my God
and my Lord, the Father of immense Majesty, and the king most worthy of
infinite reverence; and with my body to humble myself, even to the fastening
my mouth to the ground, yea, and to prostrate myself, as did our Lord JESUS
Christ in the Prayer of the Garden, Ad Hebr. 5.7.
of whom S. Paul says, that he was heard by the eternal Father, for the
great reverence he bare him, giving us to understand how much it imports to
reverence God in Prayer, to the end that he may hear us.

3. This Humiliation being made, I will kneel down in the place appointed
for Prayer, and forthwith it is good to bless myself, with inward feeling of
the words that then are spoken; desiring of God by that sign to deliver me
from those Enemies, that use to molest us in Prayer, saying with this
affection: Per signum cru^is de inimicis nostris, libera nos Deus noster, and
then presently I will add, In nomine Patris, and Filij, and spiritus Sancti,
as one that intends to begin his Prayer not in his own Virtues, but in the
Virtues of the most blessed Trinitye. Some are wont presently to say the
general Confession, Ex Prou. 18.17. iuxta 70
to begin with Humilliation, and to complye with the saying of the Wise Man:
that the Just man in the beginning of Prayer, is an Accuser of himself. Others
use to begin with Thanksgiving, following the order that S. Basile
prescribes; whereof we will speak in the first part, in the meditation of
the Examination of the Conscience.

But although every one may begin with that which shallbee most helpefull to
his Devotion, yet that which generally is convenient, for all, is to begin with
a short Prayer, Preparatorye as it were to that which we pretend: wherein
we may beseech our Lord to direct that Work to his Honor, and Glory, and
to give us Grace necessary, to do it, as he requires. This breife Prayer I
am to make speaking to God our Lord, whom I behold present, saying unto him
with great earnestness and affection of Heart: I offer unto thee, o Lord,
whatsoever I shall here think, speak, or treat, to the end that all may
be ordained purely to thy Honor, and Glory; and I beseech thee by what
thou art, to assist me in this hour, to the end that I may assurdely pray
in such manner, as thou requirest, for the glory of thy most holy name, and
for the proffit of my soul. Amen.

This manner of Prayer may be directed to the three Divine Persons in this
form. Sometimes to the eternal Father, saying unto him. Sovereign Father I
offer unto thee this my Prayer united, and Incorporated with that of thy only
begotten Son Christ JESUS my Lord, for whose sake I beseech thee to aid
me to pray in such manner as he prayed, that my Prayer, as his was, may be
acceptable unto thee.

Other sometimes it may be directed, to the Son of God, saying unto him, as
did the Apostles; My Redeemer, Luc. 11.1
and master teach me to pray, and aid me to pray with attention, purity,
and fervor like to that which thou had, when thou did pray to thy Father,
that my Prayer, as thine was, may be acceptable unto him.

Other times to the holy Ghost, saying unto him that of the Apostle S. Paul;
Ad Romans 8.26.
most holy Spirit, I am an ignorant, and wretched Sinner, I know not what to
pray, nor to ask as it behooves me, thou my God ask in me, moving me to
ask with gronings unspeakable, that my Prayer may be well received,
proceeding from so noble beginning as thou art, to whom be honor, and glory
world without end. Amen.

In this sort is fullfilled, C. 3. de diuinis nominibus.
that which S. Dyonisius says; that every Theological or Divine Act, (which
is it that beholds God, and treats of him, and with him) ought to begin
with Prayer, inuocating and calling upon the favor of the most holy Trinity,
which is present in every place, delivering up ourselves unto the same with
pure petitions, with a settled understanding, and with an Affection well
disposed, for the Union which we pretend in this holy Exercise.

Of the manner of meditating, and discoursing in Prayer, and how we are to
resist Distractions that then do combatte us.. 6.
THE work of the Understanding, which we call Meditation, is one of the most
difficult and hard that is in mental Prayer. For though it be easy to
meditate upon diverse things, running from one to another without order, or
method, yet it is very difficult to meditate upon one thing alone with
attention, having the Memory, and Understanding fixed upon God, without being
distracted, and diuerted to other things. Yea the greatest Saints were wont
to be herewith sometimes molested, and they complain thereof. Job. c.
17.11.12.
Job said of himself: My cogitations are dissipated tormentinge my heart,
they have turned night into day, because they deprive me of the quietness of
recollection, wherein I was wont to waste the night. Psalm. 39.13.
And David cried to God saying: My heart has forsaken me, and is departed my
house, be good unto me to Lord, and deliver me from this Trouble.

This very hurt we all have experience of, and it is wont to proceed from
diverse roots, and beginnings. First, Devil to hinder us from the fruit of
Prayer. Secondly from our own Imagination which is free, untamed, instable,
and illgouerned. Thirdly, Affections unmortified, which draw our thoughts
after them: for where the Treasure is, there is also the Heart. Matt. 6.21.
Fourthly from Cares which sting, and divide the heart into a thousand parts.
Fifthly from weakness, and coldenesse, thorough not enforcing, nor applying
ourselves to this so noble Exercise. Sixthly from Ignorance, Will, and stir
up Affections of Devotion. This Ignorance, by the favor of Heaven, shall be
remedied with that form, and method, which here I shall prescribe.

First in meditation we are to actuate our selves very well in the Veritye of
the mystery which Faith teaches us, laboring to believe, Secondly we are
to inquire the true causes and roots, from whence proceeded the matter that
we meditate, excluding the causes that are false, and apparent. Then by
discoursing we are to search out the true ends, wherefore it was ordained,
excluding all others that are contrary. Fourthly we are to inquire the
effects proceeding from the matter, that is the good, or hurt that it brings
with it. lastly certain properties, and circumstances that accompagnye it: as
shallbee clearly understood by this Example.

If I would meditate upon the misterye of the Incarnation; First I must well
consider, and understand what our Faith teaches: that is to say, That the
Son of God joined to himself in unity of Person our humane nature, in such
sort that truly God is man, Then I am to inquiere out the things before
propounded, pondering how the causes, and roots of this work, were not our
merits, but only the bountye, and mercy of God: and the ends were the
Redemption of the World, and the manifestation of his divine Goodness,
Afterward I will consider the proffit that thereby came unto us, to wit,
Pardon of Sins, Destruction of Death, Entrance into Heaven, and such other
like: And then the loss we had sustained, if this work had not been done,
remaining all Enemies of God, Slaves of the Devil, and Damned to Hell. Finally
the Circumstances of this work touching Place, and Time, and Manner; and what
properties of Body, and Soul, God took, when he was Incarnate.

In each of these things the Understanding is to make a pawse, detaining
itself in every one so long as it shall find Devotion, and Spiritual Gust,
without caring to pass to another, moving the Will to diverse Affections of
Love, and Confidence, as has been said, making Petitions, and Colloquies
with our Lord, according to what has been meditated, and desired. And when
our Understanding has pondered well one of these things, it may pass to
another with the like quietness, and calmness of mind, and so proceed in
the rest. Of all this we shall see plain examples in the meditations ensuing,
especially in the first which shallbee a pattern for the rest.

I only advertise, that when the holy Spirit with special Inspiration moves
us to pray, all is easy, and sweeet: for that he recollecteth the memory,
reuiueth the discourses, raineth showers of meditatio^s, inkindleth the
Affections, accords the Petitions, orders the Colloquies, and makes
perfect the whole Work of Prayer, ourselves cooperating without Trouble. But
when this special Succor is wanting, it is necessary that we ourselves,
using our freewill with the assistaunce of Grace, which never fails us, apply
our faculties to the exercise of their Acts in the form aforesaid, whereby
we provoke the holy Spirit to aid us, with the special Succor of his
Inspirations. For Spiritual men which treat of Prayer, should not be like
Ships of high building that cannot sail with out wind; but rather like
Galleys that nauigate both with the wind, and with the Oar: and when they
fail of the prosperous wind of divine Inspiratio^, they are to nauigate with
the Oar of their faculties, aided by the divine favor, though it be not so
sensible. And this kind of Prayer is wont to be sometimes most profitable
(though it be not so pleasing) for the much that it meriteth, fighting against
Distractions, and Dryness of Heart. And if we persevere rowing, and praying,
at his time Christ our Lord will come to visit us, with whose visitation this
tempest shall cease: as it happened in a like case to the holy Apostles, as
hereafter we shall see. Matt. 14.25.


The Arms to fight against these Distractions of Heart, and Drouthe of Spirit
are principally four. 1. The first is, profound Humillitye, Mar. 6.48.
acknowledging our Weakness, and miserye, and being ashamed of ourselves to
stand before God with such distraction, and accusing ourselves of our offenses
passed, and present, for the which we are chastized therein. Lucae. 14.11.
For whosoever in this manner humbles himself in Prayer, shallbee therein
exalted. 2 The second is, Fortitude of mind, making a manly resolution not
advisedly to admit any Cogitation, that may separate us from that whereof we
pray, though it be of a matter that ministers to us much pleasure, or seems
of very much Importance: for at that time none Imports so much as to attend
to my Prayer, and to God, before whom I am to pray: and when unwittingly I
find myself diuerted, I will turn again to tie the third of the good
Cogitation, and Discourse begun: and if a thousand times I shall be diuerted,
I will turn a thousand times to the same, without loosing my Courage, or
Confidence, Genes. 15.11. D. Greg. lib. 16. mor. c. 19
remembering that Abraham perseuering to chase away the Importunate birds that
approached to the Sacrifice, came to sleep a mysterious Sleep, wherein God
discovered unto him great Secrets, and passed like Fire thorough the midst of
the sacrifice, in testimonye that he accepted it: So I laboring with
Perseverance to chase away Importunate Cogitations, that disquiet me in the
Sacrifice of Prayer, shall come with Gods favor, to sleep the quiet sleep of
Contemplation, wherein he may illuminate my Soul with his light, that I may
know him, and inflame it with the fire of Love, that I may love him.

3. The third VVeapon is Prayer it self, beseeching our Lord to build in our
Soul a City of Jerusalem, Psalm. 146.2.
that may be a Vision of Peace, recollecting my Thoughts, and wandering
Affections, that they may Inhabit therein, and busy themselves quietly in
Prayer. The like will I beseech the holy Angels, who assist those that pray.
And in this mean I will Imploye all my force; for Prayer is so powerful that
it can obtain of God all things; and it self with them; using in the midst
of these Disturbations some breife Prayers to this Purpose. Sometimes I will
say with David: My Heart has forsaken me, Psalm. 39.13.
it may please thee to Lord to deliver me from the violence I suffer, and have
respect to help me. Other times, I will say with the same royal Prophet: My
Soul as Earth without water to thee, Psalm. 142.6. Matthew. 8.25.
hear me quickly, to Lord; my Spirit has fainted. Other sometimes I will
cry out with the Apostles in the midst of the Tempest, Save me, o Lord, for
I perish. Or like the blind whose Prayer was hindered by the press of the
People, I will lift up my voice saying; Luc. 18.38.
Son of David have mercy upon me. And if I persevere crying though it be
with Drouthe, and Violence, our Lord Christ will not fail to have compassion
on me, as he had on this blind man, which we shall ponder in its place.

4. The last weapon must be a great Confidence in God our Lord, persuading
ourselves, that seeing he commands us to pray, he will give us grace, and
help for the same, whereby we may be able to resist the Devil, to bridel our
Imagination, to repress our Passions, to moderate our cares, and to cast from
us our lukewarmenesse, that they may not hinder us in the exercise of Prayer.
But with this Confidence we must join Diligence, Collat. 9. c. 2. and collat.
10. c. 13. Cap. 48.49.50.
procuring (as Cassianus says) before Prayer to remove all such occasions as
we would not, should distract us therein, imitating in this the subtlety of
our Aduersarye, who (as S. Nilus the Abbot says) ordains all his
Temptations, wherewith in the day time he tempts spiritual Persons, to
hinder them from Prayer, and the fruit thereof. He tempts them with
Gluttonye to make them in Prayer heavy, and sleepye. He tempts them with
Impatience to disquiet them: with Curiositye of the Senses to distract them:
with multitude of business to disturb them: and with Pride, and Ingratitude
to make them dry. And seeing we ought to be no less provident, and careful
of our good, then the Devil is of our evil, it is great reason so to order
our works, and businesses of the Day, that they may all help to further well
our Prayer. And so with this in some sort we shall fulfill what Christ our
Savior said: Luc. 18.1
It behooves alvvaies to pray, and not to be vvearye: for he always
prays, that spends his whole time in prayer, or in preparing himself
thereunto. With this Confidence I am to enter into mental Prayer, saying to
the Devils, that of the Psalm: Psalm. 118.115.
Depart from me ye malignant, and I will search the Commandments of my
God. And to my Powers, Cogitations, and Affections I will say that of another
Psalm: Psalm. 94.6.
Come let us adore and fall down and weep before our Lord that made us,
because he is, the Lord our God, and we the People of his pasture, and the
Sheep of his hand.

Of the manner how we may aid ourselves with the Imagination, and the Tongue,
and the rest of the faculties for Mental Prayer.. 7.
ALbeeit Mental Prayer, as has been said, is the work of the three supreme
faculties of the Soul, in respect of that part which is pure spirit, and is
called Men's, from whence this Prayer also is called Mental: ^ yet
notwithstanding, the other faculties of the Soul which are more Inferior do
aid to the exercise of the same. 1. Among these, the first is the Imaginatiue:
the which when it is untamed, and disordered, as it notably hinders Prayer; so
also it aydeth much, when it can with facilitye form within it self certain
figures, or Images of such things as are to be meditated: for this is as it
were to tie it to one only place, and to set before the Soul spiritually the
thing that it meditateth, as if it were present. According to this, it were
good before we begin meditation, to procure with the Imagination to form
within ourselves some figure, or Image of the things we Intend to meditate
with the greatest viuacitye, and propriety that we are able. If I am to think
upon Hell, I will imagine some place like an obscure, straight, and horrible
Dungeon full of fire, and the Souls therein burning in the midst of those
flames. And if I am to meditate in the birth of Christ, I will form the figure
of some open place without shelter, and a Child wrapped in swaddling Cloutes,
laid in a manger: and so in the rest. But here we are to advertise, that
this be done without breaking the head: for whosoever finds much
difficultye in forming such figures, it were better to leave them, and use
only the spiritual Faculties in the manner aforesaid. And contrarily those
that are very Imaginatiue, are to be very well advised, because their vehement
Imaginations, may be unto them an occasion of many Illusions, supposing their
Imagination to be revelation, and that the Image which they form within
themselves, is the same thing which they Imagine: And so thorough their
indiscretion they use to break their head, and convert to their hinderaunce
that, which taken with moderation, might have been to their proffit.

2. The tongue likewise may help in Prayer, for (as S. Thomas says) Mental
Prayer, 2. 1. q. 83 art. 12.
and Vocal which is done with exteriourwordes, are not contrary, but
Sisters, that help one another. Mental Prayer uses sometimes to break out
into Vocal, speaking to our Lord Exterior words arising from the Interior
fervor, Psalm. 15.9.
and devotion: and vocal Prayer uses to quicken the Soul to make it more
attentive to mental. For when therein we perceive ourselves to be
distracted, or dry, it is a good remedy to speak some words that may
awaken, Ex D. Aug. epis. 121. ad Probam. cap. 9.
and recollect us, either speaking to our Lord, or to ourselves: for as the
Body aideth the Soul, so the works of the Body are accustomed to aid those
of the Soul; and the exterior word, and that which the Tongue speaks,
Processu. 7. religionis cap. 3
uses to touch the Heart. This (as S. Bonauenture aduertiseth) may be
practiced in twoe manners. The one is, every one composing the words as his
necessity, or Devotion shall dictate unto him, not standing upon this, whither
they be well, or ill ordered: for our Lord regards rather the agreement of
the Heart, and the fervor of the Affections, then of the Words, and he is
better appeased with the rude speeches of the stammering Child, and penitent
Sinner, then with the well composed words of a Learned man that is proud.

The other manner is, saying some Prayer made by another, as are those of the
Church, or of some Saint, appropriating them to himself, and speaking them
with such feeling, and affection, as if he himself were composing them; after
that manner which in the 9.. we shall prescribe.

3. As for our Corporal senses, there can be no certain rule given: for some
find themselves best, holding their eyes shut; others help themselves with
opening them, looking up to Heaven, or beholding some Image. Some are troubled
with the hearing of any thing: others are inflamed with hearing some Song, or
Music of the Church: Some feel devotion with striking themselves often on
the breast, as S. Hierome did in Imitation of the Publican: Others with much
bending of the knee, as did Symeon of the Pillar, who prayed bowing the knee
with his head even to the ground, and then raising up himself, and repeating
thus Innumerable times.

The like we may say of other motions, and comportments of the Body, as to
stretch the arms in form of a Cross, to lie prostrate on the ground, to
stand fixed in one place, to walk in some part, or to sit in some lowly
seat: in all which we must make choice of that, which helps most to the
quietness, and devotion of the Heart, having consideration of the Weakness
of him that prays, and of the edification of such as are present, if the
place be public: for in such case that settling of the Body is to be used,
that may not be offensive to the standers by.

Of the examination of Prayer, and of the fruits that may be drawn from
thence.. 8.
PRayer being ended it is exceeding proffitable to examine what has passed us
therein: and albeit this examination ought to be made after any work, or
exercize whatsoever of Vocal Prayer, whither it be Divine offices, the
Rosarye, or the Mass; yet particularly it ought to be done after retired
Mental Prayer, wherein a man has spent one, or more hours.

1. First, I am to examine whither I have observed the aduertisements of those
things that are precedent to Prayer: as whither I premeditated the matter of
the meditation; whither I put myself well in the presence of God: whither I
offered unto him this Action in Spirit, and what puritye of Intention I had
therein, with such like: being very sorrowful for any defect that I shall
find, and purposing from that time forward to amend it.

2. Secondly, I am to examine whither I were attentive, or distracted: whither
devout, or dry: whither I contented myself with discoursing only (for that
were no Prayer, but study) or whither I had good affections, and purposes:
whither I begged of God, and spoke unto him in my Colloquies with reverence,
and confidence, or without it. And if I find that it has gonne well with me
in all. I will give thanks to God for it, attributing this good success not
to my diligence, but to his grace, and mercy. But if I find that it has
gonne ill with me, I will examine the cause whither it were any fault of mine,
or any passion, or disordered Affection, or any negligence, or remissness:
and being sorry for my fault I will purpose to amend with determination to
mortify my self, and to remove away the cause of this harm.

3. Thirdly, I am to examine the motions, and Inspirations, or Illuminations,
and spiritual Taste that I have felt, marking well what effects they have
wrought in me, to know whither they spring from a good Spirit, or not, and to
gain experience that may help me to know the Variety of Spirits. To which
end it will help much to know the rules that are prescribed for this, of
which we shall set down many in the discourse of these meditations.

4. Fourthly, I am to examine the Resolutions that I made in Prayer, to see
when, and how I am to put them in execution: and generally, I am to examine
what fruit I draw from Prayer, and Conversation with God: for if my Prayer
be a Tree without fruit, Matt. 21 19.
it will be cursed like the figtree, and presently wither: but if it bear
fruit, it shallbee blessed, and grow up like a Tree planted nigh to the
streams of waters. Psalm. 1.3.
The fruits of Prayer are these; To reform manners, to withdraw us from
Sins be they never so light, to avoid the occasions of them, and of all
Imperfection; to subdue Passions, to curb the Senses, to mortifye sinister
Inclinations, to vanquish the repugnancies, and difficulties that I find in
Virtues; to fight valiauntly against Temptations: to animate myself to suffer
much Affliction with alacritye: to encourage myself to fulfill readily the
will of God declared in his holy Law, in the Evangelical Counsels, and in
the rules, and Orders of my estate, and office. To procure also the
augmentation or increase of Virtues, imitating those of Christ JESUS our
Lord, especially his Charity, and Humillitye; his Obedience, and Patience in
Afflictions: his Love of the Cross, and of Contempt, and of Chastizing the
flesh. And particularly every one is to procure to have that Virtue that he
has most need of, according to the quallitye of his Estate, whither it be
Modestye, or Chastitye, or Fortitude, or any other of the Theologall, or Moral
Virtues with a most effectual resolution and purpose, as shall be set down in
the 29. meditation of the first part. And when I shall make an examination of
Prayer, I must make good Trial, whither I have drawn out any of these fruits
in the manner aforesaid.

Of the several forms of Praying in diverse Matters, accomodated to different
Persons, and Times.. 9.
THE taste of man is so disgusted in spiritual Exercises, that it easily
begets tediousness, and loathing, if his meat be given him dressed
allwaies after one fashion, though it be never so precious, Number. 21.5.
as the Israelites were lothed with Manna though it were exceeding sweet,
because it was always the same. For this cause the Saints, and Spiritual
masters, have Invented diverse forms of Prayer, accomodating Prayer in sundry
manners, with this Variety to take away the weariness we might have in the
exercise thereof, when the Spirit of God goes not always renewing the delight
of the same, making us, Psalm. 95.1. and 97.1.
(as David says) always to sing unto our Lord a new song.

Herein the Seraphicall Doctor S. Bonauenture was very excellent, in his very
many, and large treatises that he made of these matters: and no less was our
glorious Father Ignatius, couching in his little book, not only variety of
matter for meditation, but also several forms of praying, for the examination
of the Conscience; for the application of the Interior Senses of the Soul,
and for diverse Similitudes, and Parables: and especially he taught three very
proffitable forms of Prayer, accomodated to those which walk in the three
ways aboue-saide, Purgative, Illuminatiue, and Unitive, although they are all
three of great profit for them all.

1. The first form of Praying, is upon Gods Commandments; upon the seven
Capital Vices, commonly called the seven deadely Sins: upon the three
faculties of the Soul, and upon the five Senses: taking all this for matter of
Meditation, and Prayer. This form is proper to those that walk in the
Purgative way, laboring to cleanse themselves of their Sins. And so we
will declare this form in the first part, making special meditations of all
these things, with the rest that pertain to the manner of praying, examining
the Conscience, and preparing a man's self for Confession, and Communion,
whereby is obtained the puritye of the Soul.

2. The second form of Praying, is upon Words, taking for matter of
meditation some Psalm of David; or some Sermon, or Sentence of our Savior
Christ; or some Prayer, or Hymn of the Church, ruminating every word by it
self, and drawing out the Spirit, and Affection that is in it. For as the
words of holy Scripture were dictated by the holy Spirit, they have all some
misterye worthy of Ponderation. And as the Church is governed by the same holy
Spirit, it speaks not a word, but it contains much Spirit.

The form of meditating these, is to consider who speaks that word; to
whom it is spoken, or directed: to what end: with what manner, and Spirit it
was spoken; and what is the signification thereof: that is to say, what it is
that it commands, or counsels, threateneth, or promises, or what it is
that is required, or pretended therein, drawing out of all, Affections agreeing
with what has been pondered.

For in another sort are those words to be meditated which God speaks to
man, then those which man speaks to God: The first, as a man that hears
God, who is his Master, Lawgiuer, Counselor, Protector, and Rewarder; hearing
him with Desire to learn what he teaches, to execute what he commands,
to follow what he counsels, to fear what he threateneth, to hope for
what he promises, and to love him for what he says.

The second are to be ruminated with that Spirit, with which he that ordained
them spoke them, and according to the end whereunto they are directed. The
which is manifestly seen in the Psalms of David: for some he made with a
Spirit of praising God, and thanking him for the benefits which he had done
to his Soul, and to his People: Some with a spirit of Contrition, to ask him
pardon of his Sins: and other some with a spirit of Affliction, joined with
great Confidence to Implore his aid in Tribulations. And therefore to
ruminate them, or to say them with proffit, we must clothe ourselves (as
Cassianus aduertiseth) with the same spirit wherewith they were spoken, Collat.
10 cap. 10.
as if we ourselves had made them to the same end.

And even Experience teaches us, that he that feels himself cheerful for
the benefits received from God, says with Devotion the Psalms of Joy, as
are: Benedic anima mea Domino: and omnia quae intra me sunt nomini sancto eius,
etc. Laudate Dominum de caelis, etc. And at such time he finds not so much
juice in the Psalm of Miserere mei Deus. And contrarily, he that is afflicted
with his Sins, says with Devotion the Psalm of Miserere mei, and applies
not himself then to the Psalms of Joy. Which we are to consider, that we
may choose for matter of meditation those words, and Prayers, which accord
with that Spirit which we feel, and with the end that we pretend.

This second form of Praying is most proper to those that walk in the
Illuminatiue way pretending the knowledge, and Understanding of the Verities of
Faith so to increase in Spirit; and of this we will set down the practice in
the second, and third part, meditating in this sort upon the Salutation of
the Angel: upon the Song of the Virgin; upon the Prayer of the Pater noster;
and upon certain Sentences, and Prayers of our Lord Christ; upon whose words
we will always medltate with more attention, because as the Spouse said, His
Lips are distilling the first Mirrhe, Cant. 5.13. Joan. 6.68. Ibidem. 63.
that is, they teach most excellent Virtue, the first, and most surpassing of
all other: and (as S. Peter said) His words are the Words of eternal life;
and our Lord himself says; That his words were Spirit, and Life. And
therefore whosoever meditateth them, as is fitting, he shall draw out
abundance of Spirit, and most pure life of Grace, by the which he may be
worthy of life everlasting.

3. The third form of Praying, is, by way of Aspirations, and Affections,
which answer to the respirations of the body, procuring that between
Respiration, and Respiration, there may breathe out from the inward part of
our Soul, some holy Affection, or some Groaning of the Spirit, or some short
Prayer of those which we call Iaculatorye, spending the whole time, that is
between one respiration and another, in the Pondering, or Understanding, and
Spiritual Taste of what we desire, or ask: or of the thing for the which we
groan, and sigh unto God. This form is most accomodated to those that walk in
the Unitive way, aspiring, and thirsting for Actual Union with God, and with
this desire they labor to pray with the greatest continuation, and frequencye
that they can: for Prayer is as necessary for the perfect spiritual life of
the Soul, as respiration is for the life of the Body, according to that of
David which says: Psalm. 118 131.
I opened my mouth, and drevv breath, because I desired thy Commandments:
And in testimonye hereof, as often as they open their mouth to breathe, so
often would they pray. And now seeing this is not possible thorough our
Imbecillitye, they take at certain times some space for this exercize,
frequenting in this forte the Iaculatory Prayers, whereof we will presently
speak, casting them up to Heaven like Darts, or Arrows which are shot from
the Heart, as from a Bow with vehement Affection of Love.

Of Contemplation, and of the manner how some may use Mental Prayer without
manifoldnesse of Discourse.. 10.
BY what hitherto has been said, the ordinary forms that are to be used in
Mental Prayer are declared, which are accomodated to all fortes of Persons
that desire to treat with God, though all go not after one manner. For some
in their Prayer have more discourse, and less affection: others contrarily
content themselves with little discourse, and busye themselves most in
affections. And others have need of no more but a single sight of the Truth,
and therewith they are moved to all the Acts of Devotion that have been
rehearsed; and these enjoy that which we call Contemplation: Ex D. Tho. 2.2.
q. 180. art. 3.
which (as S. Thomas says) is a single. View of the eternal Veritye,
without variety of Discourses, penetrating it with the Light of Heaven, with
great Affections of Admiration, and Love; unto the which ordinarily no man
arriueth, but by much exercize of meditation, and discourse. In such manner as
a Woman when she intends to marrye with a man, spends many days in
asking, and certifying her self what he is, Inquiring of his lineage, wealth,
Condition, Health, Affabilitye, Discretion, Virtue, and other parts,
discoursing, and thinking much upon them, and finding him to be to her liking,
she is content to love him, and takes him for her Spouse: but afterward when
she has known him, and taken him for her Husband, she needs make no new
Discourses, but with only seeing him, or remembering him, or hearing his name,
she loves him, and desires to give him Content, and to be always in his
Company. The like passes with a Scholar that would make choice of some new
master: or with a Servant that intends to take a new Lord; or with one
freinde that desires to make a new, and strict league of Freindship with
another. Even in like sort Principiants in Virtue, and in the Exercise of
Prayer, had need to spend much time in meditations, and Discourses, inquiring
what, and who God is: who is Christ our Savior, his perfections, and Virtues,
and his marvelous works, moving themselves with these Considerations to love
him, and to take him for their master, for their Lord, for their freinde, and
Spouse of their Souls. But after they are much exercised, and practiced
herein, it happens oftentimes that a single view, or remembrance of God
without new discourses, is enough to inflame them in his Love, and in the
other affections aforesaid. Yea, there are some that with only hearing the
name of JESUS, or Father, or with hearing the name of Mortal sin, Hell, or
Heaven, penetrate in a moment what is comprehended therein with great
Assections of Love, or Sorrow. True it is, that as our Understanding lays
not much hold on things that it perceives not with the Senses, it easily
loses the estimation of spiritual, and divine things, and forgets them,
and so has need often to renew those meditations; and Discourses which it
made at the first; for otherwise it will find itself much distracted, and
dry, unless it be when as our Lord by special favor, will without them
give light, and knowledge enough, to inkindle the Affections of Love,
communicating the grace of Contemplation.

By what has been said, I infer for the comfort of some Persons that are
desirous to use Mental Prayer, and yet for want of health, or some other
cause, dare not discourse, nor diue to the bottom of that which is enclosed
within the mysteries of our Faith, that they despair not of the Principal
contained in this sovereign exercise, for to such, God uses to grant under
the title of their Necessity, or Infirmitye, what he gives unto others under
the title of many Services, and large meditations wherein they have been
exercized. For as he is so liberal, and easily contended, he asks of no
man more, then what according to his portion he can give him, supplying that
which wants, The epilogue of Mental Prayer.
with his divine Illustrations. Such Persons ought therefore to be aduertized,
that the end of all the meditations, and Discourses that shallbee put in the
six parts of this Book, is to attain to three notions, or knowledges. One
of himself, and of his innumerable necessities, and miseries of Body, and
Soul: The other of Christ JESUS our Lord, true God, and man, and of his
excellent Virtues, especially those which were resplendent in his Natiuitye,
Passion, and Death. And the third of God Trine, and One, and of his infinite
perfections and benefits, as well natural, as supernatural that proceed from
him. These three knowledges go linked one with another, entering, and issuing
from one to another, ascending from himself, and from Christ to God, and
descending from God to Christ, and to himself: Joan. 10.2. 2 q. 82 art. 8.
and from them (says S. Thomas) springs that Devotion, which comprehends
three sorts of Affections corrispondent to them in the Will.

Some Affections be with himself, confounding himself for his Sins, and
want of zeal, being exceeding sorrowful for them, purposing amendment, and
humbling himself, for that in steed of fruit, he has brought forth nothing
but Sin. Others be with Christ our Lord, compassionating his Afflictions,
rejoicing in his Virtues, desiring therein to Imitate him, and requiring his
grace to that end. Others be with God our Lord, admiring at his Greatenesse,
praising him therefore, giving him thanks for the benefits he has done us,
and offering ourselves very really to serve him for the same; mingling herewith
all Petitions of celestial Graces, and guiftes, for himself, and for the
whole Church, and for other his neighbors, particularizing those things
whereof he has greatest necessity.

This presupposed, any Person whatsoever desirous to use Mental Prayer, how
weak soever he be, may put himself in the presence of the Living God, whom
he has near him, and within him, and renewing the notice which he has by
Faith of the three things aforesaid, may quietly exercise the Affections
correspondent unto then. Sometimes confessing to God, all his miseries one by
one, with Affections of Dolor, and Humilliation, and desiring remedy of them.
Sometimes calling to memory the Virtues resplendent in some misterye of
Christ our Lord, his Humillitye, Obedience, and Patience, with Affections and
Desires to Imitate them. Other times recounting the benefits that he has
received of God, with affections of Thanksgiving; or remembering the infinite
perfections of God, his Bounty, Mercy, and Providence, with Affections of
Prayer, and Joy. And these Affections by Gods favor will be drawn out
without any difficulty: for the mysteries, and verities of our faith are like
flint-stones, which in touching them with the steel of any single
consideration, cast out sparkles of Love, which if the Soul like Tinder be
well disposed to receive, they presently raise up flames of great feeling, and
affection. To do this with more facillitye, it will help much to have read
first some one of the meditations which ensue, laboring always to recollect
in the memory, some of the most notable Verities of our Faith, which may be
as it were the bait of these feelings, saying with the Bride; Cant. 1.13.
a bundle of Myrrh my beloved is to me, he shall abide betvveene my Breasts,
giving us to understand that she had recollected many Verities of those
mysteries which pertain to her Beloved, which she set before her, regarding
them simply with the eyes of the Spirit, and embracing them with the inkindled
Affections of the Heart, and applying them to herself with effectual purposes
of Imitation.

Of these we are to take sometimes one, and sometimes another for the
foundation of Mental Prayer, as did our Savior Christ recollecting himself
to pray in the garden of Gethsemani, who took three times for the Theme, Mat.
26.39.
and foundation of his Prayer, these breife words: My Father if it be
possible, let this chalice pass from me, nevertheless not as I will, but as
thou. And in the pondering, and sense of these words, he spent a great
space, as in its place we shall see.

Of the extraordinarye forms of Mental Prayer, and in what diverse manners
God communicates himself therein.. 11.
BY those things that have been said concerning Prayer, Epis. 105 prope
medium.
it manifestly appears (as S. Augustine says) that it is the guifte of the
holy Spirit promised by God our Lord to his Church, when he said, I will
power down upon the house of David, and upon the Inhabitants of Jerusalem,
Spiritum gratiae, and precum, the Spirit of Grace, Zacha. 12.10. 2. Corin. 2.5.
Ad Romans 8.26.
and of Prayer, without which Spirit none prays assuredly: for (as S. Paul
says) we of ourselves are not able to have a holy Thought, neither know we
how to pray as we ought, if the Spirit of God do not teach us, and move us
thereunto. For the which he has diverse ways, guiding some one way, and
some another, so that it should be an intolerable error to Imagine that all
are to go by the same way that I am guided: for the Spirit of God, est vnicus,
and multiplex, is only, Sapient. 7.22.
and manyfolde; only in the substance, and principal end which it
pretends, and manifold in the means, and ways it takes to obtain it.

These ways in general are two: Vide D. Th. 2.2. q. 174. art. 1. ad 3. Ex D.
Isid. and art. 3. and q. 155. art. 1. and 2. ad 1. and 2.
one ordinary which comprehends all the forms of Prayer that hitherto we
have treated of: the other extraordinary, which comprehends other forms of
Prayer more supernatural, and special, which we call Prayer of quietness,
or Silence, with Suspensione, Extasis, or Rauishments, with Imaginary figures
of Truths which are discovered, or with only an Intellectual light of them:
with revelations, and Interior Speeches; and with other Innumerable means
that God has to communicate himself to Souls, whereof no certain rule can
be given, for that they have no other rule, but the teaching, and Direction of
the Sovereign master, who teaches it to whom he will, and how he will. For
such sorts of Prayer are not to be pretended, nor procured by our Selves upon
pain of being proud, and presumptuous, and in that case unworthy of them:
nay rather of our part we are to refuse them with Humillitye, because of the
Danger we may incur, of being deluded by Satan, transfigured into an
Angel of Light. But when God shall communicate them, they are to be received
with Humillitye, and Thanksgiving, and with great Cautele, In the 19
meditation.
and Prudence, following certain Aduertisements which we shall give in this
book, especially in the third part, meditating the miracle wherein Christ was
held for a Phantasme. And in the fifth part meditating the apparitions, In
the 3 meditation and the resifolovving.
and revelations that Christ our Lord made to his Apostles, and Disciples:
wherein we will set down the signs, and effects that are wrought in the
Soul by the visitation of God, and the coming of the holy Spirit, and to what
height of Life he exalts by the means of his seven guiftes, and celestial
Inspiratio^s, which is that we all ought to desire, and pretend.

But that we may have some Light of these extraordinary, and marvelous means
that God has to cheer Souls, and to communicate himself unto them in
Mental Prayer, I will point at some of them, wherein also are touched
certain things that pass ordinarily in all, and it is good to know them, for
they will help to understand an ordinarye form of Prayer by application of
the Senses, whereof we are hereafter to treat.

For declaration whereof I advertise: that as the Body has his five exterior
Senses wherewith he perceives the visible, and delectable things of this
life, and takes experience of them: so the Spirit with his faculties of
Understanding, and Will, has five interior Acts proportioned to these
Senses, which we call Seeing, Hearing, Smelling, Tasting, and Touching
spiritually, with the which he perceives the invisible, and delectable things
of God, and takes experience of them: Ex Cassian. collat. 12. cap. 13. Ex
Gerson. 3. p. tract. de mistica. Theologia, cap. 2 de diuinis nominibus.
from which springs the experimental notice, or knowledge of God, which
incomparably exceeds all the knowledges that proceed of our Discourses; as
the sweetness of Honye is much better known by tasting a little of it, then
by making great Discourses to know it. And so by these Experiences mystical
Theologye is obtained, which is the sauoury wisdom, and Science of God, in
such sort that S. Dionisius says of Divine Hierotheus, that he had
knowledge of Divine things, not only by the Doctrine of the Apostles, nor
only by his Industrye, and Discourse, but by Affection, and Experience of
them, the which is obtained by means of the five Interior Senses, of which
the said Scripture makes much mention, Aug. lib. 10. co^fes. and lib. de
spiritu, and anima. c. 9. Bern. lib. de digni. and natura amoris diuini. c. 6.
and sequentibus. Sermon. 22 in Cant. Ad Heb. 11.27.
and the holy Fathers, especially S. Augustine, S. Gregory, S. Bernard, and
others whose sayings S. Bonauenture copiously alleges in his Treatinge of the
seven ways to eternitye, in the sixth way; from whom I will borrowe somewhat
of that which I here shall deliver, presupposing that (as the glorious S. Bern.
says) In huiusmodi non capit Intellige^tia, nisi quantum experie^tia
attingit. In many of these things the Understanding attaineth no more, the^
that which Experience perceives. And therefore I will go also pointing as it
were to that which belongs to all. 1. First, God our Lord communicates
himself sometimes by a spiritual presence with his Illuminations,
communicating to the Understanding a manner of Light so elevated, that by it
like another Moises, it beholds and regards the Invisible, as if it were
visible. And albeit it rest with the Virtue of Faith, yet it rests so
illustrated, and perfected concerning the mysteries thereof, that it appears
another light.

This sight uses to go accompanied with a kind of Spiritual Alacrity,
which is called Jubilee, leaping as it were with pleasure, and Joy for the
strangeness of the Divine Greatenesses that it has seen, according to that
which is written in Job, Job. 33.26.
I will make Prayer to God, and will appease him, and I shall see his face with
Jubilee.

To this manner of Contemplation, or Interior beholding, our Lord himself
inuiteth us, saying: Vnbusy yourselues. Psalm. 45.11.
and see for I am God: which is to say, Cease from Sins, and disoccupye
yourselues from terrene businesses, and attend carefully to the consideration
of my Works, and you shall come to see with great light, that I only am
God, glorious among the nations, and exalted over the whole Earth. Psalm. 76.3.
and 96.11.
Somewhat hereof our Lord communicatcth very ordinarily to his Servants by
certain sudden Illustrations, which like Lightenings discover unto them some
Verity of our holy Faith, after a manner very different from what they
perceived before, which allbeeit they pass suddenly, yet they leave the Heart
very much Inflamed in manifold Affections of the Love of God, or Sorrow for
Sins, according as the Verity requires, which with that light they have
seen.

With these same Illuminations our Lord God also touches Sinners to convert
them, discovering unto them on a sudden, the gratenesse of their Sins, the
Danger of their Damnation, and other like Verities to move, and affectionate
them to change their lives, which we shall speak largely of in the fifth
part, in the twentieninth meditation of the conversion of S. Paul.

2. The second manner of our Lords communicating himself unto us, is by a
Spiritual Hearing, speaking within our Soul by his Inspirations certain
interior, lively, and effectual words, and at times, as distinct as those,
which are heard with our bodily ears, with the which he teaches some
Verity, or discovers his Will with such efficacy, that it affects the
fullfilling thereof. And at times, Cantic. 5.6.
(as the Spouse says of herself) the Soul is mollified, waxes tender, and
melts in the Love of God. And that which held the Heart sad, dismayed,
frozen, and indurate or hardened for spiritual matters, with one of these
interior words in a moment makes it joyful, confident, inkindled, and
softened for whatsoever God will do with it.

And allbeeit these Interior speakings use to come after such an extraordinary
manner, that it is only known to him that hears them; yet after another
ordinary manner they pass thorough all, and are called Inspirations: for (as
the glorious Doctor S. Augustine says) The Interior speaking of God our Lord
is a secret Inspiration, Lib. de triplici habitaculo.
by the which inuisibly he discovers to the Soul his Will, or his Truth.
With this he speaks to the Just, and to Sinners; but oftnest to those that
are very spiritual, whom he teaches, corrects, reprehendeth, or
exhorts, comfort, and moves to the works of Virtue, and Perfection. And
therefore David, Psalm. 84.9.
as one well experimented in feeling these Inspirations, and divine Impulsions,
said: I will hear what our Lord God will speak in me; desiring that God
would speak unto him, and showing himself prepared to complye with whatsoever
he should say.

These twoe manners of Prayer, or Contemplation by spiritual Seeing, and
Hearing holy Job touched, Job. 42.5.
when he said to God; With the hearing of the ear I have heard thee, but
now my eye sees thee: wherein he gives to understand (as S. Gregory
notes) that it is a more noble manner of knowing God, Lib. 35. moral. cap. 4.
by an Interior Beholding, then by the Hearing: for the Hearing has more
obscuritye in the Darkness of Faith; and the Sight more perspicuitye,
beholding God more near, and as it were more present: albeeit other times in
the Scripture, supreme Contemplation is declared by means of Hearing, as in
the Introduction of the third part we shall see.

3. The third manner of Gods communicating himself interiourly, is, by a
spiritual Smelling, infusing into the Soul, an Odor, and fragrancye, of
spiritual things, so sweet, that it comfort the Heart, and reuiueth it to
pretend, and seek them, running (as it is said in the book of Canticles)
after the odor of his sweetest Ointements. Cant. 1.4. Ex D. Bonoue^t. sup.
distinct. 6.
And the glorious Evangelist S. John, as one well experienced in this inward
conversation with God, was wont to say; Odor tuus, Domine, eccitauit in nobis
concupiscentias aternas; Thy odor o Lord has raised in us eternal desires,
and Affections. Odor he calls a very spiritual sensibillity of eternal
things which we see not, and yet believe, and hope to obtain, from which
proceed foruent Acts of Hope, with inkindled desires to pretend them, and
great animositie, and courage to use all possible means to obtain them, Ad
Romans 12.12.
with a great alacritye which the Apostle S. Paul calls Rejoicing in hope.
For as Hounds by the sent follow the chase with great swiftness, and
pleasure, not staying till they come to the place where (if they can) they lay
hold on it: so Souls that in Prayer receive this sent, and Odor of the
Divinity of God our Lord; and of his most sacerd Humanitye, of his Charity,
and Bountye, and his other Virtues, run with great fervor, and diligence in
the pretention of those eternal things which they have sented, not staying
till they possess them in such manner as they may in this life, with hope to
possess them entirely in the other. Of the which we have some token in such
Persons as God calls to a religious life, and gives them any Sense, and
Odor of the Sweetness, Security, and Sanctitye that they shall find therein,
for the which they tread under foot a thousand difficulties, and rest not
till they obtain what they desire. And for this very cause says S. Paul, 2.
Corin. 2.15.
that the just are the good Odor of Christ our Lord. For that their notable
examples do comfort, and move us to follow them, and to imitate Christ from
whom they principally do proceed.

4. The fourth manner of God our Lords communicating himself, is by a
Spiritual Taste, communicating to the Soul such fervor, and sweetness in
spiritual things, that those of the flesh seem vnsauorye unto him. Psalm.
83.3.
And as David says, The flesh itself together with the Spirit rejoiceth in
the living God, and in all his works: and by the experience of this
sweetness, and of the marvelous effects thereof, comes to know the
Greatenesse of God, the Excellencye of his Law, of his Virtues, and celestial
Rewards. VVhereupon David said, Psalm. 33.9.
Taste ye, and see that our Lord is svveete; that is to say; If you taste what
God is, and the works that he does within you, by this taste you shall know
how sweet he is, how good, how wise, how potent, how liberal, and how
merciful. And after the same manner may we say; Taste, and see, how sweet is
his yoke, and his Law, how sweet is Obedience, and Humillitie, Patience,
Temperance, Chastity, and Charity. For every Virtue has his proper
sweetness: where upon the same David said: Psalm. 30.20.
how great is the multitude of thy svveetenesse, o Lord, which thou have
hid for them that fear thee? He calls it great, and manifold, to
signifye that as in meat there is variety of savors, so God has in his
mysteries, and Virtues, much variety, and greatenesse of Consolations. Sap.
16.20.
For if Manna being but one meat, had the savor of all meats to cherishe
the just with this corporal sweetness; with how much more eminency has God
the sweetness of all things, for the consolarion of those that converse with
him by the means of Prayer? for to some he geeueth it meditating his
Perfections: to some meditating his Benefits: and to others meditating his holy
Law, Psalm. 18.11. and 118.103
which David said was more sweet unto him them honey, and the honey comb. But
this sweetness is hidden for those that fear God, and reverence him, for
they only taste it with most abundance, yea, and having tasted it, they have
(says Cassianus) no tongue to declare it, Collat. 12. c. 12.
for it far surpasses all whatsoever that our sense attaineth unto.

Truth it is, that God gives part hereof to Principiants, yea, and to
Sinners to weane them from the milk of their terrene Consolations: but much
more abundantly he gives it to those, who for his Love have mortified
themselves in depriving themselves thereof.

5. The fifth manner of Gods communicating himself, is by a Spiritual
Touching, touching with his amourous Inspirations the inwardest of the Heart,
and our Lord himself joining himself to the Soul with such Gentleness, and
Affection, as cannot be expressed but by those Similitudes; whereof, Osculetur
me osculo oris sui. Ad tactu^ eius co^mota su^t viscera mea. Dextera eius
amplexabitur me. 1. Cor. 6.17. Cantic. 3.4.
the Book of Canticles makes mention, which I omit, least our gros^enesse
should be dazeled with so much tenderness: but yet all rest in this saying of
the Apostle S. Paul; That He that cleauet to God is made one Spirit with him,
for God interiourly imbraceth him with the Arms of Charity, and chearisheth
him, giving him inward Testimonies of his Presence, of the Love that he
bears him, and of the care that he has of him, with great tokens of Peace,
and very familiar friendship. And whosoever perceives himself so favored,
imbraceth himself with God himself with the Arms of Love, saying that of the
Bride; I held him neither will I let him go. And here are exercised those
tender Colloquies, those Petitions with gronings unspeakable, and those Acts
called Anagogicall, high elevated in matter of Spirit, which our Lord grants
of his fair Grace to whom he pleases: but these are not to be pretended,
but received when they shall be given; as already has been said.

These are the extraordinary manners of our Lords communicating himself by
the Interior Senses of the Soul. It belongs to our account only, Ex D.
Bonauen sup. distinct. 4. Lib. de spiritu, and anima. c. 9.
by Gods grace to mortifye very well the five corporal Senses, that God may
open unto us the spiritual: for (as S. Gregory says) if the exterior Sense
be shut, forth with the Interior Sense is open. And contrarily (as S.
Augustine says) the Interior Sense sleeps, if the Exterior be given over
to his Pleasures.

Besides this, we may use another means more easy, to apply the Interior
Senses of our Soul upon the mysteries of our holy Faith; the practice whereof
shall be seen in the second part, in the twentie-sixth meditation: with the
which let us so dispose ourselves, that our Lord if it be his good pleasure,
may communicate unto us that part which shallbee convenient for us of what
has been said.

Of the ordinary, and extraordinary time, that is to be employed in Mental
Prayer, and of jaculatorie Prayers.. 12.
THE time that is to be spent in mental Prayer is of two sorts: the one
ordinarye for every day, so long as Life, and Health shall endure: the other
extraordinarye, recollecting ourselves at certain times for the space of a
week, or two, o^ more, spending them all in these meditations, and exercises,
which may be done for diverse ends, and upon diverse Occasions.

1. First when one is heavy laden with Sins, and desires to make a true
Confession, and perfect Conversion, it is an admirable means to with draw a
man's self for some eight days, or more, to some retired place, spending all
that time in thinking upon his Sins, and in meditations that may move to
sorrow for them, and to make a very perfect change of Life.

2. Secondly, when any one desires to learn this mystical Science of the
Spirit to know how to pray mentally, and to converse with God, and to gain
herein some use, and experience; It is good to dedicate a month, or two to
this exercise, until he prove well Industriated. For albeit that the
principal master of this Science is God, yet it is also a help to have a
visible Tutour that may direct him, and to take time to learn, and practice
what he shall teach.

3. The third occasion is, when one desires to take some Estate of Life, and
doubts which were fittest for him to take for his Salvation, and perfection:
or when he desires to begin any great enterprise in the service of God, and
stands in doubt of our Lords will, and Pleasure; or if he be assured thereof,
desires to enter with good footing, and to prepare himself with Prayer,
negotiating Gods favor, to have good success therein. In such cases it is
very convenient to take some time of retiredness; Math. 4.2.
as Christ our Lord before he began to preach, retired himself fortye days
in the desert.

4. The fourth occasion is, when those that use this mental Prayer, perceive
themselves key cold, distracted, and dry therein, and withal find
themselves very slack in matters of Divine service. In these cases, the most
effectual means to renew themselves, and to reenter into fervor, is to
dedicate eight days to these meditations, spending therein the greatest part
of the day: and because this slackenesse ordinariely enters by little, and
litte into all, it is good once every year to recollect a man's self some
eight days to this end.

Finally allbeeit a man find no slackenesse, yet it is good now and then, to
give himself a sacietie, and fulness of God, to increase in his Love, and to
excel the more in his service, as many Saints were accustomed to do, who by
this means attained to very high degrees of Sanctitye.

As for the Ordinary time, there can no general rule be given for all: for
this time must be measured with the health, and ability, with the State,
and Office, and with the necessary Obligations, and Occupations of every man.
But all this considered, the more time that may be employed in this exercise,
without being wanting to the things aboue-saide, the better it is. Ordinarily,
it were meet for a man to retire himself an hour in the morning, or night,
seeing not without cause our Savior Christ spent an hour in that retired
prayer which he made in the Garden of Gethsemani, as we may collect out of
the reprehe^sion he gave S. Matthew. 26.40.
Peter, saying Could you not watch one hour with me? But he that by
reason of his businesses cannot be an hour, let him be half an hour; and
if he cannot half an hour, yet let him employ, if he please, but a quarter
of an hour in that mental Prayer, which we call Examination of the
conscience, In the twenty and eight meditation of this first part.
in that manner that we shall hereafter prescribe: and let him give some more
time to prayer upon holy Days, for they were instituted to be consecrated to
God.

Concerning this ordinary time, we must be very considerate, that after a man
has set down his time that he intends to imploye every day in Prayer; be
it for the rule of his Estate, as some Religious do; or by special Devotion,
or Direction of his ghostly Fathers, he must be very constant in spending
that whole time entirely in his holy exercise, without letting slip one only
day, or loosing one only Credo time of the hour: for the Devil with great
solicitude inuenteth a thousand occasions, sometimes of corporal excuses; and
sometimes of Cares, and Business under the title of Piety, to make us to
interrupt our Prayer: for omitting it one day through Slothe, or through any
other wrested end, a man comes to omit it afterward another, and another
day, Lib. 1. de orando Deo.
and at length to omit it altogether. VVhereupon S. Chrysostom says, That
a just man should hold it for a thing more sorrowful then Death it self, to
be deprived of Prayer, imitating herein the holy Prophet Daniel, Daniel. 6.10.
who was accustomed to pray three times a Day, and albeeit the king of Persia
commanded, that no man upon pain of his life should pray to God in thirty
days, yet he would not omit his accustomed Prayer: Ne tantillum quidem
temporis sustinuit ab orando cessare; He did not so much as for a very little
time cease to pray: for he understood that his spiritual life depended upon
Prayer, and for fear of the death of the Body, he would not endanger the
life of his Soul, which (says Chrysostom) is as dead when it wants
Prayer, as the Body is dead, when it is abandoned by the Soul. And as Daniel
although by occasion of Praying, liee put himself in danger of Death, for
he was cast into the Lions den, yet in effect he died not: for God delivered
him from that Danger, shutting the Mouths of the Lions, because he opened
his mouth to pray. So also we may believe that for accomplishing the task
of our Prayer, we shall loose neither life, nor health, nor content, nor the
good dispatche of other businesses: nay rather by the means of Prayer, we so
dispose ourselves that God may take them to his charge, and do with his
Omnipotency, and VVisdome, what we ourselves are not able to do by reason of
our Imbecillitye, and Ignorance. And if at any time for true want of health,
or for other lawful, or urgent cause, we shall be forced to Interrupt our
Prayer; the impediment being past, we are forthwith to return to our
Exercise, that the interruption which began thorough necessity, be not
prosecuted by Slothe.

Lastly that no man may exempt himself from this so high, and sovereign an
exercise, I add, that all in general, as well those which have a set time of
retired prayer, if they will conserve their devotion, as also those that have
not this time, to supplye this defect ought to exercize themselves often times
every day in the brief Acts of Mental, or Vocal Prayer, which we call
Iaculatorye Prayers, whereof in the ninth. Epis. 121 ad Proba^ cap. 10.
Chrisost. hom. 79. ad populum.
. we have made mention, in the which (as S. Augustine reports) the Fathers
in the Deserts exercized themselves very often, every day, briefly putting
themselves in mind of God, and of his benefits, or else of their own Sins,
and shooting of by and by, like a Darte, a fervent Affection to heaven, or some
brief Petition for some Virtue, saying as it might be thus: O Lord, that I
never had offended thee! O my God, that I may Love thee! O that I may obey
thee! Give me o Lord Puritye of Soul, Humillitye of Heart, Pouertye of
Spirit. Pardon my Sins, o my Redeemer, for they are very great.

This manner of Prayer being short, Lib. 2. de institutis cap. 10. and coll.
9. cap. 35. In co^stitutionib. Monast. c. 2.
is easy to all, and may be made with very great attention, and zeal, as
Cassianus aduertiseth us. And for this cause they use to be very effectual to
obtain of our Lord what we require: for (as S. Basile says) It is more
available to pray a little, and well with attention, then to pray much after
another manner, for God is not overcome with the much-nesse of Prayers, but
with the weight, and fervor of them.

The breuitye of these prayers is to be recompensed with the frequencye,
laboring by means thereof to fulfill in some sort, that which our Savior
Christ said: Luc. 18.1.
It behooves always to pray, and not to be vvearye: that is, not to fail
neither in the time assigned for Prayer, nor in the fervor thereof, nor in
confidence, nor in possible frequencye, Psalm. 75.11.
multiplying these Iaculatory Prayers, which (as David says) are the relics
of those holy Cogitations that we had in the morning, making to ourselves a
Feast, and preserving Devotion all the Day.

S. Chrysostom says, Lib. 1. de orando Deo ad finem.
That at least we ought every hour to offer unto God one of these prayers: Vt
orandi cursus cursum diei aequet, That the course of Prayer, may go equal
with the Course of the Day; so that when the Clock strikes the hour, it may
serve as an Alarm to Prayer. But those that are very fervent, procure much
more frequencye, imitating the holy Monks of Egypt, of whom Cassianus says
that when they labored, Lib. 3. c. 2. and lib. 2. c. 14.
they also prayed all day: Preces and Orationes per singula momenta miscentes;
Mingling with their handy work, Prayers and Affections, every moment of the
Day: and by this short cut they arrived in little time to much Sanctitye, and
attained to great merits. And it is not much, that we should be very
covetous of this holy exercize, for (as S. Opusc. de perfectio. vitae.c. 2.
Bonauenture says) at all times, and at all hours we may gain by Prayer
that, which is of much more value then the whole World. And we see
manifestly that so it is: for if a man should waste the whole day in framing
interior Acts of Blasphemies, Vengeances, Hatred of God, and Purposes of
other great Sins, in the end of the day he shall have merited a terrible
Hell: So contrarily if he spend it in the interior Acts of this mental
Prayer, frequenting good Desires, and Determinations to please God, with
Petitions of Virtues, in the end of the day he shall find himself with
incredible gain of celestial gifts, and of an everlasting reward: for God
is no less liberal in rewarding, then he is rigourous in chastizing.

We will put many of these laculatorye prayers in the meditations of this
book, specially in the third part, pondering some short prayers that were
made to Christ our Lord, by some Leprous, and blind men, by the Woman of
Chanaan, the Sisters of Lazarus, and such other like.

Certain Aduertisements concerning the Meditations ensuing.. 13.
FOR the good use of the meditations ensuing I advertise, that there may be
diverse ends in the reading of them, as there were in the writing.

1. The first end is, to employ some little time in that most noble, and
proffitable exercise which we call Spiritual reading, Aug. ser. 22. ad frat.
D. Isid. lib. 3. de summo. bono.c. 8. D. Bern. ser. 50. ad sororem.
wherein (as the holy Fathers say) God speaks to the Heart the same that is
in the book, illustrating the Understanding with the Light of the Verities
there written, and inkindling the Will with the fire of other such like
Affections. And for this cause in some meditations I enlarge myself somewhat,
mixing certain aduises, and rules of Perfection, concerning the Vices, or
Virtues whereof therein I treat, that they which read them to this end, may
learn also this Science of the Spirit. But they must read them with
attention, and repose, ruminating, and pondering what they read with inward
feeling thereof, so that with their reading they join some manner of
Meditation, first beseeching our Lord to illuminate them, and to speak unto
their Hearts the words of that book, 1. Reg. 3.10.
saying with Samuel; Speak Lord for thy servant hears.

2. The second principal end of reading these meditations, is to recollect
matter of retired Prayer, and Contemplation alone by himself with our Lord. In
scala claustralium.
For (as S. Bernard says) Reading disposes, and aydeth to meditation, which
without it, or some thing equivalent, uses to be straying, wandering, and
distracted. And in such cases they are only to read those points that serve
them to meditate in their hour assigned. And because some times, some point
is large, comprehending some three, or four considerations, whose number is
noted in the margent; it shallbee good to divide such a point into many, and
breifely to gather for the meditation, two, or three verities of those
considerations, to ruminate them more at leisure. And if any one desire to have
more copious matter of meditation, he may make of two poinres one.

Yet it is to be noted, that although we prescribe in them the practice of
mental Prayer, exercizing Affections, Petitions, and Colloquies, yet no man is
to be tied to those words wherein they are delivered, but he himself must
invent them, as our Lord shall dictate them unto him, and the light of the
Verity which he considers,. 2. Ex D. Bern. ser. 45. in cantic.
and his own feeling of Devotion the which (as already has been said) is
the Tongue of the Soul, and whosoever has it, knows very well how to speak
with God, and without it is as it were dumb: and then it is good to make use
of those Colloquies here set down, making them as if they were his own.

3. The third end of reading these meditations, may be, to practice them with
others, for it belongs to spiritual masters, and Confessors to give such
like points of meditation to their Disciples, and Penitents, industriating
them in this manner of Prayer, when they are capable thereof: but they are not
to give all alike to all, but to select those meditations, Points, and
Considerations that are most accomodated to the estate, and capacitye of him
that receives them.

And besides this, they may also help themselves herewithall for their
Sermons, or spiritual speeches, which are used to be made in common to such
as live in religion, or out thereof, with desire to obtain that perfection
that is proper to their Estate.

4. For all these ends I have procured that the Meditations should go
founded, and accompanied with places of divine Scripture, which was written for
the same ends. So that here are declared in a manner all the four
Evangelists: the greater part of the Acts of the Apostles: the beginning of
Genesis; and many other places of the old, and Nevve Testament. And because
many of them, may have diverse Senses, I have procured to make choice of the
most received, according to the exposition of the Saints, from whom I have
collected these Considerations: as also from that which other spiritual men
have experienced, to whom our Lord has communicated these tastes, and feelings.

So that hereupon, such as are Lovers of Variety in these exercizes of the
Spirit, shall find in this book diverse meditations for the several times of
Aduent, Lent, Sundays, and Principal Feasts of the year, accomodating
themselves in every time to the spirit, which therein the Church represents.
And because many have a devotion to have meditations distributed for the seven
days of the week, they shall here also find Variety thereof.

Those which treat of purifying themselves from Vices in the Purgative way,
shall find meditations of the Seven deadely Sins, for every day its
meditation; and they themselves may easily recollect others of the seven
principal things that are in this life, that is to say, Meditation of Sins,
Death, Judgment particular, Judgment universal, Hell, Purgatory, and
Glory. As also of the seven notorious Sinners that our Savior Christ
converted; namely: S. Matthew, S. Mary Magdalen, the Woman of Samaria, the
woman found in Adulterye, Zacheus, the good Thief, and Saul.

Those which treat of gaining Virtues in the Illuminatiue way, shall find
Meditations of the Seven Petitions of the Pater noster; of the Eight
Beatitudes; of the Seven stations wherein is consummated the vvole Passion of
Christ our Lord: of the Seven words that he spoke upon the Cross: and
they may easily make choice of Seven Parables, or Seven of his most notable
miracles for the seven days of the week.

Those which treat of Union in the Unitive Life, shall find meditations of
the Seven divine Attributes, wherein principally this Union is fed; that is to
say; Bounty, Charity, Mercy, Immensitie, VVisdome, Omnipotency, and
Providence. And if they will meditate Gods benefits, they shall find
meditations of the works that God did the first Six days of the world,
and his rest upon the Seventh day. Also the Seven rewards of Glory which
Christ our Lord declared in his Sermon of the Beatitudes; and those which he
promised the seven Bishops in the Apocalips. And after this manner shall they
find sundry meditations of the most blessed Sacrament, and of our blessed
Lady the Virgin, and for the fifteen mysteries of the Rosarye. All which they
may easily seek in the Tables that shall be put in the end of the book.

Finally, every part of the six which this Book has, wherein are diverse
meditations, with diverse manners of Praying, and Contemplating, is like a
banquet of many, and diverse meats, dressed after many fashions: the which are
set upon the table, not that every one that is invited should eat of all,
although he may make an assay of all: but for that he should eat principally
of that meat, that gives him most gust, or which is most agreeable to his
complexion, or necessity, leaving the rest for others, that shall find gust
where he finds it not, because they have another complexion, or necessitye
different from his. For it should be a great ignorance in this matter, to
seek to lead all after that form of Praying that likes me, contemning
those that use another way: And therefore every one guiding himself, partly
by the Counsel, and Direction of his Spiritual master; partly by the
experience of his own Comfort, and Proffit, must lay hold upon those
meditations, and forms of Prayer, which arm him best to this end, 1 Thessalonians.
5.21.
although it is not amiss to try all: for paraduenture our Lord will open to
me a way, where I thought he had held it very close shut.

By what has been said I conclude, that those which desire daily to clime
the mystical Ladder of Jacob, Genes. 28.12. In tomo. 9.
which S. Augustine calls the Ladder of Paradise, and S. Bernard, the Ladder
of men that are Religious: whose steps are, Reading, Meditation, Prayer, and
Comtemplation, they shall find in this book matter, and instruction for this
mounting relying principally upon Gods grace, by whose favor, we shall all
be albe to clime, and arrive to that Union with our Lord, who is in the top,
inuiting us to mount up thereby; and to this end he sends his holy Angels
who ascend, and descend for our good: they ascend to present unto God our
desires, and petitions, and they descend with the good dispatche thereof, and
allwaies animate us to clime up every day with great Perseverance, until we
enter into the Paradise of our God, where we may see him, and enjoy him world
without end. Amen.

THE FIRST PART OF THE MEDITATIONS OF SINS, and of the last ends of Man,
with forms of Prayer appropriated to those which walk in the Purgative Way,
to purifye them selves of their Vices.
The Introduction concerning Purity which is the end of the Meditations of
the Purgative Way.
AMong those Excellencyes which the frequent use of Meditation, and Mental
Prayer has; the first, that opens the way for many others, is to purifye,
(as S. Lib. 1. de considerat. ad Eugeniu^
Bernard says) the same Fountain from whence it springs. And because it
springs from two Fountains; the one superior, which is God, with his
Inspirations: and the other inferior, which is the Soul with her Faculties:
the excellencye thereof consists in cleansing this second fountain in the
Virtue of the first, purifying the memory of culpable Obliuions, the
Understanding of Errors, the Will of wrested likings; the Appetites of their
unbridled Passions, the Senses of their Superfluities: the Flesh of her
sensual cherishings, and the Soul of her vicious manners. VVhereupon the
Apostle S. Peter said, That God purifyeth Hearts by Faith, Actuum 15.9.
not because Faith alone is sufficient heereunto, but because Faith quickened
with the profounde consideration of the Verities, and mysteries which he
reuealeth, awaketh the Acts, and Affections of the Soul, which with the
Divine grace dispose for the perfect purification of the Heart.

And allbeeit this Excellencye is found in all the meditations of the
mysteries of our faith, yet it is most notably resplendent in those, which
pertain to the Purgative way, whose principal end is, to move the Will
to Acts, and Exercises, wherewith perfect Purity is obtained, and the
trenches are opened for the edifice and building of Virtues.

1. These are reduced to three ranks: The first comprehends the Acts of
knowledge of our selves with Contempt of our Selves, Tractat. de december
gradibus humilitatis and sermon. 36. in Ca^tic.
wherein (as S. Bernard says) true Humility consists. And it is of two
sorts: One is proper to the Just that never sinned, and proceeds from the
knowledge of the nothing that we have of our own reuenew: and this is
principally obtained by the meditations that shall be put in the sixth part.
The other is proper to Sinners, and proceeds from the knowledge of the
sins, and miseries whereinto we have fallen: and this is obtained by the
meditations of this first part: whose Acts are to despise our selves, to
hold ourselves worthy to be despised by all men, and as much as lies in us
to desire it, and procure it, exercizing some Humiliations, and accepting those
that happen unto us; in such sort as we shall go practizing in the
meditations themselves.

2. The second rank, comprehends those Acts which dispose to our
Justification; that is to say: Fear of Gods Justice, Hope of his divine
mercy, Perfect Sorrow for Sins, Rigorous Examination of the Conscience;
Humble, and entiere Confession, of my Offenses; Satisfaction with works of
Penance to revenge upon myself the Injuries that I have done against God, and
other such like.

3. The third rank comprehends those Acts which aid to take away the
roots, and remainders of forepassed Sins, to the end never more to return
unto them: such are; Chastizing the flesh to subject it to the Spirit:
Mortification of unbridled Appetites, reducing them to the means of Reason:
Abnegation of our own Will to make it conformable to the Will of God:
Detestation of ourselves, and of all things that nourish Self-love; that God
our Lord, and his holy Love may find entrance into our Heart.

These are the passages which we are to walk in the Purgative Way, to make
a very perfect conversion. For put case that, according to the Counsel of the
Wise Man, Eccl. 31.27. and 33.23.
In all our works we are to be very diligent, and fervent, yet in none more
then in the work of our Justification, and in the means ordained thereunto,
fullfilling at the least that which S. Paul gave us in charge, Ad Romans 6.19.
when he said: That as we exhibited our members to serve uncleanness, and
iniquity, unto iniquity: so now we should exhibit our members to serve
Justice unto Sanctification. And as S. Augustine says; Praefatione in Psalm.
31.
Quales impetus habebas ad mundum, tales habeas ad artificem mundi. Procure to
carrye as great vehemency of Love to the framer of the world, as thou
carriedst to the World itself: serving the Creator with that fervent
Affection, wherewith thou wast wont to serve the Creature: 1. Cor. 15 49.
bearing as entirely the image of the heavenly Adam, as thou barest that of the
earthly Adam. And because the holy Apostle (as S. Lib. 19. Moral. cap. 16.
Gregory pondereth it) spoke this as condescending to our weakness; it is
reason that such as are fervent, do labor to be much more diligent in good,
then before they were in evil, complying with the counsel of the Prophet
Baruch, Baruch. 4.28.
when he says; That we should convert ourselves ten times more to God, then
we separated ourselves from him. So did the glorious Magdalen, Zacheus; Saul,
and other notable Penitents, of whose marvelous conuersions we shall make
special meditations in the third part, wherein those that have passed by
these, which shall be put here, may exercize themselves.

And allbeeit these are most proper to such, as desire fervently to convert
themselves to God our Lord, and to such as are Principiants in Virtue, who
pretend to purifye themselves from all the dregs, Eccles. 5.5. Prou. 24.16.
and ill manners of their old life: yet (as the holy Spirit says) because no
man should loose the fear that his Sin is pardoned; and because the Just man
falls seven times a day; it is therefore reason that the lust also now and
then should renew these meditations, to purifye themselves of their present
Sins, and to assure themselves the better of the pardon of the forepassed
Sins: for to this end is the Counsel of Ecclesiasticus; Eccles. 18 22.
Apocal. 22.11.
That we cease not to pray, nor to Iustifye ourselves until Death. And
Christ our Lord says in the Apocalips: He that is Just, let him be
Justified yet, and let the holy be sanctified yet, increasing every day in
puritye of Conscience, and in Sanctitye of Life.

The first fundamental Meditation of the end wherefore Man, and all things
that serve him, were created.
THis first meditation is the beginning, and foundation of the spiritual life:
Cap. 4. and 5.
for (as Cassianus notes in his first Collation of a Religious man's end)
before all things we are to fix our eyes upon the end of our Life, and of
our profession: as well upon the last end which is the kingdom of Heaven, as
upon the nearer end, and mark, which is Purity of Heart, without the which
this kingdom is not obtained. For the End is the Rule of the Means, and
according unto that all the works of our life are to be squared, and
directed: So that in this meditation all those ought to exercize themselves
very often, that walk in any of the three ways abouesaide, seeing all of them
come to rely and stay upon one, and the same final end. And it will serve
also for an example, wherein what has been said touching mental Prayer, we
may see put in practice.

Afterward having done those three things which in the fifth. we spoke of;
before I begin meditation, to tie my Imagination to one place, in such sort
as here it may be done, Apocal. 4.2. and 22.3.
I will Imagine God our Lord seated in a throne of Infinite majesty like an
Immense Sea, from whence issue out the Rivers of Creatures, all retourning to
him, and he attracting them all to himself, as to their final end, and
place of their perpetual rest. Then will I humbly beseech him for what I
pretend in this meditation, that is to say: Celestial Light to know my true
final end, and to direct according thereunto my crooked Life, saying that of
David: Psalm. 42.3.
Send forth o Lord from on high thy light, and thy truth, that they may
guide me, and bring me to thy holy mount, and to thy everlasting
Habitations, for thou createdst me to live in them. This done, I will begin
my meditation in the form ensuing.

The first Point.
THe first point shallbee to call to Memory the end wherefore man was
created, Ex P. Ignatio in fundamento Exercitiorum. Ad Romans 6.22. Ex Cassiano
vbi supra.
that is, to praise, reverence, and serve his God, and by this means to save
his Soul, according to the saying of S. Paul to the Romans: You have your
fruits unto Sanctification, and your end Life everlasting; as if he should
say: The aim, and end of your works in this Life, is to serve God with
puritye, and Sanctitye: and the final end whereunto they are ordained, is, to
obtain Life everlasting.

Upon this Veritye the Understanding is to form its Discourses, to bring to
light what is comprehended therein, pondering thus: Who created me, and
ordained me to this end, and for what cause: How sovereign an end this is:
How ill I have pretended it in my forepassed life, and in what peril I have
been to loose it: What heavy losses I sustain by loosing it; and How great
goods ensue if I obtain it; and That there is great reason, that from this
day forward, I should vigilantly pretend to obtain it. With every one of
these Considerations, I will move the Will to the Affections, and Acts that
it requires, in this manner. 1. First. I am to ponder, how the Infinite
Majesty of God, which has no need of his creatures, not for my merits, but
of his mere Goodness, created me to his Image, and Likeness; Not that I
should live at random to follow mine own Lusts, nor that I should seek
Honors, or Dignities; Riches, or Delicacyes, or any other thing created; but
only That I should reverence, and praise him; That I should love, and obey him
in this mortal Life, and afterward obtain Life everlasting. And although it
had been sufficient to give me for my End that, which my Nature required,
yet God was not herewith contented, but of his mere mercy he ordained, and
raised me to another more high, and sovereign end, which is to see him
manifestly, to enjoy him, and to be happy, and blessed, as are the Angels, or
as God is himself, according to that of S. John: 1. Joan. 3 (...) Colloquie
We shall be in glory like unto God, because we shall see him as he is. O
Immense Charity of our Sovereign God! What is this o Lord that thou do?
A Creature so miserable as this little silly worm Man, do thou exalt to so
high an end, as to see thee apparently in thy Glory? what was not I obliged
to serve thee freely, for nothing as thy Slave? Then why do thou assign
me so excellent a reward? Blessed be thy Infinite mercy, and let all the
Angels laud thee for this sovereign Benefit. What shall I return thee o
Lord, Psalm. 115 12.
for so great a merced? I offer myself to serve thee freely all my Life,
without pretending any other interest more then to serve thee; for to serve
God, is to reign. And seeing thou art my first beginning, and my last end,
give forthwith beginning to my nevve Life, and aid me with thy grace, that
I may attain to the final end thereof. Amen.

2. This done, I will ponder, how ill I have pretended this end in my
forepassed life, living as if I had been created not to serve God, but to
serve my own Lusts, and to seek Honors, Delicacies, and Riches, committing
for this cause innumerable Sins, 1. Thesal. 4.3. Galat. 5.13.
as if the end of my Vocation had not been Sanctification, but Uncleanness;
not liberty of the Spirit, but Liberty of the flesh. O vvretched I! how
blindely have I gonne astray, in that which it most imported me to know? O
how Ungrateful have I been to him that created me to so high an end, and
how euilly have I repayed him, that did me so much good! O my Creator, that I
had never offended thee? Pardon, o Lord, my Transgressions, for thine own
sake, and help me to get out of them, that I may lead the remainder of my
life, conformably to the end for which thou have given it me.

3. Then will I consider the great losses I sustain by loofing this end: for
what loss can be greater then to loose my Soul, to loose Gods divine grace,
to loose the peace, and alacritye of Conscience, and to loose all Blessedness?
to which are joined eternal Damnation, Matthew. 16.26.
and the forfaiture of God himself. For what shall it proffit me to gain the
whole world, if I loose my Soul, and my God, in comparison of whom, all the
world is as nothing?

4. Contrarily, if I attain to this end, I obtain the possession of God
himself, I shall save my Soul, I shall have peace, and cherfulness of
Heart, I shall be protected by the Divine Providence, I shall find
quietness, and perpetual repose, as all things find in their End, and
Center. This then being so as it is, animate they self, o my Soul, to seek
the end for which thou wast created by God, and herein imploye all thy care,
for there is nothing that more imports thee. Ex D. Cypr. ferm. de Ascensione.
Convert thyselfe to God who is thy rest, for besides him, all, whatsoever, is
torment. If thou seruest God, what will thou more? If thou have God, what
seek thou more? If God be thy Possession what want thou? Give him
pleasure in pretending him, and be confident to obtain him, for he loves
his Creatures, and is delighted that they should obtain the end for which he
created them. Ex D. Aug. lib. 1. confess. cap. 1.
O Infinite God, Center of my Soul, convert me to thee, that I may take rest,
for thou made me for thee, and my Heart is unquiet until it come near
thee. O eternal Father seeing thou createdest me that I might love thee as a
Son; give me grace for thine own sake, that I may love thee as a Father. O
only begotten Son of the Father, and Redeemer of the World, seeing thou
createdst me, and redeemedst me, that I might obey; and imitate thee, aid
me that I may always obey thee, and imitate thee in all things. O most Holy
Ghost, seeing that of thy Goodness thou did create me to be sanctified,
grant me that it may be so for thine own glory. O Angels of Heaven! O
most blessed Saints I that have attained to the end, for the which you were
created, beseech this our Lord whom you enjoy, that I may also obtain him,
ascending up to enjoy him in your Compagnie world without end. Amen.

The second Point.
IN concluding the first point I am to pass to the second, which is, to call
to memory the end whereunto all the other things of the Earth were created:
that is to say; that they might help man to attain to the final end of his
Creation, taking them for a means to serve God, our Lord, and to save
himself, according to that which the royal prophet David said of his People:
Psalm. 104 44.
God gave them the Countries of the Nations, and they possed the labors of the
Peoples, that they might keep his Iustifications or holy Commandments, and
seek after his holy Law.

1. Upon this Veritye I am to ponder first, how Liberal God has showed
himself toward me in creating such a multitude of Creatures, so fair, and
so admirable for my sake, and not only created things necessary to preserve
my life, but also many other for my Delicacye, and Delight, and for the
Recreation of my Sight, Hearing, Smelling, Tasting, and Touching, for the which
I am to give him most infinite Thanks; seeing that the Good which he did to
these Creatures, he did it more to me, then to them, for that he did it to
them in respect of me. Colloquie
Let all these thy Creatures bless thee, O Lord, and let my Soul praise, and
glorify thee for them all. I give thee thanks for the being which thou
give to the Heavens, and to the Elements, to Beasts, and to Plants, and to
all the other Bodies of the Earth. I give thee thanks, also for the Beauty
of the Colors, for the Harmony of the Soundes, for the Pleasantness of the
Odours, for the Svveetenesse of the meats, for the Softness of our Rayments,
and for all those things which recreate my five Senses, seeing thou createdst
them for me, that I might praise, and serve thee with them.

2. And then I will ponder how well these Creatures complye with the end for
which God created them, serving me, and nourishing me, because God so
commanded it: and contrarily how euilly I have complied, and do complye with
my end, using them euilly to offend God with all, placing in them my final
end, as if I had been created to enjoy them, making the end, of that which
was but the mean. And if I run through my Senses, I shall find that they
have gonne a whoring after the Creatures, using them only for their Delight,
and not to glorifye God that gave them me: for the which I justly deserved
that God should take them from me, and that he should deliver (as he said
by Oseas) his Corn, Oseae. 2.9
and his Wine, his Flower, and his VVoll from the Servitude they are in under
my possession, using them against their Inclination to offend their Creator.
Colloquie
O most just Creator, how is it that thou did not Justice upon him that so
abused thy Creatures, using them against thee? O my Soul how art thou not
confounded with such Treachery as this? and how art thou not ashamed of this
great baseness thou have committed abasing thyselfe to place thy final end
upon a thing so vile as is the Creature to the Injury of the Creator I O my
God, how Ungrateful have I been for thy Sovereign benefits! for what thou
gave me to serve thee, I converted into an occasion to offend thee. Pardon,
o Lord, my vnthankefullnesse, and assist me, that from hence forvvard I may
not use that so euilly, which thou gave me for my good.

3. Sapient. 13.4. Ad Romans 1.20.
I may also Consider that these Creatures were created (as the holy Scripture
says) that by them, I might know the Perfections, and Excellencies of the
Creator, and that I might love him with all my Heart: and so I may imagine
that every one stands crying to me, and saying: This perfection which I have
is better in God then in me, he gave it me, know him, love him, and use it
for his Service. And with this Consideration I will provoke myself to ascend
from the visible Creatures to the invisible Creator, to unite me to him, as to
my last, and final end.

The third Point.
THe third Point is a practical Conclusion drawn from what has been said
in the two precedent points: that is to say: The manner how from hence forward
I am to use the Creatures, and what Indifferencye my Will has to hold in the
use of the^, not coveting more then that which may help me to serve my
Creator, and to obtain the end for which I was created, procuring, as much as
lies in me, not to desire rather Riches then Pouertye: Honor then Dishonor:
Health then Sickness: Long life then Short: but only that which shall be
most convenient for my Salvation, for it is a good part of VVisdome, not to
take of the means more then is meet to obtain the end: as of Rubarbe, or of
any other purgation, we take not a greater quantitye then is necessary for our
Health.

2, With this Consideration I am also to enter into my Heart, and to make an
Anatomy of the disordered Inclinations, and Affections that it has to Riches,
Honors, and Delicacies; to Parents, kindred, and freindes; and to its own
Health, and Life, laboring to move my Will to desire to mortifye the
superfluous Love of the Creatures, persuading myself heereunto by the reason
aforesaid, and by others that I may inquire out with my Discourse, especially
by that of the divine Providence, which most carefully assisteth those, that
wholely resign themselves into the hands of God, casting upon him, 1. Petr.
5.7.
(as S. Peter says) all their Cares to serve him with the greater perfection.
For it is most certain that Christ our Lord will fulfill his word which he
gave us when he said: Matthew. 6 33.
Seek first the kingdom of God, and the Justice of him, and all these things
shallbee given you besides: as if he should have said; First seek the
kingdom, of God, which is your final end, and the Justice thereof, which are
the means to obtain him, and thus doing be assured, that the Providence of
your Heavenly Father, will provide you of temporal things necessary to
sustain your Life.

3. But because with mine own forces I am not able to attain to this
resignation, I am to have recourse to him that can give them me, framing some
Colloquie with our Lord, and saying unto him very earnestly: I confess, o my
God, that my Heart very much cleaves, and is tied to the Creatures with
disoordinate Love: Seeing therefore I am so vvretched, and feeble, that having
fastened myself to the Creatures, I cannot vnfasten me, favor with thy
Omnipotency my weakness, destroying this connection, and vveeding out from
me this disordinate Love, that I may love thee, and serve thee with all my
Heart, and with all my Powers. For thou art my Love, and my repose, to
whom be Honor, and Glory world without end. Amen. The matter, of these
three points shall be handlest more at large in the sixth part.

The fourth Point.
FRom these same Principles I am to draw another practike Conclusion, as the
foundation of the Purgative Way: that is to say, that I am to detest Sin,
above all the most detestable things of the World; for that mortal Sin
only, is contrary to my final end, and by it only is it lost. So that
neither Pouertye, nor Infamy, nor Dishonor, nor Dolor, nor Infirmitye, nor
Baseness of Parentage, nor Rudeness of VVitte, nor Want of natural
Sciences, nor all the other miseries of the World, are directly contrary to
my final end; nor shall I loose it for them, but only for mortal Sin: by
the which, as much as lies in me, I destroy the true final end, which is
God, denying him, Ad Titu^. 1.16. Ad Phili. 3.19. Ad Ephe. 5.5.
(as S. Paul says) by any works: I feign another final end to myself,
which is the Creature, which I take for God. And hereupon says the same
Apostle, That Gloutons hold their Belly for their God; Proud men, their
Glory: and Covetous men make an Idol of their money.

This Veritye shall be considered in the Meditations ensuing, to move us to the
abhorring of so great an evil as Sin is, and to purifye ourselves thereof
with great care.

The second Meditation of the greiuousnesse of Sin, by the Examples of the
Sin of the Angels, of Adam, and other Particulars.
THE end of this meditation is, to know by Examples the greiuousnesse of
Sin to abhor it; and the terriblenesse of Gods Justice in chastizing it, to
fear him, and to appease him with Penance: and the Instabillity of man in
good, to know his weakness, and not to trust to himself, but to humble
himself before God. And all this I am to beg of our Lord, at my entrance to
meditation, beseeching him to Illustrate with his divine Light my Understanding
to know it; and to move my Will to have a feeling of it with great
Affections of Contrition: and to aid me, that I may be warned by others
harms, before the Chastizement light upon mine own Head.

And that this meditation, and those which follow may make the deeper
Impression in the Soul, I am to form first in my Imagination, Daniel. 7 9.
a figure of Christ JESUS our Lord, as of a Judge seated upon his Tribunal to
Judgment, with a severe Countenance, from whose Throne issues out a river of
fire to burn Sinners: and I will imagine myself before him like a deep, and
heinous Offender, bound with the Fetters, and Chains of innumerable Sins,
fearing, and trembling like one that deserves to be condemned, and burnt with
that terrible fire.

The first Point. D. Tho. 1 p. q. 63. Isaia. 14 12. Luc. 10.13. 2. Petr. 2 4.
Apocal. 12.9.

THe first Point is, to call to mind the Sin of the Angels, who were
created by God in the Empyreal Heaven, replenished with VVisdome, and Grace:
but abusing their Frewill they grew proud against their Creator, for the which
they were thrown out of Heaven, and cast into Hell, loosing for ever the end,
and blessedness for the which they were created. 1. Upon this Verity taught
us by the Catholic Faith, I may discourse, pondering three things: First how
Liberal God was to the Angels creating them according to his own Image, and
Likeness, and communicating unto them without any merit of theirs, most
excellent gifts of Nature, and Grace. By reason whereof we may say of all, as
was said of one, That they were adorned with nine Stones very precious; that
is, with nine Excellencies, which Lucifer, Ezech. 28.13.
and the rest received in their Creation. For God made them Pure Spirits,
without mixture of Body: Immortal, without fear of Corruption: Intellectual,
with great Delicacye of VVitte: Free, that nothing could force their Will:
Wise, with fullness of all natural Sciences: Powerful, above all Inferior
Creatures: Holy, with the gifts of Grace, Charity, and the rest of the
Virtues: Inhabitants of the Paradise of Delights, which is the Empyreal
Heaven. And finally, Capable of seeing God clearly with promise of this Glory
if they perseuered in his Service: which they might easily do, and were
obliged thereunto by the Law of Gratitude for these 9. Titles.

2. Secondly, I will consider, how Ungrateful some of them were against God,
growing arrogant with these gifts, and arming themselves with them against him
of whom they had received them, not giving him that Reverence, and Obedience
which they ought to have given him with Humility; but employing their
Liberty, and Forces to offend him whom for so many Titles they ought to have
served.

3. Thirdly, I will ponder, how terrible God showed himself to chastize them
presently, without giving them time of Repentance, depriving them, for that
only Sin, of those gifts of Grace which he had given them, Luc. 10.18.
and throwing them like Lightening from Heaven, to the everlasting fires of
Hell, without respect either to the beauty of their nature, or to the
greatenesse of their Estate; or that they were his Creatures made according to
his Image, and Likeness: or that they were exceeding wise; or that they had
been his freindes: for one mortal Sin only is sufficient to obscure all
this, and is worthy of so terrible punishment: 2. Petr. 2 4.
which ( S. Peter says) Gods Justice permitted, and ordained for our Example.
For if he spared not the Angels sinning, but tied with the ropes of their
Sin, threw them unto Hell to be there tormented, although they were so
noble: how much less will he omit to punish men obstinate in their
Transgressions, being so base? 2. Petr. 2 11.
And if the Angels Fortitudine, and Virtuce maiores non portant aduersum se
execrabile iudicium, who are greater then men in strength, and power bear
not the execrable Judgment against them, but with great raging, and
Impatiencie; how much less shall feeble, Ad Hebr. 10.31.
and wretched men be able to endure it? O how horrible a thing it is to fall
into the hands of the living God, hands so heavy, that the Angels
themselves cannot suffer them!

These three things I am to apply to myself pondering how liberal God has
been toward me, doing me innumerable Benefits: and how Ungrateful I have
been to him, committing innumerable Sins; and how I have deserved that God
should punish me as he did the Angels, yea, and much more: for their Sin
was but one, mine many: theirs was but a Sin of Thought only in matter of
Pride; mine both of Thought, Word, and Deed in matter of Pride, of Luxury,
of Wrath, and of other Vices: theirs was not Injurious to the blood of JESUS
Christ, for it was not shed for them, mine are Injurious against this blood of
the Son of God, which was shed for me on the Cross. Then this being so,
how Just a thing were it, that God should have suncke me into Hell in the
Company of the Devils, making me partaker of their pains, seeing I would
needs be so of their Sins? O God of Vengeance, how is it that thou have
not revenged thyselfe on a man so wicked as I? How have thou suffered me so
long time? Who has vvithhelde the rigor of thy Justice, that it should not
punish him, that has deserved so terrible punishment? O my Soul, how is it,
that thou do not fear, and tremble, considering the dreadefull Judgment of
God against his Angels? If with so great seueritye he punished Creatures so
noble, why should not so vile, and miserable a Creature as thou, fear the
like Punishment? O most powerful Creator, seeing thou have shevved thyselfe
to me not a God of Vengeance, but a Father of Mercy, continue toward me
thy Mercy, pardonning my Sins; and delivering me from Hell, which for them
I have deserved.

The second Point.
THe second Point shallbee to call to Memory the Sin of our first Parents,
Adam, and Eua, Genes. 3.1. D. Th. 2. 2 q. 163. and 164.
who having been created in Paradise, and in Original Justice, broke the
Commandment of God, eating the fruit of the, Tree that upon pain of Death
he had prohibited them, for the which they were cast out of Paradise, and
incurred the Sentence of Death, and other innumerable miseries, as well they,
as all their Offspring.

1. Upon this Verity of Faith, I may discourse as upon the forepassed,
considering: First how liberal God was to our first Parents, creating them of
his mere goodness according to his own Image, and Likeness, and placing
them in a Paradise of Delights, giving them his Grace, and Original Justice:
subjecting their appetites to reason, and the flesh to the Spirit; freeing them
from mortallity, and Penalties, to which by Nature they were subject, and
granting them a happy, and ease-full Life. And all this he did of his pure
Grace, and mercy, granting it them not only for themselves, but also for
their Successors, if they had perseuered in his Service.

2. Secondly, I am to ponder how Ungrateful they weere to God, and what motive
they ha^ thereunto: for the Serpent coming to tempt Eve(...) and promising her
guilefully, that if she did eat^ of the forbidden fruit she should not dye,
b^ should rather be as God, having knowledge o^ good, and evil: she suffered
herself to be b^ guiled, and eat of the fruit, and invited Ada^ thereunto,
who to please her, eat also thereof, treading under foot the pleasure of God
for the pleasure of his Wife, without making account, neithe^ of the benefits
that God had done him, nor(...) the punishments that he had menaced and
threa^ ned him with all.

3. Then will I ponder, how terrible God shewe^ himself in chastizing them,
casting them out(...) Paradise, depriving them for ever of Original(...)
stice, subjecting them to Death, and to all the m^ series of a corruptible
Body: which miseries(...) we his Children incur, because we all sin(...)
him, Ad Romans 5.12. Ad Ephesians. 2.3.
and for his cause we are borne the Children of Wrath, and Enemies of God,
and condem^ to the same Death. And that which more affrighteth, is, that from
this Original Sin, that w^ inherit of him, proceed as from their root,
the innumerable Sins that are in the World, a^ the Inundations of miseryes
that ouerflowe it whereby I may perceive, how terrible, dreadefu^ and hideous
an evil mortal Sin is, seeing o^ only depriueth of so much good,
brings(...) much evil, and so highely provoke the wrathe^ God, Apoc.
15.3.4. Colloquie
though he be much more inclined to merci^ then to the rigor of Justice.
Who shall not fear the o king of the Worlds? Who shall not abhor so gre^
a mischeife as to offend thee! O my Soul, if thou knevvest what thou did,
when thou sinnest like Adam, doubtless thou would tremble at the heavy
burden vvherevvith thou lodest thy self; Psalm. 37.
O Sin how heavy art thou to me? Thou depriuest me of Grace; thou robbest
me of Virtues; thou chasest me out of Paradise; thou condemnest me to
eternal Death; thou subiectest me to temporal Death; thou take away the
life of my Children, which are my Works, depriving them of the merit of
Glory; thou troublest the kingdom of my Soul, and fillest it with in
innumerable miseries. O my God deliver me from so great an evil. O my Soul,
Eccles. 21 2.
Fly from Sin (as the wise man counsels thee) more then from Snakes, and
Serpents, for Sin alone is more cruel, and venomous then all they.

4. Besides this I am to make comparison of my Sin with that of Adam, like as
in the precedent point: for I wretch being tempted by the Devil suffered
myself to be deluded by him, not once but often: my flesh has been like
Eua, that has provoked me to Sin, and my Spirit effeminated like Adam, to
please it, has a thousand times displeased God by breaking his Commandments:
and my Pride, and Ingratitude has arrived to that height, that I have often
desired to be as God, usurping to myself that which is proper to his Deitye.
Then, if God inflicted such punishment on my first Parents for one Sin of
Disobedience, and Pride, founded upon no more then eating one Apple contrary
to the precept of God, how great punishments have I deserted, for so many
Disobediences, and Prides, and for so innumerable offenses as I have committed
against him? O how lust had it been, that at my first Sin, Death should
have swallowed me, or all the miseries of the World showred down upon me.

Lastly, I will ponder, what a long Penance Adam, and Eua did for this Sin of
theirs, how bitter that morsel was unto them, and how dear it cost them: for
Adam having lived more then nine hundred years, spent them all in weeping, and
mourning, and suffering a thousand misfortunes which accrewed to him with the
estate of his Corruption: Sapient. 10.2.
but in the end (as says the divine VVisdome) thorough Penance he obtained
pardon; and with this example I am to animate myself to lament my miseries,
and to do Penance for my Sins, that God may deliver me from them, imitating
in Penance him, whom I imitated in Sin, and beseeching our Lord to chastize
me as much as he will in this life, so that he pardon me, and deliver me
from the torments of the other.

The third Point.
THe third Point shallbee, to call to Memory some mortal Sin, as Perjurie,
Carnallitye, or such other like, for the which many Souls are burning in Hell,
and that very justly, for having done Injury to the infinite majesty of God.

1. I am then to descend with my Consideration to Hell, which is full of
Souls, among which I shall find many that are there burning for one only
Sin. Some for one Perjurie; others for a dishonest Thought consented unto;
and others for some other Sin of Word, or of Deed. And then I will
consider how all these condemned Persons were men, as well as I; and many of
them, as I, Christians, that enjoyed the same Sacraments, and Sacrifices, and
those Sermons, and sacred books that I enjoye, and were perhaps sometime very
holy, and highly in favor with God: but by little, and little they grew
careless, and came to fall into that mortal Sin, and by the Just Judgments
of God, Death attached and set upon them therein, and for it they were most
justly condemned. Jacob. 2.10.
For (as the Apostle S. James says) Whosoever falls into one only Sin,
breaking a Commandment, is made guilty of all, as he that breaks many;
for he offends the God of Infinite majesty, who commands them all to be
observed.

2. Then am I to make Comparison of this Sin with many of minne, pondering
with how much more reason I deserved to be in Hell, as those Souls are, for
having offended God, not once but many times, and in other kinds of Sins
without number. O how justly had I deserved that Death should have attached
me in committing my first Sin, and that God should have given me no time of
Repentance? What moved thee, o my God, to expect me more then these? I
confess that I deserved to be in their Company, but seeing thy Majesty has
with so much mercy expected me, I resolve with thy grace to be very
truly, and entirely penitent.

3. I may also consider that it is no less a benefit of God to have preserved
me from Hell, detaining me from descending to everlasting Torments, then if,
after I had been descended, he had diliuered me from them. For the which I
may say that of David: I will confess to thee, o Lord my, Psalm. 85.12.
God with all my Heart, and will glorify thy name for ever, for thy mercy
has been very great toward me, delivering my Soul from the deepest Hell.
And to know how to esteem aright of this merced, and so repaye it, as I
ought, I am to speak to myself, saying: If God should deliver one of these
Souls out of Hell, and give it a time of repentance, what rigourous penance
would it do, how thankful would it be to God, and with what fervor
vvoult it serve him? Thou therefore art to do the like, considering that God
has done thee so singular a favor, as to deliver thee from the Danger,
before thou did fall into it.

The fourth Point. Of the greatness of our Sins, by the Pains that
Christ our Lord suffered for them.
THE fourth Point, shall be both matter of a sweet Colloquie, and of a most
devout consideration to know the greatenesse of Sin, and the
dreadefullnesse of Gods Justice, by another example much different from the
forepassed; but no less effectual then they, that is: by the Chastizements
which the divine Justice inflicted upon Christ JESUS our Lord, not for his
own Sins, but for mine, and for those of the whole World; that I may
understand how he will chastize man laden with his own Sins, that so
chastized him that bore the burden of other men's Sins: and how the guiltye
Slave shall be handled, when the innocent Son was so terribly punished:
Calling to mind that dreadefull Sentence which our Redeemer spoke to the
Daughters of Jerusalem: Luc. 23.31.
If in the green vvood they do these things, in the dry what shallbee
done? As if he should say to me, If I be treated with such rigor, being a
green tree, and full of fruit, with what rigor shallt thou be treated, that
art a dry tree, and without any fruit at all?

Then I am to set before mine eyes Christ JESUS crucified, beholding his Head
crownde with thor^es; his Face spit upon; his Eyes obscured; his Arms
disioincted; his Tongue distasted with gall, and vinegar; his Hands, and Feet
pierced with nails: his Back, and Shoulders torn with whippes; and his Side
opened with a Lance: and then pondering that he suffers all this for my
Sins, I shall draw sundry Affections from the inwardest part of my Heart,
sometimes trembling at the rigor of Gods Justice, who (as the Prophet
Zacharias said) unsheathed his Sword against the man that was united with him
in person; Zacha. 13.7.
sometimes bewailing my Sins which were the cause of these Dolours: and
sometimes animating myself to suffer somewhat in satisfaction of my offenses,
Isai. 53.
seeing Christ our Lord suffered so much to redeem them. And finally I will
beg pardon of him for them, alleging to him for a reason all his Troubles, and
Afflictions, saying unto him in an amorous Colloquie. Colloquie
O my most svveete Redeemer which descendedst from Heaven, and ascendedst this
Cross to redeem men, paying their Sins with thy Dolours, I present myself
before thy Majesty grieved that my grievous Sins have been the cause of thy
terrible pains. Upon me, o Lord, these Chastizements had been well
employed, for I am he that sinned: and not upon thee that never sinnedst. Let
that Love that moved thee to put thyselfe upon the Cross for me, move thee to
pardon me what I have committed against thee. By thy Thorns I beseech the,
dravve out of my Soul the thorns of my Sins: by thy Scourging, pardon my
Theftes: By thy Gall, and Vinegre pardon my Gluttonyes: By the nails of thy
Hands, pardon my Evil Works: and by those of thy Feet, pardon my Evil
Steps. Psalm. 83.10.
O eternal Father behoulde the face of thy Son, and seeing in him thou
did chastize my Sins, let thy wrath with these Chastizings be
appeased, and use toward me thy mercies, Michae. 7 19.
throvving all my Wickedness into the bottom of the Sea, in Virtue of that
Blood that was shed for them. Amen.

This point we shall prosecute largely in the fourth part.

The third Meditation of the multitude of Sins, and of the grieuousnesse of
them, for being so many, and contrary to Reason.
The first Point.
1. THE first point is, to call to mind the multitude of Sins that in all
my former Life I have committed: to which end I am to run thorough all the
Ages thereof, and thorough all the places where I have lived, and thorough the
Offices, Occupations, and Employments that I have had, regarding how, and
wherein I have faulted in every one of the seven Sins, we commonly call
Mortal: and in every one of the Commandments of the Law of God, and of his
Church: and in every one of the Laws, and Rules of my Estate, and Office. To
which end it will help me to know the sorts of Sins that may be
committed in these matters; as they shall be put in the first points of the
eighteenth meditation, and of the nine following.

And this Remembrance of Sins, must not be dry, but moistened with tears,
full of Confusion, and Shame, as was that of the holy king who said: I will
consider before thee all the days of my Life with bitterness of Soul.
Isaiae. 38.15.


In having called these Sins to Remembrance, I will make of them in my
Prayer, an humble Confession before God, Daniel. 9 5. Luc. 18.13.
like Daniel accusing myself of them all, yea of the most principal of them,
striking my breast as the Publican, and saying: I accuse myself o Lord, that I
have sinned before thee in pride, presuming vainly of myself, speaking
boasting words, despising my neighbors, and rebelling against thee. And in
this sort will I prosecute the Accusation in all the seven deadely Sins, and
thoroughout all the ten Commandments.

2. After I have confessed those Sins which I know, Psalm. 18.13. 1. Cor.
4.14.
I am to believe that there are very many other that I know not, which David
calls Hidden Sins, but they are not hidden from God who is to judge me,
and chastize me for them. And this must hold me careful, and afflicted.
These Sins are hidden to me, for one of three causes: either for that I have
already forgotten them: or for that they were very subtle, as Interior
Prides, rash Judgments, sinister Intentions, Negligences, and Omissions: or
for that I committed them with some Ignorance, and error; or by the illusion
of the Devil, thinking that I did God service. And thus joining the Sins
that I know, with the Sins that I know not, I may believe that they amount
to an innumerable multitude, and that they are (as David said) more then the
Hairs of my Head, Psalm. 39.13. In oration^ eius:
and (as king Manasses said) more then the Sands of the Sea. From whence I
shall draw out great Admiration at Gods patience in suffering me. For one
Injurye, or two, any one may suffer: but so many, so reiterated, so diverse,
and with so great perverseness, who can suffer them but God? Truly, o my
God, there was need of such an infinite Patience as thine, to suffer such an
Infinity of Injuries as mine: but seeing thou have not been wearied to suffer
me, be good to me, and pardon me.

The second Point.
1. FRom hence I will mount up to consider the greuousnesse of these Sins, by
their multitude, Matt. 18 6. Apoc. 18 21.
making my proffit of some Similitudes used in the divine Scripture. For if
Sin be like a Millstone hanged about the neck, wherewith man is thrown into
the depth of Hell, my Sins being as many as the Sands of the Sea, or the
Hairs of the Head, what an Immense burden will theirs be? with what a
furious Violence shall I fall with them into the Profunditye of Hell? If God
hold me not, Isai. 58.6.
but an Iron Chain of innumerable Linkes wherewith I am bound, and chained,
which is so large that it reaches to Hell, and Satan stands drawing at it to
hale me unto him. And if the Sins of the Angels (as says S. 2. Petr. 2 4.
Peter) were Ropes that pulled them from Heaven, and drew them down into the
bottomless pit of Hell; how much more strong Ropes shall my Sins be, being
twisted with so innumerable Cords? Psalm. 21.13.
Lions, Bulls, Serpents, and other Savage Beasts, that terrifye it with their
roarings, tear it in pieces with their mouths, and rent it with their claws:
like Bees they sting, and like Worms they bite it, Matt. 18 23.
and gnawe the Conscience. Finally I am that evil Seruante, that owes his
Lord ten thousand Talents, and the debt is so great that although they should
sell all that he has, both his Wife, his Children, and himself, yet all
would not suffice to pay the least part thereof. Colloquie
Then what do thou, o my Soul with so great a burden of Sinnes^ If this
Army of savage beasts made Christ sweat blood with anguish; how comes it,
that thou do not weep tears of Blood, of Dolor, and Pain? O most
merciful Savior, by that Dolor, and Sense that thou had of my Sins in
the Garden of Gethsemani, I beseech thee, aid me to have such a feeling of
them, that I may be quitte, and delivered of them.

To this I am to add another Circumstance, my recidiuation into the same
Sins, after God has pardoned me once, and many times, striving as it were
with God, I to sin, and he to pardon me, and I to return again to Sin,
Prou. 26 11. 2. Petr. 2 22.
as if I had never been pardoned; imitating (as says the Apostle S. Peter)
the Dog that retourneth to his vomit, and the Swine that being washed
walloweth again in the same mire. For the which I deserved that God should
vomit me for ever from himself, and ouerwhelme me in the filthy Dunghill of
Hell, leaving me bound hand, and foot in the power of those Infernal
Executioners, as he did with the unthankful Servant that ought him ten
thousand Tasents, and after he was pardoned, returned again to offend him.

But yet for all this, trusting upon the Infinite Patience, and mercy of God,
I am again to return unto him unfeignedly, and prostrated at his feet to say
unto him: Have patience with me, o Lord, and I with thy aid will pay thee
the whole debt of my Sins; and if thou pardonest me this once, I will never
more return unto them.

The third Point.
THirdly, I am to consider the deformity, and vileness of these Sins, in as
much as, though there were no Hell for them, yet they are contrary to natural
Reason: for man being created to the likeness of God, by Sin he is
transformed into a Beast, and with the multitude thereof engenders within
himself Bestiall manners, and Vicious Habits. His Appetites prevail against
Reason, the Flesh against the Spirit, and the Slave commands him that by
right is the Lord; for the wretched Spirit is made a Slave to the Flesh; and
to her Appetites, and is basely inthralled to many other Creatures. For (as
Christ our Savior said) whosoever commits Sin is the Servant of Sin,
Joan. 8.34. 2. Petr. 2 19.
and he that is vanquished (says S. Peter) is the Servant of him that
vanquisheth, and as a Slave, is subject to the Conqueror. If I be ambitious,
I am the Slave of Honor, and of all them that can give it me, or take it
away. If I be Covetous, I am the Slave of Wealth: If a Glouton, I am the
Slave of Niceness: If Luxurious, I am the Slave of Sensuallitie, and of those
that have robbed me of my Heart, and of my Liberty. And what greater
baseness can be then this? What more heavy Slavery, then that of Sin
frequented by vicious Custom? This should move me to great Detestation of my
Sins, to cast of from me this Servitude, and to restore my Spirit to
Liberty, reducing myself to the Service of my Creator, and Redeemer, of
whom I am to require, that seeing he bought me with his blood, 1. Petr. 1
18. 1. Ad Corinth. 7.23.
to free me from the Slauerye of Sin, that with this new Title I might be
his Slave; that he permit not that I be any more the Slave of my Flesh,
nor of my Vices, nor of the Devil his Enemy.

The fourth Meditation of the grieuousnesse of Sin, by the baseness of Man
that offends God, and by the nothing that he has of os his own.
THE end of this meditation is, to know the grieuousnesse of doing Injurye to
God, the Baseness of him that offends him: for the more vile the Offendour
is, so much the greater is his boldness, and Shamelessnesse in offending the
supreme Emperor of Heaven, and of Earth.

The first Point.
FIrst I am to consider what I am concerning the Body, G^n. 2.7 and 3.19.
pondering that my Original is Durte, and my End is Dust: my Flesh is a
Flower, Isai. 40.6. Iacobi. 4.14. Job. 14.1
and soon withers like Hay: my Life is as a Blaste, and as a Vapor that
soon passes: and it is short, and full (as Job says) of many miseries, and
necessities, of Hunger, Cold, Grief, Infirmity, Pouerties, and Dangers of
Death: it has no Securitye of one only day of Life, nor of Rest, nor of
Health: so that by mine own Strength it is impossible to free me from these
miseries, unless God our Lord with his Protection, and Providence do defend,
and deliver me from them. Now what greater madness can there be, then for a
man so needye, and miserable, to dare to offend his only Remedier, and
Protector? And what greater dotage can there be, then for the Flesh being
but Dust, and Ashes, a filthy Dunghill, a swarm of Worms, and Rottenness it
self, to presume to injurye the Supreme Spirit of Immense majesty, before
whom the Powers, and all the other blessed Spirits do tremble? O Earth,
Colloquie Eccles. 10 9. Isai. 45.9
and Ashes how art thou so provvde against God! O Vessel of Claye, how doste
thou contradict thy maker? O miserable Flesh, if thou so much fear man that
can deprive thee of thy temporal Life, without doing thee any greater harm,
how do thou not tremble at God, that can deprive thee of eternal Life; and
cast thee into the fire of Hell? Return into thyselfe, and if it were but
for thine own Interest, cease to offend him that can free thee from so many
Evils. With these considerations I am greatly to confound myself, and to
terrifye myself with myse^^^, that have fallen into such madness, and have
been so exceedingly foole-hardye: and to beseech Christ JESUS our Lord,
that by his most holy Flesh he will pardon this audaciousnesse of mine, and
reduce it to reason hereafter.

The second Point.
1. SEcondly, I will consider what I am concerning the Soul, pondering that I
was created of nothing, Psalm. 38.6.
and that of myself I am nothing, that I am worth nothing, that I can do
nothing, that I merit nothing, and that presently I shall be turned into
nothing, Joan. 15.5.
if God do not continually preserve me; neither should I be able to do any
thing, if God did not continually aid me. Besides this, Psalm. 50.7.
I was conceived in Sin, and with an Inclination to Sin thorough the
disorder of my Appetites, and Passions: I live subject to infinite miseries of
ignorances, and Errors: Inuironned with innumerable Temptations within me, and
without me, by Visible, and Invisible Enemies that on all sides do incompasse
me: and thorough the Imbecillitye of my Free Will, I have consented, and do
consent unto them, committing many Sins, by the which I come to be less
then nothing: for it is a less evil not to be, then to sin, and it had
been better for me not to have been, Matt. 26 24.
then to be damned.

2. And if this be that which I am, much worse is that which I may be,
thorough my great mutabillitie, and weakness: for by the threede I may draw
out the botome, and by the interior motions that I feel to innumerable Sins
of Infidellities, Blasphemies, Angers, and Carnallities, I collect and gather
that to all these Sins I am subject, and should fall into them, if God should
take from me his hand: and by what all the Sinners of the world do, and
have done, I may gather what I should have done, if I had been left at my
Liberty. D. Aug. in soliloq. c. 15.
For (as S. Augustine says) there is no Sin that one man does, but another
man may do it. And therefore I am to Imagine myself as a fountain of all the
Sins that are in the World; and as a dead, and stinking dog whom it is
loathsome to behold: or as a Body buried in the grave, and full of worms which
lies consuming, and turning into Dust. For all which I am to contemn myself,
and to judge myself worthy to be despised of all.

3. This then being so, Colloquie
to what farther point can my dotage arrive, then with my own will to
offend the majesty of God? If I be nothing of mine own, how dare I offend
him that is being itself? And wherefore do I abase myself so much as to
make myself less then nothing, unworthy of the being I have? If I am
subject to so many mishaps as may come to my Soul, why do I not appease him
that may deliver me from them? O God of my Soul, have a regard to that
which thou createdst of nothing; dravve it from this nothing which is Sin,
and join it to thee, that by thee it may have essence, and life of grace, and
may obtain the blessed being of Glory. Amen.

The third Point.
THirdly, I will consider the littleness of my being, and of all the good
that I have in comparison of God, proceeding by Degrees, and beholding first
what I am in comparison of all men joined together: and then what I am in
comparison of men, and Angels: and then what all Creatures are in comparison
of God, before whom, (as Isaias says) the nations are, Isai. 40.17.
as if they were not: they are as nothing, and as a thing void of being; they
are as a drop of Water, or of the Dew of the morning that falls upon the
ground, and can hardely be seen. Then I alone, Sap. 11.
what shall I be before God? As the Stars appear not in the presence of the
Sun, and are as if they were not: so I, how great good soever I have, am, as
if I were not at all, in the presence of God; and much less then a little worm
in comparison of the whole world.

My Science, my Virtue, my Power, my Discretion, my Fortitude, my Beautye, and
all whatsoever good I have, or can have, is as nothing in comparison of that
which God has: for the which our Savior said with great reason; Luc. 18.19.
None is good but only God; none is Potent, nor Strong, nor Beautiful but
God: for he only is Goodness, VVisdome, and Omnipotency it self, in
comparison whereof, that which the Creatures have, deserves not this name.

Then what wit can understand how a man of so little Being dares to despise
God, and to offend him with so many Sins? O fool what have thou done? O
wretched I, that have been so audacious? O Immense God, in comparison of whom
I am as if I were not, by the infinite excellency of thy Being, I beseech
the pardon my Sins, and illuminate me to know the vileness, into which by
their means I am come. Grant me that I may abhor, and despise myself, and
esteem myself less then nothing: Job. 42.6.
and that like Job I may do penance in Dust and Ashes, accounting my self for
such a one in thy divine presence.

The fifth Meditation of the grieuousnesse of Sins, by the greatness of the
infinite Majesty of God, against whom they are committed.
THis meditation, which has most efficacy to move to perfect Contrition, and
Sorrow for Sin, which proceeds from the love of God above all things,
pondering the grieuousnesse of Sin, not only by the Baseness of the
Offender, but by the Highness of the Offended: for by how much greater the
Injuried is, 1.2. q. 78 art. 4. and 3. p. q. 1. art. 2. ad 2.
so much greater is the Injurye: and as God is Infinite in his Essence, and
Perfection, so Sin in this behalf (as S. Thomas says) is likewise as it
werean Infinite Injury.

The first Point.
FIrst, I am to consider the Infinite Perfections that God has in himself,
especially those against which Sin directly fights, and from whence it
receives greatest deformitye, and heynousnesse.

1. And first of all I will ponder the Infinite Goodness of God, for the which
he is highly to be beloved of all his Creatures, and if another Infinite Love
were possible, it were all due unto him. And this Goodness is so great, that
it is impossible to see it clearly, and not highly to love it, as the Blessed
do. Now what greater mischief can there be, then to abhor, and despise so
infinite Goodness: and what greater Injustice, then to Injurye with Hatred
him, that is worthy of so infinite Love? O infinite goodness how have I
abhorred, Colloquie
and despised thee! O that I never had offended thee* My Grief, o my God, is
greater for Sin, then for all else whatsoever. For I desire to love thee
above all, whatsoever else that may be beloved.

2. Secondly, Note well this consideration.
I will ponder the Immensitie of God together with his infinite VVisdome, by
the which he is really, and truly present in every place, seeing, and
contemplating all that is done: and myself am to behold myself within this
Immensitie full of eyes, within the which I committed all my Sins passed, and
do commit those present, provoking him therewith to Indignation, Loathing,
Abacuc. 1.13. Apoc. 3.16.
and Vomiting: for his eyes (as the Scripture says) are so clean, that they
cannot behold Sin without loathing, and his heart is so pure, that
Wickedness makes him vomitte. Now what greater blindness can there be,
then for me to live within the Immensenesse of God, and in view of the
VVisdome of God, and yet for all this to Injury him with my Sins? To what
greater height can the Impudency of the Slave arrive, then to tread under
foot the Will, and Honor of his Lord being in his presence? And what
greater audaciousnesse then to do all this, our Lord being powerful to
chastize him as his discourtesy deserves? O Lord how have thou suffered me
to be near thee, Colloquie
and in thy presence! How is it, that thou have not annihilated this
vnmannered, and disloyal Slave! How is it, that thou have not turned thine
eyes from me, and vomited, and cast me out of thy mouth for ever! I am
grieved to the Soul for my Impudency, and Audaciousnesse; and I purpose with
thy grace, never more hereafter to do any thing unworthy of thy presence.

3. Thirdly, I will ponder the Sovereign Omnipotency of God, by the which he
is in all Creatures, giving them the being that they have, and concurring with
them in all their works: for without this concurrence of Gods Omnipotency, I
can neither see, nor hear, nor speak, nor move hand, nor foot, nor
understand, nor will, nor do any other thing. And consequently, when I sin,
I aid myself with his Divine Omnipotency, to think, speak, or do the
thing that disgusteth him: and such is his goodness, and mercy that to
conserve my Liberty he denies me not this Concurrence, nor denies it to
the Creatures of which I make use to offend him: he concurreth with my meat,
that it may be sauory to my Taste, yea, even when I sin in eating it: and
with the Beautye of the Creature that it may recreate my sight, although I did
sin in beholding it. Then what rashenesse is this for me to make war
against God, with the very power of God? And what does his aid avail me,
when I convert it to his Injury? O Omnipotent Goodness, Colloquie
how do thou so liberally give thy concurrence to him, that so euilly
abuses it! Why do thou not employe this Omnipotency to chastize him that
makes no better proffit of it! Pardon, o Lord, this boldness which has
been greater then I can imagine: for I am grieved therefore more then I can
express, and yet I would that it grieved me much more. O infinite God, that
shevvest thy Omnipotency, principally in pardoning, Ecclesia. in Collecta.
and having mercy on a Sinner: pardon me, and have mercy on me, and aid
me that I may never more use thy infinitt power, unless it be to serve
thee. And in this sort may be pondered the Attributes of the Mercy, Justice,
and Charity of God, and others that in the following point shall be touched.

The second Point.
SEcondly, I am to consider the Infinite Benefits of our Lord, and what God
has been to me, D. Bern. sermo 16 in Cantica.
comparing it with what I have been to him, and what an exceeding great
injury it is, to offend an infinite Benefactor.

1. First, I will ponder the benefits of my Creation, Conservation, and
Governance, which include innumerable benefits belonging to the natural
essence and being both of body, and Soul, and ayding to the supernatural
being of Grace. And with this consideration, I will procure to be exceedingly
sorrowful for having offended, my Creator, without whom I had had no being:
my Conseruer, without whom I could not have continued: and my Governor,
without whose providence I could not live. Deuteronomy. 32 6.
To this end it will help much to ponder all that which Moses, said to his
People, in the Canticle which he made reproching them with their Sins, Deuteronomy.
32 6.
especially in these words: These things do thou render to our Lord,
thou foolish and unwise people? Is not he thy Father that has possessed
thee, and made, and created thee? God that begatte thee, thou have forsaken,
and have forgotten our Lord thy Creator, and Redeemer.

2. Secondly, I will ponder the benefits of my Redemption: where enter the
Incarnation of the eternal Word, and all the Labors, and Travails of the
Life, Passion, and Death of our Lord Christ, beholding him as our Father,
Pastor, Physician, Master, and Savior. So that with my Sins I have injuried
him, that holds all these Titles with me. And (as the Apostle says) I have
crucified JESUS Christ within me, Ad Heb. 6.6. and 10.29.
I have trodden upon the Son of God, I have trampled upon his blood, I have
despised his examples, I have trodden underfoot his Laws, and his Precepts;
and I have lived, as if no such Redemption for me had ever passed in the
world. Colloquie
Then how is it, o my Soul that thou meltest not in Toares, having offended
such a Father, such a Master, such a Pastor, and Redeemer? How is it, that thy
Heart does not cleave asunder with Grief, for having offended with thy
Sins him, that dyed to deliver thee from them! O my Redeemer, how much
grieueth it me to have offended thee? Pardon, o Lord, my offenses. Wash
with thy blood the spots of my Transgressions, by virtue whereof, I purpose
with thy grace, no more to return to pollute myself with them.

3. In this sort, I may ponder the benefits of my Sanctification; where
enters Baptism, and the rest of the Sacraments, especially that of Penance,
and Eucharist, and the Inspirations of the holy Ghost, and other innumerable
both manifest, and secret Benefits; as also the promise of future benefits in
the Glorification, and Resurrection: with all the which I am to charge myself,
and with great astonishment to admire at myself, that I have answered so
many benefits with so evil services; holding competencie or sufficiency with
God, he by doing me favors, and giving me great gifts: and I by doing him
Injuries, and committing grievous Sins: considering that every Sin after a
sort, is an Infinite Ingratitude, for being against an Infinite Benefactour,
and against infinite benefits that from his hand I have received, given with
infinite Love, without any merits of mine.

To exaggerate the more the grieuousnesse of my Sins in this respect, it
shallbee good to profit my self of some Histories that make to this purpose:
as of that of Joseph, Genes. 39 9.
that it seemed unto him impossible to sin with the wife of his Lord, of
whom he had received so many benefits. And that of Saul, 1. Reg. 19 6.
who though he were a cruel persecutor of David, yet he grew meek, when he
heard tell the great Services that he had done him. And when he saw that
David killed him not, when he had power to kill him, he had compunction, and
said: Thou art Iuster then I, 1. Reg. 24 18.
for thou have done me good turns, and I have rendered thee evil. O my
Soul, how can thou sin against thy God, Colloquie
and Lord from whom thou have received all the Good thou have? O God of my
Heart, how much more just art thou then I, for thou ceasest not to do me
mercies, and I cease not to do thee offenses! Thou having power to take
away my Life, and my Being, yet do it not; and I having no power to take
away thine, yet as much as it lies in me, I attempt to do it. Thou did
cut of the Head of the Giant, and did break the Head of the Serpent to
deliver me frem Death; and I subject myself thereunto by offending thee.
Who is it that having power to kill his Enemy, kills him not? and yet thou
vvilt dye that he may not dye. Pardon, o Lord my bestiall Vnthankefullnesse,
and aid me with thy abundant grace, that I may no more return to fall into
so horrible a misery.

The third Point.
THirdly, I am to consider what motive I had to Sin: for doubtless it
increases the greatenesse of the Injury, when it is done upon a very light
cause, and Occasion. For why did I offend God? For a Little Wantonness of the
Flesh, for a Punctillo of Honor, for a Small Interest of Wealth, for a
slight pleasing of mine own Will: finally, for things most vile, that pass
like Smoke, and are, as if they were not, in Comparison of God. And yet being
such, for them I denied by my Works the living God, Ad Titu^. 1.16.
and made of them to myself an Idol, and false God, esteeming them more then
the true God, crucifying Christ within me, to give life unto Barrabas, which
is, Sin. O my Lord, Ierem. 2.12. Colloquie
with great reason say thou to the Heavens, that they should be
affrighted, and to the gates of Heaven that they should break, and break
with amazement for two evils which thy People committed: and yet I vvretched
Sinner have committed them infinite times, leaving thee that art the fountain
of living Water, to dravve with Labor out of broken Cisternes that cannot
contain Water. O Labor ill employed^ O Inconsiderate Change! I left the
infinite God, and the perpetual Fountain of infinite, and eternal Good, for
a thing of nothing, of Temporal, and perishing Good, which like a broken
Cisterne, loses vnperceaueably the water that it hold, Genesis 25.34.
and remains dry. O my Soul, if the Deed of Esau seem so vile unto thee,
that sold his birthright for a small Dishe of Pottage: Ad Heb. 12.
how much more vile shall thine be, that sellest thy birt-bright of Heaven
for a little interest of Earth? He soulde it to redeem his Life, and thou to
sell it, incurrest Death. And if he found no place of Repentance to revoke
the sale, it were very just that thou also should not find it, seeing thy
sin was greater then his. But set seeing that Gods mercy is greater,
approache unto it with Humillitye, that he may defeat by his Grace, the
evil sale that thou made by thy Sin.

Finally, in this meditation, and in the following, I am to lay fast hold on
this Verity: for it is an incredible follye to believe by Faith what I
believe, and yet to live in that manner that I live: that is, to believe that
Sin is so evil as we have described it, and yet for all this to commit
it: to believe that God is so good, and so right a Iusticier, and yet
notwithstanding to offend him: and so in the rest.

The fourth Point.
THE fourth point, shall be, to break out with these Considerations into an
exclamation, with an Affection vehement, and full of Amazemene; As that the
Creatures have suffered me, I having so greiuously offended their Creator, and
Benefactor. Genes. 3.24.
That the Angels who are the ministers of Gods Justice, have not unsheathed
their fiery swords against me: That they have guarded me, and been the
Advocates of so wicked a man as I. That the Sun, Moon, and Stars have
illumined me with their Light, and preserved me with their Influences. That
the Elements, the birds of the Air, the Fishes of the Sea, the Beasts, and
Plants of the Earth have helped to sustain me. I confess that I deserve
not the Bread I eat, nor the Water I drink, nor the air I breathe: neither
am. I worthy to lift up my Eyes to Heaven: I have rather deserved that flashes
of fire should discende from thence to burn me like Sodom, and Gomorrha: or
that the Earth should open, and swallowe me alive like Dathan, and Abyron:
and that new Hells should be found, and new Torments invented to chastize
my grievous Sins. And seeing that the Goodness, VVisdome, Immensenesse,
Omnipotency, Liberallitie, Beneficence, and Charity of God have not been
sufficient to bridle me; it had been Just that his Justice should have
appeared, to avenge the injuries done to these divine Perfections, Sap. 5.18
and Sovereign Benefits: and should have given License to all Creatures (as
shallbee given at the Day of Judgment) to take Vengeance on me, for the
injuries that I did to the Creator, and to them, Colloquie
to offend him. But o my God, and my Creator, seeing that of thy Mercy thou
have thought good to suffer me, add this benefit to the former, thinking it
good likewise to pardon me. Amen.

The sixth Meditation of the grieuousnesse of Sin, by comparison between the
temporal, and eternal Pains, wherewith it is chastised.
The first Point.
FIrst, I am to consider the greiuousnesse of mortal Sin by comparison, with
all the pains, and miseries that are in this life, pondering that it is the
cause of these temporal evils, God thereby chastizing it most justly. For
proof hereof; I may run in Discourse thorough the exterior Goods, which we
call the Goods of Fortune, and thorough those which belong to the Body, of the
which Sin is the Destruction First, it destroys Riches, God depriving
Sinners of them, because they abuse them: as he spoiled the Egiptians of their
Jewels, and the Iebusites, and Cananites of their Countries. Sin likewise
destroys Honor, for whosoever takes (as much as lies in him) the honor
from God, and from his Neighbor, deserves to loose his own Honor. For this,
the high Preiste Heli, and his Sons lost the Honor of Preisthood with their
life, God saying unto them, Qui contemnunt me, 1. Reg. 2.30. 1. Reg. 13 14. and
15 23. Dan. 4.23.
erunt ignobiles; They that contemn me shallbee base. Sin destroys the
Scepter, and the Government: For disobedience God took from Saul the kingdom
that he had given him: And Nabuchodonosor with vainglorious boasting lost
his also, living seven years like a Beast, God cutting down that sightly
Tree, for that his Sins deserved not that he should stand upright. And it is
a just Chastizement that he should neither have Dignity, nor Command on
Earth, that subjecteth not himself to the king of Earth, and of Heaven: and
that he should have no preeminence over men, who by Sin makes himself like
unto Beasts.

Besides this, Sin destroys the Health, God chastizing Sinners with
manifoldnesse, and Variety of Infirmities, and Sores from Head to Foot.
Isai. 1.6.
For he deserves not to have Health, that employeth it to offend him, that
gave it him: and whosoever has his Soul sick, being albe to heal it, is
worthy to have his Body sick, and not to be able to eure it: as the Lame man
that in eight, Joan. 5.2
and thirty years could not be healed in the Probatiea pond, where others
were healed.

Sin takes away Content, and Alacrity, causing a mortal Sadness, which
dries the bones, gives a Life worse then Death itself: Thren. 3.15.
Like unto the City that said, God has filled me with bitterness, and
made me drunk with VVormevvod. Or as the miserable king Antiochus that
said: 1. Match. 6.11. and 2. Match. 9.11.
To how much Tribulation, and to what Waves of Sadness am I come, I that
was merry, and beloved in my kingdom!

Sin takes away Life, procuring Death by a thousand disastrous means:
Exodus 12 29. and 14 27.
for the Sins of Pharao, and his kingdom, an Angel killed in one night all
the first begotten, and another day drowned his Army of innumerable men. And
another Angel in the Camp of Senacherib, 4. Reg. 19 35. Exodus 32 28. Leuit
10.2. Number. 11.33. 2. Reg. 24.13.
killed one hundred fourscore and five thousand men, and many Israelites
perished in the Deserts with diverse strange kinds of Death.

Finally Sin causes those three terrible evils that were offered to David,
to choose one of them in punishment of his Offense, Famine, War, and
Pestilence, with the which innumerable men perish with exceeding great
misery, and rage. For Sin likewise come Earthquakes, Tempests at Sea,
Deluges, Fires, Lightenings, Hail, Storms and other such chastizements: for
as Sin is the Injury of the universal Creator, all the Creatures are
Instruments of his Vengeance.

Then I will apply all this to myself, beholding my evils, and miseries, and
I shall understand, that they have all come upon me justly for my Sins, that
I may know, and see by Experience, (as Ierem^e says) how evil, Ierem. 2.19.
and bitter it is to forsake God, and not to fear him. And so from the horror
which I have of these pains, I shall extract a horror of my Sins, saying to
myself: Seeing thou art so much afraid of temporal miseries, Colloquie
why art thou not afraid of Sin which is the cause thereof? If thou
tremblest at Poverty, and Dishonor, why tremblest thou not at Sin, from
whence they both proceed? And if thou flyest the sickness of the body, why
flyest thou not the sickness of the Soul: seeing that ends with a
temporal Death, but this has a Death everlasting? O eternal God illuminate
me with thy Sovereign Light, that thorough the fear I conceive of the
evils of the body, I may learn to feel the evils of the Soul.

The second Point.
SEcondly, I am to consider that Sin is an evil incomparably greater, then
all the temporal evils that have been spoken of, and that with them we
cannot pay the least part of the pain, that one only mortal Sin
deserves: pondering some manifest reasons of this Verity alleged by the
Saints.

1. The first, for that all the evils that have been spoken of, deprive of
Goods created, which are very much limited; Ex D. Th. 1. p. q. 48. ar. 6. Luc.
18.19.
but Sin depriueth of an Infinite good, which is God. And as God only is for
Excellency called Good, because the other things created, though they have
some goodness, yet being compared with that of God, it is as it were nothing:
so Sin only may be called absolutely evil, and the malice of other
miseries is as if it were not, in Compatison thereof; nor all together are
sufficient to impose upon me the title of evil, D. Dionis c. 4. de diuinis
nominibus.
if I be without Sin: for by Sin only I shall be evil, though I be
exempt from all other miseries.

From hence it is, that if all the pains of this Life were joined together in
me, Poverty, Dishonor, Sickness, Dolor, Heaviness, and Persecution, with
all the Torments that the Martyrs have endured, yet they equal not the misery
of one mortal Sin: and I should willingly offer myself to suffer them all,
rather then to commit one. In Imitation of that renowned Martyr Machabean,
who answered those that menaced him with greiuous Torments, 2. Match. 6.23.
if he would not break one Commandment of Gods Law, Praemitti se velle in
infernum, That he would rather suffer himself first to be sent into Hell:
that is, That he would rather suffer himself to be killed, and cut in
pieces, and to sink a thousand degrees under ground with terrible Dolours, and
Ignominies, then to commit such a Sin. Colloquie
O most glorious Martyrs that offered yourselues to sustain such horrible
Torments, rather then to commit one only Sin, vvilling rather to loose
your Lives, then to admit an offense, though but for an Instant: beseech
your eternal, and Soue, ^igne king, to grant me such Charity, and
Fortitude, that to fly from Sin, I may little esteem any Pain whatsoever.

In confirmation hereof, I will ponder that the evil of Sin so far
exceeds the evil of Pain, that God our Lord, though he be infinitely
good, may be the Author, and cause of any pain whatsoever; Amos. 3.6.
nay rather (as the Prophet Amos said) there is no evil of these in the
Cittye, which God has not done; for this does not make him evil, neither is
it contrary to his Goodness: but it is Impossible that he should be the
author, or cause of the least Sin whatsoever. for that should be contrary
to his Goodness, which (as the Prophet Abacuch says) cannot look upon
wickedness, Abac. 1.13.
as approouing it, or delighting in it.

And by the same reason, God becoming man, might take upon himself all the
evils whatsoever of Pain only, D. Tho. 3. p q. 14 and 15.
that were in the World; but it is Impossible that in him should be found
any evil of Sin, and Christ our Lord would have offered himself to suffer
all the Torments, and Dishonours that he endured, and others much greater if
it were necessary, only not to commit one Sin: in Imitation of whom I am
to do the like, being exceeding sorrowful for the Sin wherein I have
hitherto lived. O most pure God, Colloquie
that being free from Sins, and from Pains, taking our nature upon thee,
did charge thyselfe with pains, to discover the Detestation thou have of
Sins, load me here with Torments, so thou for ever free me from Sins.

From hence proceeds another third Reason, D. Th. 1. p. q. 48. art. 6. in Sed
contra.
which manifestly declares the greiuousnesse of Sin. For God our Lord of his
Infinite VVisdome, ordained the evils of this Life, for the medecin of Sin.
And seeing no wise Physician does do any very great evil, to cure another
that is little, it is a sign that all these miseries are less evil then
Sin. And therefore with great reason our most merciful Savior, and
Physician Christ JESUS, would suffer such terrible pains in his Passion, and
Death, to deliver us from our Sins, and yet, were they much greater then
they were, they were not equal with our Sins, nor would they serve to
redeem them, nor to cure them, had not the Person that suffered them been of
Infinite Dignity, and Sanctity. From whence I will draw a great horror of
so terrible an Infirmity, for whose cure are ordained so bitter sirrops, and
putges. And withal great patience in my Afflictions, considering that how
great soever they be, they are incomparably less then my Sins, saying as
it in written in Job: Peccaui, and vere deliqui, Colloquie. Job. 33.27.
and vt eram dignus non recepi. I have sinned, and in deed I have offended,
and as I was vvorthie I have not received, the punishment due to my Sin. O
Heavenly Physician that well, know the greiuousnesse of my Sores, burn,
and cut here, and spare not so thou cure me of them.

The third Point.
THirdly, I am to consider the greiuousnesse of Sin by Comparison with the
pains eternal, pondering First, That mortal Sin is so great an evil,
that having caused, (as has been said) all the evils of this life, yet as
if it had done nothing, causes also the eternal evils of the other Life, God
chastizing therewith the Sinner, that remains in his Sin, as if in this
Life he had received no chastizement at all. So that neither the ten plagues
of Egypt, nor the fire of Sodom, nor the Tribulations of unhappy Jerusalem,
nor the pains that Sinners, Rebels to God, do suffer here, are put in
account to lighten the Chastizements of Hell, which shallbee as great, as if
here they had suffered no others at all. And so, as making no reckoning of
them, Nahum. 1.
says the Prophet Nahum, that God punishes not one thing twice, because the
Punishment of this Life, is as if it were not; or is (as S. Lib. 13. Moral.
cap. 13.
Gregory says) the beginning of the eternal.

Secondly, I will ponder the reason of this most just rigor. For as Sin is
an infinite Injury, (as has been said) and all the Pains of this Life are
finite, it is not sufficiently punished with them, if there succeed not others
that have some Infinity, as those of Hell have for two respects. First, for
being eternal, and having no end in their continuation. Secondly, because
they deprive of an Infinite Benefit, In id Ps. 49. ignis in co^spectu eius
exardescet.
which is the Sight of God, for ever. VVhereupon says S. Augustine, Although
there should be no day of general Judgment for Sinners; and though
thoroughout all eternitye they should live with abundance of Delights, without
fear of Punishment, yet only for this, that they should for ever want the
happy beholding of God, they should bitterly lament, for it is not possible
for a man, that has a lively Faith of what God is, to imagine any pain, that
is equal heereunto: Quia haec amantibus paena est, non contemnentibus. This
pain they feel which love, not they which despise it. And for that few feel
it in this Life, therefore another of most terrible fire is threatened, which
is felt much: in comparison of which, the pains here are so light, as if they
were no pains at all. Then why shall not I tremble to continue a rebel in
Sin, deserving that God should punish me with double Tribulation, Ier.
17.18. Colloquie
and should break me with a double breaking, this Temporal Punishment being
but a Scratch, and a beginning of the eternal? O infinite God, deliver me
from this Rebellion, that I fall not into so great a misery.

The fourth Point.
LAstly, I will consider the extremest that may be truly said of Sin,
which is, that though the evils of pain only which are suffered in Hell, are
so terrible; yet it is Incomparably a greater evil then all they. In such
sort, that if one man should suffer the pains of Hell without Sin, and
another should have but one mortal Sin only; this last should be more
evil, and miserable then the other. And if all the pains of Hell deuoyde of
Sin were put on one side; and on the other side one mortal Sin only, and
that I must of necessity choose one of these two, I (says S. Lib. de
similitudinibus. c. 190. Bern. sermo. 35. in Cant.
Anselme) would choose rather to throw myself into Hell, then to commit
only one mortal Sin. And with holy Eleazar I would say, Praemitti velle in
infernum, That I would rather enter into Hell itself without Sin, then
remain with Sin in the World: for the Death of Sin, (says the
Wise Man) is most wicked and the worst that may be, Eccle. 28 25. Colloquie
Et vtilis potius Inferus quam illa: The grave, yea and Hell itself, as
touching pain, is more profitable then it. O Infinite God settle this Truth
in my Heart, that I may fear Sin much more then Hell, seeing in truth
there is no worse hell, then to be in Sin. O my Soul bewail bitterly thy
Sins, not only for Hell, which thou have deserved, but much more for the
great evil, thou have committed against God. Cease presently to Sin, that
God may not strike thee with a cruel chastizement, and with the stripe of an
Enemy, Ier. 30.14.
permitting thee to wax obdurate in thy Sins, to chastise thee with never
ending pains.

Concerning this last Ponderation, it is to be considered, that it is not set
down because it is needful to make this Comparison; For Hell is never
without Sin; neither can there be any case, wherein Hell may be chosen, not
to commit a Sin: but only that hereby we may see how great an evil
Sin is, and how worthy it is to be much more extreemely abhorred then Hell,
yea, allbeeit there were no Hell at all. VVhereupon S. Ambrose says, Lib. 3.
de offic. c. 4. and 5.
That there is no pain more greiuous then the Wound of Conscience, nor no
Judgment more rigorous then the Domestical, where with every one judges
himself guilty. And though the Just man (says he) had Giges ring, with the
which he might do what he would Invisible, yet would he not Sin: for he
departs not from Sin for fear of Punishment, but for the horror of
Wickedness, and Love of Virtue.

That which in this meditation has been declared in general, shall more
manifestly be seen by that, which shallbee declared particularly in the
ensuing of the Last things of man, and in the special Punishments that
corresponde to the seven deadely Sins.

Meditations of our last things, to move us to a Detestation of Sins.
THE meditations of the last things of man, which are Death, and the Grave;
Judgment particular, and Universal; Hell; Purgatory and Glory, are of most
efficacye to move us to a Detestation of our Sins, and to an effectual
Resolution never more to return unto them. Hereupon said the
Ecclesiasticus, Eccles. 7.40. Deuteronomy. 32 29.
In all thy works remember thy last ends, and thou shallt not Sin forever.
And for the same reason said Moses to his People: O that they were wise,
and understood, and would provide for their Last things: giving to
understand, That our true VVisdome, Understanding, and Providence consists in
well meditating, and ruminating those things, which are to happen to us in the
end of ou^ Life, and to be provided therefore. And especially the meditation
of Death, (as Experience teaches us) is very proffitable for all those, that
walk in any of the three ways, Purgative, Illuminatiue, and Unitive; wherein
all men ought often to exercize themselves, though with different ends. The
Principiants, to purge themselves of their Sins, before Death assail them,
and take them unprovided. The Proficients, to make have to store up Virtues,
seeing the Time of meriting is very short, and Death cuts it of on a sudden.
The Perfect, to despise all things created, with a Desire to unite themselves
by Love with their Creator: And therefore we will point out Considerations
that may proffit all, but most especially those that aid to the end of the
Purgatine Life, whereof at this time we entreat.

The seventh Meditation of the Properties of Death.
IN this meditation we will consider some Properties of Death, and what ends
our Lord pretended in them for our Proffit, reducing them to three, which are
the most Principal.

The first Point.
THe first Propertye of Death is, to be most Certain, Ad Heb. 9.27.
from the which none can escape in the time that God has determined.

1. Wherein we are to ponder first; That God our Lord from all eternitye has
determined the years of our Life, Psalm. 38.6.
and assigned the month, the Day, and Hour wherein every one is to dye, so
that it is Impossible (says Job) to pass one minute thereof: Job. 14.5
neither is there any King, nor Monarke that can add to himself, nor to any
other one moment of Life, above that which God has determined. So that as I
entered into the World the same Day that God would, and not before; so shall
I depart out of the World, the same Day that God will, and not afterward.
That by this I may Understand, that what day soever I live, I receive it of
Grace, and that those I have lived, have been of grace: for our Lord might
have assigned me a shorter time of Life, as he assigned to others, that died
in their Mothers womb, or in their Infancye. And seeing my Life so depends
upon God, there is just cause why I should spend all the time thereof, in his
Service that gave it me, holding it for a great Ingratitude, to employe one
only moment to offend him.

2. Secondly, I am to consider, that God our Lord in this his Decree, shortened,
or enlarged the days that some men, according to their natural Complezion,
might have lived, for the secret ends of his sovereign Providence. For to
some, either for their own prayers, or for the prayers of other Saints, he
enlarged the days of their Life; as to king Ezechias he added fifteen
years, 4. Reg. 20.6.
because with Tears he required it. And the like has succeeded to the Dead,
who miraculously have been raized to Life. To some others he shortneth the
days of their life, for one of two ends: either for their Salvation, Sap. 4.11
cutting them off (as the Wise Man says) in their youth, lest Malice should
change their understanding, or lest fiction might deceive their Soul. Or
contrarily to punish their grievous Sins, and to stop their passages, that
they might not make an addition of greater. Psalm. 54.24.
VVhereupon David fayed. That the men of Blood, that is, men very wicked and
cruel, shall not live half their days. And sometimes he shorteneth them for
Sins that seem but light, 3. Reg. 13 19.
as it happened to the Propher, who being beguiled by another, did eat in the
place, where God had commanded him that he should not eat. Out of all this I
will extract a firm Resolution, so to order the days of my Life, that God
shorten them not for my Sins, saying with David. Psalm. 101 25.
Call me not back, o Lord in the half of my days by a sudden Death but
remember that thy years are eternal, and have compassion of mine that are
few.

The second Point.
THE second Propertye of Death is, that concerning the Day, Place, and Manner
it is most secretly hidden from all men, and manifest only to God. 1. In the
which I will ponder first, that we are not able to know the Day, nor the
Hour wherein we are to dye; neither the Place, nor the Occasion, nor Seas on
wherein Death may attache us, nor the manner how we are to dye whither its
hal be with a natural Death, by Sickness, and by what kind of Sickness:
or whither it shall be with a violent Death, by Fire, or Water: by the hands
of men, or by Beasts: or by some Lightning, or by the tile of a houset, hat
may fall down upon us. This only we know, that Death shall come suddenly,
or Sickness, and the Occasion thereof: and that when a man is most careless,
Luo. 12.39. 1. Ad These. 5.2 Apoc. 16.15.
it comes like a Thief in the night to scale his house, and rob him of his
Wealth. So (says Christ our Lord) shall the Son of man come to scale
your house, which is the body, and to rob, and sack the Soul of it, and to
give Judgment thereof.

2. Secondly, I will consider what ends our Lord had in this plot of his
Providence, that is to say, to oblige us to be always watchefull, Eccles. 9.2.
fearing this hour, providing ourselves for it, doing penance for our Sins
before Death seize upon us, and making haste to merit, Joan. 12.35.
and to labor before our light be ended, least the Candle dye suddenly, and
we remain in the Dark. This Christ our Lord concluded in his Parables
concerning this matter. Sometimes he said. Matt. 25 13. Matt. 24 42. Luc.
12.40.
Vigilate, qnia nescitis diem noque horam: Watch daily, and howerly, because
you know not the day, nor the hour of your Death. Other sometimes he
said: Watch, because you know not what hour your Lord will come: and
be you ready, for at what hour you think not, the Son of man will come.
With these words I will often exhort my self, saying: Girde thy body with
the mortification of thy vices, and passions: and take in thy hands the
burning torches of Virtues, and good works, and be always watchefull
expecting the coming of Christ, for he shall come when thou least think
of it, and that hour wherein thou are most forgetful, shallbee peradventure
the hour that he has assigned, and if he find thee not well provided, thou will be miserably deceived.

3. Thirdly, I will ponder that all sudden unexpected Deaths that have
happened, and daily do happen, are remembrances of this Verity given me by
our Lord, that I may fear, and prepare myself; for Death that strikes every
man, may likewise strike me. And therefore when I see, or hear say, That some
dye suddenly by the sword, some by the hands of their Enemies; and other
some lying down to sleep in good health, slept the last sleep of Death:
out of all this, I am to draw fear, and advise: for that it may possibly
happen, that such a kind of Sudden Death shall light upon me.

4. VVhereupon I am deeply to consider, that any mortal Sin whatsoever, if
I do not penance for it, deserves that Gods Justice should chastize me with
this Death, as Christ our Lord advertised to the purpose, in two like cases,
that happened in his time: the one, That Pilate killed suddenly certain
Galileans: the other, Lue. 13.2.
That the Tower of Siloe fell upon eighteen men: think you (says he) that
these men were the greatest Sinners of Galiley, or Jerusalem? Non, dico vobu:
sed nisi poenitentiam habueritis, omnes similiter peribitis. No, I say unto
you, for this has happened that you may understand, that unless you do
Penance, you shall all likewise perish: as if he should say: When you see
any dye suddenly, and of a disastrous Death, be not vainly secure, saying:
This happened unto them, because they were great Sinners: for verily I say
unto you, that what Sinner soever he be, though he be not so great, if he
do not I enance, he is worthy of Punishment, and shall perish, as these
perished. Then if this be truth, as indeed it is, why do not I tremble to
live one hour in mortal Sin, in what sort soever it be? Who can secure
me that the Punishment shall not fall upon me, that I so justly have
deserved? Who has excepted me from this general threatening, that Christ
our God menaceth to all Sinners? Eccles. 30 24.
O miserable Sinner, be merciful to thine own Soul, and endeavor to appease
God with Penance, before so horrible miserye light suddenly upon thee.

The third Point.
THe third Propertye of Death, is, that it happens but once, according to
that of the Apostle S. Paul: Ad Heb. 9.27.
Statutum est omnibus hominibus semel mori. It is appointed to all men to dye
once, whereupon it ensues, that the hurt, and error of an evil Death, being
the worst of all hurts, is irremediable throughout all eternity: as likewise
to die a good Death, is thoroughout all eternity durable. So that if I once
dye in mortal Sin, there is no means to remedy this hurt. For (as Solomon
says) If the tree shall fall, Eccles. 11 3.
when it is cut, to the South, or to the North, in what place soever it shall
fall, there shall it be.

If by Obstinacye in Sin it falls to the North of Hell, there is no remedy
to recover grace, nor to escape from pain. But, if by perseverance in Grace,
it falls to the South of Heaven, there is no fear of returning again to
Sin, nor of the loss of Glory. With the lively consideration of this, and
of the former Verities, I am on the one side to be astonished at myself, that
believing this with such certainety of Faith, I do yet live so careless of
my Salvation, and so forgetful in a matter, that so much imports me: And on
the other side to animate myself to procure, with greatest speed Penance, and
Amendment of Life, and feruencye therein, humbly beseeching our Lord to cut
the tree of my Life in such time, and place, and in such an occasion, that it
may not fall to the side of Hell, but of Heaven. And with all, I will examine
(as S. Bern. says) to what side I should fall, Sermon. 49 paruoru^.
if God should now cut me off, and will endeavor to assure my good Success,
doing fruits worthy of true Repentance, with the which the Tree inclines to
the part of Glory, and being then cut off, shallbe transplanted therein.

The experienced Deceites that men suffer concerning these three Verities, that
have been declared, shallbee set down in the twelfth Meditation.

The eigth Meditation, of those things that cause Anguish, and Affliction to
the Man that is near his Death.
THose things that may cause me great Affliction, and Anguish at the hour of
Death, may be reduced to three ranks: Some passed, others present, and
others to come. And to have the more feeling hereof, I am to present unto
myself that hour, as if I were in my bed, forsaken by the Physicians, and
without hope of Life: which is not difficult to persuade, for it is possible
that while I am saying, or reading, or thinking upon this, I want no more but
one day of my Life: and seeing that one day must be the last day, I may
imagine that it is this present Day.

The first Point.
FIrst, I will confider the great Anguish, and Affliction, which the
remembrance of all things that are passed, will cause me, running thorough the
most principal.

1. First, I shallbee greatly afflicted with the remembrance of my forepassed
Sins, and of all the Liberties, Carnallities, Reuenges, Ambitions, and
Couetousnesses that I have had in the course of my Life. Also, of the
slacknesse in the Service of God, the negligences, and Omissions, and all the
rest of my Sins that have not been much bewailed, and amended. I am to
imagine that there is at that instant an Army made of all my Sins, like as
of Bulls, Psalm. 21.13.
Lions, Tigers, and other savage Beasts, that rent in pieces my Heart: or
like an Army of terrible Worms that gnawe, and bite my Conscience, and
neither the Riches, nor Pleasures that I enjoyed, can avail me to close up
their cruel mouths: for the delight of Sin being past, there remains
nothing but the sharpness of pain: and seeing I drank the sweet wine of
sensual Pleasures, Psalm. 74.9.
I am forced to drink the bitterness of their Lees. Then shallbee fullfilled
what David says: Psalm. 17.5.
The Sorrovves of Death have encompassed me, and the torrents of iniquity
have troubled me: the sorrows of Hell have compassed me on all sides, the
snares of Death have prevented me unawares. O what bitter Dolours! O what
furious Torrents! O what pinching Snares shall these bee^ from the which mine
own forces are so far from being able to deliver me, that I shall hardely
know how to make any use of them: for the bitterness of these Dolours will
provoke me to Distrust: the vehement furye of these Rivers will trouble my
Judgment: and the straightness of these snares, will pinche my Throat, that I
may not ask pardon of my Sins: Colloquie
the Devil making use of all this, that I may have no issue out of them. O my
Soul, bewail, and confess well thy Sins in thy life, that they may not
disquiet, Eccles. 5.4.
nor torment thee in thy Death. Say not, I have sinned, and what sorovvf^^
thing has chaunched to me? for thy joy shall soon pass away, and the
stroke of Sorrovve shall come. Loose not absolutely the fear of Sin, which
thou supposest to be pardoned, least that Sin bud out at thy Death, which
thou bevvayledst but euilly in thy Life. These, and such other aduises which
Ecclestasticus notes in his fifth Chapter, I am to collect from this
Consideration, with a Resolved mind to begin presently to put them in practice.

2. Secondly, I will ponder, how at that Instant I shall not only be
tormented, and afflicted with the remembrance of my Sins, but also with the
loss of the time that I had, to negotiate a business so Important as that of
my Salvation, and with letting slip many occasions that God offered me to
that end. Then shall I desire but one day of those many, which now I loose in
sleeping, playing, and talking for pastime, and recreation, and it shall not
be granted me. Then it shall afflict me, that I have not frequented the
holy Sacraments, nor the exercises of Prayer: that I have not answered divine
Inspirations, nor heard Sermons, nor exercized works of Penance: that I have
not given alms to the poor, to gain friends to receive me in the eternal
habitations, and that I have not been devoted to the Saints, that in that
narrow straight they may be my mediators, and Advocates. Then shall I make
great Resolutions to do that which when I might, I did not, desiring to live
to accomplish them; and all peradventure without proffit, like those of the
wretched king Antiochus the cruel Persecutor of the jews, who being at the
point of Death, though he made great promises, and prayers unto God; 1.
Match. 6.12. 2. Match. 9.13.
yet says the Scripture, That this wicked man prayed to our Lord, of whom
he was not to obtain mercy; not that mercy was wanting to God, but for
that there was wanting to this VVretche a true disposition to receive it: for
all those Resolutions of his, sprung merely from servile Fear, and were but
to wrest out his bodily Health, as if he could deceive God, as he deceived
men.

From this Consideration I am to collect, that the hour of Death, is the
hour of vnbeguiling, in in the which I shall judge of all things differently
from what I do now: Eccles. cap. 11.8
holding (as the Ecclesiastes says) for Vanity that, which before I held
for VVisdome; and contrarily holding for VVisdome, that which before I esteemed
as Vanity. And therefore the truest VVisdome is, to resolve effectually upon
that, which then I would do, and forthwith to accomplish it. For the ordinary
Law is, that he that lives well, dies well: and he that lives very
euilly, seldom happens to dye well: And especially I will make a full
Resolution, to loose no iotte of Time, nor to let slip any occasion of my
proffit, Eccles. 14 14.
remembering that of Ecclesiasticus: Be not defrauded of the good day, and let
not a little portion of a good gift ouerpasse thee, but make thy Proffit of
all, to the Glory of him that gives it thee.

The second Point.
SEcondly, I will consider the great affliction, that my Soul shall feel in
leaving all things present, if I possess them with an evil Conscience, Psalm.
48.18.
or with a disordinate Affection: whereupon I am to persuade myself, that in
that hour, perforce, and in spite of my teethe, I am to leave three sorts of
things.

1. First, I am to leave the Riches, Dignities, Offices, Delicacies, and
Possessions, that I had, and shall not be able to carrye any thing with me:
And the more goods I have, the more bitter it willbee to leave them. For Death
(says Ecclesiasticus) is very bitter to him that has peace with Riches,
Eccles. 41 1.
and Dignities, and is desirous to live, to enjoy them longer: and the Sins
he committed in procuring, and in abusing them, shall augment this
bitterness, Gods Justice so ordaining it, that those things which in their
life were the Instruments of their vicious Delights, should in their Death
be their Executioners, and Tormentours: Then shallbee fullfilled that which is
written in Job of a Sinner, His bread in his belly, Job. 20.14.
which he did eat with much Savor, suallbee turned into the gall of Aspes
within him, the riches that he has devoured, he shall vomit out, and God
shall dravv them forth out of his belly: He shall suck the Head of the Aspes,
and the Vipers Tongue shall kill him: that is to say, his Delights shallbee
turned into Gall, his Riches shall make him disgorge: but he shall neither
have Courage to dispose of them, nor to leave them, until Death take them
away by force, the Serpents, and Vipers of Hell tormenting him, for having
gotten, and possessed them with Sin.

Secondly, in that hour I must forcibly depart from my Parents, and Brethren;
friends, and Acquaintance, and from all those that I love, whither it be with
a natural Love, or with a Lawful, or unlawful Love. D. Greg. 1. moral. 13.
And as we leave not without grief, what we possessed with Love: and by how
much the greater the Love is, wherewith it is possessed, so much the greater
grief is felt in abandoning it: exceeding great will the Sorrow be, that I
shall feel to depart from so many persons, and things, that are so fastened to
my Heart. And in these Anguishes I shall say with that other king: Siccine
separat amara mors? Does bitter Death thus separate? 1. Reg 15 32.
Is it possible that I should leave those whom I so love? And shall I never
more see them, nor enjoy them? O cruel Death, how much do thou exasperate
my Heart, depriving me with such Sorrow, of what I possessed with such Joy?

3. Lastly, in that hour my Soul is to depart from my Body, with whom it
has held so strict, and ancient Amitye: and consequently it is to depart
from this World, and from all things therein contained, without hope for ever
again to see, hear, taste, or touch them. And if the Love I bear to my
Body, to my Life, and to the other things of this visible world, be a
disordinate Love, of force I must needs feel exceeding great grief to
depart from them: which I may easily make experience of, by that sensible
feeling I have, when they take from me my Wealth, my Honor, and Fame; or
exile me from my Country, and force me to live from my friends, like a
Pilgrim among Strangers; or cut of some member of my Body. For all this
together in a troop succeeds in Death, after another, and a more painful
manner, which is without hope ever to return again to possess it in this
Life.

In every one of these three Considerations pondering a while what is to be
noted, I will enter into myself, and examine whither I carry a disordinate
Love to any of these things repeated; which if I find that I do, I will
endeavor to vnroote it with the force of this consideration, and with the
exercize of Mortification: for this is to dye in life, and with proffit taking
as it were by the hand Death, Sap. 3.1.
so not to feel Death, as Religious men do that abandon all things for
Christ our Lord; whom I am to beseech to aid me herein, saying unto him.
Colloquie
O eternal God in whose hand the Souls of the Just are, and under whose
Protection the Torment of Death does not touch them, take from my Soul the
disordinate Love of all visible things, that in departing from them, it may
have no feeling of Torment. O my Soul, if thou desire that these three
bitternesses of Death should not touch thee, Love not those things that
Death can take from thee; for if thou possesst them not with Love, thou shall
leave them in Death without Dolor, or grief.

I am likewise to ponder in these considerations, how great a madness it is
to offend God, and to endanger my eternal Salvation, for things that I am so
soon to abandon, resolving valourously with myself, presently to avoid any
person, or thing whatsoever, that may expose me to this peril, dying to it,
rather then for its cause, to dye to God, and separating it from me, rather
then it should separate me from God. Matt. 10 34. Luc. 12.51. Colloquie
Seeing for this said our Savior Christ, that he came to send the sword,
and Division upon Earth, separating from men all Persons, and Things, that
might hinder their Salvation. O svveete Redeemer, put forthwith into my hand
the svvorde of Mortification, that I may separate from me, whatsoever might
separate me from thee, dying to all that is created, to live to thee my
Creator, world without end. Amen.

The third Point.
THirdly, I am to consider the great Affliction, and Anguishe that the fear
of the Account I am to make with God, and of the rigorous Judgment whereinto I
am to enter, will cause me at that hour: as also that I know not the Sentence
that shallbee pronounced in the business of my Salvation.

Wherein I am to ponder the dreadefullnesse of this fear for three causes.
First, Secondly, which is to be given is definitive, and irreuocable, and at
the Instant is to be executed without resistance. Thirdly, for that the cause
on my side is very doubtful, because the Sin that I committed is apparent to
me, but not the true Penance that I did: and my Conscience accuses me to
have offended the Judge, but I know not whither I have appeased him. Eccl.
9.1. 1. Cor. 4.3.
For no man knovveth vvhither he be worthy of Hatzed, or Love, and though I
find no Sins in myself, yet it may be that God will find them. For all
these Causes, the fear will at that time be most terrible. For if those that
have a Suit in any weighty business, wherein all their Wealth, their Honor,
or Life is Interessed, have very great fear the day that they expect the
Sentence: how much greater fear shall I have, when I am neete the day, wherein
the diffinitiue Sentence is to be given of my Salvation, or Damnation? And if
the greatest Saints are then afraid, how much more shall I fear, that am a
miserable Sinner?

This Anguish, and Fear uses to be augmented by the craft, Apoc. c. 12.12.
and Subtletye of the Devil, who in that hour tempts most furiously,
because he sees, he has but a little time remaining: and therefore he
stirs up greatly all that may provoke to Desperation, he excessiuely
aggrauateth our Sins, and exaggerateth the rigor of Gods Justice against
them. He will tell me, that he that lived evil, must not dye well; and that
he that laid not hold on Gods mercy, must fall into the hands of his
Justice. 1. Petr. 4.18.
And if the Just man shall hardely be saved, what shall become of the wicked,
and the Sinner? And as he is a Liar, and the Father of Lies, and a false
Accuser of men, if God tie not his hands, and limitte his Power, he will set
before me a thousand false Imaginations, and accusations, with Cosenages, and
horrid Visages to trouble me, and to make me sweat with agonye, and to pass
greater Anguishes then those of Death it self.

These are the fears that in that last trance shlal afflict me, if I provide
me not in time to hinder their Vehemencye, which I am to do by entering into
my self, and considering, if Death should now attache me, what it is that
would give me greatest terror, and devising how to remedy that in time. And
if I would not that Death should seize upon me in the present estate that I
am in, I am to endeavor presently to get out of it; for it is neither lawful
nor secure to live in an Estate, wherein I would not dye.

I will conclude this Meditation, setting before mine Eyes Christ our Lord,
naked, and nailed to the Cross at the Instant of giving up the ghost, and I
will with great feruencye beseech him, that by his Death he will grant me
a good Death, and that if the Devil come to my Death, as he came to his,
that he would deliver me from him, and grant me so assured a Confidence,
that like him, I may say in that hour; Psalm. 118 109. Colloquie
Father into thy hands I commend my Spirit. O morcifull Father, my Soul is
yet in my own hands, but ready to fly out of them, and in peril to fall
into the hands of her Enemies. O do thou receive her into thine, that the
work of thy hands, for the which they were nailed to the Cross, may not
he destroyed. I offer myself to imitate in this life thy Pouertye, and
nakedness, that in Death thy hands may receive me, and may carrye me with
them, to the repose of thy Glory. Amen.

We may likewise make Speeches, and Prayers to our blessed Lady the Virgin,
and to the Angel of our guard, and other Saints, requiring their favor for
that hour; for while we live we negotiate that, which should aid us at that
Instant.

To this purpose we shall make our proffit of a manner of preparation to dye
well, which shallbee put in the fourth part in the fifteth and first
meditation, collected from what Christ our Savior, did at his Death: as
likewise of what shallbee said in the fifth part, in the thirteth and fourth
meditation concerning the glorious passage of our blessed Lady.

The ninth Meditation of the particular Judgment that is made of the Soul in
the Instant of Death. D. Th. 3. p. q. 59. art. 5.

IN this meditation I am to presuppose that Verity of our Faith, 2. Cor.
5.10. Ad Romans 14.10.
that all men (as S. Paul says) are to be presented before the Tribunal of
Christ, that every one may give a reason of all that he has done, either
good, or evil, while he lived in this Body: Ad Heb. 9.27.
and this Judgment is made Inuisibly after Death: for that Statutum est
omnibus hominibus semel mori, and post hoc Iudicium. It is the Infallible
Decree of God, that all men shall dye, and then follows Judgment, from the
which, as from Death, no man shall escape.

Before this Tribunal of Christ I am to present myself in Prayer, Imagining
this Sovereign Judge seated on a Throne of fire, Daniel. 7 9.
as Daniel saw him, to represent the terriblenesse of his Wrath against the
wicked; or in a most pure white Throne of most resplendent light, Apoc. 20 11.
as S. John saw him, to represent his infinite wisdom, and Purity, and his
Clemencye toward the good. And of both these figures I may make my proffit,
as in the following point shallbee seen.

The first Point.
FIrst, are to be considered the persons assistantes at this Judgment,
regarding the quallities, and semblances of each one of them: These are four
at the least.

1 The first, is the Soul that is to be Judged, the which shall stand alone,
naked, without her Body, and all visible things, clothed only with her
works. For allbeit at the time of Death there be present many kinsfolk, and
many religious Persons, yet in that Instant that it issues out of the body,
there is none of them can bear it company, nor favor it. As desolate
shallbee the Soul of a King, as that of a Clown; of a rich Man, as of a
poor man: of a learned man, as of an Idiot: for Dignities, and Riches remain
here; and though it carry with it its Sciences, there is no account made of
them, but of Works: Apoc. 14.13.
whereby I shall see what a great Inconsideration it is, to procure with so
much solicitude that, which cannot help me in that conflict, and to loose
that, which most of all Imports me.

2. Zach. 3.1 Psalm. 108 6. D. Greg. hom. 39. in Euangelia.
On either side of the Soul (as is collected out of holy Scripture) shall
stand at least the Angel Guardian, and the Devil with different semblances,
accordingly as they suspect what is like to succeed. I may Imagine that on the
right hand of the wicked, the Devil stands very cheerful for the pray that
he expects: and the Angel on the left hand with a sad semblance for the
loss that he fears. But contrarily it shall be in the good, yet always the
Devil willbee there, with his fierce, and horrid Semblance.

3. The fourth Person is the Judge, which is God himself, who is to give this
Judgment inuisibly, allbeeit he will give tokens of his preseence, Imprinting
in the wicked terrible fear, and horror; and in the good, peace, and
consolation. For as he is infinitely wise, he cannot deceive himself in
Judgment, as he is absolutely good, he cannot wrest Justice: as he is
Omnipotent, no man can resist his Sentence: and as he is the Supreme Judge,
there is from his Tribunal no Appeal, nor Supplication; his Sentence is
allwaies diffinitiue, and Irreuocable: for all that may be seen in this
process, he sees, and comprehends it at first sight, so that a reuiew is
superfluous.

Pondering these things, I will Imagine that my Soul stands to be Judged
before the Tribunal of so upright a Judge, as God our Lord is. And considering
a while my Sins, to move me to fear, I will behold the Judge in
Indignation against me with a severe countenance, and an inexorable mind. And
I will behold Satan standing on my right side, full of Content, and as it
were victorious, applying to myself that which the royal Prophet David
says: Psalm. 108 6.
Appoint a Sinner over him, and let the Devil stand on his right hand, when
he is Judged, let him come forth condemned, and let his prayer that he
makes, be turned into Sin. Another whiles to move myself to Confidence, I
will behold the Judge gentile toward me with an amiable, and pleasing
Countenance; and on my right side my Angel Guardian, cheerful for my
Victory, Imagining that he is saying in my favor against the Devil, that
which the Prophet Zachary repeateth: Zach. 3.2
Our Lord rebuke thee, o Satan, our Lord rebuke thee, Is not perhaps this
poor wretch, a cole pulled out of the fire that it might not be burned? Then
what will thou? O most lust Judge, Colloquie
and most merciful Father, I confess that I am thorough my Sins a black,
and filthy Cole, and half burnt with the fire of my passions, wash me, o
Lord, and vvhiten me with the living water of thy grace, and therevvith
quench this fire, that burns me, that in the day of account the Devil may
leave me, the Angel may protect me, thy mercy may receive me, and thy
Justice may crown me. Amen.

The second Point.
SEcondly, I am to consider the Time, and Place, S. Joan. Clima. cus cap. 7 S.
Greg. 4. dialog. cap. 37.
wherein this Judgment is to be done.

1. The time is the Instant of Death: for allbeeit that by the special
dispensation of God, it has been seen to begin visibly a little before
Death, in sundry cases that have happened for our example: yet ordinarily it
is done inuisibly, in the very Instant that the Soul leaves to Inform the
Body without any delay. And in that very moment the whole Judgment is
concluded, the accusation is made and the Sentence is given, and executed. This
moment I am to have allwaies before mine eyes, as that which is to be the
beginning of my eternal good, or evil, saying: O momentum a quo aeternitas, O
moment wherein eternitye begins, who can forget thee without great Peril,
and who can remember thee without great Astonishment? Be mindful, o my
Soul, of this moment, and endeavor not to loose any moment of time, for in
every one, thou may merit the life that shall for ever endure.

2. The place of this Judgment is, wheresoever Death arresteth any man,
without going to the Valley of Iosaphat, or to any other special place: for as
the Judge is in all places, so in all places he has his Tribunal, and makes
this Judgment: in the Earth, and in the Sea; in the bed, and in the street;
that in every place I may fear, because I know not whither that shallbee the
place of my Judgment. But because that Death most ordinarily attacheth us in
our Chamber, and Bed, when I am in these places, I must imagine sometimes, that
there stands the Tribunal, and Throne of God to judge me, and the good, and
evil Angel assistantes at the Judgment: for this holy Cogitation will
restrain the unmeasurable excesses of the Flesh, which bud out with the
Solitariness of the place.

From these two Considerations I am to draw a great fear of offending God:
for peradventure the Time, and Place wherein I committee this Sin, shallbee
also the time, and place wherein God will do Judgment: Genes. 19 26. 1. Cor.
11 29.
as the wife of Loath, who in the same Instant, and place that she turned to
look upon Sodom, was turned into a Satatue of Salt: and (as S. Paul says)
whosoever eats unworthily the body of Christ our Lord, eats Judgment to
himself. Job. 15.16.
So when I drink Wickedness like Water. I drink Judgment to my Soul, and
perhaps the Drink may be so mortal, that in that very Instant the Judgment
shall be executed.

The third Point.
THirdly, I am to consider the Frame, and Order of this Judgment: that is, the
Accusers, and VVitnesses, the Proof, and rigorous Examination that shallbee
made of all my works, to Judge me accordingly.

1. First, the Accusers shallbee three: The first, shallbee the Devil, Apocal.
12.10.
whom S. John calls the Accuser of our brethren, whose Office is to accuse
them before God day, and night: but in this last Judgment with greater
hatred, and furye he will accuse me of all the Sins I committed thorough
his persuasion, by consenting to his Temptations: yea, and he will add false
accusations for his own Suspicions; as well for that he knows not the
Intentions, as also for that his Anger, and malice do blind him, making him
hold for true that which is false. Therefore, o my Soul, resist allwaies the
Devil, and admit nothing of his, that when he comes to Judgment against
thee, Joan. 14.30.
he may find nothing of his for which to lay hold on thee, nor no Sin
whereof truly to accuse thee.

2. The second Accuser, shallbee every man's own Conscience, the which shall
likewise be a witness, and stand for a thousand: for the Thoughts thereof
shall beat against us, Ad Romans 2.15.
and they (as the Apostle says) shall in that hour, accuse, or defend us.
And as in Confession, I myself, of my own will, am the Guilty, the Accuser,
and the Witness against myself, that the Priest may absolve me: so then
also I shallbee so perforce, that God may Judge, and condemn me, for that
whereof here I obtained not pardon.

3. Finally, the Angel Guardian himself shallbee the third witness, and after
a sort Accuser against me for my rebellions to his Inspirations, and
Counsels. From whence I may collect how much it imports me, allwaies to
consent to the good Inspirations, and Dictates of these two faithful
Companions, Conscience, and Angel, and to yealde myself unto them, when in
this life they accuse, or reprehend me, that afterward in the other, they
may not condemn me; following the Counsel of our Savior Christ who says:
Matt. 5.26. Luc. 12.58.
Be at agreement with thy Aduersarye betimes vvhiles thou art in the way
with him, and go to appear before the Prince: for if thou then compoundest
not with him, he will deliver thee to the Judge, and the Judge to the Officer,
who will cast thee into prison, from whence thou shallt not get out till thou
have paid the last farthing. O Prince of Heaven, Colloqu
to whose Tribunal I go to be Judged, grant me that I may take thy
wholesome Counsel, agreeing always with these two good Adversaries, that
being freed from the Sin, I may be so likewise from the Officer, and
eternal Prison. Amen.

4. But above all I am to ponder the most rigorous examination of the Judge
himself, wherein are two terrible things: the first is, that it is universal
of all things whatsoever, charging me with all my Sins of Deed, Word, and
Thought, though they were but Idle ones; Matt. 12 36.
and with the omissions, and negligences of my Life, with the Ingratitude; and
evil correspondence that I had to Gods benefits, as well general, as special,
as are Sacraments, Inspirations, etc. I shall also be charged with the evil
circumstances that I mixed with my good works. Psalm. 74.3.
For hereupon it is said: That when his Time comes, he shall Judge
righteousness itself, making a very rigourous examination of those works
that appear good.

The second Propertye of this examination is, that it shallbee evident to the
examined himself: for the proof of all these charges shallbee a clear light,
where with God will discover to my Soul all its Sins, without omitting any
one, even those which it had forgotten, and supposed were not at all. Sophon. 1
12. D. Bern. sermon. 55. in Cantica.
And hereupon heesaithe by one of the Prophets, that he would search
Jerusalem by candlelight, that is to say: That he will not only Judge the
wicked that dwell in Babylon, but also the Just that live in Jerusalem, and
that he will inflame such a light to search into their Souls, that they
themselves may see the very corners of their Consciences. Colloquie
O how afflicted shall my poor Soul find itself with so straight, and
rigorous an examination! O how astonished shall it be with the evidence of so
certain; and clear proof! O eternal God enter not into Judgment with thy
servant, Psalm. 142 2.
for none that live, shallbee justified in thy presence. Fear, o my Soul,
although thou find no great Sins in thyselfe: for he that is to examine,
and Judge thee, is God, that sees more then thou, and can find them. Examine
thyselfe with the greatest rigor thou can, and Judge rigorously thy self
for the Sins thou shall find: 1. Cor. 11 31.
for if thou iudgest thyselfe with Dolor, thou shall no more be judged to
thy Damnation.

These are the principal resolutions that I am to collect out of this
consideration, endeavoring to accomplish them every night when I make
examination of my Conscience, or when I am to Confess me, as in the 28. and
31. Meditations shallbee declared.

Lastly, I am to consider, that in this examination, God will also discover to
the just Soul, all its good works, words, and desires, yea, even those which
it had forgotten, (...) doubted whither they were good, or no. There shall she
see her Obediences, and Penances, her Prayers, and mortifications, cheering
herself much with this view: for hereupon said the voice from Heaven;
Blessed are the dead, Apocal. 14.13.
which dye in our Lord, for their works follow them. And with this
consideration, comparing the examination both of good, and evil, I shall
animate myself to live such a Life, as in the last examination may be
approved by God.

The fourth Point.
FOurthly, I am to consider how Christ our Lord in the Instant of Death, by
his lust Sentence depriueth, and vnclotheth the wretched Soul of the Sinner,
of those supernatural graces, and gifts which remained with him after Sin,
that he may without them enter into Hell-fier.

The terriblenesse of this Sentence, and the pain that the Damned shall suffer
in this Conflict, I may ponder by that which happens to a Priest, who has
committed some crime, for the which he deserves to be burned: For not to
disgrace the Sacerdotall dignitye with so Infamous a punishment, first a Bishop
degradeth him, taking of from him one by one his Priestlike garments, saying
unto him: Seeing thou have made thyselfe unworthy of the Honor of a Preiste,
we take from thee thy Preistlike Garments, and deprive thee of the honor that
thou had, and so being degraded they deliver him to the secular Power, who
executes upon him the punishment of fire that he deserves. In this manner, I
may Imagine that Christ our Lord the Bishop, 1. Pet. 2.25.
and Pastor of our Souls, degradeth the Soul of the Sinner, to whom he gave
in Baptism the dignity of spiritual Priesthood, and adorned him with
Sacerdotall habilliments, depriving him of them, for that with Sin he made
himself unworthy of this honor, stripping himself naked of the principal
Vestment of Grace, First, in that Instant God will take from him the light of
Faith, which was his Spiritual Girdle, saying unto him: Because thou made
thyselfe unworthy of this girdle, and did not gird thyselfe therewith,
leading thy Life according to thy belief, I take it from thee, that thou
may remain bound hand, and foot in perpetual Darkness. Then will he
take from him the Virtue of Hope, saying unto him; Because thou made thyselfe
unworthy of this Virtue, not making thy proffit thereof, I take from thee the
hope of those aids which I had offered thee to carrye the sweet yoke of my
Law; and the Stole, and pledges of Immortality, and eternal life that I had
given thee: and I pull from thee the Maniple of Weeping, and Repentance, that
thou may have no hope of my pardoning of thy Sins: and I unclothe thee of
the Amice of my Protection, that thou may never more hereafter enjoy it.

He will likewise take from him the Graces given gratis or freely, that he
had, Matt. 7.22.
of Prophesying, and doing miracles, saying unto him: For that thou made
thyselfe unworthy of these Graces, using them for thine own vaineglory, and
treading under foot my holy Law, I dispoile thee of them, and of all grace
whatsoever; because for thee there shallbee nothing now bur rigor of Justice.
In this sort the unfortunate Soul shall remain with infamous nakedness,
fullfilling therein the terrible menaces of Ezechiell: Ezech. 23.26.
They shall strippe thee of thy Garments, and shall take away the vessels of
thy glory, and they shall leave thee naked, and full of Confusion. O what
terrible confusion shall the unhappy Soul suffer, when it shall see itself
stripped naked of that which before did adorn it? 1. Petr. 2 25.
O Redeemer of the World, Prince of Pastors, and Bishop of our Souls,
degrade not, nor strip not naked my Soul of the Vestments thou gave it in
Baptism: clothe me anevve with the garment of thy Grace, which I have lost
through my Sin, that I may free myself from this nakedness, and eternal
Confusion.

Then am I to ponder how the Soul remains with one of these Vestments, which
is, D. Tho. 3. p. q. 63 art. 5. ad 3.
the Character, or mark of Christianisme which was given it in Baptism, and
that of Confirmation, and Priesthood, if a man received these two Sacraments:
but this shallbee for his greater torment: for the Pagans, and Moors that
shallbee with a Christian in Hell, beholding the Signal of an edifice that was
begun, and not ended, shall scoff at him, saying: O mad, Luc. 14.30.
and Inconsiderate man that had so much good in thy hands, and letst it be
lost thorough thine own fault, why did thou not finishe thy building, seeing
thou had so much aid thereunto? If we had been Christians, we would have
endeavored to fly from the misery, that now we are in; o who beguiled thee,
and brought thee unto us?

Finally the Soul shallbee stripped naked of those moral, D. Th. in addit. q.
98. ar. 1. ad 3. Ibid. art. 7.
and politic Virtues which it acquired in this Life: it shall remain without
Prudence, or Fortitude, or Justice, or any other: and if any Sciences be left
it, that it got with its industry, it shallbee to its greater pain, for not
having negotiated therewith the Science, that might have redeemed it from all
this misery. In this manner shallbee accomplished therein that dreadefull
sentence of holy Job: Job. 20.14. Colloquie
His bread in his belly shallbee turned into the gall of Aspes, the riches
which he has devoured, he shall vomit out, and God shall dravve them forth
out of his belly. O my Soul look that thou do not vomit with thy Will
the Riches of Grace, and Charity that thou receiuedst, for afterward they
will make thee vomitte perforce, Faith, and the Virtues that thou had
gained. And those Sciences which now thou gainest with delight, shall turn
into the gall of Aspickes to torment thee.

These are the principal fruits which out of these Considerations I am to
collect, endeavoring to negotiate with those Talents that God has given me,
Matt. 25 26.
least at the reckoning day God take them from me, as from the slothefull
servant, leaving me only those, which like Aspickes, and Dragons, shall most
cruelly gnawe my Heart, because I proffited myself so euilly with them.

The fifth Point.
1. Fifthly, I am to consider the final Sentence which in that very Instant of
Death, Christ our Lord pronounces against the Sinner, intimating it unto him
with an Interior, and terrible voice, saying to him alone the same words,
that he will afterward say to all the Wicked in the General Judgment:
Matt. 25 41.
Depart from me thou accursed of my Father into that eternal fire, that is
prepared for Satan, and his Angels: that is to say: get thee from hence
abominable Sinner, that meritest not to stand in my presence, nor to enter into
my Glory: go into eternal fire which thy Sins do deserve, in Company of
Satan, to whose Infernal Power I remitte thee, that he may carry thee with
him.

2. This Sentence being given; in the very same Instant God forsakes the
Soul, and the Angel Guardian abandoneth it, saying to it, as to Babylon:
Ierem. 51.9.
I did enough to cure thee, laboring thy Salvation, and thou would not,
therefore I leave thee to the power of him, who shall take that Vengeance of
thee, which thy Rebellion deserves. And in the very same moment, the Devil
shall attache the wretched Soul, without either admitting, or hearing
Supplications, or Prayers, and carry it into Hell. So that the Sinner in the
twinkling of an eye, from his bed, where he lay very delicately, inuironned
with many friends, and kinsmen, Job. 21.23.
dies (as Job says) in a moment with a Death to appearance, happy, and
peaceable: but in the very same moment, he descends to Hell, passing from
one extreme of temporal good, to another extreme of eternal evil. O what
will the unhappy Soul feel in that first entrance into Hell, when it sees,
what it left, and what it finds! Isai. 14.11.
when it sees, and feels a bed of fire, the matresses of worms, the company
of Devils, and all the rest of Torments, from which she has no hope ever to
escape! O Just Judge have mercy upon me: Colloquie
Et cum veneris Iudicare, noli me condemnare, And when thou come to Judge,
do not condemn me. O my Soul, fear this Sentence of eternal Damnation,
and live in such sort, that thou may meritte to be delivered from it.

The sixth Point.
Sixthly, I am to consider the Sentence that shallbee given to the Just, Christ
our Redeemer saying inuisibly to him with an amiable voice. Matt. 25 34. Matt.
25 21.
Come thou blessed of my Father, possess the kingdom prepared for thee from
the foundation of the world. Well fare thee good, and faithful Servant,
because thou have been faithful over a fevve things, I will place thee over
many things, enter into the joy of thy Lord. And at that very Instant, the
Devil departs affronted, and the Angel Guardian receives the Soul, other
Angels (as they came to the Soul of poor Lazarus) coming to accompanye it;
Luc. 16.22.
and all with great joy carry it to heaven, to enjoy that eternal good, when
it has nothing to be purged in Purgatory. O what joy shall the Soul have
in that her first, and so much desired entrance? that which was before full of
Dolours, humbled with Contempts, and troubled with Fears, in a moment shall
see herself far otherwise, all her Pain turned into Glory, and her
mourning into Rejoicing, in the Company of Angels, in a place of repose, and
ingulfed in the view of her God.

2. These things considered, I will make Comparison between the good, and the
evil: and I shall see (as David says) the Death of the wicked most vile,
Psalm. 33.22. Psalm. 115 15.
and abominable, the end of their Rest, and Beginning of their Torments. And
contrarily the end of the good, is precious in the sight of God, the end of
their Labors, and beginning of their rest, and herewith I will animate myself
to procure a good Death, wherein I may receive a good Sentence, encouraging
myself to Penance, and to the exercizes of Virtues, trusting in the benignity
of the Judge, who will sentence me with mercy, if in my Life I make proffit
thereof.

3. I will conclude with a speech to the most blessed Virgin, (who at that
hour interposeth not herself in this Judgment; for when the Soul departs
the body, the Door of Intercession, and pardon is locked up, and that of
rigorous Justice is opened) beseeching her that now presently she willbee my
Aduocatrice, and Intercessour, negotiating for me this good Sentence, and
obtaining for me works worthy thereof. To which end it will aid me to
say with Spirit, those last words which the Church puts in the prayer of
the Aue Maria, and those which it uses in another Hymn, saying, Maria matter
gratiae, Matter misericordiae, Tu nos ab Host protege, and Hora mortis suscipe.
Marye mother of Grace, mother of mercy, defend us from the Enemy; and at the
hour of Death receive us. O Sovereign Virgin, seeing thou art the
Aduocatrice of Sinners, be my Aduocatrice before thy Son, appease with thy
Intercession his wrath, obtaining for me time of true Repentance, before the
time be past, wherein I may do it. And seeing the Sentence given in Death is
irreuocable, negotiate for me, o most benign mother, that it may be
favorable toward me, that I may see the blessed fruit of thy womb, JESUS,
and enjoy him in thy company world without end. Amen.

To the Intention of this meditation, is much to the purpose that which in the
third part shallbee declared in the twenty and fourth meditation, meditating
upon the Death of the Covetous Rich man, and of poor Lazarus: which is a
lively Stamp of that which here has been meditated.

The tenth Meditation, of that which hapeneth to the Body after Death, and of
the Grave.
ONE of the principal Vtillities that we ought to collect out of the
Meditations of Deaine, is that noble exercize of Virtue, much like unto it,
What mortification is.
which we call Mortification: which is nothing else but the Death of our
Passions, and disordinate Affections, depriving them of the life they have in
us, endeavoring to repress, and burye them, until they be turned into dust,
and nothing: as David said; Psalm. 17.38.
I will pursevve mine Enemies, and overtake them, and I will not return
until they fail; I will bruize them until I overthrow them, and put them
under my feet. Lib. 6. de bono mor it is. cap. 3
For this cause (said S. Ambrose) That the Just man's Life, is an Imitation of
Death: for his continual Study is to kill the carnal Life that he feels
in himself, depriving himself of all those things that his flesh, and his
own will do most disordinately covet; suppressing the desires that sproute
out, until he remain as Dead, to all that is Sin, according to that of S.
Paul: Ad Romans 6.11. Ad Colos. 2.20. and 3.5.
Be you as dead to sin, but alive to God, and seeing you are dead with
Christ from the elements of this world, touch not, nor handle not that which
shallbee to your destruction; but mortifye your members that are upon the
Earth, that is the works of earthly Life, Uncleanness, Concupiscence,
Avarice, and the rest.

The practice of this mortisication like unto Death, we will set down in
this meditation, whose end shallbee the Imitation of Death itself. And And
all beeit therein we proceed by the affections of Fear, which are most
proper to the purgative way, yet of themselves those of Love are most
effectual, Cantic. 8 6.
of which it is said, That it is strong as Death, and hard as Hell. For that
it kills, burieth, and defeateth all, that is contrary to its beloved; as
hereafter we shall see. By the way also, In the 6. part. meditation. 10. and
11
in this meditation we will put in practice, a very proffitable manner of
meditating; spiritualizing the exterior things that are perceived by the
Senses, applying them to the Interior, and collecting out of them rules, and
aduises of perfection.

The first Point.
1. THe first point shallbee to consider, what my body shallbee, after it is
dead, and abandoned by the Soul, pondering especially three miseries. First,
that it loses the use of its members, and Senses, without ever more being
able to see, hear, or speak, nor to move to one side, nor other, nor to
enjoy the goods of this mortal life. Now noe beautiful things, nor sweet
music, nor pleasing odours, nor sauourye meats, nor things that are loft do
any wise affect it: all this is to it, as if it were not. For it has lost the
Instruments which it had whereby to enjoye it, and all that it has enjoyed
serves it to little proffit. The second miserye is, to remain discolored,
disfigured, deformed, horrible, stiff, stark, and stinking, walking with
great haste to corruption. In such sort that it who a little before recreated
the eye with its beautye, now puts horror in it with its deformitye. From
whence proceeds the third miserye, that all leave it alone in the Chamber, in
possession of those that are to shrowde it in a sheet, and even those of the
house, and the dearest friends, hold it for a kind of piety to dispatche
quickly, and to carry it out of doares.

2. From this Consideration I will collect, how assured a thing it is in my
life time, to do by degrees, somewhat of that which shall afterward be
do^ne perforce, and without proffit, carrying myself as dead to the World,
and to all that is flesh, and blood, procuring to Imitate Death in three other
things like to the aforenamed; mortifying my Senses, and depriving myself of
the Delights thereof, not only of the unlawful, but even of some lawful,
and not necessary. So that like a dead man, I am to have neither feet nor
hands, nor eyes, nor ears, nor taste, nor tongue for any thing that is Sin,
or is against the perfection I profess. And for this reason the beautiful,
and pleasing things of this Life, are to be to me, as if they were not,
putting them veder my feet, Homil. 13. in Euangel.
beholding (as S. Gregor says) not what they are now, but what they shall
quickly be: for attire flesh in clothe of Gold, and in silk never so much,
nor so gaiely, yet still it is flesh. Isai. 40.6.
And what is flesh but grass? and what is the glory thereof but the flower
of the field, that withers with a blaste? Finally, I am to follow Virtue
with a generous mind, that like as a dead man complains not that all fly
from him, and forsake him: so it should be nothing to me, that the World
for sakes me, flies from me, and abhorres me like one dead, and crucified:
rather I am to hold for a happiness that of the Prophet David; Psalm. 30.12.
Those that savve me, fled forth from me, I am forgotten from the heart, as
one dead: I am made as a vessel destroyed, because I have heard the
reprehension of many that abide round about. Colloquie
O that I were dead in Heart, that I might not porceiue that men used me
like one dead! Ad Ga lat. 6.14
O that I were so dead, and crucified to all that is in the World, that the
World also hold me for crucified, and dead! Grant me, o svvete JESUS,
that by the Law of thy grace, I may die to the Law of Sin, Ad Gal. 2.20.
to live to God, delighting to be nailed with thee on thy very Cross, so
that now, not I may live, but thou in me world without end. Amen.

The second Point.
THe second point is, to consider the clothing, the bed, and the Lodging that
is prepared for my dead body. The Clothing for the most part, is in a manner
the worst of the house, and very slender: for it is nothing more but a poor
Sheet for a Shrowde, without any other more precious Ornaments of silk, or of
Gold: and if they put any of this upon me, to carry me to burial, they take
it again from me, before they put me in the Grave.

The Bed is the hard Earth, and as the Prophet Isay says, the mattresses
shallbee mothes, Isai. 14.11.
the Couerlets worms, and the Courtaines, and Pillowes the bones of other
dead. And after this fashion shallbee the House, and the Lodging: for it is
nothing but a straight pit of seven foot long, that is built in half an
hour; for the other sumptuous buildings of sepulchers, serve the wretched
body for nothing, that is not capable to enjoye them. Out of all this I will
collect great confusion, and shame for my vanitye, and Sensuallitye wherewith
I desire curiousness of apparel, softness of bed, and wideness of
habitation, animating myself to mortifye my superfluities herein, and to
bear patiently whatsoever wantes, seeing what I now have, how little soever it
be, is very much, The vows of Religion are an Imitatio^ of Death. 1.
and very large compared with that which attends me.

But particularly, if I am a Religious man, or desire to be perfect, I may
draw from hence great motives to be so in excellency, procuring to make my
Life a continual Meditation, and Imitation of Death, in three things proper
to this estate. First in nakedness of all these things, to which perfect
Pouertye obliges me: So that as a dead man loses the Dominion of all his
Riches, and they pass to his Heirs, or to the Poor, he not feeling that
they leave him the worst clothing, or interre him in some contemptible place:
so I, will not content myself with leaving all that I possessed, and giving it
to the poor, to follow naked JESUS; but I will also bear willingly the want
of things necessary, and will like best, that they give me the worst, either
of apparel, bedding, lodging, or house, without murmuring thereat any more,
then a man that is dead: Job. 1.21
for if I came naked out of my mothers womb, and am naked to return again,
it is no great matter to live naked in this sort, conforming the middle of the
life, to the entrance, and egresse thereof. 2. Secondly, I will Imitate Death
in the renuntiation fall those sensual Pleasures, whereunto perfect Chastity
obliges me: So that as in Death matrimonies are dissolved: the care of wife,
children, and familye cease, and there is made a general divorce of all
earthly things, and of the delights of the flesh: So I with the vow of
Chastity, shall delight to be as it were dead to all these things, and to
the cares thereof, as if there were none in the world for me, or I were not
alive for them.

3. Thirdly, I will Imitate the Dead in perfect Obedience: for as the dead
body suffers itself to be tossed, and carried wheresoever they will, and to
be handled as they list, without resistance, repugnancye, or complainte,
neither having will to choose the winding sheet, nor the grave, nor any thing
else, taking only what others give him: So I, in all that is not Sin, will
permit myself to be governed by my Prelates, and Superiors, obeying to all
that they shall command me, high, or low; sweet, or sour: easy, or
uneasy; without replying, contradicting, or repugning to any thing; without
any self will to choose this, or that: but as one dead to my own will, I
will follow the will of others, taking with humillitye whatsoever they give
me. These are the purposes that I am to draw out of this consideration of
Death, encouraging myself to put them in practice: seeing it is not much for
fiftye years (which perhaps shall not be fifty days) to anticipate Death in
this manner, for the assurance of eternal life: whereby fiftye thousand
millions of years, I shall possess the riches of God; I shall enjoy his
pleasures, and I shall have perfect Liberty, free from all miserye. O happy
Death to the which succeeds so happy a life! Colloqui^
O svvete JESUS whose life was a continual Death, to give us example of a
holy, and perfect life: Grant me that in Imitation of thee, I may live, and
dye, naked of all terrent things, mortified to all Delights, and obedient to
all humane Creature for thy Love: hold me always as dead to all that is
visible, Ad Colos. 3.3.
that my life may be hidden with thee in God world without end. Amen.

The third Point.
1. THe third Point is to consider the Journey of the body toward the
grave: pondering first that I shallbee carried in a coffin, or upon a beer on
other men's shoulders to Church: and that he who but a while before walked the
Streets, looking on every side, and entered into the Church, registring all
that passed, goes now upon other men's feet, blind, deaf, and dumb, being
the motive of Lamentatio^ for his miserye. And therefore to suppress the
liveliness of my flesh, I will endeavor when I rise out of my bed, to
remember that some one day, others shall raise me, never more to return to
it. And when I go down the stairs of my house, I will say; A day will come
wherein others will carry me down these stairs, never more to get up. And
when I go in the street, or enter into the Church, I will Imagine, that
shortly I shallbee carried thorough that street, and I shall enter into that
Church never more to come out. Then will I consider with what company I am
carried to my Grave, some singing, others weeping, and many following me with
piety to honor me; and yet how little it will avail my body whither they do
it much, or little honor, much less my Soul if it be in Hell; rather this
honor would torment it the more, if it knew it. Then will I consider how they
cast me into the grave, and cover me with Earth, laying a Stone upon me,
where my Body shallbee eaten with worms, and turned to Dust; and suddenly I
shallbee forgotten of all, as if I had never been in the World. And though
there do remain of me very great, and honorable memory, little shall it
avail my Soul, if it enjoye not God; as it little auailed Aristotle, or
Alexander the great, to be magnified in the world, being in Hell in
terrible Torments: for as a holy Saint says: VVoe to thee Aristotle that art
praised where thou art not, and art tormented where thou art.

Out of these Considerations I will collect some vnbeguilings, persuading
myself to make no account of the vain honors of this Life, but to humble
myself, and in mine own estimation to put myself under the feet of all,
Psalm. 21.7.
like a worm, of dust, that of all is trodden upon, and cast out: as also not
to contemn the poor, and little ones, seeing in death I shall soon be
equal with them; and speaking to my Soul, Colloquie
I will say unto her. Consider well what will be the end of this flesh that
thou have; Consider whom thou cherishest, whom thou adornest, and upon
whom thou do build these Castles in the air: for all is but like a little
dust raised by the vvinde, Psalm. 1.4.
from the face of the Earth, which prosently retourneth to fall thereinto.
Be ashamed to subject thyselfe to so vile flesh, endeavor rather to subject
it like a Slave unto thee, that it may aid thee to negotiate Life everlasting.
O eternal God, clear the eyes of my poor Soul with thy Sovereign Light,
that it may behold the vvretched end of its miserable body, and contemn
that which is present, with the vievve of that which is to come. Amen.

Finally, I will consider, that I cannot tell whither it will fall to my Lot to
have so honorable funerals, or whither our Lord will permit for chastizement
of my Sins, Ierem. 22.19. 3. Reg. 9.
that I be buried in the belly of fishes, or of wild beasts, or (as Jeremy
says) in the sepulcher of Asses, or be eaten by Crows, or by Dogs like
unhappy Iezabel, which I have well deserved for my Sins, for to a be^^iall
life, is due the sepulcher of beasts. And therefore as much as lies in me, I
will abhor the vain pomp of wordely sepulchers, desiring both in life, and
death, to choose for myself the humblest place of the Earth.

I may also spiritualize what has been said in these three points, applying
it to my Soul dead by Sin, which remains ougly, and deformed, and unabled
to do meritorious works of eternal life, her passions carrying her to be
interred in the profunditye of evil, covering her with the graue-stone of
obstinacye, until she descend to the obscure, and dreadefull Sepulcher of
Hell. Ex D. Aug.
All which is to move me to compassion, for if I bewail the body, from
which the Soul is absent, much more reason have I to bewail the Soul from
which God is absent. And seeing I would give life to the dead body if I
could, there is reason that I should procure the life of the Soul by those
means that God has given me to that end, before body, and Soul, Colloquie
dye together without remedy. O eternal God, permit me not to carrye in a
living Body a dead Soul, but quicken it with thy grace, that when the
Body dies, the Soul may obtain life everlasting. Amen.

Of this Consideration shallbee spoken in the third part in the meditation
39.40. and 41. meditating on those three that Christ raized from Death.

The eleventh Meditation of the remembrance of Death, For Ash wednesday.
and of the dust whereinto we shallbee converted in the Grave.
THis meditation shallbee grounded upon those words which the Church uses on
Ashwednesday, Genes. 3.19.
Memento homo quod puluis es, and in puluerem reuerteris: Remember man that
thou art Dust, and to Dust thou shall return: which words our Lord spoke unto
Adam after he had sinned, intimating unto him the Sentence of Death which his
Sin deserves: and by the way declaring unto us what we were, what we
shallbee, and what we are, saying, that all is but Duste.

The first Point.
1. FIrst, we are to consider that God our Lord, though he might have created
the body of Adam of nothing, as he created his Soul, yet he would not; but
made it of a matter of the one side most vile, and gross, and on the other
visible, and palpable, Genes. 2.7. De limoterrae.
which is the Dust, and slime of the Earth, to the end that man seeing daily
with his corporal eyes this Durte, might continually remember his Original,
and Beginning, for 2. ends. First, that he might humble himself profoundely,
and understand, that of himself he deserves to be contemned, trodden under
foot, and trampled upon like Durte, and that he has nothing (though he have
great goods) whereof to be proud, for that all have their foundation in
Dust. And secondly, that he might be moved to love, and to serve his so
loving, and powerful Creator, who from vile Dust raised him to so g^^ate an
height, as to be a man according to the Image, and likeness of God himself.

2. So that Dust, and Durte may serve for Alarums to recall to my memory my
Original, and the matter whereof I was formed, imagining, when I see them,
that they cry out to me, and say: Remember that thou art Dust; humble thy
self as Dust: Love, serve, and obey thy Creator that took thee from the Dust.
And when I wax proud with the gifts that I have, I am to imagine, that they
cry unto me, repressing my Vanitye, and saying unto me: Of what art thou
proud Dust, and Ashes? Eccl. 10.9. Isai. 45.9. Colloqui^
Why art thou puffed up Vessel of claye? Be warned by forgetful Adam, who
forgetting that he was Dust, presumed to be as God, and rebelled against thy
Maker. O Omnipotent Creator permit not in me so praeiudiciall an oblivion,
that I fall not into so great a danger. Clear my eyes, that I may in spirit
behold the Dirt whereof I was formed, and open mine ears that I may hear
the clamours thereof, so imprinting them in my heart, that I may never forget
them. Ame^. Of this point we shall speak largely in the sixth part, in the
twenty and sixth meditation.

The second Point.
SEcondly, I am to consider that God our Lord, seeing the forgetfullnesse, and
pride of Adam, condemned him to the Sentence of Death, and to return into
the Dust whereof he was formed, wherein principally he pretended three ends
for his good, and ours. First to chastize therewith his Sin, and that all we
might perceive how greiuous an evil Sin is, eeing it is sufficient to
destroy, and to turn into dust; so beautiful, and rich a frame, as is man:
for if Adam had not sinned, he had not died, but had been translated into
Heaven in body, and soul with all hi^ Integrye, and Perfection. But thorough
his Sin the soul is forced to abandon the body, and the body is dismured
or unwalled and turned into small dust, according to that of the Apostle: Ad
Romans 5.12.
By one man Sin entered into this world, and by Sin Death.

2. The second end was, that the memory of Death, and that we are to
return into Dust, might be a most effectual medecin for our pride, seeing
it was not sufficient to humble us, that he had made us of Dust. So that the
Dust, and Dirt of the earth which I see, and feel, is not only a watch-bell
to recall to my remembrance the Original from whence I began, but also the
end wherein I am to stay: and when I behold it, I am to imagine that it is
crying out, and saying unto me: Remember, thou art to return to earth, and
Duste, and that like me thou shall be trampled, and trodden upon. Then why
art thou proud? thou art now flesh, thou shall shortly be dust; Eccl. 10.9.
Colloquie
wherefore art thou puffed up? O Father of mercy, I give thee thanks for that
with the chastizement of my Sin, thou have made a medicine for my Pride:
Grant me, that I may not be deaf to these cries that Dust gives me, that
the chastizement of a pious Father, turn not into the punishment of a severe
Judge.

3. The third end was, for that the fear of this Chastizement, and of this
Dust wherein the flesh is to rest, might be a spur to our backwardenesse to
do Penance for our Sins committed; and a bridle to our sensual liuelynesse,
to curb our Passions. So that if the remembrance of the sovereign benefit
that God did us, to take us out of the dust of the Earth, be not sufficient
to spur, and to curb us; yet at least the remembrance may suffice, that when
we least think of it, we shall be turned into Dust, and so what Love could
not do, let Fear bring to pass. Therefore, o my Soul, Colloquie Micheae.
1.10.
take Counsel of the Prophet, who says: In the house of Dust, cover
thyselfe with Dust: and seeing thou live in flesh, which is Dust, and art
shortly to dvvell in the house of Dust which is the grave, cover thyselfe
with Dust, and Ashes, doing penance for thy Sins; and with the remembrance
of this Dust, beduste the svveete, and pleasing things of this life, that they
may not carrye thee after them to Death everlasting.

The third Point.
1. FRom hence I will ascend to consider the spirit that is included in these
words, pondering that not without cause, they say not unto me, Remember that
thou wast Dust, but that thou art Dust at this present, to signifye, that of my
corrupt nature I am earth, and Dust, for that I am inclined to earthly things,
as Riches, Honors, and pampering of the flesh: and that like Dust I am
mutable, and instable, Psalm. 1.4.
suffering myself to be tossed with the wind of every temptation, especially
of Vanitye. And if I restrain not myself, I shall turn into Earth, and Dust
following my Inclinations, and tourning myself into a terrene, ambitious,
sensual, and vain man. For the which I am greatly to humble myself, and to
tremble at my own mutabillitye, and weakness, and at the peril wherein I live.

2. Then will I ponder how by Gods grace I may free myself from these
Dangers, remembering that as well I myself, as all those earthly things that I
love, are to end, and to turn into Dust. And with this spirit when I shall
behold a rich, and potent man, whose riches, and power carry my eyes after
him; that Avarice, and Ambition may not overthrow me, I will remember that
he is but Dust, and that his gould and Silver is earth, and that all shall
return thereinto. And if I see any beautiful woman, that I may not be
tempted, and vanquished by Luxury, I will also remember that she, and all her
Ornaments are Dust, and that therein they shall rest. And with this spirit I
will apply these words to all things upon Earth, saying to myself; Remember
that what thou see, and desire, is Dust, and shall turn into Dust, and
Ashes: and if thou do love it disordinately, thou likewise shall be Dust,
and Earth as it is. Therefore love God only, and celestial Riches, that by
Virtue of his Grace it may be said unto thee: Thou art Heaven, and to Heaven
thou shallt return, transforming thyselfe by love into Heaven, which thou
love.

The fourth Point.
FOurthly, I am to consider that God our Lord by the means of the Dead, and
of their Skulles, and Bones, says unto me these very words: Remember that
thou art Dust, and that into Dust thou shallt return, that they may be the
more strongly imprinted in my Heart, and that out of them I may collect the
greater prossit. This I may ponder calling to memory that memorable Sentence
of Ecclesiasticus, Eccles. 38 23.
which comprehends the sense, and spirit of the said words: Memor esto
Iudicij mei, sic enim erit and tuum, mihi heri, and tibi hodie, Remember my
Judgment, for so shall thine be, yesterday for me, to day for thee. And for
that the Dead had two Judgments, one of his body, by which he was condemned
to turn to Dull, and to Worms; the other of his Soul by which he receives
Sentence conformable to his meritte^ of both of them he wills us to remember
ourselves. And therefore in seeing any dead body, or the sculles, and bones
of the deceased, I am to imagine that they say unto me: Remember that where
thou see thyselfe, I saw myself, and where I now see myself, thou shall
see thyselfe: yesterday ended my life, to day peradventure thine shall be
ended. Yesterday I turned into Dust, to day the like will begin for thee.
Yesterday the Bells rung for me, to day perhaps the same shall ring for thee.
Yesterday I gave an accounte to God of my works, to day thou shallt give a
reckoning of thine. Yesterday I received Sentence according to my merits, to
day thou shallt receive according to thine. Consider well that all this
shallbee to day, for all the time of thy Life is but as a day, Ad Hebr. 3.13.
Colloquie
and peradventure for thee this day shallbee thy last, and thou shallt not live
till to morrow. O my Soul hear the cry of the Dead, hearken unto the
Lecture that withered bones do read thee. Consider well what Judgment
passed on them, for such shallbee thine. Live, as they vvishe that they had
lived: prepare thyselfe, as they would that they had prepared themselves:
pass often alive this carriere that they have passed, that when thy hour
approaches, thou may run it in such sort that thou may obtain Life
everlasting. Amen.

The twelfth Meditation of the most grievous Deceites, and Dangers, which the
forgetfulness of Death brings with it, and of the manner how they are to be
remedied.
THis meditation I will ground upon the speech of our Savior Christ
concerning a rich man, Of the parable of the covetous rich man.
whose fields having yielded him plenty of fruits, he thought within
himself to enlarge his grainaries or barnes to gather, and to keep them, and
speaking unto his Soul, he said unto it, Soul, Luc. 12.19.
thou have much goods laid up for many years, take thy rest, eat, drink,
and make good cheer: But God said unto him, Thou fool, this night they
require thy Soul of thee, and the things that thou have provided, whose shall
they be? In the person of this rich man so forgetful of his Death, are
represented unto us those, that have the like forgetfullnesse, especially when
they are rich, healthful, and young, which I am to apply to myself in the
form ensuing.

The first Point.
FIrst, I am to consider three great Deceites which the forgetfullnesse of
Death brings with it, by reason whereof our Lord God calls this Richeman
fool.

The first Deceit is, Iaco. 4.13.
James, saying to myself: How dare thou say, to morrow I will go into such
a Cittye, and there I will spend a year, and will traffic, and make gain,
when thou art ignorant what shall become of thee to morrow? for thy life is as
a Vapor which soon vanishes away; Therefore it were fitter thou should
say, If our Lord will, and If I shall live, I will do this, or that, for
otherwise thou shallt find thyselfe deceived, if God have determined the
contrary. second Deceit is, to promise to myself not only long life, but
also to assure myseffe that I shall have health, strength, and content with
all the goods that I possess, and that they also shall last as long as I: from
whence it proceeds that hereupon I exhort my Soul saying; Requiesce; comede,
bibe, and epulare, Take thy rest, eat, drink, and make good cheer, give
thyselfe to banqueting and Pleasure, for thou shallt want nothing. And this is
a most grievous Illusion, for all this depends upon God, who can take from
me my goods before my life be ended, and though he take not away them,
Eccles 5.18.
he may (as ecclesiastes says) take from me my health, and strength, that I
may not enjoy them. The third Deceit is, to forget to provide what is
necessary for the other life, as if there were no more but this present. And
this was the most quallified folly of this rich man, that having provided his
Soul of so much wealth to pass this temporal life, he was alltogither
obliuious to provide it of those necessary goods for life everlasting: for the
which it must needs be, that the unhappy Soul that in this miserable life,
did eat, drink, and banquet, must afterward endure perpetual Hunger, and
Thirst, and eternal miserye.

Pondering these three deceites, I will examine, if my Soul be beguiled with
them, and will exhort her contrarily to this rich man, saying unto her: O my
Soul promise not to thyselfe many years, Colloquie
for peradventure thou shallt not live out this present. Glory not of to
morrovve, for thou know not what the day that is to come shall bring
forth Give not thyselfe to rest, but to labor; not to feastings, and banquets,
but to Fasting, and Tears. Prouer. 27.1. Eccles. 9.5.
Have a care of eternal life which attends thee, for after Death there is
no means to meritte any durable rest, or saciety. O eternal God, deliver me
of thy Infinite goodness from these miserable Deceites, before Death seize
upon me in them. Exhort thou my Soul to works that are pleasing unto thee,
that this day it may more and more separate itself from all such things, as
offend thee. Amen.

The second Point.
SEcondly, I am to consider the great losses they suffer in Death, that have
been thus beguiled all their Life, drawing them from the words of our Lord
God to this rich man: Stulte, hac nocte animam tuam repetent a te, and quae
parasti, cuius eru^t. Thou fool this night they require they Soul of thee,
and the goods that thou have scraped together, whose shall they be? wherein
are touched four greiuous losses, Psalm. 33.22.
for the which king David had great reason to say, that the Death of Sinners
is very evil.

1. Stulte.
The first Loss is, to dye in his very Folly, without falling into a reckoning
thereof, till it be past remedy. For late, or early, both good, and evil
shall come to perceive their errors, but in a different manner: for the wicked
continue in their error until Death, and then with the experience of their
torments, and miseries, they fall into a reckoning how much in their life time
they were beguiled, Sap.5.
calling themselves Insensati, men without wit, or Judgment. But the good in
their lifetime perceive their error by the light of faith, and prepare
themselves for Death, before Death seize upon them. Therefore o my Soul, to
perceive thine own errors, take for thy mistress this divine Light, if thou
willt not have the experience of eternal miserye to be thy mistress, and
beware by other men's dangers, before this Loss light upon thee with thine
own.

2. Hac nocte.
The second Loss is, to dye in the night, that is, by a sudden, and hasty
Death in the midst of their Crimes, for oftentimes when men are healthefull,
and contented, as this rich man was, God intimates unto them the Sentence of
Death, and executes it with all, passing from a temporal night to an
eternal, Matthew. 8.12.
and from the interior Darkness of the Heart to the exterior of Hell. With
this fear, I will ask very earnestly of our Lord, that he would in such
manner advise me of the peril of my Death, that I may have time to dispose
myself thereunto, Isai. 38.1 4. Reg. 20.1.
as he advised king Ezechias by the means of the Prophet Isaias, saying unto
him: Order thy house, for thou shall dye: But to this end I am not to expect
Revelations from Heaven: but my Prophet Isaias must be the light of Faith,
and of reason: the Inspiration of God, the Experience of the Death of others,
the greiuous sickness that assaileth me, and the advice of the Physician,
when he tells me, I am in danger. And generally seeing I have no certain
day of Life, and every day I may expect Death, it is wisdom to imagine that
God says this day unto me, Order to day thy Soul, for to morrow thou
shall dye; and to do it presently.

3. The third Loss is, to dye by force, Repetent
and with violence, requiring, and pulling out their Soul in despite of them.
Wherein I will ponder the difference between the Just vnbeguiled, and
between Sinners beguiled: for the Just offer themselves voluntarily to Death,
when Gods will is that they should dye, and they say unto him with David: Psalm.
141.8. Psalm. 30.6.
Deliver o. Lord my Soul out of this prison, that it may praise thy holy name:
and Into thy hands I commend my Spirit, for thou redeemedst me, o God of
Truth. And although nature somewhat shunneth Death, yet Grace prevails
against it, and when God requires of the^, their Soul, they yeilde it with
great resignation. But the wicked abhor Death; and bear it very
Impatiently: and therefore it is said that the Devils the ministers of Gods
Justice do require, and pull from them their Soul against their will.
Colloquie
O eternal God grant me, that I may live so vnfleshed from all things of
this life, that there may be no need to pull from me my Soul perforce.
Require it of me when thou vvilt, for I am ready, and vvilling to give it
unto thee, in what day soever thou requirest it.

The third Point.
1. THirdly, I am to consider the dreadefullnesse of that terrible question
that God our Lord makes: The things that thou have provided, whose shall they
be? wherein is represented the final Losle of those, who (as has been
said) live forgetful of Death, which is suddenly, and with great grief to
leave the goods which they possessed, without enjoying them, or disposing of
them, or knowing to whom they shall come: this is to say unto them: The goods
that thou have gathered together, whose shall they be? whose shallbee the
house wherein thou live? and the bed wherein thou sleep? The rich
garments wherewith thou attirest thyselfe? And the treasures of gold, and
silver that thou have in thy Chestes? whose shallbee the servants that now
serve thee? and the friends that now entertain thee? and the office, and
dignitye for which all do the honor? Psalm. 38.7.
O wretched man that heapedst up treasures without knowing for whom, thou
did gather them! for thye wretched Soul, for whom thou did provide them,
can now no longer enjoye them.

2. This question I am to make to myself, examining what kind of goods I have
heaped up in this life, and saying to myself: The goods that thou have
gathered in thy Life, whose shall they be when thou art dead: Shall they
peradventure be thy Souls? Eccles. 2.19. Psalm. 48.18.
or shall one be thy heir whom thou know not? If they be temporal
goods, certainly they shallbee none of thine: for the rich man dying shall
carrye nothing with him, nor shall descend with the glory that he has: but
if they be spiritual goods of Virtues, and good works, thine they shallbee;
Apoc. 14.13.
for these accompanye those that dye in our Lord, and forsake them not till
they put them in the throne of his glory. Therefore, o my Soul, labor to
treasure up goods that in Life, and Death may allwaies be thine, and of which
no body can deprive thee.

3. Like this Question I will make another to myself, saying: This Soul that
thou have now in thy body whose shall it be? Shall it peradventure be Gods,
or the Devils? Shall it be Christ's that redeemed it? or Satan's to whom it
has subjected itself? If I am in mortal Sin, and dye therein, doubtless
it shallbee the Devils: he will come to require it of me, and will carrye it
away, for it is his thorough Sin. But if I be in the grace of God, and
persevere therein, it shallbee Gods, and he will come for it, to carrye it
with him. Therefore forthwith do penance for thy Sins, that if to day the
Prince of Darkness should come, he may not find in thy Soul any thing that
is his, Joan. 14.30. Psalm. 118.94.
and so may leave it. O king of Heaven, and of Earth, Tuus sum ego, saluum me
fac, I am thine, save me: my Soul is thine, for thou did create it; it is
thine for thou did redeem it; let it also be thine sanctifying it with thy
grace, that it may be perpetually thine, crovvning it with the reward of
thy Glory. Of the horride Death of king Balt hazar.
Amen.

The fourth Point.
FOr Conclusion, and Confirmation of what has been said in these three
points, I will consider a terrible example, and stamp thereof in king
Balthazar, who being eating, and drinking in a banquet, suddenly saw two
fingers of an hand, which wrolte upon a wall these words, Mane, Thecel,
Phares, He has counted, he has weighed, he has divided. Dan. 5.25.
Which Daniel expounded in this form; God has counted thy kingdom, and it
is come to an end. He has weighed thee in his Scale, and has found thee
light. He has divided thy kingdom, and delivered it to the Medes, and
Persians. And so it happened the same night, he dying miserably.

Applying this to myself, if I live in the like forgetfullnesse, I am to
Imagine that suddenly will come a day, or a night, wherein God our Lord with
the fingers of his Omnipotency, will write in the Wall of my Conscience the
Sentence of these three words. Job. 14.5
First, God has numbered the days of thy Life, and those which thou have to
enjoye thy kingdom, thy Wealth, thy Honor, Dignitye, and Office, and they
are already complete, and this day shallbee the last. Secondly, he has
peised thee in his Scale, examining thy works, without omitting any one, and
he has found that they were light, and not complete works, for that thou
have not fullfilled all thy obligations. Thirdly, God has divided, Apocal. 3 2.
and separated from thee thy kingdom, thy wealth, and dignitye, and the goods
that thou possessedst, and has delivered them to thy Enemies, or to
strangers, and to others to enjoye them. He has likewise divided thy Body,
and Soul; and thy Body he has delivered to the worms to eat, and thy
Soul to the Devils to torment it. And in the very same hour that God shall
intimate this Sentence, he will execute it, and none shallbee able to resist
him. Colloquie
O what tremblings shall I then feel, more terrible then those of king
Balthazar! O what clamours, and Lamentations, what Troubles, and Agonyes of
Death shall afflict my poor Soul, with so much the greater Torment, by how
much the Forgetfullnesse was the greater! Remember me, o God for thy mercy,
and imprint in my Soul the memory of these three Sentences, that I may
alvvaies remember the account that thou have made of my days, and of the last
which must be the end of them, that I may live with such care, that at the
day of Judgment, when thou shall peize me in thy Scale, thou may not
find me defective, but entire, and full in all my works: and that although
thou diuidest from me the kingdom of the Earth, thou may not exclude me
from thy kingdom of Heaven. Amen.

The thirteenth Meditation of the General Judgment, and of the Signs, For
the first Sunday of Aduent.
and things precedent to that Day.
The first Point.
FOR the foundation of this matter, Of the causes of Judgment.
I am to consider the truth of that Article of our Faith that teaches us,
that besides the particular Judgment that is made of every man in the hour of
Death, there shallbee another General Judgment of all me^ together in the
end of the world, which Judgment shallbee public, and visible, ordained by
the Divine Providence for many causes. First, to confirm the Sentence that was
given in the particular Judgment, and to manifest to the World the equitye
thereof; D. Tho. 5 p. q. 59. art. 5.
and with all to supplye what there wanted. For in Death, Judgment is made of
the Soul only, and not of the body; and sometimes it happens the Soul to
be condemned in the Judgment of God, and the body to be carried to the
Grave with great honor: Or contrarily the Soul to be carried with great
glory to Heaven, and the Body with great Ignominye to the Grave And seeing
Body, and Soul were united together in serving, or offending God, it is just
that there should be a Day wherein Judgment should be made of them both.
VVhereupon I will animate my flesh to serve the Spirit, seeing that with it,
it is also to be Judged. The second cause is for God, to show him self for the
honor of the Just, that were oppressed in this life, and much more for the
good credit or his Government, that all may see that he was both wise, and
holy in all whatsoever he ordained, Psalm. 82.19. Ierem. 12.1. Abacuc. 1.6. 1.
Cor. 4.5.
and permitted. So that, neither the good may complain any more then, that
Virtue was oppressed, nor the wicked glory that Vice was exalted: and finally
to confound the rash Judgments of those that dared to judge what they knew
not. Hereupon the Apostle counsels that we should not judge before the time
until our Lord come, who also will lighten the hidden things of Darkness,
and will manifest the Counsels of the hearts.

The third cause is, the glory of Christ JESUS our Lord, that he may not only
discover himself in Heaven to the good; but also that in Earth, where his
Ignominye was apparent, he may manifest himself to the wicked: and that those
which saw his Humilliation, may see the reward thereof. And for this cause
the place of Judgment shallbee the Valley of Iosaphat, Joel. 3.2.
near to Jerusalem, and the mount of Olives, that in the same place where he
was Judged, condemned, and crucified for our Sins, they may all see him with
great honor to be the Judge both of the quick, Actuum. 10.42.
and the dead: and that he that ascended to Heaven in the fight of a few
Disciples, shall descend (as it was told by the Angels) in the sight of the
whole world to Judge them all. Actuum. 1.11.
For these causes the remembrance of Judgment may move me to Joy,
Thankefullnesse, and Praise, glorifying God for his sovereign Providence,
wherewith he designed it for so high ends: Psalm. 95.11. and 8.
and wi^h ^^uid inuiting all Crearures to rejoice, and clap their hands for
Joy, for that our Lord shall come to Judge the Earth, and shall Judge all
People, and all Princes with Justice, and equitye, righting wrongs without
acception of Persons.

The second Point.
SEcondly, Matt. 24 5. Marc. 13 5. Luc. 21.8 Erunt signa in sole, etc. Sapien.
5 18.
are to be considered the signs precedent to this General Judgment, as
Christ our Lord reckons them in his Gospel, pondering their number, and
terror: the things which they signifye: the effects which they shall cause in
men: the manner how they shall come to pass; and with all the causes wherefore
they come to pass.

1. First I am to ponder the number of them, for all Creatures (as the Wise Man
says) shallbee armed to take vengeance on the Enemies of their Creator: and
all the world shall fight for him against rash inco^siderate Sinners. And as
all have been instruments of Gods mercy to do them great benefits: so then
they shallbee instruments of Gods Justice to do them great Damages, and with
great reason for that they abused them to the iniurye of their Creator. And
although they now dissemble this wrong, then they shall manifest it with
terrible signs.

2. Secondly, I will ponder their terriblenesse, discoursing of some of them.
The Sun shallbee obscured, the Moon shallbee turned into the color of Blood:
The Stars, or Comets shall fall from Heaven like Lightening: and the powers
of Heaven shallbee moved, for they shall make a fearful noise like a Clock,
when it is let loose to strike the hour: the Earth shall dreadefully tremble,
like Mongibels opening it self in many parts: the Sea shallbee in a tumult
with terrible waves: the winds encountering one another shall raize horrible
Tempests: Dreadefull thunder claps, with fearful flashes of Lightening shall
sound in the air: Sapi^n. 5 22. 2 Match. 5.2.
and there shall appear affrighting visions, and horrid monstres, much more
horrid then in Egypt and Jerusalem. The wild, and savage beasts, and venomous
Serpents shall stray up, and down, running in all parts with horrible
howlings, roarings, and hissings.

3. But how terrible soever these signs be, they will afflict much more with
the terror of the things which they signifye, and which men apprehende; Haec
autem omnia Initia sunt maloru^.
because all these are but as a draught of the dreadefull evils, which they
expect: for the world shallbee the very pourtraiture of Hell. The darkness
of the Sun menaceth eternal Darkness, in chastizement of the darkness of
the Soul. The blood of the Moon is the sign of the Indignation of God, which
shall take vengeance of them, for staining themselves with the blood of Sins.
The falling of the Stars from Heaven, is the sign of the most unhappy fall,
which they shall take from the Heaven of the Church, to the bottomless pit
of Hell: for they threw themselves down headlong from the height of Grace, to
the Depth of Sin. The furye of the Elements, and Beasts, prognosticateth the
terriblenesse of the Infernal Furyes against them, for living like Beasts
without any order, Aresce^tibus hominibus prae timore.
or gouermnent of their Passions.

4. From hence it will arise, that men shall wither with fear, and
Astonishment, as well for the evils which they experiment, as for those which
they expect, Prou. 17.22.
being seized upon by the sad Spirit that withers the bones. O what a
difference shall there be in this case between those that have a good, and
secure, and those that have an evil, and unquiet Conscience! for albeeit that
all shall fear: yet the fear of the good shallbee mixed with great
confidence in Gods mercy. And so our Savior Christ comfort them, saying:
Lucae. 21.28.
When these things begin to come to pass, open your eyes, and lift up your
heads, for they are signs that your redemption is at hand, the end of your
labors, and the beginning of your rest. But the fear of the wicked shallbee
full of Desperation, Sap. 17.10. Psalm. 13.5.
and great Impatiencie: for (as the Wise Man says) an evil Conscience
augmenteth their fear, and pain. And if already (says David) they tremble
with fear, where they have nothing to dread, how much more will they tremble
where they have so much to tremble at? beginning presently to have that
trembling, and gnashing of teethe which they shall ever have in Hell. Pondering
all these things, and every one of them, I will exhort myself to the fear of
God, and detestation of my Sins, saying to myself: How is it, o my Soul,
that thou fear not the wrath of allmighty God, who the more merciful he
is now, shall then be the more rigorous? why embracest thou not with love the
Sacraments, and signs of his Grace, before the terrible signs of his wrath
fall upon thee? If the Pillars of Heaven shall then tremble, why do not thou
fortifye thyselfe with a celestial Life, that though thou fear, yet thou
may not fall? O infinite God nail my flesh with thy holy fear, Colloquie
Psalm. 118 120.
making me fear thy terrible Judgments. Let my bones be withered with
sorrovve for having offended thee, rather then I should be withered with an
unprofitable fear. Let my face be covered with shame for my Sins, that
then I may lift up my Head for Joy of the redemption that I expect of them.
Amen.

The third Point. Of the fire that shall burn the World. Psalm. 49.3. and
96.3. 2. Petr. 3 7. and 10.

THirdly, I am to consider the terrible fire that shall arise from all the
four parts of the world to burn, and consume the things of the Earth, and
to renew, and purifye what is therein to remain.

1. Concerning this fire we are principally to ponder three things for our
purpose. First that it shall burn, and consume exceeding quickly, and without
resistance the Palaces, and Forests; Treasures of Gold, and precious Stones:
Beasts, Birds, and Fishes, and all men that it shall find alive; for from it
none shallbee able to escape. And herein shall end the Glory, and Beautye of
this visible World, which Worldlings so much love, and esteem. Joel. 2.3.
Fullfilling that of Joel, That before God, shall come a consuming fire, and
after him burning flames, and the Earth that was a Paradise of Delights,
shall become a Desert, for nothing shall escape from that fire. Colloquie 1.
Cor. 7.31.
O my Soul, why do not thou abhor the figure of this world, which
passes so hastily, and shall have so disastrous an onde? Tremble at this fire
which shall burn the riches thereof, that thou may not give food
therevvith to the fire of thy Avarice.

2. Sapien. 16.22.
Secondly, I will ponder that this fire (as says the book of VVisdome)
shallbee most cruel against the wicked, and most gentle to the good, that
shall then be alive; for to these it shall serve as a Purgatory to purifye
them from their Sins, and from the dregs thereof, and to augment unto them
the merit, and the Crown that soon after they are to receive. But Sinners, it
shall terribly torment as the beginning of Hell that attends them to chastise
their rebellion.

3. From hence it is, that this fire shall last in the world till the general
Judgment be concluded, Psalm. 28. and ibid. D. Basil.
God (as David says) dividing the power thereof, to inlighten without hurt
the bodies of the elect, and to torment the bodies of the reprobate; so that
forthwith in rising they shall feel the horrible fire wherein they are to
remain, which, (the Sentence being given) like a furious River shall
ouerwhelme them, and go down with them to Hell. Then shallbee fullfilled both
in good, and bad, that saying of the Prophet. Malach. 4.1.
The day of our Lord will come kindled like a fiery furnace, and all the
Provvde shallbee like Straw, and that day of our Lord shall burn them to the
root: but unto you that fear my name the Sun of Justice shall arise, in
whose plumes you shall have safetye: you shall leap like young Calves, and
shall tread upon the wicked, and they shallbee like Ashes under your feate.

O my Soul compare this fiery furnace with this Sun of Justice: these flames
that blind, Colloquie
with these Splendours that give light: these Ashes of Torments with these
plumes of Ease: this burning like Straw, with this leaping for pleasure like
a young calfe; and choose such a form of Life, as may free thee from so great
evils, and negotiate for thee so great good, O eternal God from whose
presence shall filovve this River of fire, for the Punishment of the wicked,
Daniel. 7 10.
and another River of living water for the refuge of the good, wash me,
Apocal. 22.1.
and purifye me with the water of this second, that I may be free from the
fire of the first. Amen.

The fourth Point.
FOurthly, Matt. 24 36.
I am to consider what Christ our Lord says of the day, that he has
assigned for this Judgment: to wit, That none knows it but God, Luc.
17.26. Genes. 7.5.
and that it shall come on a sudden; for the which he brings twoe
similitudes. As (says he) in the days of Noe, men were eating, and drinking,
buying, and selling, marrying themselves, and negotiating their businesses,
until Noe entered into the Arc, and then began on a sudden the Diluge, that
drowned them: Likewise as in the time of Lot, Genes. 19 24.
the Sodomites being very careless, Lot departing out of the Cittye of Sodom,
it rained fire, and brimstone from Heaven that destroyed them all: so shallbee
the coming of the Son of man to Judgment. For men being occupied in
marriages, and Pastimes, the flood of Tribulations shall begin, and there shall
rise a fire that shall consume them, and innumerable shall they be that
shallbee condemned, except some few, that like Noe, and Lot, shallbee saved.
And seeing the same happens in many Tribulations, Matt. 24 21.
Plagues, and mortallities, which suddenly assail us, I am to endeavor to
live so well prepared, that I may merit to be saved; taking the Counsel that
our Savior Christ inferred hereupon, Luc. 17.33.
saying: Whosoever would save his Soul, let him loose it, that is; let him
mortifye his carnal life, for loosing it in such manner, he shall quicken it
with a spiritual Life, and shallbee secure at the day of this Judgment.
Colloquie
O sovereign Judge quicken me with thy grace, that like another Noe I may
be faued in the Arc of thy Church. Dragge me out of the Sodom of the
World, though it be by force, like Lot, that being free from the fires that
burn it, I may save my Soul in the high mountain of thy Glory. Amen.

The fourtenth Meditation of the Resurrection of the Dead, and the coming of
the Judge, and what he will do before he give Sentence.
1. FIrst, Joan. 5.28. 1. Ad These. 4.16. D. Tho. in addit. q. 75. and q. 76.
Ex D. Hier. in reg. Monacharu^ c. 30. Apoc. 20.13.
I am to consider the general Resurrection of the Dead, that men in Soul,
and Body ar to appear at this judgment. Concerning this Article of our
Faith I am to ponder, First, that an Archangell with a dreadefull Voice in
manner of a Trompet shall summon, and call all the Dead to rise again, and
come to judgment, saying, Surgite mortui, and venite ad Iudicium, Arise you
dead, and come to judgment. And so potent shall this voice be by Virtue of
Gods Omnipotency, that in a moment all the dead shall arise. And (as S. John
says) the Sea shall give up the bodies that perished therein: the Earth
those that it swallowed alive: and Death those, whom after they were dead it
dissolved, and consumed: who though they were turned to Dust, Gods Omnipotency
will form them in a moment with all the perfection of members that they should
have. And in this very moment the Souls shall ascend from Hell, and those of
Heaven shall descend, and every one shallbee united to the same body, that
before it had. So that to this voice of the Archangell, and to his Citation to
judgment, all shall obey without refistance, excuse, or delay: yea, though
they have been kings, Popes, and monarkes of the world. Colloquie
O my Soul remember often this powerful voice, let this Trompet sound in
thy ears, fear this terrible summoning, and prepare thyselfe for it. Obey the
voice of God, and of his visible Archangell that says unto thee, Rise thou
that sleep, Ad Ephe. 5.14.
and arise from the Dead; and Christ will illuminate thee, for he desires
not the death of a Sinner, but rather that he should be converted, raised
up, and live.

2. Secondly, I will consider what body shallbee given to the Soul of the
Damned that came up from Hell, and what the Soul shall think to see it self
incaged therein. There shallbee given unto it a body partly passible, partly
immortal, that it may ever suffer, Apocal. 9 6.
and never dye. A foul, stinking, and horrid body, that shallbee the eternell
prison of the wretched Soul, and a new Hell to abide in it. O what
Maledictions will they one belche out against another in that first entrance!
Cursed be thou Body (will the Soul say) for to pamper thee, and for that
thou have been rebellious unto me, have I suffered so many, and so great
Torments, and I shall forever suffer them with thee. Cursed be thou Soul
(will the Body say) for because thou did not with thy freewill mortifye, and
subdue me, I am to suffer with thee such horrible Torments. In this sort
these twoe miserable Companions that in this life joined together to seek
their delights, drinking therewith innumerable Sins, Nahum. 1.
shall then be joined, and knit together like Thorns, to prick one another,
and to be their own Executioners, and to augment one another terrible
Torments.

3. Thirdly, I will breifely consider the Body that shallbee given to the Soul
of the Blessed that descended from Heaven, and with what Pleasure it shall
enter therein. There shallbee given unto it a body Immortal, Impassible,
Resplendent, thoroughout Perfect, and very Glorious. O what benedictions will
they impose one upon another: O what welcomes will the Soul give to her
beloved body! Blessed be thou (will she say) for thou have aided me to merit
the glory that I have enjoyed: Blessed art thou, that sufferedst thyselfe to
be mortified, and did yeilde with obedience to fulfill whatsoever God
commanded. Cheer up thy self, for now the time of Labor is passed, and the
time of rest is come. Thou wast sowed, and buried in the Earth with Ignominy:
1. Cor. 15 42.
thou art now returned to live with new Glory: glorifye God with me,
because with me thou shall reign. Finally making comparison of that which
shall happen to the good, and the evil, I will say to mine own Body, Animate
thyselfe in this mortal life to suffer, that the happy lotte may fall upon
thee to rise again to life everlasting.

The second Point.
SEcondly, I am to consider the coming of the Judge to Judgment, his
descending from Heaven: the Majesty of his Person: the train that accompanye
him: his Royal Standard, his glorious Throne, the Semblance of his
Countenance, and his Assistantes that are on either side.

1. First, Matt. 24 30.
I will ponder how Christ our Lord shall really, and truly descend from
Heaven, and come the second time into the world, to judge it, but in a fashion
very different from that which he came in the first time. For at this second
coming, he shall come with a glorious, and resplendent body, crowned with a
Crown of Glory, and Immortallitie, with such splendour, that the Sun, moon,
and Stars shall not give light in his presence: and with such Majesty that
Angels, and men, Righteous, and Sinners, yea, and the Devils themselves,
shall subject themselves to him, and adore, and (be they never so loath)
acknowledge him for their God, and their Lord. For then shall the eternal
Father fulfill the promise that he made him, to subject all things unto him,
Psalm. 109 1. 1. Cor. 15 25.
and to put his enemies under his feet: that every knee shall bow in his
presence, and every tongue confess that Christ JESUS our Lord is in the glory
of God the Father. Ad Phil. 2.11. Colloquie
O my Savior, very just it is, that thy second coming should discover that
glory, which at thy first coming thou did cover. Grant me, Lord, to
imitate the humillitie of the first, that I may enjoy the glory of the second.

Then will I ponder the Train that accompanies him: In epistola Iudae.
Daniel. 7 10. Matt. 16 27. and 25 31. Et omnes Angeli cum eo. Matt. 24 30.
Parebit signum filij hominis.
for (as Enoch prophesied) our Lord shall come with thousand of Saints,
incircled with the whole Army of Heaven, with the three Hierarchies, and nine
Quires thereof, assuming (as may piously be believed) aereall bodies
resplendent like the Sun, discovering therein the beautye, and excellencye of
their Hierarchy, and Quier. Before him, (as is collected out of the Gospel)
shall come the banner of the Son of man, which is the royal Standard of the
holy Cross with an admirable splendor. The which being one and the same,
shallbee most pleasing, and delightful to the Just that in this life embraced,
and esteemed it, crucifying their flesh with the Vices, and Concupiscences
thereof: but most horrible, and dreadefull to the wicked, who believed not in
it, or abhorred it being Enemies thereof, because they held their belly for
their God. Ad Phil. 3.19. Colloquie
And therefore in seeing it, they shall weep bitterly, for they shall see in
it the just cause of their Damnation. O my Soul, follow the banner of the
Cross in this life, that thou may see it with peace, and security in the
other. Bewail the Enmitye thou have had against it, that thou ma^est then
behold it with alacrity.

Fourthly, I will ponder, how our Lord Christ coming to the valley of Iosaphat
shallbee seated in a most excellent Throne made of a most beauteous, and bright
shining cloud, and his divine face being one, and the same, shall yet appear
most amiable to the good, and to the wicked most terrible, so that to behold
him only they shall remain full of terror, and confusion. And from the most
sacred wounds, of his feet, hands, and side, shall issue out rays of Light,
and delectable splendor to the good, who by the corporal view of these
wounds shall receive special comfort, considering how infinite the love was
of this sovereign king to receive them for their sakes. But from the same
wounds shall issue rays of wrath, and as it were of fire against the wicked,
who (as the Scripture says) shall bitterly bewail, Zachar. 12.10. Apocal.
1.7. Psalm. 54.7.
that of them they reaped so little proffit: But much more shall the jews, and
Gentiles weep, that with so great crueltye made these wounds. O most svveete
IESVVS by these thy most sacerd wounds I beseech thee, give me vvings, like
the vvings of a dove to fly unto them, and to dvvell in them while I live,
mourning for my Sins, for whose cause thou receiuedst them, that at the day
of judgment I may behold them with alacritye, and thorough them may be
admitted to they glory. Amen.

Then will I ponder how on Christ our Saviors side shallbee placed another
Throne of exceeding great glory for his most sacred mother; for it is very
just that in this Judgment, she like another Bethsabee should be seated on
the side of the true Solomon, not to be the Advocate for Sinners, 3. Reg. 2.
for that time is now paste, but to confound them, because they would not make
use of so holy a mother, and so powerful an Advocate as they had: as also that
the righteous may be cheered with her presence, and she herself be honored
before all the world, for the Humilliations that she suffered in this Life,
from those that knew her not, and did her outrage in the passion of her Son.
O sovereign Virgin, I rejoice for the glory thou shall have at that day, aid
me with thy intercession that then also I may be joyful with thy Presence.

6. Matt. 19 28. Isai. 3.13.
Finally round about the Throne of our Lord Christ shall stand other thrones,
where his Apostles, (as he promised them) shall sit to judge the twelve tribes
of Israel, and all the nations of the world, condemning with their exemplary
life the evil life of Sinners, D. Th. q. 89. addit art. 1. and 2. Job. 36.6
approouing the Sentence of the supreme Judge, and in his name declaring the
righteousness thereof. And as many holy Fathers affirm, there shall likewise
be seated in Thrones of Glory, the Poor of spirit who in imitation of the
Apostles, left all things for Christ. O how astonished will the Tyrants, and
Emperors be, that martyred these Apostles, when they shall see them with so
great glory exalted! O how much shall the poor Religious be honored, who in
this world lived contemned! Colloquie
O sovereign Judge, if thou do thus honor those that are voluntarily
poor, I embrace Poverty with a great good will, not so much for my honor,
as for the glory which to thee ensues thereupon.

The third Point. Of dividing the good from the evil.

THirdly, I am to consider, that Christ our Lord to finish his Judgment,
shall separate the good from the evil, as the Shepherd seperateth the Sheep
from the Goats: The righteous shallbee placed on his right hand, Matt. 25 32.
and the wicked on his lest Concerning the which I am to ponder first, that
this World, and the Church is now like a flock of Sheep, and Goats, of
good, and evil, so mingled together, that we cannot allwaies discern who is
the Sheep of Christ, or the Goat of Satan. And thorough this ignorance
oftentimes we honor the Sinner as a Just man, and despice the Just man,
holding him for a Sinner. From whence also it proceeds, that the Just, and
the unjust have not allwaies that place which they merit. For oftentimes wicked
men usurp the right hand, and most exalted place of the Earth; and the good
stand on the left hand in the most contemptible place of the world. For, the
which Solomon said; Eccles. 3.16. and 10.6.
I savve a great evil under the Sun, in the place of Judgment Impiety, and
in the place of Justice Iniquity, and I said in my Heart, the Just, and the
Impious God shall judge, and then shallbee sceene what every one is.

2. Now this time being come, Christ our Lord, Matt. 3.12. and 13 30. and 47
to scatter these Deceites, and Oppressions, shall separate the wheat from the
cockle, the grain from the chafe, the good fish from the bad, and the Lambs
from the kids. And the good he shall place on his right hand, taken up (as S.
Paul says) into the air, that all the world may know them, 1. Ad These. 4.
and honor them as Saints: and the wicked he shall place on his left hand,
leaving them upon the Earth that all may know them, and despise them as
Sinners. O how great shall the confusion be of the wicked, who in this life
had the right hand, and were mighty, when they shall see themselves on the left
hand in such an extremity of baseness! O what a raging envy will they have
against the righteous, when they shall see them so honored, and themselves so
contemned? what will the Prince, and the Lord say, when he shall see his
Slave exalted to so high a place? What the Prelate, and the master, when he
sees his subject, and Disciple so preferred before him? Sap. 5.4.
All at once will say that of the book of VVisdome: We senseless esceemed
their life madness, and their end without honor, behold how they are
counted among the children of God, and their lotte is among the Saints: we
therefore have erred from the way of truth, and the Light of Justice has not
shined to us, and the Sun of Understanding rose not to us. Colloquis
O Sun of Righteousness clear the eyes of my Soul with thy celestial
light, that I may behold the blindness of these vvretches, and be warned
in time by their miserye.

Contrarily the Righteons shallbee very full of Content to see themselves on
the right side of Christ; and Christ our Lord very joyful to see them at his
side; for then that saying of David begins to the letter to be visiblye
fullfilled: Psalm. 44.10.
The Queen sat on thy right hand with a golden Garment wrought with
marvelous Variety. O how glorious then will that Congregation of the Just be
there, like a Queen that shall soon be placed in the kingdom of her Spouse,
rejoicing to behold herself set at the right hand of her beloved adorned
with Virtues. In this life it was much humbled with contempts, and now it is
seen in an instant exalted to great honors. O happy he that seateth
himself in the lowest place of the World, for then Christ will say unto
him, Luc. 14.10.
Amice, ascend superius, Freinde sit up higher, ascend above the proud of
the Earth, Colloquie
and forthwith thou shallt ascend with me to the Thrones of Heaven. O my
Soul choose in this life a low place among men, that at the day of
Judgment, Christ may give thee a high place among the Angels. Make no
account of the right, or left hand that thou have in this World, but of that
thou shall have in the Tribunal of Christ endeavoring to live with such
purity that thou may meritte to be on his right hand. Amen.

Lastly, if I would know what hand I shall be on, at the day of Judgment, I
am to consider whither I be a Sheep, or a Goat: that is, If I hear the
voice of my Pastor Christ; if I have meekness, and humillitye: if I suffer
with Patience adversities, and Injuries; and if I part my goods liberally to
others: Or contrarily, If I be proud, and vindicatiue; If I seek my
temporal proffit with the hurt of my neighbor, and with the loss of
spiritual good; and so making reflection hereupon, I will endeavor to be a
Sheep of this sovereign Shepherd, confidently trusting that with great
prosperitye he will place me on his right hand.

The fourth Point. Of the publication of Consciences. D. Tho. in addit. q. 87.
1. Cor. 4.5. Daniel. 7.10. Apoc. 20.12. Libri aperti su^t, and alius liber qu^^
est vitae.

THe fourth Point shallbee, to consider the Publication that shallbee made at
the day of Judgment of all the Consciences of the good, and evil, before men,
and Angels; discovering (as the Apostle S. Paul says) the things that were
covered in darkness, and manifesting the Secrets that were enclosed in their
hearts, with a special light that God shall communicate to have them seen.

Wherein I will ponder how God our Lord in that day shall open (as the holy
Scripture says) and unfold the books of Consciences which during the time
of this life were shut up, so that all shall read what is written in the book
of every ones conscience, and every one what is written in the book of
conscience of all: and according to the contents of those books Judgment
shallbee made, and Sentence pronounced, that all may see the uprightness of
Gods Justice, as well for the honor of the good, as for the confusion of the
wicked. From whence I will collect how much it behooves me too consider well,
what I write in the book of my conscience, for I may now write what I list,
and cover it as I will, but in that day, in spite of my Heart, all shall come
to light: and if the book of my conscience be well written, according to the
book of Life, which is Christ JESUS; my book (says Job) shallbee my
defense, my honor, Job. 31.35.
and my Crown: But if it be contrary to that of Christ JESUS, it shallbee my
accuser, my dishonor Colloquie
and Condemnation. O most pious Savior, whose book in the day of Judgment
shallbee opened, that thy life may be as a Law, and living rule, by the
which Judgment shallbee made of ours; permit me not to write in the book
of my Conscience, any thing that may be contrary to thy book; and if at any
time thorough my frailetye I shall so write, aid me to blott it out with
penance, that in the day of my account, thou seeing me conformable to thee in
Life, may likewise make me conformable to thee in Glory. Amen.

2. But particularizing more at large what is to pass in this publication. I
will ponder that then the secret Sins of the Heart shallbee published, and
the foul Sins of Act that were committed in corners, and those which for
Shame were concealed in Confession, or were covered with excuses, and shifts.
Then shall also be manifested damned Intentions, secret Treasons, Hipocrisies,
and all other works that seemed holy, and were in truth wicked. There
shallbee known unfaithful Servants, false friends, fained Christians with
very great confusion to see themselves discovered: for if I feel it so much
to have my secret Sin published before ten men, how shall I feel it, to have
all my Sins together published before all men, and before all the Angels? O
my Soul, how dare thou sin in secret, if thou beleiuest that thy Sin
shallbee published, and manifested before all the World? How can thou in
confession cover some Sins for Shame, if thy Faith tells thee of this
confusion, that thou shallt suffer for concealing them? Remember what thy
Redeemer says, Luc. 12.2.
Nihil opertum quod non reueletur, neque occultum quod non sciatur; Nothing is
hid that shall not be revealed, nor secret that shall not be known.
Therefore cease to commit that Sin, that thou would not have manifested.

3. Then will I ponder, how God our Lord shall manifest the good Works of the
Just, how secret soever they have been; their pure thoughts, their holy
affections, their intentions so close hidden, that the left hand knew not what
the right did? and their exterior works which they covered for Humillitye,
and those which the world esteemed for evil, and for them calumniated, and
condemned them: for the which not withstanding they shallbee honored, and
exalted. O how foul, and abominable shall Vice then appear, and how
pleasing, and beautiful Virtue! O what honor, and credit shall it then be to
have been obedient, and humble, and to have suffered Injuries silently,
without execuses, or diuertings! O happy they which embrace these Virtuous
exercises, seeing for them they shall receive so great glory. Cover o my
Soul, Colloquie
thy good works with Humillitye, that Pride may not rob thee of them, for
in his good time our Lord to thy great glory shall discover them.

4. Lastly I will ponder how the Just Judge in that day will discover as well
the good works which the evil did, as the evil works which the good did,
buth with a different end, and success. For the good works of the evil
shall arise to their greater Ignominy, for not having perseuered in that good,
loosing the reward thereof for mingling them with many evils. And when they
shall see the aduises, and good Counsels which they gave to the elect, they
shallbee much the more ashamed that they took them not for themselves, nor
made proffit of them. Contrarily, when God shall publish the Sins committed
by the Just, he will likewise publish the Penance which they did, and the good
they collected thereout; so that they shall not be to them an occasion of
confusion, but rather a motive to praise God that pardoned them, and freed them
by his great mercy from so great miserye. And all shall redounde to the
greater confusion of the wicked, seeing others that committed the same, or
greater Sins then theirs, in so great honor for having done Penance for
them in time.

The fifth Point. Of the Accusations, and Imputations against the Wicked.
Apoc. 12 10. Orat. 1. de amore erga Deu^ and proximum.

THe fifth Point shallbee to consider the terrible accusations, and
imputations that shall arise out of this publication, against the wicked in
favor of the good. For first of all, the Devil the Accuser, and Calumniatour
of men at this day, which is the last of his office, shall do it with great
vehemency, exaggerating the Sins of the wicked, the more to confound them
(as S. Basile says) before the whole World: for turning himself to the
Judge, he will say: I created not these, neither gave I them life, nor
sustenance, nor the goods which they enjoyed: I neither suffered, nor died for
them, nor promised them any eternal reward; and yet not which standing,
forsaking thee that did all these things for them, they served, and obeyed
me. Therefore mine they are by right, for I vanquished them, and they yealded
themselves to me, and they esteemed me more then thee. This will proud
Satan say, as one that after his raging manner desires to triumph over
Christ our Lord, and to revenge himself of him in his creatures. O how
ashamed, and out of Countenance shall the wicked become, for having obeyed him!
Colloquie
Fly, o my Soul, to obey him, that will give thee so evil recompense. Turn
for Christ's honor that created, and redeemed thee, deceiving his Enemy in
this life, that he may not beguile thee in the other.

2 Secondly, I will ponder the terrible imputations that Christ himself will
interiourly impose upon them, calling to every ones memory the benefits that
he has done them. I (will he say) created thee to mine own image, and
similitude, and thou distainedst it with many sins. I redeemed thee with my
precious blood, and thou with thy evil ways did tread it under foot. I
gave thee the Sacrament of Baptism making thee a membre of my Church, and
thou profanedst it living with standall therein. I offered thee the sacrament
of Penance to restore to thee my grace, and thou choosedst to remain in sin.
I invited thee with my body, and blood for thy sustenance, and thou dispisedst
it for the fleshepots of Egypt. I called thee with many inspirations, and thou
with pertinacie wast rebellious unto them. I menaced thee with Chastizements, I
regaled thee with benefits, and I animated thee with promises of great
rewards, and of all these thou made no account. O wretched man, what could I
do more for thee then I did? and thou, what could thou do more against me
then thou did, esteeming more thine own honor, then mine? Isai. 5.2.
O my Angels and ministers, judge you, and see, what could I have done for
this vine that I did not, and hoping that it vould have brought forth grapes,
it has brought forth nothing but sower ones? Pondering all this I will with
great feeling pronounce those words of David, Psalm. 6.2.
Lord rebuke me not in thy furye nor chastise me in thy wrath: but correct
me in thy mercy whilst yet there is time for Amendment.

To this reprehension of Christ the very Angels of out guard will assist,
Colloquie
alleging how much they did to divert the wicked from their evil life, and
yet with what rebellion the wicked contradicted them. The ^ust likewise that
are present shall accuse them: some for that they rejected their Counsel;
others, because they received from them great wrongs: and others for the
peril wherein they saw themselves thorough their evil example. All this the
VVretches shall hear, and see in the interior part of their soul, Ad Romans 2.
and of their unhappy conscience, the which (as the Apostle says) shall be
the most terrible accuser of all: for being convinced with the evidence of
Truth, and seeing the reason that all have to accuse her, she shall have
nothing to answer, but much whereof to accuse herself. O how much better had
it been for her to have willingly, and proffitably accused her self in this
life, Colloquie
then to accuse herself at that time perfocre, and with out remedy? O svveete
JESUS, grant me, that I may vorthily accuse myself of my sins before thee,
and before the confessor that is to absolve me, that they may not accumsemee
of the in Judgment to condemn me.

The fiftenth Meditation, of the Sentences, in favor of the good, and against
the Wicked, and of the execution of them.
THe form of the sentences that Christ ourlord shall pronounce (as it is
believed, Abul. q. 333. in Matthew. Iansenius, sotus, and alij.
with a sensible voice) in favor of the good, and against the wicked, is
expressed in the holy Gospel, beginning with that in favor of the good, that
we may understand how much more God our Lord is Inclined to reward, then to
punish.

The first Point.
FIrst, I am to consider, that Christ our Lord seated in the Throne of his
glory, looking toward the righteous, with a gentle, Math. 25.34.
and amiable voice shall say unto them: Come, ye blessed of my Father,
possess you the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the World,
for I was hungrye, and you gave mer to eat etc. This sentence we will
meditate word by word, pondering the mystery that every word contains,
conformable to the second form of Praying set down in the ninth. of the
introduction. And yet we will here do no more, but point at the
considerations of these words: for that hereafter they shall be handled more
at large.

Venite.
THe first word is, Come, wherein I am to ponder for what cause he says
unto them Come; from whence they are to come; and whither they are to come He
says unto them come, to recall to their memory their first vocation, when
he called them to follow him, saying unto them; Math. 11.28. and 16.24.
Come ye to me that labor, and are burdened, and I will refresh you. and If
any man will come after me, let him deny himself and take up his Cross,
and follow me. And because they hearkened to this Vocation, he calls them
with such a another like word, as if he should say: seeing you came after
me, embracing the cross, and mortification, to follow my life, Come to
receive the reward, following me in glory Come from Mount Libanus of my
Church, wherein ye were baptized, Cant. 4.8.
and washed with the tears of Penance, and grew up like Cedars in all
Virtues. Apocal. 7.14.
Come from the great Tribulation wherein you have lived, washing your robes,
and making them white in my precious blood. Come from the Dens of the Lions,
and the inhabitations of Tigers in whose company you have lived, suffering
great persecutions. Come out from amongst the midst of them, and come to be
crowned, and to receive the reward that you have merited for the many
Victories you have obtained. Colloquie
O my soul, hear speedily the voice of Christ vvherevvith het calls thee
to imitate his life, that thou may be worthy to hear this svveete voice
vvherevvith he shall call thee to receive the Crown.

Benedicti Patris mei.
THe second word is, ye, blessed of my Father. He calls them blessed,
Psalm. 23.5.
and wilt do thoroughout all eternity, fullfilling that of the Psalmist, that
the innocent, and Pure of heart should receive the benediction of our lord,
and the mercy of God his savior. And he says not, Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob, nor ye blessed of Moses, or of the Patriarchs, Ad Ephesians 1.4.
and Prophets: but, ye blessed of my eternal fathet, who has blessed you
with all kind of caelestiall benediction, communicating unto you the goods of
his grace, and now entirely those of his glory. And he says not, ye
blessed of God, but of my Father, that it may be understood, that all these
blessings proceeded from the fatherly love that God bare them in respect of his
son. And for that his benediction is effectual,

Possidete paratum vobis regnum a constitutione mundi.
THirdy, he says unto them, possess you the kingdom prepared for you from
the foundation of the world. In which words I am to ponder what kingdom
this is: how long time ago, since it was prepared: that it is prepared for the
Righteous, and that to them is given the possession thereof, in all which is
resplendent the infinite Charity of our caelestiall Father. For first he
would that the inheritance, and eldership of his Children, should be a
kingdom: so sovereign, that for excellency thereof it meriteth the name of a
kingdom, for it is no terrene but a caelestiall kingdom, whose riches are
infinite, and the pleasures thereof so inestimable, that they make blessed
their possessors. This kingdom was prepared for them from all eternity,
predestinating them of his mere mercy to reign with him. And from the
foundation of the world he created the Heaven called Empyreall, that it might
be a royal Cittye, and habitation of these blessed kings. And with great
tenderness he adds that word Vobis, for you: as who should say. This
kingdom was not prepared principally for the Angels, and for want of them for
you, entering in place of those that lost the seats of this kingdom: But it
was prepared equally for all the just, Angels, ad men, and for you, for your
souls, and for your bodies.

Come then to take peaceable possession of this kingdom so noble, and so
ancient, out of the which you shall never be eiected; enter into the joys of
my Father, which shall never be taken from you; Apocal. 3.21. Colloquie
sit down to reign with me in my throne, as I am seated with my eternal
Father in his. O most loving Father, I give thee thanks for this so sovereign
kingdom which thou have prepared for thy elect, to shevve in them the
infinite Riches of thy Grace, and Charity. Grant me, o Lord, that I may in
such manner prepare my soul, that thou may reign therein by thy grace, and
afterward carry it to possess this eternal kingdom of thy Glory. Amen.

Esurivi enim, and dedistis mihi manducare etc.
THen declares the judge the reason of his sentence, and the merits for which
he ge^eth them his kingdom, saying: I was an hungered, and you gave me to
eat: I was a thirst, and you gave me to drink: I was a stranger, and you
took me in; naked, and you covered me: sick, and you visited me; I was in
Prison, and you came to me to set me at liberty. And the just admiring that
for so little works he should give them a kingdom so great; and that he
should so much esteem these works of mercy, as if they had been done to
his own Person, shall ask him, not so much with words, as with affections,
and inward feelings of great admiration; saying, Lord, when did we see thee
hungrye and Thirstye, and gave thee to eat, and to drink? Or when did we see
the a stranger, naked, sick, or in prison, and used toward thee such mercy?
Then our Lord will answer them; Amen, I say unto you, as long as you did it to
one of these my leasle Brethren, you did it to me; Colloquie
for I was in them; and though but little ones. I yet esteem my self to hold
them for my Brethren. O happy poor, that are accounted as his Brethren, by
the Judge that shall Judge them, and by the eternal king that shall reward
them, who likewise revvardeth others, for doing them good. O happy works of
Mercy whose principal object (...) Christ, and whose Reward is his
kingdom. O blessed are the merciful, seeing in this day they shall obtain
so great mercy!

Lastly, I will ponder, that albeeit Christ our Lord in the Gospel, alleges
only for the reason of his sentence the works of mercy to wards our
Neighbors, yet he will also declare the other good works of obedience, and
mortification necessary to enter into Heaven. And as the voice of God is of
infinite Virtue, he will to every one mentally declare, (in such sort, that
all may understand,) the special works for the which he gives him his
kingdom. To the Martyr, he will say, Come thou blessed of my Father, to
possess the kingdom prepared for thee, because thou shedst thy blood formee.
And to the Virgin, he will say, Come thou blessed of my Father, for the
Virginity which thou preservedst with purity of Body, and soul. And to the
Religious man: Come thou blessed of my Father, for thou lestst all things to
follow me. And in this manner I may run thorough all the other Estates of
the just O what Content will all receive with the sweet voice of this
comfortable sentence, Psalm. 50.10. Joan. 10.3.
with the which God will give to their ears complete Joy, and alacrity, and
the Bones that were humbled shall rejoice! Happy the sheep that in this life
hear the voice of their shephearde, and follow his steps, for on this day
being placed on his right hand, they shall hear the voice that calls them
to the eternal pastures. O sovereign shepherd, Colloquie
aid me with thy abundaunt grace, that I may be worthy to hear so
favorable a sentence. Amen.

The second Point.
SEcondly, I am to consider, that toward the wicked the Judge will turn his
Angrye Countenance, and with a dreadefull voice will say unto them: Depart from
me, you cursed, into fire everlasting, which is prepared for the devil, and
his Angels, for I was an hu^gred and you gave me not to eat etc. This
sentence like the former we may ponder by the words, for that herein are
declared all the kinds of Pains that are in Hell, of the which we shall
hereafter make a large consideration.

Discedite a me.
1. THe first word is, Depart from me: In the which he condemns them to
that eternal pain, Paena Damni. Pain of loss: or danatio^.
which they call of loss or damnation, which is a perpetual Banishment from
Heaven, and a depriving them of the sight of God for ever. And the more to
wound them, showing himself so glorious unto them, he says. Depart from
me that am your God, your first beginning and last end. Depart from me that
am your Redeemer: from ^nee that made myself man for your sakes, and received
these wounds for your remedy: from me that invited you with pardon, and you
would not accept it. Therefore depart for ever from my freindship, from my
protection, from my kingdom, from my Paradise, from my clear sight, and from
the copious River of my Delights. And for that whosoever is separated from
Christ, is also separated from those that go with Christ, in saying to them,
Depart from me, he says likewise: Depart from the Hierarchies, and Quires
of my Angels: Depart from my Apostles, Martyrs, Co^fessors, and Virgins: and
Depart from the sweet company of my holy mother, who would also haut been
yours, but you would not have her. I did sufficient to attract you to my
service, and to my house, but you thorough your perverse will separated
yourselues, and made yourselues strangers. Therefore in punishment hereof,
Colloquie
I by my just will do banishe, and separate you from me, and all mine, without
hope ever to have any part in me or any thing that is mine. O my savior, let
not such a Punishment fall upon me, to separate me from thee for ever.
Chastize me with what punishment thou vvilt so that united with thee in
love, I may always be near thee. Amen.

Maledicti.
THe second word is, you cursed, Deuteronomy. 28 16. and deinceps.
There shall light upon them the Malediction of Hunger, and Thirst, of
sickness, and Dolor, of infamye, and Dishonor. Cursed in the Cittye where
they shall live; in the house where they shall dwell: Psalm. 108.18.
and their sins, according to that of David, He loved cursing, and it shall
come to him: and he would not blessing, and it shall be far from him: And he
put on cursing as a garment and it entered as water into his inward parts and
as oil in his bones. O how raging and mad will the wretches be, to hear this
horrid word of their eternal malediction! O what a raving envye shall pierce
their intrailes, seeing that God blesleth the Righteous, without leaving so
much as one only benediction for them. Genes. 27.34.
If sau seeing his younger Brother Jacob to have got the blessing, Irr^gi^t
clamers magno, Roared out with a great cry, and with remediless Tears said
to his Father, have thou not reserved me also a biessing? When these
Reprobates figured by Esau, shall see that the Elect figured by Jacob, have
negotiated the benediction of the heavenly Father, and that not one only
blessing remains for them; how loud will they cry, and roar? With what
rage will they confirm their own Malediction? curfing the day wherein they
were borne, and the milk which they sucked desiring rather never to have been
bo^ne, then to hear such an affrighting Malediction? Ad Gala 3.13.
O most svvete JESUS, who ascending the Cross tookest upon thee the curse of
the Law, to deliver us from the curse of sin, and eternal Pain, favor
me with thy mercy, that upon me may not fall so terrible miserye. Amen.

In ignem aeternum.
THe third word is, Paena sensus. Pain of Sense.
Into fire everlasting; In thee which he condemns them to the pain which
they call of Sense, which is fire everlasting, as if he should say, I
separate you not from me, that you should return to that scope, and Liberty
of life that you were wont to have; nor that you should live upon the face of
the Earth at your pleasure: but that you should descend to the obscure Prison
of Hell, and burn in the terrible fires that are therein: and this not for the
space of ten years, nor ten thousand, but for all that time that the fire
which is eternal shall last, and shall do his office to torment you
thoroughout all eternity. O what affliction shall that dreadefull word cause
in those wretched sinners, seeing themselves again condemned to return to
the Prison, and fire from whence their soul had come up, that the body also
might burn in those flames wherein the soul burned.

Qui paratus est.
THe Judge adds that this fire was already prepared, to reduce to their
Memory that the divine justice, as it prepared a kingdom to reward the
Righteous, so also it prepared a fire to chastize the Wicked, which although
it were hidden from the eyes of the body, yet it was so revealed, that they
might see it with the eyes of faith, and might endeavor to escape it. With
these eyes am I to penetrate the Earth, and to see the terrible fire, that at
this day is in the Center thereof, prepared for the chastizement of my sins,
Isa. 30.33.
if I do not Penance for them, remembering that of the Prophet Isaias,
Praeparata est ab heri Tophet etc. The eternal king, from yesterday, that is,
very long since, and from the beginning of the world, prepared a horrid,
profounde, and spacious place, full of fire, and of much wood, and the breathe
of our Lord, like a river of Brimstone is kindling it. He calls it Tophet,
Matthew. 5.29.
as our Savior Christ calls it G^henna, which was a place of terrible fires,
where the children were burnt that were sacrificed to the I doll Moloch, to
advertise us that by the Furnaces, Aetnas, and horrible places of fire, of
smoke and, Brimstone, that we see upon the earth, 4. Reg. 23.10. Nota.
Colloquie
we may as it were trace out the Terriblenesse of that fire, that God has
prepared under it, for such as sacrifize their souls to the Devil. O eternal
king which preparedst Heaven, and Hell, to cherishe in the one the righteous
with the gentle Breathe of thy Charity, and to torment the Wicked in the
other with the burning blast of thy indignation: visit me with the breathe
of thy divine inspiration, that I may always be mindful of these tvvoe
places, preparing my self by thy grace with such a manner of life, that I may
attain to the one, and be for ever free from the other. Amen.

Diabolo, and Angelis eius.
He says likewise unto them, that this fire is prepared for the Devil, and
his Angels, that they may understand, that they are condemned to the
perpetual compagnye of the Devils, matching them with them, that whom they
imitated in sin, they might imitate in pain: and seeing they made themselves
of the faction of Lucifer, and of his evil Angels, they should have their
Punishment with them, and by their means: they being their executioners, that
were their seducers. But he says not to them, Go to the fire prepared for
you, as he says to the righteous, Come to the kingdom that I haut prepared
for you: to vpbraide them with the great mercy that he would have done
them, for he intended not to make Hell to punish men, if they thenselues had
not thorough sin made themselves worthy of Punishment: and had they not been
like the Devils impenitent, they should not have been cast into the eternal
fire prepared for them. Colloquie
O God of Vengeance, and with all, Father of Mercy, seeing thou rather
desire to pardon sinners with mercy, then to chastize them with Vengeance,
give me time of true Penitence, that I be not chastized with the impenitent
Devils. Amen.

Esuriui enim, and non dedistis mihi manducare.
THen declares the Judge the just reason of his sentence, saying: for I was
hungrye, and you gave me not to eat, nor exercized to wards me the other
works of mercy. And the Danmed desiring to excuse themselves not to have
failed with Christ in such works, he will say unto them, What you did not to
one of these little ones, you did not to me, for I was in them, and therefore
what you did not to them, you did not to me. 1. Joan. 4.20.
For he that loves not his neighbout, whom he sees visibly with his eyes,
how can he love God that is invisible? and he that forgets the Image of
God whom he has present, how will he remember God himself, whom he
esteems as absent? I will also ponder that Christ our lord in the reason of
the sentence all edgeth those sins that seem the lesser, to give us to
understand with how much more rigor hec will chastize the greater sins, of
which he will also make mention: And especially he will declare to every one
(that all shall understand it) the cause wherefore he. condemns him, saying
to the Luxurious: Depart from me ye cursed to the fire everlasting for the
luxuries, and Carnallities wherein you lived. And to the Perjured. and
Blasphemours: Depart from me, be cause you profaned my holy name, I having
had so great care of honoring yours. etc. Mathe 7.22.


Thirdly, I will ponder, that the wicked in the Day of Judgment will allege
for their discharge some glorious works that they did, saying to Christ.
Matthew. 7.22.
Lord, Lord, did not we prophecye in thy name? and in thy name cast out
Devils? and in thy name wrought many miracles? then why do thou separate
us from thee? But our Lord will answer them, I never knew you, Depart from
me you workers of iniquitye; which is to say, This Faith, and these graces
that you had I know, for I gave you them: but you abused them, mingling them
with heinous sins: and it had been reaseon that you prophesying to others,
should have prophesied to yourselues: and casting out Devils out of other men's
bodies, should have cast them out of your own souls: and doing miraculous
works, should also have done vertuons works: which seeing you did not do, I
neither know you, nor approve you: and though you call me your lord, I will
not admit you as my servants, because you were not obedient unto me. From
whence I will collect, that if at that time no account shall be made of
Prophecy, and the Grace to do miracles without Virtues: less account shall
be made of Nobility, Riches, Dignities, sciences, and other much lesser
things, which yet are much esteemed of men. For to all in general he will
say, I know you not, Depart from me you workers of iniquity.

The Damned hearing the Thunder of this dreadefull sentence, Psalm. 76.19.
Colloquie Psalm. 76.19. and 96.4.
a mortal raving sadness shall fall upon them. For if the signs of
Judgment, (which like Lightenings are precedent to this Thunder) shall wither
their bones with fear, what a Terror shall the Thunder it self cause? what
affliction the Flashe? and what Torment the fire? O sovereign Judge, send the
Lightenings of thy divine inspirations upon the Earth of my soul, that
contemplating what is to pass in Judgment, I may tremble, and quake, and so
alter my life, that thou may alter the sentence. Psalm. 76.11.
Change my Heart with thy right hand, that in that day I may not be
placed on thy left hand. Et cum veneris iudicare, noli me condemnare, And
when thou come to Judgment do not condemn me. Let thy mercy now
pardon me, that then thy Justice may not condomne me. Amen.

The third Point.
THirdly, I am to consider the execution of these sentences, Math. 25.46.
of the which our savior Christ says: Et ibunt he in supplicium aeternum,
iusti autem in vitam aeternam, And these shall go into punishment
everlasting, but the just into life everlasting.

First I will consider the execution of the sentence given against the wicked,
for in the instant that it shall be given, without any delay, in view of the
Righteous the earth shall open under their feet, and the Divelle laying hold
on them, they shall all together descend unto Hell; and the earth shall
presently close up again, they remaining for ever buried in that abysme of
Fire. Then shall be fullfilled that Malediction written in the Psalm, Psalm.
54.16. Apocal. 20.14.
let Death come upon them, and let them go down quick into Hell, And that
which Saint John speaks of in his Apocalips, That the Devil, and Death, and
Hell, and all those that were not written in the book of life, were cast into
the Lake of fire, and brimstone, where with Antichriste, and the false Prophet
they shall be tormented Day, and might for ever, and ever. And this is the
second Death bitter and eternal, which comprehends the souls, and Bodies,
that died the first Death of sin, and the corporal Death that ensued
thereupon. O what a furious Raving shall possess the Damned, seeing themselves
not able to resist, nor to impeache the execution of this sentence? O what a
bitter Envye shall penetrate their entrails, to beeholde the glory of the
righteous from whom they are divided! O what a desperate sadness shall they
receive by this second Death, and in their first entrance into that stinking
infernal poole! O what raging Agonyes, beholding themselves covered with
mountains of Earth, bolted up with eternal boltes, and bound hands, and
feet with Chains of perpetual Damnation! Then shall they see by experience
how evil, and bitter it was to have divided themselves from their God, and to
have abandoned his holy fear. Ierem. 2.19.
Fear, o my soul, the terriblenesse of this second Death, that thou may
avoid the iniquity of the first Death. Enter with thy spirit into these
Openings of the Earth, and hide thy self therein, Isai. 2.10.
beholding quietly what passes there, that thou may fear the wrath of
the Almighty, and escape his furye.

I will likewise ponder how Joyful the righteous shall be (as David says)
to behold the vengeance that Gods justice takes on wicked. Psalm. 57.11.
for although among the Damned be he that was his Father or mother, Brother,
or Friend, they shall receive no pain but rather Joy, to see the great
reason that God has for what he does: Exodus 15.1. Apocal. 15.3.
so that they shall sing the song that Moses sung, when the Egyptians were
drowned in the sea: or the song of the Lamb which Saint John makes mention
of, saying, Great and mer vailous are thy works lord God omnipotent: just,
and true are thy ways king of the worlds. Who shall not fear thee, o
Lord, and magnifye thy name, because thou only art holy, and thy Judgments
are manifest to all. From hence I will mount up to ponder the execution of the
sentence of the Righteous, beholding how all the blessed are carried above the
air, following their Captain Jesus, singing a thousand songs of Joy, and
glorifying God, for having delivered them from such, and so great Perille,
with those words of the Psalmist: Psalm. 123.6,
Blessed be our Lord that has not given us a pray to their teethe, our
soul as a sparrovve is delivered from the snare of the foulers. The snare is
broken, and we are delivered, our help is in the name of our Lord which
made Heaven, and Earth. And in this manner they shall penetrate the whole
Heavens, until they arrive at the Empyreall Heaven, where Christ our Lord
shall place them in those Thrones of glory, which they are to possess
reigning with him thoroughout all eternity, with great peace, and
tranquillity. Colloquie
O happy labors of a virtuous life, which are so well rewarded in life
everlasting. Cheer up thyselfe, o my soul, with the hope of these rewards,
and embrace with great feruencye these Labors.

The conclusion of what has been said.
THere remains for conclusion of what has formerly been spoken, that I
consider myself in this world, as in a middle place between Heaven, and
Hell, Sermo. 31. ex paruis.
and that I am here (as Saint Bernard says) like as Novices are in a house of
Probatio^, God proving me with the precepts he imposes upon me, and with
the afflictions that he sends me, but yet assisting me with his Grace, to
issue out of them wellapproued. If I prove ill, following the devils party,
by the irreuocable sentence of God, I shall be cast out of the world into
Hell: But if I prove well, fullfilling the will of God, by his sentence I
shall be exalted from the world unto Heaven. VVhereupon it behooves me to
consider very well how I live, that I may issue out of his world well
approved. Colloquie Psalm. 25.1.
O eternal Cod that made this Earth like a House of probation, to exercise
men whom thou have ordained for heaven; prove me, and exercize me,
preventing me ^vith thy Mercy, that I may obey thee insuchsorte, that at the
day of indgement thou may approve me, and admit me into thy kingdom.
Amen.

The sixtenth Meditation, of Hell, as concerning the eternitye of the pains,
and the terriblenesse of the place: and of the inhabitanies thereof, and the
tourmentours.
The first Point.
FIrst, what Hell is.
we must consider what Hell is, in such manner as by Faith we are instructed,
that knowing the definition thereof, we may tremble to hear the name. Hell,
is a perpetual prison, full of fire, and of innumerable, and very terrible,
torments, to chastize perpetually such as die in mortal sin. Or otherwise,
Hell is an eternal estate, wherein sinners for the punishment of their
sins, want all that Good which they may desire for their content, and endure
all kinds of evils which they may fear for their torment. So that in Hell is
joined together the privation of all that good which men enjoy in this life,
and angels in the other: and the presence of all those evils which afflict
men in this life, and the devils in the other.

This I may ponder, discoursing thouroughout all evils, and miseries that I
fuffer, or see others suffer, augmenting them, and eternizing them with my
consideration; for all that in this life is suffered, is little, and lasts but
a little time, because it has an end: but that which is suffered in Hell is
exceeding much, and shall continue an infinite continuance, which has
competencye with that of God, for it thall continue as long as God shall
continue. If I here suffer Hunger, and thirst, I must understand, that in Hell
I shall have another kind of Hunger, and thirst incomparably greater, and
besides that everlasting. If I here suffer any dolor, or dishonor, or
pouertye, or heaviness, or want of friends, etc. All this I shall suffer in
Hell with such excess, that that which is here, is at it were painted, or but
like a blaste: but that there shall all of it be most terrible and shall never
have an end; for after it has continued fifty thousand years, there remain
other fiftye thousand millions to pass, and these being passed there remain
others, and then others without number, or end. For Cain having been in Hell
more then five thousand years, is as if he began but to day. And it is some
two thousand years now, that the covetous Dives burns in hell, and asks
but one drop of water, Colloquie
and he shall for ever burn, and for ever desire it. Then what follye is it,
o my soul, for not suffering in this life so small, and so ^hort afflictions,
to put thy self, in danger to fuffer evils so great, and so everlasting?
How is it, that thou vvilt not bear patiently that little, and brief that
thou suffer, seeing thou deseruest to suffer so great, and se everlasting
for thy sins; O eternal God, illustrate me with thy sovereign leght that
by the evils present, I may know the terriblenesse of those that are
eternal, and may live in such manner, that I may meritte to be free from
them. Amen.

The Second Point.
SEcondly, I am to consider the causes, and Circunstances of this eternity,
pondering how that all that is in Hell is eternal. First, the Damned is
eternal, not only as concerning his soul, but also his Body: for he shall
be Immortal, neither can he kill himself, Apocal. 9.6.
nor can any other kill him, neither will God annihilate him. And though he
himself should desire Death, it will fly from him, and God will not
accomplish this his Desire: rather his raving to dissolve himself will
terriblie torment him, seeing he cannot obtain what he desires.

Secondly, Eccles. 1.2.
the place of the Prison is eternal, and cannot be ruinated: For the Earth
(in the midst whereof Hell is) shall continue for ever: Isa. 30.33.
The fire likewise shallbee eternal; for the eternal breathe of God (as the
Prophet Isayes says) shall serve for Brimstone to preserve it, and so, that it
shall have need of no other fuel. Or if brimstone serve for fuel, it shall
likewise be eternal, for the same breathe of God shall preserve it. And Fire,
which has the Virtue to burn, Psalm. 28.7.
and to consume, has there by Gods Omnipotency, its Virtue divided, for there
it burns, and consumes not: And so that which forever burns, forever
continues.

Thirdly, Marc. 9.44.
the Worm that there biteth shall be eternal, and none, (as Christ our
Savior said,) shall be able to kill it. For the Corruption, whereof it is
engendered, which is Sin, never ends; and the lively apprehension thereof,
and of the Pain never cease: and so that cruel gnawing which it makes in
the Conscience, shall never have an end. Fourthly, the Decree of God is
eternal, and immutable; for he is resolved never to revoke the diffinitiue
sentence that he has given, nor to deliver out of Hell him, that once enters
therein: Quia in inferno nulla est redemptio. For in Hell there is no
Redemption of Captives, nor ransoming of Prisoners, nor any price for them, for
as much as the blood of Christ passes not thither. D. Tho. 3. p. q. 52. art. 6
And if when it was fresh, and was shed upon mount Caluarye; it drew out of
Hell none of the Damned, neither shall it now deliuee any.

Finally, all the Pains shall be eternal, because the sins shall likewise
be so. For as much as in Hell there is no pardon of sins, no true Penance,
nor satisfaction that may be accepted, neither is the blood of Jesus Christ
applied unto them. From whence it proceeds, that whosoever will dye without
doing penance for his sins, Nota. Ex D. Th. 1.2. q. 87. ar. 3. ad 1. cum D.
Aug. and D. Greg. quos citat. Meditat. 9. pu^cto. 4.
he virtually wills to remain in them for ever, and that his sins should
be eternal, and therefore he meriteth that Gods Justice should chastize him
whith pains everlasting. And heerevpon it is, that allbeeit a sinner dye with
true Faith, and Hope, yet entering into Hell, he is deprived of them, not
only for being (as is aforesaid) unworthy of them, but also for that now
there remains with him, no object of Hope, neither to obtain pardon of
sins, nor to be heard in his petitions, nor to issue out of myserie, nor
ever to attain to any blessedness. Then how is it, Colloquie
o my soul, that thou fear not this being eternal, obliged to eternal
miseries? How is it, that thou art not affrighted with this fiere, this
breather, this worm? and this decree of God immutable, and sempiternall?
Consider, that yet God will alter the sentence, if thou with penance alterest
thy life. Attend not till thy sin be eternal, for then so likewise
shallbee thy punishment.

The third Point.
THirdly, I am to consider the continuation, and inuariablenesse of the pains,
which goes together with eternity. Pondering that the painer shall in such
sort for ever endure, that they shallbee perpetual without interruption, and
inuariable without diminution. So that allbeeit they should continue millions
of years, yet shall there not be one only day of vacation; neither shall the
pain cease so much as for an hour, or a moment; neither shall the
substantial pain be diminished, Luc. 16.24.
nor have any refreshing, as is apparent in the rich covetous man, to whom
Abraham denied so small a refreshing, as to have his tongue touched with the
tippe of a finger dipped in water. Rather new accidental torments shall be
augmented upon them, by the new entrance of other damned: and that change
which here uses to be a refreshing, (if in hell be any change) shallbee
there as a new torment. Job. 24.19.
For if the luxurious (as it is said in Job) pass from the ardours of the
fire to the waters of snow, it shall be, that the heat may more torment
them, thorough the war that it has with the cold: and the cold may cause
the greater trembling, and gnashing of teethe combating with the heat. Finally
allthough these torments be so lasting, and continual, yet custom in suffering
gains nothing to be any cause of their ease; rather every day they are as it
were renewed, and wax green with new impatience. Psalm. 73.23.
For as the pride of these wretches which abhor God (says the Prophet
David) always increases; so likewise increases their wrath, and envy,
their impatience, furye, and rage. Then what say thou o my soul, and what
do thou; if thou have a lively faith of such torments, how is it that thy
spirit fails not to consider such terriblenesse; such perpetuitye? such
continuation? such immutabilitye, and eternity? If lying in a soft bed, thou
feel it equal with death to pass a long night in watching, and pain,
expecting with grief the refreshing of the day break; how much more shallt
thou feel it, to be in an obscure prison, in a bed of fire, in perpetual
watching, and in terrible pain, in a night so long, and tedious, that
expects no refreshing of day break, because it is eternal? Colloquie Psalm.
9.2.
O Justice of the allmighty, who trembles not in thy presence. Deliver me, o
lord, from thy ovrathe, and chastize me not in thy furye: but project me
with thy mercy, that I fall not into so dreadefull, and eternal a misery.
Amen.

The fourth Point.
FOurthly, descending to the particular I am to consider the dreadefullnesse of
that Place which we call Hell.

1. For first, it is a place under the earth, obscure, and full of darkness,
thicker then that of Egypt, where never enters the light of sun, moon, nor
stars. And the fire, allbeeit it burns, it gives no light, but smoketh and
blinds the sight: for our Lord for the wicked divides the flame of the fire,
Psalm. 28.7.
taking from it the good that it has, and leaving it the evil.

2. Item, Hell is a most strait Place devoide of those flowery meadows; and
spacious Foresss of the Earth. For allbeeit that Hell, (as Isaias says) is
very deep, Isai. 30.33.
large, and wide, and has his creekes far stretdched out: yet so many are
the men that shall discende there into, that hardely there shall be for every
one the place of a very narrow grave, and they shall be crowded together like
brickes in a fiery furnace, that they shall not be able to wrinche.

3. Besides this, it is a most distemperate place with excessive heates, having
not so much as a chinke, where any wind may enter to refreshe it. Apocal.
19.20. and 20.15.
And for this cause S. John in his Apocalypse calls it allwaies, a Lake of
fire, and brimstone: For as Fishes are in a Lake of Water overwhelmed, and as
it were prisoners, without being able to get out: so shall the Damned be in
that burning lake of terrible fire, mingled with Brimstone melted, of a most
abominable smell.

4. And from hence also it is that Hell is a most stinking Place: For the
bodies of the Damned shall reake forth an insupportable sweat, with an
abominable stinch. And finally, it shall be fastened on al sides with eternal
boltes, that they shall never be able to get out, neither by Force, nor by
subtletye. And if by the Dispensation of God, any comes out, he carries
with him his Torment, and returns presently from whence he issued, but that
dispensation shall never be given after the day of Judgment. O how soft, and
sweet would any Dongeon appear unto thee if thou did well ponder the
terriblenesse of Hell? Job. 10.21.
O good Jesus, aid me to bewail bitterly my sins, that I may not go to
this Tenebrous land covered with the shadovve of Death, the land of those
that are in Despair.

The fifth Point.
FIfthly, I am to consider the misery, wretchedness, and discord of the
Inhabitants of this place which are Captives in this prison. Pondering how
they want all the good respects that are of Bountye, discretion, Nobillitie,
Parentage, Friendship, and loyalltie, and are clothed with all the contrary
respects, with strange abomination. For in Hell are all sorts of Persons:
some were Angels of several Hierarchies, and Quiers, beautiful, Potent, and
very resplendent. Others were Emperors, kings, and Princes with diverse
estates, and Titles of nobillitye. Others were sage Philosophers, eloquent, and
learned in diverse sciences. Others courteours, discreet, affable, liberal,
grateful, and well conditioned. Others Parents, kinsmen and Allies; Fathers,
and sons: Brothers, or Cousin germans. Others very great freindes and
acquaintance, Companions, and Neighbors. But in entering into Hell, they loose
all these respects, Job. 10.22.
without having (as Job says) any order or Concord, but confusion, and
horror. All make themselves mortal enemies, one to another: filling
themselves with wrath, rancour, envy, impatience, and rage one against
another, that one can not endure to see the other, nor to give him a good
word. The father abhors the son, and the son the Father; the Lord his
vassal, and the vassal his Lord: one cursing another, and biting themselves
with rage. And specially those which in this life loved with a disordinate
love, and were Companions in sins, shall much more abhor one another, and
their pains shall be augmented with the rage to see themselves together For
as burning coals when they are together, the one kindles the other: so these
infernal Coals, kindled with the fire of their wrathes, shall add heat to
the ardent heat of their companions.

Add to this, the most painful imagination, that perforce, and in despite
of them, they shall be eternally together, not being able to fly or divide
themselves one from another. For flying from one whom thy much abhor, they
light upon anothere that is worse: and so shall they have a perpetual, and
cruel war, having no body to pacifye, nor to comfort them: for from the
earth none will go, though he could; nor none shall come from heaven though
he would: For none that is good will daigne to enter into so infamous a place.
Insomuch that Christ our lord when he descended into Hell, entered not into
this place, nor gave them any comfort. What, will Princes then think, to see
themselves consorted with Plebeyans, and entreated by them with such
insolency, and hatred? what a torment will it be to live perforce with my
enemies that actually abhor me, and curse me, without being able either to
stop their mouths, or mine own ears? what a pain will it be never to see
person that wishes me well, nor is compassionate of my miseries, but that
rather increases them? Cassian. collat. 16. c. 2. 1. Cor. 13.13.
O my soul, ground all thy friendshipt upon true charity. For this only is
eternal, and perishes not, and without it all the rest shall perish. Have
peace, as much us in thee lies, with all men, that thou may not enter into
the company of so man wicked.

The sixte Point.
Sixthly I am to consider the terriblenesse of those hellish tormentours, and
executioners. First generally in hell, every one of the damned is a Tormenter
of all, and all are tormenters of one, saying, and doing things, (as is
abouesaide) to torment them. Moreover, the devils, are terrible tormenters of
men, revenging themselves upon them, for the rage they have against God, and
against JESUS Christ: And therefore they torment them with affrighting visions,
with horrible imaginations, and with all other means that their fierce Cruelty
can invent. Besides all this, the third and the most cruel tormenter, is the
worm of conscience which biteth, and shall eternally bite with terrible
crueltye. For the damned wretch, remembering the sins he has committed, and
the inspirations he had to get out of them, and to have freed himself of
those torments, and yet that thorough the sin of his own peruers freewill,
he entered into them, himself will be his own torturer, and will bite
himself, and would rent himself in pieces with incredible bitterness, and
rage: herein fullfilling that punishment, where of S. Augustine speaketeh.
lib. 1. co^fessionu^.
Thou did command it o Lord, and so it comes to pass, that the
disordinatt mind should be its own tormente, for his sins are his
tortures, and his unbridled passions his tormentours: so that he himself, is
most greiuous to himself. Learn then, o my soul, Colloquie Mat. 5.26.
to hearken to this beating of thy conscience, and make peace with thy good
Aduersarye, that priketh thee when thou sinnest: for in hell like a mad
dog the will bark, and bite, revenging the iniurye thou did her, when in
this life thou contemnedst her.

The fourth tormentour will be the Invisible hand of God, which discharges
it self upon the damned, sing his omnipotentcie against them: who knowing
this, turn their rage against him, breaking out into horrible blasphemies, and
desiring that he-might cease to be. Colloquie
But all is turned to the increase of their doulour, and torment. O most heavy
hand of the omnipotent, who can abide thee? O what a dreadful thing is it
to fall into the hands of the living God being offended! sunder, o Lord, very
far from me this thy hand of Chastizement, and touch me with that of thy
mercy, that being freed from these fears, I may ever enjoy thee world
without end Amen.

The seventeenth Meditation of the pains of the Senses and interior
faculties: and of the pain of loss or Damnation, which is suffered in hell.
AS the sinner embraces two great evils which are, to separate himself from
God the Fountain of living water; Ierem. 2.13.
and to turn unto the creatures, to enjoy their perishing delights: so in
Hell he is punished with two sorts of pains: one which they call of Loss or
Damnation, Paena Damni. Paena sensus. Hiere. 2.
for the first evil: and another which they call of Sense for the second: and
with this we will begin, because to have sense is most easy.

The first Point.
1. FIrst, Paena sensus. Sapien. 11.17.
I am to consider the pain which the Damned do suffer, when they have a
body. For according to the laws of Gods justice, Per quae quis peccat, per
haec and torquetur. By what things a man sins, by the same also he is
tormented. And seeing sin enters by the senses; in them must be thee
punishment thereof. This may be pondered running thorough all the five. The
Sight shall be tormented by beholding their Enemies near them, and by
suffering horrible visions which the devils will set before them, taking these
dreadefull figures to torment them withal, they not being able to shut their
eyels from seeing them, in chastizement of the sins they committed with this
sense. Ear shall allwaies be hearing blasphemies against God, maledictions,
and words most injurious, and other most harshe soundes after the manner of
horrible howlings, and roarings, without being able to shut up their Ears, in
chastizement of the sins which with them they committed. The smell, Taste, in
the throat, Ierem. 23.15.
yea much more bitter then Gall, or wormwood, with terrible belchings, and
vomitings of the stomach: and on the other side it shall suffer the Hunger of a
Dog, Luc. 16.24.
and a raging thirst, desiring, like the rich covetous man, one little drope of
water, which yet shall not be granted him, in chastizement of his sins of
Gluttony. The Touching,

With this consideration I am to animate myself to bewail the sins, which
with these five senses I have committed, sorrowing for the liberty that I have
given them, Hiere. 9.21.
and resolving to mortyfie, and restrain them, that death, ane hell enter not
by them.

The Second Point.
SEcondly I am to consider the pain of the fire which is so terrible, that in
comparison thereof, this here is no more, then as if it were but painted: for
it is an instrument of gods Justice, and omnipotency to chastize, and
tormente, not only bodies, but souls alone, and pure spirits. The properties
of this fire are: First, that it imbowelleth it self with the damned with such
a connection, that wheresoever the devil goes, he is tormented with this
fire, and we may say, that he carries the fire of hell with him, because he
carries the torment that he receives thereby Secondly, D. Tho. 1. p. q. 64.
art. 4 ad 3.
for the greater sinners it tormenteth much more, and the lesser less. Yea,
and he himself that is damned, it shall torment more in one part of his
body, then in the other, when that part was a special instrument of his
sin. Some it will torment more in the Tongue, because they where murmurers,
and perjured. Others in the throat, because they where Gluttons, and
drunkardes. And all this is wrought by the omnipotency, and justice of god,
which takes it for the instrument thereof. third is, that it wants that
which uses to refreshe, and retains that which is pure torment. For (as
already has been touched it burns, and gives no light; it burns and
consumes not: it burns perpetually, and never diminishes; For it is
preserved by God. Malach. 4.1.
And allbeeit the miserable damned (according to the sayng of the Prophet) are
like unto straw, this fire layng sodainelye hold upon them without any
resistance: yet this straw never cease to burn; and the flame that
proceeds from it, casts out such a smoke, that it blinds, but choketh
not: it tormenteth, but kills not. Then what will it be to see one of the
damned drencht. add over whelmed in a pit of fire, and in an immensitye of
flames, with pitiful gronings, and exclamations, without finding any
refreshing, or hope of ease? O what a terrible evil is sin, seeing that God
being infinitely merciful, beholding one that is his own Creature, redeemed
with the blood of the Lamb, to suffer such horrible Torments, yet has no
compassion of him, nor pulls him out of that fire: nay rather from heaven he
stands looking on him, Isa. 33.14. Colloquie
and reioicing that he suffers according to the statute of his Justice. O my
soul, hear what this our Lord says: Which of you can dvvell with
deuovvring fire? O who shall be able to dvvell in these perpetual ardours?
If thou dare not touch the light fire of this life, why do thou not
tremble at the terrible fire of the other? Contemplate this fire with
attention, that the fear thereof may consume the fire of thy insatiabel
desires, if thourough thy want of fervent Zeal, the fire of gods love be not
sufficient to consume them.

The third Point.
THirdly, discoursing of all the interior faculties of the soul, I am to
consider the pains which they suffer.

First, D. The. in addit. q. 94.
the Imaginatiue shallbee tormented with horride Imaginations, more terrible
then those which the most melancoly suffer in dreams, or then those the
Egiptians did suffer, which (saiethe the Wise Man) were horrible, Sap. 17.4.
and deinceps.
and dreadefull, with most monstrous affrighting visages of wild beasts, and
dragons, and with roarings, and hissings, that wrought in them great terror,
and amazement. Appetites shall be tormented with the furye of their own
Passions, which shall issue out in troops, and with great vehemencye: to
wit, Fears, Heauinesses, Irksomeness, Agonies, Anger; Desperations, Enuyes,
and Rages, with such a cruel war among themselves, that they shall one rent
another in Pieces.

The Intellectual memory shall be tormented with a continual, Understanding
shall be darkened, Will shall be obstinate, and obdurate in his sins: and
in the Hatred of God, of his saints, and of men, without being able to be
appeased, or changed, or to repent what it does; and desiring to do his own
will, he shall never be able to do it in any thing, that may be for his
comfort: Mat. 22.13.
for already they have bound him hand and foot to cast him into that
darkness, not permitting him liberty to exercise the works of light or of
joy. Whereupon a man's own will not being fullfilled, shall be the Hell of
itself, to chastize it for those many times that in this life it was
fullfilled contrary to the will of God.

Finally I will consider that the Heart of one of the damned, is like a most
bitter sea, whereinto enter ten Rivers of most terrible torments. Five for the
five exterior senses. And other five for the five interior faculties; to
chastize the sins they committed against the ten commandments of Gods law,
or against any one of them. For (as the Apostle says) whosoever breaks one,
Jacob. 2.10. Colloquis
shall pass thorough the same kind of torment, which he shall, that breaks
all. Then what greater unhappiness can there be, then that those faculties
which God our lord gave me to enjoy him, and to innoble myself, should be
converted into my cruel executioners to torment, and confound me? Immense
God, aid me to mortify, and subdue the faculties which thou have given me,
and let me be their tormentour in this life, rather then they should be mine
in the life to come.

The fourth Point.
FOurthly, Pana damni. D. Tho. 1.2. q. 87. ar. 4.
I am to consider that pain which they call of loss or Damnation which is
infite, because it depriueth of an infinite good, which is God. So that these
wretches shall for ever be banished from heaven, and deprived of the
blessedness, and end for the which they were created; and of the clear
beholding of God, of the love that makes blessed, and of that River of
delights which proceeds from all: all which shall give them terrible
torment, and heaviness, especially those who in this life believed therein.
For allbeeit that their understanding be obscured to know other things, it
shall not be so to ponder, and esteem this; Gods divine Justice so ordaining
it for their greater torment.

1 The terriblenesse of this pain may be considered two ways: the first is,
by that which holy men feel here, who have the light of heaven to know the
greatenesse of the Glory, and the high felicity that it is, to see God: who
hold it for an extreme pain to want this sight, and tremble only to think
on it, as is noted in the third point of the sixte Meditation. Thesecond way
is, by that which the damned themselves feel by wanting this high felicitye,
not in so much, as it is an honest Good, for they neither love God, nor any
holy thing: But for so much, as they want that which should give them high, and
eternal rest, and free them from so horrible a torment. This I may come to
find out by some likeness of things of this life: For if men have so much
feeling to be deprived of an Inheritance, whereunto they had some right, how
much more shall they feel to be deprived of the eternal inheritance of
heaven, to which they might have had right, if they had not forfeited it
thorough sin? And if the privation of finite, and limited goods, and
delights does so much grieve the heart, how much more will it be grieved
with the privation of an infinite Good, wherein are eminently comprehended all
the goods, and pleasures created? And if among terrible things, death is the
most terrible, because it divides the soul from the body, and from this
visible world: how much more terrible shall eternal death be, wherein the
soul is divided from God, from his kingdom, and from the invisible world?
And as neither eye has seen, nor Ear has heard, 1. Cor. 2.9.
nor has it ascended into the heart of man, what things God has prepared in
Heaven for them that love him: So likewise it is not possible to imagine the
terriblenesse of the evils, that are included in wanting for ever these Goods.
O infinite god, Colloquie
let all the other pains of sense be discharged upon me, so I may be
without sin: rather then thou should chastize me with this pain of
less, depriving me thorough my sin of thy amiable presence.

To this pain is annexed the wanting of the sight, and company of our Savior
Christ, of his most blessed mother, of the nine Quires of angels, and of all
those that are blessed. The which shall inflict much terrible Torment upon
these wretches when in the day of judgment they shall see part of the glory
of this blessed Company, and shall be divided from them, the memory whereof
shall perpetually remain in them with a furious Envy, and rage. Finally by
the terrible evils which they suffer, they shall collect what most excellent
Goods they want; because they conjecture that God will be as liberal in
rewarding, as he is terrible in chastizing: and that, in that most beautiful
place of heaven he has as many Delectations, as there are torments in that
most wretched place of hell: of which great goods to see themselves deprived,
will exceedingly augment their evils. With these considerations, I will cast
deep root in the affections of the fear of God, and detestation of my
sins, accompanying them with a great confidence in Gods mercy, that he
will deliver me from this extreme misery, and so will I beg it of our Lord,
saing unto him: I confess, o my god, Isa. 26.10.
that I am that miserable sinner, who in the land of the saints committed
innumerable sins; for the which I deserve not to see thy glory: nor to be
admitted into the company of those that enjoy it. I am sorrye for those
sins by which I have merited so great punishment. Pardon them, o Lord,
thorough thy mercy, that the work of thy Hands, be not destroyed, nor
want that end for which it was created. Let not me help to people Hell,
nor to be fevvell for that never ending fire: Psalm. 6.6.
suffer me not to fall into an estate, wherein I thould curse, and abhor
thee: For in hell who shall praise thee? No, no o Lord it must not be so,
for I must for ever love, and bless thee, and after this life thou must place
me in the other, where I may love, and praise thee world without end.
Amen.

Here follow other Meditations, and forms of Prayer to obtain puritye of
soul, and perfect Mortification of her vices, and Passions.
TO obtain perfect Purity of soul, which is the perpetual end of the
Purgative way, there are ordained certain forms of Prayer, prescribed in the
ninth:. of the introduction of this book: of which, the first contains for
matter of Meditation the Seven capital, or Principal Vices, commonly called
the Seven deadely sins: And the Ten commandments of the law of god: And
the Three faculties, and Five senses of Man. And it is very profitable to know
more particularly, the multitude, and greatenesse of our sins: and to learn
how to examine the conscience, as well for sacramental Confession, as for the
quotidian examination, which is every night to be made. And finally it aydeth
much to diue deep into the knowledge of our selves, to discover the roots of
our sins, and to apply unto them the remedies thereof.

In this first place I will set down the meditations of the Seven deadely
sins: D. Th. 1.2. q. 84. ar. 4. Apocal. 12.3.
For in them as in seven heads the other sins are virtually included, and
for this cause our principal battle must be against them; for whosoever
perfectly vanquisheth them, vanquisheth the Dragon with the seven heads,
which makes war upon the saints, and destroys the seven nations of
Enemies which hinder the entrance into the land of promise, Deuter. 7.1. Ite^
Collat. 5. cap. 16.
not terrenne, but celestial, as Cassianus largely prosecuteth it in those
books which he wrotte of this matter. From whence it proceeds that the
principal end of these Meditations must not be only to know the malice,
and deformity of these vices, and to abhor it; but to lay presently hands
to the work, and to mortify those disordinate Passions, and Affections, Reg.
7 ex fusis.
that have taken deep root in our heart (for as S. Basile says) Vices are
not vanquished, nor virtues gained with bare considerations, but with strong
exercises of mortification; for the which Meditation, and prayer is a help,
moving our will to be willing to be mortified, and obtaining of our lord,
forces to that end. And allbeit it is truth, that all mortal sins are
taken away together and at an instant by contrition, and confession, wherein
one mortal sin is not pardoned without another: yet vicious customs that
remain in the soul, and passions of the apetite upon which they are founded,
are to be mortified by parcells, and by little, and little; for the which Moses
said to his People, speaking of the seven nations above mentioned. Deuter. 7.22.
Ipso consumet nationes has in conspectu tuo paulatim, at que per parts, non
poteris eas delere pariter: He will consume these nations by little, and little,
and by parts: thou can not destroy them all together: The divine Providence
so ordaining it for our exercize, and humilliation; because the war
continuing longer, the victory shall be more secure, and more proffitable.
For this cause we will make a special meditation of every one of these vices,
teaching the manner how to make war upon them by their contrary acts. To
which end we shall ponder in every one three things. First in what manner a
man may sin in every vice, setting down not only great, but also light
sins, that those which are desirous of perfection, may know more often what
things they are to mortify. The Second shall be, the loss which follows
such a vice, and the temporal punishements, wherewith God uses to chastize
it, and the eternal which in the other life are especially correspondent unto
it. The third shallbee the great favors, and rewards which they enjoy, that
valourously do mortify it, and embrace the contrary virtue, declaring some
acts, and excellencies thereof, that fear, and love may animate us to
mortification.

The Eightenth Meditation of pride and Vaine-glorye.
The first Point.
FIrst, D. Tho. 2.2. q. 162.
I am to consider what Pride is, and in what manner a man may sin therein,
pondering how contrary it is to all reason, how injurious to God, how
priudiciall to our Neighbor, and how hurtful to virtue: for all this is
discovered in every one, Cassian. l. 12. c. 2. and collat. 5. c. 12.
as the fathers have noted it. Pride is a disordinate appetite of excellency:
and it is in two manners. The one is carnal, and worldely, which places its
excellencye in corporal goods, as wealth, Parentage, beautye, honnorable
office, etc. The other pride is spiritual, which fatteneth it self in the
spiritual goods of sciences, and virtues: And this has four acts. The First
is, D. Greg. lib 34. moral. c. 18. D. Greg. 25. moral cap. 7. Psalm. 11.5. Isa.
10.13.
to attribute to himself that which is Gods, as if it were his own, due to
his nature, or acquired by his own Industry, without acknowledging God for
the author thereof. The Second is, that although he thinks that it is from
God, what he has, yet to atribute to his own merits that, which is of pure
grace. The Third is, to think of himself that he has much more good, then
in truth he has; as well in virtue, as in learning, and other natural, or
acquired gifts, and to flatter himself with them. The fourth is, to think,
that he is singular, and excellent above all, in those good paites which he
has; or to desire-vainely to be so, that all may yield, and subject
themselves unto him.

From pride spring many other vices with sundry acts of sins, the which, D.
Tho. 2.2. q. 132.
like the seven heads of this infernal dragon, we may reduce unto seven: The
first is her eldest daughter, Vain glorio: which is disordinate appetite to
be known, esteemed, and praised of men, whose actesare, to boaste himself of
what he has, as if he had not received it from God: to boaste of what in
truth he has not; or of a thing unworthy of Glory, for being wicked, and
most base: to desire vainly to delight men, saying, or doing things that they
may praise him: to rejoice vainly when he is praised, delighting to hear his
own praises, though they be false flatteries. D. Basil. de co^stit. monast.
c. 11. and orat. 17. D. Th. 2.2. q. 112.
This vain glory is most abominable in matter of virtues; for it is a sweet
poison, and a secret thief that robs, and destroys them.

The Second vice is Boasting, whose acts are to praise himself, telling of
those good parts that he has not, or superfluously exaggerating, and
blasoning those that he has: or discovering without any necessitye those
which he should cover. Hiere. 48 2.2. q. 131.
The Third is Ambition, disordinately coveting honors, and dignityes, whose
disorder, consists in coveting those which he deserves not, or in procuring
them by evil means, or with overmuch affection, having no other end but
worldly honor. The fourth is Presumption, presuming great matters of
himself, more then he is able to perform, and thorough his vanity casting
himself inconsiderately into them. The fifth is Hypocrisye, faining that
virtue, and good Intention that he has not, to be accounted a holy man, and
doing good works to this end with a dissembled Goodness. The sixth is
Stubbornness in his own judgment, preferring it before the judgment of
others, yea although they be his superiors, in matters wherein it were good
for him to subject himself to the opinion of others, not to be beguiled. The
seventh is, Contempt of others, making small account of them; First of his
inferiors, then of his equals, and afterward of his superiors, until he
come to despise God himself. For pride, (as David says) is allwaies
increasing, Psalm. 73.23.
and these budde out of it other innumerable sins, Discordes, disobediences,
maledictions, and blasphemies.

As I am meditating these vices, I must consider what sins I have committed
in every one of them making of them an humble confession in the presence of
God, Colloquie
sayng unto him: I accuse myself, o my God, that I am full of pride, that
whatsoever I do is vain glory, my words smell of boasting: and my
actions, and desires are poisoned with ambition. O that I had never fallen
into such sins, pardon me, o Lord, and deliver me from them. I will also
reprehend myself, with these reprehentions which are frequent in holy
scripture, 1. Cor. 4.7.
saying to myself. O vile silly man, what have thou that thou have not
received? And if thou have received, why do thou glory, as if it were
thine own? Art thou now full? Art thou now rich? Would thou reign
alone, as if thou had no need of others? If thou think so, behold God
will say unto thee, as he said to another as proud, Apo^al. 3.17.
thou art blind, poor, naked, and miserable. Blind because thou know
not thyselfe: Poor of virtues: naked of good works: and miserable with
grievous sins. Why art thou provvde, dust and ashes? Eccles. 10.9. Eccles.
25.3.
Why art thou puffed up vile worm? Fly, fly from pride: for being poor
and provvde, thou shall be abhorred by God.

The Second Point.
SEcondly, I am to consider the terrible punishements that God has inflicted,
Pro. 16.5.18.19. and 18.12. Mat. 23.12. Luc. 14.11. and 18 14.
and does inflict upon some proud men in this life, and what he will inflict
upon all of them in the other. These chastizements are pointed at in that
sentence so frequent in scripture, He that exalts himself shallbee humbled.
Wherein are included three terrible chastizements of the proud: to wit, to
deprive them of the excellencye they have: to deny them what they desire: and
in steed thereof to give them baseness and confusion which they fear; which
is verified in many sorts, and may be pondered by diverse examples that have
happened. Isa. 14.12.
The angels thorough pride lost the excellencies of grace, and obtained not
their preheminences in the seats of glory. but were cast from the empireall
Heaven, to the abisme of hell. With this example I am to terrify myself, as
Christ our Lord terrified his Apostles, when they boasted that the devils
obeyed them, saying unto them, Luc. 10.18.
I savve Satan as a lightning fall from Heaven. As who should say; So shall
you fall, if you be proud: For pride of angels makes devils: and will make
devils of apostles. I^a^. 6.71
Thorough the like chastizements passed Adam, Nabuchodnosor, Cyrus, Herod, and
others that desired to be as God, Ge^. 3.17 Dan. 4.28. Ezech. 28.6. Actuum.
12.23. Ex. D. Ber. ser. 54. in Cant. and D. Greg. lib. 11. moral. cap. 8. Orat.
17. de humil. and vana gloria. Actuum. 5.5.
and gave him not the glory that is due unto him.

2 From hence I will ascend to ponder, that the greatest chastizement that God
in this life inflicteth upon one sin, is, for that cause to permit many
others, and to take from them the special favors of his Grace, which should
preserve them from them. And in this manner he chastizeth pride, which is the
cause of those interior drinesses discomforts, and abandonings that happen
unto us; and thorough it God permits grievous fallings into luxuries, and
infidelites. Ananias and Saphira (as S. Basile says) for vain glory sold
their goods, to be accounted for perfect, and for this, God permitted them to
retain half the price, for the which they died suddenly, loosing with their
life the honor they desired: which struck a great fear into all the
church, and should strike a fear into me, because the punishment of a few,
should be a warning for many. And if I be proud, I shallbee peradventure
one of these few punished, unless I amend.

3 Then will I ponder how at the least, I cannot escape from the terrible
chastizements of the other life, where all the proud shall suffer special
confusion, with terrible shame to see themselves so contemned. And those which
here pretended the highest place, shall there have the lowest, at the feet of
Lucifer the king of the proud: yea, and the Devils themselves shall scoff at
him, using for a mock that of the prophet Isaias: Isai. 14.10.
Et tu vulneratus es sicut and nos, nostri similis effectus es detracta est ad
inferos superbia tua, Thou also art vvounded even as we, thou art made like
unto us in punishment, as thou have been in sin; Thy pride is drawn
down to hell, and to the deepest lakes thereof. Then what greater madness
can there be, then to seek with pride that excellencye whose end is eternal
confusion? Mat. 7.3 D. Bern. in Apologia ad Guilielmum Ab batem.
And what greater folly then for a glory which passes like the wind, to
oblige me to an ignominye that shall never have end? O pride! what a great
beam art thou in the eye foolishly blinding it, that it cannot see its own
Hurt? O humble JESUS take from my eyes this great beam, that I fall not by
reason of it, into these so exceeding great Losses.

The third Point.
1. THe third point is to consider the great good that I shall get, if I
mortify pride, and embrace humility, especially for the end that I do
pretend, which is to purify my soul. These benefits are comprehended in our
savior Christ's promise, when he said, Mat. 23.12. Luc. 14.11. and 1^ 14.
He that humbles himself shallbee exalted, wherein he sets down three
great benefits which he does to those, that truly humble themselves; freeing
them from the miseries whereinto they have fallen: Preserving in them the
graces, and excellencies that they have received and exalting them a new to
others that are greater: so that those which humble themselves with a contrite
heart for having sinned, are exalted by Christ in the very same, wherein they
humble themselves: for he pardons them their sins; puts from them the
punishements they deserved: gives them his grace, and charity: exalts them
to the dignity of the sons of God: hears their prayers, and fills them
with great gifts. Jacob. 4.6. 3. Reg. 21.29. Luc. 18.10.
For God resists the provvde, and gives grace to the humble. King Achab
because he humbled himself before God, was delivered from the chastizement
that was menaced unto him. The Publican was justified for his humility, the
Pharisee being reproved for his Pride.

In like manner the just humbling themselves are exalted by God in justice
itself, augmenting unto them sanctitye, and the gifts of grace, and the
honor and glory which thereby they do meritte. And hereupon says the
wise man, Eccles. 3.20. Luc 1.48.
The greater thou art humble thy self in all things, and thou shallt find
grace before God, as our blessed lady the virgin did, and was exalted to be
the mother of God: and the son of God himself became man to destroy pride,
and to give example of humility; and because he humbled himself more then
all men, Ad Phil. 2.9. Colloquie
he was exalted above all the heavens. Therefore, o my soul, fly from Pride,
if it be but to avoid thy Hurt; and embrace Humilitye though it be but for
thine own proffit. For it is a general law from the which thou shallt not
be excepted, that whosoever is provvde shallbee humbled, and that vvhoseuer
humbles himself shall be exalted. Comply thou with that which belongs to
thee, humbling thy self for thy sins, and God will perform what belongs
to him, exalting thee with his gif^es.

Lastely, I will examine what degree of pride prcdominateth in my heart, and
which of those vices above mentioned holds it in subjection, and that I will
manfully endeavor to mortify, exercizing the contrary acts, taking away the
occasions of stumbling, and applying that particular examination which
hereafter we shall set down: beginning by mortification, and humiliation in
exterior things, which is the most easy: for (as glorious S. Sermon. 2. in
quadragesima.
Bernard says) Nihil facilius est volenti, quam humiliare semetipsum, there
is nothing more facile to him that has a will, then to humble himself: for if
I would make myself great, many will contradict me: but if I will humble
myself, there will be none to contradict me, Bernar. epist. 78.
and humbling myself I shall come to be humble. For humiliation is the only
means to estrange me from pride, and to obtain the virtue of humility.

The ninetenth Meditation upon the vice of Gluttonye; and the virtue of
Temperance:
The first Point.
GLoutonye is a disordinate appetite of eating, D. T^^. 2.2. q. 148.
and drinking, and herein we may sin five manner of ways: First, in eating
meats prohibited by the church, or by breaking of fastes, either those which
I am obliged to observe by a special vow: or by the obligation of a regular
estate. Secondly, taking meat, or drink, D. Greg. lib. 30. moral. cap. 26.
in over great danger of my corporal health, or of my spiritual, which is
hereby hindered; or in drinking until I loose, or trouble my Judgment.
Thirdly, procuring meats, and drinks of such quallitye, as are much more
delicate, and precious, then my person, and state requires, only for
pampering, and sensuallitye. Fourthly, eating oftener then is convenient, out
of season, and upon an occasion that may do me harm, or in a place not
convenient, or contrary to the prohibition, and rule of my religion. Fifthly,
in eating with over great affection, sauouring what I eat only for pleasure,
and after an immodest, and hastye fashion, wholely overwhelmed in what I am
doing with thoughts, and words of sensuallitye.

Upon these five acts, I am to examine myself, and to accuse myself before
God, bewailing my imbecillities, and sayng: vvoe to me, Colloquie
that do always in a manner sin, even in eating, and drinking, serving
rather my own sensuallitye, then my necessitye: and seeking rather the
delight of my flesh, then the conservation of my life; so that when I pay
that debt to my body, I pay the tribute of sin to the devil. Have
compassion, o God, of my Weakness and succor me with thy grace that
Gluttonye may not dragge me after her. With this Understanding, I am to make
great Resolutions to mortifye this Vice, D. Basil lib. de vera virgi.
observing the Rules of Temperance in the five things above mentioned, to
wit, in the Precept, Quantitye, Quallitye, Time, and Manner, endeavoring to
take of meat, and drink a competent Quantitye flying the two extremes that
it be neither so much as to ouerlod me, D. Bern. sem. 30. in ca^tica and ad
fratres de monte Dei. Eccles. 37.33.
nor so little, as not to sustain me. And in the Quallitie, contenting my
self with ordinary meats, rather gross then delicate, avoiding all
Singularitye if it be not in a case of manifest necessitye. But in the manner.
I am to endeavor that which the holy Ghost instructs. Not to suffer myself
to be dragged by my Appetite; so that when the Body is eating, the Spirit
be eaten, and swallowed with the meat: But rather with an Imperious Heart to
give some food to the Spirit, that may moderate the covetous Desirs of the
Flesh. The considerations of the Points here ensuing shall much help to
move me hereunto.

The second Point.
SEcondly; I am to consider the Punishements of this Vice reducing them to
three Ranks. Some that proceed from Gluttonye it self, like an evil Tree.
Others that God our Lord has added, and does add in this life to discover how
unpleasing this Vice is unto him. And others that he has reserved for the
other life. First Gluttony is a chastizement of it self, and pays in ready
money with pain the delight of the sin: for it over charge the Body,
takes away Health, shortneh the life, and Hasteneth Death. Item. it
afflicts the Spirit, dulleth the Understanding, Luc. 21.34.
disableth for prayer, and conversation with God, and makes Incapable of
spiritual comfortes, for that it suffers itself to be fiilled with carnal
pleasures: and it cowardizeth the heart for great matters in gods service,
Cassian. lib. 5. ca. 13. and 20 and collation 5.
because he that is subjected to this enemy that is the weakest, has no
courage to combatte against others that are more strong.

Besides this for Gluttonye God has inflicted terrible punishements. For the
eating of an apple against the precept of God, Adam and Eua, Genes. 3.17.
lost their estate of innocencye, and were cast out of paradise. The Israelites
that disordinately desired to eat fles. he in the deserte, Psalm. 77.30. Number.
11.33. Exodus 32.6. and 27.
while they had (saiethe David) the morsel in their mouth, the wrath of God
came upon them, and the place of their fulness was called the sepulcher of
their gluttonye; Another time the same Israelites from eating, and drinking
rose up to idolatrye, gods justice permitting, that those should adore a calfe,
that took their belly for their God. For the which thirty three thousand of
them were put to the sword. And that which is most admirable, a holy Prophet,
3. Reg. 13.24.
for eating in a place that God had prohibited him, was slain by a Lion: and
nothing might excuse him, neither the miracles that he had done, nor the
obedience that he first had, nor the necessitye that he suffered, nor that
he had been beguiled by another that seemed of the same profession.

Finally, in the other life, D. Basil. sermon de abdicatione rerum. Luc 16.24.
the gluttons shall suffer particular torment in their tongue, as the Covetous
rich man who fared very delicately, came in Hell to suffer such thirst, that
he begged to be refreshed by Lazarus with the tippe of his finger only
dipped in water, and it would not be granted him. So that all there, shall
suffer dogs hunger, raging thirst, pangs, and bitternesses of eternal galls
according to the sentence pronunced against Babylon; As much as she has
glorified her self, and has been in delicacies, Apocal. 18.7. Colloquie
so much give her torment, and mourning. Then what do thou, o my soul?
why do thou not bewail thy Gluttonyes? why do thou not amend thee of
them? Behold that temporal fulness, and drunkenness shall be chastized
with eternal hunger, and thirst. And if like Esau for a vile dishe of meat
thou sellest the inheritance of heaven, Genes. 25.33. Ad Heb. 12.17.
thou shallt peradventure have no time to recover it. Consider how many have
been chastized for this vice, and beevvare by other men's harms, least torment
light upon thee for thine own.

The third Point.
Thirdly, Of Temperance and Fasting.
I am to consider the great Benefits, and Rewards that I shall receive of God,
if I mortify Gluttonye, and perfectly embrace Temperance and fasting, reducing
them to other three ranks, opposite to the three punishments of Gluttony.
Some are proper to them selves, like good fruits of a good tree: others our
Lord adds, to show how much this virtue does please him: others are rewards
of heaven wherewith he rewards it. For first abstinence pays in ready
money the pain which it has in the beginning: for it eases the body, it
preserves from infirmities, it conserueth the health, it inlargeth the life,
it recreateth the soul, it ableth it for prayer and for receiving celestial
comforts, it takes away the Arms of his enemy the flesh, and subiecteth it
to the spirit, to encourage it to undertake glorious enterprises in the service
of God.

Besides this, Bern. ad fratres de monte Dei.
God being so liberal, and compassionate as he is, consents not that we
should live void of some pleasures. And therefore those who abstain from
bodily food, he recreateth with the food of the soul; and for sensual
Consolations, he gives them spiritual. So that they loose no consolation,
but better it, transporting it from the flesh to the spirit. To these he
communicates celestial illuminations, like as to Daniel: and gives them
notable victories, like as to his three companions against Nabuchodonosor: and
exalts them to very high contemplation, as he did Moses; and Helias, Mat.
17.3.
giving them part of his glorious Transfiguration in reward of their fasting
and mortification.

3 Finally God rewards them in heaven with a spiritual fullness, seating
them with Christ at his table, that they may eat and drink in his kingdom
of that food which God himself eats. Therefore o my soul, if thou desire
to attain to great sanctitye upon earth, and to obtain great rewards in
heaven, begin with temperance and fasting: for the which God represseth vices,
Ecclesia in praefat quadragesimae. Ad Gal. 5.24.
exalts the spirit, grants virtues, and crowns with, Rewards. O svveete
JESUS, seeing all that are of thy party ought to crucify the flesh with the
vices, and desires thereof, grant me that I may mortify mine, as thou did
mortyfy thine. By that thirst which thou suffredst on the Cross, and by the
Gall and vinegar which they gave thee to drink, grant me, I beseech thee a
temperance so perfect, that in eating, and drincking I may satisfy my
necessity, and not serve my delight: and a fasting so strict, that like the
Ninevites I may appease thy wrath, Ionae 2.10. and 3.11.
satisfy for my sins, terrify the devils, give joy to the Angels, and
be made partaker of thy gifts, world without end Amen.

The xx. Meditation upon the vice of Luxury, and the virtue of Chastity.
The first Point.
LVxurie is a disordinate appetite of sensual pleasures, D. Th. 2.2. q. 153.
contrary to the order that God has appointed therein. In this vice we may
sin, first, by thought, consenting with the will to commit this sin, or
taking pleasure to think upon dishonest things, with that delectation called
by the schoolmen Morosa, detaining our selves voluntarily in this delight, or
weakly resisting it, or not remoouing the occasion from whence it arises.

2 Secondly we may sin by word, speaking filthy things; by the ear,
delighting to hear them, or to hear music, and dishonest songs: by the eye,
beholding things that provoke to dishonestye, or seeing such like
representations, or reading books that treat of such things: by the smell,
and taste, smelling, or eating, and drinking things that provoke to Luxury,
having in all, this sensual delight for the end.

3 Thirdly, we sin by the act committed many ways. If by ones self alone,
it is pollution: if with a single woman, it is fornication: if with a married
woman, adultery: if with a virgin, deflowring: If with a kinswoma^, Incest: if
with a religious woman, or contrary to the vow of chastity, it is
sacrilege: if with one of the same sex, it is sodomye: if with a beast,
beastly brutishness: Touching by ones self, or by others for the same end of
delight, are reduced to the sin of the act consummated. In this point we
are not in prayer to make much pause, reckoning the particular circumstances of
these sins, least they should be an occasion of new Temptations, and
therefore they are rather to be beewailed, then thought upon, saying: Colloquie
Wretch that I am, my life is so bestiall, and filthye that I am ashamed to
consider it, and afraid to look back on it, least I should a new be
infected with the evil odor thereof. Look, on it, o my God with thy eyes of
mercy, that from my eyes may issue fountains of Tears, wherewith I may
purify myself from so great uncleanness.

The second Point.
1. SEcondly, I will consider three other fortes of Punishments correspondent
to luxury, as before we have said of gluttony; but much greater, for that it
is a greater sin. The first punishment is, innumerable miseries which this
vice draws with it; our Lord permitting that the Angel of fathan, who with
the prick of the flesh overthrows sinners, should likewise give them cruel
buffets, tormenting their bodies with a thousand Crosses, 2. Cor. 12.7.
with painful, loathsome, and shameful diseases, with infamies, and a
thousand other Torments, until they have consumed their wealth, their
health, their content, and their life. And as S. 1. Cor. 5.5.
Paul delivered over to satan an incestious christian to be bodily tormented,
so whosoever gives himself over to this vice, delivers both his body and
soul to this cruel Tormentour, Pro. 23.32.
who though be begin with pleasure, yet finally he stingeth like an adder,
and like a basiliske disperseth his poison.

2. Besides this, God to show the hatred he bears to this Vice, Genes. 6.12
and 19. and 24.
has inflicted upon it terrible chastizements: for this vice principally, came
the deluge that drowned the world: and the fire that burned Sodom, and the
great slaughter that Moses made of his Israelites, putting in one day 24.
thousand to the sword. And when as Phinees full of great zeal publicly
slew a public Fornicatour, God was so much pleased with this chastiseme^t,
that he forth with ceased the slaughter. For the finne of pollutio^ God killed
a gra^dchild of the partriarch Jacob: and the sons of Hels the high priest,
Genes. 38.7. 1. Reg. 2.22. and 4.17. Iudic. 16 21. 2. Reg. 12 3. Reg. 11 11. D.
Hier. in regu. monas. c. de castit.
for their carnallities died desastrously. It is at well known how dear it
cost Sampson his sinning with Dalida: and David his adultery with Bethsabee:
and Solomon his ouergreate affection to strange women. Then if such men were
vanquished by Luxury, and suffered for that cause so terrible punishments, how
is it that thou flyest not from it? Art thou peradventure more strong then
Sampson, or more wise then Solomon, or more holy then David, or more
privileged then they, that thou should not fall as they fell, nor be
chastized as they were?

3. But in hell the luxurious shall suffer excessive torments, the fire of hell
with special torment burning those parts of the body, which were the
instruments of sin. The imagination which was delighted in thinking upon
these carnallities, shall suffer horrid representations: and the five senses
which were five fountains of delight, shall be five pooles of incredible
torment. Finally from head to foot, they shall be drenched in the lake of
fire and brimstone, because during their life they yealded to the odours, and
blandissements of the flesh. Colloquie
O my soul to eschew the flames of this eternal fire, consider well the
flames of hell fire. As one nail drives out another: so the fear of the one
fire shall expel out of thee, the love of the other. From hence am I to draw
so firm a resolution to fly this vice (which is not vanquished but by flying)
that I may fly also to take in my mouth the name thereof, 1. Corin. 6.18. Ad
Ephe. 5.3.
acording to that of S. Paul to the Ephesians, speaking of vnclea^nesse, and
fornication. Nec nominetur in vobis. Let it not so much as be named among you,
least the name bring to your remembrance, the thing that is signified. And for
that there are two ways to vanquish this vice, one by contenting himself with
the lauful delights of matrimony. The other much more perfect, abstaining
also from them: the point that ensues shall be principally touching this
second way.

The third Point.
THirdly, Ex D. Bonaue^t. in dieta salutis tit. 4. c. 4
we are to consider six acts comprehended in the perfect mortification of
luxury, and in the sovereign virtue of chastity, when it has attained to
its due perfection: and other six favors, and rewards that God grants for
them. By reason of which, chastity in scripture is compared to the lilly,
which has six very white, and soft leaves, within the which are six little
sprigs, with their little buttons gilded, and kindled like fire, signifiyng by
the leaves these six acts, or degrees of purity; and by the sprigs, the six
favors, all founded upon the gold, and fire of charity, with the which this
virtue is made most amiable, and the mortification most sweet: and to this
end we are to ponder them.

Acts of perfect chastity.
THe first act of chastity is, to keep purity in the eye, and ear; locking
up the doors of these senses, that nothing may enter thereby to awake any evil
thought, or filthy imagination. In such sort that my eye must be chaste, and
my ear chaste, preserving chaste these senses, Job. 3. c. 1 Ex D. Basil. lib.
de vera virginit.
that they may be the gardians of chastity. The Second act is, purity in
things delectable to the senses of smelling, tasting, and touching, seperating
myself with great rigor from all those sweet, and pleasant things that are
any impediment to chastity, laboring to be chaste in my meat, and drink:
in my appare II, and bed: and chaste in all my touchings, flying (as from fire)
all things that are otherwise. The third act is, purity, 1. Pet. 3.2.
in words, speech and conversation; in looks, laughters, and gestures of the
body: and in the exterior garce and fashion, observing in all this such
chastity, that christian honestye and decencye may be resplendent in all,
cutting of what soever shallbee contrary thereunto. The fourth act is, purity
in friendship, and in loving, and familiar commerce or conversation with the
creatures, carefully avoiding any over great familiarity with any one, that
may be any occasion of blemishing chastity, neither giving, nor receiving any
presents, or gifts, that may be shares, or stumbling blocks to fail in this
virtue. The fiste act is, purity in seperating ourselves from all occasions,
as well exterior, as interior, which provoke to any thing that may
dissillustrate, or ouerthowe chastity. And therefore he that is perfectly
chaste, flies secret pride, by the which, God permits man to fall into
manifest Luxurye. He flies wrath, for that it inflameth the blood, D. Greg.
lib. 11. moral. cap. 8. Eccles. 3.27.
and alters the flesh. He flies idleness, because it opens the gate to
fleshly lust. And finally he flies all places, and persons by whose company
he may indaunger his chastity: For he that loves danger, shall perish
therein. The sixth, and last degree of chastitye is, puritye in all the
cogitations of the heart, and in the motions, and alterations of the flesh,
keeping it low, and subjected to reason, not only, in waking, but as much as
in us lies, Ex Cassian. collat. 12. cap. 8.
even in our sleeps, endeavoring to give no occasion, that the devil should
therein delude us with filthy representations, or alterations. And these are
the six pure white leaves of this celestial lillye, which allthough it grows
among the thorns of many temptations, and tribulations which the continent man
suffers, Ca^t. 2.2. Cassian. cit. c. 11. D. Tho. 2.2. q. 155.
before he come to be perfectly chaste: yet if I trust in Gods omnipotency,
and mercy I may obtain it: wherein I shall be furthered by a profounde
Consideration of the six favors, and rewards, of which we shall presently
discourse.

The favors, and rewards of perfect chastitye.
THe first favor that God our Lord will do me, if with a generous mind I
resolve to fight against the rebellions of the flesh, and to embrace perfect
chastity, is, to send angels to assist, and aid me in this war, that I
may overcome, and get the victory: For the purer a man is, Lib. 1. de
virginibus ad sororem. Quo sa^ctior quisque, eo munitior. Daniel 3.49.
(says S. Ambrose) the more he is guarded, and encompassed with Angels, who
delight to converse with virgins, and chaste men, because of the likeness that
is between them. And as when the three chaste young men were in the fiery
furnace of Babylon, an Angel descended among them, which divided the flame,
and with a humide wind, refreshed the furnace: so unto those that are in the
midst of the furnace of sensual temptations, with a purpose to give no
consent unto them, Angels favorably repair unto them, to the end that these
flames do not burn them, nor touch them in the superior part of their
soul: and with wind, and deawe of heaven, they quench the heat of the
flesh, provoking them to glorify God, for the victory he has given them
against it. And therefore when I shall see myself forced with these
temptations, Colloquie
I am to call unto them, saying: O ye glorious Angels, gardians of virgins,
protectors of the chaste; Friends and companions of men that are pure, come
ye, and favor me, that the fire that circlith me, may not burn me:
Disperse the flame that burns within my flesh, that it may neither touch,
nor damnifie my spirit: and negotiate for me the gentle vvinde of Gods spirit,
that it may cool, and refreshe the ardours of my flesh.

2. D. Basil. in lib. de vera virginit.
The second favor is, that God himself with a particular protection,
assisteth to guard such as are chaste, who by their purity not only make
themselves like unto angels, but even to the Lord of the angels himself, the
fountain of all purity, who is delighted to converse familiary with the
chaste, and to admit them to his freindship. O eternal God that feedest
among the lillies, Colloquie Ca^t. 2.2. D. Greg. ibi. and D. Hier. epist. ad
Demetriadem. Ex Cassian. collat. 12. cap. 8. and lib. 6. cap. 9. Daniel. 13.23.
Oseae. 2.19.
for it is thy food, and thy pleasure to converse with chaste souls, indue
mine with chastity, that thou may daigne to inhabit it, and to converse
with it.

From these two favors, I am to collect a most effectual means tovanquishe
temptations, when on a sudden, and alone they assail me, by lifting up
presently the eyes of my soul unto the Angel which is present: but much more
to the presence of God himself, shaming to do before them, what I would not
do before men: and with this consideration, I shall answer the temptation
like as chaste Susanna did the dishoneste old men that solicited her, I will
rather die then sin in the presence of my God.

3 The third favor is, for the carnal marriage that I renounce, to admit me
to a spiritual, espousing himself spiritually with my soul, with the
espousal of faith, mercy, and charity, and communicating unto me such
sovereign delights of the spirit, as I shall forget those of the flesh,
fullfilling herein his word which he gave, Mat. 19. Ita Cassian. collat. 12.
c. 12. and 13
when he said: That whosoever should leave a wife for his love, renouncing
that faculty that he had to be married, he would give him an hundred fold
in this life, that is, a delight so great, that should a hundred fold exceed
the delight he should have in marriage: for so excellent is the sweetness of
chastitye, Colloquia
that it is impossible to know it but by proouing it. O spouse of chaste
souls, grant me such virtue that thereby mine may be thy spouse. O my soul,
seeing thou art such a lover of delights renounce liberally the vile delights
of the flesh, that thou may enjoy the most svveete delights of the spirit.

4 The fourth favor is, for those carnal children which I might have had, to
give me abundance of spiritual children incomparably better, filling me with
good works, with rich merits, and with many souls gained to Christ by my
example, and word, of which I may be the spiritual father, and mother, Isai.
56.3 Non dicat Eunuchus etc.
fullfilling that which he promised by his prophet, when he said: Let not
the eunuche say, behold, I am a dry tree; for I will give him in my house, and
within the walls of my church a place, and a name much more excellent then
those that have children, a sempiternall name that never shall perish.

O happy chaste man to whom God grants the sovereign dignity both of a
son, and of a father: of a son by the singular grace of adoption: and of a
father in spirit by the copious fruits of Benedictio^.

5 The fifth favor, comprehends many very singular graces, and privileges,
which he grants them in testimony of the great love he bears to
chastity: for as the chaste eleuate themselves above the ordinary laws of
nature, living in flesh, as if they had no flesh: so God will sometimes exalt
them a boue the ordinary laws of grace, in honor of their chastity. The
virgin our Blessed Lady, thorough the rare vow she made of virginity, was
exalted to the dignity of the mother of God himself. The evangelist Saint
John, for his puritye, was much beloved by our Savior Christ, from whom he
received extraordinary favors in the supper, and on the cross, and great
revelations: in the which also for this cause were very famous Elias, Eliseus,
Daniel, and other sons of the Prophets: and the fire of Babylon touched not
the three children, because they had vanquished the fire of Luxurye.

6 The Last favor is, Apocal. 14.4.
that singular privilege to follow the lamb in glory where ever he goes:
for whosoever imitateth him in this life, embracing his virginity, D. Aug.
lib. de vera vir ginit. c. 27. D. Hier. lib. de laud virginit.
and purity, he shall also imitate him in the other, participating of his
most excellent glory, united to his sweet company with particular joy. O
most pure immaculate lamb, grant me that I may follow thy puritye both in
body, and spirit, that in issuing out of this strait prison of the world, I
may with thee in thy spacious Heaven dilate myself, and rejoice. Amen.

With the consideration of these six favors, I am to arm myself, to resist
those combats which shall happen to me against chastitye: saying as chaste
Joseph said to the woman that solicited him: God having done me so many
benefits, Genes. 39.9.
and promising me such favors, if I live chaste: Quomodo possum hoc malum
facere, and peccare in Deum meum? How can I commit this evil, and sin
against my God? Colloquie
O Lord of heaven, and of earth, I will leave, not only my cloak like
Joseph, but my honor, wealth, and life rather then offend thee. For thou
made Joseph for his chastitye, and loyalty, vice-king of Egypt, but me for
mine, thou vvilt make a king in thy heaven.

The xxj. Meditation, of Avarice.
The first Point.
AVarice is a disordinate desire of riches, and temporal Goods, wherein we may
many ways sin. First, in desiring to take that which is another man's,
contrary to the tenth commandment of the law of God: or taking it in deed,
or retaining it contrary to the seventh which is not to steal. Secondly, with
nigardise abusing that which is our own, not shating it; when the law of
justice, or of charity, and mercy obliges us, with the needye, but being
harde-hearted against them. Thirdly, in in seeking after these goods with over
great Care, setting our whole heart upon them, treading under foot for this
cause the commandments of God, and of his Church, and the obligations of our
estate: from whence spring many sins that are the Daughters of avarice: to
wit: lies, frauds, periuries, violences, tirannies, cruelties, suits,
discordes, and innumerable others. 1. Ad Timoth. 6.10.
Whereupon the Apostle said, that covetousness is the root of all evil.
Fourthly, whosoever has made a vow of pouertye, sins against it in
usurping to himself (without license of his superior,) what is given him by
others, or in alienating what is given him, or in hiding it: or in using what
he has to a prohibited use, or after a proprietary manner, that is, with an
affection so disordinate, as if it were his own, being sad, or complaining
when they by just title deprive him of it. Fifthly, we may sin, doing good
works principally for temporal interest, or for only omitting works
obligatorye, treading under foot the rules of our estates, and office.

This examination being made, I will consider whither I have any thing that
may be an Idol for my avarice to adore: seeing ( S. Ad Ephe. 5.5. Ad Coloss.
3.5.
Paul says) avarice is the service, and adoration of idols. And if I shall
find any such thing in my possession, or in my heart any such affection, and
desire thereof, I will confess these sins before God our Lord, with great
shame that I have coueted any thing against him: resolving to root out this
affection, and if I can also, to disapropriate myself of that which is the
cause thereof. To which end I shall be aided with these considerations
ensuing.

The Second Point.
SEcondly, I am to consider the damage, and chastizement of avarice, reducing
them to the three kinds that have been spoken of.

1 First, 1. ad Timoth. 6.9.
I will ponder, that avarice (as S. Paul says) is the root of twoe sorts of
evils, in the which are summed all the evils of this life, to wit:
Transgressions, and pains: sins, and dolours: the which are joined together
to chastize the mother, that ingendreth, and sustaineth them: so that she is
the tormentour of herself, putting the covetous man in great vexations, and
afflictions, to gain, or preserve riches with a miserable servitude, and
slavery of them. It is likewise a snare of satan, wherewith he draggeth him
thorough thorns, and pricky shrubbes of temptations, clouds of faith,
remorses of conscience, and of cares that sting him; and in the end he
hangs him like Judas between heaven and earth, neither permitting him to
enioie the goods of the earth, nor to attain to those of heaven.

2 To these chastizements God sometimes adds others, to show how much he
abhors this vice, and such as sin therein in any of the five ways before
rehearsed, of every one, I will set down an example. Iosue 7.25.
Achan because he took certain things of Jericho, contrary to the precept of
Iosue, was by Gods commandment stoned to death, and all his wealth consumed
with fire. 1. Reg. 25.27.
Nabal overwhelmed with avarice, denied David the alms that he asked, and
because he was hard hearted to him that was needye, he died with his heart
as hard as a stone. 3. Reg. 21.23. and 4. Reg. 9.36. Actuum. 5.1. Aug. ser.
27. de verbis. Apost. vide Belar. to. 1. lib. 2. de Monach. c. 20.4. Reg. 5.27.
Joan. 12.6. Act. 1.18.
Iezabel with a disordinate desire to have Naboths vineyarde, to get possession
thereof, caused him to be put to death: and she was thrown out of a
window, and eaten with dogs. Ananias, and Suphira, because when they had
vowed poverty, they reserved to themselves, part of the price of the sale of
their land, they died disastrously. Giezi vanquished with covetousness,
demanded money of Naaman, for the health that Eliseus the prophet had given
him, and was therefore strooken with a leprosy. Finally Judas harried and
drawn by his avarice, admitted satan to enter into him, and being not
content to steal what they gave his master, he sold him, and hanged
himself. O my soul, how is it that thou art not affraide of so fierce a vice
that assaileth, and overthrows kings, and plebeians, rich and poor,
secular and religious: servants of the prophets, and primitive christians,
and one of the twelve apostles?

3 After these chastizements come the eternal punishements of hell, where the
covetous shall suffer very great dolor with the apprehension of their
terrible necessity, seeing they want all that their avarice desired: and by
how much more rich, and covetous they were here, so much the more they shall
there be tormented; like the rich covetous man, whose abundance ended in
horrible misery. Colloquie
O omnipotent God, rich in doing mercy: deliver me from this avarice, out
of which spring so many miseries, for I had rather without it suffer
temporal necessities, then with it fall into eternal.

The third Point.
THirdly, Of Pouertya, and liberallitie.
I am to consider the great benefits that are included in the perfect
mortificacation of avarice. And for that there are two ways of mortifying it,
one, keeping still the domination of my Riches, and mortifying only the
disordinate affection unto them; wherein consists the first degree of
pouertye of spirit, wherewith goes the virtue of liberallitie, which
distributeth its goods when, and as it is convenient: and the virtue of mercy,
which with them remedieth the necessities of the poor. The other way is,
forsaking all the riches that I have, or might have, the more to disroote my
affections from them; wherein consists the voluntary poverty of religion, in
both ways are included great benefits: for generally to all the poor of
spirit, Christ our Lord promised the kingdom of heaven, Mat. 5.3. Ad Romans
14.17.
as well the kingdom of the other life, as that which is enjoyed in this life,
which is justice, peace, and joy in the holy spirit. So that if I mortify,
and vanquish avarice, I shall enjoy three benefits: justice with abundance of
good works: peace without any noise of disturbance: and spiritual joy free
from heaviness, and vexation: because I shall have taken away the root of
these evils that hinder this good.

2 Besides this, auaricie being vanquished, if I shallbee liberal toward
God, in giving for his sake what I have, God shallbee most liberal toward
me in giving me his benefits, as well the temporal which shallbee befitting
me, as also the spiritual, both in this life, and in the other. For it is he
that said: Luc. 6.38.
Give, and it shallbee given to you, good measure, and pressed down, and
shaken together and running over shall they give into your bosom, where it
shallbee very secure, and well loved. And he says, Dabunt, they shall give,
to signify, that our gifts are the cause that God gives us this measure,
with those four conditions that it may have, when it is most abundant. And he
adds, that with the same measure that we shall mete, it shallbee measured to
us again: for our liberallity increasing toward our neighbors, the
liberallitie of God shall increase toward us, 2. Cor. 9.6.
so that he that sows much shall reap much. Therefore; o my soul, be
liberal toward God, and for his love toward others, and God by himself
and by others, willbee liberal toward thee. Prou. 11.24.25. Alij diuidunt
propria, and ditiores fiunt.
For the soul which blesses, shallbee made fat: that which gives,
shallbee enriched, and he that inebriateth, himself also shalll be inebriated,
receiving much, because it gives much.

3. From hence I will mount to ponder the great benefits that I shall receive,
if I embrace the second way of mortifing avarice, forsaking all things for
Christ, and giving them to the poor: because as this is a much greater
liberallitye toward God; so God shall be much more liberal toward me,
fullfilling the promise which he made, to give in this life a hunder fold for
what we give him, and afterward life everlasting: with a special promise to
give us at the day of judgment thrones of great glory, to judge the tribes
of Israel, Mat. 19.28. Colloquie
and the nations of the world. O happy poueritie that is revvarded with so
great riches? O blessed liberallitie, whose guerdon is a measure so abundant!
O if I could mortify the love of terrene riches to obtain divine, possessing
all thing in God? O most svveete JESUS that came from heaven to earth, to
give us an example of poverty, by the which we may mount from earth to
heaven, and made choice to dye naked upon a cross, departing the world
without possessing any thing of the world: grant me to abhor temporal
riches, that I may serve thee with perfection, and obtain riches everlasting.
Amen.

4. From these considerations I am to collect a very firm resolution to
mortify avarice in all things, that in the first point have been spoken of,
observing some manner of poverty conformable to my estate. First living
content with my estate, though it be but mean without coveting what is
superfluous or what belongs to others. Secondly, in using well what I have,
and being liberal to those that want. Thirdly, in taking away the ouergreate
love thereof, 1. Cor. 7.30.
possessing it, as if I possessed it not. Fourthly in delighting sometimes to
suffer want of some thing, to imitate in some thing the poverty of my
redeemer. Finally endeavoring to serve him, not because he should give me
temporal goods, but because he is worthy to be served; with a hope that he
will give me goods everlasting. Amen.

The XXII. Meditation of wrath, and Impatience.
The first Point.
Wrath is a disordinate appetite of revenging injuries, D. Th. 2.2. q. 158.
and 1.2. q. 48.
and a disordred inflaming of the heart, for things that happen against our
liking, from whence proceed three sorts of sins. Some of Thought, as are
the hatred of our neighbor, determining to be revenged of him; desiring some
misfortune to him; rejoicing at his mishaps; sorrowing for his good hap: and
taking delight in revenge. Some sins are of the Tongue, to wit:
Vindicatiue, and injurious words in presence: or murmuring in absence:
maledictions, high, and untuned words, demonstrating choler; contention, and
perverseness in disputations, to maintain a man's own opinion; and other such
like. Other sins there are of Fact, contrary to the fifth commandment, as
to kill, to strike, or euilly to entreat our neighbor, against reason and
justice: or to do some act only to revenge an injury; or to require this
revenge of the judges, not for love of justice, but for rancour, and hatred:
not to pardon him that has done the iniurye when he asks pardon, but
giving exterior demonstrations of enimitye against him. Also discordes,
processes, brawlings, schisms, factions, and wars proceed from wrath, with
many other sins that accompagnie them.

4 Finally with wrath goes joined Impatience, for the evils that happen to
us against our health, honor, or wealth, ouercharging ourselves with
heaviness thorough a vehement, and disordinate desire to be delivered from
them; from whence use to proceed many sins against God, against our
neighbor, and against our selves. Such as are complaints against our Lord,
because he afflicts us, with appearances of blasphemye: little conformitye to
his will: Distrustes, irksomeness of life, impatient desires of death, and
ragingly to lay violent hands upon ourselves. To be ill-conditioned, rough,
and intractable toward others, giving them occasion of indignation, and
living at discord with those of our own house, being angry even with the
beasts and insensible things: Ionae. 3.9.
as Jonas was angrye with the iuye that withered, when the sun oppressed it
with heat. Considering these sins, and finding myself culpable thereof
before God, I will convert my wrath against myself only, because I have
sinned, beseeching our Lord that he will assist me to vanquish it. O infinite
God, whose wrath is terrible, Psalm. 4.5. Colloquie
but yet just against those that are angry without measure, clear the eyes
of my soul, that considering the terrible chastizements that proceed from thy
sacred indignation, I may restrain those evil, and vehement passions that
proceed from mine.

The second Point.
SEcondly, Ex D. Gre. li. 5 moral. c. 30. circa illud Job. 5. Stultu^
interficit iracu^dia.
I will consider the damages and chastizements of this vice; as well those it
brings with as those which God of his justice adds in this life, and in the
life to come. First, anger destroieth the likeness with God, whose works are
full of great tra^quillitie: it disquieteth the conscience: it stops the
fountain of Gods mercy; it strangleth the spirit of devotion, and the
consolations of the holy ghost, who dwells, and reposeth in the humble, and
meek hearted: Ex D. Basil. hom. de Ira.
and flies from the wrathefull, in whom the evil spirit inhabiteth. For
furious wrath is a frenesye of the soul, a short madness, and a voluntary
devil that prossesseth the spirit with such visages, as the devil makes when
he possesses the body

2 Besides this, as our Lord is the God of vengeance he exercizeth it with
rigorous justice against those that wrathfully revenge themselves, by killing,
or opressing their neighbors. For the which, sentence was given against the
two first wrathful homicides that were in the world, Genes. 4.15. and 24
Cain, and Lamech: that of Cain vengeance should be taken seven fold: and of
Lamech that was not warned by Cain, seventy times seven: that is, a vengeance
so complete, that it comprehends all the kinds of torments that are in this
life.

3 But above all, I will ponder what Christ our Lord, Mat. 5.23.
said in his gospel against this vice: whosoever is angry with his brother,
shallbee in danger of judgment: And whosoever shall say to his brother,
Raca; shallbee in danger of a council: and whosoever shall say, thou fool,
shallbee guilty of hell fire. So that wrath no sooner begins to govern the
heart, but the tribunal, and council of the most sacred trinity begins
to treat of vengeance; the rigor of the punishment increasing, as the sin
grows greater. If anger remains but in the heart, the punishment shall
be the lesser; if it issue out giving open signs thereof, with scorn, or
exterior gestures, upon better advise, the punishment shallbee the greater:
but if it comes to the uttering of grievous, and injurious words, and much
more if it mounteth to an actual revenge, the sentence of eternal fire is
already given against it: with the which in hell is joined the fire of wrath
itself, to be a most cruel tourmentour of the soul: for that which there
most tormenteth, is anger, impatience, and rage. And allbeeit the fire of
purgatory, and of hell is all one, yet that is sufferable with patience, but
this is insufferable with anger. And therefore the wrathful, and impatient have
two hells: one in this life by their small patience in temporal afflictions:
and another afterward by their rage in the eternal. Colloquie
O most patient JESUS deliver me from wrath, and impatience, seeing there is
no greater hell, then to live subjected thereunto.

From these considerations, Ex D. Aug. in Psalm. 149.
I will draw two resolutions of very much importance for the perfect
mortification of this vice. First, to avoid any motion of anger whatsoever,
though it come covered with the cloak of justice, and zeal, fearing least
with the zeal of correcting, or chastizing other men's vices, I mingle an
affection of my own revenge. The Second shallbee, Ex D. Dorothe^ sermon. 8.
Eccles. 11.34. Psalm. 38.2.
speedily to repress whatsoever Passion of anger, before it increases: for at
one Spark (says the holy spirit) fire is increased but in the beginning it
is an easy thing to appease it: and appeased it shallbe, if I repress the
words, and e^xteriour signs of anger, our Lord rewarding me the
mortification of that exterior, by giving me victory over the interiont.

The third point.
THirdly, I will consider the great benefits acquired by the perfect
mortification of wrath, comprehe^ding the two virtues that resist it, meeknes,
and patience. For the first restrains anger from agrieuing of any one. The
second suffers the grieuances that it receives. The first serves to make us
affable to all. The second to suffer of all. From whence proceed three great
benefits to make us perfect in all that pertains to ourselves, to our
neighbors, and to God.

1 First meekness, and patience give us quiet, and peaceable signory, Mat.
5.4. Luc 21.19.
and possession of ourselves, and of our paisions: For the meek possess the
land of their Heart; and in patience we possess our souls, and obtain
peace of conscience with cordial alacrity of spirit.

2 Meekness also makes us amiable, and patience admirable. Eccles. 3.19.
For he (says the wise man) that does his works with meekness, is more
to be beloved, then honor, and glory which men love so much: and he that
has valor to repress his anger, and to suffer wrong, crediteth his own
person, and edifieth his neighbors: for better, and more admirable, Prouer.
16.32. Cassian. collat. 1^ cap. 13.
is the patient, then the strong man, and he that rules his mind, then the
ouerthrovver of cities. It is in some sort a greater miracle to suffer
injuries joyfully, then to raise dead men to life.

3 likewise meekness and patience, make us amiable to God, and give us
entrance to a familiar conversation with his majesty, whereas the want of them
barreth us the gate. Epist. 8. ad Demophilium. 1. ad Timoth. 2.8.
Moses for his great meekness had very inward familiarity with God: and (
as S. Dionysius says) for failing a little therein, the spirit decreased that
he had received. And if I will pray to God in every place, and lift up pure
hands to heaven, it must be, having mortified anger, and contention, easing
myself with the wings of meekness and patience.

4. Finally if I be meek, and patient, I shall partake with excellency, the
spirit of Christ JESUS our Savior, who in these two virtues excelled, giving
us a rare example of them in his life, and passion, like a most meek, and
patient lamb, that we might imitate him therein. And to the two Apostles, who
with a spirit of Anger and revenge, cloked with zeal, desired that fire should
come down from heaven upon the Samaritans, he said; Luc. 9.55.
You know not of what spirit you are. As if he should say, the spirit of
my disciples must not be of anger but of meekness; not of vengeance but of
suffrance. O meek and patient Jesus, 1. Pet. 2.23. Colloquie
who being cursed did not curse: and suffering Injuries, did not
threaten: and receiving most grievous contempt, either did answer with
divine meekness, or did hold thy peace with admirable silence: aid me
that in imitation of thee I may vanquish Wrath, repress impatience, embrace
meekenes: and armed with patience, may suffer afflictions willingly, that I
may attain to enjoy with thee eternal repose Amen.

The XXIII. Meditation of Envy. D. Tho. 2.2. q. 36.

The first Point
Envy is a disordinate sadness for the goods of our neighbor when it
excels and obscureth ours. It springs from pride, and is accompaned with
wrath: so that the acts of these two vices do accompany it. The most
ordinary are to abhor my neighbor because his Prosperity makes me sad: to
rejoice at his fall, to grieve at his exalting: to hear his praise with pain,
and his dispraise with delight: to murmur at him and his affairs, procuring to
drown, and undervalue them, and using means to attain to this end.

1. Envy feeds itself in all kinds both of good and evil: from whence we
may collect four sorts of Envy. The first, and grossest Envy is, to see
others surpass me in temporal goods of wealth, honor, dignity, favor
with princes, beauty of body, and other such like excellecies. This is proper
to worldlings, and springs from that pride which in the eighth meditation we
call worldely pride.

2 Another greater Envy is fed upon letters, sciences, habilities, and arts,
and in those excellencies which touch the understanding. This Envy assaileth
those that profess study, and it is mixed with obstinacye, and contentions,
and with other unlawful means for a man to exalt his own honor, and to
abase, and vngilde another man's.

3. An other Envy much greater feeds upon spiritu, all virtues, and goods,
being sad that any others should have any excellency therein, or should be
honored, and praised as holy men. This proceeds from that pride which we
call spiritual, and sets upon those that converse with virtue: and it is
most familiar, to principiants, and hipocrites.

4. Finally when this augmenteth it arriueth to the supremest degree, D. Th.
2.2. q. 36. ar. 4 ad 2. and q. 14. ar. 2.
which is called Envy of grace, and brotherly charity; and it is one of those
sins which are against the holy Ghost, being sad, and heavy that our
neighbor should be virtuous, and should have the graces, and gifts of the
holy spirit, wishing that he had them not: from whence proceeds the most
grievous sin of scandal; which is, to say, or do something to cause our
neighbor to loose grace, and charity. Such was the envy of the devil
against man, by the which (says the wiseman) death entered into the world,
Sapient. 2.24.
whom all they imitate that are of his faction. This might suffice to abhor
this so abominable vice, which makes me an imitatour of satan. And so
confounding myself for the sin which in this matter I have committed, I will
say to myself: seeing thou wast called to imitate Christ, imitate not his
enemy, for if thou imitatest him inenuie, thou shallt be partaker of the
death that entered thereby.

The second Point.
SEcondly, I will consider the innumerable evils of sin, and pain that
spring from envy, by Gods just punishment, that itself might be the most
cruel tormentour of him that is subjected unto it, as well in this life, as in
the other. First, envy is avenemous breathe of the infernal serpent, by the
which he casts out all his poison together, seducing to most grievous
sins, obscuring reason, inraging the soul, corrupting the body, and rotting
the bones, and much more destroying the strong virtues of the heart. And on
the other side, Prouer. 14 30.
it is like a disease incurable, or very difficult to be cured: for as it is a
vice infamous, and proper only to base minds, we are ashamed to manifest it
to the spiritual physician; and with what success soever it be, though it
be contrary, prosperous, or adverse, it is baited, and augmented. All which
may be pondered by certain examples of holy scripture, in all estates of
persons, according to the degrees of envy that we spoke of. Cain thorough
envy, Genes. 4.8.
that God accepted the sacrifice of his brother Abel, killed him by deceit,
and cruellty: yea he would have covered his sin from God, and he dispaired
of mercy, and remedy. The brethren of Joseph thorough envy, put him in a
well, and sold him for a slave; Genes. 37.24.
and though he humbled himself unto them, they were not appeased. Core,
Dathan, and Abyron, enuing Aaron, and Moses, Number. 16 31.
would have usurped their dignity, and have put the people in a tumult: for
the which the earth opened, and swallowed them alive. Saul thoroughe Envy
persecuted David with such obstinacy, that he lived as if he had been
possessed with a devil, and killed himself, like a man in despair. Finally
the Jews, for the Envy they bore against our Savior Christ, committed the
greatest sinnnes, and suffered the greatest punishments, that have happened in
the world.

3. From hence I will pass to consider the punishments of hell, where the
Enious with incredible rage shall turn against themselves, biting their own
flesh, and that cruel worm that gnaweth their consciences shall whet their
teete with Envy, remembering what goods they lost, and others obtained:
specially when after the day of Judgment, they shall see the glory of the
righteous, whom here they despised.

4 Finaly, Envy is so evil, and cruel that it conuerteth al things to its
own hurt. Prou. 17.22.
From other men's good, it draws a spirit of heaviness that dries up the
bones. And from other men's harms, it draws such a manner of joy, that with
the sin it makes it self partaker of them. And therefore in hell the good,
and evil of others, shall be the proper torments of the envious. Now this
being so why do not I tremble at this cruel Beast? How dare I dwell with
this basiliske that with his eye kills, and tormenteth me? Judas Apostolus
in sua canonica. 11. Colloquie
O how truly may I apply to myself that of the Apostle: VVoe to me that
vvickedely have follovved the ways of Cain, persecuting for envy my
brethren: and like Balaam have given them evil counsel to overthrow them
in sin: and like Core have pretented to exalt myself, by debasing of them. I
have deserved, o my God, that the earth should svvallovve me as it did Core:
that I should perish miserably like Balaam: and that thou should cast me
for ever out of thy presence like Cain, imiating in pain those whom I
imitated in sin. But herein by thy grace I differ from Cain, confessing that
thy mercy is greater then my wickedness, and therefore I hope to obtain
entire pardon thereof.

The third Point.
THirdly, I will consider the great benefits which are included in the perfect
mortificatio^ of Envy, and in embracing brotherly Charity. Pondering First,
the acts of this charity, as they are contrary to envy. The first is, to
resist evil motions, Ex D. Bern. sermon. 49. in cant.
in such sort, that though I feel myself to be assailed with heauienesse
for the prosperity of my neighbor, that yet I give not consent thereunto.
Another, and better is, to rejoice at his good, as if it were mine own, and to
give him, the much good may it do him. The third, and most perfect is, to
wish that many had the same excellencies that I have, yea, and greater, if God
shall be so pleased, reioicing the reat for this cause, as if they were mine
own. To move me to so excellent acts I am to ponder, that it is the
generositie of a christian mind, to seek more Gods pleasure, then mine own;
and the glory of God much more then mine own: and that it may be spread
amongst many, and in many things. And if it be Gods will, and for his glory,
that others should have greater natural, or supernatural gifts then I, it is
just, that my will should condescende thereunto. I must not be like Iosue the
servant of Moses, who was envious that others should prophecy, but like
Moses himself, who said: Number. 11.27. and 29.
I would I might understand that all did prophecy, that all were wise,
prudent, and holy: and that all did serve, and glorify God. I must not be
like the disciples of John Baptist, Joan. 3.26.
who were envious that Christ should baptize, and that all should follow
after him; but rather as the Baptist himself, who said: It behooves that
Christ increase, and I diminishe: I rejoice that my neighbor is axalted, and
I humbled: and so it is meet when God will have it so. Besides this, brotherly
charity, contrarily to envy draws out of all things good to itself: for
reioicing at the good of my neighbor, I make it mine own: and grieuing at his
evil, I shall free miselfe therefrom: for by such acts I dispose myself,
that God may give me the one, and deliver me from the other, in such sort as
shall be most convenient for me. Finally, with this charity, whose fruit is
peace, and joy in the holy ghost, I shall begin even from earth to taste
what is in heaven, where all the blessed are contented, and the least are
partakers of their glory, that have most, thorough the joy they receive
thereby. And so I shallbee partaker of the prosperity, and joy of all my
neighbors, having so many motives of allacritie, as I shall see good fortunes
happen unto them. Colloquie Ad Gal. 4.18.
O my soul, begin foortvvith to exercize upon earth, the life that thou
hopest to enjoy in heaven. If thou vvilt needs have envy, let it be a holy
envy of the good, imitating them in that which is good, endeavoring to excel
all, not to be more honored, but that in thee God may be more glorified
world without end. Amen.

The XXIIII. D. Tho. 2.2. q. 35.
Meditation of Slothe.
The first Point.
ACcidia, (which we commonly call by the name of Slothe), is a disordinate
heaviness, and fastidious irksommesse of virtuous exercize. Hereein we may
sin manifoudly, thorough the many vices that accompany it. The first is, an
ouergreate fear of the labor, and hardenesse of virtue, flying it for this
cause: from whence proprocedeth hauinesse, and tediousness in the exercizes
thereof, performing them with irksomeness. The second is, pussillanimity, D.
Tho. 2.2. q. 133.
and cowardice in enterprising difficult things in Gods service hiding for this
cause the talents that God has given me, and not using them, when the law
of justice, or charity (...) obliges me. The third, is slothe, and
negligence in fullfilling and observing the law of God, the Evangelical
counsels, the statues and rules of my estate, and office doing these things a
little more or less with breakings of delays, and repugnancies, for fear, and
when I cannot otherwise leave them undone with base ends and servile and
subtle intentions. The fourth is inconstancy, in prosecuting the actions of
virtue and carriyng them to the end: with instabillitie in them, dashing out
of one, into another to take away tediousness, until I leave of the good I
have begun, retourning back, like a dog to his vomit. The Fifth is
dismaiednesse, 2.2. q. 26. ar. 4.
and distrust of getting the upper hand in pretention of virtue: or of getting
the victory against temptations, until we fall into the abisme of
desperation. The sixth is, rancour, Ex D. Greg. lib. 31. moral. cap. 31.
and indignation against spiritual persons, because their virtues, and good
examples vpbraide me to my face: or because I am offended with the aduises,
and corrections I receive from them. The seventh is, idleness in loosing that
precious time which God has given me to labor. As also overmuch sleep, and
drowsinesse in good works, specially in the spiritual exercizes of prayer,
reading, mass, sermons, and speeches concerning God, thorough the small
delight I take in them. The eight is, vagation in diverse unlawful, Ex
Cassian. lib. 20. c. 2.
and vain things to entertain me: as are voluntary distractions of thought,
and imagination: prattling, and loosnesse of tongue in idle words; vain
sportes; beholding profane representations; curiosity of the senses; wauing of
the body, gadding up and down the streets, here, and there for pastime, and
recreation; and desiring change; being constant in nothing but in inconstance.
Finally to this vice belong all sins of omissions, and negligences in Gods
service, which are innumerable: and hardely shall you find a good work, but
it has some of these defectes, either in the beginning, in the middle, or in
the end; wherefore I am greatly to accuse myself before our Lord, Colloquie
saying unto him: I confess, o my God, that in this vice only, I have sinned
so often, that my sins are numberless: and therefore I throvve them
alltogither into the numberless multitude of thy infinite mercies, that thou
may remedy the numberless multitude of my miseries.

The Second Point.
SEcondly, I am to consider the most grievous hurtes proceeding from slothe:
Some that spring from itself: and others added by the just chastizement of
God, both in this life, and in the other.

The first, are the most grievous: For luke-warmnesse is painful, and
perilous, the shadow of death, and very near neighbor to hell: it emptieth
the heart of spiritual consolations, Ex D. Bern. 3. and 5. de ascen. Luc.
11.25.
it fillethe it with heaviness, and opens the gate to innumerable
temptations of the devil; who comes to dwell, and settle himself in that
soul which he finds idle, and vacant; bringing with him, seven other worser
devils, which are the multitude of sins: for all gather themselves to the
slothefull, and idle soul, Eccl. 33.29. Prou. 24.30.
which (as Solomon says) like a vineyarde, or graunge which is not
cultiuated, nor has no tre^che, nor enclosure, is full of the nettles of
sins, and of the thorns of passions, and amaritudes; it is trodden upon, and
trampled by the devils, and by diverse unquiet thoughts, which like
passengers enter in, and issue out by it. From whence proceeds a strange
poverty of spiritual goods and an unprofitable beggerie, Prou. 20.4.
for he that in the winter of this life has not plowed, nor labored, shall
beg in the summer of death, and shall find none to give him what he
beggeth: like the five foolish virgins, who thorough slothe falling a sleep,
begged oil for their lamps, Mat. 25.8.
and none would be given them.

2 Besides this, the just sustain exceeding great loss by this
lukewarmnesse: which is as it were the canker of virtues, the mothe of good
works, the aloes of consciences, the banisher of divine consosolations, the
diminisher of merits, and the augmenter of their labors: for the lukewarm in
virtue, walk full of fears, and desires. Fears oppress them, and desires
torment them. They labor much, Prou. 18.8. and 21.25. Mat. 20.12.
and thrive but little, for the burden of Gods law lies heavy upon them, and
they merit but little in bearing it, because of the great repugnancie, and
irksomeness wherewith they bear it: and so they live in peril of forsaking
it, and of falling into the malediction of Jeremy, which says. Hiere. 48.10.
Cursed be he that does the work of our Lord fraudulently. And into that
other most terrible one, wherewith Christ our Lord menaced a lukewarm bishop,
saying unto him: that if he amended not he would vomit him out of his mouth
and cast him both from himself, Apocal. 3.16.
and out of the mystical body of his church. Finally as the slothful
servant which buried the talent of his Lord, lost what he had, Matthew. 25.
and was cast into utter darkness, wherethere is perpetual weeping, and
gnashing of teethe: so the slothful shallbee punished in hell with torment
proportioned to his slothe, taking from him the Talent of faith, and hope
which he had buried. And because he loved idleness, and trembled at labor,
he shall live in perpetual darkness: not working, but suffering, trembling,
and gnashing of his teethe for the terriblenesse of the torments that he
suffers. Number. 14.22.
O eternal God by whose sentence the faint hearted, and slothefull perished
in the desert, without entering into the land which thou had promised them;
I confess that for my slothe, I deserve to be cast out of thy house, to be
excluded from thy kingdom, and being bound, hand, and foot to be cast
into utter darkness. I am grieved, o Lord for my former slackenesse: deliver
me from it for they mercy, that I may merit to enter into the land of
eternal promise. Amen.

The third Point.
THirdly, I will consider the great benefits that I shall obtain by
vanquishing slothe, and embracing spiritual alacritye, and fervor in the
service of God: Mat. 20.12.
for First, the works of virtue, shall be easy and sweet unto me: I shall
labor little and thrive greatly, increasing much in a little time: like to
those workmen, who coming late to the vineyarde, labored so fervently, that
thy merited as great reward in one hour, as the slack did that had labored
many hours, bearing the burden of the day, and of the heat, which burden
they had not felt, if they had fervently labored: for the alacritye of the
spirit, makes the burden of the law very easy, and the yoke thereof very
sweet. And besides this, it augmenteth merits, it doubleth the talents
received; it causes great peace in the soul, and it much assures
Perseverance to the obtaining of glory

2 I may likewise ponder, that God our Lord exceedingly delights to be
served with zeal, and alacritye: for as he is essentially alacritye itself,
and as all the works that he does, and the rewards that he gives us, are
with great alacritye, reioicing in doing us good; most justly he commands
me to serve him, and give him, what he requires, not with irksomeness, and
sadness; not perforce, and with repugnancye, but with feruencye, and alacritye
of heart: Hilarem enim datorem, Psalm. 103.31. Psalm. 99.2. 2. Corin. 9.7.
Psalm. 36.4. Psalm. 50.14. Colloquie Psalm. 18.6.
diligit Deus. For God loves a cheereful giver. To such a one he does great
favors, and hears the petitions, and desires of his heart. And finally he
gives him a taste of that alacritye that is enjoyed in heaven, because he
fullfilleth cheerfully Gods will upon earth. And therefore I am most
earnestly to beg of God our Lord this most noble spirit of alacritye in his
service, saying unto him with David: Render unto me the joy of thy salvation,
and confirm me with the principal spirit. O savior of the world, that
reioycedst like a giant to run thy carreere, though it were very sharp,
grant me that health, and allacritie of spirit, that thou gainedst for me,
that I may in such manner run my carreere, that I may merit to gain an
eternal crown. Amen.

The XXV. Meditation, D. Th. 1.2. q. 100. ar. 4. and 5. and seq.
upon the ten Commandments of the law of God.
FOr the end of this meditation, it will much help to form in the
imagination a figure like the vision which the Prophet Zachary had, Zachar.
9.1.
wherein he saw a volume, or parchment extended, which was ten cubits in
breadth, and twenty in length, wherein were written the sins of him that
steals, and of him that swears falsely, and the malediction that shall
therefore light upon him; which volume came flying to his house, and destroyed
it, until it had consumed all the wood, and the stone. In the same manner I
will imagine before me a great book or parchement very broad and long: and
in one side thereof, I will behold written my oaths, theftes, murmurations,
and all other sins that I have committed against the ten commandments of
the law of God: for as I go writing them in the book of my conscience, God
goes writing them in the book of his justice to chastize the in his time. And
on the other side, I will behold written all the maledictions, and punishments
that God menaceth to such as break these ten commandments, or any ofthem:
making comparison between the sins, and the punishments in number,
grieuousnesse, and continuation. For if my sins be many, the punishments
shallbee many: and if they were very grievous, and of long continuance, the
punishments shallbee very grievous, and of so long continuance, that they
shallbee eternal. And for that chastizements when they are beheld very far
distant, terrifye but little, I will imagine that this book of Gods justice,
comes flying very swiftly to light upon the house of my soul, Volumen volans.
and peradventure it is allreadye very near, and will this day light upon it,
death, or chastizement seazing suddenly upon me. For if I make haste to
sin; God will likewise hasten his punishments, and make desolate my body,
soul, honor, wealth, and all that I have. With this wholesome apprehension,
I will beseech our Lord to illuminate my soul, that I may know the sins
that are written in this book, and the chastizements, that I have deserved,
ayding me with his grace bitterly to bewail them, that with my penance, I may
blotte out the sins, and that his mercy may likewise blotte out the
maledictions, that he had written against them.

This being presupposed, I will begin the meditation, discoursing upon the ten
commandments, of the law of God: with aduertissement, that (as Cassianus
says) the commandments of God have Collat. 14
two senses, one literal, and the other spiritual. Collat. 14. cap. 11. and
D. Bonauent. opusc. de dieta salutis, tit. 3. and sermon. de 10. praeceptis.
t^mo. 2. Exodus 20.3.
The first serves for ordinary people that pretend no more but to save
themselves. The second for those that desire greater perfection, who are not
content to fly, only mortal, and venial sin: but also desire to fly
whatsoever imperfection is contrary to the end of the precept. And according
to this second sense, I will declare in what manner we sin against every
commandment.

The first Point.
FIrst, I am to consider what God commands, and prohibiteth in his holy
law, and in what sort we do sin against it, running through the ten
commandments, and thorough that which spiritually they include within them.
The first commandment, commands the principal works that appertain to
the virtue of faith, hope, charity, and religion: that is to say, to adore
one only God; to believe firmly all such things as he has revealed to his
church: to expect those which he has promised, and to love him more then all
things that are created. Against this I may sin, First, by idolatry, or
infidelity, adoring false Gods, or denying that which God has revealed, or
doubting thereof. I may likewise sin, (as the holy scripture says) adoring
the idol of mine own judgment, 1. R^g. 15.23. Ad Phil. 3.19. Ad Tit. 1.16.
and will, rebelling against the will of God, or holding for my God, my belly,
or money: or denying God by my works, or not observing due loyalltye unto him.
Secondly, I sin, in despairing that I shall obtain heaven, or pardon for my
sins, or that God will hear my prayers according to his promise: and
contrarily in presuming to obtain this, without using the means that God
has therefore ordained. Thirdly thorough hatred, or want of love, loving some
creature more then God; or rejecting the will of God, to fulfill that of the
creature, or in being slack in loving him with all my heart mind, and soul,
and with all my force; much forgetting both him, and his benefits.

2 The second commandment, prohibiteth every defect whatsoever, in the
truth, justice, reverence, and necessity of an oathe: so that I may not by
swearing, affirm any thing contrary to my belief: or promise any thing
without intention to fulfill it, or any thing that is evil, or not fulfill
that which is good, nor swear without necessity or vtillitie, nor without
considering well what I say; nor without that reverence that is due to the
sovereign name of God, whenever I take it in my mouth. I may likewise
sin, breaking my vow, or causelessely differring to fulfill it, or being
slack in the observation of it, derogating from the perfection that I profess.

3 In the third of sanctifying the feasts, I may sin in doing in them any
servile work, that is prohibited, or in not hearing a whole mass, or in not
assisting thereat with due reverence and attention: or wasting such days in
things unworthy of the feast, and of the end for the which they were
instituted, which is, to pray, and to glorify God.

4 The fourth commands, to honor our parents according to the flesh, to
susstaine them in their necessities, and to obey them in their just precepts:
and in like manner our spiritual fathers, prelates, and superious, obeying
their ordinances without contradiction, or without perverseness of judgment,
without repugnancy of the will, and without delay in the execution. Ad Philip.
2.3. 1. Petr. 2.13.
And to draw this out more curiously, I am in humillitie to hold all for my
superiors, honoring all, and subiecting myself to every human creature for
God

5 The fifth, not to kill, prohibiteth all that has been declared in the two
and twentieth meditation, of wrath: and spiritualizing the several ways of
killing. First, I kill my soul by sin, taking away from it the life of
grace. Secondly, 1. Ad These. 5.19. Ad Heb. 6.6.
I extinguish the spirit, that is, the inspirations of the holy spirit,
rejecting those good desires wherewith he inspireth me. Thirdly, I crucify
Christ with in me, and trample upon his blood, doing works, for which he
might again be crucified, if the first crucifying had not suffized. Fourthly,
I kill the souls of my neighbors with scandal, being to them a stumbling
block by my evil example: D. Amb. d. 16. c. pasce fame morientem, si non
pauisti, occidisti. 2. Corin. 2.17. Ex Cassian. collat. 14. cap. 11.
or not succouring them with correction, or counsel, or spiritual alms,
when charity obliges me thereunto: as we call it killing of the poor, when
we succor them not with the corporal works of mercy.

6 The sixth, not to commit fornication, prohibiteth all that which is
declared in the 20. meditation of Luxury. But yet there are other sorts of
spiritual fornication, and adultery, forsaking God which is the true spouse
of our souls, to join mysefe by disordinate love unto some creature; or
adulterating the works, and words of God, doing, and saying, them, not to
please him, or to engender spiritual children that may be pleasing unto him,
but for my own pleasure, or temporal proffit. Or finally being alltogither
forgetful of God, and diuerted with idle occupations. The seventh not to
steal, prohibiteth all that has been spoken of in the one and twenteth
meditation of avarice: and besides this, spiritually I rob, and destroy many
things pertaining to others, conrarie to the will of their owner. For I rob
God of his glory, and play the banqueroute with his gifts: I am an unthrift
of the time that I had to spend in his service: I pay him not the debtes, that
I owe him, by reason of my sins, or of his benefits, satisfying for the one,
and being thankful unto him for the other. I rob my will which I delivered
him by my vow of obedience: D. Basil. sermo de abdicatione rerum.
and I usurp his authority, interposing myself to judge the secrets of my
neighbors, which belong to his tribunal. And in like manner, I destroy the
charity, and spiritual riches of my neighbors, ayding the Captain of
thieves the devil, who is continually busied in robbing them.

8. The eigth not to bear false witness, prohibiteth all sins of the
tongue, that are against the honor, and fame of our neighbor, whereof mention
was made in the two and twenteth meditation, of wrath. Also, to judge rashly
of his affairs, or to suspect evil of them, taking them in the worst part
without a sufficient foundation: or to deceive him by any manner of lie, or
fiction, as is that of hypocrisy, adulation, flattery, worldely compliments,
and offers, having no purpose to fulfill them. And spiritualizing this
precept, I bear false witness against God, when I think basely of his
goodness, and mercy: of his justice, and providence: And when by my evil
works, I defame, and discredit his law, and his doctrine, and am a cause that
his holy name is blasphemed among the gentiles, Isai. 52.5. Ad Ro^. 2.24.
or less esteemed, and reverenced among the faithful. I also lie to God, when
I fulfill not my word, having given it unto him: nor the resolution that I
made to do some thing in his service. The ninth and tenth commandments are
declared in the sixth and seventh.

After I have considered these sins, I am to charge myself with them before
our Lord with great dolor, and shame for having committed them. And allbeeit
I had broken but one commandment only, Iaco. 2.10.
I may esteem myself (as the Apostle S. James says) gilty, and culpable of
all: for in every sin I shall find that which is spiritually prohibited in
all: for one mortal sin only, in the form that has been declared, is as
idolatrye, infidelity, hatred, adulterye, theft, infamye, and homicide. And
therefore reprehending myself, Colloquie
I may call myself by these infamous names, saying. Idolater, infidel,
adulterer, thief, hypocrite, and homicide, how have thou dared to injury so
many ways a God of so infinite majesty? Why do thou not break thy
heart with grief, for having broken the so just commandments of thy Lord?
O God of my soul, Psalm. 118.136
that I might say to thee with David: Mine eyes have gushed forth issues of
waters: because they kept not thy law, Grant unto me these tears so
abundaunt, that I may wash therevvith my innumerable sins.

The second Point.
SEcondly, I am to consider the maledictions that God powers out upon the
breakers of his law, and the terrible punishments that he menaceth unto them,
both in this life, and in the other.

1. This I may ponder discoursing first of the terrible catalogue that Moses
makes of these maledictions in two chapters of Deuteronomye, Deuter. 27.15.
and 28.16.
saying unto the people, that if they broke the law of God, these maledictions
should come upon them, and overtake them. Thou shall be cursed in the city,
and in the feelde. Cursed shallbee the fruit of thy womb, and of thy flocks:
God shall send down upon thee famine, and pestilence: he shall chastize thee
with pouertye, burning fevers, cold, heat, corrupt air, and rottenness
until thou perish: The heaven that is above thee shallbee of brass, and the
earth that thou treadest shallbee of iron: It shall rain dust upon thy land,
and the ashes of heaven shall fall down upon thee. He shall deliver thee into
the hands of thy enemies: and thy dead body shallbee food: for the birds
of the air, and for the beasts of the earth. And in this manner he goes on
with other horrible maledictions, which after he has reckoned up, as if they
were but little ones, he says; God shall augment these plagues adding others
that are greater. And because the curse of God is not only in word, but in
deed, there is none of those that infringe his law that shallbee able to
escape, what God shall inflict upon him. An finally all shall be overtaken with
that last which Christ our Savior shall pronounce at the day of judgment,
Mat. 25.41.
the terriblenesse whereof has already been declared. The effects of these
maledictions, the miserable people of the Jews had experience of in their time,
and many of them ^ee experiment in ours: which with all are aduises for our
amendment: for that the desire of this divine Lawgiuer, is not to entangle us
in these maledictions, but to terrifye us that we may keep his law, and be
delivered from them. O most just lavvgiuer, Colloquie
I confess that in very great justice the heaven should be to me of brass,
and the earth of Iron, and that I deserve neither the favor of earth, Prou.
21.13. Job. 15.16. Psalm. 108.18. Ad Gal. 3.13.
nor heaven. I deserve that thou should stop thy ears against my prayer,
because I stoopped mine against thy law. I have drunk wickedness like
water, and therefore it is reason that malediction should enter like water
into my bovvells. But remember, o Lord, that thou did subject thyselfe to the
curses which the law cast upon him that dyed orucified, to deliver us from
the curses that are menaced by the law. Apply unto me then the fruit of
thy death, pardoning me the sins that against the law I have committed,
and freeing me from the maledictions that for them I have deseruea.

2. I may likewise ponder the chastizements that God inflicteth upon those,
that break the ten commandments of his law, as they are ^epresented in the
ten plagues of Egypt, with the which they are many times punished, that are
rebels to the commandment of God, as Pharao, Exodus
8.6.17.24.9.3.23.10.13.22.12.29.14.24.
and his vasialls were, there coming upon them frogs, flies, gnattes,
pestilences and grasshoppers, thunders, lightnings, and hail, and darkness
exceeding thick: yea, and the Angel of God with his sword drawn, entered
their houses, killing their first begotten, and destroying what they loved
most, until at last the sea of tribulations, (which gives free passage to the
just) drowneth, and strangleth them for their sins, sinking like lead to the
bottom of hell, where they shallbee melted, and tormented in that fire
everlasting. 3 And that we may not imagine that these Plagues touched only
the ancients before the coming of Christ, when our Lord was called the God
of vengeance, there is mention also made of them in the Apocalips. Apo^al.
8.2.15.6. and 16.1.
For Gods providence which is benign to the obseruers of his law, is rigorous
against those that infringe it: wherefore he has in readiness seven Angels
with seven terrible trompets, and other seven with seven cups full of his
wrath, and indignation, which they power out upon the earth, striking sinners
with horrible plagues. Colloquie
O my soul, why do not thou tremble to trespass that law, that has
such terrible, and zealous reuengers? How is it, that thou art not terrified
with the sound of these trompets? How is it, that horror is not caused in
thee with the horrible wine of these cups? How art thou not affrighted with
the dreadfulnesse of these plagues? O most merciful JESUS that receiuedst five
wounds on the Cross, and from head to foot vvast vvounded thereon: cure
with thy precious blood the wounds of my sins, that I may be free from so
horrible plagues.

4. Lastly, Eccl. 23.12.
I will ponder some particular chastiz ements that God threateneth in Scripture
to such as break any special commandments: that is to say. Eccl. 2.3.12.
A man that svveareth much shallbee filled with iniquity, and plague shall
not depart from his house. Wherein are set down two most grievous hurtes of
this vice, which are, to fill the house of a man with sins, and punishments,
with spiritual, and corporal wounds, and to lay it even with the foundations,
Zach. 5.1.
as it is manifest by the malediction of the volume, which we put in the
beginning of this Meditation. Also against him that despises his father, Prou.
30.17.
and mother he says: That the ravens shall pull out his eyes, and the Eagles
shall eat them: for such a one is not worthy of long life, but of an infamous
death and in the other life, the infernal crows, and Eagles shall pull out
his eyes, blinding him with obstinacye, and eating his bowels with dolor. And
in this sort we may ponder, other chastizemets collected from what has been
declared in the seven Meditations precedent.

The third Point.
THirdly, I am to consider the benedictions that God powers out upon those
that observe his law: as well corporal, as spiritual benedictions, and
as well temporal, as eternal.

1. This I may ponder first running thorough the catalogue that Moses makes
of them in the same book of Deuteronomye, Deuter. 28.3.
saying to his people, that if they observed the law of God, all these
blessings should come upon the^, and ouertak them. Thou shall, (says he) be
blessed in the city and in the feilde: blessed shallbee the fruit of thy
womb, of thy land, of thy flocks: Blessed shall thy garners be, and what
thou shall take out of them; blessed shallbee thy commings in, and goings out,
and all the works of thy hands. Our Lord shall open his most excellent
treasures to inriche thee, and his heaven that it may rain upon thee
plentiful showers. He shall make thee the head, and not the feet, thou
shallt be superior, and never inferior; and thy enemies shall fall before
thee. Our Lord shall exalt thee to be his holy people, and all shall respect
thee, because thou art favored by his holy name.

These, and other benedictions Moses goes on with all; which allthough they
are temporal, accomodated to the estate, and condition of that imperfect
people: yet they are a sign of others much greater, and spiritual which God
gives to Christian people; who with all, want not these temporal, after a
more excellent manner: Mat. 6.26.
for the providence of our heavenly Father (as his son himself did promise
unto us) is careful to provide for us those that are meet, Psalm. 144.16.
giving them for an addition to those that observe his law. For thee that
opens his hand, and fills with his blessing brute beasts, shall open it
much better to replenish his children.

2. From hence I will ascend, to ponder the spiritual benedictions, which God
gives to those that keep his law, in the keeping whereof, he has with
great excellencye included three kinds of good: to wit, honest good,
proffitable good, and delectable good, Psalm. 18.8.
of the which David in the eighteenth Psalm makes another sweet catalogue.
For first the law of God is most pure, and most holy, converting souls,
replenishing them with wisdom, and all virtues. It is also most proffitable to
obtain all good that may be desired, not only for the soul but for the
body, as health, Prou. 3.2. Psalm. 18.11. and Eccl. 24.27.
long life, sustenance, and prosperitye: And therefore it is more to be
desired then Gold, or then precious stones, or more then all the treasures of
the earth. It is also most delectable, much more then honye, or the honye
comb, and cheereth men's hearts with a greater alacritye, then any that can
be given, by all the sweet things of this life. From hence it is, that God
preuenteth principiants with the benediction of delight, Psalm. 20.4. Psalm.
83.8.
that they may cheerfully begin the way of his commandments. To those which
are proficients, this divine lawgiuer gives his benedietion, that they may
increase from virtue to virtue, until they arrive to the height of perfection.
Prou. 10.6. and Psalm. 23.5. Mat. 25.34.
And upon the heads of the just that are perfect, he powereth his blessing in
abundance, giving them some taste of what in glory they shall enioie. And
finally in the day of judgment he will give them the supreme benediction,
saying unto them: Come ye blessed of my father, to possess the kingdom
prepared for you: as already we have pondered.

Considering these blessings, and comparing them with the curses which in the
precedent point were declared, I am principally to collect three affections of
very much importance. The First is agreate Sorrovve for having infringed a law
so holy, so profitable, and so sweet, making myself unworthy of its
celestial benedictions, and incurring the three evils contrary to the three
goods that have been spoken of: for together with the breach of the law
march those vices that pollute both body, and spirit; all the temporal, and
eternal hurtes, that body and soul do suffer: and all the heauinesses, and
bitternesses wherewith our heart is afflicted.

2 The Second affection is of Confidence, assuredly hoping that if I observe
the law of God, I shall obtain the blessings that he promises me, calling
to mindethose memorable words of Ecclesiasticus, who says, Homo sensatus
credit legi, and lex illi fidelis, The wise man beleiueth the law of God,
Eccl. 33.4.
and the law is faithful unto him: which is to say. The just man, and the
law are faithful one to another. The just is faithful in obeying the law,
and the law is faithful in rewarding the just. It defends him in perils:
It comfort him in his adversities: it directs him in his prosperities: it
counsels him in his doubts: it favors him in his businesses: it makes
his prayers to be heard; it aideth him in life: it protecteth him in death:
and finally it croweneth him in glory. Colloquie
O my soul be faithful to the law of God, and the law shallbee very
faithful to thee. Fail not thou in doing what it commands thee; and it
will not fail to do what it promises thee. Praise thy sovereign lavvgier
with the psalterion of ten strings, keeping his ten commandments, Psalm.
32.2. Malach. 3.14.
and thou shallt forthwith be partaker of his promises. Say not vith the
wicked Israelits: It is a vain thing to serve God, and what prossit have I
in keeping his commaundemenis? Convert thyselfe truly to our Lord, with a
contrite heart for having broken them, and thou shallt see by experience the
difference betvveene the just, and the sinner: betvveene those that observe his
law, and those that infringe it.

3 The third affection must be great love, and estimation of the law of God,
Prou. 3. and 7.
endeavoring (as Solomon says) to write it in the tables of my heart, which
are the three faculties of my soul: In my Memory to be always mindful of
it: In my Understanding to meditate continually thereon: and in my Will to
love it, and if need were, to lay down my life for it: saying, Deute. 6.7.
as Moses to his people: I will meditate thereon in my house, and upon the
way: at my down lying, and up rising: I will put it as a signal in my
hands, to work thereafter: and I will have it before my eyes, to guide me
thereby: saying with David; Lord, Psalm. 118.97.
how have I loved thy holy law? all the whole day it is the matter of my
meditation. O most sweet lawgiuer, who when thou becamest man, did forthwith
put this law in the midst of thy heart, and by thy grace write it in the
hearts of thy elect, Psalm. 36.31. and Iere^. 31.33
write it also in my heart, in such manner as may never be blotted out, that I
may be worthy to be written in the book of life, without ever being blotted
out thereof, world without end. Amen.

The Conclusion of what has been said.
OF all that has been said in this meditation, I will recollect a brief
sum of the Titles therein; as well to procure great contrition for having
broken the law of God, as to animate myself to keep it with perfection.

First, beause it is just, and holy, and with great excellency imbraceth al
kind of good. Secondly, to deliver myself from the maledictions, and plagues
both temporal, and eternal that it menaceth. Thirdly, to enjoye the
innumerable benedictions that it promises in this life, and in that to come.
Fourthly, and principally, for the lawgiuer that gave it, to wit, God
infinitely good, wise, and potent: and my infinite benefactour, upon whom
depends all my good, both temporal and eternal. And this reason only shall
suffice to move me to love a law given by such a Father, and to be
infinitely sorry to haven broken it:

The fifth Title is, for that the lawemaker himself becoming man, put it in
the midst of his heart, and came to fulfill it entyrely, without omitting
any iotte, or tittle to move me by his example, to the perfect accomplishement
thereof.

The sixth is for the fidelity of the law to those that observe it; and for
the experience that I myself have of the great good I shall get by observing
it, feeling great peace, and serenity of conscience, and great, allacritie,
and confidence in God. And contrarily, of the great evil that befalls me
when I break it, having my Heart broken with sins, excessive fears,
remorses of conscience, and many other miseries. And finally, because at the
hour of death, nothing will more torment me, then to have broken the law of
God nor nothing more content me, then to have observed it, because upon this
depends my damuation, or salvation. Hereup on I will conclude as Ecclesiastes
concluded his book, saying: fear God, and keep his Commandments, Cap.
vltim. 13.
for this is the whole man: that is to say. Herein consists the whole being
of man, and the accomplishment of the obligations of the whole man: and
whosoever fails herein, fails in the integrity, and perfection of a man,
and does like a beast.

The XXVI. Meditation upon the five Senses, and exterior Faculties.
The first Point.
THe first point shallbe to recall to my remembrance the sins that I have
committed by my five senses, and exterior faculties of my body, accusing
myself thereof before our Lord.

1 First, with my eyes I have sinned, delighting to see beautiful, vain,
curious, or hurtful things, only for vanitye, or curiositye, or sensuallitye,
with immodestye, and liberty of flesh, and disedification of others. So that,
many times I sin in the things, that I behold, or in the intention wherewith
I behold them, or in the manner of beeholding them, carrying faulcons eyes,
and lightly moving them to one side, and to another. My ears I have had open
to hear vain, and curious talk, impertinent novelties, flaterings, and
praises of myself; murmuringes, and detractions of others, without
reprehending them, or stopping them, or as much as showing an evil liking of
them when I was obliged thereunto. And having so much gust in hearing these
things, I have been disgusted to to hear good talk, and displeased to hear
sermons, and the aduises, and corrections of those that were obliged to give me
them.

With the smell, taste, and touching, I have manifoldly sinned in gluttonye,
and luxurye, as has been declared in the meditations of these vices.

2 But of the sins of the tongue what shall I say? For some words I have
spoken against the due respect to the name of God: some against the honor, and
fame of my neighbor: And some to the great hurt of my soul, as appareth by
what has been set down in the first points of the precedent meditatio^s.
Other some words have been vicious, by failing in the due circumstances,
speaking things indecent for my estate, and profession: or in places, and times
prohibited, as, to talk much in the church, at mass, or at sermon time to
the scandal, of others: or when by my rules, if I be religious, I am obliged
to keep silence: or when I speak after an ill fashion, hastily,
inconsiderately, very affectedly, and vntunedly. In such sort, that
considering the sins of my words, I may affirm with the apostle S. Jacob.
3.6.
James, that my tongue has been vniuersitas iniquitatis, a whole world of
iniquityes, where they have all been assembled: and a fire that has inflamed,
and burnt the wheel of my natiuitye, thoroughout the whole course of my life.

3. With these sins, I may join others of immodestye, and disorder in the
use of the rest of the members, and exterior faculties, as are overmuch
laughter, scorning, mocking, and light gestures of the head, feet, or hands;
or going affectedly, vntu^edly, and ouerhastily, and other such like, which
show but small grauitye: Eccles. 19.27.
of which the Wise Man says: That the attire of the body, the laughing of
the teethe, and the going of a man, discover what he is, and what virtue he
has.

Pondering these sins, I am greatly to confound myself, for having so much
abused the faculties that God gave me, using them for my own pleasure,
pampering, and honor. Colloquie
O great god how have thou suffered in me so great disorder! O miserable man
how is it that thou have dared thus to denounce war against God!

The second Point.
THen will I consider the great hurt that comes to me by these senses ill
guarded, and unmortified.

1. For first they are the gates, and windows, whereby (as the Prophet
Hieremye says) the death of sin enters into the house of my Soul, Hierem.
9.21.
destroys the life of grace, and suffocateth the vital heat of charity:
for by them enter the temptations of the devils, who like theeus rob the
house of my conscience, dispoiling it of the guiftes of God, and of all virtue:
whereupon says the same Prophet. Thren. 3.51.
My eye has robbed my soul. For as the eye robbed Eua of her Original
justice, Dyna of her virginitye, and David of his chastitye, and justice: so it
robs me sometimes of my temperance, sometimes of my devotion. And the like
does the ear, and tongue. Prou. 25.28.
For as a city beseeged by enemies, if the gares be left open, and unguarded,
is entered, sacked, and destroyed: so is the soul that has no guard over its
senses.

2 These also give entrance to the images, and figures of visible things, which
disquiet the imagination and memory with distractions, and vagations: these
disorder the appetites with disagreement of passions, and disturb the heart,
casting us out of it And for this cause likewise it is truth, that my eye
robs my soul, because it robs my attention, cogitation, and affection,
causing my soul not to be so much within me, as out of me, in the thing
that it meditateth, and loves. And I myself likewise by theses ports, issue
out of myself to wander thorough the whole world, and after me issues out
the spirit of devotion, prayer, and contemplation. So that when I would return
to enter into myself, I hitte not the right way, nor find any quietness in
mine own house, because of the tumultes that I experiment therein: and from
hence proceed innumerable defectes, and damages in prayer, and the privation of
the favors of heaven: for God is not pleased to put the liquor of his gifts,
Deute^. 19.15. Aggei. 1.6.
in a vessel that has no coouer, and that in five parts is full of holes.

3. Finally, great are the chastizements that God has inflicted upon those
that have been notably rechlesse in the guard of their senses, and tongue;
giving them liberty against the precepts, and counsels of Gods law: as may
appear by what has been related in the precedent meditation, VVhereupon
says Ecclesiasticus, Eccl. 28.28.
hedge in thy ears with thorns, and hearken not to the evil tongue: make a
door for thy mouth, and a lock for thy ears: take heed thy tongue slip
not, and thou fall before thy enemies; for thy fall may be irremediable, and
the cause of thy death; sometimes of thy temporal death, and sometimes of thy
eternal in hell: where the five senses (as already has been noted) shall
suffer incredible torments, in chastizement of their unbridled appetites.
Therefore, o my soul shut the doors, and windows of thy senses if thou
vvillt not have death, and disorder enter in thereat. Stop, and bridle thy
mouth, that thine own tongue do not kill thee. Hedge in thy ears with
Thorns, that others men's tongues do not prick thee, dravving from what thou
hear, sins of thine own.

The third Point.
THe third Point shallbee, Mortification of the Senses.
to consider the great good which the holy curbing, and mortification of the
the senses brings with it. First, for that besides shutting the door against
so many evils as have been spoken of, it opens it for the spirit of God to
enter into the soul, which willingly inhabiteth in souls mortified to the
flesh, and to the delights of the senses. It likewise opens it to let in
the spirit of prayer, devotion, and contemplation: for our Lord loves to
converse with souls that are enclosed gardens, and there he speaks unto
their heart, conforting, and communicating unto them his gifts. And for this
cause when we pray, Math. 6.6.
he commands us, to enter in to the closet of our heart, and to shut after
us the gate of our senses, that nothing may enter in to disturb our prayer,
and to interrupt the conversation we have with our celestial Father.

2. Besides this, the senses when they do their acts according to the will of
God, which is the end of their mortification, are the doors, and windows
whereby life enters: and what they seee and hear, taste, and speak, aydeth
them to obtain. the spiritual life of grace, and augmentation thereof From
whence I am to infer what S. Ia^ob. 3.11.
James the apostle says. That as a fountain gives not forth out of one hole
sweet, and sour water: so from the self same tongue ought not to proceed
blessing, and cursing: good words to bless God, and evil words to curse our
neighbor: but all ought to be good words, pleasing to God, profitable to my
neighbor, and sweet to my own conscience and in like manner in at the self
same eyes, and ears ought not to enter life, and death: but they ought
allwaies to be shut to all that is an occasion of death: and open to that
which should give me life, and herein consists their true abnegation.

3. To this I am to add, that the modesty, and mortification of the senses is
a sign, and testimony of the interior virtues: it much edifieth our
neighbors, and casts from it such a fragrancie, that it fills the house of
the Church, Ex D. Ambr. lib 2. de virginibus.
and religion with good credit, and renown: for as a good portall honoreth the
house, and gives a desire to enter in, to see what is within: so the modestly,
and composing of the senses, and exterior members, is the most beautiful
portall of virtue, and a religious life, making it so amiable, that it
provoke a desire to enter in, to enjoy what interiourly is enclosed within
it, whereupon said S. Ad Phil. 4.5.
Paul, That our modesty should be manifest to all men, for that God is nigh,
and present with us, and in the presence of so potent a king, all we his
servants ought to carry our selves very modestly.

Finally the five senses shall receive in heaven, (as afterward shallbe seen)
particular crowns of glory, with great pleasure in reward of the
mortification that they suffered on earth. And so with the hope of all these
benefits, I will encourage myself to mortyfie them with great fervor.

I will conclude this meditation with a sweet colloquye with our Lord Christ
crucified, pondering the mortification of his five senses, which he suffered
on the Cross. The which on the one side was most holy, casting forth
resplendent rays of admirable virtues: and on the other side was most
paineful, with the mixture ofterrible dolours, which he suffered for the
sins, that I with my five senses committed. And discoursing how his eyes were
obscured with spittle, his ears tormented with blasphemies; his smelling with
the smell of mount Caluarye: his taste with gall, and vinegar: and his touching
with VVhippes, thorns, and nails, being compassionate of all this, I will
say unto him: Colloquie
It grieueth me, o svveete Savior, for the sins that I with my five senses
have committed, for the which thine were so direfully tormented; by the
dolours whereof pardon, I beseech thee, the many sins of mine. With the
blood that issued out of thy five precious wounds, wash the stains that
have issued from these my five impostumated fountains. Cease now, o Lord,
their abominable current, and aid me with thy grace to destaine it, that
imitating the mortification that thou did exerctze in thy life, and
sufferedst in thy death, I may meritte to obtain thy glory. Amen.

The XXVII. Meditation, upon the Interior Faculties of the Soul.
The first Point.
THe first point shallbee, to consider the vices, and sins that have their
particular seat in the understanding: and the hurtes that proceed therefrom,
examining that part which appertains to me in every one of them, which may
in all be reduced to seven.

1 The first is, D. Th. 2.2. q. 77.
ignorance of those things that I am obliged to know; as are, those which I
ought to believe, to ask, to receive, and to do; which are included in the
creed, and prayer of pater noster, in the sacraments, and in the
commandments of God, and in the other obligations proper to every man's
estate, and office: for I can but ill accomplish them not understanding them.
And (as S. 1. Corin. 14.38.
Paul says) if any man know not, he shallbee unknown, God saying unto him,
I know thee not. With this vice, ciphreth much the culpable forgetfullnesse
of God, and of his law, and of such things as I may, and ought to remember, of
which we may likewise say, that whosoever forgets, shall be forgotten: for
if I sinfully forget God, and his things, God willbee forgetful of me, and
mine.

2 The second vice is Imprudence, D. Tho. 2.2. q. 53.
o^ Precipitation, and Want, of consideration in those things that I have to
do, or say, casting myself into them with violence of passion, without first
considering whither they be lawful, or unlawful, or without taking
concerning them convenient counsel. From whence proceed innumerable errors,
and defectes in all the matters of virtue.

3 The third Vice is Temeritie, 2.2. q. 60. ar. 3.
in judging the sayings, and doings of my neighbors, condemning them, or
supecting amiss of them, without sufficient foundation, wherein I do injury
to God our Lord usurping his authority, and interposing myself to judge that
secret, that is properto his tribunal: I likewise do injury to my neighbor,
condemning him without sufficient reason therefore: and I do hurt to myself,
for ordinarily I come to fall into that, which rashely I would Judge of.

4. q. 53. ar. 5.
The fourth vice is Inconstancy, and Mutabilitie in the good, that I have
determined, easily altering my opinion: from whence proceeds the not
accomplishing the good resolutions that I had purposed: the not keeping my
word with God, and with men: and the easy giving credit to the temptations of
the duiell, and to the flattering deceites of the flesh. And with this
inconstancy goes adioined mutabillitie of thoughts, suffering myself to be
carried by foolish imagination, which blunteth the understanding, and makes it
frantic, and inconsiderate in thinking upon diverse things without any order.
From hence also proceeds mutabillitie in good exercises, skipping from one to
another, only to satisfy my own pleasure, and by the novelty of them to
take away their tediousness.

5. The fifth vice contrarily, is Perverseness, Cassian. collat. 17 cap. 5.
and 27.
and Pertinacie in my own judgment, and opinion, being unwilling to yield,
or submit it to the judgment of my superiors, or those that are more wise,
whom I ought to obey, and to give credit unto. This is the idol of discordes,
from whence spring many sins of disobedience, and rebellion, against our
Prelates; many obstinacies, and contentions in disputations, and great
errors, Job. 18.7. D. Th. q. 55. ar. 3.
and illusions of the devil: for as it is said in Job, my own counsel is my
downfall.

6 The sixth vice is Subtlety, or fleshly prudence, and vvorldely vvisdome,
craftily inuenting means to accomplish my carnal, and worldely intents, from
whence spring frauds, and deceites in words, and deeds, and hipocrisies.
This vice uses to go accompanied with foolishness, simplicity, or dullness
of understanding in judging, and discerning the things of God, and the
spiritual good of our souls, esteeming basely of them, measuring them with
the vain rules of the world, and not with those of God. 1. Corin. 2.4.
For (as the Apostle says) the sensual man perceives not the things that are
of the spirit of God, for it is foolishness to him, and because he is
ignorant of them, he blasphemeth them.

7 The seventh vice is Curiosity, Judas in epist. canon. 10.2.2. q. 167.
desiring disordinately to know that which is not meet for me, as to desire
to know things hurtful to my soul, or which exceed my capacity, by evil
means: or things that are unprofitable, and vain, and disagreeing with my
estate, and profession: or if they are convenient, to desire to know them with
a disordinate affection, and only for curiosity, or vanity, contrary to
that of the apostle, desire not to be more wise, Ad Ro^. 12.3.
then behooves to be wise, but be wise unto sobriety.

These are the seven vices of the understanding, in the which if I examine
myself, I shall find myself very culpable, and thereof I am to accuse
myself humbly before God, collecting from hence what estate my poor soul is
in, if her understanding, which is that which guides her, Mat. 6.23. and 15.14.
be so miserable. For (as our savior Christ says) if the eye be obscured
the whole body shallbee in darkness: and if the blind be guide to the
blind, both fall into the ditch, falling fom the internal darkness, into
the eternal of hell. And therefore I am very carefully to endeavor, Psalm.
11.7. Isai. 11.2. Colloquie
partly by penance, partly by mortification, to purify myself of these
seven vices, that my understanding may be like silver seven times refined,
beseeching the holy spirit with his seven gifts to purity me of them. O
divine spirit, illustrate my soul with the gift of vvisdome, against my
ignorance, and dullness. Give me the gift of counsel, against my
imprudencie: the gift of understanding against my temeritie: the gift of
science against the perverseness of my judgment: Ad Ro^. 11.20.
the gift of fortitude against my mutabillitie: the gift of piety against
fleshly prudence: and the gift of fear to oppose to my curiosity: that be^ing
free from these vices, and illuminated with these gifts, I may begin a nevve,
spiritual, and perfect life, follovving thy divine inspiration, without ever
dividing myself therefrom. Amen.

The Second Point.
THe second point shallbee to consider the sins that spring from my own
will, and what hurt I receive by fillowing it, pondering well, first, that it
is my own will: for this only is sufficient to abhor it. My own will is
that which attends only to seek my own pleasure, omitting that of God, and
of my neighbors: And it is called my own, because my will being the
workmanship of God, created to conform itself with his divine will, I rebel
against that, and appropriate it to myself alone, as if it were mine own, and
use it to seek only that which is to my own liking. For what Theft is more
unjust, and what Robbery more tirannicall, then to steal, and rob from God
the will that he gave me, and therewith to rebel, allwaies contradicting his
will? And what, wickedness is there more horrible, then that my will entering
into battle with the will of God, mine should remain vanquisher, and Gods
will vanquished, treading under foot his will in regard of mine own?
Colloquie Cassian. collat. 19. c. 8.
O omnipotent God, by thy infinite mercy permit not in me such inustice.

2 Then will I ponder how my own will is the root of all the vices, and sins
that I commit, and of all that are committed in the world, all which we may
reduce to three heads. The First is, a general disobedience to all that God
commands by himself, or by his ministers. So that our own will is the
capital enemy of all laws both divine, and human: but especially of
religious laws: for all religion is founded upon the mortification of self
will, which if it lives, religion dies: and if religion must live, self will
must dye. The second vice is to wrest, and make abortiue the intention, in good
that it does; doing it, not because it is the will of God, but for other ends
of their own vain, interessed, and sensual pleasure. D. Bern. sermon. 71. in
Ca^tic. Isa. 58.3
Whereby the good is converted into evil, and that which might have been
pleasing to God, becomes displeasing unto him; as our Lord himself said by
the Prophet Isaias. Your fasting is not pleasing to me, because therein you
do your own will. The 3. vice is, to appropriate all things to our selves
that we may, without considering what hurt may ensue thereof to others. From
whence spring innumerable iniustices, auarices, cruelties, conte^tions,
processes, oppressions, and discordes: treading under foot all the laws of
justice, and of mercy toward our neighbors, as likewise the laws of
charity, which (as S. Paul says) seeks not her own. 1. Cor. 13.5.
And therefore self will is the poison, and total destruction, of charity.

4 From whence it is, that as self will is the queen, and capitanesse of all
vices, and sins: so it is the peopler of hell, and the fuel of those
eternal fires: whereupon-saieth S. Sermon. de resurrect.
Bernard: let self Will cease, and there shall be no hell: for if self will
cease, there shallbe^ (...) sins, and then what need is there of hell? And
besides this, if there be any Hell in this life, our own will is a hell to it
self; for all the miseries of this life, so far are the causes of extreme
affliction, and heaviness as they are contrary to our own will, which if it
cease, by our conforming ourselves to Gods will, that which is hell, is turned
into purgatory, and into augmentation of meritte, and of crowning in heaven.
VVhereupon says S. Lib. 1. de vocatione gentium. ca. 8.
Ambrose, Our own will is blind in desires, puffed up in honors, full of
anguish in Cares, and unquiet in suspicions: more careful of glory, the^ of
virtue: a greater lover of fame, then of a good conscience: and much more
miserable enjoying the things that it loves, then when it wants them: for
her experience augmenteth her myserie. Out of all this. I will conclude how
great my misery has been, in having subjected myself to my own will,
contrary to the will of God, bewailing my blindness, and purposing firmly to
abhor it, and to deny it, Joan. 6.38.
in imitation of our Lord Christ, who descended from heaven, not to accomplish
his own will, but the will of him that sent him. And being in the heaviness,
and agonies of death, he said to his Father. Not my will be done, but
thine. O sovereign master I confess that I am not worthy to be called thy
disciple, Lucae 22.24. Colloquie
because I have not proffited by thy example. May thee sorrovves, and Agonye of
death come upon me for the times that I have said against thee, not thy
will be done, but mine. Separate, o my Savior; from my mouth, so cursed a
word, and favor me with thy grace to mortify my own will, that entirely
I may accomplish thine: 1. Corin. 10.
may I from henceforth seek not that which is mine, but what is thine, and
my neighbors, pretending their proffit, and thy glory world without end.
Amen.

The third Point.
THe third Point shallbee to consider the sins and disorders of the other
interior faculties of the soul, which are the imagination and sensitive
appetites with the hurt that proceeds from them. First I will ponder that my
Imaginatiue Faculty, is like a hall painted with many images, and figures,
some foul, some profane, and others ridiculous, monstrous, and deformed,
entertaining it self in painting them; taking pleasure to behold them,
soliciting the understanding to gaze upon them, and oftentimes drawing it
after it to cogitate upon them. From whence originally spring many sins,
which they call delectatio morosa, a continuing, or lingering delight in matter
of carnallities, reuenges, Ambitions, and auarices, delighting myself with the
imaginanation of these things as if they were present.

2. Then will I ponder, Ex D. Th. 1.2. q. 23. a. 4
how my appetitiue Faculties are like a rough troubled sea combated with eleven
waves of passions, encountering one with another; to wit, love, and hatred;
desiring, and flying: heaviness, and joy: hope, and despair: fear, and
audacitye, and anger. All which for the most part, I apply unto evil with
great disorder. For I love that which I ought to abhor, and I abhor that
which I ought to love: I desire that which I ought to fly, and I fly that
which I ought to desire: I rejoice in that for which I ought to be sorrowful,
and I am sorry for that wherein I ought to rejoice. From whence greiuous
sins do arize: for the appetites with these affections solicit the will,
and carry it after them, that with them it may give its consent.

3 Hereupon it is, that these passions are the arms, and snares of the devils
to combatte us, D. Amb. lib. 1. offic. ca. 4.
and to entangle us in great sins: for in seeing any passion rize up, they
are joyful to see it, and presently make use thereof to frame their
temptation: so that I myself give unto my enemy the principal arms
wherewith he does combatte, persecute, and destroy me, Besides this, these
passions are my torturers, and tormentors, for they make war within me
against the poor spirit, molesting me to make me will, Ad Romans 7.15.
what I would not, to do according to the desiers of my flesh. And so
likewise they are one contrary to another: for the passion of delight makes
me desire that, which the desire of honor abhors: and the desire of honor
that which the passion of avarice flies. For (as the wiseman says) I
always will, Prou. 13.4.
and I will not: I will virtue because it is good: and I will it not, because
it is laborious: I will vice because it is delectable, and I will it not,
because it is dishonest: And these willings, and nillings of my passions,
Colloquie Job. 7.20 Ad Romans 7.24.
are the tormentours of my miserable heart. O with what great reason may I
lament me to myself, saying to our Lord: Why have thou made me so contrary
unto thee? And how am I so heavy, and troublesome to myself? Vnhapy man that
I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this death? Let thy grace, o
Lord favor me to deliver me from so great a miserye? From this consideration
I am to draw a very resolute determination, to gither with my own will to
mortify these passions: for this gives life to my Passions, and my passions
give life unto it: and therefore they must dye together to be vanquished,
following herein the counsel of Ecclesiasticus who says: walk not after thy
own passions, Eccl. 18.30.
and desires; and separate thyselfe from thy own will: for if thou grauntest
unto thy soul her concupiscences, thy will make thee the laughing stock of
thy enemies. To put this in execution, we shall be assisted with the
examinations that shallbee setdowne in the meditations ensuing.

The XXVIII Meditation, wherein is set down a form of praying, making every
night an Examination of the Conscience.
ONe of the most effectual means to purifye the soul of vices, D. Basil.
sermo 1. de instit. Monach. D. Chrisost. Hom in Psalm. 4.
is the continual use of examining the conscience every day, before we go
to bed, which the holy fathers, and spiritual masters do very earnestly
recommend unto us. That form of making this examination, which was taught us
in five points by our glorious Father Ignatius, is the most proffitable of all
that I have seen, for that it contains a most excellent form of prayer for
all sorts of persons.

For the understanding whereof, D. Bern. and alij.
I breifely aduertize, that every day we do newly charge ourselves with two
debtes to our Lord, although very different, and for very diuerses respects.
The first debt is, for the innumerable benefits we receive of him. The second,
for the innumerable sins we commite against him. The first is paid with
thanks giving: the second, with dolor. And it is reason that in the end of
every day, we should pay them both, beginning with the first debt: as well
because it disposes to pay well the second: as also because (as saint Basile
says) when we go to prayer; De constitutionibus Monasti cis. c. 2.
we are not all ways to enter begging by, and by, for our own proffit: for
therein it seems, we give to understand that we seek therein principally
our own interest: but sometimes we must begin with the praises of God, giving
him thanks for the favors he has done us: for hereby we give to
understand that we principally seek the glory of God, and that we esteem
it more then all other things. 2.2. q. 83. art. 17.
The same thanksgiving also will serve us (as S. Thomas says) for a pretext
to obtain our petitions: for God willingly gives us what we ask him, when
he sees that we are thankful unto him for what he has given us.

3 Besides this, because I am to stir up the stinking sink of my sins,
least they should cause me such despair, Sermon. 11 iu ca^tic. cap. 48.9
and heaviness as should swallowe, and consume me, it is good (as S. Bernard
says) to prevent me with the remembrance of Gods benefits, praising him for
them, taking (as Isaias says) this bridle of praise, which he puts in my
mouth, that I be not thrown down headlong, and perish. And all beeit it is
truth (as S. In speculo disciplinae. p. 2. cap. 6.
Bonauenture says) that it is not allwaies necessary to observe this order
in the beginning of prayer: Yet in this present exercize it comes much to the
purpose for the reasons declared.

The first Point.
THe first point shallbee breifely to call to memory the benefits I have
received of our Lord, as well general, as special: and particularly those
that this very day he has done me, giving him very hearty thanks for them
all, acknowleding how great they are, as well for the greatenesse of him that
bestows them with so great love, as for the baseness of him that receives
them without meriting them. And reckoning them one by one, I may say: I give
thee thanks, o my God, for that thou createdst me of nothing, and have unto
this day preserved my life. I thank thee for that thou redeem did me with
thy precious blood, and made me a christian, and a member of thy chruche:
blessed be thou, for that thou have this present day fed me, and clothed me,
and delivered me from great perils of body, and soul, and given me many
good inspirations, ayding me to fulfill some works of obligation, etc. All
the good that is in me is thine, and to thee belongs the glory thereof, and
for it all the thanks that I can, I render unto thee, with the whole affection
of my Heart. And I beseech the Quires of angels, and all the blessed spirits
to praise thee for me, and to give thee thanks for the favors thou have
done me. Of this point we shall speak largely in the sixth part.

The second Point.
THe second point shallbee, to ask of our Lord with great instancie light to
know my sins, and grace to be contrite for them, alleging unto him thee
respects of my great necessity, and misery in this behalf. The first, is,
the great forgetfullnesse of my memory, The second, the great blindness of
my understanding. The third, the great coldness of my will. From whence it
proceeds that the devil holds me strongly tied with a threefolde cord of
my sins, which hardely I can break: because some sins I forget with the
same facillitie that I commit them: others thorough ignorance I know not:
and those which I do know, thorough my great coldness I deplore not as I
ought. Therefore, o my God, with thy inspiration remedy my forgetfullnesse:
with thy light illuminate my darkness: and with thy fire of love, chaze away
my coldenesse, that I may know my sins, and in such manner bewail them that
I may obtain pardon of them.

The third Point.
THis petition being made, I will lift my heart to God, beholding him as a
judge that is to judge me with great rigor, Sophon. 1.12.
searching (as Sophonias says) the corners of Jerusalem, which is my soul,
and the faculties thereof with candels, discovering all the finnes that are
therein, be they never so small: examining (as David says) not only my
unrighteousness, Psalm. 74 3.
but also my righteousness, and good works, with the which, evil
circumstances use to be mixed.

With this consideration, full of a holy fear in the presence of God, I will
begin to examine all the sins which in that day I have committed by thought,
word, and deed, and by omission, or negligence: and I will very attentively
endeavor to find out, Psalm. 18.13.
whither I have any of those which David calls, hidden sins; having
committed them thorough ignorance, or culpable inconsiderateness, or by the
illusion, and deceit of the devil, holding them for works of virtue: as if I
should hold for zeal, that which is Anger.

For this examination, that will help much, that has been said in the first
points of the meditations upon the 7. deadely sins, and upon the
commandments, senses, and faculties of the soul: for therein, all that may
be matter for a very often, and diligent examination, is set down. The manner
of making this examination shallbee, dividing the day into parts, and
considering what I did in the two first hours of the day: then in the other
two, separating the precious from the vile: and if I find any good, I will
with thanks attribute it to God, and the evil I will attribute to my
corrupted liberty: and of all together, with a very deep shame, and
confession, I will make an humble confession before God, fullfilling that of
David; I have said, Psalm. 31.5.
I will confess to our Lord my unrighteousness against miselfe: that is to say:
I have determined to confess my sins before God, not to excuse, but to
accuse myself; not lightening, but aggravating my sins, and pondering much
the injustice I did against God in committing them: for this is the day to
obtain pardon of them.

The fourth Point.
THe fourth Point shallbee, to procure so great a dolor for my sins that
it may come to be co^trition, sorowing for them principally, for being
offenses against God my summum Bonum, whom I desire to love, and do love
above all things: for with this so perfect dolor, sins are remitted, having
a purpose in fit time to confess them; as it happened to David himself, who
in saying, Psalm. 31.5.
I will confess my unrighteousness, against myself; he presently adds;
And thou did pardon the impiety of my sin. 2. Reg. 12.27.
And hardely had he before Nathan the Prophet pronounced this word, I have
sinned against our Lord, when the Prophet answered him, Our Lord likewise has
pardoned thy sin. So that if in the examination at night, I say unto God with
all my heart: It greiueth me, o my God, that I have offended thee, because I
love the above all things created, and would willingly have lost them all,
rather then have sinned: and with thy grace I purpose to confess all my
sins, with a determination never more to return unto them: at that very
instant I remain justified: And if that night I should dye suddenly, without
being able to confess me, allbeeit I had committed many mortal sins, I
should not be condemned for them. Whereby is seen the importance of this
dolor before my going to bed: for if I have sinned mortally, and death
assault me in my sleep, as he has assaulted many, with this dolor I
shallbee saved, and without it I shallbee damned.

To provoke me to this contrition, Ex. D. Greg. lib. 25. Moral. c. 26.
it is very available to compare that of the first point, with that of the
third: that is; the great benefits that in this day God has done me, with
the sins that I have committed, being ashamed of myself for having offended
so good a God, and so liberal a benefactour: and greeuing that I have
answered such benefits, with such offenses. To which end serve the
meditations ofsinnes, which we haueset down, especially the fifth. And that
which shallbee declared in the 31. Meditation.

The fifth Point.
THe fifth point is to make a very effectual purpose by Gods grace to amend
the day following, and not to fall into the like sins, Psalm. 118.106
with that earnestness wherewith the Prophet David says: I have sworn, and
determined to keep thy commandments eternally, not for a day, nor for two,
but thoroughout all my life, and all eternitye. And that this purpose may be
such, (besides that which shallbee declared in the meditation following) it is
necessaryeto have examined the occasions that I had to fall, by reason of such
a place, or such a person, or such a beesinesse, and withal to determine to
separate myself from this occasion, if I can leave it; and if not, to resolve
to use greater circumspectnesse, and to enter into it with prevention. Ad Phil.
2.13.
But because our resolutions are very weak, and mutable, if our Lord with his
grace do not fortifye, and establish them, I am to beseech him, that seeing
he gave me such a purpose, he will likewise give me grace to accomplish it;
and so I will conclude with the prayer of the Pater noster, making a pause with
feeling, in the three last petitions thereof, forming in this manner an amorous
colloquy.

I acknovvledge, o my God, Colloquie
the two debtes vvherevvith I am charged for thy benefits, and for my sins:
all that I have here done, is but little to satisfy them; for that which
wants I offer unto thee the most precious blood of thy Son, shed with
infinite love, and thankefullnesse; and with excessive dolor, and pain. For
the which I beseech thee, pardon the debtes of my sins, and aid me that I
may no more return unto them: permit me not to fall into the temptations
that shall assail me, but deliver me from all evil for the glory of thy
holy name. Amen.

The XXIX Meditation, wherein is set down another form of praying at three
times of the day, making a particular examination of some one vice to pull it
up by the Roots.
BEsides the general care which we ought to have, to cleanse the soul of all
her vices and sins, it is very convenient (as the holy fathers say, Collat.
5. cap. 14.
and specially Cassianus) to imploie a particular study to disroote some one
vice of those that use most to indaunger us, for with this so special care it
shallbee the more easily vanquished; and this vanquished, we may take heart
to get the victory of another, until we have vanquished them all: As the 7.
nations that were enemies to the Israelites, were vanquished by little, and
little, and by parts. To this end our glorious father Ignatius, taught us a
form of making a particular examination of one vice, wherein is included
another form of praying very proffitable, divided into three times of the
day, to wit morning, noone, and night, the which are much celebrated in
sacred scripture, by that which David says of himself: In the evening, in
the morning, and at midday, Psalm. 54.18. Daniel. 6.10.
I will recount unto God my miseries, hoping that he will hear me, and
deliver me from them. And of Daniel, the scripture says: That three times a
day he fell on his knees, and adored God, making confession before him of his
divine praises, and of his own sins. According unto this, we will divide
this form of prayer into three points, which may serve for the three times
aforesaid.

The first Point.
FIrst in the morning, in clothing me, kneeling on my knees like Daniel, and
putting myself in the presence of God, I will adore him, giving him thanks
for my life, quietness, and sleep, which he gave me the night passed, and
for the perils from which he delivered me, and by the way, I will likewise
examine, if since I lay down, sleeping, or waking, any thing that might be a
sin, has happned unto me, and with all my heart to be sorry therefore. 2.
The^ will I make an offer unto our Lord of all things whatsoever that I shall
do that day, ordaining them purely to his honor, and glory, requiring of
him preseueraunce in this pure intention until the end of the day, and of my
life: and beseeching him to accept my works in the union of those which his
only beegotten Son offered unto him for me in this life.

3 This done, I will make a valiant, and determinate resolution that day, by
Gods grace to separate myself from all kind of sin, after the manner that
David did, Psalm. 100.8.
when he said, that in the morning he killed all the sinners of the earth,
not with a sword of steel, but with a very steeled, and courageous resolution
to destroy them all, so far forth as they were adversaries to God, desiring
that in the city of my soul there may nothing live to offend him. But
particularly I must most resolutely determine, to depart from that vice which
I desire to disroote from my heart, conceiving against it a holy hatred for
the hurt that it does me.

4. That this purpose may be effectual, it will help me much not to take
things by the bulk, being ignorant of their difficulties, but to provide
for them with the eyes of prudence, and in the morning to imagine all the
difficulties, vexations, contempts, and occasions of stumbling, that probably
may be offered unto me that day, considering the quallitie of my person,
estate, and office, and the affairs, and persons with whom I am to converse.
Which having considered, I will endeavor willingly to accept for the love of
our Lord God, whatsoever shall happen against my liking, determining by Gods
grace for no such occasions, to fail in humillitie, and patience; nor to
admit any thing that may be a sin, founding this purpose, not upon my own
force, but upon the force that God shall give me, and upon some strong reasons
that may convince me, and make me affectionate to execute it: as Christ our
redeemer in the garden of gethsemani, set before his eyes all the torments that
the day following he was to suffer, and accepting them with great love, In
the meditation 22. of the 4. part. Collat. 19. cap. 14.
wrastled against fears, and sorrows with discourses, and prayers, as in its
place we shall see.

5. And if those who are very zealous will yet pass farther, and excel more
in virtue, they may take the counsel that a holy Abbot, (as Cassianus
reports) gave to those, who by living in solitariness have no occasions to
exercize humillitye, and patience: that they should imagine terrible dolours,
injuries, contempts, and torments come upon them by the hands of their
enemies, or of their companions under the pretext of pietye, such as were those
which the martyrs, and holy confessors have suffered, and to accept them all
very heartily, yea, and to desire that they might be offered them, and to
beg them of our celestial father with those words of David: Psalm. 25.2.
Colloquie
Prove me, o Lord, and try me, burn my heart, and my reins, for thy
great mercy is before me, and therein I trust that thou vvilt avde me; and
with this confidence, I may say unto thim. O if in this day, some body would
stricke me upon one cheek, how willingly for thy love would I offer him
the other! Or if any would speak unto me any injurious word, or bear
false witness against me, how heartily would I be silent, and suffer it
for thy love! O if my prelatet would command me any very sharp, and
difificult thing, that I in accomplishing it might show the love that I
bear thee! With such purposes as these, virtues are much augmented, and the
heart becomes strong to resist vices: but yet the imperfect, and lukewarmee,
must walk warily in such like meditations, least perhaps thorough their
imbecillitye that which should have been a means of their good, turn into a
snare of their temptation.

The second Point.
SEcondly, at Noone before dinner, setting myself in the presence of God, and
having asked of him light to come to the knowledge of my sins, I will examine
those which I have committed that morning in that particular vice: which if
they were many, I am to be ashamed that I have not fullfilled the resolution
that I made, nor kept my word which I gave to God, accusing my self of
infidellitye, inconstancye, and mutabillitye, and being sorrowful for my
transgressions herein, for being against a God that is so faithful, and
constant in benefitting me, and in accomplishing whatsoever he purposes to
do for my good. I am to reprehend myself (as Cassianus says) saying to
myself: Collat. 19. cap. 14.
art thou he that this morning did purpose such great matters, and
offeredst thyselfe to suffer very terrible injuries? then how comes it that so
light an occasion has overthrown thee? Thou did purpose to kill all the
enemies of God, and have thou renderd thyselfe to the least of them? Be
ashamed of thy cowadize, humble thyselfe before God, and turn a new to
determine, trusting with more viuacitie in his mercy, that it may aid thy
great weakness. I will likewise examine the cause, and occasion of hauiug
failed, to avoid it, or to prevent it, wholely resolving upon amendment the
rest of the day.

2. I may likewise at this time remember, that Christ our Lord was crucified
at midday, and perseuered a great part of the evening, suffering most
grievous pains upon the cross with great constancy until he gave up the
ghost. And in thankefullnesse for this benefit, I am to purpose to be very
constant in not yiedling to the lust of my flesh, nor to my own will in that
vice, that it may dye in me, or I may dye fighting against it, until I
vanquish it. Sometimes again I may call to mind, that Christ our Lord
likewise at midday ascended above all the heavens to enjoy the fruit of his
labors. And with this consideration I may animate myself to fight a new
against my passions: and with both considerations I may say unto him that of
the Canticles: O thou beloved of my soul, Cant. 1.6.
show unto me with thy celestial light the place where at midday thou
reposest, and feedest thy sheep, that I may there fix my heart, and my
desires, and not go wandering any more to seek after vices.

The third Point.
AT night before I sleep, I will make another examination like that which I
made before dinner, comparing the times that I sinned in the morning, with
those that I sinned in the evening: and if they were fewer I will give thanks
to God for this ame^dement, because it has come from his hand; but if they
were more, I am to confound myself, to see, that insteede of going forward,
I turn back: but yet I am not to be dismayed, but to purpose anewe, a very
hearty amendment: for with such a like battle, Proverb, 24.16.
the victory is obtained. For hereupon said the holy Ghost: The just man
falls seven times a day, and shall rise again: giving to understand, that
falling, and yet rising again, he shall come by Gods favor to stand upright.
The same comparison I am to make between the sins of one day, and those of
another, according to the counsel of S. Basile: Ser. de abdic. re rum sermo.
10.
and between those of one week, and those of another, according to the
counsel of S. Dorotheus, helping my memory by noting them with two lines, or
strakes for every day in the week: putting in the one line as many prikes as
I have sinned times in the morning, and in the other those of the evening.

It will likewise help me to give myself a stroke on the breast when I fall
into this sin: the one to remember the times that I have sinned, by the times
that I have stricke^ my breast: and the other, forthwith to move me to
contrition for my sin, and to obtain pardon thereof. Frouerb. 24.16.
For in this sense also said the holy Ghost, the just man falls seven times
a day: and rises again, giving to understand, that when he falls, he
has light to know that he has fallen: and if he falls while it is day,
he stays not to rise up at night: rather if he fall seven times, he rises
seven times as soon as he has fallen, sorrowing for his fall, and purposing
amendment: and in this manner, his frequent falling shallbee turned into
frequent praying, and into good affections, and purposes, which with new grace
repair the hurt of the fall. Other means of examining, and reflecting upon
our works, shallbee set down in the sixth part in the meditation of what God
said, having finished the work of the Creation of the world.

Meditations for before Confession and Communion.
AS the Purity of the soul which is the end of the purgative way, is
perfectly obtained with the use of the two sacraments of Confession, and
Communion; it shall not be amiss here to set down certain Meditations,
whereby we may prepare ourselves worthily to receive them: and by the way, to
teach principiants the manner how to make this preparation, causing them to
hold in estimation the frequencye of these two remedies, that God has left us
for our Salvation.

The XXX. Meditation of the Excellencyes of the holy Sacrament of Confession:
of the Virtues that are exercised therein: and of the Graces that are received.
The first Point.
FIrst, D. Tho. 3. p. q. 84. art. 6. and 7.
I am to consider the great favor that God has done to his church, and to
me as a member thereof, in having instituted the holy sacrament of penance,
pondering some things that discover the greatenesse of this benefit, and
animate me to the use thereof. First, it being proper to God alone to pardon
sins, Isai. 43.25. Ioa^. 20.23.
he would put this power in the hands of the priests, assuring us that he
would approve in heaven, the sentence that they should give upon earth. And
he ordained, that these priests should be men subject likewise to sin, and
in need of the self same remedy, that they might be the more compassionate
of sinners. And the power that he gave them was so ample, that he reserved to
himself alone no sin, how great soever, nor limited unto them the number of
sins, nor how often they were to pardon them: for he said to S. Matthew.
18.22.
Peter, that pardon should be given not only seven times, but seventy times
seven, that is, without number, or limitation. In all which is apparent the
goodness of this great God, Colloquie.
and the desire that he has to forgive us. O merciful father, seventy and
seven times, and thousands of times more may the angels of heaven lavvde thee,
for the favor thou do to us sinners that live upon earth. As often as we
can sin, so often, if we ask pardon of thee thou will pardon us, for thy
mercy is greater then our miserye. I will confidently approache to ask
pardon for the iniurye, seeing he himself that is iniuried, so liberally does
offer it me.

2. Secondly, I will ponder how this sovereign judge being to make a most
strict judgment of our lives in the end of them, and in the end of the
world; would mercifully change this rigorous judgment of our sins, into
the merciful judgment that we shall make of them in this sacrament: 1.
Corin. 11.31. D. Cypr. sermon. de passione. Nahum. 1.9.
so that (as the Apostle says) if here we shallbee judged, and absolved, we
shall no more be judged, and condemned for those sins: for to this end the
scripture says; that he neither judges, nor chastizeth one thing twice.
Finally this Sacrament according to the Prophecye of Zacharias is a fountain
of living water that God has in his church to wash the uncleanness of our
sins; to heal the infirmities, Zachar. 13.1.
and wounds of our vices: to restore unto us the life of grace, the beautye of
charity, and the splendor of virtues: to repair lost merits, and to remedy
the other hurtes of our sins. And it is a continual, and open fountain, for
it is never dry, nor God will never shut it so long a we live, rather he
desires that as soon as ever we have sinned we should approache to wash our
selves therein. Colloquie. Isai. 12.3.
O blessed be the fountain of Gods goodness, from vvhe^ce springs this
fountain of so great mercy. ^ome, o my soul, for water to this fountain
of thy Savior: come with heaviness by reason of thy sin: but with joy
thorough hope to wash thyselfe therein. This point shallbee handeled more
largely in the fifth Part.

The second Point.
SEcondly, I am to consider what an excellent work the act of confession is,
to affect us the more to exercise, and frequent it; pondering how Christ our
Lord instituted this Sacrament in his church, that the faithful might take
occasion by their own sins, to exercise excellent acts of virtues,
wherewith they might not only repair the losses they received by them, but
also might gain new commodities. These acts are principally seven.

1. The First is of faith, beleiuing firmly that the pardoning of sins,
which is proper to God alone, has been communicated to Preistes, Math. 18 18.
putting in their hands the keys of heaven, wherewith they shall open the
gates thereof, that from thence, may descend the celestial giuftes, and
graces that justify sinners: and that sinners may enter therein to enjoy the
kingdom which is promised to the just.

The 2. act is of hope above all humane hope: for the confession of our own
crime, which in the tribunalls of the world is a means to condemn the
guiltye: in this tribunal of heaven is a means to absolve him. The 3. Act is
of charity to which it pertains to be greatly sorrye for having offended
the infinite Goodness of God, and lost his grace, and freindship, desiring to
repair it by loving, and serving him with all our hearts. The 4. is of
heroical humillitye, humbling ourselves not only before God, but before men:
discovering unto his ministers the secret things that are to humble us, and to
cause in us great shame and confusion, embracing this contempt for the love of
God, and delighting that others should hold us in that figure that we hold
ourselves. The 5. is of excellent obedience in a matter, (as has been said)
that is so hard, and difficult: and in subiecting ourselves to our confessors,
as to our superiors, with a mind to obey them in whatsoever they shall
ordain to this end. The 6. is of justice highly elevated, exercizing its
acts as shall be declared, of accuser, guilty, witness, judge, and
executioner: and subiecting ourselves to Gods minister, not perforce, but
willingly, with a mind to undergo his sentence: and with a zeal to revenge
in ourselves, the injuries we have done against God: and to repair, and
restore the hurtes that we have done to our neighbor. The 7. is of admirable
fortitude, ourselves vanquishing ourselves, and the vehement inclination that
men have to cover their sins, to defend, and excuse them, like Adam, from
whom all men do inherit it. Job. 31.33.
For which (as holy Job notes) whosoever vanquisheth himself herein is more
then a man; and sometimes we had need of no less fortitude to confess with
humility the sin committed, lib. 22. Moral. cap. 12.
then not to commit it. For (as S. Gregory says) we use to suffer a
greater war in manifesting the sin committed, then would have been
suffered in resisting the committing it. And therefore he is no less
admirable, that with humility confesses well his sins, then he that
exercizeth other virtues.

These seven acts so heroycall accompany confession, and make it of great
merit before God, and of great glory before the angels, and before
discreet, and prudent confessors, and therefore I am to endeavor to exercize
them with great spirit, that the fruit, and the grace may be more
aboundaunt, Eccles. 14.16.
saying to myself that of Eccesiasticus: Give, and receive and justify thy
soul: and seeing God is willing to give thee pardon of the seven deadely
sins, and grace with the seven gifts thereof, give thou unto him these seven
acts, wherewith thou may dispose thyselfe to receive the^, cry out seven
times like the child whom the Prophet Elizeus raized from death, budding out
these seven affections, 4. Reg. 4.35.
that God may exalte thee to a new life, and exalt thee to the height thereof.

The third Point.
THirdly, I am to consider the graces, and favors that God does to those that
confess themselves, receiving the sacrament with that disposition which is
requisite. The which we may reduce to three, Ad Romans 14.17. Math. 3.2. Ex D.
Aug. in illud ps. 95. Confessio, and pulchritudo in conspectu eius.
wherein S. Paul puts the kingdom of God, saying, that it is justice,
peace, and joy in the holy Ghost; which kingdom is promised to those that
truly do penance; First, he grants them justice, which is the grace of
justification, justifying, them of all their sins, making them his freindes,
and adoptiue children, and inheritours of his heaven. And with this grace he
gives them charity, and virtues infused, and the gifts of the holy Ghost,
and the true beautye of the soul, which goes together with humble confession.
And if they come to confession with justice, there it is augmented
communicating unto them greater grace, and fullfilling that which is said in
the Apocalips. Apocal. 22.11. Eccl. 18.22.
He that is just, let him be more justified, endeavoring not to cease
justifying himself more, and more until death.

2 Secondly, he grants them peace supernatural, not only for that he
reconcileth them to himself: but also for that in reward of the glorious
victory which they obtain of themselves, vanquishing the difficulties of
confession, he gives them three victories over their enemies, destroying
some, putting others to flight, and subjecting the rest unto the^. He
destroys sins, casting the^ into the profunditie of the sea: and the
devils with their temptation fly away, for there is nothing that, more
terrifieth them then to manifest the wounds of the conscience to the
physician, Prou. 16.7.
that is to cure the^. And the passions of the flesh begin to yeilde themselves
to the spirit: for when the ways of a man are pleasing unto God, he will make
his enemies to be at peace with him. Ex Cassian. collat. 2. c. 10. and 11. D.
Bonauen. in speculo disciplina. p. 2. c. 3. Psalm. 10.10.
And threfore it is a great means of vanquishing temptations, and passions to
manifest them to the confessor, and spiritual father: for while they remain
concealed, the devil is in peace, and we in a terrible conflict: but in
discovering them, he flies, and we remain in peace.

3 Thirdly, he grants joy in the holy Ghost, banishing the fears, and
heaviness that spring from an evil conscience, replenishing them with
alacrity with the news of pardon, according to that of the prophet David;
Thou shall give to my hearing joy, and gladness, and my humbled bones shall
rejoice. For taking from them the most heavy burden of their sins, which
wayeth them down like lead; and the spirit of sadness, which withered, and
consumed them, they grow green again, and lift up their head with the hope
of pardon, and with the pledges they receive of life everlasting.

4 With this consideration, I am to resolve myself to execute all that is
necessary for confession, how painful, shameful, and troublesome soever it
seems, remembering that all is but little, in comparison of the great good
that God promises me, and of the eternal evil from which he delivers
me. And if I consider what Christ our Savior did for the pardon of my
sins, what dolours, what ignominies, and what pains he suffered for them:
that will soon appear but little unto me that God requires for their pardon.
And again if I ponder how much God might require of me, if he would extend
his rigor, seeing I merited dolours, ignominies, and eternal torments, I
shall presently see that he requires of me but very little. And therefore I
may imagine that the same words are spoken to me, 4. Reg. 5.13.
which were spoken to leprous Naaman by his servants: Father, if the prophet
Elizeus had commanded thee to have done some very grievous thing to cure thy
leprosy, thou had reason to do it, how much more having told thee a thing
so easy as to wash thyselfe seven times in Jordan? Colloquie.
O my soul, if God should command thee many things very sharp, and heavy,
to heal the leprosye of thy sins, it were reason thou should do them
with great pro^ptnesse, and speed: how much more bidding thee do a thing
so easy to do, as is; Confess thy sins, and thou shallt be healed: wash
thyselfe seven times in the Jordan of penance, accompanying thy confession,
with the seven affections above named, and thou shallt be cleansed of the
leprosy of thy sins. Vaunt thyselfe, like Job, Job. 31.33. Eccles. 4.24.
of not hiding thy sin, as a frail man, nor covering with in thy bosom thy
iniquity. Take the counsel of the wise man who says, for the salvation of
thy soul, be not ashamed to confess the truth: for there is one shame that
draws on a nevve sin: and another that draws on great honor, and
glory. If vanquished by shame thou co^cealest thy sin, thou encreasest it:
but if with shame thou confessest it, thou shall obtain a crown of great
glory for the victory thou gainedst by confessing thy sins.

The XXXI. Meditation, of Preparation to receive the holy Sacrament of
Penance.
The end of this Meditation is, before my Confession, to make of myself so
perfect a Judgment, as may make plain all the difficulties that may happen in
the sacramental Judgment, to be made by the Confessor, that I may be
secure in the last Judgment, which the supreme Judge is to make of me. In
this Judgment I myself am to execute the office of the accuser, the witness,
the Judge, and the tormentour. And hereupon S. Gregory says, that
conscientia accusat, lib. 25. moral. c. 26.
ratio ludicat, timor ligat, dolor excruciat: My conscience is to accuse me of
all my sins without omitting any one. My reason is to judge what I merit for
them, sentencing that I am worthy of great punishment for having committed
them. The fear of God, and of his rigorous judgment is to bind me, and
humbly to subject me to undergo what penance soever that reason shall
dictate, and the Confessor shall impose upon me. And dolor as an executioner,
is to torment me breaking, Psalm. 4.5.
and shiuering my heart, for the offenses I have done to my creator. These
four Judicial acts, am ^to do within the hall of my heart, quickening them
with the considerations which to this end are ordained: Job. 23.4. and 35.14.
Isai. 43.26.
and much more with the remembrance of the presence of God, the judge of the
quick, and of the dead, whom I am to behold seated in the Throne of his
majesty, as in the 9. Meditation has been declared: for that the view of
this most righteous Judge, will be a cause to make me do it with greater
diligence.

The first Point.
FIrst, I am to consider, D. Tho. 3. p. q. 90. act. 2.
that our Lord Christ would that our own acts, should be parts of this
sacrament, to wit, contrition, confession, and satisfaction, which answer
to the three sorts of sinning by thought, word, and deed, that I myself
might concur to the grace of my Justification: and that seeing I sinned with
my acts, with the same I might dispose myself to receive my pardon. And now
that it has been the good pleasure of our Lord to ennoble my acts, making
them the Instruments of his grace, it is reason that I should exercise them,
with the greatest excellency that I may, Eccles. 33 23.
laboring (as the Wise Man says) to be in them superexcellent: requiring of
the three Persons of the Godheade, particular favor for every one of them. Of
the holy Spirit, to whom is attributed Charity, I will beg contrition of
heart, beseeching him that he will kindle in my soul the fire of his love,
from the which may proceed such a dolor, as may consume all the dross of my
sins. Of the Son of God, who is the word of the eternal Father, to whom is
attribued wisdom, I will beg light to know my sins, and such humble
words to confess them that I may be purified, and cleansed of of them. Of
the eternal Father, to whom is attributed Power, I will beg force for the
works of satisfaction, with perseueraunce until I have paid all the pains
that I owe for my sins. Colloquie.
O most blessed Trinity assist in my heart, and in my lips, that I may
vvorthily confess all my sins, and obtain, complete remission of them.
Amen. Then am I to consider all that is necessary to exercize these three
acts with great perfection, discoursing of every one of them.

The Second Point.
1. AS concerning the first act, Of Contrition.
which is sorrow for sins, I am to procure, to have it the most perfect that
may be, not contenting myself with an imperfect sorrow which they call
Attrition, proceeding from fear of the pains of hell, but procuring the
perfect sorrow which they call Contritio^, and proceeds from the love of God,
above all things, as before has been said. And this sorrow must be the
greatest that possibly may be, because it is the measure of the grace that is
given in this sacrament. So that if the sorrow be imperfect, and little the
grace shallbee little: if it be perfect, and great, the grace shallbee great:
for look, as sorrow increases, so shall grace: and if there be no sorrow,
no grace shallbee given. And therefore the principal part of this
preparation, consists in the perfection of sorrow: unto the which I am to
move myself with the considerations that were set down in the fifth
Meditation, and with some similitudes deduced out of holy scripture to move us
unto the tears of love.

2. Of the tears of love. Hierem. 6.26.
Sometimes it tells me that I should weep bitterly as a mother weepeth for
the death of her only begothen, upon whom she had laid all her love, and
repose: so will I weep for the spiritual death of my soul which is my only
one, and by reason is much to be loved: yet I myself have cruelly slain her
by sin, and subjected her to death everlasting. And seeing I have so great
a feeling of the loss of those things that I love, a much greater feeling am I
to have of this, because it is the greatest of all: and herein tears are well
employed. For a mother, let her weep never so much, she shall not give life
to her son that is dead: but I with the tears of Contrition, shall obtain
life for my dead soul. O infinite God, Colloquie
I am very much greaued for the injury I hune done thee, by killing with
sin the soul that thou gave me, and seeing it is more thine, then mine,
have mercy upon it. Deliver my soul from the svvorde of death, Psalm. 21.21.
and my only one from the dog of Hell, that I may live to thee, and confess
thy holy name amen.

2 I will likewise weep for my sins, because with them I have killed the
only begotten Son, Zacha. 12.10. Ad Heb. 6.6.
who through excellency meriteth this name, Christ Jesus my Lord, whom within
myself I have crucified again, and have, as much as lies in me given
occasion that he should die. O only begoten Son of the Father, I am
exceedingly sorroufull for my sins, Colloquie
for having binne thereby a cause of thy death: return a Lord to live in my
soul with thy grace, seeing thou dydst die to give it life.

3 Othersometimes it tells me, that I should weep like a Bride that has by
death lost her beloved spouse, upon whom depended her whole remedy, and
relief, thereby remaining a widow, poor and abandoned. And so will I weep
for my sins, by the which I have lost God the spouse of my soul, and with
him have lost the jewels of his grace, and Charity, and the gifts that he
had given me, remaining like a widow, not able to engender children of good
works, merittes of life everlasting, but abandoned, Colloquie
and left dessolate without the protection of so sweet a spouse. O if my heart
would shiuer, and break with the force of dolor, for having lost such a
spouse, such Ievvells, and such amiable protection. And yet notwithstanding if
I perceive that my heart is still hardened, and melts not with the
considerations of love, Ex D. Bern. sermon. 16. in Cant.
I will make use of those of fear before mentioned, that fear, (as S Barnard
says), may quickne me, and open the door to love, excitetur vt excitet. Let
fear be awakned that it may awake me. Fear o my soul, the face of the Judge,
whom the powers of heaven do fear, the wrath of the Omnipotent, the face of
his fury, the noise of the world that shall perish, the fire that shall burn
it, the voice of the Archangell, and the most rigorous words of the final
sentence. Fear the teeth of the Dragon, the belly of Hell, the roating of
fierce beasts that stand ready to devour, the worm that ever gnaweth, the
fire that allwaies burns, the smoke, the brimstone, the whirlewinde, and the
exterior darkness. O who can give water to my head, and fountain of
tears to my eyes, Colloquie
that I may there with prevent the eternal lamentation, the gnashing of
teeth, the binding of hands and feet, the weight of the fiery chains that
oppress, that gripe, that burn and that never cons^me. With these tears of
fear, I am to dispose myself to pass on to those of love. Tract. in illud.
^Ioan. 4. Charitas perfecta for as mittit timorem.
For (as S. Augustine says) Fear must be like the needle that enters through
the cloth, not to remain within itself, but to make the threde enter,
wherewith to ioyn the parts that are disioyned: so fear must serve to make
Charity enter, and to join together the affections of the soul, employing
them in loving God, and bewaling the offense that it has do^ne him.

The Third Point.
In order to the second act which is Confession: Of Confession.
presupposing the examination, and auerring of sins in that manner that has
been declared in the third Point of the 30. Meditation. The first purpose
must be to confess them all entirely, how ignominious soever they be,
vanquishing the shame that may disturb me, with those considerations that
were set down in the end of the last meditation, saying to myself: better is
shame in the face, then, a spot in the heart? If thou suffer not now this
little confusion, thou shallt suffer a greater in the day of Judgment. And
seeing God knows well all thy iniquites, what is it for his minister to know
them, who in his name is to pardon them? Courage then, give glory to God, and
confess thyselfe, for thy confession shall not be like that of Achan to dye,
but like that of David to live. Iosue 7. De puritate conscientiae. cap. 1.
Having thus resolved, it is good (as S. Bonauenture advises us) to begin
confession with that sin that causes me, most shame: for that vanquishing
the greatest of my enemies, it will be easy to va^quish the resteas thegy ant
Golias being vanquished, the Philistians fled. The second purpose must be to
manifest my sins, Ex D. Tho quaest. 9. addit. art. ti. 4.
not only with Integrity, but with all the humility that I may, making of
all, a clear, pure, sincere, naked, and well Intentioned Confession: not
excusing, nor extenuating my sins, not casting the fault upon my neighbor
like Adam, Psalm. 31 and 24. D. Bernar. de gradibus Humillitatis. simulata
confessio D. Bona uentura vbi supr cap. 3. 2. Reg. 12.13.
not upon the Devil like Eua, but upon myself like David, confessing my
iniquity against myself, and saying that it is exceeding great. But yet I
must avoid another extremity, of so much exaggerating my sins that it may
seem to be a fained confession, to be honored, and esteemed for humble, for
vainglory uses many ways to assail these works of humility, seeking in
them her own honor. The third purpose must be, to hear the reprehention of
the confessor with great silence, and humility, without interrupting him,
though it be very rigorous, as the holy king David heard the terrible
reprehentio^ of the Prophet Nathan, acknowledging his fault, and saying, I have
sinned against our Lord. For herein shall be vetified that of Ecclesiasticus,
Hear silently, and for the reverence that herein thou show, Eccles. 32.9.
Accedet tibi bona gratia Good grace shall be added unto thee, and what better
grace, then that which is here given, which is the grace of God himself.

In all this it will be a great aid unto me, not to guard the Priest as he
is a man, D. Bonauentura in specul. part. 2. cap. 3. and de informati. norut.
c. 12. Colloquie Eccles. 20.4. Ezech. 18.22.
but as he is the Lieftenant of God, or rather as God himself is in him,
respecting him with internal, and external reverence: for there would his
divine Majesty, that the Confessor should absolve, not praying for pardon, but
commanding, and sentencing as God, saying, I absoule thee. O my soul, seeing
thou hopest to hear this word of eternal life, what matter is it to suffer
some temporal shame? show in thy correction humble repentance, and thou shall
remain free from voluntary sin. Discover once all thy sins, seeing God
has promised thee to forget them all.

The Fourth Point.
IN order to the third Act of satisfaction, I am to make a most effectual
determination, Of Satis faction.
to obey my Confessor in whatsoever thing convenient that he shall command
me: as well for the medicine of my spiritual infirmities, as to satissie for
the injuries that I have done against God: for it is reason that the ficke
should obey the Physician, in things that are necessary for the obtaining of
his health, and for the escaping the peril and occasion near at hand to
destroy it. And it is likewise just, that the Detter should pay that he owes
to his Creditor. And seeing God is willing to pardon me the sin, and to
change the eternal into temporal punishmente, it is reason to animate myself
to receive with a good will, that penance which my Confessor shall assign me
to pay it, saying with David: Ego in flagella paratus sum. I am ready for the
punishmente that my sins deserve: Psalm. 37.18.
and my dolor shall ever be with me. I will confess my impiety, and cogitabo
pro peccato meo, and I will all ways have a care of my sin, procuring that
nether my memory may forgetit, nor my eyes cease to bewaille it, nor my hands
to chastize it, until it be wholly blotted out.

2 To this end it will help me to consider the terrible penance that Christ
our Savior did in satisfaction of my sins. What more rigorous dicipline
could there be then that of his whippinges? What rougher hairecloth then the
prickles of his thorns, of his passion? What bed harder then that of his
Cross? And what fast more terrible then all day to suffer hunger and thirst,
and to break his fast with gall, and vinegar? O my soul, Colloquie
seeing Christ suffered so much for the sins that he committed not, suffer
somvvhat for those that thou have committed, Matt. 3.
yield fruit worthy of penance, for the tree that bears not such fruit as
Christ, shall have noe part with Christ.

3 It will much help me likewise to consider the pains of purgatory, whereof
soon after we shall speak. For it is a great folly not to be willing to pay
the debt, until the Creditor lay his execution upon me, and cast me into
prison with costs, and charges: paing in Purgatory with terrible pains, that
which in this life I may pay with my short satisfaction, and great proffit. For
such is the liberallity of God, that he rewards with new pay, the same that I
do to pay the debt, recompesing it with mentation of grace, and glory.

4 Finaly, I am to make another most effectual resolution to amend my life,
and no more to return to the sins that I have committed: For if this purpose
be wanting, the Contrition is fained, the Confession sacrilegious, the
satisfaction little auailable, and the absolution of no effect: for his sins
are not remitted to him, that has a purpose to return unto them: and though
it were but a venial sin, it shall not be pardoned, unless there be a
purpose of amendment of it.

1. With this preparation, conseruing these holy Affections, and purposes, I
may securely come to this holy saerament, putting in practice what I have
determined with a defire to renew my life, and to make a great change therein,
Hierem. 31. iuxta 70. and D. Hier. ibi, cogitationes operibus tunge.
imagining that that of the Prophet Hieremie is spoken to me: Get thee up to a
watch tower, set before thee thy bitternesses, bewailing bitterly thy sins:
direct thy heart in the right way wherein thou wast wont to walk. and da cor
tuum super humeros tuos, And put thy haite upon thy shoulders, taking with love
the yoke of obedience to fulfill what God, and his ministers shall command me.

The xxxii. Meditation of Thanksgiving after Confession.
Having ended the Confession of my sins, and receled Absolutio^, it is very
convenient to give some little time to the Confession of praises, for the favor
that God has done me: for both Coufessions our Lord exacteth of us, according
to the saying of the Prophet Oseas: Oseae 14.3.
Turn, o Israel to the Lord thy God, seeing thou have fallen thorough thine
own Iniquitye: take words with you, and convert you to our Lord, saying unto
him. Take from us, o Lord all our sin, receive our good Intention, for we
offer unto thee the calves of ourlippes: that is, in steed of the ealues which
of old they offered thee in sacrifize, we offer unto thee now the calves of
words; confessing our sins that that thou may remitte them, and
confessing thy mercyes, when thou have remitted them. Psalm. 49.23.
This sacrifize of praise, as David says, honoreth God much: and in it
consists the way, and means to obtain perfect health, which is confirmed
thereby to the grateful, and is ordinarily much debilitated in the
ungrateful. Luc. 17.17.
To this end. it will help to consider how much our Lord Christ was pleased
with the leprous Samaritan, who going to present himself to the priest, was
cured as he went, of his leprofie, and forth with returned back to give
thanks for the health that was given him: and contrarily, how much he was
displeased with his other nine companions, who having received the like
benefit, returned not to acknowledge it, and to give unto God the Glory which
thy owed him: as we shall farther consider, in the meditation of this miracle.

Therefore having ended my Confession, I will recollect myself in the Church
before the most blessed Sacrament or in some other convenient place, where
being set in the presence of the everliving God, I will revive the Faith of
the favor he has done me, wherein with my bodily ears, I have heard that
favorable sentence, and most sweet word. I absolve thee. Psalm. ^0.10. D.
Thom. 2.2. quasti^ 107 art. 2.
A word powerful to do what it signifies, to give joy to my ears, and
gladness to my humbled bones. And so trusting in the goodness and mercy of
God, that he has made good and ratified this sentence, I will endeavor to
exercize three acts of thanks giving: which are, to acknowledge the benefit,
to praise God for it, and to offer unto him some service.

The first Point.
FIrst, I will ponder in my heart, the manifold benefits that in this holy
sacrament I have received: of the which the prophet David made a breife
catalogue by way of praise in the 102. Psalm; Psalm 102.
and they may be reduced unto six. The 1. is, to pardon me all my sins,
not only the confessed, but also the forgotten sins, and those which without
my fault; I could not have knowledge of. The 2. is to heal the spiritual
Infirmities of my soul, as are vices, and passions, heaviness. and fears,
and other afflictions, putting a moderation in all, according to reason. The 3.
is to deliver me from the eternal Death, whereunto I was condemned by my
sin: and from the most bitter death, which the privation of Gods grace
brings with it. The 4. is to crown me with mercy, and the works of
mercy, favoring me to gain the victory of temptations, wherewith I have
been, and shallbee combated: delinering me from other innumerable miseries,
and offering me his aid, that I may no more return to them. The 5. is to
fill my desire with good things, giving me his grace, and Charity with the
rest of the virtues, or new augmentation there of. The 6. is to renew my youth
like the eagle, vnclothing me of the works, and customs of the old man,
clothing me with those of the new man, and restoring unto me the first
feruour-of spirit, with new gladness of my heart, to exercize new works of
virtue with great perfection. These benefits our lord for his part grants
to those that confess themselves as they ought. Ex D. Tho. 1.2. q. 106. act. 2.
And so much the greater are the benefits, by how much more freely they are
given without any merit of ours: and in this behalf the true penitent ought to
be the more grateful. And with this spirit, I will greatly exagerrate the
infinite liberality of God toward me, and with a silence of admiration, I
will yeilde myself vanquished thereby.

The second Point.
THen will I break out into a canticle of praise with great affection, saying
the words of this Psalm. Psalm. 102.
Bless our Lord o my soul, and all that is within me praise his holy name:
bless our lord, o my soul, and be not forgetful of the favor that he has
done thee he remitteth all thy sins, and heals all thy Infirmities: he
redeemeth thy life from death, and crowns thee with mercy, and merciful
works: he fills with good things thy desire, and like an eagle renews thy
youth: he has not chastized me according to my sins, nor inflicted on me
that punishment, that my iniquities deserved: as far as the east is distant
from the west, so fare has he put from me all my Impieties: as the father
has compassion of his children, so our lord has compassion of those that
fear him, for he well knows our weakness, and the mass whereof we were
formed. Colloquie
O God of my soul, if the mercies are so great that thou have done me,
what shall I do not to he behind kande in thanks giuings. I desire to
procure with thy Aid, that which thou have begun in me by thy mercy: and
seeing thou have pardoned my sins, I will never more return unto them.
Seeing thou have delivered me from death, I will not again subject myself
thereunto; seeing thou have crowned me with morcies, I will give thee the
glory of all my crowns. Add o Lord, this mercy to the former, to fill my
desire with thy good things of heaven, giving me grace to occoplish what I
offer unto thee, changing my fortitude in such manner, that with great
fervor I may walk, Isai. 40.31.
run, and fly, like a renewed eagle, until I obtain the eternal crown
of thy glory. Amen.

After this forte, we may make other canticles of praise, inuiting those
saints that were great sinners to gloriefy God for me, for having pardoned
my sins.

The third Point
FInallly in order to the third act of thanks giving, I am to do three
things, First, to confirm myself much in my inte^tions of Amendeme^t,
imagining that Christ our Lord says unto me, as he said to that other
sick man in the Temple, who was giving thanks for the health that he had
received: Ecce sanus factus es iam noli p^ceare, Joan. 5.
ne tibi aliquid deterius contingat. Behold, now thouart whole sin no more,
least some other worse evil happen unto the: Prouer. 26.11. 2. Petr. 2.22.
Luca 11 26.
for the relapse is vsualy worse then the fall. But if like a dog I return
to eat what I vomited, after this eating, the first devil will enter with
seven other spirits, worse then himself and this second entrance shallbee
much worse then the first. And at least I am much to be afraid, of falling
near upon my Confession. For if the self sameday, I fall into the self same
sins, it will be a sign that my conversion was cold, and imperfect, though
it were true: and that of Ecclesiasticus may be said unto me: Ecclos. 34.30.
he that was heth himself for having touched a dead man, and retourneth
presently to touch him, what has his washing auailed him? And so the man that
fasteth for his sins, and presently returns to commit them, to what end
is his Hamiliation? The praire of this man who shall hear it? Proverb. 24.16.
But this I am to consider, to move me to fear, not to distrust, for it is not
strange for a man to fall 7 times, and to rise again as often.

2 The second thing that I ought to do, is forthwith to accomplish all my
pen^unce, if it may be accomplished and if not some, part thereof with a
spirit, and affection of obedience, and love, to pay somewhat of the much that I
owe unto God, desi^ing to have much force to do much more for him, that has
done me so many benefits: and saying that of the other seruante. Math. 18.26.
Have patience with me o lord, and I will labor to pay thee, the whole debt.

3. The third thing is, in than kefullnesse of the benefit received in this
sacrament of penance, to dispose myself with great fervor, to receive that,
of the sacred Communion, because for this end, it is ordained: Psalm. 115.12.
according to that of the Prophet David: What shall I give to our Lord etc. I
will receive the Chalice of salvation, and will inuocat his holy name.

The XXXIII. Meditation of the most blessed Sacrament of the Altar, before
Communion.
OF the excellencies, and commodities of this nost blessed Sacrament of the
Altar, we shall speak in the fourth part among the mysteries of the Supper,
but more largely in the sixth part among the divine Benifittes. Now in this
Meditation, I will only point out certain considerations to communicate with
reverence, and devotion, in the which I am to fix my eyes upon the ponderation
of these four things, to wit: The greatnesses of our Lord that comes to
visit us: the vileness of man who^ he comes to visit: the amiable fashione
wherein he comes: and the ends of his coming: making comparison between
the one, and the other, for the greater splendor of the soueraignety of this
benefit.

The First Point.
First I am to consider the greatnesses of this Lord, that is enclosed in this
blessed Sacrament, actuating lively my faith of the^ all, as well of those that
he has as he is God, as of those which he hat as he is man.

1. First I will discourse of the greatnesses of his Godheade, and of the
works that he does, Joan. 1.14. Ad Heb. 1.3.
as he is God, pondering that he that is there, is the very only begotten
Son, which is in the bosom of the eternal Father, the brightnesses of his
Glory, and the figure of his substance, as Eternal, Immense, Infinite, and
Omnipotente as the Father, and the very wisdom, Goodness, and Fortitude, by
whom all things were created, and are conserved. There also is the governor
of the world, the sanctifier and glorifier of souls, he that is the first
beginning and the last end of all creatures. And though he be a Lord of so
great majesty that Heaven, nor Larth cannot contain him, yet he was not
content to have made himself man for our remedy, but would humble, and
restrain himself more, remaining with us in this visible sacrament to
comfort, and protect us with his presence, that we might have upon earth some
visible throne of his grace, Ad Heb. 4.16.
whereunto to approach (as the Apostel says) with great confidence to obtain
mercy, and aid in seasonable time for the remedy of all our euelles. O divine
word, Colloquie
which art in the Immense bosom of thy eternal Father, how is it that thou
come to dvvell in the straight bosom of a silly man? O king of glory
which art in thy heaven seated in a Throne of infinite majesty, how is it
that thou humblest thyselfe to be on earth in a throne of such basnesse? Thy
Insinite Charity has binne the cause of this humiliation to exallt me, and to
provoke me to love thee for a work of so great love. O that I could love thee
as thou love me. O that I could humble me, as thou did humble thyselfe, to
be able to honor, and serve thee as thou meritest. To this Throne will I
approach for the remedy of my euilles, with confidence that thou vvilt fill my
desire with thy good things.

2 Secondly I will discourse of the mysteries of his most sacred humanity; and
of the marvelous work: that he did therein, and of the offices that he
exersized, pondring how he himself is in this Sacrament, that was niue mo^ths
in the womb of our B. Lady the Virgin, enriching her with admirable gifts of
his Grace: and from thence in the house of Zachrias sanctified the Baptist, and
replenishid with the holy Ghost, both the son, and the mother, And seeing he
has in this sacrament the same goodness and Omnipotency, he may work the
same effects in my soul. Likewise he that is there, is the very same that was
laid in a maunger, and was adored by the shephards, and Magies, paying them
for this service, with an abundant reward, And if I do adore him with the
same living Faith, I shall receue the same grace. Again there is he that went
thorough the world teaching, and preaching, curing the sick, rasing the dead,
and doing good to all with innumerable miracles; And especially I will ponder,
that it is he himself that for my sake was taken, scourged, crouned with
thorns, scorned, and crucified, who being nailed on the Cross prayed for his
enemies, pardoned the thief, and promised him his paradise. And seeing he
himself in parson is in the most blessed Sacrament representing his passion,
and with the same blood that he shed therein, he likewise both may, and will
work in me the same effects. Finally, he that dispoiled hell, rose again in
glory. and sits on the right hand of his eternal Father, and shall
afterward come to Judge the whole world: even he himself with the same
glory, is in this holy Sacrament: for not content to have his Court and
Throne in heaven, he will also have another Throne on earth, for the comfort
of us that live therein. And there he does to us the offices that he was wont
to do in the world, of our Master, Physician, Redeemer, Pastor, and High
Preiste, desiring that we should come unto him with the same Faith, and
confidence, as if we did see him in his mortal, and visible flesh, seeing he
himself is really there, though covered under the accidents of bread, and
wine. O my svveete Redeemer, Colloquie
what thanks may I give thee for thy bovvles of mercy, vvherevvith thou
come every day to visit us from on high? Why chall not I considently come
unto thee, seeing thou come from heaven only for me? I adore thee, and
glorify thou in this venerable sacrament: and in spirit I cast myself as thy
feet like Mary Magdalen, that thou may pardon me: with the woman that had
the flux of blood, Joan. 20.27.
I much thy sacred Vestment that thou may cure me: and with S. Thomas I
feel thy sovereign Wounds: that thou may illuminate me, and quicken my
Faith: with the which I say, and confess, that thou art my Lord, and my God,
worthy of Highest honor, and glory world without end. Amen.

The Second Point.
Secondly, I am to consider in what gentle, and amiable manner, Christ our Lord
comes to visit me, I being so miserable, and abominable a sinner.

1. Numer. 21.8. Joan. 3.14.
First, I will ponder, that it might have sufficed for my salvation to behold
this most blessed Sacrament, as it suffized the Israelites being wounded by
serpe^ts, that their wou^des might be healed, to behold a Breazen serpent
erected upon a pole, which was the figure of this Savior. Or it might have
suffized only to touch it with the hand, Luc. 8.44.
as the woman that had the flux of blood, was whole with touching only the hem
of his garment: and to give me but this liberty were an ouergreate honor.
But the Charity of this great God was not contented herewith, but that he
will also join himself unto me with the most entire, and penetrating union,
that any corporal thing can join itself to man: for in the form of meat, he
enters in at my mouth, and passes thorough my throat, and makes his
dwelling, and habitation within my breaste, so long as the species of the
sacrament do remain; and so renueth that famous miracle whereof the prophet
Hieremye spoke: Hierem. 31.22.
a new thing has God done upon the earth: Famina circundabit virum. A woman
shall bear within her a perfect man in wisdom, and sanctity, which is
Christ: for every day, whatsoever woman, or other Person that communicates,
bears within them for that time, this man, perfect in age, and as great, and
beautiful as he is in Heaven.

2 But this will seem a much greater nouelltie unto me, if I consider the
vileness of the person that bears it within him, and the basnesse, and
horible straightness of the house whereinto he enters. Colloquie
O Sovereign nevve man, calestial Adam, what nevve inventions of love are
these that shou make to cherish meet know thou peradue^tur into what
house thou entresi^ Behoulde what I am, a vessel of inyquitie, a cave of
basiliskes, and a house of perdition. Then why will thou enter into so vild a
harbor? or how dare I entertain thee therein? My tongue is a world of
impieties: how shall I touch therewith, him that is the fou^tain of all good?
My throte^^s a sink of gluttony, and drunkenness: then how shall the auathor
of purity and sanctity pass thorough it? My breast is a puddle of wicked
cogitations and desiers, how shall I harbor therein him that is Charity
itself? O Sovereign king, how well it befitteth thee to be the Father of
mercy, seeing thou will dwell in a house of so great miseries? Reneue it
first, o Lord cleanse, and adorn it, that it may be for thee a worthy abiding
place. O infinite God, Inclina Caelos ^uos, and desc^nde. Incline thy heavens
and descend. Psalm. 143.5.
And seeing thou will descend, and humble thyselfe, to dwell within me, what
is it for the heavens to humble themselves and descend? Let come the celestial
virtues into my soul: let come lively Faith, assured Hope, and much enkindled
Charity: let come humility, obedience and devotion, and convert into heaven,
that which must be the habitation of the king of heaven himself.

3, The like Colloquies I am to make to the three persons of the Godheade,
beseeching them, that they would make me a n^we man, renewed in spirit to
receive this new Celestial Adam, that is willing to harbor himself in my
soul: and especially I will say to the holy Spirit. O most holly Spirit that
did purify, and adorn the soul of the most sacred Virgin, that it might be
avvorthy habitation for her some: Purifye me also, and adorn me with thy
grace, seeing the some God that entered into her, is to enter into me.

The third Point.
THirdly, I am to consider the ends that Christ our lord prete^deth in this
coming, beseching him as soon as he enters, to put the^ in execution, and that
my indignity may be no means of the hinderance thereof. This may be pondred
running through some of the offices that this our Lord did in the world, which
he comes to exercise in my soul.

1. First, he comes as a Savior to pardon me my sins; applying unto me
the price of the blood he shed for them. Secondly, he comes to cure al my
spiritual infirmities, like a Physician, that enters into the house of a
sick man, and comes near him, to apply unto him his remedies. Thirdly, he
comes as a Master to illustrate me with the light of his inspirations, and to
instruct me in the way of virtue, and perfection. Fourthly, he comes as a
high Priest, to apply unto me the fruit of the bloody sacrifice, which he
oftred for me upon the Cross: and to move me to offer unto him the sacrifice
of an humble and contrite heart, the Hostia of of praise, and the Holocaust of
love. Fifthly, he comes as meat to sustain me, as to a child with the milk
of his delitiousnesse: and to unite himself to me with the union of perfect
love: and to give me the kiss of peace, of reconsiliation, and perfect
amity: fullfilling the desire of the soul that said: Let him kiss me with
the kiss of his mouth, Cantic. 1.1.
and make peace with me. And in this forte I may run through his other
offices, imagining that he comes as a shepherd to gather me to his fold, as
a protector to defend me, and as a consuming fire to purify, and inflame me.

2 VVithall as I am pondring these offices which Christ our Lord is willing to
do for me, I will also ponder the great necessity that I have of them:
behoulding myself as a man captiued by the devil for my sins, sick of
diverse passions, ignorante with many errors, weak, poor, and needy of
suste^tation for my soul, and to have peace with my Creator, and to be
governed, protected, and favored by my Savior. And making comparison between
him and me, and beeweene his excellent offices, and my innumerable miseries, I
will break out on the one side, into affections of admirations: and on the
other, into fervent desires of his coming, Colloquie 3 Reg. 16.21. 4. Reg.
4.34.
saying unto him; O God of immense majesty, how is it, that I am not beside
myself, considering this plotte of thy infinite Charity. Helias and Heliseus
shrunk up themselves, joining themselves to a dead child to restore him to
life: but thou restrainest thyselfe much more to a morsel of meat, to join
thyselfe unto me, and to raize me again to a new, and feruorous life. It
had been sufficient that with thy word thou had commanded what thou
would, and presently it had been done: or that some servant of thine like
Gyezi, had touched me with thy staff that I might live, but thou would
not, but come in person to heal me, to revive me, and to recale me. Come
then, o my Savior, and delay not: come, and dissolve the miseries of thy
servant Awake thy omnipotency, and come that thou may presently save me.
Isai. 64.17. Isai. 45.8.
O that thou would break the heavens, and come, that with thy coming the
mountains of my passions might dissolve, and all my bowels might melt
themselves in thy love! O heavens send this dew! O clouds rain down this
just one! O land of the living bud out unto me this Savior! O most sweet
Savior, come to my soul that longs to receive thee, take from her all
impeachements, of thy entrance, exercize in her the offices that thou
pretendest by thy coming. Join thee speedily unto me, for I desire to see
myself united with thee my only summum bonum, world with out end, Amen.

3. This kind of fervent Desiers is much to be exercized in this Point, for
Christ our Lord will be received with Desire, and Hunger of his coming. And
this meat, with how much the greater Hunger it is eaten, with so much the more
proffit it enters. And herein we shall be aided with other places of divine
scriptur like unto those which have been produced, wherein the holy fathers
declared the fe^ruent desire they had of the coming of the Messiah for the
redemption of the world. Withdraw these desires I am to join others of carrying
the greatest purity of heart that may be, endeavoring that as the body goes
to communicate fasting from all Corporal meat, so that from the midnight
before it must not have eaten, nor drunk any thing how little soever; so also
the soul may that day go fasting of all sin: In such sort, that as near
as possibly may be from the night before, 2. Corin. 7.1.
it be not spotted with any uncleanness of flesh, or of spirit, and that from
my mouth there has issued no idle word, nor from my heart any evil thought,
for Christ our Lord being puritye itself, it is our Duty to receive him with
the greatest purity that possibly we may. And if thorough our Imbecility we
do fall into any sin, 1. Corin. 11.28.
we are first to purify our selves thereof by the means of Confession (the
which is obligatorie if it be a mortal sin) or by the means of Contrition,
when it is but a light sin, and that we were lately at Confession.

The XXXIV. Meditation of spiritual Communion, which is a disposing for
Sacramental Communion; and for hearing Mass profitably.
Spiritual communion is an exercize of excellent Interior acts: 3. p. q. 80.
a. 1. ad 3.
by the which (as S. Thomas says) without receiving the Sacrament, we
participate the fruit of the Sacrement, which is union with Christ; And it
serves for two times, and for two ends.

The first is, duly to prepare ourselves before sacramental Communion,
adorning the soul with acts of virtues proportioned to this caelestiall
banquet. The 2. is, to hear mass every day with proffit. As the preiste when
he says mass, together offers the sacrifize, and receives the Sacrament:
so when I hear mass, it is good that I do other two such like things. The
first is, to offer that sacrifize in thanks giving for the benefits received,
or in satisfaction of my sins, or of the sins of them that are departed:
And to obtain of God the benefits that I require him, for myself, and for the
whole church: for to all this, is this sacrifize ordained, as in the fourth
part shall be declared. The 2. is to receive likewise the Sacrament
spiritually, eating Christ our Lord with a desire by means of the Acts of the
three Theological Virtues, Faith, Hope, and Charity: according to the which
the same Lord himself said: I am the bread of life, Joan. 6.3 s.
he that comes to me shall not hunger, and he that believes in me shall
never thirst. The manner of this communion disposing itself for the
sacramental, is that which follows

The first Point.
First we are to exersize acts of faith, concerning this mystery, Acts of
Faith.
breifely pondring first the excelency and firmness of the four pillars upon
which this Faith relieth, that is to say, that God wanted, not infinite
wisdom, to invent this means of our spiritual sustentation, nor goodness to
will it, nor omnipotency to execute it. And seeing God is infallible truth in
all that he reuealeth, and that he has revealed this mystery, I am to believe
him with all assuredness, much more then if I had seen him with my bodily
eyes.

2. Upon this foundation Faith is to exercize her acts, denying the Judgment
that proceeds from the senses, and firmly believing, that under those species
of bread, and wine, is Christ Jesus true God, and man, with all the integrity,
glory, and majesty, that he has in Heaven. And as there he inuiteeh, and
fills the Blessed with the clear sight of his Divinity, and humanity: so
here he will inuit, and fill our desires of good things with the sight, by a
lively faith, of himself enclosed in this sacrament. And to this end faith
must help itself with meditation, and contemplation, penetrating the
greatenesses of this Lord: as has been said in the first point of the
precedent meditation. The acts of faith are to be exercized in this form: I
believe that under this veil is covered Jesus Christ my Lord, his body, his
soul, his blood, and his divinity. I believe that there is present the Son
of the everliving God, infinite, eternal, immense, almighty, wise, and holy:
yea wisdom, and sanctity itself. I believe that there is my Savior, my
master, my father, my judge, and my glorifier: he that for me was borne in a
maunger, and was whipped, crowned with thorns, and crucified. All this I
believe for that he himself has revealed it; and I am most assured that he
had knowledge, Colloquie
power, and will to do it. O my king, and my God, although I see thee not
clearly, it suffizeth me to know that thou art there, that I may reverence,
adore, and glorify thee, as if I did see thee. I rejoice to have thee present,
and I give thee thanks. for that thou daignest to be with me: quicken my
faith, o Lord, that I may love ever to be with thee. Amen.

The second Point. Acts of Hope.

Secondly, are to be exercized the Acts of Hope, resting upon the same four
pillars that faith does: to wit, upon the infinite wisdom, goodness, and
omnipotencye of God, and upon his fidellitie to fulfill all that he promises,
seeing he has knowledge, Power, and will to perform it. Upon this
foundation, Hope is to exercize its Acts ayding itself with prayer to ask,
and obtain what it hops, and desires. And what here is to be hoped, and
desired, is the performaunce, of the promises that Christ our Savior made, to
those that worthily receive him in this sacrament, as may be collected out of
the 6. chapter of S. John: saying thus unto him. Joan. 6.35.50. etc.
I hope, o my Savior, that if I eat this bread of life I shall never die, I
shall live for ever, I shall remain in thee, and thou in me, united thou with
me, and I with thee. I hope that as thou live by thy Father, so I shall live
by thee: and by thy means I shall obtain life everlasting, and thou willt
raize me again at the last day. Colloquie
O bread of life I come to receive thee, with great confidence that thou
vvillt quicken my spirit, comfort my heart, cheer up my soul, for tifie my
powers, make chaste may flesh, and change me into another man: Aug. 7.
confess. cap. 10.
for I shall not change thee into me, unless thou chaungest me into thee. O
most svveete Savior, augment in me confidence, that I may be worthy to
obtain thy sovereign promise.

But hope must pass yet farther, hoping in the goodness, and omnipotency of
this our Lord, who is not tied unto the sacrament, but may grant me all these
benefits, only for a lively desire in me to receive him: and therefore
beholding this divine sacrament, I may exercize these acts of faith, and
confidence: Math. 8.8.
sometimes with the Centurion saying unto him: Lord, I am not worthy that thou
should enter under my roof, but only say the word, and my soul shallbee
saved. Numer. 21.8.
And sometimes, I will say unto him: If to behold the brazen serpent suffized
to heal those that were wounded: it may likewise suffize me to behold thee
with a lively faith, and thee to look upon me with thy mercy, that thou
may deliver me from all miserye. Other sometimes, as the woman that had the
flux of blood, Luc. 8.44. Actuu^ 5.15.
I will say within myself, if I can but touch the garment that covers my
Lord, without doubt I shallbee safe. And if the shadow of his apostle healed
the sick, how much more shall the shadow of his divine sacrament heal my
soul? With this confidence ought I to enter into the church, to assiste at
mass, and to behold the sacred host and chalice, when they are elevated. For
as S. Bernard says, Sermon. 38 in Cant.
great faith attaineth to great things: and the more the affection of
confidence dilateth itself, the more we shall obtain of Gods mercy.

The third Point.
FInally, Acts of Charity.
Charity is to exercize her acts, with the which spiritually we are united,
and Joined with Christ our Lord, with the Union of love, which is pretended
in the Communion of this blessed sacrament. The principal acts are, to
rejoice in the goodness, charity, omnipotency, and liberality of Christ,
which is resplendent in this banquet: to joie to see me so beloved of him,
that he gives himself unto me for meat: to desire all ways to be united
with him by actual knowledge and love; and to be like unto him in all his
virtues. To desire that all may know, love, and reverence him in this most
blessed, and sovereign sacrament, and may enjoie the benefits that therein are
enclosed. And to offer myself with great earnestness, to have in all things
the same willling, and nilling that he has, placing my whole liking in
complying with his. Colloquie
O my most svveete Savior, where soever thou art, thou art exceedingly
amiable; but in this sacrament thou art most worthy to be beloved with all
the whole forces of love. O that I did love thee with all my heart, with
all my soul, with all my spirit, and with all my fortitude? May I love
thee, for the bounty that herein thou discouerest, for the love that herein
thou demonstratest unto me: for the benefits which herein thou do me: for
the evils from which thou deliuerest me: for the good things which thou
promisest me: and for the much that thou desire that I should love thee.
Fulfill, o Lord, this desire which thou have, and which I have, granting
me to love thee, as thou desire to be loved, uniting me unto thee with
the union of perfect charity, that it may remain unto life everlasting Amen.

Diverse other Meditations, with several forms of preparing our selves to
communicate, shallbee set down in the parts that follow, following the order
of the evangelical history, and shall easily be found by the table.

The XXXV. Meditation, of thanks giving after Communion.
AFter we have communicated, it is of greatest Importance, to know how to
enioie the sweet Presence of the guest that we have received: for there is no
better time to negotiate with him, then when we have him within us: for here
likewise it is truth that he said; that while he is in the little world of
every man, he is the light of the world, Joan. 9. and 12.
and therefore it behooves us to walk whilst this light lasts, before it
be hidden, and darkness overtake us. And as this divine sacrament is so
sovereign a Benefit, and so high a Gift of his divine liberality, so we are
to be grateful unto him for it, with the greatest gratitude that possibly we
may; applying herein the counsel of the wiseman: Suffer not the good day to
pass? Et particula boni doni non te praetereat, Eccles. 14.14.
And let not so much as the least parcel of the good gift escape thee, but
make use of the good lot that has befallen thee. For as we much esteem the
least part whatsoever of this sacrament, for that whole Christ is therein:
so we are to esteem every little part of the day, and time that we have him
with in us; seeing in each part thereof he his able to do us great favors,
if with a devout and thankful mind we dispose ourselves to receive them,
especially for that this sacrament as S. Dionisius says) is the co^summation,
De Eccles. hi^rar. cap. 3. D. Tho. 4. q. 65. art. 3.
fullfilling, and perperfection of all the other, and the most effectual
means that God has given us for our perfection, And seeing we have him
present to communicate it unto us, it is reason to enlarge the vessel of our
heart to receive it. To this end, we are here to exercize with greatest
fervor, the three acts of thanks giving, that were set down in the 34.
meditation: spending the time, not so much in new considerations, seeing those
that are set down are sufficient, as in new affections, and canticles of
praise, and thanks giving, in this form ensuing.

The first Point.
1. FIrst I am greatly to quicken my faith of the presence of this our lord
that is with in me, beholding the invisible, as if I did visibly behold him:
and breifely pondering that he is the same Lord, of whom I conceived so
great excellencies, when I prepared myself to communicate. And seeing where
the king is, there is the court, I may imagine (as S. Gregory says) that he
is Inuironned with thousands of the courtiers of heaven, Lib. 4. Dialogo. cap.
58.
in whose company prostrate in spirtte before his feet, and admiring that so
great a God is harbored in so humble a place, I will break out first into
affections of humility, of reverence, and of mine own confusion: sometimes
saying with S. Peeter; Depart from me, o Lord, and go forth from this
wretched little ship, for I am a great sinner. And sometimes with S. Luc. 5.8.
Luc. 1.43. Psalm. 8.2. Colloquie
Elizabeth I will say unto him: whence is it to me, that my God, and my Lord
comes to visit me? O eternal God what is man that the ^art mindful of
him? Or the son of man that thou visitest him? Thou made him less then the
angels by being clothed with vile flesh: and come thou from heaven
accompanied with angels to harbor thyselfe within him? O our Lord, and God
how admirable is thy name thoroughout all the earth, seeing thou have made it
thy Habitation as well as heaven.

2. In the Preface. Isai. 6.3.
Then will I break out into affections of praise and thanksgiving, using
some canticles of the church. Sometime I will say as the Seraphins, Holy,
holy, holy is the Lord God of hosts, that has humbled himself to dwell in
this smoky, cloudie temple of my soul. Sometimes, I will cry out with the
Hebrewe children that accompanied Christ on Palmesunday, saying: Math. 21.15.
O king of Israel and Savior of the world, blessed be he that that has
come from on high to visit me, I not knowing how to deserve it. Daniel. 3.52.
Other sometimes with the three youths that were in the furnace in Babylon, I
will inuit all creatures to praise our Lord, for this favor that he has
done me,

3. Or in imitation of this canticle, I will make another, inuiting to the same
end the nine quires of angels, and the quires of the patriarchs and prophets,
of the apostles, and evangelists: of the martirs, and doctors: bishops, and
confessors: preistes, and levites: virgins, and widows; Colloquie
and all the Saints in heaven in this form: May thy Angels, Archangells,
and Principallities bless thee, o Lord; may they praise, and glorify thee for
ever. May thy powers, Virtues and Dominations bless, praise, and glorify
thee world without end. May the Thrones Cherubins and Seraphins bless thee
praise thee, etc. Bless our Lord o ye Patriarchs and Prophets, praise him
and glorify him for ever. Bless our Lord, o ye Apostles and Evangelists
praise him etc. And in this manner I may go through all the saints. Psalm.
102.1.


4. I may likewise with David inuit all faculties, and senses, and all the
cogitations, and affections of my heart, that all together may assemble to
adore, and glorify this our Lord, for the part that they all have in this
sovereign benefit. May my eyes bless thee, o Lord, for they have seen thee
in this sacrament; and my lips for they have touched thee; Colloquis
and my tongue and palate for they have tasted thee; and my breast for hat it
is thy habitation; Psalm. 34.10.
and let all my bones say, O Lord, who is like unto thee? Let my memory budde
forth thy praises; my understanding magnify thee, my will love thee, my
appetites desire thee, and let them all be dissoued in thy presence. singing
the glory of thy Coming.

The Second Point.
1 Then am I to recall to my memory the Offices of Christ our lord, and the
ends that he had in coming to visit me, being glad, and iojfull to have
within me, my Redeemer, my physician, my master, and all my good: and with a
great affection, I will spiritually embrace him with the arms of humility,
and charity, speaking that of the Canticles: Ca^t. 3.4.
I have found him whom my soul loves: I will keep him, and not let him
go; I will for no cause part from his sweet Company: and for no labor, Ad
Gal. 4.26.
nor tribulation, will I leave his amity: I will allwaies have him with me,
till he carry me to the house of my mother, which is the caelestiall
Jerusalem, where I may enjoy him with perfect security.

2. Then like David, in the presence of this our lord, I will power forth my
prayer, and set before him all my necessities, and miseries, recounting them as
if he knew them not, because he delights to hear them, beseeching him to
do his offices in remedying them, seeing this was the end of his coming, and
the coming of so great a prince, should not be in vain. And therefore I may
say unto him: I, Colloquie
o Lord, am sick of grievous Infirmities and passions, pride, wrath,
sensuallitie, and covetousness have prostrated me: Thou art the Omnipotent
physician, and have come to my soul to cure me: cure me according to thy
power and leave me whole: say in this entrau^ce as thou saidest entering into
the house of Zacheus, Luc. 19.9.
Hodie salus huic domui facta est, this day salvation is made to this house.
And because thy saying is doing, it shallbee as thou say. I am likewise
full, of ignoraunces, and errors, in the darkness, and obscurity of death:
Thou art my master, my light, and my guide, teach me, illuminate me, and
guide me, for this was the end of thy coming. In these and other like
petitions, I will spend another while, Gene. 32.24.
wrestling like Jacob with this angel of the great counsel, with the
wrestling of prayers, beseeching him not to depart, without pouring out upon
me his most copious Benediction.

The third Point.
FInally, I am to make some offers to this our Lord in thankefullnesse for the
favor he has done me, inuiting him, seeing he inuiteth me, Apoca. 3.20.
for hereupon he says in the Apocalips, that entering into the soul he
would suppe with her, and she with him: for she suppeth of the celestial
guiftes that this our Lord communicates unto her, and he suppeth of the
fervent affections, and purposes that she offers unto him. And so in
communicating, I am to inuit Christ our lord, considering what is acceptable
unto him, and offering unto him what is best to his liking.

2. And specially I will offer him my heart, for that is the principal thing
he requires of me. And seeing he gives me his heart, Prouer. 23.26.
what is it for me to give him mine? with a determination to admit nothing
that may be contrary to his love, nor no thought that may separate me from
him. Ad. Romans 12.1,
I will likewise exhibit to him my body as a living host, holy, and pleasing
to his eyes, with a desire to carrye ever with me his Mortification, and the
signs of his Passion: resolving particularly to mortifye, and make a cruel
war against that passion, that most hinders me to serve him as I ought.
And besides this, it shallbee well that day to inuit Christ in the poor,
bestowing on them some alms according to my ability.

3. And if I be a religious man, I may anewe offer unto him perpetual
obedience to his most holy will, most pure chastity, and poverty of spirit,
according to my estate. And I will allwaies offer somewhat that I may
accomplish the same day, endeavoring to spend it all in the^se exercizes of
thanksgiving, and Imitation, Cant. 1.12. Ad Gal. 2.20. 3. Reg. 19.8.
saying as the spouse. My beloved shallbee to me to day, a nosegay of mirhe, I
will bear him betvveene my breasts. And as the apostle: I live, now not I,
for I have within me Christ himself, who lives in me, in whose virtue I
will go like another Helias to the mount of God Oreb, ascending from virtue
to virtue, until I clearly, and manifestly beeholde him whom in this blessed
sacrament I receive. I will conclude with a colloquie to this our Lord,
beseeching him, that allbeeit, the sacramental species being consumed, he
departs, as concerning his corporal presence: that yet he would allwaies
remain with me. according to his spiritual presence, awaking my memory,
that I may allwaies be mindful of him; illustrating my understanding, that I
may allwaies think, and meditate upon him; and inflaming my will, that it may
allwaies be united with him, world without end Amen.

The XXXVI Meditation of Purgatory, to encourage us to the works of Penance.
THe principal end of this meditation, is to encourage those who walk in the
purgative way, to the exercize of penal works, to pay the pains that they
owe for their sins: and likewise it may be exercized on all souls day in
remembrance of the dead, to move us to have compassion on them and to aid
them.

The first Point.
First I am to consider, that God our Lord has ordained that whosoever shall
die, 2. Machab. 12.40. Zachar. 9.11. 1. Cor. 3.12. D. Tho. in addit. q. 69. and
70. Math. 5.26.
having co^mited mortal, or venial sin, all be it the fault be pardoned
him, yet if he have not likewise paid the pain correspo^dent there unto, he
shall not enter into heaven, until he pay it in a prison underneath the
earth, deputed to this end, which is called Purgatory, to the which, the
soul of the just is carried by his Angel, that he may there satisfy his
whole debt, unto the uttermost farthing.

2. Upon this verity of our faith, I will ponder, first how just God our lord
is, and how great is the righteousness of his justice, though it be mixed
with mercy. For he will leave no sin without some chastizement: and
therefore in the Sacrament of penance when he pardons a mortal sin, he
changes the eternal, into some temporal punishment, demonstrating therein
his infinite mercy, and his justice. His mercy, in pardoning the most terrible
pain that was perpetually to continue, and his justice in requiring
satisfaction, with another lighter pain that continues but a while. With
this consideration I will animate my self, to conform myself to his justice,
seeing his mercy is so abundant toward me, to change millions of years in
a most terrible fire, into a very few of voluntary penance. So that all
that I am able to suffer in this life, is to seem little, or nothing unto me,
in comparison of what I have deserved, and God has pardoned me.

2. Secondly, I will ponder how this temporal pain, if it be not paid in
this life with some very deep contrition, or with some penal works, it must
of necessity be paid in the other: as well for the observing the order of the
divine justice, as also because God is so great a lover of purity, that he
will admit nothing into heaven, but what is very well purged, not only from
the sins, but from the pains which are the Relics thereof: for the
glorified church, Ad Ephesians. 5.26. Apocal. 7 14. Colloquie
(says S. Paul) must neither have spot, nor wrinckle, nor any other like
deformity: and therefore I must labor for such purity in this life, that I
may have nothing to purge in the other. O lamb of God in whose blood the just
wash, and make white their souls, to be admitted into thy kingdom; grant
me by the virtue of thy most precious blood. so great compunction for my
sins, that I may likewise be free from the pains, that my soul being
loosed out of the prison of this body, be not detained in the prison of
purgatory, Amen.

3. The greiuousnesse of venial sin. Apoca. 21 27.
From hence I will pass to ponder how great an evil venial sin is, seeing
that therewith it is impossible to be able to enter into heaven until it be
first purified, for there (as S. John says) nothing that is polluted may
enter. And I shall also perceive how much God abhoreth it, when he there
detaineth captives his own freindes though they be very holy, until they be
purified, and so much humbles them, that he gives them for their prison, an
obscure place under the earth and near unto hell, discovering hereby how
heavy the burden is of any sin whatsoever, or pain that redoundeth
thereof, seeing it casts us into so profound an abisme. From all these
considerations, I will collect a great detestation of venial sins, for the
good that they deprive me of: for the prison that they menace me: for the
burden wherewith they burden me: and above all because God so abhors it,
as forthwith we shall ponder more at large.

The Second Point.
SEcondly, I am to consider, what a great feeling those souls have, and mine
shall have of the obscurity, and darkness of that prison, which is to want
the sight of God, and what a terrible pain this is, like to that which they
call the pain of loss, pondering the causes of this sense and Dolor.

1. The first is, for that there they have a very lively faith of what God is,
and how good, how beautiful, and potent he is: how he is our last end, and
eternal blessedness; many of those clouds, and doubts which here we have
being taken away. And this liveliness of faith shall kindle their desire to
see their last end, and consequently shall increase the pain of their delay
of beholding it: Proverb. 13.12.
for (as the wiseman says) Hope that is delaied, afflicts the heart.

2. The 2. cause is, for that the love of God is there in its perfection, and
exceedingly desires to see its beloved, to be united with him, and has
nothing to divert it, not entertain it in this life, with meriting new glory,
augmenting its perfection, and doing good to its neighbors: all which cease
in purgatory. And if with all this, some holy men have here so great longing
to behold God, that they are much afflicted with the delay of the
accomplishment of their desire, and mourning say with David: VVoe to me; for
my banishment has been much delaied, Psalm. 119.5.
and my soul has been a long time a pilgrim on the earth: with how much
more feeling, shall the souls detained in purgatory say this, who love, are
in pain, and yet thrive not?

3. The 3 cause of this pain is, the suspension wherein those souls are, not
knowing how long time this prison, and this delaying of beholding God shall
endure: for allbeeit they are conformable to the will of God, yet for all this
they are in great pain, considering that originally it springs from their
own sin; and from their own negligence, and carelessness, as well
insatisfiing for their sins, as in desiring to see God. Refert Blosius in
monili spiritu ali cap. 13.
For as it was revealed to S. Briget, there is for this culpable lukewarmnesse,
a kind of punishment in the other life, which they call the purgatory of
desire, wherewith they are chastized that were but lukewarm in their desire to
see God.

4. This Pain likewise is augmented by wanting the sight of our savior
Christ, of the most blessed virgin, of the sweet society of the angels, and
saints in heaven, and the sight of all other things which they believe, and
hope to behold: for of them all they have a very lively faith confirmed by
the experience of their immortallitie, and of the purgatory itself which they
suffer. The greatness of this pain, I may simbolize, by that which a
discreet, wise, and noble man has, when he is imprisoned in a very obscure
prison of the inquisition, without seeing the light of heaven any more but by
some chinke, or loope hole: without having any communication with his kindred,
freindes, or acquaintance: and without knowing what passes in the world, or
how long his imprisomnent shall continue. And all beeit it is to be believed,
that the Angel guardian comes now, and then, to confort the soul of whom
he had care: Tob. 5.12. Colloquie
yet we may imagine that it answers him, as blind Tobyas awnsuered to S.
Raphael; what Io^ can I have being seated in darkness, without seeing the
light of heaven, or my svveete Creator, and redeemer? O my soul, seeing thou
beleiuest this pain that attends thee in purgatory, if thou payest not here
what thou ovvest for thy sins, defer not the payment, that God may not
defer thee from beholding him clearly. Desire with great feruency to go
to behold him, remoouing from thee all that may defer the accomplishment of
this desire: that with the end of thy life, there may be an end of thy
pain, and that thou may presentely enter into rest, and gloris. Amen.

The third Point.
THirdly, I am to consider the pain which they call of sense, which my soul
shall suffer in Purgatory, tormented by the terrible fire thereof.

This is to be pondered, first, for that this fire is the same with that of
Hell, in comparison whereof that of this life, is as it were painted: As also,
for that it wonderfully tormenteth, as being the instrument of God, and of a
wrathful God, whose hand is exceeding heavy when he reuengeth his iniurye.
For as the fire melts the silver, to purify it from dross: so this fire as
the Prophet says, Malac. 3.3.
shall melt, that is, shall terribly afflict those souls to purify them from
the dross they brought from the world. So that whilst there is any thing to
purify, D. Aug. in ps. 37. and D. Greg. in ps. 3. peniten. D. Tho. 3. p. q. 46
ar. 6. ad 3. Colloquie
the dolor shall continue: for there is no sleep, nor distraction, nor
nothing else to temper the fury thereof, as there is in this life. And
hereupon holy men conclude, that the dolours of purgatory exceed in that
which is pain, and torment, the dolours that sinners endure in this life: and
those which martirs have sustained: yea, and those that the king of martirs
himself, Christ Jesus our Lord did suffer, to whom I am humbly to say, O
most svveete redeemer, chastize me not in thy fury with the fire of hell: and
purify me so in this life, that I may have no need of the fire of purgatory.

From this consideration I am to collect three affections, and Intentions of
very much Importance. The 1. is a great Fear of God, and of the rigor of his
Justice. For if I consider it well, what need I be so much amazed that the
majesty of God, stands beholding the souls burn in hell without having
compassion of them, seeing they are his enemies, and persist in abhoring him:
as that his should see those of Purgatory burn, enduring most terrible pains,
and sometimes for very light sins: and yet loving them much, and being
beloved of them, he lets them burn, and be in pain until they pay all
that they owe? Colloquie
Who shall not fear thee, o king of the nations? If thou thus burnest the
fruitful tree for a fevve thorns that were mingled, with the good fruit:
how vviltt thou burn, and torment the wi hered barren tree that has brought
forth nothing but the thorns of greiuous sins?

The 2. intention is, to satisfy in this life for my sins, and to embrace
willingly whatsoever penaunces, and afflictions, seeing they are all as nothing
in comparison of these other. For that which is suffered in this life is but
little, and for a little time, and is very proffitable to increase in virtue,
and to meritte augmentation of grace, and glory: But in purgatory much is
suffered, and vnproffitably for the ends before said. And therefore I am to
beeseeche our Lord, that if I shall be careless of this payment, it will
please him to purify me with the fire of afflictions, that I may pay here
with gain that which I shall afterward pay without gain. O my Savior that
did promise to purify the sons of thy church, as gold, and silver is
purified in the fire, Colloquie Malac. 3.3.
purisie me as thou vvillt in this life, that in departing out of it, I may
go to enjoy thee. Amen.

The 3. intention is, to avoid as much as possibly I may venial sins: 1.
Cor. 3.12.
seeing (as the Apostle says) they are no other thing, but wood, hay, and
stubble to make fuel for the sier that shall burn me in purgatory. The
which is a great rashness if I have the eyes of faith to behold it; for if
I should see a man cut wood from a mountain, and carry it to his house, and
asking him wherefore he carried that wood, he should answer me, that it was
to kindle a fire wherein to burn himself, should not I hold him for a mad
man? then am not I much more mad, doing things with so great pleasure,
Colloquie Ex D. Thom. ibidem.
that shall burn me in Purgatory? O my soul, seeing thou art founded upon
so precious a foundation as is Christ our Lord, build upon it works of
great value, Gold of charity, silver of Innocence, And precious stones of
solid virtues, which may remain with thee unto life everlasting. Bevvare
thou minglest not with them works that shall perish, the vvood of avarice,
the hay of sensuallitie, and the stubble of vanity, loving with some
disorder the goods of this life: for this shallbee sevvell for the sier that
shall burn thee in the life to come. O good Jesus, deliver me from such
madness, preserving me from these sins by thy grace.

The fourth Point.
FOurthly, I am to consider two notable things that are in the souls of
purgatory. The first is, the great resignation that they have in the will of
God, as touching the greatenesse, and continaunce of their pains: and the
great patience wherewith they suffer, and accept their torments, being
pleased that God is just and chastizeth them according to their merits: and
that he purifieth them in that fiery furnace, that being refined they may
enter into heaven. From whence I will learn, to have patience in my
afflictions, if I desire they should be my purgatory, and not my hell: seeing
the lesser they are, the more proffitable they are to pay my debtes with all,
and are contrived by Gods justice to that end. And seeing what soever is in
God, is to be loved, if I love him in deed, I am to rejoice that he is a
iusticer, Cant. 5.16.
and that he has a place appointed to chastize my sin, being as it is, so
worthy of Chastizement.

The second is, the great desire that these souls have to be aided by the
faithefull that live upon the earth with sacrifices, prayers, alms, fastings,
and other satisfactorie works. As also with indulgences, and other suffrages,
to get out quickly from those pains, and to go to enjoy God: which ought to
move me to favor them, as much I may, though I take it from myself to give
unto them. For if I should see my freinde burn in a great fire, and could get
him out without burning myself, or any other hurt, it were a great cruelty
not to get him out. Then if by faith, I see these souls burn in such a
terrible fire, and may deliver them with masses, Indulgences, and other good
works, it will be a great charity to be careful herein. And if what I
would for myself, I am to will for my neighbor, it is just to do what I may
to deliver him that paineth in purgatory, as I would that others should do
for me when I am there. Ex D. Greg. lib. 4. Moral. c. 57.
Especially, for that with this care, I make myself worthy that God should
then inspire others to aid me: for the merciful shall obtain mercy in that
kind wherein they themselves used it. And these very souls when they come to
behold God, are very grateful to those that favored them in their afflictions
and will solicit the favor of God for us in ours, And all be it I take from
my self the satisfaction, of the work that I apply to the dead: yet in
giving it for alms, I augment the merit, for charity increases by taking
from myself that I had need of, to succor the needy. For all these reasons
the holy scripture says, that it is a holy, 2. Machab. 12.46.
and meritorious care to pay for the dead, that the pains of their sins may
be pardoned them: for of this care follow those benefits that have been
declared, to those that pray for them.

With this meditation is concluded all that appertains to the purgative
way, and to purity which is the proper end thereof, whose defectes if any
were in this life, are remedied in the purgatory of the other, to enter with
entire purity into glory, which is the final, and last thing of the just;
whereof meditations shallbee made in the end of the 6. part; for that it is
the last of Gods benefits, and the farthest end of the unitive way. In the
which the lust shall rest united unto their God, world without end.

Amen.
The end of the first Part.
A TABLE OF THE CONTENTS IN THIS First Part.
THe prologue to the Christian Reader page 1. The introduction to these
meditations, wherein is set down a summarie of such things as are comprehended
in the practice, and exercize of mental prayer. page. 6.. 1. What mental
prayer is. page 9.. 2. How we at to speak unto God in mental prayer. page
14.. 3. Of the virtues that accompany mental prayer, and of their
excellencies. page 20.. 4. Of the matter of mental prayer for meditation page
23.. 5. Of entrance into prayer page 29.. 6. Of the manner of meditating, and
discoursing in prayer, and how we are to resist distractions, that then, do
combatte us page 34.. 7. Of the manner how we may aid our selves with the
imagination, and the tongue, and the rest of the faculties for mental prayer.
page 40.. 8. Of the examination of prayer, and of the fruits that may be
drawn from thence. page 43.. 9. Of the several forms of praying in diverse
matters, accomodated to different persons and times. page 46.. 10. Of
contemplation, and of the manner how some may use mental prayer without
manifoldnes of discourse, page 50.. 11. Of the extraordinary forms of mental
prayer, and in what diverse manners God communicates himself therein page 55..
12. Of the ordinary and extraordinary time, that is to be employed in mental
prayer, and of iaculatorie prayers. page 64.. 13. Certain aduertisments
concerning the meditations ensuing. page 70.
The first part of the meditations of sins, and of the last ends of man,
with forms of prayer apprropriated to those, which walk in the Purgative
way, to purify them selves of their vices.
The introduction concerning purity, which is the end of the meditations of
the purgative way. 75. The first fundamental meditation of the end wherefore
man, and all things that serve him were created. page 78. The II. meditation of
the grieuousnes of sin, by the examples of the sin of the Angels, of Adam,
and other particulars. page 88. The III. medit. of the multitude of sins, and
of the grieuousnes of them, for being so many, and contrary to reason. 100. The
IV. meditat. of the grieuousnes of sin, by the baseness of man that offends
God, and by the nothing that he has of his own 104. The. V. meditat. of the
grieuousnes of sins, by-the greatenes of the infinite majesty of God,
against whom they arcommitted 108. The VI. meditat. of the grieuousnes of
sin, by comparison between the temporal, and eternal pains. wherewith it
is chastized 116. Meditations of our last things, to move us to a detestation
of sins. 125, The VII. meditat. of the properties of death 116. The VIII.
meditat. of those things that cause Anguish, and affliction to the man that is
near his death 131. The IX. meditat. of the particular judgment that is to
be made of the soul in the instant of death, 140. The X. meditat. of that
which hapeneth to the body after death, and of the grave. 154. The XI. meditat.
of the remembrance of death, and of the dust whereinto we shall be converted
in the grave. 162. The XII meditat. of the most griueous deceites, and
dangers, which the forgetfulness of death brings with it, and of the manner
how they are to be remedied. 167. The XIII. meditat. of the general judgment,
and of the signs and things precedent to that day. 175. The XIIII. meditat.
of the resurrection of the dead, and the coming of the Judge, and what he will
do before he give sentence. 183. The XV. meditat. of the sentences in favor
of the good, and against the wicked, and of the execution of them. 196. The
XVI. meditat. of Hell, as concerning the eternity of the pains, and the
terriblenes of the place, and of the inhabitants thereof, and the tormentors.
212. The XVII. meditat. of the pains of the senses, and exterioure faculties:
and of the pain of loss or damnation, which is suffered in hell. 222. Other
meditations and manners of prayer, to obtain purity of soul, and parfect
mortification of her vices, and passions. 230. The XVIII. meditat. of Pride,
and vain glory, 232. The XIX. meditat. upon the vice of Gluttony; and the
virtue of Temperance. 239. The XX. meditat. upon the vice of Luxury, and the
virtue of Chastity. 244. Acts of perfect Chastity. 247. The favors and
rewards of perfect Chastity. 249. The XXI. meditat. of Avarice. 252. The
XXII. meditat. of wrath, and Impatience, 258. The XXIII. meditat. of Envy
263. The XXIV. meditat. of Slothe 268. The XXV. meditat upon the ten
commandments of the law of God. 273. The XXVI. meditat. upon the five
Senses, and exterior faculties 287. The XXVII. meditat. upon the interior
faculties of the soul 293. The XXVIII. meditat. wherein is set, down, a form
of praying, making every night an examination of the conscience. 301. The XXIX
meditat. wherein is set down another form of praying at three times of the
day, making a particular examination of some one vice, to pull it up, by the
roots. 307. The XXX. meditat. of the excellencies of the holy sacrament of
confession; of the virtues that are exercised therein: and of the graces that
are received 313, The XXXI. meditat. of preparation to receive the holy
sacrament of penance. 320. The XXXII. meditat. of thanks giving after
confession 328. The XXXIII. meditat. of the most blessed Sacrament of the altar
before Communion. 333. The XXXIV. meditat. of spiritual Communion which is a
disposing for sacramental Communion, and for hearing mass profitably. 340.
The XXXV. meditat. of thanksgiving after Communion. 345. The XXXVI. meditat of
purgatory to encourage us to the works of penance. 351.
A TABLE OF THE PRINCIPAL MATters contained in this first part.
Abstinence. Acts and rewards of it. page 242. Adam. How great his fault was.
page 91. Adoration. How it must be made to God at the entering into prayer.
page 32. Affections. Those of devotion be the end of meditation 11.52.
Affections of the love of God. 25. Affections of devotion be of three sorts, 53
affections of sinners that be repented 76. Ambition. It is the daughter of
pride, and the acts thereof. 234. Angels. The evil fell thorugh pride. 88.
How we may talk to them in prayer. 20. They assist those that pray. 74. They
especially assist those that be chaste. 249. Anger. The acts and punishments
thereof, and the rewards of those that do mortify the same. 359. Ashes. See
Lent. Aspirations. How we may pray with them. 49. Attention in prayer. The
means to get it, and to resist distractions. 35. Avarice. The acts, damages,
and chastisments of it. 252. The benefits of mortifying it. 255. S. Augustine.
His counsel to those that love God. 2.3.5. His order of mental prayer. 14.
Author. The author of this woork has drawn it from three principal fountains
6.7.8. Benedictions. Promised to those that keep the law of God. 282.
Benefits. That come of mortifying pride. 137. That come of mortifying Gluttony
242. of chastity. 249. of mortifying Avarice. 255. of mortifying wrath 261. of
mortifying Envy. 267. of mortifying Sloth. 272. Of God toward us. 111.
Blessinge See Benedictions. Canticles. What spiritual canticles be 16.
Charity. The acts thereof to be practiced in communicating. 344. Chastity.
The acts and excellencies, the favors and rewards thereof. 247. Colloquie. See
Speeches. Commandments. See Law of God. Communion. The manner how to
prepare our selves worthelie for sacramental Communion 333. The manner of
communicating spiritually. 340. The manner of thanksgiving after Communion.
345. Confession. The excellencies of sacramental confession. 313. The virtues
that at practiced in it. 315. It is a great means to surmounte tentations.
316. The manner how to prepare our selves unto it. 320. The manner of giving
thanks after it. 328. Confidence in God, See Hope. Conscience. How we must
hear thee good inspirations and instructions of it, and how it will accuse us
in our particular judgment. 145. and how in the universal judgment, 196.
Consolation. See delight spiritual. Contrition. What it is, and wherein it
consists. 108.305.322 Conversion. That toward God, how perfect it must be.
76.77. Death. The properties of it. 126. It is hastened sometimes for our
sins. 127. Three things must afflict in it. 131. What passes therein with
the soul. 140. That of the wicked how terrible it is. 147.170. What passes
with the body at death. 154. the remembrance thereof very profitable. 162.
The forgetfulness of it dangerous. 167. Of the dreadful death of king
Balthazar. 173. Delight spiritual. God has and uses diverse ways to
communicate spiritual delight in prayer. 55. It is granted to some to weane them
from worldly delits. 62. Devotion. Wherein it consists 11. It is the tongue
of the soul, according to S. Bernard. 18. How it is obtained. 53. See
Affections. Diligence. That in Gods service what good it does against Sloth.
272. Distractions. Those of prayer whence they proceed, and the remedies
against then. 35 37.38.39. Devil. He presses and streighteneth us at the
hour of death. 138. He accuses in the particular judgment. 141.142.144. And
in the universal. 194. Doctors. Schoole-Doctors the third fountain of
mystical divinity. 8. End. The final end of all Christians. 1. The special
end of religious folks. 1. Twoe principal ends of mental prayer. 14.17. The
end of mental prayer and meditations contained in this work. 52. The last
end of man, and how it is to be sought for. 80. The last end of other visible
creatures. Envy. What it is; whence it grows; the actions, hurts, and
remedies thereof. 263. Estates. Three sorts of them; to wit of Beginners, of
Proficients, and of the Perfect. 24. Examination of Conscience. That which we
must make at the end of prayer. 43. That which God will make of the soul at
the particular judgment. 146. and in the universal judgment. 191. How we ought
to make it every inght of the sins we commit in the daytime 301. How it
must be made of same particular vice to root out and amend the same. 397. How
it must be done before confession. 320. Exercises spiritual. Those of our
glorious Father Ignatius how excellent they are. 7. Faith. The acts thereof
relying upon four pillars 341. Fathers. Holy fathers the masters of mystical
divinity. 7. Fear. That which afflicts for giving account at the hour of
death. 137. Fear of Gods punishments. 116. That which will afflict us in the
general judgment. 191. It prepares us to contrition. 323. Fire. Divine and
heavenly fire, what property it has. 3.4. That of hell. 224. Gluttony. The
acts, harms, and remedies thereof. 239. The rewards of mortifiyng the same.
242. God. He is our last end. 80. Hearing. How God is spiritually heard. 59.
Hell. What and how terrible it is. 212.217. The eternity thereof. 214. The
continuation and variety of pains therein. 216. The misery of the
inhabitants in it, and their discord. 219. The dreadfullnes of its torme^tors.
220. The pain of Sense of the damned in hell. 222. The pain of fire that they
endure. 224. The pain of their interior senses. 225. Their pain of loss or
damnation. 227. Humility. It rises of the knowledge of our selves. 76.
Humiliation the only means to get it. 238. Hope. That which we must have
going to communion. 342. Himmes. What spiritual himmes be. 15 Jesus. The
mysteries of his life. 25. Ignatius. His book of spiritual exercises of what
authority it is. 7. Ignorance. Not knowing in what sort to discourse or
meditat, and the remedies of it 35. That of death what euiles it causes. 167.
It is a proper vice of the understanding. 293. Impatience. The acts, hurts, and
remedies thereof. 258. Inspirations. How God speaks by them. See Talk. How
God does communicate them. 55. Intention. The authors intention in this work.
1.4. Intention that we must have in prayer. 32.33. Joy. How profitable
spiritual joy is. 272. See delight. Judgment. The particular that is made of
the soul at the hour of death, with the circumstances of the Assistants,
Judge, Accusers, Time, Place, and Sentences 140. till 154. The rigorous account
to be made therein. 146. The terrible sentence in it against the wicked. 150.
General judgment and the causes thereof. 175. The signs going before it. 177.
That fire that shall before it, burn the world. 180. The resurrection and
summoning of the dead to judgment. 183. The coming of the judge. 185. The
separation of the good from the evil. 188. The publication of consciences to be
made at that time. 191. The terrible accusations that shall flow upon this.
194. The sentences in favor of the good, and against the wicked, and the
execution of them. 196. Sacramental judgment in confession, and the acts
thereof. 320.321. Rash indgme^t and the evils of it. 294. Self-iudgment and the
hurt thereof. 295. Kingdom. That of heaven is given wholly to the elect in the
day of judgment. 199. The kingdom of this life and of the other, is promised
to the poor of spirit. 256. It is justice peace and joy in the holy Ghost.
256.317. Knowledge. That of God, Christ, and of our selves, the end of mental
prayer. 52. Experimental knowledge of God wherein it consists, and how it is
gotten. 57. Knowledge of our own miseries the root of humility, and how we
may obtain it. 76. Law of God. Ten commandments of Gods law, and two
ways of understanding them. 274. The means of sinning against them. 275.
Maledictions of those that break them. 279. Benedictions of those that keep
them. 282. How they must be written in the tables of our hearts. 289. Reasons
moving to observe them. 286. Lechery. The acts and chasisements thereof. 244.
Lent. Of the Ashes which we take in the beginning of Lent. 162. Liberality.
The rewards of it, as it is contrary to Avarice. 255. Love. Our love toward
God has three estates, of spiritual childhood, grouth, and of perfection. 25.
Luxury. See Lechery. Mass. The manner to hear it by communicating
spirituallie. 304. Meditation. The matter of meditation. 23. How it must be
made. 34. It causes the fountain whence it springs. 75. See Praire.
Meekenes. The acts and rewards of it. 161. Mental prayer. See Prayer. Mercy.
How much Christ will esteem the works thereof at the day of judgment. 200.
Modesty. The importance thereof and the manner how to keep it. 292.
Mortification. Wherein it consists, and how it rese^bleth death. 154. It
must be by degrees by little and little, and is most necessary to attain to
virtue. 229. Mortifications of the senses, what good it brings unto us. 291.
Oaths. Chastisements of those that be ill made. 273. 282. Pains. Pains of
hell. page 212. till 230. See Punishment. Patience. It is contrary to Anger.
261. Penance. The excellencies of Sacramental Penance. 315. The graces and
favors that God bestows in it. 317. Perfection. All men ar called by God to
persection. 2. Petitions. To whom they must be directed, and from whence they
must be taken 11. why they are to be alleged in prayer 13. How we must present
them before God 14. How they be made to God. 17. They depend chiefelie of the
holy Ghost 18. Poverty. The contraritie that poverty of spirit has to
covetousness 255. Prayer. The holy ghost chief master of mental prayer. 6.
What mental prayer is, and how the substance thereof consists in four
things. 9.10.11 The order of mental prayer according to S. Augustine 14. Two
principal ends of mental prayer 14.17. How in it we may have conference with
our own soul, with our B. Lady, Angels and other Saint 19. what virtues
accompany mental prayer, and the excellency thereof. 21 23. What the matter
of mental prayer is. 23. How it is reduced to there orders fit for three
estates of those that meditate 24. Entrance in to prayer how it ought to be
made. 29. How we may aid our selves with our imaginations, tongue and other
faculties for mental prayer. 40. The examination of prayer ended, and the
fruits thereof. 43. Diverse forms of prayer in diverse matters accommodated to
sundry persons and times. 46. How mental prayer may be used of some without
manifoldnes of discourses. 52.53 Forms ordinary and extraordinary of mental
prayer, and how diversely God communicates himself therein.
Presence.
The presence of God necessary to be had by us in prayer 20. Pride. The acts
and punishments of it. 233.235 Profit. Spiritual profit and advancement, is
gotten by doing and suffering. 26. Providence. That of God toward such as
resign them selves to him. 86. Psalms. Interior psalms what they be 15.
Punishments. Punishment of the Angels that sinned. 89. Of our first parents.
92. Of any mortal sin. 94.116. That which Christ suffered for sins. 96.
Punishments of pride. 235. Of gluttony 240. Of luxury. 245. Of avarice. 154.
Of Of wrath. 259. Of envy. 295. Of slothe. 270. Of those that break Gods
comaundements. 279. See pains. Purgatory. The terriblenes of it, with other
circunstances of the souls that be therein. 35^. How godly a thing it is pray
for the souls that be there. 358.359. Purity. Pureness of heart is the end of
the purgative way. 75. Purposes. Good purposes and determinations, how they
ought to be made by us in the morning and at prayer time. 308. Reading. In
reading of good books God speaks unto us. 70. It is the first step of the
spiritual ladder. 74. Religion. It, with three ways thereof is a spiritual
imitation of death. 157. Resignation. That which we ought to have in the use of
things created. 85, Resurrection. The general of all men with many
circumstances. 183. Reverence. That which is due to God in prayer. 31.
Satisfaction. Of that which we must make for our sins, and means to stire us
up unto it. 326. Scripture. Holiescripture the principal fruit of spiritual
science. page 7. Seeing. How God is seen spirituallie, and what is seen in
him. 57.58. Senses. Sins of our corporal exterior senses, and their
chastisements. 287. Mortification of them 291. Internal and spiritual senses.
56. Sin. It is most contrary to ou^ last end. 87. The griuousnes of it by
diverse examples. 88. By the pains that Christ endured for them. 96. By the
multitude of them, and for the being against reason. 100. By the baseness of
them that commits them. 104. by the greatness of God against whom they are
committed. 108. By the vile motive that induces to sin. 115. By compari^on
betwixt the temporal and eternal pains thereof. 116. It is worse then all
the evils of pain laid together that are suffered in hell. 123. Of the seven
called deadly sins by order. 230. Sins against the commandments of God.
273. Senses and sins of them, and of the tongue. 287. Sins of the
understanding. 293. Those of our own selfewill. 296. How much venial sins
is to be abhorred for fear of purgatory. 352. Sloth. what it is, the acts,
and harms and chastisement thereof. 268. The reward of him that mortifieth it.
272. Smelling. How we do spiritually smell God. 60. Sorrow. Sorrow for sins
some rises of love. 322. Some of fear preparing us to that other sorrow of
love. 323. Speeches. Colloquies or speeches how they must be made in prayer
with God. 11.17. with ourselves, with our B. Lady, Angels, and Saints. 19.
Talk. How we may talk with God in mental prayer. 14. Talk with God cause of
great good. 21. Talk of God with us what it is, and what it woorketh. 22.59.
See Speeches. T^st. How we do taste God spirituallie. 61: Tears. Those of
love and fear how they are obtained. 322. Temperance. See Abstinence.
Tentations. Those that be against prayer, and their remedies. 39.
Thanksgiving. What they are. 16. The acts thereof, and how to be practiced
after Confession. 328. How every day in the examination of our consience. 302.
How after communion. 345. Things. The last things of man moving us
effectually to detest sin. 125. Tongue. The sins thereof, and the manner
how to mortify it. 288.291. Touching. How we do and may touch God with
union of love. 62. Vain glory. The acts and hurtes thereof. 233. Virtues. They are not obtained by consideration only, but by mortification of our vices. 231.
Vices. See Sins. Virginity. See Chastity. Union. Diverse forms and manners
of it pertaining to contemplative life. 62. VVayes. Three ways, Purgative,
Illuminatiue, and Unitive; accommodated to three states of persons. ^4. Will,
Self will what acts it has, the harms and punishments thereof, and means
how to mortify it. 295.296. Word. That of God, with what spirit to be
ruminated. 48. Wrath. See Anger.
Faults escaped in the printing.
Page 52. contended, read contented p. 53. then, them. p. 51. him, her. p.
172. the, thee. p. 194, which, with. p. 195. regaled, recaled. ibid. vould,
would. ibid. out, our. p. 196. perfocre, perforce. ibid. accumsemee, accuse
me. ibid. the, them. p. 202. whosoeuet, whosoever. ibid. mother, mother. ibid.
haut, have. p. 203. peruersc, perverse. p. 204. thee, the. p. 206. haut, have.
p. 207. danmed, damned. ibid. neighbout, neighbor. ibid. hec, her. p. 210.
might, night. ibid. on wicked, on the wicked. p. 212. his, this. ibid. Cod,
God. p. 213. fuffer, suffer. ibid se, so. p. 215. deliuee, deliver. p. 220. us,
as. ibid. man, many. p. 122. which the damned, which the exterior senses of
the damned. p. 224. ane, and. p. 225. and, and. p. 227. from all, from all
this. p. 234. these, there. p. 235. shall, shall. p. 296. purity, purify.
ibid. bening, being. ibid, fillowing, following. p. 297. in good, in the good.
p. 299. thee, the p. 230. thee, there.

Good Reader, if thou find any other which I have ommitted, I pray thee of thy
courtesy to correct them.

MEDITATIONS UPON THE MYSTERIES OF OUR HOLY FAITH WITH the practice of mental
prayer touching the same, (...)

Composed in Spanish by the R. F. LVYS DE LA PVENTE of the Society of JESUS,
native of Valladolid.

AND Translated into English by F. RICH. GIBBONS of the same Society.

THE SECOND PART. The contents of this work are to be seen in the page
following.

ornament with sun SIT NOMEN DOMINIBENEDICTUM

IHS



Printed with privilege M.DC.X.

THE CONTENTS OF THIS WORK.
These Meditations go divided into six parts, which be correspondent to the
three ways, PVRGATIVE, ILLVMINATIVE, and VNITIVE: the first two parts for
Principiants in Virtue: the other two for those that Go^ for^^^^d: and the two
last for (...) And all six do help for Preachers, and Masters of perfection.

The first part, of Sins, and Last things of man, with Means of prayer to
purify the heart from vices.

The second part, of the Mysteries of the Incarnation, and Childhoode of JESUS
Christ our Lord, until his Baptism.

The third part; of the Principal mysteries of his life, Diuinitye, and
Miracles, unto the end of his preaching.

The fourth part, of all the Mysteries of the Passion

The fifth part, of the Mysteries of the Resurrection, Apparitions, and
Asce^sion, till the coming of the holy Ghost, and publishing of the Gospel.

The sixth part, of the Mysteries of the Diuinitye,

Trinity, and Perfections of God, and of the Benefits,

natural and supernatural that proceed from him.

According to the order of the history there go inserted also meditations of
all the Life of our LADY, and of some Saints, of whom the Gospel, and the
book of the Acts of the Apostles make mention; of which, and of those that be
upon the Gospells of the Sundays, and holy days thoroughout the year, there
be Tables in the end of the whole work.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL, VIRTUOUS, AND DEVOVTE LADY THE LADY LVYSA DE
CARVAIAL.
THIS child borne in Spain your native soil, fertile of such worthy wights
and Virtuous Imps, being clod in English attire, though not in Courtlike
fasshion, as too too delicate for his grave education and religious pretense;
but in ordinary suit, yet well beseeming his intention, and in no point
disagreeing from his parentage; has been so bold, encouraged by me his
foster-father, as to present himself, Right Virtuous Madame, to your
worshipful service: not doubting but that at your devout hands he shall
receive such intertainment, as the place from whence he had his beginning, his
parents and Allies so addicted to your self and your noble family, and his
own merits do worthily deserve. To all which if I should add my
commendation of him, or my diligence, such as it is and your self may easily
perceive, in setting him forwards, and directing him to your presence, although
it may seem to many, as to my self it does, that it were in a manner to cast
water into the sea; yet considering that to so kind and noble a heart, as yours
is, and so given to piety and devotion, my good will to pleasure, and serve
you in this sort, cannot be but acceptable: I do in the best wise that I am
able, commend unto your worshipful custody and protection this gracious
infant, to be cherished of you, as he is worthy. And so desiring Madame to be
remembered in your best devotions, I wish you all hearty contentment in him
that is our true contentment.

Yours Madame in Christ JESUS to command RICH. GIBBONS.

THE SECOND PART OF MEDITATIONS APPERtaining to the Illuminatiue way, upon the
Mysteries, of the Incarnation, and Childehood of our Lord and Savior Christ
JESUS until his Baptism.
With these are inserted Meditations of the life of our blessed LADY until
the same time.
THE INTRODVCTION.
Of the perfect Imitation of our Savior Christ which is the end of these
Meditations.
THE Meditations pertaining to the Illuminatiue way, whereof in this second
part we begin to entreat, have for their subject the Mysteries of the life
of our Savior Christ, from the time of his Incarnation until his Death upon
the Cross. The which (as it appears by what has been said in the
Introduction of this book, in the fourth Paragraphe) are divided into three
parts: Some of his Incarnation, and Childhood: Othersome of his Preaching: and
Others of his Passion, and Death: after the which ensues the Glorified life,
which pertains to the Unitive way, albeit unto this also are much accordant
the mysteries of the Passion, wherein our Savior Christ discovered the
finenesse of his love, as hereafter shall be declared. All these mysteries the
divine wisdom ordained, to the end that with a pleasing variety they might
be the spiritual sustentation of those souls that travail to perfection,
into the which souls this sovereign King enters in the wineseller of his
precious wines. Cant. 2.4.
And from these mysteries, as from celestial vessels, he draws the
feruorous wine of Love, and of other most ardent affections, wherewith he
cheareth, sustaineth, and makes them drunken: ordering Charity in them with
that order, wherewith our Lord himself exercised his acts: unto the which he
inuiteth, and exhort^h us, saying: I came into my garden, Cant. 5.1.
I reaped my myrrh with mine aromaticall spices, I eat my honycombe with my
honye, I drank my wine with my milk: eat o friends, and drink, and be
inebriated my beloved. Which is to say: By my Incarnation I came into the
Garden of my Church, and in entering into the world, I cut the Myrrh of many
bitternesses, and mortifications, that I suffered in my Infancye, with the
Aromaticall spices of most odoriferous virtues. I preached my doctrine, and
practiced it with as much pleasure, as he that eats the hony-combe with his
honey. I became so drunken with the wine of my love, that I remained naked, and
dead upon a Cross, being as much pleased with drinking the chalice of my
Passion, as he is that drinks wine with his milk. Therefore, o my frindes,
and my beloved, prepare the garden of your souls: for in them I desire to
work other three like effects, you yourselues also working them thorough my
grace, to imitate my life. First of all, Cut Myrrh, and the Aromaticall Spices
of Virtues, that may mortifye your Passions, and preserve you from the
Corruption of your Sins, imitating herein my Puritye. Then eat my hony-combe
with his honye, meditating upon the excellent Doctrine that I preached, figured
by the Wax of the hony-combe, that gives light: But you are not to eat it
alone, but with the imitation of the Heroical Virtues included therein,
figured by the honye, that nourishes with it sweetness. And finally drink,
and be drunk with the Wine of my perfect Love, mingled with the milk that I
will give you of my divine Consolations, with the which you shall so easily
renounce the Affections of all earthly things, that you shall, if need be,
remain naked upon another Cross, to imitate my nakedness, and to love me,
as I loved you.

These are the three principal Exercices of Charity well ordered in her three
Estates, of Beginning, Augmentation, and Perfection. And these same in that
form, and degree prescribed, are the principal ends, whereunto are ordained
the Meditations of the Childhood, Preaching, and Passion of our Savior
Christ, whereof the three parts that follow do entreat. Among the which,
those of this second part, which are of his Childhood, have this Excellencye,
that they move us to love him with more tenderness, and to imitate him with
more sweetness; for that, as in making himself a Child for us he
accomodated himself (as the Prophet Isa^as says) to eat the Isai. 7.15.
food proper to Children, which is milk, and Honye: so also to those that
meditate the mysteries of his Infancye, specially to Principian^s, he uses to
give more abundantly the milk, and Honye of divine consolations, to weane
them from terrene, and to animate them to the imitation of his Heroical
Virtues.

To attain to these ends, we are to procure, by the means of these
Meditations, to know Christ JESUS our Lord, true God, and man, with so
certain, proper, entire, and perfect a knowledge, that it may arrive to
understand, and penetrate the infinite dignity of his Person, and the
inestimable riches, and treasures of his grace, with great esteem, and
valuation thereof. For in this knowledge (as is testified by our Savior
himself) consists Life everlasting: Joan. 17.3. Psalm 38 4.
and from it, as from seed, proceed the means to obtain it: and with the
breathe thereof is inkindled in meditation the fire of Charity, which
inflameth us in his Love, Sermon de perfecta forma hominis Christiani.
from which springs fortitude of heart to imitate his Life, with so great
perfection, that (according to that of S. Gregory Nyssenus) a Christian may be
called alter Christus, Another Christ in Humillity, Patience, and all the other
Virtues; as we say of a Wiseman, that he is another Solomon.

The manner of meditating upon these Mysteries, Ex Patre Ignatio in primo
exerci^io secundae, and tertiae hebdomadae.
to effectuate what we pretend, must be to carrye our eyes fixed upon four
things, and to ponder them with attention. The first is, they speak them. In
the introductio^. 1. and 2.
with those other Affections, and Colloquyes that we spoke of in the beginning
of this Book. All this is to be done in every Point that the meditation
shall have, following the Order of the Historye, as in the Progress thereof
shall be seen. And for that among the Persons that are touched in many of
these mysteries, (especially in those of this second part) the most principal
is our blessed LADY the VIRGIN, we must most principally attend to draw out
of these meditations the knowledge, and Love of her, and the imitation of her
Heroical Virtues, ascending from the imitation of the mother, to the imitation
of her Son, 1. Cor. 11.1.
seeing she may say unto us much better then Saint Paul. Be ye folowers of
me, as I also of Christ.

To dispose us the better to the pretense, and estimation of the end that has
been spoken of, the meditation following of Vocation to imitate our Lord JESUS
Christ, will help very much, as a foundation of these meditations, imagining
him in the likeness of a most excellent King, elected by God, Ex Patre Ignatio
in principio secundae hebdomadae.
that should raise up men to make war upon his enemies, inuiting his vassalls
to follow him, and promising them, that if they accompany him in the fight,
they shall enjoy with him the spoils of the victory.

The fundamental Meditation, of the infinite Excellencye of the celestial
King, Christ JESUS our Lord, and of the Vocation that he makes, inuiting all
men to follow him.
The first Point.
FIrst, The Excelle^cyes of our Savior Christ as he is a King. Psalm. 2.6.
I am to consider that our Lord Christ is a most excellent king, elected by
the eternal Father to rule, and govern men, commanding all to obey him as
their proper king, and lawful Lord; according to that which he himself said
by the Prophet David: I am appointed king by him over Sion his holy hill,
preaching his precept.

Upon this truth, I am to ponder first, the infinite Charity of the eternal
Father in the election of this sovereign king; for that being resolved to
give men a king, he made choice of the best that he could give us: who on
the one side should be true man as concerning our nature, that he might be
before us with his example, and entreat us with Meekness, and Compassion:
and on the other side should be true God, and his only begotten son, that
by his infinite power he might remedy, Sermon 1. de Natiuitate.
and aid us. For (as Saint Leo the Pope says) If he had been man only,
he could not have remedied us: and if he had been God only, he could not
have given us Example.

From hence I will ascend to consider the excellencyes of this king, in whom
concur all the Quallities, that may be in a most perfect king; as is
manifest by those, Psalm. 44 3. etc. Iere. 23.5^ Zachar. 9.9.
that are attributed unto him by the Prophets. But principally I will po^der
his infinite Wisdom, whereby he knows our necessities, and miseries: his
Omnipotencye, to remedy them; his Mercy, in being compassionate of them; his
Bountye, and Charity, in desiring to remedy them; his Providence, in being
careful for our Good; his Meekness, and Affabillitye, in entreating us as
Brethren: his Liberallitye, and Magnificence, in sharing among us his riches,
and giving us all that he has, even unto his very body, and blood; his
Justice, and Prudence in Government, directing us with great Integritye, and
Uprightness; and finally his Eternitye with perpetual Constancye in his
celestial Empire, which shall never have an end.

And to make me more entirely affectionate herein, Isai. 10.13.
for they impose tributes, and taxations upon their vassalls, and exact them
with rigor; this quitteth all those, and lovingly pays their debtes: they
impouerish their vassalls to enrich themselves; this impouerisheth himself to
inriche them with his Pouertye: 2. ad Cor. 8.9.
they err oftentimes in their government thorough ignorance, passion, or
malice: this never erreth, because he is infinitely Wise, Just, and Good.
Math. 11.23.4. and 29.
They impose very heavy Laws upon their subjectes, and yet excuse themselves
to fulfill them: this imposes Laws very sweet, and by his own example
animateth men to fulfill them. Finally, those are te^porall kings, that end
with Death, Dani. 2.32.
and their Empires be they of gold, or silver, of brass, or of iron shall
perish because they are founded upon feet of Clay: but this king is eternal,
and his kingdom shall never have end, because it is founded upon God.

From these three considerations, and from every one of them, I am to extract
several affections of Praise, Joy, and Thanksgiving, with great Resolutions,
and Offers to do much in the service of this Sovereign king: sometimes to
this purpose I will speak to the eternal Father: other sometimes to this
royal king his Son; and other sometimes to my self, exhorting my self
here unto in this manner. Colloquie.
O my Soul, praise, and glorifye the celestial Father, for having given thee
a King so potent, so wise and so holy: Rejoice at the good fortune that has
befallen thee, to have so loving a king, of whom thou may obtain favor,
and interior freindship. If men make so much accoumpt to be the minions of
earthly kings, how much more ought thou to accoumpt thyselfe, for being the
minion, and favorite of the king of Heaven! O Sovereign king, I rejoice at
those so infinite Greatenesses that thou have, for the which I beseech thee to
take me under thy Protection: Psalm. 22.1
for seeing thou art he that do govern me, I am sure te want nothing.

The Second Point.
SEcondly, Psalm. 2.6.
persuading them to accomplish the precept of his Father, saying unto them: My
most Just Will is, 1 Ioa. 3.8. In hoc apparuit filius Dei. vt dissoluat opera
diaboli. Joan. 12.26.
to make War upon mine Enemies, the Devil, the World, and the Flesh, and
upon all Vices, and Sins, and triumphing over them, to enter into the
kingdom of my Father: Therefore whosoever will follow me in this enterprise,
let him live like me, and he shall reign like me: let him imitate me in
the fight, and doubtless he shall have part in the Victory. And this is
founded upon that which the same our lord said by S. John: If any man minister
unto me, let him follow me: and where I am, there also shall my minister
be. which is to say: Whosoever offers himself to my service, must live as I
live, and so shall he enjoye the eternal reward that I enjoye.

Upon this Vocation I will discourse, Iudic. 7.17. and 9.49.
and his king does? when as Gedoon, and Abimelech, but in saying to their
Soldiers, Do what you shall see us do, were Instantly obeyed? Fourthly, O
eternal king, Colloquie. Osea 11.4.
I give thee thanks for the sweetness where with thou call us, attracting
us to thy service with Adams cords, weaued with so effectual reasons. O that
all men by thy divine Light might understand them, that all with ardent Charity
might follow thee!

The third Point.
THirdly, S. Sermon. 21. in Cant.
Bernard says) All Christians desire to arrive where Christ is, and yet few
will follow after Christ: All would have the reward of those that follow
him, but there are not many that will endure the travel to follow him: who in
chastizement of their disobedience, Luc. 14.18.
(like those that were called to the banquet, and excused themselves) shall
never attain to enjoye his sweet Society: to whom our Lord swore that they
should never more taste of his supper: using likewise unto them that speech of
the divine Wisdom: Prou. 1.24
Because I called you, and you heard me not, I will laugh at your perdition,
chastizing your Rebellion with Death everlasting.

The second kind is, desiring to remain with their Riches, and Dignities, and
to enjoye the lawful Pleasures of Matrimonye, because they have not a mind to
arrive to greater perfection: like that young man that from his infancye had
kept the Commandments of God, Matt. 19.21.
and when Christ said unto him, That if he would be perfect, he should sell
all that he had, and give it to the poor, and come follow him, he went away
sad, and would not do it, contenting himself with doing what he was wont to
do. These, allbeit they do what is sufficient for their Salvation: yet as
their imitation comes short, so also their reward shallbee short. For it is
a kind of Shortness for a Soldier not to imitate his Captain in all that
he can, to his uttermost power, when as his Captain does for him more, then
he is obliged unto.

The third kind is, Matt. 19.29.
and the other afterward in Life everlasting. Unto this manner of Life it were
reason that we should all of us offer ourselves, not so much for the
temporal, and eternal interest that ensues thereof, as for the infinite
obligation that we have to love, and serve this great king. And Because (as
the Wiseman says) It is great Glory to follow our lord with Perfection.
Eccl. 23.38 Matthew. 5.48. Luc. 6.46
And the nearer we follow him, the greater shallbee our glory, laboring to
be perfect, as our heavenly Father is perfect: and as is the king, and master,
that for our example he has given us. From hence it is, that those, who by a
special Vocation have not been called to this kind of Life, are to make
demonstration of the good will they have to serve this Sovereign king, saying
unto him with the royal Prophet David: Psalm. 107.2.
My heart is prepared, o God, my heart is prepared: behold me here ready
to fulfill thy precepts, and likewise prepared to observe thy Counsels: I
offer myself for thy Love to follow thee in Pouertye, and Chastitye,
abandoning my Liberty, and all whatsoever I have for thy Glory, if thou willt
but daigne to call me to such a kind of Life.

To these three kinds of Persons may be added a fourth, VVisdome says) to
mount up to the Fortress, Prou. 9.3.
and to the Walls of the City: that is, to the highest of Christian
Perfection. In this kind enter those Religious, whose end is, in imitation of
the Apostles, to attend not only to their own Salvation, and Perfection, but
also to that of others: and such is the end of our Society of JESUS, for we
that are the Religious thereof, profisse to be the Companions of JESUS in this
enterprise* and those which in this manner are called, ought to be exceedingly
contented with their Vocation, considering the highness thereof, and to give
many thanks to him that called them, offering themselves with great Courage
to undertake whatsoever Travails, and Peregrinations, whither among
Christians, or Infidells, even unto the shedding of their blood, if need be,
for the Glory of God, and for the Salvation of their Souls, using those
words of the Prophet Isaias: Isa. 6.8.
Behold me here, o Lord, send me whither thou willt, and how thou willt, for
I am ready to do whatsoever thou commaundest me.

The Conclusion of what has been said.
By what has been said in this meditation, I Infer with what spirit we
are to enter into the Meditations ensuing: every one endeavoring to imitate
Christ our Lord most perfectly, conformable to the Estate that he has chosen.
If he be a Religious man, following his proper Institution with Perfection.
If he hold an Estate of Continencye, or Preisthood, full filling all his
obligations with integritye. And if he be a married man, dispoiling his
heart of disordinate Affections to the things that he possesses, according
to the rule of the Apostle which says: 1 Cor. 7.29.
Those, which have wives, let them be as if they had none: those, which buy,
and possess, as if they possessed not: and those which use this World as if
they used if not, doing all things in such sort, that for them they neither
loose Christ, nor grow cold in his love, and service.

But those which have not yet taken an Estate, and desire to make choice of
that which is most convenient for their Salvation, and Perfection, their end
must be, to regard what our Lord Christ does Inspire them, to imitate him in
that degree of Perfection, where unto they shall find they are moved: wherein
they shall be aided by the 6.7. and 8. meditation of the third Part.

The first Meditation, Of the Decree made by the most holy TRINITY, that the
Second Person of the Deity should become Man for the redemption of Mankind,
lost by the Sin of Adam.
IN the Entrance of this meditation, and of those ensuing which treat of this
mystery, it shall not be amiss to imagine God our Lo^rd Three, and One,
seated in a Throne of infinite Majestye, Apoc. 4.3.
environed (as S. John saw him) with the bow of Heaven, the Symbol of his
infinite Mercy, with the three Colors of his infinite Goodness, Wisdom, and
Omnipotencye, wherewith he governs all things, and has both Will,
Knowledge, and Abillitye to remedy our miseries. Then will I imagine all
mankind, and myself among them, thorough the sin of Adam, Luc. 10.30
prostrate upon the Earth, dispoiled, wounded, and half dead, as was that
poor man who in the way of Jericho fell among thieves. And the three Persons
of the Deitye beholding them, taking compassion on them, and entering into
Counsel what means they should take for their Remedy.

With this holy representation, prostrate in Spirit before this Throne, and
adoring the most blessed Trinitye, I will humbly beseech him to illuminate me
with his divine Light, that I may know to depth of the Counsel that he took
for our remedy, in such sort as may proffit me. And the lovely veiwe of his
celestial Bow, shall encourage me to approache (as S. Heb. 4.16
Paul says) with great Confidence to the Throne of his Grace, hoping to
obtain mercy, and aid in time convenient, as is this time of Prayer.

The first Point.
THe first Point, Ex D. Th. 3. p. q. 1. art. 1. and 2 and q. 4. art. 1.
and the Foundation of those that follow, shallbee, to consider the Decree
that God our Lord made in his Eternitye, for the Remedy of mankind, that was
lost by the Sin of Adam, pondering the causes that moved him thereunto; some
in the behalf of his infinite Mercy, and others in the behalf of our own
Miserye, and of the lamentable means whereby we incurred it.

First, Heb. 1.16 No^ Angelos apprehe^dit, sed semen Abrahae.
I will consider that our Lord having created two sorts of Creatures to his
own image, and likeness to serve, and to praise him; to wit, Angels, and
Men; Angels in the Empyrean heaven, and men in the terrestrial Paradise: and
having seen that a great part of the Angels sinned, and so likewise the
men: he determined to demonstrate the terriblenesse of his rigorous Justice by
chastizing the Angels, 1. Petr. 2.4.
bending against them the rigorous Bow of his Indignation, and throwing them
immediately From Heaven into Hell, not giving them any time of Repentance. But
to men, though they deserved the same punishment, he was desirous to show the
Riches of his infinite mercy, determining to remedy them, and to draw them
out of those miseries, into which they had fallen, by giving them means to
obtain pardon of their sin. For in nothing is the mercy of God so
resplendent, Sap. 11.10. and 12.1.
as in pardoning Sins, and taking Compassion on his very Enemies: neither
were it reason that mercy should omit to show it self in a thing, that so
greatly does magnifye it. And thus did he with men, according to that of S.
Paul; Ad Tit. 3.3.
The Benignitye, and Kindness toward man of our Savior God h^th appeared, in
that he has saved us, not by the works of Justice which we did, but
according to his infinite mercy. For the which every one of us ought to give
infinite thanks to this our Lord, considering that we being creatures so
vile, that we deserved to be vnprotected by his Justice; Yet he took us
under the protection of his mercy, rejecting the Angels that were much more
noble then we. Colloquie.
O eternal God true Father of mercy, wherewith shall we repay thee so
sovereign a benefit as this, that without any merit of ours, thou give us a
remedy to obtain pardon of our Sins? may the Angels that remain in Heaven
laud thee for this favor: may the men that live upon the Earth, acknowledge
it, and make use of it: and may my soul melt it self in thy Love, singing the
multitude, and Greatenesse of thy mercy, by the which I beseech thee to
pardon my Sins, ayding me, that I may never more return unto them. This
Consideration I am to apply to myself, pondering, that allbeeit God our Lord
thorough his mercy has made a Decree to pardon Sinners, and effectually
pardons those that submit themselves: yet to the Rebellious be uses his
rigorous Justice, condemning them, as he did the Devils. And therefore I am
to endeavor not to resist Gods mercy, least I fall into the hands of his
Justice.

Then will I ponder the causes that in some sort moved the Divine Mercy,
Adam by his Sin, not only indammaged himself, Romans 5.12
but also all that descended of him; who were to be borne Sinners, condemned
to Death, and to perpetual Prison, incurring these damages, not by their own
personal Will, but by that which they had in their first Parent. But whereas
God was so merciful, that his Clemencye could not permit, that his whole
work, for one man's Transgression, should perish without remedy: and that all
this visible world, that was created for man, should be frustrate of his
end, serving the sinner, he therefore resolved to find out the Remedy. From
whence I will collect two motives to repose my Confidence in Gods mereye,
alleging them as David did, for respects, wherefore he should remedy my
miserye. Psalm. 50.7
The one, because I was conceived in Sin; from whence originally spring all
my miseryes: O most merciful Father, Sapient. 11.25. Psalm. 102.14.
seeing thou know the mass, wheref we thy Children were formed, which
issued good from thee, and by Adam was made evil, have Compassion on us,
remedying the Hurt done by Adam, to reform the Good done by thee. My hands
have defaced in me the work of thy Hands: les thine by thy abundant grace,
repair what mine did thorough my great sin.

Another cause was, Sapient. 2.24.
for that man sinned being tempted, and seduced by the Devil, partly for the
envy that he had of his good: partly for his rage against God, ^esiring to
revenge himself of the Creator in the Creature, who by him was so favored,
and in whom his divine image was stamped: whereupon God himself moved to
Compassion, would take to himself the cause of man, with a determination to
remedy him, because his Enemy should not remain for ever victorious. And
therefore he said unto him, Genes. 3.15.
when Adam had sinned: I will put enmityes between thee, and the Woman, and
thy seed, and the seed of her: and they shall break thy Head, vanquishing
him that vanquished them, and triumphing over him that triumphed over them.
Whereby he also puts me in hope, that he will have Compassion on me, and
take my cause for his own, seeing the Devil now persecuteth me with the like
Envy, Psalm. 73.22.
and Rage: and so I may say unto him with David: Arize, o Lord, Judge thine
own cause, ayding me with thy Grace to break the head of the Serpent, who
always persecuteth me, because he abhors thee.

The Second Point.
SEcondly, I am to consider the admirable Decree, made by the most sacred
Trinitye, that the second Person, who is the Son of God, should be made man
to redeem mankind, lost by the Sin of Adam; pondering the causes that
moved him thereunto, some in regard of our own great necessitye, and
miserye: and others in regard of his infinite Bountye, and Mercy.

First, Seraphines: he would not make choice of a mean that was more easy,
nor less perfect; nor would he impose the charge of this work upon another,
but chose the best means that was possible, plotting that the Son of God
should become man, for the remedy of man: In such wise, that he could not
give us a better Remedier, Ad Romans 5.20.
nor a more powerful Remedy, nor a more copious Redemption, willing that
where Sin abounded, there Grace should more infinitely abound.

To ponder this Veritye the more, Adam plotted with Pride to rebel against God
himself, desiring to usurp his Diuinitye, and Wisdom; and to have Signorye
over all things: whereby he deserved that God should abhor, and humble him,
and should annihilate his perverted nature. But God of his infinite Goodness,
was not only willing to pardon this iniurye, but to that end chose a means of
the greatest Honor, and Proffit, for man, and of the greatest Humilliation,
and Travail for God: for that the Divine Word being of infinite Greatenesse,
and Majestye, sticked not (as S. Psa. 137.5
Paul says) upon exinaniting, and humbling himself, to take the form of a
Servant, and to Inuest himself with the mortal, and passible nature of his
very Enemy, joining it to himself in unity of Person, to draw him out of
that great misery, whereinto he was fallen thorough Sin, and to exalt him
to that high Honor, and Happiness, that he might lay hold upon by his
Grace. Phil. 2.6. Ser. 9. de Natiuit.
For (as S. Augustine says) God made himself man to make man God: that by
the Virtue of God made man, men might be Gods by Participation.

Finally, considering this sovereign Decree, Moses I will magnifye, saying:
Dominatour Lord God merciful and clement, Exo. 34.6
patient, and of much compassion, and True, which keep mercy unto thousands
of generations, which take away iniquity, and wicked factes, and Sins; and
without whom no man of himself is Innocent before thee. Othertimes with the
Seraphines, covering with my wings the face, and feet of God, and adoring this
conjunction of his Diuinitye, and Humanitye, I will cry out, saying: Holy,
Isa. 6.3.
Holy, Holy is the Lord God of Hosts all the Earth is full of his Glory
thorough the Greatness of his mercy. And othersometimes, I will give thanks
to this our Lord for this so glorious a benefit, saying unto him.

O Eternal God, Colloquie.
I most humbly thank thee for this sovereign Plot which thou inuentedst for
my remedy, taking upon thee my baseness, to communicate unto me thy
Greatenesse: Grant that I may humble myself to serve thee, as thou did
humble thyselfe to remedy me; and that I may do all that I can for thy
service, seeing thou did all that thou could for my Remedy. O my Soul,
do for thy God all that thou can, for all is but little, Ex D. Leo sermon. 1.
de Natiuit.
considering how much thou dooest owe him. Learn to esteem God, as he
esteems thee: and seeing he has exalted thee to such a Greatenesse, do not
thou any thing that may be unbeseeming it.

The third Point.
THirdly, I am to consider, how in this work of the Incarnation, our Lord God
pretended withal to discover unto us the infinite Excellencye of all his
Perfections, and Virtues, employing them with the greatest perfection that was
possible, and to our greatest commoditye. This may be pondered discoursing
breifely of the most principal.

First, the union of Love, giving them freely, and liberally the thing that he
most loved, Ad Romans 8.32.
and esteemed, and with it all other things whatsoever. He showed his infinite
Mercy, Psalm. 84.11.
for there could not be a greater mercy then for God to come personally to
remedy our miseries, and to make himself capable of sorrow, that he might
be truly compassionate of them. Nether could there be greater Justice, then
for God himself made man, to pay our proper debt, suffering therefore the pain
of death that our sins had deserved: neither could there be greater
Brotherhood, then to apply to us men by mercy, that reward which God man
merited by Justice: giving me an assurance to obtain all things that are
convenient for me, seeing this our Lord gained them all by Justice, and
applies unto me his merits by infinite mercy. Ex D. Damaso lib. 3. de Fide
orthodoxa a principio.
He also showed his immense Wisdom, in inuenting a means how to conjoine
things so distant, as are God, and Man; Eternal, and Temporal: Impassible,
and Passible: neighbors, who should not love them? If God do good to his
enemies, who should do evil to his? If God humble himself, who should be
proud? If God suffer, and endure, who should be impatient, and ill suffering?
And if God obey, why should not man be obedient?

These seven Divine Perfections resplendent in this work, are to move me to
praise God seven times a day, yea, seven thousand, if I may, desiring to love
and to serve him, with the greatest perfection that may be possible. For if
before God made himself man, he required that we should love him with all
our Heart and Soul, Spirit, and Forces: D^ut. 6.5
with how much greater reason may he now require of me this degree of Love,
and Fervor in his Service? D. Greg. homil. 36. in Euang.
And seeing works are the proof of Love, I am in them to demo^strate this my
Love, endeavoring to imitate those most excellent Perfections, that he
discovered in this work: to wit: his Bountye, Charity, Liberallitye,
Mercy, and the rest which are imitable, and especially those Virtues, that
this God Incarnate exercised in the world for our Example.

O most blessed Trinitye, Colloquie.
what thanks shall I give thee for having discovered in this work, those
infinite Greatenesses, that thou heldst closed in thy breaste? What shall I
give thee, that shall not be all to little for so sovereign a gift? How shall
I love, and serve thee therefore? Behold me here wholely dedicated to thy
Service, with a Desire to love thee, as thou louedst me: and to imitate those
Virtues, that thou discoueredst unto me. And seeing thou have given me that
which is more, give me also that which is less, granting me that I may love
thee, for the infinite gift that thou gave me. Amen.

The Second Meditation. Of GODS infinite Charity resplendent in this Mystery
of the Incarnation, and of the great Benefits that we receive thereby.
ALlbeeit, all the Divine Perfections are (as has been said) resplendent in
the Decree of the Incarnation: yet above them all, Charity most florisheth, of
which this meditation shallbee: (leaving the others to the sixth part.) And it
shallbee founded upon that which our Savior Christ said to Nicodemus: Joan.
3.16 1 Joan. 4.^.
So God loved the World, that he gave his only-begotten Son; that every
one which believes in him, perish not, but may have Life everlasting. In which
words our Savior disciphered three most principal things of this Sovereign
mystery; to wit: The principal Fountain from whence it proceeded: The
Greatenesse thereof: The Ends, and Admirable effects thereof.

The first Point.
FIrst, Sic Deus dilexit mundum.
I am to consider the infinite Greatenesse of the Person that loved us, and did
us this sovereign benefit, and the infinite Baseness of him that is loved,
and to whom this favor is done, comparing the one with the other. First,
Apostle: God which is rich in mercy, Ephesians. 2.4
for his exceeding Charity loved us: that is to say: He loved us, not because
he had need of us, nor because we of right did merit it: but only for that
his Mercy was compassionate of our miserye: and his Charity would needs
break forth from him to love others.

Secondly I will ponder, Adam, contracting from him the foul spot of Original
sin, and afterward thorough their own Will fell into most grievous, and
actual Sins, by the which they made themselves most unworthy to be loved,
and deserved to be very much abhorred. In so much that God not only loved men
when they were not, and so consequently were neither Freindes, nor Enemies: but
he loved them also when they were Enemies, Rebels, and Unthankful for other
innumerable Benefits that he had done them, to discover herein the infinite
Treasures of his Mercy, and Charity.

Thirdly,

O God of infinite majesty, Colloquie.
why daignest thou to love a World of infinite Baseness! Thou knowing what
the World is, why do thou not abhor it? why do thou not sinck, and
anthilate it? Blessed be thy immense Charity, in whose bosom is contained
the Love of so ungrateful a Creature. Domonstrate it, o Lord, toward me, in
making me to love thee, as thou love me, and to serve thee, as thou do
merit.

These three things I am to apply to myself, putting myself in the place of
the world, who ungratefully, and forgetfully have abhorred, and offended God:
and yet for all this, God has not omitted to love me, desiring to do me
good, that I might heartely love him.

The Second Point.
SEcondly, Vt Filium suumvnigenitum daret.
I am to consider the infinite Greatenesse of the Gift, that God gave to the
World, which was his only begotten Son. Wherein I am first to ponder,
loves: and the more he loves, the greater Benefits he bestows upon the
beloved. From hence it is, that to demonstrate the infinite Greatenesse of his
Love, he gave us the most precious thing that he could give us, which was his
only begotten Son, of equal dignitye with his Father, and one, and the same
God with him, willing that he should become man like us, Coloss. 2.9
that within one man might dwell the fulness of God, of the which all might
participate. And for this cause Christ our Savior desiring to endeare the
greatenesse of the divine Love, said: So God loved the woe lde, Joan. 3.16
that he gave his only-begotten Son: as who-should say: He could not love
it more then to give his Son; and that not any Son; but his natural, sole,
and only begotten Son. And in steed of this Word, He loved: he might have
put some other like Words, saying: So God esteemed the World; so he honored
it: so he glorified, and exalted it: so he enriched, and protected it, that
he gave his only-begotten Son: and this freely, and of mere Grace: for
there was none that could merit so infinite a Gift.

Then will I ponder, Mundus eum non cognouit: Joan. 1.10
The World knew him not; neither esteemed, nor reverenced him, as it ought:
neither knew it how to be thankful unto him for the great Honor, and
Benefit, which from him it received. And so comparing what God does for men,
which is, to give them his Son: and what men do against God, which is, to
offend him, and to be ungrateful for his Gift: I will greatly admire the
infinite Charity of God, desiring earnestly to love him for this favor,
endeavoring actually to demonstrate my Love, that as God gave me the only
Son that he had: so I may give him the only Soul, and the only Heart
that I have, employing my Memory, Understanding, and Will, with all my Senses,
and Faculties to love, and serve such a Father, that gave such a Son to such
a World.

O eternal Father, Colloquie.
I give thee all the thanks that I can, for the infinite Love that thou have
borne us, giving us the most beloved, and precious thing thas thou had. I
desire lo love thee, as thou louedst me, giving thee the most precious thing
that is within me. Receive my Heart in pledge of this Love, that from this
day forward, I may not only love thee in Words, 1 Joan. 13 18.
and in Tongue, but in Deed, and in Truth, seeking always thy Glory
without mixture of any thing that is profane. Amen.

The third Point.
THirdly, I am to consider the end wherefore God gave unto the World this his
only-begotten Son, Vt omnis qui credit in ipsum non pereaet: sed habeat vitam
aeternam. Joan. 12.47.
and what infinite Benefits redounde unto men by this Gift: Wherein I am to
ponder how the Son of God came into the World (as he gives testimonye of
himself: Vt saluificem Mundum) to save the World with a most perfect
Salvation, the which consists in two things: First, from the Slavery of the
Devil, and from the eternal Prison of Hell, and from all other miseries that
are annexed to Sin, and are the cause of returning unto it.

And finally to seal up the Greatenesse of this Benefit,

O only-begotten Son of the Father, Colloquie.
what thanks shall I give thee, for having come into the World to free us
from so many evils, and to heap upon us so many Benefits! Thou pardonest our
Sins, dispoylest Hell, openest the Gates of Paradise, Vanquishest the Devil,
Triumphest over the World, Tamest our Flesh, Cuttest of our Perils,
Comfortest our Heauinesses, Quickenest our Works, Augmentest our Merits,
Give us Perseverance in thy Grace, and finally Crownest us with thy Glory.
Without thee we had had nothing of this, and now by thee we possess it all:
for by thee descend from Heaven all the Benedictions, and Mercies that
replenish the Earth. Blessed be the Father that gave thee unto us for our
remedy: and Blessed be thou his Son that came to remedy us. Remedy me
effectually, o Lord, that I may not perish, but obtain by thee Life
everlasting. Amen.

By what has been said in this, and in the precedent Meditation, it
appears, that the causes, and motives of the Incarnation, may be reduced to
three ranks, inchayned own within another. One, Eccl. 4.12
wherewith strongly to bind us to this divine Word Incarnate, joining us unto
him with perfect Love: seeing we have so many motives to love him, as are the
divine Perfections that he has discovered unto us, and the miseries from
which he has freed us, and the Graces, and Virtues that he has merited unto
us.

The third Meditation, Of the Decree that GOD made to be borne of a Woman: and
of the election of our Blessed LADY to be his Mother: and of the singular
Graces that therefore he granted her in the Instant of her Conception.
The first Point.
FIrst, D. Th 3. p. q. 31. ar. 4
I am to consider, how God having determined to make himself man, although he
might have taken the body of a perfect man, as was that of Adam, yet he would
not, but be borne of a Woman (as S. Gal. 4.4.
Paul says) and have a mother, as other men had: And this he revealed in the
beginning of the World, saying unto the serpent: Genesis 3.15
That the Seed of the Woman should break his Head. To this Determination
there were many causes that moved him, wherein, to our proffit, he discovered
his infinite Charity. S. 1. p. q. 25. ar. 6. ad 4
Thomas says) is in some sort likewise infinite: whereby he gives us
assurances, that without acception of persons, his intention is to do good
unto all. Gal. 3.28.
For (according to that of the Apostle) in Christ JESUS there is no difference
of male, nor female; of Bond, nor of free: of little, nor of Great.

Isa. 9.6.
by his Mother, as by his Assistant in the Work of our Redemption: to both
whom men should repair for the Remedy of their necessities, with that
Confidence, that they use to have recourse to their own Father, and mother.
But especially our Lord Christ would have a mother, that she might likewise
be the Mother, and Aduocatrice of Sinners; who if thorough Pusillanimitye they
should be afraid to have recourse unto him, for that he is not only man,
and our Advocate, but also God, and a Judge most Just: they might confidently
approach to his blessed Mother, D. Ansel. lib. de excel. Virg. cap. 6.
to whom it pertains not to be a Judge, but an Aduocatrice, that she as a
Mother full of Mercy, and Pity might be an Intercessour for all. Whereby we
may see the great longing that God has of our Salvation, and that we should
be confident to obtain it, seeing he has invented therefore so great
means, so sweet, and so effectual.

I give thee thanks, Colloquie.
o eternal Father, for having given us a Father, and Mother of our own
Nature, by whose mediation we may securely negotiate thy Grace. I give thee
thanks, o divine Word, for that it was thy holy Will to have a Mother, who
should likewise be Ours, by whom we should find entrance unto the Throne of
thy infinite mercy, that we may not be condemned by the rigor of thy
Justice.

The last cause was, for that it was the pleasure of God to make himself a
Child for us, and to have a Mother on Earth to whom to obey, and subject
himself, like other men: to give us an Example of Humillitye, and of other
Virtues, as shall be seen in the ninth Meditation, and in the other ensuing.

The Second Point.
SEcondly, I am to consider the election of our blessed LADY the Virgin, to
be the Mother of God: pondering how the most holy Trinitye, among the
innumerable Women that he saw in his Eternitye, cast gaciously his Eyes upon
the blessed Virgin, and made choice of her for those Greatenesses, that in the
precedent Point we have spoken of; that is to say: for being the Mother of
the Divine Word Incarnate, and his Cooperatrice in the Redemption of the
World: the Mother, and Aduocatrice of Men: and she to whom God himself, as
he was man, did subject himself, and obey. Vide Fra^ciscum Suarez tom. 2. in
3. p. disp. 1.
This election (as say the holy Fathers) was the Root of the other
Greatenesses of our LADY, of which she always made great estimation, and
for which she was ever very thankful, considering that it proceeded from
mere Grace, without any merit of hers: for when as almighty God made choice of
her to be his mother, he might have chosen many other Women as well as her,
and made them like unto her. But yet I am to rejoice that this good Lot fell
upon her, and to give her the Much good do it her, therefore saying unto her.

O most blessed Virgin, Colloquie.
I exceedingly rejoice that thou wast elected for so sovereign a dignitye, as
to be the mother of the same, whose Daughter thou art. And seeing with this
dignitye, it was granted thee likewise to be the mother, and Aduocatrice of
Sinners: show thyselfe to be our Mother in favoring us, and Aduocating for
us, that we may be the worthy Children of him, of whom thou art the Mother.

The third Point.
FRom hence I will mount to consider that God our Lord in his Eternitye having
made choice of our blessed LADY to be his Mother, Of the Predestination of
our blessed LADY D. Th. 3. p. q. 7. ar. 10 Ex D. Aug. lib. de not. and great.
c. 38. Cant. 6.9.
did withal elect her to be the most excellent Vessel of his Mercy, with
whom he would leave in trust all the Greatenesses of Grace, and Glory that
were convenient for the Mother of such a Son; and consequently the greatest
that might be granted to any one, being but a mere Creature: for the which
it is said of her, that she is Electa vt Sol, Elect as the Sun: for as the
Sun is only, and singular in his Excellencyes among all the Stars: So the
blessed Virgin was elected to be the only, and most singular in the Gifts of
Grace among all the pure Creatures, so that never any should be equal unto
her.

This I may ponder in general, by that saying of S. Paul, Ephesians. 1.4.
that God elected us, Vt essemus sancti, and immaculati in conspectu eius in
Charitate, That we might be holy, and immaculate in his sight in Charity. In
all which the Election of our blessed LADY the Virgin was supereminent. For
first, Sermon. de Assumpt. to. 4.
For (as Saint Hyerome says) Those Graces that were distributed among other
Saints, were given all together with great fulness unto MARY, because of
her was to be borne the Author of all Graces Christ JESUS: Matt. 1.21
who as he is the Holy of Holyes, would sanctifye her that was to be his
Tabernacle, Psalm. 45.5.
that among all pure creatures she should be as it were the Holy of Holyes,
superior to all in sanctitye.

Secondly, S. Lib. de concept^ Virg. cap. 18.
Anselme says) It was convenient that the Virgin should be resplendent with
such a Puritye, that next unto God none should be greater, because she was to
be the Mother of him that is Puritye itself: who as in being God, he has a
Father by his Divine Essence, pure, and clean from all Sin: so in being
Man, he would have a mother pure, and clean with like Puritye thorough
special Grace, that his earthely Mother might herein resemble his heavenly
Father.

In conspectu ^ius in charitate.
and immaculate, not howsoever, but in the presence of God: that is, that with
Sanctitye, and Puritye, true, and not fained; not exterior only, but also
interior, she should walk in the presence of God: as well in the presence of
his Deitye, contemplating, and pleasing him as a faithful daughter in all her
Works: as also in the presence of God made man, nourishing him, and ministering
unto him as a mother: loving him for both respects with most inkindled
Charity, and gathering together with such services, innumerable, and most
notable merits, for which, he might afterward communicate unto her, his
amiable Presence, and resplendent Countenance with greater Excellencye of
glory, then to all the rest of the elected. All which proceeded from the
infinite Charity wherewith the most sacred Trinitye loved her above all, and
predestined her to so great a Glory. The Father, for that she was to be
the mother of his own Son: The Son, for that she was to be his own
Mother: And the holy Ghost, for that he was to work in her, the Conception
of this Son, true God, and true man.

And this is the end of the Election, and Predestination of the B. Virgin: for
the which I am to praise the most holy Trinity, and to rejoice at the Glory
that from hence redoundeth to her, whom I hold for my Mother. And seeing God
our Lord has also called me thorough his infinite Charity to be holy, and
immaculate in his presence, I am in all this to take for my pattern the sacred
Virgin, imitating her in the three things that have been declared: and for my
Aduocatrice, that she may obtain them for me of her Son; 2 Pet. 1.10
I, for my part endeavoring (as S. Peter says) with good Works to make sure
my Vocation, and Election.

O sacred, Colloquie.
and sovereign Virgin, I rejoice that as the Sun, thou art elected, in whom
there might be no obscurity of Sin, but great Splendor of Grace, and
finally bright shining light of Glory, as far exceeding all other Saints,
as the Sun excels the Stars. Do to me the Office of the Sun, lightening
my Darkness, that I may be pure, Dan. 12.3
and resplendent, like a Star of the Firmament, shining in perpetual
Eternityes. O everliving God by whose Charity without our merits we were
elected to be immaculate, and Holy in thy Presence; I most humbly thank thee
for having elected this sacred Virgin with so sovereign an election: for whose
sake I beseech thee to purifye my Soul from her Sins, and to adorn it with
thy Virtues, that I may live for ever in thy Presence, and obtain Life
everlasting. Amen.

The fourth Point.
FOurthly, I am to consider, The Conception of our B. LADY
how the time being come, wherein God would make himself man; to lay the
first Stone of this building, he created the B. Virgin that was to be his
mother: and in the very instant of her Conception, he communicated unto her
most excellent Graces, and singular Privileges, as was meet for such a Son,
to give unto his Mother, having chosen her thorough his own Will, and thorough
his great Charity, and being most Rich, and Potent to inriche her with the
Treasures of his Grace. These Privileges we will reduce unto four, pondering
breifely some Reasons thereof, and in what manner we may participate of them.

The first Privilege he granted her, Adam she was to fall, sanctifying her
Soul in the first instant of her Creation, when he joined it to the body. So
that like as God our Lord at one instant gave to the Sun Being, and Light, and
to the Angels, and to our first Parents Adam, and Eua, he gave jointely
nature, and Grace: So in one, and the same instant, he created, and sanctified
the Soul of the B. Virgin, electing it as the Sun, that it might not be
touched by the darkness of Sin. The reason hereof (beside what has been
said in the precedent Point, was for that our Savior Christ came into the
World, to redeem men, and to free them from all Sin, especially from
Original. The which he might do in two sorts: either by drawing them out of
Sin, after they were fallen into it: or by preserving them from falling into
it. And this second manner is much more excellent: for in it is most
resplendent the Omnipotencye, and Mercy of the Redeemer, 1. part in the 6.
Meditation.
because, (as before has been said) as there is no greater miserye then the
foul stain of Sin: so there is no greater mercy then so to preserve us
from Sin, that it may not touch us so much as for an instant. From hence it
is, that for the Glory of the Redeemer, and of his Redemption, it was very
convenient to use this mercy toward her, that was to be his mother,
redeeming her with the best manner of Redemption, that was possible: preserving
her from the Infamye, and Miserye of Original Sin, at such time as she was
to fall into it; honoring, and beautifying her with his Grace, that the mother
might be like unto the Son in Puritye, they being both conceived without
Sin: he by Right, and she by Privilege: he as the Redeemer of the World,
and she as his Coadjutrice in the work of the Redemption.

O Son of the living God, Colloquie. Ephe. 5.27
that being borne of the Virgin becamest man, to make a glorious Church
without spot, or wrinkle, or any other imperfection. I render unto thee all the
thanks that I can, for that it was thy good pleasure, that thy blessed Mother,
by special Grace should enjoye even from her Conception, that puritye from
Sin, that the rest of the Elected obtain in Glory. O most Glorious mother,
I rejoice at the Puritye wherewith thou entredst into the World, bright
shining with the Light of Grace, as entered thy Son, the Sun of Justice. Well
may thou say in this first entrance, as he said in his: Psalm. 39.9
That thou art ready to accomplish the Will of God, and that in the midst of
thy Heart is imprinted his Law, which is, His Grace, and his Charity. And
seeing my Redeemer granted thee this favor, that thou might assist him in
his Office; beseech him to apply unto me his Redemption with Excellencye,
pardoning me my Sins committed, and preserving me from those I am likely to
commit, with so great an horror of Sins, that I may not continue in them
so much as a moment.

And this is the principal fruit that I am to collect from this
consideration, beholding this spot-lesse Mirror the most sacred Virgin, Sap.
7.26
to imitate her Puritye with the greatest perfection that possibly I may,
remembering what God said to his People: Be perfect, Deuteronomy. 18.13. Ex D. Th. 3.
p. q. 27. ar. 3. and sequent.
and immaculate in my Presence.

Fomes Peccati, the Root, Seed, and Food of Sin, which is, the Rebellion
of the Flesh against the Spirit, and of Sensuallity against Reason: that the
house of her Soul with all the inhabitants thereof, which are the Faculties,
might have perpetual Peace, and Concord, for that it was to be the Habitation
of the Prince of Peace, whose Dwelling place (says David) is in Peace
itself. Psalm. 75.3.
So that this blessed Lady never felt that interior War, which all we
feel, and mourn for: for her flesh lusted not against the Spirit, Gal. 5.17
nor the Spirit found any Difficulty in governing the flesh: Romans 7.23
the Law of the Appetites contradicted not the Law of Reason; neither did
Reason labor to subdue the Passions of the Appetites; nay rather with great
pleasure they were united, and accorded in subjecting themselves to the
eternal Law of their God.

O Princess of Peace, Colloquie
much good may it do thee, the interior Peace that thou enjoyedst, without
having past thorough any Conflict, or War: obtain for me most B. Lady,
that the interior War which I suffer, may be moderated, to the end that I
may some what enjoy the sweetness of thy Peace.

The third Privilege was after a most singular manner to confirm her in
Grace, S. Ephe. 5.27
Paul says of the Church) Works glorious, and pure, in the three Degrees of
Puritye: that is; without spot of mortal Sin, without wrinckle of Venial
Sin, and without any Imperfection at all: she leaving not only Evil, but
also Imperfect, and less good, choosing all ways what she held for Best,
and imprinting in every work the glorious Purity, that is in the Triumpha^t
Church. This manner of Purity, in that degree that it is possible for me, I am
to procure, and to ask it of our Lord, saying unto him:

O eternal God, that did sanctifye the Tabernacle of thy Mother, Colloquie.
Psalm. 45.5.
assisting immutably in the midst of her, and every day rising very early to
aid her in all her Works: sanctifye also my Soul, assist her perpetually;
and arize early, preventing me with thy Grace, that my Works may be pure,
without spot, or wrinckle, or any thing else that may be displeasing unto
thee. Amen

The fourth Privilege, Angels, and Seraphins of heaven, to the end she might
be the worthy Mother of God, and Queen of the Angelical Hierarchyes, Heb.
1.4.
making her so much better, and holyer then they, as the name was better which
he intended to give her of his mother, then that which they had of Servants,
and ministers in his house: so that this sacred Virgin began her Carreere where
the Angels ended theirs: and being on earth had greater Degrees of
Sanctitye, then those which lived in heaven (excepting that which is proper to
that estate) fullfilling in her, that which the Prophet David says of the
City of God, Psa. 36.1.
That her foundations were upon the high mountains: for the beginnings of her
Life were higher raised in Sanctitye, then the highest height that ever the
greatest Saints of the Church arrived unto. O what content received the most
B. Trinitye in beholding the excellencye of this Child. The eternal Father
rejoiced in having such a daughter. The Son of God was exceed ingly pleased,
to see her so beautiful that was to be his mother. And the Holy Spirit was
full of Joy, to have such a Spouse: And all Three entered in her by grace, and
dwelled in her with high Delight.

O Angels of Heaven that adored afterward the Son of God, when he entered
into the World; Colloquie.
come now at this instant to reverence her that is to be his Mother, and your
Queen! O Queen of Angels, I now salute thee in the Womb of thy Mother,
Luc. 1.29
with those Words which shall after be spoken unto thee by the Angel S.
Gabriell: Hail, full of Grace, our Lord is with thee: Blessed art thou among
Women: for in the first instant of thy Conception, thou foundest Grace before
God above them all. Beseech him, B. Lady, to purifye my Spirit, to bridle my
flesh, to moderate my Passions, and to replenish me with his Grace, that I
may begin to serve him with great fervor, and perseverance, until I obtain
the Crown of Glory. Amen.

The fourth Meditation. Of the Life of our blessed LADY until the
Incarnation: Wherein is treated of her Natiuitye: her Presentation in the
Temple: and her Betrothing to S. Joseph.
The first Point.
FIrst, Of the Natiuitye of our blessed LADY. Natiuitas tua gaudium
annunciauit vniuerso mundo.
I am to consider, how the nine Months after the Conception of the Virgin
being accomplished, she was borne in the house of her Parents to the joy of
the whole World; according to the saying of the Church; Pondering the joy of
the most holy Trinitye in seeing the birth of this his beloved Child, by whom
he intended to work things so glorious for his own Glory, and our Benefit.
And therefore it is to be believed, that upon that day he communicated to the
Angels of heaven, and to the Righteous on earth, and to the holy Fathers in
Limbus a news of accidental Alacritye, (allbeit all knew not the cause
thereof) as a Prognostication of the Joy that they should receive by the
coming of God into the World, whose Mother that Child was to be: as the
birth of the Morning causes a certain kind of joy, and solace in living
Creatures, because it is a token of the rising of the sun. For if many reioiced
at the natiuitye of S. John, Luc. 1.14.
because he was the Day Star, and forerunner of Christ: many more
doubtless reioiced at the Birth of the blessed VIRGIN, who was to be his
mother. And with this consideration, I will move myself to affections of
Praise, and joy, giving the Much good do it, to the most holy Trinitye, for
the birth of this Babe: To the eternal Father, for that there is borne unto
him such a Daughter: To the Son of God, for that she is borne that is to be
his Mother: To the holy Spirit for that there is borne unto him such a spowse.
O most blessed Trinitye, Colloquie.
much good may it do thee, the Birth of this thy Beloved, share to me of that
joy which thou give to others; because she was borne also for me.

From hence I am likewise to collect another motive of great spiritual joy:
Devotion to our blessed LADY is a sign of predestination.
pondering that as the Natiuitye of the Virgin caused Alacritye in the World:
for that it was a sign of the coming of the Savior to redeem it: so also
when the Devotion of the Virgin is bredde in the soul, it causes therein
wonderful joy: being a great pledge, that allmighty God will come to visit
it, and to save it. Heerevpon said S. Anselme. Lib. de excellent. Virginis
cap, 4.
That to be much devoted to our blessed LADY is a sign of being predestined
in heaven. For with devotion to her, enter the effects of Predestination, she
negotiating them for such as are devoted unto her. She as a mother solliciteth
for us the Inspirations of Heaven; the Vocation of God, the Grace of
Justification, the Victory of Temptations, the Preservation from falls, the
Augmentation of Merits, the Perseueration in Grace, and the Crown of Glory,
Colloquie. Eccl. 24.16.
as in the discourse of the Meditations ensuing shallbee seen. O sacred, and
sovereign Virgin, who by the Commandment of God, layest deep roots in the
elected for Heaven, fix in my soul so deep Roots of thy devotion and
Imitation, that they may be assured pledges of my eternal Predestination.

The Second Point.
SEcondly, Of the name of MARIE.
I am to consider, how the Parents of this our blessed Lady gave unto her the
Name of MARYE, as is credibly supposed by revelation from God (who also
revealed the name of the Baptiste) and consequently with the name God pretended
to declare the Greatenesses of this Child: Luc. 1.13. Nomen Virginis MARIA.
which as they were very many, so also he chose a name, that in diverse
languages should have many significations, because she was borne for the good
of all. Ex D. Bonauent. in specul. B. Virg. c. 3. Number. 24.17.
For MARYE interpreted, signifies Star of the sea, or Bitter sea: Lady, or
the Exalted: Illuminated, or Illuminatrice, or Mistress of People. And all
this is found in the Virgin. She is the Star of the sea, for that she is
the Light, Consolation, and Guide of those, that sail in the sea of this
World, combated with the great waves, and tempests of temptations, and
Perils of their damnation: who by the Prayers of the blessed VIRGIN, with her
examples, and with the favors that she does them, are cheered, and
fortified, and guessing at the right way, arrive at the Port of Salvation.
She is a Bitter Sea for diverse respects: Ex D. Ber. sermon. 2. in missus est.
a Sea, Bitter for the Immensenesse of Bitternesses that she suffered in the
Passion of her Son: for God uses to mete equally the measures of
Consolations, and Afflictions and so did he with this sacred VIRGIN. She is a
Lady, and Exalted, supreme Authority, as already has been said She is
likewise Lady of the Angels exalted above them all: and is that much, when as
after a sort she was likewise the Lady of God himself, she commanding him
as he was Man, and he obeying her as a son, that was subject unto his
Mother? Illuminated, or Illuminatrice, Luc. 2.51.
for that she received from God great light of ce: lestiall Wisdom: not
alone for herself, but to illuminate others: and therefore she was the
Mistress of the Apostles, and of all the faithful, as hereafter we shall
see.

With these breife considerations I will awake in my soul several Affections
of Joy, and Confidence, and of great Devotion to the sacred name of MARIE;
beseeching the VIRGIN to do unto me those offices that her name does
signifye. O most sacred VIRGIN, Colloquie.
with much reason I may say, that thy blessed name, like that of thy son, is
Oil powered out, for that it illuminateth, comforts, Ca^t. 1.2.
heateth, and rejoices my heart. Power upon me, this so precious Oil with a
liberal hand; and seeing thou art the Star of the Sea, guide and protect
me in my temptations, and perils: Seeing thou art a Sea of Graces, and
Bitternesses, share them also with me: for it is no lesser a Grace to receive
gifts from Christ, then to bewail with bitterness his pains: Be thou my
Mistress, illuminating my ignorances, ayding me to be Master of my Passions,
and guide me in the pathe of Perfection, that with the invocation of thy holy
name, I may arrive to the top, and excellencye thereof. Amen.

Here also may be considered, Vide Suarez. tom. 2. disp. 3. sect. 7.
how this blessed Babe, beginning to have the use of Reason (whither in the
womb of her mother by special privilege, like S. John Baptist: or about
three years before she was presented in the Temple) she presently began with
great fervor to negotiate with those gifts, and Graces which she had
received, by those means which in the fourth point shall be declared.

The third Point.
THirdly, Of the Presentation of our blessed LADY in the Temple.
I am to consider, how the blessed VIRGIN being but of small age, (as it is
thought of three years) by Gods inspiration, was by her Parents presented in
the Temple, that she might there be dedicated, and occupied in his divine
service, with other Damosells that had made the like Profession. Concerning
this Presentation, we are to fix our eyes upon three Persons interposed
therein.

The first was the Majesty of God, Psalm: Psalm. 44.11.
Hear o Daughter, and see, and incline thine ear, and forget thy People and
the House of thy father, and the king will covet thy Beautye. The blessed
VIRGIN hearkened to this Voice, and Inspiration of God, she saw the favor
that herein was done her; she inclined her Ear speedily to obey what was
commanded: she wholely forgot her People, and renounced the house of her
terrestrial Father, to accomodate herself to the good liking of her
celestial Father, who called her his Daughter. And so much increased her
beautye with this new Obedience, and Humillitye, that the king of Heaven, and
of Earth, cast his Affection upon her, and reioiced for having elected her to
be his mother. From hence will I collect, how great a favor God does to
him, whom he effectually inspireth, and withdraws from the Occasions, and
Perils of the World, making him to abandon his Country, and the House of his
Father for his service: and how great Reason we all have to be obedient to
such an inspiration when we perceive it: seeing it is a true sign that God
loves us, as his well beloved Children, Genesis 11.31.12.4.19.12.
drawing us like holy Abraham from the fire of the Chaldeans: or like just Loath
from the burning of Sodom.

Secondly, S. Ioachim, and S. Anne the Parents of the blessed VIRGIN: who as
holy people not only diuerted not the good desiers of their daughter, but took
her by the hand, and moved by the inspiration of God himself, offered unto
him the only fruit of their womb, retourning unto him, what he had given
them, esteeming themselves happy, that God might be served by their daughter,
and depriving themselves of her to give her unto him. And this they did with no
less spirit, 1. Reg. 1 24.
then Anna the mother of Samuel offered her son unto God, because they knew
how acceptable this offering would be to him. From whence I may also learn to
offer unto God with spirit and fervor, the only and best beloved daughter of
my soul, which is Liberty: and the principal of her Affections which is
Love, with de termination to will nothing, but what he wills; and to love
only what he loves, offering myself to give him what soever he shall ask
me.

Thirdly, I will ponder the Devotion of the blessed Virgin herself in this
Presentation, For her parents had no sooner told her, that they would carrye
her to the Temple but she was replenished with joy saying that of the Prophet
David. Psalm. 121.
I reioiced in those things that were said unto me, we shall go into the
House of our Lord. But in arriving at the Temple, Ezech. 40.6.
she began to mount the fifteen degrees or steps with great fervor of
spirit, resolving to ascend by all the degrees of Virtue unto the highest
top of Perfection, Psalm. 83.6.
fullfilling that of the Prophet David. Blessed is the man whose help is from
thee: he has disposed ascensions and increases in his heart in the valle of
tears, in the place which to this end, he has appointed. They shall ascend
from Virtue to Virtue, the God of Gods shall be seen in Sion.

O manlike; Colloquie Psalm. 45.6.
and blessed Babe, whom God favored with his aid, and to assist whom, he
was early up in the morning, what zealous resolutions make thou in thy
Heart! and how well do thou dispose the Augmentation of Virtue in this place
which thou have chosen for thy habitation! Ascend now happily by these degrees
from Virtue, to virtue: for thou have an entrance by the Contemplation of
allmighty God to look into this holy cittye of Sion. No sooner was the blessed
Virgin ascended the Temple, but that prostrate upon the earth, she adored the
Divine Majesty, and presented, and offered herself to his perpetual service:
for her Intention was not to offer herself for a year, or for ten, like other
damosells: but for ever, with a resolution (as much as lay in her) to serve him
all her Life in his holy Temple. O how was allmighty God pleased with this
Offering! With what pleasure might he accept it, and what Thanks, and Gifts
might he return unto her! The VIRGIN might say: Behold me here, o Lord, I
am come into thy house to be thy perpetual slave: receive me into thy
service: for I desire no other Lot more glorious, then to serve thee: To this
our Lord might answer within her heart: Come my Spouse, enter into my
garden: Cant. 5.1
for in thee I will place my Throne: thou shall be the Sun where I will assent
my habitation, Psalm. 18.6
and issue out of it as the bridegroom from his chamber. Adorn it with the
flowers of Virtues: for the time shall speedily come of celebrating therein my
marriage.

In Imitation of this blessed LADY, I am to present myself before God, and to
offer myself to his service, as his perpetual slave, with a determination
never to separate myself from him.

The fourth Point.
FOurthly, Of the Life our blessed LADY led in the Temple. Lib 2. do Virg.
Prou. 4.18 Eccl. 33.23
I will consider the most excelleut Life that this Child led in the Temple:
For first, Ambrose says) she accompanied every step of her body with
exercice, and augmentation of Virtue, increasing like the Light of the morning,
until perfect day. For the Holy Spirit solicited her with his Inspirations,
and she cooperated with all the force that she had; endeavoring (as says
the Wiseman) to be most excellent in all her Works, with four Excellencyes:
First, Cant. 6.9
saying: Who is she that comes forth as the morning rising, fair as the
Moon, elect as the Sun, terrible as the Army of a Camp set in array? what is
this Child that makes her Progress from Virtue to Virtue, increasing like
the Light of the morning without staying, or turning back? beautiful like the
full moon with plenty of Graces, without any waning therein? elected as the
Sun, that there is none in Earth to be her equal? And who is this, that
being a weak maid by nature, is most firm by Grace, containing within her
an army of all Virtues, ordered with the Order of invincible Charity? Thus
spoke the Angels with Affection of Admiration: and God rejoiced in beholding
her Fervor: and men that beheld her were edified, in seeing so great
Sanctity in so tender years. But I both admiring, and rejoicing heereat, will
withal confound myself, considering how far I am from it thorough my
Negligence, and Coldness, and desiring to get out of it, to imitate her
example.

Then will I ponder, Jacob, Genesis 28.12.
which reached from Earth unto Heaven: in whose top stood the Omnipotent God,
Ex D. Ber. in scala claustralium.
and whose Degrees (as before has been said) are Reading. Meditation,
Prayer, and Contemplation. One while of the day she spent in Reading holy
Scriptures, to the great consolation of her Soul, allmighty God opening unto
her the Sense, that she might penetrate, and understand them. From hence she
ascended to meditation, conferring with herself what she had read, searching
out new Verities that illustrated her Soul, and inflamed it with the fire of
Love, and Devotion. From hence she mounted another space by the Degree of
Prayer, desiring of God with great feruencye the gifts of his Grace, not only
for herself, but for her Companions, and for all the People. And lastly, she
ascended to the Degree of Contemplation, wherein she spent very much time,
uniting her Soul to God, from whom she received such sweetness, and
consolation; and such extraordinary abundance of celestial Gifts, that none
can comprehend, or know them, but God that gave them, and she that received
them; rejoicing in that hidden Manna, Apoc. 21.7
whose taste none attaineth unto, but he that receives it. And in these
Exercices, she was visited by the Angels, that guard this Ladder, comforting
those that ascend it; but much more this blessed Virgin whose Puritye was
greater then theirs: for seeing her mount up, they spoke with Admiration that
of the Canticles: What is she, Cant. 3.6.
that ascends by the desert, as a little rod of smoke of the aromaticall
spices of Myrrh, and frankincense, and of all pouders of the Apothecary? Who
is this young Maiden that lives in the Desert of this World, and in the
Solitariness of this Temple, and sprowteth up not like a Rod, but like a
Twigge that is small, and humble in her own eyes, but most odoriferous, and
gracious in the eyes of God, in the which she goes always ascending, and
increasing with the Myrrh of Mortification, with the Incense of Prayer, and
with the continual Exercize of all Virtues?

Finally, in descending this Ladder,

O sovereign VIRGIN, Colloquie. Cant. 4.11.
Rod that sprungest from the root of less, and ascendedst to thy Beloved,
like a most odoriferous Sprigge of Perfume: obtain for me, that I also may
be little in Humillitye, and careful to mount by the Ladder of Prayer, by
which thou ascendedst, Isa. 11.1.
until I unite myself with allmighty God: descending also to exercize the
works of Mortification in myself, and those of Piety toward my neighbors,
increasing in all Virtues, and giving unto all men the Odor of good Example:
for the which they may glorifye God world without end. Amen.

The fifth Point.
FIfthly, Of her Vow of Virginitye.
I am to consider, how in this time this Sovereign VIRGIN made another very
new offer to our Lord God, and a very pleasing, which was the Vow of
perpetual Virginitye, offering it unto him by special inspiration of the holy
Spirit, and with extraordinary Devotion. For the greatenesse of the Love that
she bare unto God, moved her to desire, to deliver unto him her whole Heart,
and to take him to her Spouse, occupying herself totally in meditating upon
him, and in pleasing him, without dividing herself in other things, 1 Cor.
7.33.34.
as those are divided that are married. And she knowing that Virginity was
more precious with a Vow, then without it, she was not contented with a
single Purpose of preserving it, but she made a particular Vow thereof;
because she allwaies desired to do what was best, most firm, and most
secure, and that which was most to the Glory of God our Lord. Then was
fullfilled that which her Spouse said of her: My sister spouse is a Garden
enclosed a Garden enclosed, a Fountain sealed up. Cant. 4.12.
He twice calls her an enclosed Garden, for that she was perfectly chaste
both in Soul, and in Body, confirming it with a perpetual Vow, which served
as a Lock for her greater Security: adding for Gardes, Humillity, Modestye,
Silence, and Abstinence, by reason whereof he also callet^ her a Garden: to
give us to understand, that her Virginity was not barren, but accompanied with
many Flowers of Virtues, and with excellent fruits of good Works: Some that
beautified the Soul: Others that adorned the Body, that she might be,
Sancta corpora, and Spiritu: 1 Cor. 7.34.
Holy in Body, and in Spirit O how pleasing was this Garden to the divine
Spouse! he was recreated with the Vow, and Odor of the Flowers of her
Virtues: he eat of the sweet fruictes of her good Works: Cant. 5.1.
he rejoiced to behold it so well enclosed with a Vow, delighting much in
the Lock, and Gardes that it had. And therefore he watered it with great
abundance of heavenly Consolations, and Gifts; making in them a Fountain, and
Well of the living Waters of his Graces, enclosed with his divine Protection.

From this Heroical Example of the sacred VIRGIN, I will collect a hearty
Desire of Chastity, offering myself to preserve it with the greatest
perfection that possibly I may, according to my Estate: taking the blessed
VIRGIN for my Patroness, and Defendresse in this Enterprise, saying unto her
that verse which holy Church sings: O Virgin singular among all other in
meekness, and Puritye, deliver us from Sin, and make us meek, and chaste.
Amen.

And in imitation of her, I will shut up the Garden of my Body, and Soul, if
God shall inspire me thereunto, under the lock of a Vow: and if in this
manner I cannot lock it up, I will place for Garders those Virtues that guard
Chastitye.

The Sixth Point.
SIxthly, Of the Betrothing to S. Joseph. D. Tho. 3. p. q. 29. Mat. 1.18 Luc.
1.34 35.
I am to consider, how the time of the Incarnation approaching very near, the
blessed VIRGIN our LADY, by revelation from God, was batrothed to a just man
named Joseph, she being certified that it should be without peril of her
Chastitye: to the which she readily obeyed. Upon the which, to accompany her
in her Peregrinations: S. Joseph, exalting him to such a Dignitye, as to be
the Spouse of the Mother of God, and the Foster father of the Son of God.

O most loving Father, Colloquie.
I give thee thanks for the care thou have of thy Children, and Servants,
providing for their Honor, and for their Ease, and sustentation, preventing in
time the Remedy of what may molest them, and seeking out Occasions to magnifye
them. Happy is he that is under thy Wing, and Protection. Provide for me, o
Lord, that am thy Creature, that I may always be employed in serving thee,
seeing thou art always employed in governing me.

Secondly, Rachel, with the fruitefullnesse of Lia, without receiving any harm
the one by the other.

The seventh Point.
Seventhly, Of the fervent zeal wherewith she desired the Incarnation.
I am to consider the fervent Desires the blessed VIRGIN had of the coming of
God into the World, the which so much the more increased, by how much the time
of the Incarnation approached nearer, the holy Spirit inspiring them into her,
whose propertye is, when he will grant any thing to the elected: to inspire
into them lively desires thereof: that with their Desire, and with Prayer they
may dispose themselves to receive it.

Besides this, 2 Cor. 5.14.
Canticles: Cant. 8.1
Who shall giae to me thee my Brother, sucking the Breasts of my mother, that
I may find thee without, and kiss thee, and now no man despise me: I will
take hold of thee, and bring thee into my Mothers house, there thou shallt
teach me, and I will give thee a cup of spiced wine, and new wine of my
Pomegranates. O how happy were I, if I might see thee allreadye in humane
flesh, sucking at the breasts of some Woman, and might find thee out of thy
Heaven, conuersing visibly with men upon Earth, that I might give, and receive
of thee the kiss of Peace. Then would I procure to converse with thee, and to
hear thy Doctrine in this Temple, and to inuit thee to what thou most of all
desire, giving thee my whole Love with many Affections, and Acts of Charity.

Hereunto was added, David, and of Isaias which the Church uses in the Aduent,
Psalm. 79.3. and 84.8 Isa. 64.1. and 45.8.
saying unto allmighty God: Raise, o Lord, thy might, and come to save us:
Show us thy mercy, and give us thy Salvation: O that thou would break the
Heavens, and descend: Drop dew ye Heavens from above and let the clouds
reign the Just: Be the Earth opened, and bud forth a Savior.

Finally,

I rejoice, o blessed LADY, Colloquie.
that thou wast so powerful with God, as to make him mende his pace, and
hasten his coming: beseech him also to make haste to come to visit me: and
that I may be worthy of his visitation, Invoke the Divine Spirit to inspire
me with feruerous Desires thereof. Amen.

The fifth Meditation. Of the time that God chose to annuntiate, and execute
the Mysteries of the Incarnation.
THree times might our Lord God have made choice of, D. Th. 3. p. q. 1. ar. 5.
and 6.
to execute the Decree of his Incarnation. The first, was in the beginning of
the World, as soon as Adam had sinned: The second, in the middle of it
Continuance, Abac. 3.2.
which the Prophet Abacuch calls, In the middle of years. The third, about
the end. But the Divine Wisdom made choice of the first time to promise this
mystery, as concerning the Remedy of Sin: of the second, to execute it. And
of all the rest, to gather the copious fruits that from it were to spring:
ordaining it thus for our Good, for the Causes that in the ensuing points
shall be pondered.

The first Point.
FIrst, D. Th. 2.2 q. 2. ar. 7. ex Genesis 3.
I am to consider, that God our Lord; as soon as Adam, and Eua had sinned, was
willing to reveal unto them the mysterye of the Incarnation for the Remedy of
their Sin, and of the Punishment that therefore they had deserved, to
demonstrate herein the greatenesse of his Charity, and mercy toward men.

This was resplendent, Adam, and Eua for their Disobedience, and to denounce
unto them the Sentence of Death, which thereby they had incurred; withal as a
merciful Father, he promises them, not only to make himself man for them,
but also to dye, to deliver them from Death, pretending herein, that by their
Faith in this Redeemer, they should not distrust the Divine mercy, nor of the
pardon of their Sin, but that they should forthwith procure it by Penance,
greiuing to have offended him that had showed them so much Love. So that when
God cast our first Parents, and all their Posteritye, out of the terrestrial
Paradise, he then promises them him, that shall open the Gates of the
Celestial Paradise. And when he charge them with Maledictions for Sin,
he offers them of his mere Grace, the Author of all Heavenly Benedictions.
And when they are vanquished by the Devil, he assures them that there
shallbee borne of them a man, that shall free them from his Tirannye.

O Father of Mercyes, and God of all Consolation, Colloquie.
I humbly thank thee, for that in the midst of thy Wrath, thou art
mindful of thy infinite mercy: Abac. 3.2.
And when all men by the first Adam deserved to be accursed, thou did
promise us the second Adam by whom we should be blessed. Show, o^ Lord,
this thy mercy to me, delivering me from the Maledictions, which I deserve
thorough my Sins, and replenishing me with the Benedictions which thy Son
gained by his Merits. O Son of the ever living God, Apoc. 13.
Lamb that wast slain from the beginning of the World, for then was
published thy Slaughter, and true Life was given to men that sinned; I humbly
thank thee for this favor that thou did us, for the which I beseech
thee, to apply unto me the f^^ite thereof, that being free from the Death
of Sin, I may obtain by thee Life of Grace. Amen.

I will likewise ponder the Infinite mercy of God, in not deferring this
promise of our Redemption many Days, nor yet many Hours: but even the self
same day that Adam sinned, he came to give him advise both of his
Transgression, and of his Remedy, for that he greatly desires, that the
Sinner, allbeeit he sin thorough frailtye, should not detain himself so
much as one day in his Sin, for the great Hurt that thereof redoundeth unto
him, but should presently be converted, and do Penance. All this I am to
apply to myself, considering that many times, our Lord, when I have sinned,
in steed of chastizing me with Justice, preuenteth me with Inspirations,
offering me pardon with mercy. For the which I ought humbly to render unto
him many thanks, procuring the self same day that I sin, to raize up
myself presently thorough Penance. So that (as S. Ephesians. 4.16.
Paul says) the Sun go not down without taking from me Anger, and Pride,
and every other Sin whatsoever.

The Second Point.
SEcondly, I am to consider the Conuenience of the Time, that God chose to
execute the Decree of his Incarnation, to the end to make his infinite Mercy
the more eminent. Heerevpon I am to behold in what state the World stood,
when God came to redeem it, running thorough the Thoughts, Words, and Deeds
of men, and comparing them with those of God, Isa. 55.9.
the which (as the Prophet Isaias says) were as different as Heaven, and
Earth are distant.

First, Adam. Cant. 1.26.
said: Let us make man to our own Image, and Likeness: so now they said:
Let us remedy man vhome we created repairing the Image, and Likeness that
we gave him. O how great Pleasure had they in this Discourse! What Alacritye
to behold the time arrived of executing their Determination! And what Joy had
each Person to prepare themselves for what belonged unto them in this Work!
The Father to send his Son into the World. The Son to come, and to unite
his Divine Person with our nature. And the holy Spirit to work this so
sovereign an Union.

I thank thee, o most blessed TRINITYE, Colloquie.
for that thou had pleasure to treat of my Remedy, O that I might treat
with much Delight of all that belongs to thy service.

Then will I abase my Eyes, Gentiles were grown to such a Height in their
Idolatries, that they caused themselves to be adored as Gods. The Jews were
full of Hypocrisies, Auarices, Ambitions, and other innumerable Sins. The
Earth was wholely drowned with a Deluge of Vncleane-nesses, and Carnallities,
one Wave of Blood (as says the Prophet Oseas) ouertaking another. Oscae 4.2.


All this was God beholding from Heaven, for from him nothing is hidden: and
though this so great multitude of Sins provoked him to great furye, yet
were they no cause to make him defer his Determination. Rather this most
merciful God, Abac. 3.2
(as said the Prophet Abacuch) when he had most occasion to show his wrath,
was then mindful to do us the greatest mercy: and in steed of drowning the
World again with another Deluge; or burning it with fire like Sodom; he
would drown it with abundance of mercies, and burn it with the fire of his
Love, giving it his own Son to remedy it, and his Son coming to redeem
it. Cant. 8.7
O Infinite Charity, whose Flames could not be quenched with the many Waters
of the Rivers of innumerable Sins, but rather increased with greater
Demonstrations of Love, doing the greatest of all favors to us, that every day
made ourselves more unworthy thereof: I give thee thanks, o most loving, and
merciful Lord, for this Love which thou did show us: for the which, I
beseech thee, though I as a wicked VVretche deserve thy Indignation, yet that
thou as a good God, cease not to favor me with the Greatenesse of thy Mercy.

This Consideration I am likewise to apply to myself, pondering how it has
many times happened, that when I was actually offending God by my Works, then
was God doing me great Benefits, and devising yet to do me greater; as to
draw me out of the World into Religion, or such other like: for the which I
am to give him many Thanks.

From hence I may likewise ascend to ponder, abhor him, and thorough Envy
to persecute him, even to the bereauing him of his Life, taking Occasion from
hence to redeem them by his Death.

O Infinite VVisdome of God, Colloquie.
how contrary art thou to the VVisdome of the World, seeing thou treatest of
redeeming it, when thou art to have greatest Occasions to suffer for the
redemption of it! O how contrary to this VVisdome are the Imaginations of my
flesh, which flies the occasions of Affliction, and seeks the Occasions of
it own Ease! Chase away, so Lord, my Imaginations, that I may follow thine,
embracing Affliction, as thou embracedst it for my Example.

The third Point.
THirdly, I am to consider, why our Lord deferred his coming into the World,
so many thousands of years, pondering especially two causes for my own
proffit. Humillitye. And when the Desire of Riches, Honors, and Delicacyes was
most egre, and hot; then would God clothe himself with Pouertye, Contempt, and
Dolor, to cure such an ardent Desire of temporal Goods, with so ardent a
Contempt of them.

O sovereign Physician, Colloquie.
I humbly thank thee, for having come in such a season to cure our Infirmities
with such precious Medicines. Behold, o Lord, my wounds are much increased,
defer not to remedy them, that in me may be discovered the greatenesse of
thy Mercies.

The second cause of this delay was, Lymbo, and the Reighteous that lived on
the Earth. And by the way likewise with this deferring, he made proof of
the Confidence, and Patience of the Just to whom this promise was made: for it
is an Heroical Virtue not to loose Confidence, Hebr. 11.
though the accomplishment of the promise be long time deferred. Whereupon
said a Prophet: Abac. 2.3.
If he shall made tariance expect him: because coming he will come, and will
not slack, that is: Though he delay according to the Desire of thy Heart,
he will not delay according to the Order of his divine Providence, to
accomplish what thy necessity requires: for he will come infallibly in his
determinate time, when his Coming shall much more avail thee.

These two Causes I am to apply to myself, pondering how God our Lord
sometimes permits his Elected a long time to suffer great Afflictions, and
Drouthes, that by experience hereof, they may know what need they have of
Gods Visitation; that they may be grounded in profound Humillitye, and that by
this delay the desiers of their remedy may increase, and their Faith, and
Confidence may be proved: and that so they may come to make great esteem of
the Gift of God, and with great Care to preserve it. Heerewith entering into
Consideration what a great Happiness it was to me, to be borne after this
sovereign misterye was executed, to enjoy more abundantly the Graces, and
Gifts that were thereby communicated unto men: my Longings, and Sighs, my
Desiers, and Gronings must be to this end, that God by his Grace may come
unto my Heart, and visit my Soul with abundance of his gifts, taking to
name (like another Daniel.) The Man of Desiers, Dan. 9.23 and 10.19 Aggei 2.
employing them in desiring the coming of him that took to name, The Desired
of Nations: without being weary of soliciting it, though it seem to me to
be long deferred: for that there is no day that comes not at last: And the
greater the Solicitation, the lesser the delay, and the greater the Reward.

The sixth Meditation. Of the coming of the Angel S. Gabriel to annunciate to
the Virgin the Misterye of the Incarnation: and of the manner how he saluted
her and removed her Fear.
The first Point.
FIrst, I am to consider what passed in Heaven, when the appointed time was
arrived wheerein God our Lord would make himself man. Imagining how the most
sacred TRINITYE being on the Throne of his Glory, desiring to give notice
hereof to her that was to be the Mother of the Word Incarnate, determined to
send her a very glorious Embassage, to move her to accept it, the beginning
whereof is recounted by the Evangelist, Luc. 1.26
saying: The Angel Gabriel was sent of God into a Cittye of Galilee, called
Nazareth, to a Virgin despoused to a Just man, whose name was Joseph, of the
House of David: and the name of the Virgin was MARYE.

In this Embassage I am to ponder, Who sends it: Who brings it: to whom it
comes: and upon what cause: collecting out of all, Proffit to mine own
Soul. herein creatures so noble, as are the Angels: Who (as S. Heb. 1.14.
Paul says) are ministers of God for the good of those that are to receive
the inheritance of Salvation. And their continual ministry is, to ascend,
and descend that Ladder that Jacob saw, Genesis 28.12.
bringing down messages from God to men, and carrying up messages, and
Petitions from men to God.

O God of Immense majesty, Colloquie. Psalm. 8.5.
what is man that thou art mindful of him? Or the Son of man, that thou
visitest him? May thy Angels praise thee for the tender Love thou hear unto
men.

He that brings this Embassage is an Archangell so excellent, Ex D. Gre.
hom. 34. in Euang.
that he has to name Gabriel: which is to say: Fortitude of God: to signifye
the Fortitude that is resplendent in our Lord that sent him: and in him that is
to be Incarnate: and in the Works, that the Word Incarnate is to do: and in
the ministers that he shall take to publish them, whom this Ambassador
represents: who in the Virtue of God was strong, Psalm. 102.21.
and Potent to fulfill whatsoever he commanded him; not only in this case
that was so glorious, but in any other how humble soever, as hereafter we
shall see. In the 13. Meditation.
For his Glory is, to do what God wills: and in imitation of him, I will
procure by Gods grace, to clothe myself with his Fortitude, to accomplish in
all things the Divine Will.

She, Ioa. 1.46
But she was most holy, and pure, and therefore so esteemed of God, that she
was preferred before the Daughters of the kings, and Emperors of the World:
for in the eyes of God there is no such Greatenesse as Sanctitye: neither in
mine ought there to be, I esteeming only what God esteems.

The Intent of the Embassage is, to require the Consent of the VIRGIN to be
the Mother of God: for this our Lord is of so noble a condition, that though
he be an absolute Lord, he will not be served by his Creatures in such
weighty Affairs, without their free Consent. For though to be the mother of
God was a thing very excellent, yet great Afflictions were annexed unto it: it
was therefore meet, that the Virgin should of her own freewill accept the
Dignitye with the Charge, that she might merit the more, and it might be the
more sweet, and easy unto her. And so likewise, neither will God enter to
inhabit in men by Grace, nor exalt them to the Dignitye of the Sons of God,
without their free Consent, having attained to the use of Reason.

From hence I will pass, spiritually to consider this Embassage, applying it
to myself, and pondering how God our Lord sends me every day Inuisibly many
Embassages with his Inspirations: Tract. de 7. donis Spiritus sancti c. 6. ex
Richa. de sancto Victore. Ex D. Ber. ser. 1. de Pentec.
the which (as S. Bonauenture says) are the Invisible Ambassadors, and
messengers of God: and by them he speaks unto me, and discovers his Will,
and solliciteth me to give him entrance into my Soul, and to employ myself
always in his Service. And therefore in feeling within myself these
Inspirations, I am to reverence them as Ambassadors of God, giving him many
Thanks, for that he daigneth to speak unto me by them, consenting presently
to all that he requires of me, and beseeching him more often to speak unto
me.

O most loving Father that solicitest my Consent with so great Love, and Care,
Colloquie.
as if that which imports me, imported thee: Inspire me what thou willt,
for I am ready to consent to whatsoever thou inspirest me.

The Second Point.
SEcondly, I am to consider the Entrance of the Angel to the VIRGIN, and the
manner how he saluted her: Apostolical men ought exteriourly to be, who (as
S. 2 Cor. 5.20. Ephe. 6.20.
Paul says) are the Ambassadors of Christ: and likewise what Religious men
ought to be, that profess an Angelical Life; whose exterior behavior ought
to represent Sanctitye, and to move thereunto all that behold them.

The Angel in entering saluted the B. full of Grace, S. Ambr. Beda in Luc. 1.
our Lord is with thee; Blessed art thou among Women. This Salutation, (as say
the holy Saints) was new, and never heard of in the World, invented by the
most holy TRINITYE to honor the sacred VIRGIN, and to declare her rare
Sanctitye, and new Dignitye, as the Misterye was new for the which it was
ordained. Ier. 31.22
For as Christ was a new man contrary to the old Adam: so the blessed VIRGIN
that conceived him, was a new Woman contrary to the old Eua. With this
Spirit, and esteem we are to say, and to meditate this new Salutation,
pondering in every word, the Greatenesse that it signifies, with affections
of Joy, and Thanks giving: rejoicing that the blessed VIRGIN has such
Greatenesse, and giving Thanks to God, for giving it her; desiring of him some
part thereof, and purposing to imitate what is imitable.

AVE.
First, the Angel to manifest his Joy, and the Joyful news that he
brought, and to assure the VIRGIN, enters saying: Aue: which is as much to
say, as Hail: or God save thee: peace be with thee, be cheerful, and
assured: for the news that I bring is of peace, and Prosperitye.

O sovereign VIRGIN, Colloquie.
with all the Affection of my Heart, I salute thee, and say, Aue, Hail, God
save thee. For by thee began our Salvation, conceiving him that was the Author
thereof: Ecclesia in Hymno Aue maris stella.
Thou have changed the name of Eua, defeating her miseries, and replenishing us
with mercyes: The other Eua was the beginning of Sin, thou the beginning of
Grace. By the other Death entered into the World: by thee Life. Genesis 3.15
The other subjected us to the Serpent, thou have broken his Head. Be
cheerful, o blessed VIRGIN, for the good lot that has befallen thee: and
renew my Heart that I may daily sing this new Canticle of Praise with new
fervor of Spirit, Amen. Psalm. 32.3


Secondly, Hail MARYE: but Hail, full of Grace; our Lord is with thee:
blessed art thou among Women. This he did, that we might understand, that
allmighty God gave her new, and most glorious names, as he gave to the
Messiah, Isa. 9.6.
the which for Excellencye are to be attributed unto her in the Church: so
that as we call Solomon the Wise: and S. Paul the Apostle: so we may call
the blessed VIRGIN the Full of Grace, or the Blessed among Women. Isa. 7.14.
And as the name of the Mossias is Emanuel, which is as much to say as God with
us: so the name of the VIRGIN may for excellency be, Colloquie.
Our Lord with thee. O most sacred VIRGIN, let others call thee the Rod of
Iesse, the Port of Heaven, the House of VVisdome, and other like names: I will
now call thee, as did the Angel, full of Grace, the Inhabitation of our Lord,
and the blessed among Women: and declare to thy glory the Greatenesses
signified by these names.

GRATIA PLENA.
First,

Her memory was full of holy Cogitations: her Understanding of great
Illuminations of God: her Will of fervent Acts, and Affections of Love, and
zeal, with inward, and hearty desires of the Glory of God, of the coming of
the Messiah, and of the Redemption of the World. And this fulness she
actually had, when the Angel entered to salute her: for she was busied in the
Contemplation of these mysteries, which was in a manner her continual
Occupation. Besides this, she was full of Grace in her Works: for they were
all works full, entire, and massiue, with that fulness that they might have
of pure Intention, fervor, and Love: So that God could not say unto her, as
he said to that other Bishop: Apoc. 3.2.
I find not thy Works full in my presence.

Then will I ponder the Greatenesse of this plenitude: S. Thomas) above all: 3.
p. q. 27 art. 5.
for she was a much greater Vessel, and her fulness was conformable to the
Dignitye of the mother of God, which far exceeds the Dignityes, and offices
of the other Saints: and she every day with the use of Graces amplifyed the
Vessel, and made it capable of other greater.

O most sacred VIRGIN who is able to recount the fulness of Grace that thou
have above all the Saints that were filled therewith! Colloquie.
They were like Rivers: but thou according to thy name, art full like the Sea.
It gladdeth me that for excellencye S. Gabriel calls thee, the full of Grace,
it seeming unto him that there was no other, that had the like fulness: and
that he, and his Companions in comparison of thee, might call themselves
emptye. I thank thee most blessed TRINITYE for the fulness of Grace, Ecol.
1.7.
that thou gave to this Sovereign VIRGIN: by whose merits I beseech thee to
give me some part thereof, that the Vessel of my Soul though but a little
one, may be filled according to the capacitye thereof. O Mother of mercy, and
Immense Sea of Grace; seeing the Rivers issue out of the Sea whereinto they
entered, let there issue from thee some River of Graces, to fill the vacant
places of my Soul, that my Works may be full, and perfect before God. Amen.

DOMINVS TECVM.
In this third Word the Angel mounteth to the Height of the Salutation, Our
Lord is with thee: that is, he is in thee by excellencye in all those manners
that he may be in his pure Creatures. He is with thee, not only by Essence,
Presence, and Power, as he is with all men: not only by Grace, as he is with
all the Righteous: but with eminencye of Grace, assisting in thee with special
Grace, and Amitye, and with strict familiaritye. He is with thee in all thy
Faculties, uniting them with himself: He is in thy memory, surprising it that
thou may always remember him: In thy Understanding, illuminating it that
thou may perpetually know him: and in thy Will, inflaming it, that thou
may everlastingly love him. He is with thee likewise, assisting in all thy
Affairs with special Providence, and Protection, governing thee with his
Inspirations, and directing thee in all that thou do. He is in thee as in
his Heaven, in his Temple, in his Chamber, in his House of Recreation: and
shortly he will be in thy Womb as thy Son: and therefore for excellencye,
with a full mouth I say, unto thee, Dominus tecum.

I will also ponder, that the Angel says not: Our Lord is, was, or shallbee
with thee: but, our Lord with thee: to signifye that he was, is, and shallbee
perpetually with her: as if he should say: from thy Creation God was with
thee, and now is, and shallbee thoroughout all eternitye: Psalm. 45.6
He shall not depart, nor be alienated from thee, neither shall there be in
thee any Change that may impair the Divine Providence.

O blessed VIRGIN, Colloquie.
I rejoice at the great good thou have in having with thee God himself,
firmly, and constantly enjoying his sweet Conversation. Beseech him that he
will be with me thorough Grace, possessing me with such Love, that he never
depart from me, nor I from him, for ever, and ever. Amen.

BENEDICTA TV IN MVLIERIBVS.
With this fourth Word the Angel concludes the Salutation, saying: Blessed
art thou among Women: Ephe. 1.3
that fell upon men: so thou shall be the beginning of all the caelestiall
benedictions that shall light upon them, by the blessed fruit of thy Womb, by
whom thou shall break the Head of the Genesis 3.15.
Serpent, and deliver them from those Maledictions which his cursed Suggestion
heaped upon them.

And I also thy unworthy servant do praise, Colloquie.
bless, and glorify thee, and do rejoice that all should praise, bless, and
glorifye thee: and I beseech thee to make me partaker of those blessings
which thy most sweet Son our Head, by thee as by his neck communicated to
the Church. Deliver me, o blessed LADY, from the Maledictions of Sin, and
Pnnishment whereunto I live subject, that I may bless thy Son, and serve him
world without end. Amen.

The third Point.
THirdly, I am to consider the manner how the blessed VIRGIN received this
Salutation: for having heard it, she was troubled, Luc. 1.29.
and thought within herself what manner of Salutation this might be: In which
she discovered four excellent Virtues, wheerein we may imitate her: to wit;
Chastitye, Humillitye, and Prudence with Silence. Lib. 2. de Virginib. and in
exhortatiene ad Virgins. Yob 31.1
being astonished (as S. Ambrose says) at the sudden veiwe of a man in her
Chamber, she being alone: for it is the property of a modest, circumspect
Virgin, to be astonished at any veiwe, or word whatsoever of a man: As it is
likewise the propertye of a chaste man to close up his Eyes like Job, least
he should have any evil Thought against a Virgin. But principally she showed
her rare Humillitye: Messiah, and of her that was to be his Mother. Thorough
her profounde Humillitye, she held a very mean conceit of herself: And
when she heard so strange, and yet so glorious a Salutation, she was
astonnied, not so much at the sight of the Angel, as because she found in
her self no foundation of such Praises, and greatenesses as he declared. O
most pure VIRGIN, how well befitteth the at this Instant that which thy Spouse
said: Cant. 1.9
Thy Cheeks are beautiful like the Turtles, a bird shamefast, and chaste: for
in them is resplendent the beautye of thy Chastitye, and the splendor of thy
humble VVisdome.

These Virtues of the Virgin are more eminent, Genesis 3.3.
comparing her with the first Woman Eua, who when she was yet a Virgin, went
wandering, and gazing thorough Paradise, and the first Question that the evil
Angel in form of a Serpent did ask her, she made answer, and held a long
discourse with him, wheerein she discovered Pride, Curiositye, Imprudence, and
Desire of talking, and other Vices, wheerein we her Children do imitate her.
Which considering I am to be astonished, imploring the aid of this most
prudent VIRGIN, that in the like Occasions I may follow her Virtues.

The fourth Point.
THe Angel knowing the holy Disturbance, and Fear of the B. VIRGIN said unto
her: Fear not MARYE, for thou have found Grace with God. Martha, when he
said: Martha, Martha, Luc. 10.41.
thou art careful, and art sroubled about very many things, when as but one
thing only is necessary. And this am I to require of the Angel of my Guard,
saying unto him:

O most blessed Angel, Colloquie.
remove from my Heart all vain fear, that it may be capable of Divine Love:
appease the Disturbance that it suffers in earthly things, that it may
contemplate the things of Heaven, contenting myself with that one, wheerein
consists my eternal rest. Amen.

Secondly, For that (says he) thou have found Grace with God, How great a
good it is to find grace with God.
which was to say unto her. Thou need not to fear the Devil, nor Hell, nor
visible, nor invisible Enemies: neither have thou cause to suspect the
Greatenesses that I have spoken to thee of in this Salutation; nor other
greater that I shall presently tell thee of: for I do thee to wit, that thou
art fallen into Grace with God. And this is sufficient to secure thee: for from
hence it proceeds that thou art full of Grace: that our Lord is with thee:
and, that thou art blessed among Women: for whosoever finds Grace with God,
what benefits shall he not receive from his liberal hand? O happy, and a
thousand times happy is that Soul that finds Grace with God! If it be held
among men for a high felicitye to fall in grace with an earthly king: how much
greater shall it be to fall in Grace with the king of Heaven? From that grace
proceeds abundance of Riches, Honors, Dignityes, and many other temporal
benefits that a king bestows upon his Favorite: and yet sometimes, all ends
with Disgrace: But from this Grace proceeds an abundaunce of Virtues, and
heavenly gifts that God bestows on his beloved, for the which it is said in
holy Scriptures of the greatest Saints, as of Noe, Genesis 6.8. Exo. 33.17 Act.
7.46
Moses, David, and other such like, that they found Grace with God: but above
all, the most sacred VIRGIN found much greater, and nearer Grace with God; yea
so near, that she was always with him, and he with her, even to the
containing him in her Womb as his mother.

O sweetest mother, Colloquie.
I rejoice that thou have found Grace before God with such singular favor.
And seeing Queen Esther, for that she found grace before king Assuerus,
Esth. 2.9
was a cause that her People found the like, and was by him very much
favored: be thou our Mediatrix, that we may find Grace before God, and
obtain that perfect Grace which is eternal Glory. Amen.

But I am very carefully to consider, that allbeeit God does not this favor
thorough the merits of man, but thorough his mere mercy: yet Humillitye does
most of all dispose us to obtain it, by the which the blessed VIRGIN obtained
it. And therefore said the holy Spirit. The greater thou art, Ecol. 3.20
humble thyselfe in all things, and thou shallt find grace before God: bocause
the might of God only is great, and he is honored of the humble. He says
that the Humble do him Honor, for that they attribute unto him, the Honor,
and Glory of all that they have: for the which God honoreth them much more,
and they find greater Grace before him. Therefore, o my Soul, if like the
blessed VIRGIN, thou willt find Grace near unto God, humble thyselfe in all
things, like her. For God resists the proud, and gives his abundant grace
to the Humble. Jacob. 4.6


The seventh Meditation. Of the manner how the Angel annunciated, and declared
to the blessed VIRGIN the Misterye of the Incarnation.
The first Point.
THe Angel having quieted the holy Amazement of the blessed VIRGIN, delivered
his Embassage in this manner: Luc. 1.31.
Behold thou shallt conceive in thy Womb, and shall bear a Son: and thou
shall call his name, JESUS. He shallbee great, and shallbee called the Son
of the most High; and our Lord God shall give him the seat of David his
Father, and he shall reign in the house of Jacob for ever, and of his
kingdom there shallbee no end.

In these words are to be pondered the greatenesses, and Excellencyes of the
Son that the Angel promises to the Virgin. The first is, that he shall be
JESUS, second, third, manner he shallbe her Son, that he shall be likewise
the Son of the most High God. The fourth; David, and by the House of Jacob,
of whom according to the flesh he descended. fifth, that his kingdom
shallbee eternal, and have no end. O glorious Embassage! O most joyful
news! Happy Virgin, to whom such a Son is promised: and blessed Son in
whom so great Greatenesses are contained: of all which the Angel gave notice
to the Virgin, that she might know, that this Son whom she was to
conceive, was the Messiah promised by the Prophets, of whom so great
Excellencyes were written. From whence I will collect a great Estimation, and
Love of this sovereign Messiah, rejoicing at each one of these five
Excellencyes rehearsed, and recording the five wounds that he received on the
Cross, that unto his Elected, and to me he may apply the fruit of them:
for on the Cross they were all made manifest, as hereafter, when time serves
shallbee declared.

I will now meditate only, how these Greatenesses had their Original from the
most profounde Humillitye of the only begotten Son of the everliving God,
which is included in the first Word spoken by the Angel to the Virgin: Ecce
concipies in vtero. ^eholde, thou shallt conceive in thy womb: as who should
say; This Savior, and this eternal king being so great, yet will so far
humble himself, as to streighten himself to the smallness of an infant
conceived in the Womb of a Woman. And ^^om this smallness his greatenesse
shall have beginning, complying with that of the Prophet Isaias: Isa. 9.6.
A little Child is borne to us, and a Son is given to us, and Principallitye
is made upon his Shoulder and his name shallbee called Admirable, Counselor,
God, Puissaunt, Father of the World to come, Prince of Peace: His Empire shall
be multiplied thorough the whole World, and there shall be no end of Peace.

O Sovereign Prince that descendedst from Heaven, Colloquie. Dan. 2.34.45.
as a Stone without heads, being without thee action of man, conceived in the
Womb of a Virgin: and then came to be so great a mountain as to fill the
Whole Earth, dilating therein thy kingdom, which is a kingdom eternal, and
without end: I humbly thank thee for having chozen so strange a smallness,
to be the Original of so sovereign a Greatenesse. Grant me, o Lord, that I
vnder-propped not by mine own hands, but by thine, may conceive such
resolutions in thy service, that they may increase to very great works of thy
Glory. Amen.

The Second Point.
THe blessed VIRGIN having heard this Embassage, Luc. 1.34
said to the Angel: How shall this be done? because I know not man? As if
she should say: I doubt not of Gods Omnipotencye, nor of thy promise: but I
desire to be informed, how I should obey this Commandment, having made a
vow not to know man?

In this answer, most Prudent Virgin. For though the promise of the Angel
was so great, yet she was not presently hooked therewith, until she might
perceive how it would accord with her Vow she had made of Chastitye; unto the
which she was so entirely affected, that she made difficulty to be the
mother, though it were of such a Son, with the Loss thereof. And all be it
she knew by the Prophecye of the Prophet Isaias: That the Mother of the
Messiah should be a VIRGIN, Isa. 7.14.
yet she would prudently examine the Revelation of the Angel, to see how it
agreed with the Revelation of the Prophet. From whence I will collect a
fervent, and heartye Love of Chastitye, avoiding, as much as lies in me, all
whatsoever that may be any Occasion to impair it; yea though it carrye with
it an appearance of Piety, and Religion. For in imitation of the most sacred
VIRGIN, I am to examine well the Spirit, that shall incline me to a thing,
wherein there may be danger: fearing least it may be the Spirit of Satan,
who (as says the Apostle S. 2 Cor. 11.14.
Paul) transfigureth himself into an Angel of Light, to deceive those which
are either very simple, or ouerconfident, or exceeding zealous of other men's
good, without regarding their own.

Secondly, A rule to speak Prude^tly
(being the first that we read of the blessed VIRGIN) four Circumstances
with the which she did speak them; in the which is pourtrayed an admirable
rule how to speak prudently: for these words were but few; and no more then
necessary; and in a case of great importance: and in a very humble, and
decent manner. It seems that the Virgin held firmly in her memory that
counsel of Ecclesiasticus, which says: Eccl. 32.10.11. Habeat caput
responsum tuum.
Young man, speak in thine own cause scarcely more then is needful: if thou
be asked ^wise, let thy answer have an head, that is, let it be breife, and
to the purpose. In many things be as it were ignorant: and hear holding thy
peace, and withal asking. All this the B. VIRGIN meruailously observed, in
these breife Words, which she uttered not till the Angel had spoken to her
twice. And though she had occasion to enlarge herself in this Question, yet
she touched no more then the necessary Point, and that with great bteuitye,
declaring the Vow of Chastitye that she had made, with humble, and chaste
words, but sufficient for the Angel to understand her, saying unto him: I
know not man.

O most sacred VIRGIN, Colloquie. Cant. 4.5 11.
with much reason was the divine Spouse pleased with thy Lips, saying: That
they were like a girdle of Scarlet in grain, and like the Honnye-combe that
distilleth by little, and little: for thy Words are well girt, and much
pondered, and uttered with repose, sweetness, and Charity. And seeing this
rule in speaking is so pleasing unto him; beseech him to imprint it in my
Heart, that my Words may proceed from it well ordered, and ruled.

The third Point.
TO this Question of the Virgin the Angel made answer saying: Spiritus
sanctus superueniet in te, etc. Luc. 1.35.
The holy Ghost shall come upon thee; and the power of the most High shall
ouershadowe thee. And therefore also that which of thee shallbee borne Holy,
shallbee called the Son of God. In these words may be pondered three most
excellent promises made by the Angel to the most sacred VIRGIN; First,

The second,

The third Promise was,

O most blessed VIRGIN, Colloquie.
if when the Angel entered thou wast already full of Grace: how much more
fuller shallt thou be, the holy Ghost coming upon thee with this new
Plenitude? If before our Lord were with thee, for thy Government, Protection,
and Consolation: how much more shall he be now, the Power of the most High
coming to ouershadowe thee? now may thou, o blessed LADY, say with a new
Title: Cant. 2.3
I sat under the Shadow of him whom I desired, and his fruit is sweet to
my Throat. Thou art seated under the Shadow of the most High, which shall
take from thee the sensual Pleasure in Conceiving: and the fruit of thy
Conception shallbee Delectable to God, pleasing to the Angels, sweet unto
thee, and to the Salvation of us. Much good may do thee, o Purest VIRGIN, so
great a fulness, so happy a Shadow with Hope of so sweet a fruit. And
seeing thou have this day found so great Grace with the Holy Spirit, beseech
him to come anowe upon me, and with his Power to ouershadowe me, that being
seated under his loving Protection, I may taste the sweet fruits of his
Divine Presence.

From hence I am to collect, that whereas for the Virgin to conceive the Son
of God, it was necessary that the Holy Ghost should come upon her from Heaven,
to accomplish this Work; and that the Power of the most High should
ouershadowe her: so likewise that I may conceive in my Soul the Spirit of
Salvation, Isa. 26.8. Ex D: Fulgentio lib. de Incar natione cap. 20.
whereby I become the adoptiue Son of God; it is necessary that the Holy
Ghost do inspire me, and that the Power, and Omnipotencye of God do
ouershadowe me, tempering the Heat of my sensual Concupiscences, and
protecting me in all Temptations, and dangers: and in this Faith, I am to
cry to Heaven, saying: Colloquie.
O most Holy Spirit, come from on High to my poor Soul, sow in it the seed
of thy Divine inspiration, that it may conceive within itself the Spirit of
Salvation. Psalm. 16.8. Psa. 139.8
O power of the most High, protect me with the Shadow of thy VVings: cover
me with them in the Day of Temptation, that the Puttockes of Hell prevail not
against me, and that I loose not through mine own Weakness, what thou have
begun in me by thy Grace. Amen.

The fourth Point.
TO what had been said the Angel added: Luc. 1.36.
Behold Elizabeth thy Cousin, she also has conceived a Son in her old age,
and this month is the sixth to her that is called barren; because there shall
not be impossible with God any word.

In these Words the Angel pretended three marvelous things: first, to
reveal to the blessed VIRGIN a thing that would give her much Content, because
of the Abundance of her Charity, Rem. 12.15.
whose Propertye is to weep with those that weep, and to rejoice with those
that rejoice. And as the blessed VIRGIN had a feeling of the Barennesse of her
Cousin, because of the grief that she received thereby: so she rejoiced at
the news of her being with Child, because of the great Joy that it would
give her.

The second was, S. Gabriel himself chastized Za^harias, Luc. 1.20.
because he asked a sign to be assured that he should have a Son,
himself being old, and his Wife barren, whereas contrarily to those that
have Faith, he gives a Sign, allbeeit they ask it not, as he did to our
blessed LADY the VIRGIN, to chere, and to comfort her, and by the way to
confirm her more, and more, in her Faith. From whence I will collect how much
it imports constantly to believe the matters of Faith: for to believers, our
Lord uses to give interiourly greater signs of his Truth, Joan. 15.
which he denies to the incredulous, Isa. 7.9. iuxta 70.
according to that of the Prophet Isa^as: If you believe not, you shall not
understand.

The third was, Luc. 1.37.
adding that so glorious Word, that to God nothing is impossible: which is to
say. He can do all that he will, and can accomplish all that he promises:
especially those two miraculous things that I have told thee of: to wit,
That the Barren, and the Virgin may conceive, and bring forth. From whence I
will collect two other for my spiritual Comfort. The first, Elizabeth
conceived John, which signifies Grace, so it may conceive in itself the
fruits of Grace, and of Benediction, very gracious, and pleasing unto God. And
with this Hope, I am to cheer, and animate myself to pretend this happy
Fertillitye, remembering what is said by the Prophet Isaias, Isa. 54.1. Gal.
4.27
and the Apostle S. Paul: Reioite thou barren that bear not, break forth,
and cry thou that trauailest not: for more Children shall thou have that wast
barren like Sara, then she that was fruitful like Agar.

The second is, Matt. 19.29. Isa. 56.4.
our Lord fullfilling unto them that Promise, which he made them thereof by
the Prophet Isaias, as was declared in the first Part, and the 20. Meditation.

The eigth Meditation: Of the final Answer given by the VIRGIN to the Angel,
consenting to his Embassage.
The first Point.
THe blessed VIRGIN having heard all that was spoken to her by the Angel,
said unto him: Behold the Handmaide of our Lord, Luc. 1.38
be it done to me according to thy Word. And here I am to consider what a
longing desire the Angel had; expecting the Answer of the Virgin: and not
only the Angel, but the Holy Ghost himself her Spouse, who spoke unto her
Heart that of the Canticles: Cant. 2.14
Let thy Voice sound in my Ears, for thy voice is sweet, and pleasing unto
me. And he himself likewise inspired into her, the Words she should say,
exercising therein some most excellent Virtues, wherewith she perfectly
disposed herself to be the Worthy Mother of God.

The first was, great Faith,

The second was,

The third was, great Obedience, Colloquie.
O most prudent Virgin, who has instructed thee, to conioine with such
excellencye things so far distant? If thou beleeuest, that thou art to be the
Mother of God, why call thou thyselfe his Handmaide? And if thou hold
thyselfe for a Handmaide, why do thou offer thyselfe to be the mother of
God? What has a mother to do with being a Handmaide? And how are they
compatible, a Faith of such baseness, with a Faith of so great Highness?
and so profounde an Humillitye with so exalted a magnanimitye? O Height of the
Wisdom of God! O miracles of his Omnipotencye! Thine, o Lord, are these
Meruailes, and thou art he that have knowledge, and abillity to conieine
Mother, and Virgin: Handmaide, and Mother: Humillitye, and Magnanimitye: and
Faith of all this, with Humane Understanding. O Heavenly Father, Matt. 11.25.
Prou. 11.2.
thou that hidest thy Secrets from the Proud, and reuealest them to the
Humble; and therefore where Humillitye is, there dwells thy VVisdome: teach
me to choose with Humillitye the lowest place on Earth, and to pretend with
Magnanimitye the highest in Heaven; conioining the nothing that I am of
myself, with the much that I may be by thy Grace.

The Second Point.
FOr that the Mysteries are many which are included in these Words of the
VIRGIN; it will not be amiss to meditate every one by itself, pondering the
Spirit therein contained for our Proffit.

ECCE.
This Word Ecce. Behold, the Scripture uses to denote, or to signifye some
great thing worthy of much Consideration, and the Angel used it in the
beginning of his Embassage, saying: Ecce concipies, Be hold, thou shallt
conceive a Son. And therefore also would the most holy VIRGIN use the same in
her answer, saying: Ecce Ancilla Domini. Behold the Handmaide of our Lord
for as the Angel had great Desiers, that our blessed LADY the VIRGIN should
ponder the Greatenesses, which he promised her from God: so the Virgin had as
great Desiers, that the Angel should ponder how mean, and lowely a Handmaide
she was of herself, and how fervent longings she had to obey, whatsoever God
commanded her. For the Humble, when the gifts they have of God are published,
do very earnestly desire that the miseries should be known, which they have
of themselves: that those Gifts be not attributed to their own merittes, but
to the bounty of him that gave them, to whom they desire to be very
thankful, and therefore very obedient.

ANCILLA DOMINI.
In this Word, What an Honor it is to be Servant, or Bondsman of God. Gal. 4.
Romans 8.
Handmaide of our Lord, the blessed VIRGIN declared what a backwarde Conceipte
she had always had of herself, ever since she had the use of Reason. And
allbeeit the name of Servant, or Bondsman, when as it signifies to serve God
with a Spirit of Fear, and as it were by force, is dispraised in holy
Scripture: yet when Servant is joined with Love, it is a most glorious name.
For the Slave is not his own but his Lords: he has not Liberty to do what
he lists, but what his Lord commands him: He serves him neither for
Salarye, nor Daye-wages, but because he is obliged thereunto: He labors
not for himself, but for his Lord: neither serves he him only in person, but
also all those of his House, and Familye: in the which he holds the basest
Place, and has always given him the worst, and that which is most
contemptible.

All this the blessed VIRGIN our LADY imagined in herself, when she called
herself the Handmaide of our Lord. For first, she held not herself to be
her own, but a thing proper to God our Lord, and in his Possession: as well for
that he created her, as also for that she had wholye dedicated herself to
his perpetual Service, saying in her Heart those Words which the Prophet
Isaias reports of the Righteous: Isa. 44.5.
He shall say, I am of God: and with his own hand he shall write, and
sign, that he is our Lords. And as the faithful Bondsman never flies from
his master, nor is at any time absent, neither will serve any other master,
because no man can at once serve two Masters: Matt. 6.24
so the blessed VIRGIN never separated herself one moment from the Service of
God, neither served she any other Lord but God, Matt. 4.10 Deuteronomy. 6.13.
fullfilling most perfectly that Precept: Thou shallt adore the Lord thy God,
and him only shallt thou serve.

In all other things also, Psalm. 12 24.2.
that has her eyes always placed upon the hands of her Lord, suffering
herself to be managed by him, and to be moved by every beck that he should
make.

Besides this, Luc. 17.10
When you shall have done all things that are commanded you; say: We are
unprofitable Servants, we have done that which we ought to do.

From hence it proceeded, of God, and not to her own; saying that of the
Canticles. Cant. 7.13
All the fruits the new, and the old my beloved I have kept for thee: that
is, all the Works of my Life present, and passed, I will that they be to thy
Honor, Romans 14.7.8.
and Glory: for I will neither live, nor dye to myself, but to thee, because I
am thine.

Finally, Abigail might she have said, 1 Reg. 25.^1.
what she said to David: Lo let thy Servant be as an Handmaide, to wash
the feet of the Servants of my Lord.

All these inward feelings had the blessed VIRGIN when she called herself the
Handmaide of our Lord, and esteemed very highly of this Title: for she knew
how pleasing it was to God, who used to call by the same name of Servant, the
Messiah his Son, as he was man: and he himself esteemed highly thereof, as
appears by what is delivered by the Prophets. Isa. 41.8.9. and 44.1.21. Zach.
38. Colloquie. Ps. 115.16
And if I desire to be devoted to our blessed LADY, I am highly to esteem
myself for this name, and for the Spirit which she includes in the said
things; saying to God with David. O Lord, I am thy Servant, I am thy Servant,
and the Son of thy Handmaide: then have broken my bonds, I will sacrifize to
thee the host of Praise, and will invoke the name of our Lord. O God of my
Soul, I highly esteem myself for being thy Servant, because thou createdst
me: and again for being thy Servant, because thou redeemedst me: I am the
Son of thy Handmaide, because by inheritance, it falls to my Lot to be thy
Slave: but especially I hold myself for the Son of thy Handmaide the
blessed VIRGIN thy Mother, by whose merits I beseech thee to unloose the
Chains of my Sins, and Passions, that being free from this evil Bondage, I
may serve thee with Liberty of Spirit, and may praise, and glorifye thy holy
name world without end. Amen.

FIAT MIHI.
It was not without a mystery, that the B. VIRGIN said not to the Angel: I
will do what thou say: but this Word, Fiat; Be it done: which God our
Lord used when he created the World, saying: Be Light made, etc. Genesis 1.3.
For the VIRGIN understood that the Incarnation was as well a Work of the
Omnipotencye of God, as the Creation of the World: and that with one Fiat of
his Omnipotencye it might be done, though on her part there was no Merit of
so glorious a thing. Allbeeit withal she accepted it, saying: Fiat, as who
should say: Al though there were no need of my Consent, because I am the
Handmaide of God, and he may do with his Handmaide what he will; And
allbeeit being but a Handmaide, I merited not that this thing should be done
unto me: yet notwithstanding, seeing God will have it so, Fiat: Let i^ be
done: for I am pleased with all whatsoever that pleases him. Whereby we see
the sovereign Obedience, and Resignation of the VIRGIN, founded upon the
knowledge of her own being nothing, offering herself not to resist the Fiat
of God: as the Insensible Creatures resist it not, or as that which is nothing
resists not, when God says, Let it be done.

But that we may the better understand the height of this consenting: we are
to ponder, that she not only fixed her eyes upon the Greatenesses, foretold
her by the Angel: but also upon the terrible Afflictions, which that Son who
was offered unto her, was to suffer: the which she knew well by the sacred
Scriptures; and that a very great share of them was to light upon his Mother:
And yet notwithstanding she accepted this Dignitye of a Mother, with the most
heavy charge of that office. And hereupon she called herself a Handmaide,
as one that accepted it, not to be served as a Lady, but to serve, and suffer
as a Handmaide.

I thank thee, Colloquie.
most sacred VIRGIN, for the generous offer that thou make, with so great
Magnanimitye of Heart: may the Angels in Heaven praise thee, and the
righteous on the Earth, as likewise those that were in Lymbo, expecting him.
And seeing that all have a share in thy Consent, beseech thy Son, to grant
me such a resignation of myself unto his holy Will, that I may resist
nothing whatsoever he commands me, nor any affliction whatsoever that he
shall send me; 1 Reg. 3.18.
but that to all my Replye may be, Fiat. God is my Lord, whatsoever shall
seem good in his Eyes, let that be done in me his Servant.

SECVNDVM VERBVM TVVM.
It is likewise not without a great mysterye, that the B. VIRGIN said not to
the Angel: Be it done to me as God commands, or wills: but, Be it
done to me according to thy Word: for herein she declared the perfection
of her Faith, and Obedience. For perfect Faith believes whatsoever God
reuealeth by himself, or by the means of others: and perfect Obedience
obeys God, in whatsoever he commands either by himself, or by the means
of his ministers: for he that hears them, hears Christ. Allbeeit, Luc.
10.16
I may likewise contemplate that the B. VIRGIN in this Point exalted herself
above herself, and above all the Angels, and above all whatsoever is created:
directing her Answer, not so much to the Ambassador, as to allmighty God
himself, who sent the Embassage, saying to the eternal Father: Behold here
the Handmaide of thee, o Lord, Colloquie.
be it done to me according to thy Word: not only according to what thou
commaundest by this Word which the Angel delivers: but according to the
Desire of that Word and Speech, which thou speak within thyselfe, in thy
eternitye, which is thy only Son, who also desires to be mine. And seeing
it is his good Pleasure so to be, be it as he commands. In Imitation of
the B. VIRGIN, I will also oftentimes say unto God, with the same Understanding
that she had: Behold here me thy Slave, o Lord, be it down to me,
according to thy Word: for I am ready to put in practice all, whatsoever
shallbee ordained me by thy Divine Word.

The third Point.
THe Angel having heard the Answer of the B. VIRGIN, returned to Heaven; Et
discessit Angelus ab ea: Luc. 1.38
And the Angel departed from her. In this departure, I am to consider, first,
how joyful, Psalm. 29.6
according to that of the Prophet David, consists our Life.

Secondly, I am to consider, Religious, that having fullfilled our Ministeries
with our neighbors, we make no causeless tariaunce among them, but that
forthwith we retire ourselves to our Oratorye, which is our Heaven, to repose
ourselves with God.

And as we after our humane fashion imagine, we having fullfilled our
Obligations, are to present ourselves before God, ready to accomplish
whatsoever he shall anewe impose upon us, or give us in charge: according to
that of holy Job: Job 38.35.
Shall thou peradventure send lightenings, and will they go, and returning
shall they say to thee, here we are?

O eternal, and omnipotent king, Colloquie.
make me like one of these caelestiall lightenings, resplendent with thy
light, inflamed with the fire of thy Love, quick in obeying thy holy Will,
and thankful in retourning to give the thanks, for the accomplishment
thereof.

I may likewise piously contemplate, S. Gabriell being entered into heaven,
preached to his companions the excellent Humillitye, Wisdom, and Sanctitye of
the blessed VIRGIN; all of them being full of alacritye, for that God had
found upon earth a Person that was as pleasing, and acceptable unto him, as
the inhabitants of heaven: for it is the Propertye of the Saints to rejoice,
that there are many others, that supplye what they want in loving, and serving
with great fervor our Lord God, to whom be Honor, and Glory, world
without end. Amen.

The ninth Meditation. Of the execution of the Incarnation: and of some
Circumstances thereof, as concerning the body of our Lord Christ.
The first Point.
FIrst, D. Th. 3. p. q. 32. and 33
I am to consider, how the blessed VIRGIN having given her Consent; in the very
same instant, the Holy Ghost formed of her purest blood a most perfect Body,
and created a most excellent reasonable Soul, and joined them together with
the Person of the eternal Word; God being made man, and man God: Joan. 1.
and God being espoused with Humane nature in that Virgin Chamber: and the
Virgin herself exalted to the Dignitye of the Mother of God.

In this Action we are to ponder the Content of all those Persons, S. 1. p. q.
20. ar. 4. ad. 1
Thomas says) God much more loves Christ alone, then all the Angels, and
men, and then all the Creatures together: Phil. 2.9.
for he would give him a name above all names, which is the name, and being
of God: And therefore was much more pleased, and did more rejoice to behold
him, then to behold all the rest of the Created, or to be created. With this
Consideration I will rejoice at this Joy of the Father, and will be
thankful unto him for the favor he has done us: beseeching him, that
seeing he so much loves this Son, for his sake he will also love me, and
grant me his holy Love.

O eternal Father, and our Protector, Colloquie. Psalm. 83.10
behold the new face of thy Christ, in whom thou art so much pleased; and
seeing he made himself semblable to us in our nature, make us semblable to
him in his Grace.

Then will I ponder what Contentment the eternal Word had to see himself
made man, Ruth said to Booz: Ruth 3.9 Colloquie.
Spread thy mantel upon thy servant because thou art nigh of kin. O divine
Word, true Booz, and Fortitude of the Father, seeing thou have made thyselfe
of the kindred of men, spread upon me the cloak of thy divine Protection,
unite me unto thee in Faith, and Charity, and give me the kiss of Peace
with the kiss of thy mouth: Cant. 1.1 Cant. 2.6
and embrace me with the right hand of thy Omnipotencye, that nothing created
may be able to separate me from thy Friendship.

We may likewise contemplate the Contentment of the Holy Ghost, Isaias said:
Isa. 11.1.
A Rod shall sproute not of the root of less, and from that root a flower,
upon which the Spirit of our Lord shall take rest. For in this eternal Word
Incarnate, figured by this Rod, and flower of Iesse, the holy Spirit found
rest, and perpetual Joy, as in the thing that he most loved.

From hence I will pass on to consider the Joy of that most sacred Humanitye,
Canticles: Cant. 3.4
I have found all that which my Soul could desire, I will with great
Constancye preserve it, and will never forsake it.

O most sacred Humanitye, Colloquie.
I joy for thy Joy, and for thy good fortune, and seeing thou art so content
with thy beloved, give us part of that Love which thou have, that together
with thee, we also may enjoye it.

Then will I ponder the Content of the most blessed VIRGIN in that instant of
the Incarnation: she was full of unspeakable Joy. O what Gratitude, what
Praises, and Thanksgiving, and what exultations had she! O what a fulness
of good received she in that moment! For as this Visible Sun as soon as it was
created in this World, filled it with his Light, and communicated unto it his
Heat, and Influences: so the Sun of Righteousness Christ JESUS our Lord, in
that very Instant that he was conceived, and formed in the abbreuiated World
of his blessed Mother, filled her with exceeding great Light, and caelestiall
Heat, with the Influences of Life everlasting. So that she, D. Th. 3. p. q.
27. ar. 5. ad 2.
that before was full of Grace, was then much more replenished, and heaped up
with all Graces, and with inestimable Joy in the possession of them.

O most sacred VIRGIN, Colloquie.
much good may it do thee, for being the mother of God made man. And seeing
thou likewise beginnest to be the mother of us men, distribute with us that
Light, and Joy which was given thee, that we may know, love, and serve him,
whom thou have conceived.

Lastly, S. Ser. 1. de Natiuit.
Leo the Pope says) to live as the kinsman of so great a king, without
admitting any thing that may be contrary to this nobillitye.

The Second Point.
SEcondly, I am to consider the Circumstances of this Incarnation, as
concerning the body of this God, and man, beholding it as a body mortal, and
passible: and the causes hereof. For according to that which naturally was due
to the person of our Lord Christ, his body was not to be mortal, nor
passible for 2. causes. First, Christ our Lord was absolutely free from
Original Sin, not by Privilege, but by right, for being the natural Son
of God, and for having been conceived not by the Work of Man, but by the
power of the Holy Ghost. And consequently the punishment of mortallitye, and
passibilitye due to Original Sin touched not him? and yet for all this, this
our Lord to demonstrate his Humillitye, and Charity, was willing to leave the
Sin, and take the Punishment: and without being a Sinner, Romans 8.3
to take (as S. Paul said) the flesh of a Sinner, subject to all the
penalties, and miseries of Sinners, to pay with his Death, and with his Pains
our Sins. Colloquie.
O blessed be such an Immense Charity, from the which sprung so profounde an
Humillitye. O what reason have I to confound myself for my pride, seeing
contrary to this our Lord I would have the Sin, but not the punishment? I am
a Sinner, and yet would not suffer the penalties due to Sinners. Animate
thyselfe, o my Soul, to Imitate this example of Humillitye: and seeing thou
have subjected thyselfe to Sin, be content to suffer the Punishment, that
thy Sin does deserve.

The second cause why the body of our Lord Christ was not to be mortal, is
for that his Soul was glorious, and blessed: and so by right his body was to
have the four endowments of Glory, which he now has in Heaven, which are,
Perspicuitye, Impassibilitye, Subtillitye, and Agillitye: yet notwithstanding
this, our most loving Lord was willing to do this new miracle, and to
renounce this right, depriving himself of these endowments of Glory, and
inuesting himself with mortallitye, and with Ignominye, with all the rest of
our miseries, that his body (as he himself said) might be fit to be an
Host, Psalm. 39.7 Heb. 10.5
and Sacrifice for our Sins upon the Altar of the Cross.

May the Angels bless thee, o Lord, Colloquie.
and may my Soul praise thee for ever, for the Charity that thou have showed
in doing miracles, to be able to dye, and in renouncing all that which might
have excused thee from suffering. O how I am confounded, and ashamed, beholding
how carefully I fly from afflictions, desiring sometimes miracles to deliver
me from them. I desire from hence forth rather to renounce all that shallbee
Honor, and Delicacye, to imitate thee in suffering Ignominye, and Torment: and
seeing thou give me such a Desire, give me also grace to fulfill it.

The third Point.
THirdly, I am to consider the causes why our Lord God was willing to become a
Babe, Isa. 9.6.
and to be conceived in the Womb of a Woman, when as he might have taken the
body of a perfect man, as he formed the body of Adam. The causes hereof,
omitting those which were touched in the 3. Meditation were these. Heb. 2.17
Isa. 46.3.
First to make himself (as the Apostle says) in all things to be like to
men his brethren, and to oblige them hereby to love him more tenderly.
Colloquie.
O most loving God, who as a mother bear us in thy Womb, who has made thee
a Babe enclosed in the womb of thy mother? Thy Love doubtless is the cause
hereof, and the great desire thou have to be loved: for that if we should
not love thee for the Greatenesse that thou show, as thou art God, yet we
should love thee for the Tenderness thou thewest toward us, as thou art a
Babe.

The second Cause was, Colloquie.
O divine Word, who as thou art God, art in the Immense besome of thy Father,
and as thou art man, inclosedst thyselfe in the narrow bosom of thy Mother,
clear the eyes of my Soul, that considering the greatenesse thou have in the
one bosom, and the litlenesse thou have in the other, admiring at both, I may
adore thy greatenesse with trembling, and embrace thy Littleness with
Humillitye.

The third cause was, Ecclesia in Hymno. Non horruisti Virginis vterum.
to enter into the World, move himself from one side to another, nor to
stir hand, nor foot, nor to see, nor to hear, nor to smell, nor to taste
any thing. Of which although other babes have no feeling, because they have not
the use of Reason, yet this most blessed Babe having the most perfect use
thereof, had a feeling of it, and yet with a good will suffered this
Imprisonment, and this mortification of Senses, to free us from the everlasting
prison: and to satisfye for the liberty, and overmuch looseness of Eua, who
going to recreate herself in Paradise, bebelde the fruit of the Tree, and
contrary to Gods commandment tasted thereof. And so likewise to satisfye for
the libertyes, and Lightnesses of my Senses, and to animate me by his Example
to mortifye them, and to suffer any shutting up, or straightness whatsoever in
my Chamber, or bed, or in whatsoever else pertains to the pampering of my
flesh.

I humbly thank thee, o divine Word incarnate, Colloquie.
for this entrance thou have made into the World, suffering so straight a
goole, such a horride prison, and so long, and tedious a mortification of thy
flesh: by the which I humbly beseech thee to deliver me from the eternal
Prison of Hell, and from the troublesome jail of my Vices, ayding me to
mortifye my passions, and with the spirit to restrain the disordinate use of
my Senses.

The tenth Meditation. Of the excellencyes of the most holy Soul of our
Savior Christ, D. Th. 3. p. q. 34. and etiam q. 7 cum sequ.
and of the heroycall Acts of Virtue that he exercised in the first instant
of the Incarnation.
The first Point.
FIrst, I am to consider the Graces, and Excellencyes of our Savior Christ, as
he was man, his Soul being united with the Deitye, the which were Immense:
for as his Forerunner said of him: Ioa. 3.14.
God gave him not his Spirit by measure, for the Father loves the Son, and
has given all things into his hand: that is to say: To the rest of the
Saints, he gives them his Spirit by measure: and the graces of the holy
Spirit (as S. 1 Cor. 12.81.
Paul says) are divided among them, some being given to some, and others to
others: but to our Savior Christ, his Father gave him his Spirit without
measure, for he gave him these graces all at once, Ephesians. 4.7
not only for himself, but with power to distribute them to others, giving to
every one his measure: for he loves him as his only begotten Son with a
most singular Love, and therefore he communicated unto him such fulness of
Wisdom, and Grace, as was fitting for the Glory of such a Son: whereupon
his Evangelist S. John said of him: We saw the glory of him, Joan. 1.14.
glory as it were of the only begotten of the Father, full of Grace, and
Veritye. Besides this, the eternal Word having communicated to this most
blessed Soul, the principal thing which he had, which was his own personal
Essence; it pertained unto his Honor to communicate likewise unto it, the
Immensenesse of those Graces, and gifts, that were convenient for that which
had so noble a Being. These graces we may reduce unto 7. heads.

The first was, Puritye: in such sort, 1 Pet. 2.22
that he neither sinned, nor could sin, nor err, nor be deceived, nor have
any Imperfection that might be repugnant to this Puritye, and Cleanesnesse of
Hearthe: Ioa. 1.17.
for he was the Lamb of God, not the earthly, but the heavenly Lamb, the
most Innocent Lamb without any blot, whose coming was to take away the Sins
of the World, and so by Right was free himself from them all.

The second is, Sanctitye, the which incomparably exceeded that of men, and
Angels all together. And in this measure he had Charity, and Humillitye, and
Obedience, and the rest of the Virtues; in such sort, Dan. 9.24 Isa. 11.2.
that for Excellencye he is called the Holy of Holyes, in whom the holy
Spirit reposed, filling him with his seven gifts with an Immense Plenitude.

The third was, Grace consummated which is, Blessedness, and the
blessed-making Vision: for from that very first instant, his Soul saw the
Divine Essence with greater Clearenesse, then all the Blessed together, and in
this proportion it loved God, and rejoiced with unspeakable Joy: for the
which it is said of him, that God anointed him with the oil of Gladness
above all his Companions. Psalm. 44.^


From hence proceeded the 4. Colos. 2.3
Grace, Treasures of the Wisdom, and knowledge of God, not divided, but all
together (as S. Paul says) that he might know all things created, passed,
present, and to come, and that nothing might be covered from him, he being
to be the Judge of all things, to reward the good, and to chastize the evil.

The fifth is, the Power of doing miracles, Luc. 4.14 32.36.39.
to heal all that were sick; to cast out Devils out of Bodies possessed; to
command the Winds, and the Sea, and all the Elements, all subiecting
themselves to his command.

The sixth is, Matt. 6.9 and vltim. 18.
Power of Excellencye in pardoning Sins: converting Sinners, changing their
Hearts: ordaining Sacraments, and Sacrifizes: and distributing among men
Graces, and supernatural Gifts.

The seventh is, Colos. 2.10 Ephesians. 1.22
the Grace of being a Head, Iac. 1.17.
for the good of the mystical Body, whose Head is Christ.

From hence it is, that this our Lord was the first, and principal, of all
the predestined, for whose respect our Lord predestined others, that he
might have many Companions in Glory: but especially, for that he might be,
(as the Apostle S. Romans 8.29
Paul says) the first borne of many Brethren, like, and conformable unto him
in the gifts of Grace, as they were in nature: and so he entered first before
all men into this Glory, and saw the divine Essence, and opened the Gates of
Heaven, that the rest might enter in to behold it.

Considering these 7. kinds of Graces, that our Savior Christ has; and every
one of them: I am to collect from them several Affections; sometimes blessing,
and praising the eternal Father, for the Gifts he gave to his Son, as he
was man: sometimes rejoicing at the benefits which this our Lord has, giving
him the Much good do it him, thereof: and sometimes beseeching him to imparte
unto me of what he has: for of his fulness all we have received: Joan.
1.16
and therefore with great Love I may say unto him:

O Son of the living God, Colloquie. Psalm. 44.3 Cant. 5.10. Zacha. 3.9
I rejoice to see thee so beautiful above all the Sons of men, white, and
red, elected among a thousand: O living, and corner stone, how sightly thou art
with these seven eyes of unspeakable splendor, put into thee by the hand of
thy Father! O Son of man, how well do these seven stars become thee, given
thee for thy Glory, Apoc. 1.16
and to imparte of their Light to the whole World? O Word made flesh full
of grace, and of Veritye, Joan. 1.14
seeing from this thy fulness men do receive one grace for another, every
man his: fill my Soul with this grace, that thereby I may be thankful unto
thee, and may merit the reward of thy Glory. Amen.

The Second Point.
SEcondly, I am to consider the Heroycall Acts of Virtue, which this most
sanctified Soul of our Savior Christ exercized in that first Instant toward
God our Lord: for as she clearly beheld the divine Essence with that
clearenesse that has been spoken of: and on the other side beheld the
Innumerable benefits, which without any merits of her own she had graciously
received: at the instant she very forcibly budded out Four excellent
Affections; like the Four Rivers that spring from Paradise: that is to say: a
most fervent Love of God: Thankefullnesse for so great Benefits: Humilliation
in his presence, Offer to obey him, Four Affections before-saide, a celestial
music of Four Voices, the eternal Word to whom it was united, as a master
of a Chapel guiding it therein.

O Diuino Word give to my Soul part of that Light which thou gave unto
thine, Colloquie.
and unite thyselfe therewith with the Union of Charity, that it may make thee
such other music as this: Incline my Heart to the lowest with Humillitye:
exalt it to the Highest with Thanksgiving: draw it out at length in the
Spirit with Love: and accord it in all it Works, with promptness of
Obedience, that it may always glorifye thee, and accomplish thy holy Will.
Amen.

These Four Affections, I am to exercise in this Consideration, pondering with
that Light which I have of Faith, the Infinite Bountye of God, and the
multitude of Benefits that he has done me, without any merit of mine.

The third Point.
THirdly, I will consider the most excellent Acts of Virtue, which our Lord
Christ exercised in that very Instant toward his neighbors. first, he
beheld the Sins of men, and the great Injuries they did unto God: how the
Devil was possessed of the World, and Hell was peopled with Souls: and all
this caused him terrible Pain, and Grief; partly to see the Father Injuried
whom he so much loved, and whose Glory he so much desired: partly to see
how men his Brethren, according to Humane nature were cast away, and
destroyed. And this Interior Dolor was the greatest that ever was, or
shallbee in this Life, there being in one, and the same Soul, extreme Joy
thorough the view of Almighty God, and extreme Sorrow thorough the view of
our Sins.

O Word Incarnate, Colloquie.
what a Dolor is this which possesses thee? If it be an Importunate thing to
join Music with Lamentation, Eccl. 22.6
why ioynest thou so great Joy with so great Sorrow! Hardely had thou
entered into the Womb of thy Mother, but that the zeal of the House of God
had eaten thee up. Psalm. 68.9
Cause, o^ Lord, that the like zeal may eat up me, tormenting myself with
Sorrow for having offended thee, and consuming in me all, that may be any
occasion to offend thee anewe. From hence I will collect how great an evil,
mortal Sin is; seeing that the Sin of other men was sufficient to cause so
extreme Sorrow, in a Soul so full of extreme Joy. And is there not much
more reason that I should be very sorrowful for mine own Sins, when as
Christ JESUS our Savior was so sorrowful for them? And he deferred not this
Sorrow to the end of his Life, but had it even in the first instant thereof,
that I should not defer Sorrowing, and doing Penance for my Sins, but
should, as soon as I fall into them, be heartily greiued.

Secondly, Psalm: Psalm. 39.7
The Sacrifice, and oblations of our Elders thou acceptedst not, neither were
their Holocaustes sufficient for the remedy of men: but seeing thou have given
me a body fit to be sacrifized, I offer myself thereunto with a good will:
Heb. 10.5 6
Ecce venio, vt faciam voluntatem tuam Deus. Behold me here, I came into the
World, in this, and in all to perform thy holy will, writing thy Law in the
midst of mine own Heart. O how pleasing to the eternal Father was this
offer, Heb. 10.10
and will of his Son, seeing thereby (as S. Paul says) we were all
sanctified, he meriting for us Grace, and Sanctification! In Thankefullnesse
for this generous Will, wherewith our Savior Christ offered himself to be my
Redeemer, I will offer unto him a Will to serve him so effectually, that
thereby he may dispose me, to receive that Sanctification which he gained
for me: and in Imitation of him I will say: Ecce venio vt faciam Voluntatem
tuam Deus. Colloquie.
Behold me here, o Lord, ready to accomplish thy Will: and thy holy Law
shallbee from hence forth ever more in the midst of my Heart. This I would
have done in the very first instant that I had use of Reason as thou did
in the very first instant of thy Life: Psalm. 76.11
but allbeeit I did it not then, I now say, Nunc coepi, Now I will begin to
serve thee, with a Resolution so to continue even unto Deat he.

The fourth Point.
FInally, Herod, and the Jews; and that thou be taken, whipped, crowned with
Thorns, and dye upon a Cross with great Dolor, and Contempt. Therefore
seeing thou love me, for my Love, and for the good of thy Brethren, Joan.
10.18. and 14.31.
accept these Afflictions. To this Will of the Father, which our Lord Christ
calls the Commandment, and precept of his Death, he readily answered,
offering himself with a prompt, and ready will to suffer all whatsoever: and
then was fullfilled that saying of S. Heb. 12.2
Paul: That abandoning the Joy of this Life, and contemplating the eternal
Joy of the other, he embraced the Cross, not regarding that it was very
Ignominious. Then also with an effectual Will he drank the bitter chalice
of his Passion: and was baptized with the Baptism of his Ignominies, Mar.
10.39.
and Dolours, perseuering (as he himself said) in the bitterness of this
Drink, and of this Baptism, all the days of his Life, until in the end
thereof he effectually drank it, accomplishing all that his Father had
ordained him.

But his Charity, Act. 21.13
for if S. Paul when the Prophet Agabus told him, that he was to be bound
Prisoner in Jerusalem, answered, that he was ready, not only to be bound,
but to dye also for the name of our Lord JESUS: how much more would our sweet
Lord JESUS, when his Father related unto him the Afflictions of his Life, and
Death, immediately answer, that he was prepared not only to suffer those
afflictions, but others also much greater for his Love.

And that I may perceive how much I am indebted to this our Lord, S. Paul: Gal
2.20
He that loved me, and delivered himself for me to Death, offering
himself thereunto for my Love.

O tender Babe, and valorous Gyaunt, Colloquie.
wherewith shall I repaye thee the Affection, with which thou this day offerest
thyselfe to run thy Carreere, Psalm. 18.6
accepting withal all those Afflictions, which in the course thereof, thou art
to endure? May the Angels praise thee for this singular favor that thou have
done unto men, and may my Soul glorifye thee for the Love that then thou
did bear me: for the which I offer myself, to suffer whatsoever shall
happen unto me in the Carreere of my Life, thou favoring me with thy grace,
that therein I may not fail.

The eleventh Meditation. Of the Journey which the eternal Word Incarnate
made in his Mothers Womb, to the House of Zacharias to sanctifye his
Forerunner S. John the Baptist.
The first Point.
FIrst, I will consider, Luc. 1.44
how the Word made flesh, being yet in the Womb of his blessed mother, with
the exceeding great desire he had to save men, presently fixed his eyes upon
John, who was in the Belly of S. Elizabeth, and was to be his Forerunner: and
seeing him to be in Original Sin, he was greiued thereat, and determined
with himself forthwith to free him from that miserye, and to sanctifye him,
taking possession of his Office of Redeemer which was given him in charge. And
to this end, he effectually inspired his mother, speedily to go visit her
Cousin, that he thereby might effect this his Work. Wherein I am to ponder,
First, John Baptist.

O Divine Word that made thyselfe man to deliver us from Sin, Colloquie.
and deriuedst to enact this office with such speed, Isa. 8.1.
that thou tookest, for thy Surname: Make speed, hasten, rob, and take
Spoils: seeing thy names are not emptye, but full, come Lord with speed to
free me from my Sins, make haste to sanctifye me with thy Grace: rob my
Heart for thy Service, and take it for the Spoil of thy Victory, that from
hence forth I may begin fervently to serve thee.

The Second Point.
SEcondly, I am to consider, how our Lord having power to sanctifye the Baptist
from the place where he was, would notwithstanding inspire his mother to
carrye him to the house of S. Elizabeth: and there to work this miraculous
sanctification for causes very admirable, and proffitable for our instruction.
First to give new Demonstrations of his Humillitye, and Charity. For as these
Virtues moved him to come down from Heaven, and to come into the World to
visit it, Luc. 1.79. Beda ibid.
and to draw it out of the Darkness, and Shadow of Death wheerein it
stood: so likewise they moved him to come from Nazareth to visit John, and to
draw him out of Sin: the greater coming to visit the lesser, to honor
him; and the Physician, the Sick to cure him.

The second cause was, John that was in Sin, and replenishing with the holy
Spirit his mother that was just: to the end that we Sinners might understand
that to obtain Pardon of our Sins, the blessed Virgin was to be our
Mediatrix: and that the Righteous might understand, that by her means they
were to obtain fulness of the holy Spirit, and of his grace, with the
virtues, and gifts that descend from Heaven; and that therefore all might
endeavor to love, and serve her, and to be much devoted unto her.

O sovereign VIRGIN, Colloquie.
seeing to day together with thy Son thou take possession of the office
given thee for our benefit, prosecute it this day with me obtaining for me
pardon of my Sins, and abundance of spiritual Craces. Amen.

The third cause was, Inspirations of our Savior Christ.
for that it is the propertye of our Savior Christ in entering into a Soul,
to inspire it with exercises of Virtue, and to move it zealously to aspire to
the Height of Perfection. Sometimes he inspireth it to exercise Prayer, and
Contemplation, and the other Actions of a contemplative Life: Other sometimes
to issue out of that retirement, and to exercize the works of the active Life
with their neighbors. And so in the instant that he entered into the Womb of
the blessed VIRGIN, he moved her to go up to the hill Country of Judea, to
exercize notable Works of Charity, Mercy, and Obedience: He might speak to
her Heart that of the Canticles: Cant. 2.14
Rise up, make haste my beloved, my Dove, my Beautiful, and come: O fruitful
Dove that have thy nest in the holes of the stone, and in the chinke of the
Wall, contemplating the Secrets of my Divinity, and Humanitye, and living
allwaies under my Protection, arize up in haste, issue out of this secret
place, and get up to the mountains of Judea, that there thou may confess,
and glorifye me with works of Charity to the good of those Souls that I
have created.

From hence I will collect, how it is likewise the Propertye of our Lord
Christ, when he enters into the righteous by the Communion of the most
blessed Sacrament of the Altar, to inspire into them the like exercizes of
Virtue, that they may clime to the perfection of both Lives Contemplative, and
Active, inspiring every one with what is most convenient for him. And if I
feel not in myself these inspirations when I communicate, it is thorough my
wicked Disposition, and thorough my over much slackenesse, whereby I make
myself unworthy of this favor. For the which I am to confound myself, and
to beseech him to use toward me his mercy, inspiring me effectually with
what may be agreeable to his holy Will.

The third Point.
THirdly, Perfect obedience to Gods Inspirations.
I am to consider the perfect Obedience of the sacred VIRGIN to this
inspiration, the which the Evangelist notes, saying: MARYE rising up, went
with speed unto the Hill-Countrey of Judea: first she attended no precept nor
express order, but as soon as she perceived that it was Gods pleasure that
she should visit her Cosen, this inspiration was sufficient to make her
perform it. For the perfectly Obedient fullfilleth whatsoever he
understands, to be most conformable to the Will of God, and of his Superior.

Secondly

Thirdly, she was very pure in her Intention, Ex D. Amb. l. 2. in Luca^.
and she went not (as S. Ambrose says) to the house of Elizabeth thorough
any Curiositye, or Doubt to prove if it were true what the Angel had said:
but rather because she was assured thereof, and would glorifye God in
beholding the Work that he had done.

Fourthly it was mixed with much Charity,

Lastly,

O Sovereign VIRGIN, Colloquie.
how full thou art of God, and how delighted to accomplish his Will! O how
well it befitteth thee in this Way to be the Litter of the true Solomon,
Cant. 3.9
builded with admirable Art to carry him from one part to another. The silver
Columns are thy Virtues; the Seat of Gold thy Contemplation: the ascent of
Purple thy Humillity, and Patience: and that in the midst, which is thy
Heart, is adorned with Charity: for within thee is God himself, who is all
Charity. And seeing all this was given thee, because of the Daughters of
Jerusalem, which are weak Souls, I beseech thee, o most pitiful mother,
obtain for me such another like Ornament that imitating thy Virtues, my Soul
may be the Litter of thy Son, in the which he may repose, and by which he
may be made known to the whole World. Amen.

The twelfth Meditation. Of what happened in the blessed VIRGINS Visitation of
S. Elizabeth.
The first Point.
FIrst, I will consider the entrance of the VIRGIN into the house of Elizabeth,
and the great Benefits that entered in with her. For the blessed Virgin as
being the most humble saluted her first, and the Word Incarnate which was in
her Womb, took the Words of his Mother, for an instrument to act marvelous
works in the Babe, that was in the Womb of Elizabeth. He cleansed him from
Original Sin, he justified him with his Grace, he filled him with the holy
Spirit, he hastened unto him the use of Reason, he made him his Prophet; he
gave him Light, and knowledge of the mysterye of the Incarnation, and he
communicated unto him so great Joy, that he leaped for pleasure in his mothers
womb, manifesting as well as he could the Delight that he took in the
coming, and Visitation of his Lord: and all this was in one moment, wherein I
am to ponder two things of great Consolation.

The first is, the Omnipotencye, Pro. 20.8
The king that sits in his Throne of Judgment, with his Countenance
disperseth all evil: for this king of kings seated in the Throne of the
Virgins womb, beheld with the eyes of mercy his Forerunner, and with this
only view in a moment he dissipated all the evil of Sin that he had. Upon
which I may build an assured Confidence that he will use mercy toward me,
remembering that saying of Ecclesiasticus: Eccl. 11.22.23.
Be confident my Son, for in the eyes of God it is an easy thing to remedy
the Poor.

O omnipotent king, Colloquie.
show toward me thy Omnipotencye, delivering me from my evil, and filling
me with thy good, that the greatenesse of thy mercies may be discovered in one
so unworthy of them. Give to me as to thy Praecursor, remission of my Sins,
Light and knowledge of thy Incarmatien, add Spiritual Alacritye in thy
service. Amen.

The second thing to be considered, is the efficacye of the Word of the
blessed VIRGIN, by being the mother of God; and how much she may be able to
obtain of her Son in a moment: seeing by her means so many benefits
together were suddenly heaped upon the Baptist, who was the first fruits of
our Savior Christ, and of his Redemption: and he by the mediation of his
mother, was willing to ripen this first fruit before his due time, to give us
Confidence that by her Intercession, we shallbe prevented, and aided by the
mercy of God. And therefore I am humbly to beseech this Sovereign Queen, to
use in my behalf this her great Power, obtaining for me somewhat of that
much, that by her mediation was given to this happy Forerunner.

The Second Point.
SEcondly, S. Elizabeth likewise was replenished with the holy Ghost,
allmighty God communicating unto her by means of this salutation, the light
and knowledge of this mysterye, and the gift of Prophecye. Whereby he
meruailously discovered four effects which these gifts caused in her, in the
which are resplendent four properties of the Interious Visitation of our
Savior Christ, and of the presence of the holy Ghost, when he replenisheth
Souls with his gifts. The Properties of the Interior Visitations of God.


First, S. Elizabeth with most great affection moved by the holy Ghost brake
forth into Praises of God, and of his blessed mother, saying with a loud
voice, Blessed art thou among Women, and blessed is the fruit of thy Womb.
As if she had said. True it was that the Angel said unto thee, that thou
art Blessed among women: to the which I add, that blessed is also the Son of
thy Womb: for he being blessed, thou also art blessed, because from him, as
from a fountain, proceed all celestial Benedictions. Whereby we may see,
that it is the Propertye of the holy Ghost to move us to glorifye Christ, and
his mother with great fervor of Spirit, for that such Praises are very
acceptable unto him.

Secondly, Whence is this to me, Luc. 1.43
that the mother of my Lord comes to visit me? As Soon as the voice of thy
Salutation sounded in my ears, Luc. 1.44
the Infant in my Womb did leap for Joy. Where I will ponder how it is also
the propertye of the holy Spirit to cause Humillity, and thanksgiving in the
midst of the favors that he does us, that they may be proffitable unto
us, and that his gifts may be secure, holding ourselves as unworthy thereof,
and giving Thanks for them to the Giver. And therefore in imitation of this
Saint, when our Lord God shall interiourly visit me, or when I shallbee to
receive him in the most blessed Sacrament. I am to revive in myself these two
knowledges of mine own baseness, and of his height; and beholding the
Original from whence so great a Good comes unto me, which is the mere
Bountye of God himself, with great astonishment I will say:

Whence is this to me that my Lord comes to visit me? to me so vile a
Slave! to me so ungrateful, Colloquie.
and wretched a Sinner? to me comes my Lord, who is a Lord of infinite
greatenesse, and majesty? to visit me, and to enter into my poor Cottage?
from whence to me so great a favor? Is it peradventure for my services, or
merits? or by my nature, or own industry: O blessed be the immense Charity
of God, that merely of his own infinite mercy daigneth to visit so base a
Creature.

Fourthly, S. Elizabeth confirmed the blessed VIRGIN in her Faith, and
Resolution, saying unto her: Blessed art thou that beleeuedst, Luc. 1.45
because doubltesse those things shallbee accomplished that were spoken unto
thee by our Lord: In the which words she discovered the sovereign gift of
Prophecye that she had received, knowing all that appertained to the VIRGIN,
as well that passed, which the Angel had said, as the present of being the
mother of God, and the accomplishment of that which was to come. Whereby we
see that it is the propertye of the holy Spirit, to inspire the righteous to
make use of his gifts to the benefit of their neighbors, confirming them in
Faith, and in the Love of God. In these Four marvelous affections, I will
endeavor to imitate S. Elizabeth, beseeching her to obtain for me of our Lord,
grace to that end. And lastly I will ponder, how this day was published the
most glorious name of the VIRGIN, which is the MOTHER OF GOD, which she heard
with great Humillitye, and Joy; and with it I am to salute her, and to give
her the Much good do it her of this name, praising him that gave it her.

The third Point.
VVheerein is Meditated the Canticle of Magnificat.
THe third point shallbee to consider what the VIRGIN answered having heard
the Words of S. Elizabeth: for she likewise was forthwith replenished with a
most high Spirit of Prophecye, and composed thereupon the sovereign Canticle
of Magnificat: concerning which we are to ponder, First: S. Elizabeth who
praised her, as commonly men use to do, in respect of showing themselves
grateful: but all her words she directed to God our Lord, teaching us the
manner, how we are to converse with men when they praise us: for the best, and
securest is to alter the Discourse, and to speak unto God, from whom proceed
those gifts, for which we are praised.

Secondly, I am to ponder, first is Prudence, and Respect: but the second is
Excess of Love, and Thankefullnesse, according to that of the Wiseman: Eccl.
43.33.
Yea that bless our Lord, exalt him all that you can, for he is greater then
all your praise. Matt. 12.34
So our blessed LADY the VIRGIN, as she was replenished with God, uttered
with her mouth this sovereign Canticle, full of Affections of God; which
Canticle has ten verses, and is as it were a Psalterion, or Harp of ten
strings, like to those, Psalm. 42.4. 91 4. and 143.9.
which David commands us to touch for to glorifye God: and therefore it
shall not be amiss to meditate all her Words, that we may know how
spiritually to rehearse them to the honor of the VIRGIN, joining to every
word, or Verse some holy Affection, or joy of the Virtues of this our Lady,
with the peticion, and colloquye belonging unto it.

My Soul does magnify our Lord.
In this first Verse the sacred VIRGIN teaches us the Spirit of praising God,
thinking highly, and magnificently of him, and magnifying that which is his, in
all that is possible: that is: his Bountye, and Mercy: his Wisdom, and
Charity, and the excellencye of his Government. And this not only with
corporal words, but with the Soul, and all her interior Faculties, inuiting
them with David to praise our Lord. Psalm. 102.1. and 103.1.33.
And she said not: My Soul did magnifye, or will magnifye, but does
magnifye, to signifye that her principal office, and perpetual occupation
was, to magnifye God, doing on Earth that which the Angels do in Heaven.

O that my Soul might always magnifye our Lord! Colloquie. Eccl. 43.30.
o Lord of infinite greatenesse, little can I magnifye thee with my praises: But
as I may, I praise, and magnifye thee, and confess that thou art greater then
I am able to say, or to think. O Sovereign VIRGIN, Psalm. 33.4
whose Soul always magnified our Lord, and like another David invited all
others to magnifye him, impetrate for me, that my Soul may likewise magnifye
him, occupying herself continually in singing his Greatenesses world without
end. Amen.

And my Spirit has rejoiced in God my Savior.
In these Words the B. VIRGIN discovers the manner of our rejoicing in God,
The manner of rejoicing in God.
nothing five Conditions of this Joy to make it pure, and perfect. For first,
Psalm. 83.3 and 15.9.
according to that of David: My Heart, and my Flesh reioiced in the living
God. Finally, David: My Soul shall rejoice in our Lord, Psalm. 34.9
and shallbee delighted in our Savior. Such was the Joy of the blessed
VIRGIN, who at this instant beheld our Savior whom she bare in her Womb,
and rapt with his exceeding Love, she said: My Spirit has reioiced in God my
Savior.

O my Soul, exalt thyselfe above thyselfe in Spirit like the VIRGIN, and
rejoice purely in Christ thy Savior, placing in him only all thy Alacritye.
Psalm. 36.4 Joan. 16.32.24. Matt. 25.21.23
If thou desire Joy, rejoice in God, and he shall fulfill the desires, and
petitions of thy heart, that thy joy may be full, and that none may deprive
thee of it, until at last thou may enter into the eternal joy of thy
Lord.

Because he has regarded the Humillity of his Handmaide.
In this Verse, and in those following, the B. VIRGIN declares ten sovereign
benefits, three special, and seven general: which are the principal causes,
and respects that she has to magnifye God, to rejoice in him, and to show
herself so thankful.

The first is, of us, to do us good. For allbeeit it is truth, that he sees
all things: yet he is not said to regard, nor make account of those which he
leaves in the abysme of nothing, or in the profunditye of their miserye, but
of those which he regards, to use toward them his great mercy. Pharisee.
Luc. 18.14.
Rather this Lowliness is to be the respect why to beseech allmighty God to
regard me with a good eye, and to do me great favors: Psa. 112 6
for his Condition, (as David says) is to behold the lowely things in
Heaven, and on Earth, and to do them great mercyes. Psalm. 30.8
And this the said David had experience of, saying of himself: Because God
regarded my Humillitye, and Lowelinesse he delivered my Soul from all her
miseries.

O highest God whose Habitation is in the highest Heavens, Colloquie. Psa.
112.5.
behold the lowelinesse of this thy vile Slave, and use toward him thy
accustomed mercy, raising this beggar from the Dust, and this poor wretched
one from the Dunghill, to place him with Princes, and to sanctifye him as well
as they. Amen.

Behold from henceforth all generations shall call me blessed.
And this is the second respect that the B.

O Sovereign VIRGIN, Colloquie.
I for my part am willing to fulfill this prophecye of thine, and to be one
of those that call thee blessed. Luc. 11.28
Thou art blessed (as thy Cousin said) because thou beleiuedst: and thou art
blessed for bearing our Savior in thy Womb: but much more blessed for hearing
his Word, and keeping it. Thou art blessed likewise with those eight
Beatitudes preached by thy Son our Savior upon the Mount. Thou art poor in
spirit, Matt. 5.3
and thine is the kingdom of Heaven. Thou art meek, and possesses the Land
of the Living. Thou mournedst for the Sins of the World, and therefore art
comforted. Thou did hunger, and thirst after Justice, therefore now thou art
filled. Thou art merciful, and obtainedst mercy. Thou art a peacemaker, and
therefore for thy excellencye, thou art the Daughter of God. Thou art clean of
Heart, and now thou art clearly beholding God. Thou sufferedst persecution for
Justice, and now the kingdom of Heaven is thine, and thou art the supreme
Queen of all the Inhabitants thereof. O sovereign Queen, I rejoice that
thou art blessed for so many respects. O that all the nations of the World
were converted to thy Son, and might all with great Faith call thee
blessed, that by thy mediation they might all come to be blessed, imitating
here on Earth thy life, and enjoying afterward thy Glory in Heaven.

From hence I will likewise collect, what a great motive it is to rejoice in
God, to have an assured Hope to be blessed. For the which our Savior Christ
said to his Disciples, Luc. 10.20.
Rejoice not in this that the Spirits (to wit the Devils) are subject unto
you, but rejoice in this that your names are written in Heaven. Romans 12.12
And S. Paul says, that we should rejoice in Hope to obtain the
blessedness that is promised us.

Because he that is mighty has done great things to me, and holy is his name.
This is the third respect the blessed VIRGIN alleges to glorifye God, that
God had wrought in her, and the great benefits he had done her, from the
instant of her Conception until then: especially that great miracle of being
a VIRGIN, and a MOTHER, and that not any mother whatsoever, but the mother of
God himself: admiring at all which greatenesses, she praised God for them,
attributing them to his Omnipotencye, and to the Holiness of his name: for
with his Omnipotencye he wrought them, and with his Holiness he would enact
them, that thoroughout all Ages, his name might be sanctified, and glorified.
And in saying that God did great things, to her, she gives likewise to
understand, that he magnified her in those things, that magnifye men before
God, which is, Sanctitye, and Caelestiall gifts: for the Son being great,
the mother was likewise to be magnifyed. Whereby it appears, that it is not
contrary to Humillitye to acknowledge in ourselves the gifts of God: rather
(as S. 1 Cor. 2.10.
Paul says) the divine Spirit itself discovers them unto us, that we may
be thankful for them, attributing them not to our own merits, but to the
power, and Sanctitye of God, making a connection of these two Attributes, as did
the four holy Beasts which gave Glory to God, saying: Holy, Apoc. 4.8
Holy, Holy, Lord God omnipotent, which was, which is, and which shall come.

And his mercy from Generation to Generations, to them that fear him.
This is the fourth respect why the blessed VIRGIN magnifieth God, benefits
received, but for many other which she hops to receive: and not only for her
own benefits, but also for those which all the nations of the world do
receive, rejoicing that the Mercy of God is Continual, Infinite, and
Sempiternall, and extends itself to all those that serve, and fear him, of
what nation soever they be. For it is the propertye of holy men, when they
acknowledge the favors that God has done them, to expect of his mercy that
he will do them many others, as S. Paul said: 2 Cor. 1.10.
God has delivered, and does deliver us out of so great dangers, in whom we
hope that he, will yet also deliver us. It is likewise the propertye of holy
Persons, to think that the Sun of Justice rizeth not upon their houses only,
but to conceive highly of his mercy, and that he extends himself to many
others, and thoroughout all Ages: for the which they are thankful unto God,
taking the general benefit of all, as their own in particular, and rejoicing
to have a God so merciful, that he denies his mercy to none that fear him,
as David confesses in the 102 Psalm, Psalm. 102.
wheerein he does nothing else but glorifye God for these two respects of
mercy toward himself, and toward the rest of the Just.

He has showed might in his Arm.
The fifth respect to glorifye God, is, VIRGIN recorded in her memory, calling
to her remembrance the Creation of the World, the Conservation, and Government
thereof with so great, and so admirable Providence: the prodigious things that
he did delivering his People out of Egypt, and carrying them thorough the
desert unto the Land of promise, with all the other things that the Scripture
reports: and principally she called to mind this work of the Incarnation,
wheerein God showed his power, and the might of his Arm. For all these
regardes she magnified God, declaring in one word that which David did at
large, Psalm. 135.
recounting all these potent works of God very particularly.

Besides this, in this Verse, NOT^.
and in the following, the VIRGIN not only recounteth what God has done, but
what he uses, and accustometh to do conformable to his Goodness: and
therefore she glorifieth him, for that with his Arm he uses to work
powerfully, and to do powerful Actions, when, and how he will, and with whom
he will; and as he did them in times past, he does them at this present, and
will do them in time to come. All which may be a great motive to make me to
rejoice in God, trusting that in me also he will do powerful things with the
might of his Arm.

He has dispersed the proud in the conceit of their Heart.
The sixth respect to glorifye God is, works of his Mercy, but also what he
has showed in the Works of his Justice, chastising the proud, defeating
their inventions, and the imaginations of their heart. This the VIRGIN reuolued
in her memory, recording how our Lord God had defeated the plottings of proud
Lucifer who had said: Isa. 14.13
I will ascend up in to Heaven, I will exalt my throne above the Stars of
God, and will be like unto the most High. As also the plots of those proud
ones that would have builded the tower of Babel: Genesis 11.5 Exodus 10. and 11.
Dan. 4.28
and the punishments that he inflicted upon Pharao, upon Nabuchodonosor, and
other such proud ones. And for all these regardes she likewise magnified God,
seeing for them he is worthy to be praised, as did our Savior Christ when he
said: Matt. 11.25
I confess to thee, o Father, Lord of Heaven, and Earth, because thou have
hid these things from the wise, and prudent, and have revealed them to little
ones.

He has deposed the mighty from their seat, and has exalted the humble. The
hungrye he has filled with good things, and the rich he has sent away emptye.
These two Verses two other respects of praising God the proud Angels, and
in their place exalted humble men: and from the Throne of this World he cast
the proud Prince Satan who had tirannized over it, and in his place exalted
Christ the master of Humillitye: Dan. 2.34
who being little as a Stone descended from Heaven without hands, or work of
men, ouerthrewe the Statue which signified the Four monarchies of the World,
and by his Humillity increased till he came to be a great mountain. And this
custom he has always observed, Job 5.11. and 40.6. and seq.
as it is said in the book of Job, fullfilling that which is written. That he
that exalts himself shallbee humbled: and he that humbles himself shallbee
exalted. And in like manner the poor, and hungrye that are in necessitye,
which hunger, and thirst after righteousness, he replenisheth with spiritual
benefits fullfilling their desiers: and contrarily the rich that think they
have abundance, and that they have no necessity of others, he sends awny
emptye; according to that of the Prophet David: The rich were hungrye, and in
want, Psa. 33.11
but those which seek God, shall have abundance of all good things.

O my Soul magnifye thy Lord for this most noble condition that he shows,
Colloquie.
in favoring so much the humble, and hungrye of the Earth. O my Spirit,
rejoice in God thy Savior, Psalm. 102.4.5.
for that he crowns thee with mercyes, and fills thy desire with
innumerable benefits. Prize thyselfe for being lowely, hungry, and full of
need, that God may exalt thee, fill thee, and replenish thy Desiers: but
tremble to be proud, rich, and disdainefull, least he cast thee out of thy
seat, and leave thee emptye of his Grace.

He has received Israel his Child, being mindful of his Mercy, as he
spoke to our fathers, to Abraham, and his seed for ever.
These two Verses two most powerful respects One is, the Care, and Providence
that he has to provide for those whom he has taken to his charge, as for
his Children, and Domesticalls, coming personally to redeem them. And
allbeeit it seems that for a time, he forgets them: yet when he sees time
he is mindful of his mercy, and remedyeth them, as he was mindful of
Israel, and of the whole world, coming to remedy it when he made himself
man. The other respect is, the great fidelitye that God has in accomplishing
the promises he had made to our fathers, fullfilling them faithefully to all
their seed for ever unto the end of the world: As he fullfilled his Word to
Abraham, and to David which he gave them, that he would come to remedy them,
and to give to their Children, life, and Salvation, world without end. These
two considerations inflamed the Soul of the VIRGIN to magnifye God, and her
Spirit to rejoice in God her Savior: and with these, my Soul, and my Spirit
are to be inkindeled with the like affections, seeing every day, I behold
this Providence that God has of his Children, and with what faithfulness he
accomplisheth complisheth what he promised to the Apostles our Fathers, not
forgetting the faithful which are their seed unto the end of the world.

And these are the ten causes, and respects alleged in this Canticle by the
blessed VIRGIN to glorifye God, inspired thereunto by the eternal Word
Incarnate whom she bare in her Womb: of the which I may make another
Psalter, and Harp of ten strings to the same end, praising, and glorifying
God, sometimes for one respect, and sometimes for another, which because I
cannot do as I ought, I am humbly to beseech the Incarnate Word to teach
me, as he taught his blessed mother: and her, to obtain it me, for the glory
of her Son. Amen.

The fourth Point.
FInally, three months. Pondering the great good she might do to all that
dwelled there, with her Discourses, and with her examples of Modestye,
Humillitye, and Charity: for if she did so much at her first entrance, it is
to be believed, that in those three months she would augment what she then
did, especially toward S. Elizabeth, discoursing of these mysteries: and both
of them exhorting one another to Prayer, and Conversation with God, and to
diverse Exercises of Virtue. For, if because the Arc of the Testament was
three months in the house of Obed-enlom, God filled him, 2 Reg. 6.11.
and all his, with so great benefits, that David with an holy Envy desired to
draw the Arc to his own house, that God might cast upon it his benedictions:
how much more are we to believe, that this divine Arc of the new Testament,
within the which was Christ himself, having remained about three months in
this house, would fill it with a thousand benedictions? And if I with a lively
Faith could understand them, I would presently be desirous to draw it to my
house, and that the Devotion to this Sovereign LADY should dwell in my Soul,
not only three months, but all my whole life, that she might replenish me
with all spiritual Benedictions. But it is not without a mysterye, S. John,
and to his mother, yet would not heal his Father Zacharias, nor dispense with
the Sentence pronounced by the Angel, that he should be dumb until the
birth of the Child: for God is just, and this was convenient, to observe the
order of his Justice: and also he reserved this his mercy for another time
more convenient. From whence I will learn to reverence the secret Judgments
of God, to humble myself, and to pass over his Devises, expecting the
convenient time of his visitation, seeing there is no day that comes not at
last, and what this day he granted to S. Elizabeth, he gave afterward more
largely to Zacharias.

The thirtenth Meditation. Of the birth of S. John the forerunner of our
Savior Christ.
The first Point.
FIrst, For the feast of S. John Baptist. Luc. 1.11.
I will consider what happened before the Conception of this Saint: for God
having elected him for his forerunner, was willing to honor him, to
demonstrate in him the greatness of his mercy, and the height of the office
that he gave him in charge, all for the glory of Christ JESUS whose
forerunner he was. As first he would that he should be miraculously conceived
of barren Parents, S. Gregory says, Lib. 1. dial. c. 5.
speaking of the birth of the Patriarch Isaac. Whereby he moves us to have
great Affection, and Confidence in Prayer, though it be concerning things that
seem difficult, seeing for all it is available. S. Gabriel, who annunciated
that of his Son: and with the self same spirit of prompt Obedience, the
Angel came to declare both the one, and the other, because it was God that
commanded it. Tob. 5.5.
In the same manner that S. Raphael came to serve Tobias in very base things,
with no less pleasure then if God had commanded him things of great height:
for all the Angels place their Glory in accomplishing the will of God.

Then will I ponder what Greatenesses S. Gabriel spoke of the Child, that he
might be esteemed by all, and to instruct his Father in the manner of his
education for so high an office. The first was, John, which is as much to say
as Crace, to signifye that he should be an absolute Portraiture of Grace, in
whom should be shown the riches of Gods grace: for he truly found grace
before God, who without any merits of his, elected and called him, Isa. 49.13
and was mindful of his name even from the Womb of his mother. The second,
third, Nazareth, wholely dedicated to the service of God. And for that the
Divine promises are not emptye but full, giving a sufficient portion for all
that is promised, he adds the fourth excellencye, fifth that he should go
before our Lord, Precursor with the zealous spirit of Elias, converting to God
many Israelites, and preparing him a People perfectly industriated to receive
the new Law that he was to teach.

So that, according to the Sentence of the Angel, this Child should be
perfect in all manner of perfection, toward God, toward himself, and
toward his neighbors. For toward God, he should be great in the gifts of
his Grace; toward himself rigorous in the works of mortification, and
Penance: and toward his neighbors he should be zealous in seeking their
Salvation, not contenting himself to be perfect, but endeavoring that all might
be perfect, and ordaining all this to the glory of our Lord Christ. This
pattern of perfection (which is the same that is taught us by the Prophet
Micheas) I am to set before my eyes for imitation. Mich. 6.8. etc.
And of the Greatenesses that God so much esteems, I am to pretend for
myself those which are convenient for my Estate, beseeching his divine
majesty to give me them for the Love he bare to this Precursor, to whom so
liberally he granted them.

The Second Point.
SEcondly, Luc. 1.39.
are to be considered the favors that our Lord did to this holy Babe, being
in the womb of his mother in the sixth mo^neth of his Conception, the Word
Incarnate himself coming in the Womb of his mother to visit him, and to
sanctify him, as is declared in the precedent meditation, from the which we
may recollect three excellencyes of this Saint.

First, S. John was the first fruits of all the Saints that our Savior made
after his Incarnation: and therefore he sanctified him with great excellencye,
giving him great Sanctitye, and many graces given gratis after a very perfect
manner, granting him the use of reason, and free will: Illuminating his
Understanding to know his Incarnation, and Inflaming his will with fervent
affections of Admiration, and Love, and with Jubilees, and rejoicings in the
holy Spirit. The second excellencye was, Romans 11.29 In Luc. 1.
(as S. Paul says) are without repentance; it is to be believed (as says S.
Ambrose) that he took not from him the use of reason that he had granted him:
and consequently, that whereas the blessed VIRGIN those three months that she
was in the house of Zacharias, aided S. Elizabeth to grow in all Virtue: so
the Child JESUS that was in the womb of the VIRGIN, aided the Child John who
was in the womb of Elizabeth, to grow up in that holiness, that he had
granted him, prosecuting it with new acts of his freewill, inflamed with
divine grace by the holy Spirit, of whom he was full. third excellencye was
(as holy men report) that in respect of the Child John, Ambr. and Bed. in Luc.
God did so many favors to his mother, that he filled her with the holy Ghost,
and with the Spirit of Prophecye, to give us to understand how much he
esteems this Child, and what good he will do us for his sake. For the which
I am to procure great Love to this forerunner, rejoicing at the favors that
he received, and giving thanks to God that gave them him; and beseeching him
to be an Intercessor for me, that I may have some part in them.

The third Point.
THirdly, I am to consider the most special things that happened in the birth
of S. John. The first was, Luc. 1.59
against the will of their kindred, said his name should be John, which is as
much to say, as Grace: to signifye, that whereas this Child by Circumcision,
was laden with the heavy burden of the old Law, Luc. 16.16 Lex, and
Prophetae vsque ad Ioannem, ex eo regnum Dei euangelizatur.
God gave him most abundant Grace to bear it, and to be after a sort the
beginning of the new Law, which was the Law of Grace, of which some part
fell to his Lot, and in which, this Grace is granted unto all. And therefore I
will beseech our Lord, that seeing he has imposed upon me the burden of his
Law, he will grant me abundance of his grace to fulfill it.

The second miracle was, Luc. 1.64.
to restore unto his father Zacharias his specche, whom he forthwith filled
with the holy Spirit, giving him the spirit of Prophecye, wherewith he composed
the Canticle of Benedictus Dominus Deus Israel, beginning with the praises of
God, who showed himself so liberal in coming to visit us, and then with the
praises of his Forerunner. For it is the propertye of the divine Spirit to
inspire praises of God for his benefits: and of his Saints for the gifts
that he has given them. But the excellencye of this Child, and the much that
God loves him is most resplendent, this being granted to his Father, as soon
as he had written in a table the name of John, that we may perceive the grace
and favor that he will do for his respect to those, that with devotion shall
worship his holy name.

O glorious Child, Colloquie.
I rejoice that thou art so beloved of our Lord, and seeing thou according to
thy name, art so full of Grace, obtain for me of our Lord, that I may be
replenished therewith, that I may perpetually serve him, and in thy Company
may enjoy him world without end. Amen.

The third that happened, Luc. 1.14.65.


The last, and most glorious is, Evangelist says in the beginning of his
Life, Luc. 1.68
that the hand of our Lord was with him, that is, that his Omnipotencye
favored him, and wrought for him great things, and moved, and directed him in
all his ways, and protected him in all his necessities: for the which the
Church applies unto him that of the holy Prophet Isaias: Cap. 49.
Our Lord has called me from the womb from the belly of my mother he has
been mindful of my name; he has protected me in the shadow of his hand,
and has put me as a chosen arrowe, in his quiver he has hidden me.

O happy Arrowe, Colloquie.
that mouedst not by thine own impulsion, but by the impulsion of the
all-mightye. O selected arrowe, directed by the holy Spirit to great things,
never leaving thee out of his powerful hand. O hand of the Allmighty that
mouedst thy Forerunner, move me with thy impulsion to fulfill thy holy Will:
and be ever assistant unto me, for thou know that without thee, I am able
to do nothing.

The fourtenth Meditation. Of what happened when S. Matt. 1.18
Joseph would have forsaken the Virgin seeing her with Child: and of the
revelation made unto him by the Angel concerning this mysterye.
The first Point.
FOr the foundation of this Meditation, Of the sanctitye of S. Joseph.
I am to consider the great Sanctitye of S. Ioseth, and the Virtues, and
Graces granted him by our Lord, for being the worthy Spouse of his mother,
and his worthy Foster-father, so that he should be held for his Father, Luc.
2.48.
and was so indeed, as concerning the office of educating, and sustaining him.
For as our Lord filled with grace, and with the holy Spirit, the Baptist, and
the Apostles with that abundance that was convenient to exercize worthily the
Offices that he incharged them: so also would he replenish S. Joseph with most
excellent gifts, and graces, with the which he might fulfill those
ministeries that he recommended unto him, and he so skillfully negotiated with
the gifts received, that every day he increased them, and was therefore
called Joseph, Genesis 49.22.
which is to say, Accrescens, Increasing, or he that increases.

First, Abraham: more Patience in Afflictions then Jacob: more Chastitye then
his Son Joseph: more familiar Conversation with God then Moses: more
Charity toward the People the ^amuel: and more Humillitye, and Meekness
then David. In these, and other Virtues he was resplendent, and daily augmented
them, that being fullfilled in him, that was spoken by the Prophet David:
Blessed is the man whose help is from thee; Psa. 83.6.
for with thy favor he has disposed ascensions in his Heart, ascending from
one Virtue to another, until he see the God, of Gods in Sion.

Especially this happy Saint increased mounting that spiritual Ladder, two
Seraphins provoking one another to fly with their wings, and to glorifye the
Holy of Holyes in their Prayer. Isa. 6.3.
And to do this with more liberty of Spirit, by Inspiration of the holy
Ghost, he chose to observe perpetual Chastity, 1 Cor. 7.35.
which (as S. Paul says remoueth the impediments of Prayer: and therein he
proceeded so far, that by special favor he felt no evil motion, though he
conuersed with a Virgin exceeding beautiful, but withal so admirably chaste,
that merely to behold her, inflamed one with desire of Chastitye. And in this
very Action, he discovered his great Love to allmighty God, for whose sake he
renounced the pleasures of matrimonye, accepting the burden of that estate,
without the delights thereof. With these Virtues he joined other, whereof we
shall by and by speak, in the which I am to endeavor to imitate him,
beseeching him to be my advocate unto his Spouse, and Christ JESUS our Savior;
for doubtless he may prevail much with them both, for the great services that
he did them.

O glorious Patriarch, Colloquie. Genesis 49.26.
whose beautye the Hierarchies of Heaven do admire, beseech the Desired of
the eternal Hills, who powered forth upon thy Head his copious benediction,
that he will likewise power it forth upon mine, that in imitation of thee I may
increase in good works, and augment in Virtues, perseuering with Constancye to
the gaining of the everlasting Crown. Amen.

The Second Point.
AFter that the blessed VIRGIN came from the house of Zacharias, her Husband
seeing her with Child, and not knowing the cause, felt a great affliction:
but as he was a just man, he would not carrye her to his own house, neither
yet would he defame her, but abandon her secretly.

Upon this Veritye, I am to consider the secret Judgments of God, in not
revealing this mysterye to S. Joseph, as he revealed it to Zacharias, and to S.
Elizabeth, whose end was, hereupon to take occasion to exercize the VIRGIN,
and her Spouse. For S. Joseph perceiving his Wife to be with Child, S. August.
S. Chryso. and alij.
might without any sin (as many Saints say) have judged that she was an
Adulteress, or doubt of a thing that was to him so new, and so strange. And
this afflicted him much, it being a case so much to his dishonor: but much
greater was the Affliction of his Spouse, from whom this could not be hidden,
it being a great Infamye for a Virgin so pure to be held by her own Husband
for an Adulteress, and to see herself therefore at the point of being
abandoned. All this our Lord disposed of, for the great good that arizeth
from these Afflictions, and Humilliations: by the which he pretended to perfect
these two notable Saints, and to dispose them to greater things. For as the
blessed VIRGIN had received great favors in the Annunciation of the Angel S.
Gabriel, and in the house of Elizabeth, our Lord God was willing that she
should suffer this Infamye, and Humilliation, to exercize her in greater
Humillitye, and to dispose her for those favors which soon after she was to
receive in the City of Bethleem: for Humilliation is the evening of
Exaliation, Ex D. Ber. ser. 34. in Cant.
and Affliction is the Vigill of a great feast of Consolations. And
peradventure for this cause the holy Church sings the Cospell of this
mysterye on the Vigill of the Natiuitye: and for the same reason God exercized
S. Joseph to receive the revelation of so high a mysterye, and that he might be
his sufficient witness.

From hence I will collect, that allbeeit one be very holy, and converse
always with holy persons, and employ himself in holy works, yet in this
life he shall not fail of Humilliations, and Afflictions, caused sometimes
even by those holy things wheerein he conuerseth. For the life of man is a
warfare: and the righteous man ought to be prepared for temptation. Job. 7.1.
Eccl. 2.1.
I am rather to hold Afflictions from God as a favor, especially when they
happen without any fault of mine: and much more when they happen in a case that
deserves honor: as the blessed VIRGIN for that which was most excellent in
her, came to suffer this Humilliation, which likewise her Son did afterward
suffer. Encouraged with these examples, I will with the Prophet David say to
our Lord: Psalm. 25.1 Colloquie.
Prove me, o Lord, and tempt me, burn my reins, and my heart, because thy
mercy is before mine eyes, and I am glad in thy Truth. Which is to say:
Exercize me in diverse temptations, and Afflictions of body, and Soul, for I
am assured of thy mercy, and of thy faithfulness, that thou willt measure
them according to my strength, and willt convert them into the augmentation of
new Gifts.

The third Point.
THen will I consider the excellent Virtues, which upon this new Occasion, and
proof were discovered, and exercized by these two excellent Saints, for our
imitation: seeing for this end also our Savior permitted those Afflictions
which they suffered.

First S. Joseph demonstrated great Patience, and Prudence: Patience he
demonstrated in suffering this Injurye with silence, without seeking to be
revenged of his Wife by Justice, or complaining of her to her parents, and
kindred^ and without murmuring at her, or speaking to her Injurious words:
rather as a Just man that contented not himself with what only was lawful, he
sought what was most perfect, resolving himself to be silent, and to suffer
his pain within himself. He demonstrated Prudence in seeking, and finding a
means how on the one side to preserve the honor of his Wife, and on the other
side not to bring to his house her, whom he suspected to be an Adulteress;
nor giving her a secret bill of divorce, which was lawful in the old Law:
nor with some good occasion absenting himself from her. And likewise he
demonstrated Prudence in not doing this rashly, or on a sudden, without first
meditating, and considering it well, as may be collected from these words,
Matt. 1.20
Haec autem eo cogitante, But as he was thus thinking, for he had a great
scruple to inhabit with her, that seemed an Adulteress, and he had likewise
as great a scruple to abandon her, that seemed a Saint. With this
Consideration, I am to confound myself for my small Patience in Affronts; for
my much Indignation against those, that do me Injurye; and for the Facillitye
wherewith I murmr at, and defame my neighbors, and discover their secret
faults: and for that Furye with the which suddenly, and without deliberation,
I cast myself into all this. And in this manner confounded, I will beseech
our Lord thorough the merits of this Saint, to aid me to imitate his notable
example.

But the blessed VIRGIN, four very excellent ones, proper to those that are
most perfect in such cases; to wit: rare Humillitye, and Silence: great
Confidence in Gods providence, and continual Prayer. Thorough Humillitye she
was silent, not desiring to manifest the secret mysteries of God, though her
great honor might ensue thereof, nor consenting that S. Elizabeth, or
Zacharias should discover them. And allbeeit it is very ordinary among good
married folk, to communicate their secrets one to another, yet she communicated
not this to S. Joseph, all though she conjectured what might happen, if her
husband were ignorant thereof. Thorough Humillitye likewise she was silent,
when she saw herself disgraced in the opinion of her Husband, not seeking to
excuse herself, nor to stand upon her honor, neither to allege sufficient
witness: but absolutely with great Confidence casting herself into the
divine Providence, and putting her Honor into the hands of God, she made
continual prayer to his majesty, that he would be pleased to remedy that
Ignominye, in such sort as should to him seem most convenient. With this
example I will likewise confound myself for that pride, and vain boasting of
mine, wherewith I publish whatsoever may honor me: and for that perverseness
wherewith I excuse my faults, standing vainly upon my Puntillos of Honor:
and for my little confidence in God, and less recourse unto Prayer. To this
purpose I am to imagine that God speaks unto me that of Ezechiel: Ezech.
43.20. D. Greg. lib. 24. moral. c. 6
Son of man show to the house of Israel the temple, and let them be
confounded, at their iniquities: and let them measure the frame, and be
ashamed of all things that they have done. O my Soul behold this living
Temple of God the blessed VIRGIN, contemplating the marvelous virtues
wherewith she is adorned, that thou may be confounded at those vices,
whereinto thou have fallen: measure her marvelous frame, pondering the
excellencye, and harmonye of her works, that thou may be ashamed of the
baseness, and discorder of thine.

O Temple of the Word Incarnate, Colloquie.
beseech this great God, whom thou carriest in thy Womb, to adorn me with
such Virtues, that I may be a worthy Temple, wheerein he may inhabit by his
Grace. O my Soul, Matt. 13.21.
consider that the just ought to be like a grain of mustard seed, which when
it is ground, discovers the heat, and force that it has: therefore if God
be pleased to grind thee with Afflictions, animate thyselfe fervently to
exercize these Virtues.

The fourth Point.
WHile S. Mat. 1.20
Joseph was thus thinking, behold the Angel of our Lord appeared to him in
sleep, saying: Joseph Son of David fear not to take MARAE thy Wife: for
that which is borne in her, is not by the work of man, but of the holy Ghost.
And she shall bring forth a Son, and thou shallt call his name JESUS: for he
shall save his People from their sins.

Herein is to be considered the fidellitye of the Divine Providence, S. Joseph
could not conceive the cause of that being with Child, he sent an Angel
after a very sweet manner to reveal it unto him: for calling him by his
proper name Joseph, he adds, Son of David, to reduce to his memory, that to
David was made the promise of the Messiah, that he should descend from him. He
says to him, Fear not, to take from him both Scruple, and Anguish; which is
the propertye of good Angels. he says, that the VIRGIN had conceived by the
Holy Ghost, to take from him all suspicion, and to clear the Honor of our
LADY. And wholely to convert his mourning into Joy, he adds that she shall
bring farth a Son, of whom he must have as tender a care, as if he were his
own: and that to him it should belong to give him his name, which should be
JESUS, which is as much to say, as Savior for that he was to be the Savior of
the World. And all this was revealed unto him with so great Illumination,
that forthwith he gave entire credit thereunto.

From hence I will ascend to ponder the alacritye of S. Joseph at the hearing
of these news, that being fullfilled in him that is written in Job: Job 11.17.
When thou shall think thyselfe consumed thou shall rise like the day star.
O how full of Content was he to see himself freed from his suspicion! How
ashamed that he had admitted it, though it were ignorantly, and without any
fault of his! How warye afterward not to judge evil of any body! How
thankful to God, for having given him a Spouse so Holy, and of so great
Dignitye, and for committing to his charge the care of his only begotten Son!
And how joyful to see, that now was the time come of the Redemption of the
World!

I will likewise ponder the great Joy of the blessed VIRGIN to see her Husband
so fall of quiet, Oseas: I will put her in the valley of Achor, that is, of
Affliction, Oseae ^ 15
to confirm her a new in hope, and she shall renew her Songs to see herself
free from her pains.

I give thee humble thanks, Colloquie.
o eternal God, for the great care thou had of these two glorious Saints,
Oseae 2.15
turning for them, as thou art wont, the valley of Achor into the food, and
augmentation of their Spirit. By their merits I beseech thee, to make me
worthy to enjoy the fruit of thy fatherly Providence, relying thereupon with
great securitye in the midst of my Afflictions, seeing it is most certain,
that thou in thy good time wilt come to remedy them.

The fifth Point.
Joseph obeying the commandment of the Angel, Matt. 1.24
forthwith arose, and carried the VIRGIN to his house, and lived with her most
chastely, until the birth of her Son, and much more afterward. Wherein I
am to consider, not so much the obedience of S. Joseph (for it was not much to
carrye to his house so excellent a woman) as the manner thereof: that is, with
what Reverence he carried her, speaking to her some words like to those of S.
Luc. 1.43.
Elizabeth; Whence is this to me, that the mother of my Lord enters into my
house! O how great was his Love, and Affection to our blessed LADY! how
careful was he of her! what holy discourses were between them two! what more
then Angelical Puritye of Life, and what conformitye of wills! how subject,
and obedient was the VIRGIN to S. Joseph, as to her head! how did she reveal
unto him the particularities, of what the Angel had declared unto her in the
Annunciation, and what had passed in the house of Zacharias! for now was the
time come that she might speak, to inform him of the mysterye, to the
honor, and glory of him that had wrought it.

O happy Saint, Colloquie.
to whose lot it fell to have so good company! O happy is that Soul that
serves them, and learneth of them their obedience, and Charity! O Seraphins
of the Earth, Isa. 6.2.
as pure as those of Heaven, who with your wings fly lightly to accomplish the
will of God, inflame my Heart with the Love of this our Lord, that I also may
serve him with the like Obedience, that both of you had: and may love all my
Brethren with that pureness of Charity wherewith you loved one another.

The fiftenth Meditation. Of the expectation of our blessed LADIES deliuerye:
and of the preparation for the birth of our Savior Christ.
FOr that in Spain eight days before the birth of our Savior Christ we
celebrate the feast of the Expectation of our B. LADIES deliuerye, I insert
here this meditation for that day, and the days ensuing till the natiuitye:
in which whee are to consider the lively desiers that three persons had of this
sovereign Deliuerye, and Birth: that is to say: the Child, the VIRGIN, and S.
Joseph in whom are represented the faithful, that firmly believe this
mysterye, and in their imitation desire to prepare themselves worthily to
celebrate it.

The first Point.
FIrst, I am to consider the most fervent desire that our Lord JESUS Christ
had, being in the womb of his mother, to perfect, and bring to end the
business of our Redemption; and consequently to be borne in the World, to
frame all things according to the will of his Father. For even from his mothers
belly that Sentence was true, that afterward he uttered: I am to be baptized
with a bapt^me, Luc. 12.50
o how am ^ straitened until it be dispatched? For howsoever his body was
pressed, and straitened in that strait Womb of his mother, his heart was
much more pressed, and straitened with the force of this vehement desire: for
the which I ought to give him infinite thanks, and to be correspondent unto
him, with such another hearty desire truly to serve him. But notwithstanding
this desire, he would not be borne before the nine months, which is the time
wherein commonly all other Children are borne. First, to conform himself unto
all, even months, nor at the eight, but at the wine months complete.
Secondly, fortye days in the Desert, before he mani^^^ed himself to the
World by his Preaching: ^^^uising us herein, how we ought to recollect
^urselues, dedicating some time to retired prayer, and to be vacant to God
only, before we issue out in public, and begin any great enterprise: as
likewise how we should recollect ourselves to celebrate with Devotion his holy
natiuitye.

The Second Point.
SEcondly, I will consider the fervent desiers of the most sacred VIRGIN to see
her Son borne, and that now was arrived the happy hour of his natiuitye.
First, that she might know face to face him, that was not only her Son, but
the Son also of the everliving God; to behold that sacred Humanitye that he
had taken from her flesh, and to enjoy his excellent Beautye.

Secondly, Canticles: Who shall give thee me, o my Son, Cant. 8.1.
Vt inueniam te foris, and deosculer te: that I may see thee out of this thy
enclosure, to kiss thee, to cherish, and to serve thee, as thou do merit?

Thirdly, Prou. 13.12
And as Hope that is delayed afflicts the heart, every day seemed to her a
whole year: though on the other side she was most contented to contain him
within her, understanding that such was his pleasure. With these Considerations
I am to move my heart, and to awake therein fervent desiers, that this Son
of God might be borne spiritually within my Soul, and within the Soul of all
men, that by all he might be adored, served, and loved, repeating to this end
certain verses of the Psalms, and of the Prophets, which holy Church uses in
the time of Aduent: which are to say: Colloquie. Psalm. 79.3 Isai. 64.1 Isa.
45.8.
Awake o Lord, thy power, and make haste to save us. Would thou would break
these Heavens, and descend, that in thy presence all my Vices might be
dissolved. O Heavens distill from on high this divine dew: O clouds rain for
me this Just one: and open o thou Earth, and bud out to me this Savior: show
thy-mercye, o Lord, and graciously give me thy Salvation. To this purpose I may
frame certain Iaculatorye Prayers, like to those which in these days the holy
Church uses, in those seven Antiphone which are sung at Euensong, calling our
Savior Christ by those names, which he holds as he is God, or as he is man,
by reason of the offices he does in those Souls, whom he visits. Colloquie.
And therefore I may say unto him: O infinite Wisdom, come to govern me in
the way of Heaven! O Splendor of the glory of the Father, come to illuminate
me with the splendor of thy virtues! O Sun of Justice, come to give light, and
heat of Life to him, that is seated in the Shadow of Death! O King of kings,
descend to govern me! O master of nations, come to instruct me! O Savior of
the World, make have to save me. And in this form may be framed other such
like petitions, conforming myself to the Spirit of the Church at this time.

Finally, I may spiritualize the desiers of the blessed VIRGIN, and of her
Son whom she bare, in her Womb, quickening my desire, that those good
purposes, which by the Inspiration of the holy Ghost I have conceived, may come
to light, and be effected in such time, place, and season, as God shall
require, absolutely conforming myself to his most holy will. For as the infant
conceived, naturally desires to come into the light of this World at his due
time, and if he comes not, he tormenteth his mother, and dies, indaungering
likewise her life; So the good purpose, which the holy Ghost inspireth me with,
of altering, or bettering my life, is as it were crying, and desiring to come
to light in his due time. And if by negligence, or Contempt, it be not
effected, it tormenteth the Conscience with remorses, and uses to be an
occasion of great falls, 1 Thessalonians. 5.19.
God permitting them as a chastizement, for having extinguished the Spirit, and
the good purposes that proceeded from his Inspiration. Pro. 21.25
And hereupon the holy Spirit says, that Desiers kill the slothful: that
is, Desiers conceived by the Virtue of God, and not accomplished thorough our
own Slothe.

The third Point.
THirdly, Isaias, saying: Behold a VIRGIN shall conceive, Isa. 7.14. Mat. 1.23
and bring forth a Son, whose name shallbee Emanuel, which is to say being
interpreted, God with us. These words she might reuolue within herself, and
with great admiration might say: Whence to me so great good, that I should
be this miraculous VIRGIN? what, is it possible that I have conceived within me
that very Son, whom the eternal Father contains within himself? And that
this Emanuel is with me, whom so many have desired to be with them: and that
without loss of my Virginitye, he should issue out of me, to be, and remain
with all universally? I give thee thanks, Colloquie.
o most blessed Emanuel, for having chosen this humble VIRGIN for thy mother. O
that the hour of thy birth were now come, for allbeeit as thou art man, thou
issuest out of me, yet as thou art God, thou willt always remain with me.
With such Affections as these might the blessed VIRGIN be at this time, this
Hope filling her with great alacritye, for the great Love she bare to
Virginitye.

From hence it proceeded that she was free from those fears, that other
childing women have, and from those cares of their deliuerye, which use to
afflict them with great pain: for she only was careful to prepare her Soul
with notable Acts of Virtue, the better to serve her Son, and likewise to
provide (as far forth as her Pouertye would suffer her) for all things
needful for his birth. In imitation of her, I am to prepare myself for the
natiuitye, that I expect of the Son of God, removing those impediments that I
shall find in my Soul, and adorning it with excellent Acts of Virtue,
according to that which in the precedent points we have declared, and to that
which holy Church commands on those days, Luc. 3.4.
with the very words of S. John Baptist: Prepare the way of our Lord: make
straight his paths: Ex Isai. 49.3.
every valley shallbe filled, and every mountain, and Hill shallbe made low:
crooked ways shall become straight, and rough ways plain: and all flesh
shall see the salvation of God. Which is to say: Remove from you vices, that
are contrary to the Savior that is borne: and adorn you with Virtues, like
unto his. Remove the baseness of Pusillanimitye, the loftiness of Pride,
crooked Intentions, and rough manners, endeavoring in all that is possible, to
exalt your Spirit to the highest with Confidence, and to abase it to the lowest
with Humillitye; directing your intentions to that which is heavenly, without
any mixture of what is earthly; being meek, and gentle to all, without giving
occasion of stumbling to any; for such is the Savior that is to be borne, and
with such dispositions you are to receive him. These four Virtues opposite to
the four Contrary Vices, I am to procure for the end aforesaid, by the
mediation of our B. LADY the VIRGIN, saying unto her:

O most sacred VIRGIN, Colloquie.
who with fervent desiers expectedst the natiuitye of thy Son, and with
excellent works disposedst thyselfe to behold, and to embrace him, negociate
for me, that I may remove from me the impediments of his coming, and may with
great diligence prepare myself thereunto. Amen.

The sixtenth Meditation. Of the Journey of our blessed LADY the VIRGIN from
Nazareth to Bethlehem.
The first Point.
FIrst, D. Th. 3. p. q. 35. art. 7. and 8.
for the foundation of the meditations ensuing, I will consider, how the Word
Incarnate being in the womb of his mother, would make the newest, most
admirable, and holiest entrance into the World, that ever was, or shall be,
painful to himself, and profitable to us, to settle the foundations of that
Evangelical perfection, which he was to preach. So that his first entrance
into the World, was (as S. Sermon. de Natiu.
Cyprian says) a Pattern of our first entrance into Christian Religion, that
his Disciples might enter by the way he entered, exercizing those Virtues that
he exercized. And to this end he left all that the world loves, and seeks:
and sought for all that which the world abhors, and flies. And therefore
to be borne, he disposed how to get out of Nazareth, to leave those commodities
that he might have had, being borne in the house of his mother, and among his
kindred, and freindes, where he could not have wanted the shelter of some warm
lodging, and couerture, besides some daintiness for his nourishment, which
John Baptist failed not of, being borne in his fathers house. But he abandoned
it all, demonstrating how much he abhors the pampering of the flesh, and
what a lover he is of Pouertye: seeing he forsook that little that his poor
mother had, and like a stranger would be borne in Bethlehem, and in such a
season, when all things should be wanting unto him. With this example I will
confound myself, for being so great a Lover of mine own commodities, and
delicacyes, that not only I do not fly from them, but I carefully seek for
them, and if I find them not, I afflict myself.

O JESUS of Nazareth, Colloquie.
flourishing with the flowers of celestial Virtues, which come out of
Nazareth to abandon the flowers of earthly delights: I humbly beseech thee,
by this thy coming from thence, that thou will be pleased to favor my
imbecillitye, that I may renounce the flowers, and flatteries of my flesh,
desiring only the flowers of thy Virtues, with the which thou may so adorn
my Soul, that thou may daigne to be borne therein. Amen.

The second Point.
SEcondly, I will consider the occasion that our Savior Christ took to make
this journey, and to issue with his intent: for, In those days there came
forth an edict from Caesar Augustus, that the whole world should be enrolled.
And all went to be enrolled, every one into his own Cittye. And Joseph also
went up from Galilee out of the cittye of Nazareth into Iewrye, to the cittye
of David that is called Bethlehem, for because he was of the house, and familye
of David, to be enrolled with MARYE his despoused wife, that was with child.
In this Action, I will ponder how different are the thoughts of God, from
those of men; those of the king of Heaven from those of the king of Earth. For
this his Edict was founded upon Pride, Ambition, Arrogance, and Avarice,
commanding more then he might do; that is, that the whole world should be
enrolled, as if all the world had been his: and desiring that all should
profess themselves to be his Vassalls, and should pay him tribute were they
never so poor, and needye. But contrarily the king of Heaven Christ JESUS, had
all his cogitations placed in Humillitye, Pouertye, and Subjection: and in
treading down Pompes, Riches, and Vanities. He comes not to command, nor
to be served, but to obey, and serve the whole World. And in confirmation
hereof, he wills that his mother, and he himself in her, should be
enrolled, and profess themselves to be the Vassalls of Augustus Caesar, and
pay him tribute; to confound by this his example the Pride, and Covetousness
of the World. For if the king of kings, and monarche of all that is created,
enters into the World humbling himself, and protesting Vassallage to an
earthly, and evil king: what is it for me to humble myself, 1 Pet. 2.13
and to be subject to every humane Creature for his Love? And what a pride will
it be not to humble me to God himself, acknowledging myself for his Vassal,
and paying him with Obedience the tribute that I owe him?

O king of Heaven, Colloquie.
permit not in me such pride, seeing thou to remedy it, did so much humble
thyselfe.

Secondly, I will ponder, lawfully they shall command us, albeit they
command it for their own interests, Matt. 23.3.
and damned ends, acknowledging God in them whose Lieutenantes they are. And
this Obedience our Savior Christ himself raized to the height, making this
journey to accomplish the will of the eternal Father, who had ordained that
his Son should be borne in Bethlehem of Judah: Mi^h. 5.2. Matt. 2.6
albeit his Providence took this Edict of the Emperor Augustus, as a means
to compass his intent. Joan. 6.32
And as our Lord Christ came into the world not to do his own will, but the
will of him that sent him, he would be borne in that place which his Father had
ordained, and be borne obeying, as he died obeying, that all of us might learn
to obey.

O my beloved, Colloquie. Psalm. 29.6
seeing my life consists in doing thy will, may my entrings in, and goings
out, and all whatsoever I shall do, be conformable to thy will for ever, and
ever. Amen.

The third Point.
THirdly, I am to consider the journey of the VIRGIN; the manner how she
travailed, and the Virtues that she exercized, with desire to imitate her
therein: pondering how she being poor, the way long, and in the rigorous
time of winter, she wanted not much trouble; and yet she carried all with
admirable patience, and alacritye. She bare a great modestye in her eyes, her
heart being placed on God, and on the Son that she bare in her womb, with
whom she entertained those Colloquies, and Discourses, which before have been
spoken of. If some other while she talked with her Husband, In the 10
Meditation, the 3. point.
it was wholely of God, and with very great sweetness: and she was not
wearye, though she went great with Child, for her Son was not burdensome;
and the hope to see him speedily brought forth, gave her great alacritye, and
pleasure to part from Nazareth, that she might the more quietly enjoy her
Son, being borne out of it. Colloquie. Cant. 2.10
O blessed VIRGIN, there is no need to say unto thee, as to the Spouse: That
thou should make haste, because VVinter was passed, the foul weather was
ceazed, and the flowers of the spring began to appear: for the desire of
suffering, and obeying, makes thee travel in the rigor of VVinter, that the
flower of Iesse may be brought forth, in whom consists our repose. O that I
might imitate the Virtues, thou did exercize in this journey, accompanying
thy Steps in Spirit, though it were not granted me to do it with my body.

The fourth Point.
FOurthly, I will consider the entrance of the blessed VIRGIN into Bethlehem,
which was in an occasion of so great a concourse of People, that she found
no body that would lodge her, neither was there any room in the Inn where
she was: so that she was forced to have recourse to a poor Stable for
beasts: the divine providence so disposing it, that the Son of God might
enter into the World begging, and suffering, having no body to be
compassionate of his Afflictions.

Upon this passage, I am to ponder the excellencye of this our Lord, who
seeks a Chamber to be borne in, and finds none: the blindness of men,
that know him not, nor provide him one: the benefits whereof they deprive
themselves, for not giving him one, and how he chooses for himself the worst
of the world; collecting out of all this, tender Affections: and hearty
feelings. First, I will ponder how the men of the World have Palaces, and
Howses well accommodated: and the rich of Bethlehem were under good shelter,
and warmely lodged at their ease: but the Son of the eternal Father, Joan.
1.11
lord of all that is created^, coming to seek a Lodging, in his own City,
of whence naturally he was, and among those of his own tribe, and familye, he
finds none that would harbor him.

O eternal Word incarnate, Colloquie.
how soon the world begins to reject thee, thou having come to redeem it!
now may thou well say, Luc. 9.58.
that the foxes have holes, and the fowls of the air have nestes wherein to
hatche their eggs, and to bring up their little ones: but the Son of man,
and his poor mother, find not where to repose their head. The foxes chase
thee from their Caves: for the craftye, and rich of the Earth, abhor thy
Simplicitye, and Pouertye. The Birds admit thee not into their nestes, for
the noble, and proud of the world despise thy humillity, and lowliness: and
therefore thou go to a poor, and humble Stable, Isai. 1.3^.
where the Ox will know his Owner, and the Ass will leave his maunger to
resign it to his master. O Lord of Lords, and Owner of all that is created,
cast out of my Soul all foxelike Subtleties, and high-soaring Prides that
possess it, that thou may find therein a fit lodging for thyselfe.

From hence I will ascend to consider, harbor in Bethlehem, was the Ignorance
of that People: for God coming to their gates, they acknowledged him not,
neither knew what good might came to them by admitting him, admitting other
guestes of whom they could receive little, or no proffit. O how happy had he
been that had harbored this our Lord, that he might have been borne in his
house! what spiritual riches would he have given him? how well would he have
recompensed his hospitallitye, as he recompensed Martha, and Zachous? O how
happy were my Soul, if it should happen to harbor this our Lord, and to give
him place to be borne spiritually therein!

O infinite God which inuironest the ports of my Heart, Colloquie. Apoc. 3.20.
calling with Inspirations, that I might open unto thee, with a desire to enter
therein, to inriche it with the gifts of thy grace: permit me not to shut
the port, not to know thee: nor to dispatche thee away, not to esteem thee:
Come, o Lord, come, and call, for I will hear thee; knock at my door, and I
will open unto thee: and I will give unto thee the best part of my house,
which is my Heart, that thou may therein repose at thy pleasure.

Finally, S. Joseph carried this Affliction, and Abandoning: and with what
alacritye they suffered the reproaches of those, who rejected them because they
were poor: and with what content they retired themselves to the Stable, taking
for themselves the most contemptible place of the Earth: whereby they
meruailously insistered Humillitye, and Pouertye, with Patience, and Alacritye.
In imitation of whom, I will endeavor to desire for myself, that which is
worst, and most contemptible in the world, carrying it with alacritye, when it
falls to my lot: for there is no better lot then to imitate these glorious
Saints, as they imitated our Savior Christ, in such sort as hereafter we
shall see.

The seuententh Meditation. Of the birth of our Savior Christ in a Stable in
Bethlehem.
The first Point.
FIrst, I am to consider what the Word Incarnate did in the womb of his
mother, when the hour was come of his deliverance from thence. first, that as
he would not anticipate the time of his birth, so also he would not defer
it, but would puntually be borne at nine months end, to manifest himself
unto the world, with an hearty desire to begin his carreere with great
fervor, and Alacritye of Heart; fullfilling that of David: Psalm. 18.7.
He has reioiced as a Gyaunt to runnet he way: his coming forth from the top
of Heaven, not staying till he come to the other extreme. For albeeit he knew
what a sharp carreere he was to have from his natiuitye to his Death, yet he
rejoiced with fortitude to begin it, issuing out from the womb of the VIRGIN,
which was his Heaven, and presently setting his feet upon the vilest, and
basest place that was on the Earth. For the which I ought humbly to thank
him, beseeching him to give me light to know, and understand what passed in
this his entrance.

O Child more strong, Colloquie.
and valiant then a Giant, seeing that, respleudent like a new Sun thou will
issue by thy Orient, to run thy Carreere unto the Occident of the Cross,
Illuminate my Understanding, and inflame my Will, that I may behold, and
contemplate thy egression, and may love with fervent zeal the Virtues thou
discouerest therein.

Then will I ponder how liberal he then showed himself to his mother, D. Th.
3. p. q. 35. ar. 6.
like as a mighty, nine months; at such time as he meant to depart from his
lodging, he gave her the richest gifts of grace; a most high Contemplation of
that mysterye, and certain extraordinary Jubilees of gladness, in steed of
those pains that other women use to feel when they are in travel of Child.
For it was not reason, that she that had no sensual pleasure in conceiving,
should have any pain in bringing forth. And allbeeit as touching the suffering
Dolours, he dispensed not with himself, yet he would not that his mother in
this case should suffer any. In like sort I may consider, that when our
Savior Christ enters Sacramentally into us, at his first entrance he gives
us Sacramental grace: and if we give him good hospitallitye, before his
departure, he gives us rich Jewels of Affections of Devotion, and
Contemplation; and Iubilies of Alacrity, wherewith he recompenseth the good
entertainment, that we give him.

Therefore, o my Soul, Colloquie.
regard how thou harbourest this sovereign guest, that he may leave thee
rich, and abundantly stored with the gifts of Heaven.

Thirdly, Before in the 14. Meditation, 3. point.
I will ponder how our Savior Christ would for the same cause issue out of his
mothers womb after a miraculous manner, she not suffering any loss of her
Virginitye; for it was no reason that he should depart out of a house, where
he had been so well entertained, with the indammaging of the Integritye that
it had; honoring herein his mother, and aduising us all, that to entertain
him, and to serve him, we shall receive no detriment: rather if need be, he
will do some miracle to that end. For though he did none to preserve himself
from suffering, yet he uses to do it, to preserve his elected, when it is
convenient for them.

O sovereign master, Colloquie.
how well thou teach me by this Example the Condition of true Love, which is
rigorous to itself, and gentle to others! for ^^selfe it will have rigours to
afflict it: but for it neighbor, it will have favors to delight him: aid me
with thy abundant grace, that in both things I may imitate thy fervent, and
admirable Charity.

The Second Point.
SEcondly, I am to consider what the blessed VIRGIN did, when by those Iubilies
she knew that the hour of her delivery was come, pondering her Affections,
her Actions, and her Words. For recollecting herself in a corner of the
stable, and settled in very high Contemplation, she brought forth her only
begotten Son, and forthwith she took him in her Arms. O what content, and
Joy she received at that first view, not staying upon the outward beautye of
the body, but passing to the beautye of the Soul, and of the Deitye! On the
one side she embraced him, and kissed him lovingly as her Son: and on the
other side she shruncke back, and humbly retired, considering that he was
God: for with these two arms God desires to be embraced; with Charity, and
Humillitye; with Love, and Reverence: and the like am I to do spiritually,
taking him as it were in my arms, loving him, and reuerencing him, approaching
to him with Love, and retiring myself with Humillitye.

This done the VIRGIN swathled her Son in such swathling cloutes, and
mantles as she had prepared, and with an Affection of Humillitye she laid him
in a maunger, esteeming herself unworthy to hold him in her Arms: and
falling on her knees she adored him as her God, and her Lord, and very lovingly
she spoke unto him, for she was assured that he understood her. She humbly
thanked him for the great favors he had done to mankind, in coming to
redeem it. She likewise gave him thanks for having taken her for his mother,
without any merits of hers: and there she offered to serve him with body, and
Soul, and with all her forces, employing them all in his Service: And all this
she uttered with such loving words, and tender Affections, as they are rather
to be imagined, then possible to be explicated. The like did S. Joseph, adoring
the Child, humbly thanking him for taking him for his fosterfather,
acknowledging it for a great favor, and offering himself truly, and really
to serve him. The like am I to do, accompanying these Saints in heartye
thankefullnesse, offering unto him my body, and Soul, and all my faculties.

O most sweet, and most sovereign Lord, Colloquie.
what thanks may I give thee, for this great favor thou have done me, in
coming to remedy me, as a Child, and in so extreme Pouertye? O that I
might have been present at that time to serve thee in thy Infancye! I here
present myself in Spirit before thy divine majesty, and I offer unto thee all
that I am, or may be able to be, to employ it wholely in thy Service:
accept, o Lord, this my good Will, and give me thy grace to effect it.

The third Point.
THe third, and principal point is, to consider the marvelous greatenesses
of that divine Child, laid in the maunger. Pondering the Dignitye of his
person; the Words that he spoke in his Heart: the Works that he did; and the
Things that he suffered: and for whom; and how: and the heroycall Virtues that
he there did exercize. All this I am to ponder, as the most sacred VIRGIN did
ponder it, in this form.

First, Of the person of the Child.
making a comparison between what he is, as he is God, and between what he is
there, as he is man, with an Affection of Admiration, and Love the greatest
that I am able: pondering how this Child is that God of majesty, Isa. 66.1.
Psalm. 79.2.
whose seat is Heaven, whose Throne are the Cherubins, and whose servants the
Hierarchies of Angels are, being in the midst of them, as an Emperor,
whom all do adore, and to whom all acknowledge subjection. And on the other
side, he is laid in a maunger in the midst between two dull beasts: Abac.
3.2. inxta 70. Joan. 1.1.3 Heb. 1.2.3 Ps. 103.2. Heb. 1.3.
And he that is the word of the eternal Father, by whom he created all
things, and who sustaineth them with his power, is become a Child not yet
able to speak, his hands and feet being swathled, and he not able to
stir. And he whose Vesture is the Infinite Light of the Deitye, being the
brightness of the glory of his Father: he who clotheth his Creatures with
beautye, and with a liberal hand gives them sustenance for the conservation
of their Life: he, even he, is wrapped up in poor mantles, and rags, and
has need to be sustained with the milk of his mother.

O most excellent, Colloquie. Ex D. Ber. ser. 1. in Epiph.
and most humbled Babe, and in all venerable, and amiable in all: yet, quanto
pro me vilior, tanto mihi carior, the more thou art despised for me, the more
worthy thou art to be loved: and the more thou art humbled, the more to be
exalted: for in thy Humilliations, thou demonstratest the greatenesse of thy
Incomprehensible Charity. O that I could love thee, as thou deseruest: (...)
that I could debase, and humble myself, as I deserve to be: for to debase me
with myself, were to magnifye me with thee. How is it, o my Soul, that thou
art not confounded to see this person so great, and yet so humbled: and to see
thy own person so vile, and yet so proud! Learn of this Child to humble
thyselfe: for he that with him shall humble himself on Earth, Matt. 18.3. Of
the Words
shall by him be magnified, and exalted in Heaven.

Secondly, the spirit: not with voice, but with examples. To his eternal
Father, he might speak, giving him thanks, because that hour was come, and
that it was his pleasure to have him laid in that maunger, offering unto him
with great Love all the Afflictions that he was to suffer in the world, and
again saying unto him, that which the Apostle pondereth he might say in
entering into the world, he added: Heb. 10.9 Psalm. 39.
Behold me here, o Lord, I am come to accomplish thy will. But to men he
spoke likewise, and cried out to them with his examples, speaking that from he
maunger, which he afterward spoke while he preached: Learn of me, for I am
meek, Matt. 11.29. and 18.3.4.
and humble of Heart: and unless you be converted, and become as little
Children, you shall not enter into the kingdom of Heaven: and whosoever shall
humble himself as this Child, he shall be greater in the kingdom of Heaven.
These, and other like words he is there preaching by his Example, which I am
to hearken unto with great devotion, beseeching him to open the Ears of my
Heart, that I may understand this Language, and put it in practice.

O sovereign Child, Colloquie. Mar. 10.16.
that even from this maunger art inuiting me to become a Child, and wast
always so great a Lover of Children, that thou did lovingly embrace them:
make me like thee, a Child in Innocencye, a little one in Humillitye, an Infant
in Silence, and tender in Charity. In these sour things consists the
making ourselves Children, to become great in the eyes of God.

Then will I contemplate the works that he does: Of the Works that he does.
wherein there is one marvelous thing to consider: for being a man as perfect
in Judgment as when he was thirty years old, he did all the Actions,
gestures, and semblances of a Child, not counterfaited, nor fained, but
really, and truly, as other Children do, with an Admirable Harmonye, for him
that knows how to ponder the connection of these two things together. In
particular I will now ponder that weeping of the Child, and the causes of his
tears: he weepeth not so much for grief of what he suffers, as other
Children do, as for that which we suffer by our Sins, lovingly bewailing
them; and with those tears joining interiourly most zealous prayers to the
eternal Father, Heb. 5.7.
doing as S. Paul said of him: That in the days of his flesh, he offered
prayers, and Supplications to God with great Clamor, and Tears. And it is to
be believed, that the blessed VIRGIN wept, seeing her Son weep, and
considering the causes wherefore he wept.

O sweet JESUS, Colloquie.
why lamentest thou so bitterly my miseries, forgetful of thine own! O my
Soul why weepest thou not, seeing this Child weep, that so weepeth for thee!
Weep thou for Compassion to see him weep: weep because thou art the cause of
his weeping, and weep for thy Sins that afflict his Heart: and if this make
thee not weep, then weep because thou art so hard hearted that thou can
not weep, having so much reason to shed abundance of Tears. Matt. 5.5.
O most sacred VIRGIN, obtain for me the gift of Tears, if it be but to
accompanye thee with them, to comfort thy Son, who is comforted to see us
weep, and said: Blessed are they that mourn, for they shall be comforted.

Lastly, Of the things that he suffers
but willingly, and pleasingly: for as he is God, and man in Judgment, D. Th.
3. p. q. 35. ar. 8
he makes choice of all that he suffers. He chose to be borne in the most
rigorous time of the Winter, in the coldest hour of midnight; in the most
vile, Ex D. Ber. ser. 3. de Natiu.
and contemptible stable of all the Cittye; with the greatest Pouertye,
Contempt, and forgetfullnesse of men that was possible: and all with such a
mask of Humillitye, that being voluntary, it seemed forced, and consequently
most vile, and contemptible. Finally, from the maunger (as he himself says
in one of the Psalms) he took for his inseparable companions even until
death, Pouertye, Contempt, Dolours, Psa. 87.16
and Afflictions: and in all these things he suffered a thousand kinds of
Afflictions, electing such a manner of Life contrary to that of the World, to
discover by his example the Deceites, and Errors of worldelings that do
follow it. For as S. Bernard says: It is a matter very evident that the
world erreth, choosing for his Companions, Riches, Honors, and Delicacies,
when as Christ the Infinite wisdom, who can neither deceive himself, nor
beguile us, chooses the contrary. With this Consideration, I am to confound
myself in the presence of this most blessed Babe, seeing how contrarily I have
lived to that, which he teaches, purposing to imitate him from hence forward,
choosing to suffer what he suffers, and beseeching him to make me worthy to
suffer with him, and as he; not of necessity, but acceptably, and willingly for
his Love.

O sovereign Child, Colloquie. 2 Reg. 23.8.
who like another David art the wisest Prince among three: for of the three
divine Persons thou art the second, to whom wisdom is attributed: what do
thou seated here in this chair of the maunger, being silent, without speaking
unto us? Thou art the most tender little worm of the wood, that violently
killest eight hundred: for with the Contempt, and Humilliation that thou have
in the worme-eaten wood of thy poor harbor, thou killest with the violence of
thy divine Love, the innumerable violences of the Love of the world. O most
wise, and most valiant Prince which silently instructest, and silently killest,
teach me to follow with silence thy Contemptes, and kill in my Heart
worldely Affections, that making myself a Worm in imitation of thee, I may
merit to ascend to behold thee in the throne of thy Glory. Amen.

The eightenth Meditation. Luc. 2.9. D. Th. 3. p. q. 36.
Of the Joy of the Angels at the Natiuitye of the Son of God: and of the
news which they told to the Shepheardes.
The first Point.
FIrst, I will consider what passed in Heaven, at such time as our Savior
Christ was borne on Earth. For the Hierarchies of the Angels, as they
clearly beheld the infinite majesty, and greatenesse of God: and on the
other side saw him so humbled, so thrust up into a corner, and so unknown
among men, they extremely admired this so great Humillitye, and being very
careful that he should be honored, and reverenced by all, desired, if God
would give them leave, to come down into the World, to manifest him, and make
him known. Then did the eternal Father give that commandment unto all,
which the Apostle S. Heb. 1.6.
Paul pondereth. Et cum iterum introducit primogenitum in orbem terrarum;
dicit, and adorent eum omnes Angeli eius. And when again he brings in the
first begotten into the World, he says: And let all the Angels of God adore
him: he says all, not excepting any one. And all of them from Heaven adored
with high reverence this Babe, who being on Earth beheld what they did. The
Seraphines inflamed in Love, beholding him held themselves as frozen, and with
profounde Humillitye acknowledged him for their God. The Cherubins full of
knowledge, in presence of this Child, esteemed themselves as Ignorant, and
with great trembling adored him, and reverenced him as their Lord: And the
like did the other Quires of the Angels.

I rejoice, o all my Good, Colloquie.
to see thee adored by thy Angels: and it greiueth me greatly to see thee so
forgotten, and unknown among men. I, o Lord, adore thee together with these
blessed Spirits, and do heartily desire that all men might know, and adore
thee: and if it lie in my power, to give them netice hereof, Ecce ego, mitte
me: Behold me here, Isa. 6.8.
send me. For if thou sendest me, I will fly with those wings which thou shall
give me; and like the Seraphines I will cry out thorough the World, saying:
Holy, Holy, Holy art thou Lord God of Hosts, the earth is full of thy
glory, albeit with the smoke of the Humilliation, which thou have in this
poor Stable, it seems to be obscured.

The Second Point.
SEcondly, I am to consider how the eternal Father would manifest the birth of
his Son to the Shepheardes, that were near about Bethlehem watching, and
keeping their flock, sending to this end an Angel (which as it is thought
was S. Gabriel) invested with a resplendent Body, who inuironing them with a
celestial light said unto them: Luc. 2.10.
Behold I euangelize to you great Joy that shallbee to all the People;
because this day is borne to you a Savior, which is Christ our Lord, in the
City of David: And this shall be a sign to you, you shall find the Infant
swadled in clothes, and la^ed in a manger. Upon this passage, I will consider,
first, Bethlehem, for they were proud; nor to the Rich, for they were
covetous: nor to the noble, for they were pampered: but to the Shepheardes,
because they were poor, humble laboring men, that were watching, and
attending their office, for such dispositions as these God requires in those,
to whom he imparteth his mysteries, and if he Imparteth them not with me, it
is because I want such a disposition; seeing it was for this, that he said:
that he hides these things from the wise, Matt. 11.25.
and prudent, and reuealeth them to the little ones that are humble, and lowely.

Secondly, I will consider, not to save himself: nor he is not borne to the
Angels, for he comes not to save them: but to men, and to me, for he comes
to save me. For me he is borne, and circumcized, and all whatsoever he did, and
suffered, it is all for me: And that which passes in the manger, is all to
pardon my Sins, to inflame me in the Love of Virtues, and to inriche me with
those merits.

O sweet JESUS, Colloquie.
that which to thee is matter of Dolor, is to me matter of Joy. I rejoice
that thou art so good, that thou embracest my Dolours, to give me thy Joys:
let not me, o Lord, be so unhappy, that thou being borne for the good of all
men, I should live, as if thou had not been borne for the good of me,
hunting prowdely after greatenesse, and forgettyng thy lewelinesse, and
Humillitye.

Thirdly,

O infinite Greatenesse of God, Colloquie.
who would ever have imagined, that things so base should be the signs to
find out, and to know the God of majesty! but I now know, o Lord, that thou
art delighted with these debasings, and that thou art in the midst of them,
to move me to procure them: teaching me by the way, that the signs to know
that thou art borne spiritually within me, Ex D. Berser. 4. de Resurr.
are Innocence of an Infant in Life, Silence in Tongue, Pouertye in Habit, and
Humillitye in choosing to myself that vhich is most vile, and contemptible on
Earth. Imprint them, o my Savior, in my Soul, that it may be like unto thee,
that thou may be pleased to be borne, and to inhabit therein.

The third Point.
ANd while the Angel was telling this to the Shepheardes, Luc. 2.13.
suddenly there was with him a multitude of the Heavenly army, praising God,
and saying: Glory in the highest to God, and in Earth peace to men of
goodwill. Upon this point, I am to consider, who sent these Angels, and to
what end: and the Hymn, or Canticle which they repeat. He that sends them,
is the eternal Father to honor his Son, who was so humbled for his Love:
for he had allwaies a care to exalt him, when he humbled himself: and that the
Angels likewise might instruct men by their example, what they are to do in
this case.

I humbly thank thee, Colloquie.
o eternal Father, for this care that thou have, to honor him, that humbles
himself. Well has he merited that thou should honor him, seeing he has
humbled himself to honor thee. And seeing it is just, that I should honor,
and praise him, teach me to sing this Hymn of the Angels with the same
spirit that they sang it.

Gloria in Altissimis Deo.
Glory in the Highest to God: Luc. 2.14
In these words the Angels teach us, that all this work of the Incarnation
is the Glory of God in a supreme excellencye: so that none of his works is
so glorious unto him as this, for the which he meriteth to be praised by all
such as profess Highness of Life: and in Heaven for this he is especially
glorified: and reason would he should be so here on Earth; seeing for this
cause it is full of the glory of God, as the Seraphines said, Isa. 6.2.
when the Prophet Isaias saw the glory of this our Lord.

O king of glory lift up my Heart to the highest, that I may glorifye thy
name on Earth, Colloquie. Ioa. 12.41 1 Cor. 10.31.
as the Angels do glorifye it in Heaven. Whatsoever I shall do, or say, let
it be to thy glory, without seeking my own; and from my mouth shall never
depart this word, Glory be to God three, and one-Glorye to the Father, and
to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost. Glory to the Father, for that he gave me
his Son. Glory to the Son, for that he became man for my redemption: and
glory to the Holy Ghost from whose Love this Work did proceed.

Et in terra Pax.
And in Earth peace: which is to say: Luc. 2.14.
By this notable work comes Peace to the inhabitants of the Earth, and not
a peace limited, but very complete: Peace with God, and with Angels: Peace to
every one with himself, and with all other men; for this Savior brings
Reconciliation of the world to his Father, the Remission of Sins, Victory
over the Devils, Subjection of the flesh to the Spirit, Union, and Concord of
wills one with another, and with God, from whence proceeds Alacritye of
Conscience, Phil. 4.7.
and that Peace which passes all Understanding.

O Prince of Peace seeing it is written that in thy days Justice should be
borne, Colloquie.
and Abundance of Peace till the moon should have an end: Psalm. 71.7
I humbly beseech thee to take from me all worldely mutabillitye, and to
fortifye me with divine Sanctitye, and Peace.

Hominibus bonae Voluntatis.
To men of good will. Luc. 2.14
In this third word we are to ponder, that allbeeit Peace originally springs
from the good will that God bears us, with the which he offers it unto all
men: yet in effect they only enjoye it, that have good Will, well intentioned,
conformable to the Will of God, and subject to his divine Law. So that Peace
is not promised to men for being of good Understanding, or sharp wit, neither
for great abillities, nor notable talents, and natural parts: for with all
these things there may be much War, and Discord, and Enmitye with God:
whereas if all these should fail me, yet Peace shall not be failing unto me,
if I have good Will. And therefore I am to make more account thereof, then of
all the rest: Hom. 5. in Euang.
for (as S. Gregory says) Nihil ditius bona voluntate. There is nothing more
rich, more amiable, nor more peaceable then good Will. As contrarily there is
nothing more miserable, more full of Disturbance, and of Horror, then evil
Will. And therefore with great feruencye I am to beg of the Savior that is
borne, that he will deliver me from the evil, and give me the good, seeing it
lies in his Gift. Heerepon another Text says: Hominibus bona voluntas. Be
good Will unto men.

O most sweet Savior, Colloquie.
give me this good Will which thou offerest us, that I may deny my own
Will, Romans 12.1
and may follow thine, good, pleasing, and most perfect, seeing thine is the
beginning of all good; and mine left to it own free will, the root of all
evil.

The fourth Point.
THe Angels having been a while with the Shepheardes returned to Heaven: and
we may piously believe, that they went by the Inn of Bethlehem without any
sensible noise, and that there they renewed their Song, so that the blessed
VIRGIN, and S. Joseph might hear it, and adore the Child new borne with
greater reverence, as their God, and their king. O what content received the
blessed VIRGIN with this Music! and how thankful was she to the eternal
Father for the honor he did to his Son! and how Joyful to behold so great
an Host of Angels, and how confirmed in Faith, calling to mind that which is
written, Heb. 5.6.
Let all his Angels adore him.

I, o my God, adore thee with them, Colloquie.
and with them I sing Gloria in this poor maunger of thine; and I desire that
all the World may sing it unto thee in thy Church, that by all thou may be
glorified world without end. Amen.

The ninetenth Meditation. Of the going of the Shepheardes to Bethlehem: and
what there happened unto them, and all the rest unto the Circumcision.
The first Point.
THe Angels being departed, Luc. 2.15
the Shepheardes exhorted one another saying: Let us go over to Bethlehem, and
let us see with our eyes this word that is done, which our Lord has showed
to us. And they came with speed; and they found MARIE, and Joseph, and the
Infant laid in the Manger: Where I am to ponder, first, Ezech. 3.13 Greg. l.
24 moral, c. 6
in such sort, as the four holy Beasts following the Impulsion of the holy
Spirit, did strike one another with their Wings, provoking as it were one
another to follow him the more fervently.

Secondly, they showed great obedience: Bethlehem: yet they contented
themselves, that he showed that it was the good liking of God, for to this
end he revealed, and Inspired it. And to one perfectly obedient, it suffizeth
to have any signification whatsoever of the divine Will, to put it presently in
practice, albeit it were needful to leave therefore (as the Shepheardes did)
both his flock, and all that he has.

Thirdly,

O that I might Imitate the zealous obedience, Colloquie.
and diligence of these holy Shepheardes, to seek, and to find out the
Savior. O sovereign Shepherd, whose Sheep all other Shepheardes are,
discover unto me with thy divine Illumination the place where thou lie, and
feedest in thy holy Natiuitye, that I may so seek thee, and find thee, that I
may know, and love thee world without end. Amen.

The second Point.
Here is to be considered what these devout Shepheardes did, when they found
what they sought. first is, to believe that in entering into the Stable, there
did shine from the face of the most blessed Babe such a light, and splendor,
as penetrated their Understandings, and discovered unto them by a lively
faith, how he that was there was God, and man, the Savior of the world, and
the Messiah promised in the Law: and with this light inflamed in his Love,
with great reverence prostrating themselves on the ground, they adored him,
and were thankful for his coming into the world, beseeching him to go
forward with this work, and to be compassionate to his people of Israel: and
likewise they offered themselves to serve him with words very full of
Devotion. Deuteronomye which says: Thou shall not appear before our Lord
emptye handed. Deuteronomy. 16, 16.
O with what affection might they offer, and with what Love might the Child
accept, retourning unto them such abundant gifts of his grace, that they
should not depart emptye from his presence. It is also credible,

O sweet JESUS, Colloquie.
I adore thee with these holy Shepheardes, and I desire to adore thee with that
devotion that they adored thee: and not to come emptye into thy presence, I
offer thee my heart, and liberty, and all that I have. And I beseech thee, o
my God, suffer me not to depart emptye from thy presence, but fill me with thy
grace, that I may therewith serve thee, and obtain Life everlasting. Amen.

The third Point.
And the Shepheardes returned glorifying, Luc. 2.20
and praising God in all that they had seen, and heard, and they published it
to all that they met, causing great admiration in all: but MARIE kept all
these words, conferring them in her heart.

Concerning this Veritye, it shall not be amiss to consider for our own
proffit, four sorts of Persons that were in Bethlehem, and the confines
thereof: and the manner how they behaved themselves about this natiuitye of the
Son of God, applying it to myself for my own proffit.

Some came not at all to the Inn in Bethlehem; seek, and to know him.
Others, finally, S. Joseph, and the blessed VIRGIN were allwaies in the Inn,
assisting the Child, and serving him with Love, keeping in their memory all
that they saw, and heard, and conferring it in their Heart. O how divine a
conference the blessed VIRGIN had of all this. She conferred, what God was in
Heaven, with what that Child was upon Earth: what the Prophets said, with
what she beheld with her eyes: what the Angel, and Shepheardes had spoken,
with what was present in that manger: and this conference was not dry, but
tender, full of great admiration, and of fervent affections of Devotion. And
in this she spent the eight days until the Circumcision. This our LADY they
imitate, that dedicate themselves largely some days to the Contemplation of
these mysteries, making these spiritual conferences in their hearts. Happy
are those that in this manner can, and know how to assist this Infant in the
manger.

O sovereign VIRGIN, Colloquie.
teach me to confer within myself, what Faith does dictate unto me of thy
Son, and that which thou did confer of him in thy Heart, that
Imprinting it in my spirit, I may never depart from his presence, but employ
myself in knowing, loving, and serving him for ever, and ever. Amen.

In the 26. Meditation, shall be pondered another manner of meditating this
mysterye.

The twentieth Meditation. D. Th. 3 p. q 37. ar. 1 Luc. 2.14
Of the Circumcision of our Savior, on the eigth day.
The first Point.
FIrst, is to be considered how on the eigth day after the natiuitye, the
blessed VIRGIN, and S. Joseph determined to circumcize the child in
accomplishment of the Law, Leuit. 12.3
with Imposed upon the Parents a precept thereof: upon which I am to ponder. S.
Joseph, which was very puntuall, and prompt to accomplish this precept, though
they knew that the execution thereof would be very dolorous, and painful to
the Child, whom they so much loved: yet the will of God was to be prefered
before all: which the blessed VIRGIN esteemed so much, that if need had been,
she herself like another Se hora, would have taken the knife, Exodus 4.25
and would have circumcized the Child: some say that she herself did
circumcize him: some others that S. Joseph did it: but howsoever, certain it
is, they were prepared to put in execution, whatsoever they should esteem to
be most agreeable to the Will of almighty God.

Secondly I will ponder the Charity, there shed, and to keep that little piece
of flesh that was cut of: for she knew it to be the blood of God, and to be
of infinite value. O with what devotion did she kiss it with her mouth, and
keep it in her breast! O what Loueacts used she with that precious blood! and
how did she beseech the eternal Father that for it he would pardon the
World, beseeching him, if it were possible, he would content himself with
this alone it being so Infinitely worth! She likewise directed her speeches
to the holy Ghost, whose spouse she was; saying unto him, as Sephora said to
Moses being in an Inn with her Son: Exodus 4.25
O most holy Ghost, though thou art to me a Spouse of blood, desiring that the
blood of my Son should be shed, bathing therewith his sacred feet, yet for
all this, I will not leave thee, as Sephora left Moses, for I esteem more thy
Will, then my own, though it were needful to shed my own blood to fulfill
it. Adam, how bitter art thou to this caelestiall Adam!

O most B. Colloquie.
VIRGIN, that I might accompanye thee in this Lamentation, bewailing my Sins,
to obtain the remedy of them, by the Virtue of the precious blood of thy
Son.

The second Point.
SEcondly, I will consider the Heroical Acts of Virtue, which our Savior
Christ exercized in his Circumcision: which in him was not alone an exercize of
suffering as in other Children, which want the use of reason; but it was a
work of most excellent Virtue. First, it was Obedience to the Law: for albeit
that as he was God, and the supreme Lawgiver, he might have dispensed with
himself herein, and had sufficient cause therefore, being not obliged by the
rigor of the Law, for that he was not conceived by the work of man, nor with
the debt of contracting Original Sin: yet for all this, he would of his own
will obey this painful, and rigorous precept, protesting therewithal that he
would ohserue all the old Law: for (as S. Gal. 5.3.
Paul says) every man circumciding himself is a debtor, obliged to
accomplish the whole law how burdensome soever it be: and therefore this
blessed Child offered himself at that time to undergo this heavy burden,
Psalm. 39.9
setting this whole Law (as himself says by the Prophet David) in the
midst of his heart, to the end to give unto us a perfect pattern of
obedience.

O my Soul, Colloquie.
why do not thou offer thyselfe to bear the burden, and sweet yoke of the
new Law, when thy Savior offers himself to bear for thee the most heavy
burden, and insupportable yoke of the old Law? If he for thy example obeys
in hard things whereunto he is not obliged: why do thou deny to obey him in
those easy things that he has commanded thee? Pardon, o Lord, my
disobedience, and aid me to follow the example which thou gave me,
obferuing thy Law in such sort, as thou allwaies obseruedst it.

The second Virtue was Humillitye, Sinner, seeing he neither was, nor could be
so; yet he would be held so to be, subjecting himself to Circumcision, which
was the sign of sinful Children; so that such as saw him circumcized, might
have said that he was a Sinner: which he ordained for the confusion of us, who
being sinners will not seem so to be, but take upon us the mask of being
righteous. Therefore, o my Soul, seeing thou art humbled by Truth, Ex D. Ber.
ser. 42. in Cant.
be humbled also by Charity: and seeing thou know thyselfe to be worthy of
Humilliation for thy Sins, desire with thy Lord, to be humbled, though thou
were without Sin.

The third Virtue was Patience,

The fourth Virtue was, most fervent Charity, and for our good.

O Immense Charity! o Invincible Patience! Colloquie.
o profounde Humillitye, and perfect Obedience of my Redeemer! Exo. 29.8 Exo.
39.1
O sovereign Virtues wherewith is weaued the Preistlike garment of our high
Preiste JESUS, much more precious then Grain, or Purple; then Hyacinthe, and
wreathed Holland! O high Preiste that on this day did clothe thyselfe with
this garment, to offer this sacrifize of the morning, and did afterward
again put it on, on the Cross, to offer the sacrifize of the evening: Inuest
me with such another, that I may offer up my body, Romans 12.1
and Soul a living Host, holy, and pleasing to thy sovereign majesty. I am
ashamed, o Lord, Apoc. 3.18
to see myself so naked of these four Virtues, let thy grace aid me, to
Inuest me with them, and to cover my nakedness. Amen.

The third Point.
THirdly, Christ exacteth of me, with the example of this his corporal
Circumcision, wherewith he moves, and teaches me to circumcize, and cut of
all my Superfluities in Pampering, Honor, Rem. 2.28 Colos. 2.11
and commodities of the flesh, mortifying my disordinate Vices, and
Affections, to accomplish the Law of God, yea, if need were, therefore to
shed my blood: for in this manner is the true Spirit obtained. Sermon. 10.
And in this sense said an holy man (as S. Dorotheus reports) Da sanguinem,
and accipe Spiritum. Give blood, and thou shall receive Spirit: for the
perfection of the Spirit is not obtained but with the cost of blood,
mortifying, and circumcizing all the affections of flesh, and blood.

Besides this I am willingly to suffer others to circumcize me, and to aid me
to take away these superfluities, whither they do it with a good intention, or
with an evil intention to to do me disgrace: suffering them with Patience to
circumcize, and cut of from me some of my Delicacye, my Honor, and Commoditye,
although it be with the shedding of my blood: for (as S. Heb. 12.1
Paul said) It makes not much who fights against sin, when he comes not
to resist it unto blood, as our Savior Christ did. Unto whom I am to say,
Exo. 4.25.
Sponsus sanguinis tu mihi es, My beloved, thou art to me a Spouse of blood,
for for thy sake I will suffer with a good will, any Circumcision, or
mortification that may happen, though it be to the shedding of my blood for
thee.

To this end, it will help me to consider, three places, and by the hands of
three sorts of persons. First, in Circumcision by the minister of God that did
it to a holy end. Secondly, in the Garden by himself with the consideration
of the Afflictions of his Passion, which made him to sweat blood. Thirdly, in
the house of Pilate, and on mount Caluary by the hand of the Tormentors, and
ministers of Satan, And all this that I may persuade myself, that I am
likewise to be prepared to shed my blood, and to suffer in these three sorts.
First, subjecting myself to what the ministers of God shall ordain, although
it be to the cutting of, and circumcizing what I most love. Secondly, I being
the Tormentor of myself, moving myself with such Consideration to works of
Penance, and mortification, chastizing my flesh, and depriving myself of
whatsoever hinders me in the Service of God, though it greiueth me never so
much. Thirdly, suffering those Dolours, and Afflictions which happen unto me by
the hands of my enemies, though they do it with a damnable intent.

O good JESUS, Colloqui^.
by that blood which thou shedst upon these three occasions, I beseech thee
encourage my heart, that if need be, it may offer itself to shed it blood
upon the like occasions. And seeing it has so much to circumcize, which self
Love detaineth it from doing; circumcize it, o Lord, by thy own hand, and lay
a plot that others may circumcize it, that there may remain in it no
superfluous thing that may be displeasing to thy divine majesty. Of this
shedding of blood which happened in the Circumcision, there may be made another
very devout meditation, in that form that shall be set down in the fourth
part, concerning the blood that our Savior Christ shed in his passion.

The XXI. Meditation. Luc. 2.21 D. Th. 3. p. q. 37. ar. 2
Of Imposing upon our Savior the name of JESUS.
The first Point.
FIrst, I am to consider who Imposes this name upon the Child, and for what
cause, and how he accepts it. Pondering how the principal giver of this
name, was not the VIRgin, nor S. Joseph, nor the Angel, but the eternal
Father: for the excellencye of this Child is so great, that no Creature,
neither of Earth, nor of Heaven was able of himself, to give him a name
befitting him, but only his eternal Father, who knew him, and knew the end
wherefore he was Incarnate, and what office he was to execute, as he was man.
And for this cause, among many names that he might have given him, he would
have him called JESUS, which is to say, a Savior. For his coming into the
World was principally to save us, and this was his Office. And albeit others
had this name, yet they were but figures, and shadows of this Sovereign
Child: who with full mouth, and thorough his excellencye deserves to be
called, JESUS, Savior, and Deliverer not only of bodies, but also of Souls,
which he does with three admirable excellencyes.

First,

Secondly, Nun, Deuteronomy. 31.7.20.
into the land that flows with the milk, and honye of temporal Delicacies,
which recreate the body, but into the Land that flows the milk, and honye
of eternal Delicacyes, which recreate, and fill the Soul without end.

The third excellencye is, Isa. 63.1.
And therefore this our Lord being asked who he was, answered, Ego qui loquor
Iustitiam, and qui propugnator sum adisaluandum. I that speak Justice, and am
a defendor to save.

O most sweet JESUS, Colloquie.
happy may be unto thee this name so glorious, which is given thee this day. I
rejoice that it is not an emptye name, nor a name of Shadow, as others have
had it, but a name full of truth, and of all perfection. Rejoice, o my Soul,
with the excellencies of this so sovereign a Savior, and say with the
Prophet: I will joy in our Lord, Abac. 3.18
and will rejoice in God my JESUS, and my Savior: for he is my fortitude: he
will give me feet like a Stagge to run away from Sin, and as a Conqueror
he will exalt me above the Heavens with his Saintas, with whom I may praise
him with Hymns, and with Psalms, world without end. Amen.

I may likewise ponder how our B. revealed them unto her, and in her heart she
did ruminate, and confer them; and therefore on this day she with great
reverence, and devotion took his name in her mouth, and said, his name
shallbe JESUS. O what great Joy felt the most sacred VIRGIN, when this first
time she pronounced this most sweet name of JESUS, and not she only, but
glorious S. Joseph, and the rest that were present, and heard this name, felt
a celestial fragrancye, and sweetness. For then began to be fullfilled that
which is written in the Canticles: Cant. 1.2
Oil powered out is thy name: therefore have young maids loved thee. Until
this hour, this sweetest name made no odor of itself, because it was locked
up, and enclosed: now that it manifested itself, it powered out a most sweet,
and odoriferous fragrancye, cheering, comforting, and affecting those pure, and
chaste Souls that either pronounce it, or hear it, the which are inflamed
with the Love of this our Lord, thorough the sweetness of his holy name, but
above all our most blessed LADY the VIRGIN being most pure, and undefiled, and
knowing best the sovereign mysteries of this name. O with what pleasure
repeated this B. LADY those words of her Canticle: My Soul does magnifye
our Lord, and my spirit reioiceth in God my JESUS, and Savior: Because he has
regarded the humillitye of his handmaide, for behold from henceforth all
generations shall call me blessed: because he that is mighty has done great
things to me, and holy is his name.

O Sovereign VIRGIN beseech thy Son to imprint in my Heart that
estimation, Colloquie.
and love of this holy name, that he imprinted in thine. O most sweet name,
pour down upon me thy Celestial fragrancye, that my weak, sick, and
miserable Soul may be comforted, and healed therewith, and may be free from
those miseries wherein it is plunged, enjoying the fruit of her abundant
faluation.

Lastly,

I thank thee, o good JESUS, Colloquie.
for this will which thou had to save us, accepting the office with the name
of Savior, fulfill it, o Lord, effectually in me, and seeing thou art JESUS,
Este mihi JESUS, Be to me JESUS, be my Savior.

The Second Point.
SEcondly, I will consider the causes, why this name was given him on the eigth
day, at his Circumcision: for albeit the Angel declared it before the
Incarnation to the blessed VIRGIN, and afterward to S. Joseph: yet in the
Circumcision it was manifested for two principal causes. First, for the
honor of the Child, for his father seeing him so humbled, that he bare the
likeness of a Sinner, would that he should then be exalted, giving him a name
above all names, which is the name of JESUS, that we might understand, that not
only he has no Sin, but that he is the Savior of Sinners, and pardoner of
Sins. This is, to move me to give infinite thanks to the eternal Father,
for thus honoring his Son, when for his Love he humbles himself: whereby he
gives me an assured pledge, that if I humble myself, he will also exalt me,
Apoc. 2.17
and will give me a new name so glorious, that none shall know how to esteem
it, as it ought to be esteemed, until he receive it, and that God
communicates his greatenesses in glory.

Secondly, to make manifest, that the name, Apostle) there is no remission of
Sins. Heb. 9.22
And therefore our sweet JESUS taking the office of a Redeemer, gives in
earnest of the price that he is to pay for our ransom, a little of that blood
which he sheddeth in his Circumcision, with a determination to pay the whole
price entirely in his passion, shedding for us all the blood that he has. True
it is, that this little was a sufficient price for all the Sins of the World,
yea, if there had been a thousand other Worlds, because it was the blood of
God: but his Charity, and Liberallity would, that the price should be all his
blood: to which end he gave license to all the instruments that are on Earth
for shedding of blood, to draw out his blood with greiuous Dolor, and
Contempt: to wit; the Knife, Whippes, Thorns, Nails, and Spear. The knife
on this day opened the first fountain of blood, but that was presently
closed. The other instruments afterward opened others, which closed not till
all his blood was run out.

O sweetest Savior, Colloquie. Isa. 12.3.
vhose fountains, albeit they are of blood, shed with great dolor, yet they
are also fountains of the living water of infinite thanks, which are to be
gathered with great reioicing, and Love. May my Soul praise thee for this
infinite Charity, wherewith thou openest these fountains, commanding me to
approache with alacritye, to enjoy the price that thou sheddest with such
pain. O my Soul what have thou reason to do for thy own Salvation, when as
thy Savior does so much for it? If it cost him his blood, is it much that it
should cost thee thine? Behold me here, o Lord, ready to shed my blood for
thy Love, so that thou will make me partaker of thine. Amen.

The third Point.
THirdly, I will consider the greatenesses of this sweet name; the great
proffit that we reap by it; and the manner how we are to make our commodity
thereof: but before we enter into this consideration, I am to beseech the
eternal Father, that for the glory of this most holy name, he will be pleased
to illuminate me, that I may know his greatenesse for if (as S. 1 Corint. 12.3.
Paul says) no man can duly say JESUS, but in the holy Ghost: then can no
man worthily ponder, and understand what is contained in the name of JESUS if
he be not prevented, and aided by the same holy Ghost.

This presupposed I will consider how the name of JESUS, Christ our Lord,
reducing them to three heads: for that it is the Sum of all the perfection
that agree to him as he is God: and of all the graces, and Virtues that he
has, as he is man: and of all the Offices, that as he is God and man, he
does unto men. So that I may well infer, if he is JESUS, then is he
infinitely good, holy, wise, omniponent, and full of mercy: and the very
Goodness, sanctitye, and Wisdom of God: for all this is needful to complye
with the name of JESUS, 1 Corint. 1.30.
who (as S. Paul says) is made unto us, Wisdom, Justice, Sanctification, and
Redemption. Likewise, if he be JESUS, then he is exceedingly mild, humble,
patient, courageous, modest, obedient, and Charitable: for he is to be the
pattern of all these Virtues; Joan. 1.16
and of his fulness all men are to receive the Graces, and Virtues wherewith
they are to be saved. Again, if he be JESUS, then he is our master, our
Physician, our Father, our Judge, our Pastor, our Protector, and our Advocate.
So that in JESUS only we have all things: and therefore I may say unto him,
JESUS meus, and omnia.

O my JESUS, Colloquie.
and my all things: If I be sick, thou art my Health: Ex D. Amb. lib. de
Virg. ad finem.
and my all things: If I be sick, thou art my Health: if hungrye, thou art
my fulness: if I be poor, thou art my Riches: if weak, thou art my
Strength: if I be ignorant, thou art my Wisdom: and if I am a sinner, thou
art my Justice, my Sanctification, and Redemption. O my JESUS, and my all
things: grant me, that I may love thee above all things, and that in thee only
I may seek my repose, and perfect sacietye: for in thee only is altogether all
that, which can satiate me: for thou only art my sole summum bonum, to whom
be honor, and glory world without end. Amen.

Hereupon, I may also discourse, names that the Prophets give the Messiah:
such as are those related by the Prophet Isaias saying: Isa. 9.6.
That he shall be called God, Strong, Admirable, Counselor, Father of the World
to come, and Prince of Peace. Pondering how the name of God is fitting to
JESUS: for if he had not been God, he could not have remedied us; and the
name of Strong, or valiant, for he is to fight against, and to vainquish the
Devils; the name of Admirable, for all that is in him, his Incarnation, Life,
and Death is all new, and marvelous. JESUS likewise is a Counselor, and the
Angel of the great Counsel, for his Doctrine is repleate with admirable
Counsels. JESUS is the Father of the World to come, engendring us in the
being of Grace, and giving us the inheritance of Glory. He is the Prince of
Peace, pacifying us with God, and with men, with abundance of all peace.

O great JESUS, Colloquie.
how well befitteth thee the greatenesse of these names: and seeing they are
not names emptye, but full, work in me that which all of them signifye, that I
may glorifye thee, for the glory that thou have from them. Amen.

From hence I may ascend to ponder the benefits that I have in this sweet
name of JESUS: Considerations, I am to collect a great Desire that this most
holy name may be always fixed in my memory to be mindful of it: in my
understanding to meditate on it: and in my Will to love, and to rejoice in it.
I am to imprint it in my Heart, that it may be always united with me: and to
keep it in my Tongue, to praise, and to bless it, delighting to publish the
greatenesses thereof, taking it for the beginning, and end of all my speeches,
and naming it with high reverence both interior, and exterior: Phil. 2.10.
seeing (as the Apostle says) In the name of JESUS every knee boweth both of
Heaven, Earth, and Purgatory; yea, and those of Hell in dispite of them,
shallbe forced to respect him.

O sweet JESUS, Colloquie.
be JESUS unto me in all my faculties, exercizing in them the office of JESUS,
that they may likewise be exercized in all that pertains to thy honor, for
ever, and ever. Amen.

The XXII. Meditation. Of the coming of the three kings of the East to adore
the Child: and of their entrance into Jerusalem.
The first Point.
FIrst, D. Th. 3. p. q 36. ar. 7. and 8. Matt. 2.1
is to be considered the apparition of the Star in the East, when it
appeared, for what end, and what effects it wrought in those three kings, or
Sages. First, new borne in Bethlehem should be known, and adored, not only of
some Jews, but also of some Gentiles, having sent an Angel to declare the
news of this birth to the Shepheardes, the same day he created in the East, a
most beautiful, and bright shining Star, to be a sign that the Messiah, and
king of Israel was borne, of whom Balaam had prophesied, Number. 24.17.
desiring that they also should come to acknowledge, and to adore him, seeing
for the good of all in general he was borne.

I give thee thanks, o sovereign Father, Colloquie.
for the care thou have, that thy Son should be known, and adored, by the
Gentiles, as well for his Glory, and Honor, as also for the proffit of those
that are to know, and to adore him. O that all did know, and adored him, that
all might participate the fruit of his Coming!

Secondly. Slothfulness in seeking Christ, and the punishment thereof.
how that there were many in the East that saw this Star, that admired at
the beauty of it, and that understood what it signified: but there were none
that moved, but only the three kings, who resolved to go to seek out this
king, whose Star they had seen: the rest would not stir, for they were
loath to leave their Houses, their wealth, their Wives, and their freindes, and
to depart out of their own Country to undertake such a long, and laborious
journey, into a strange Land, and to an uncertain place: and the flesh, and
the Devil augmented all these difficulties, to hinder them from this journey:
that being fullfilled in them which is written: The Sluggard says, A Lion,
Prou. 22.13. and 26.13.
and a Lioness are in the way, I shallbe killed in the midst of the
Street, to avoid this Danger, I will not go from home. But these wretches
flying from the Lion encountered with the Bear, Amos 5.19.
and flying from temporal Death, fell into eternal: for it is to be believed
that this was the cause of their eternal Condemnation, they remaining in the
darkness of their Infidellitye. And this I am to apply to myself, pondering
how often the Star of divine Inspiration appears within my Soul,
soliciting me to seek Christ, and to embrace his Pouertye, Humillitye, and
Virtues: and albeit I understand what this Star means, yet I will not move,
nor stir a foot to seek him, because I will not loose my Commodities, nor
abandon those things that I love, and because I will not suffer a little
Affliction, faining Difficulties when there are none at all: and so flying the
frost, Job 6.16.
which is the Afflictions of the Earth, the snow will fall upon me, which is
the Chastizement of Heaven, our Lord God leaving me frozen, and abandoned: and
the Star which appeared for my Salvation, shallbe a witness against me to my
Condemnation.

Thirdly, Christ, letting others alone in their blindness, and miserye. And
by this shall I know the efficacye of Gods divine Inspiration, and will humbly
beseech our Lord to prevent me therewith, and to say to me, as he said to
Abraham: Genesis 12.1
Go forth of thy Country, and out of thy kindred, and out of thy Fathers
house, and come into a Land which I will show thee. But if God has already
done me this favor, that with the Light of another Star, he has
effectually called me out of the World to seek him in Religion, leaving
others in the midst of those turmoyles, and traffickes, I am to give him many
thanks, and am humbly to beseech him, that he will be pleased to send often
into my Soul such like Stars, and Illuminations, that they may move me to
abandon all, that hinders me from loving him, and to follow him with
perfection.

Lastly, Matt. 20.13.
that many are called, but few are chosen: for among so many men of the East,
three only were chosen for this enterprise, the holy TRINITY selecting them for
the first fruits of the elected among the Gentiles.

O blessed TRINITYE, Colloquie.
make me of the number of these three, that following thy divine Vocation, I
may confess, adore, and glorifye thee, world without end. Amen.

The Second Point.
SEcondly, I am to consider the departure of these kings from the East, and
their Voyage, till they arrived at Jerusalem. first, how these kings with that
lively faith, which they had, cast themselves into the hands of God, and
began their Voyage, carrying with them gifts to offer unto the Child: and
setting themselves in their Way, they suddenly perceived the Star to move
it self, as if it would be their guide in that journey, whereat they rejoiced
with exceeding great joy, praising, and glorifying God for the great
Providence, and care he had of them: from whence I will collect, that if
trusting in God, and building upon Faith, I begin to seek him, his Providence
will not be failing to provide me a guide, and a Helper to prosecute my
journey; and the divine Spirit, and the Grace of my Vocation, will go always
before me like a Star guiding, and directing my paths, Exo. 13.21
as he guided the Israelites through the Deserte, going before them, showing
them the way by day in a pillar of a cloud, to defend them from the Sun; and
by night in a pillar of fire, that might show them light, to be at both times
their Guide. So likewise our Lord will guide me, protecting me in the day of
Prosperitye, and in the night of Adversity, defending me from the heates of
sensual, and Worldely temptations, and likewise from Coldenesses,
Lukewarmenesses, and Pusillanimities.

Secondly, I will ponder, four Stars, are reduced to one which is God, Apoc.
2 28 and 22.16
who guides us by them. And to me it belongs directly to follow what this
Star dictateth unto me, without turning to the right hand, nor to the left,
endeavoring not to do any thing that may be offensive in his eyes.

Thirdly, Jerusalem, suddenly by Gods ordination the Star disappeared, they
remaining therefore very sad, and afflicted. This the divine Providence
ordained to make proof of their faith, and loyaltye, and to give them
occasion to exercize great Virtues at their entrance into Jerusalem: and that
wanting the guide of Heaven, they might seek such guidance as God has left on
Earth, which is, the Sages, and Teachers of his Law, and the Prelates, and
Superiors in his Church, and therefore these Sages were not dismayed, neither
accoumpted they themselves deluded, neither did they leave their enterprise to
return to their own Country; but determined to enter into Jerusalem to
seek what they desired; instructing me by their example, what I ought to do,
when God hides himself from me, and when sensible devotion fails me, and
when I find myself in darkness, and in temptations: for in such cases, I
must not be distrustful, nor turn back from what I have begun, but must use
those means that I may, to seek, and to find God, having recourse to his
ministers, as it is said in the book of Canticles, that the spouse, that is,
Cant. 3.6
the just Soul, being thoroug the absence of her Husband in darkness, and in
the obscurity of night, she rises up to seek him in the streets, and
corners of the Cittye, exercizing herself in holy works, and regarding the
examples of other just ones: and then she asks those which watch, and guard
the Cittye, which are the Prelates, whither they have seen whom her Soul
desires, that they may inform her, and teach her where, and how she may
find him, and in this manner she found him, and so found him the Sages.

O eternal God, Colloquie.
give me the faith, and Constancye of these men, that I may seek thee with
that loyaltye, and perseverance that they sought thee, coming with humillitye
to take humane means, when divine means lie not open unto me.

The third Point.
THirdly, I am to consider the entrance of these kings into Jerusalem; and the
demand they made, saying: Where is he that is borne king of the Jews;
wherein are resplendent the great Virtues of these men. For first, Messiah,
promised to the Jews, and they doubted not here of, but only of the place
where he was to be borne; for he that revealed unto them the first, revealed
not the second unto them.

Secondly, they showed great magnanimitye, Herod, for asking in his Country,
and Court for another king: yet for all this, they entered not hiddenly, nor
demanded secretly in Corners, but publicly, and in his own palace. O
heroical Confidence, o courageous Portitude, inspired by this newe-borne king,
who though he hid from these Sages the light of the visible Star, he hid
not from them the invisible light of faith, by whose power the Saints
overcome kingdoms, Heb. 11.33
work, Justice, and obtain the fullfilling of all their promises. Colloquie.
O my Soul have a lively Faith in thy God, for by his power thou shall break
Walls, Psalm. 17.30
animate thyselfe to break thorough difficulties fear not to set upon
Dangers, for he will protect thee, and set thee at liberty from them.

From this Faith, Herod was troubled, and all Jerusalem with him, yet they
themselves were not troubled. Wherein I will ponder how Herod was troubled
because he was a Tirant, and ambitious, and so feared least he that was borne
might deprive him of his kingdom. But that which is most to be admired is,
that the Jews also were troubled at that, for which they should rather have
rejoiced, attending more to flatter, and to give Contentment to a Tyrant king,
then to the king of Heaven that was promised unto them. Whereby I may learn
how perilous a thing it is, to entertain strict amitye with potent, and
vicious Personages, which are easily troubled with Passions of Hatred, Anger,
Revenge, and Ambition; for they being troubled, I may also be troubled with
them. But if I trust in God, as did the Sages, I shall not be troubled, though
all others be troubled: rather I shall say with the Prophet David: Psalm. 26.1
etc.
Our Lord is my Light, and my Health, whom shall I fear? Our Lord is the
Protector of my life, who shall make me tremble? If Armies of enemies come
against me, my Heart shall not fear; and though they make great war against
me, I will not be dismayed, but will hope in our Lord.

The fourth Point.
FOurthly, I am to consider, how Herod having heard this demand, consulted
thereupon with the high Preistes, and the Scribes of the People; who aunswering
him that this king should be borne in Bethlehem of Judah, for that it was so
foretalde by Micheas the Prophet, Mich. 3.2
he said unto the Sages: that they should there inquire, and seek for the
Child, whom having found they should give him advise thereof. Wherein the
providence of God is many ways resplendent; First, in that he makes use of
the wiched, to favor the intentions of those that are good: as he made use of
Herod, to discover unto the Sages the place of the birth of our Savior:
fullfilling that which is written, Pro. 11.29 Romans 8.28
and to them that love God, all things cooperate to their good. Secondly, it is
resplendent, Mala. 2.7
of whom he says by a Prophet, that their Lips keep knowledge, which they
hold as it were in a cheste of trust, to teach the doubtefull things of the
Law to those that demand them, for they are the Angels, and messengers of
our Lord, and the manifesters of his will.

The Providence of God is likewise resplendent in having given us the divine
Scriptures, wherein there is most sufficient light to know Christ, to seek,
and to find him: without having need of any miraculous Star, or new
revelation, but only fervent Prayer, and profounde meditation: according to
that which our Savior Christ said unto the Jews: Search the Scriptures,
Joan. 5.39
for you think in them to have life everlasting, and the same are they that
give testimonye of me.

O sweet JESUS that saydest, Ask, Colloquie.
and you shall have, seek, and you shall find: illuminate me that I may seek
thee in thy sacred Scriptures, so that I may find thee, and that I may search
out the eternal life contained in them, in such sort that I may obtain it.

Finally, Gentiles coming from Countries so far distant, and with so great
labor, and travel to seek Christ: the Jews who so many years had expected
him, being so near him, yet moved not to seek him. And though they advised
the Sages where they might find him, yet they took not this advise to
themselves; that the veritye of that might be manifested, which was afterward
spoken by this our Lord: Ioa. 6.44
No man can come unto me, unless the Father that sent me, draw him. But these
wretches were not drawn by the Father, for they delighted more in pleasing a
Tyrant: and deferring their going till the Sages were returned, they never
performed it. Wherefore taking warning by other men's harms, I will remove all
impediments, that may any ways hinder the eternal Father from calling me by
his inspirations, and joining me with Christ, not deferring to another time to
obey those which he shall give me: for delay may be peradventure the cause of
my perdition?

O eternal Father, Colloquie. Psalm. 65.5.
whose judgments upon the Sons of men, are terrible, but yet just; by that
Love which thou bear to thy Son I beseech thee, that seeing thou have so
great a desire, that he should be known, and adored by all men, cast me not
of thorough my own Sin, and slackenesse, leaving me overwhelmed therein, but
with efficacye pull, and draw me unto thee, that I may seek, and find him,
know, and adore him, world without end, to thy Glory. Amen.

The XXIII. Meditation. Matt. 2.9
Of the departure of the Sages from Jerusalem, and their entrance into the
Inn at Bethlehem, and what happened there.
The first Point.
THe Sages having heard Herod's answer, departed from Jerusalem the way of
Bethlehem, in quest of the new borne king: and at that very instant, the
Star again discovered it self unto them, at whose sight they reioiced with
exceeding great joy: Gauisi sunt gaudio magno valde.

Here I am to ponder first the Care of these kings, in prosecuting their
intention: Jerusalem, and from the Court of king Herod, flying from the
noise, and unquietness thereof: whereby they teach us how puntually we ought
to apply ourselves to the business of our Salvation, departing from the noise
of the World, and flying to the place where we are to find God, saying with
David: Psa. 54.7.
Who will give me wings like a Dove to fly, and take my rest? and having them
given him, he says: Behold I presently fled, and retired myself, and
inhabited in solitariness, and in the place of Quietness, and peace, where
God uses to inhabit. And if king David desired to fly the noise of his own
Court; and these Sages the noise of Herod's court: how much more reason is it,
that I, if I be a religious man, or if I desire to be a spiritual man, should
fly from the Courts of kings, and Princes, except it be, when some precise
necessitye, and the Will of God obliges me to remain therein?

Secondly, Bethlehem without the Star: yet our Lord would that it should
again appear unto them, and cause Joy in them, and that, no ordinarye Joy,
but an exceeding great Joy, heerewith to reward the Afflictions they
suffered in Jerusalem, the perils whereunto they opposed themselves, their
diligence to know where they should find the king they inquired after, and to
convert the Sorrows they had passed, into exceeding great Joy, fullfilling
that of the Prophet David, who said, Psa. 93.19
that according to the multitude of his sorrows was the greatenesse of the
Consolations that recreated his Soul.

O great God, Colloquie.
and loving father, who will not carefully seek thee? who will not suffer thy
absence with patience? who vill not do his diligence to find thee, when thou
treatest with such Love those, that seek thee with perseverance?

The second Point.
THe Sages arriving at Bethlehem, Matt. 2.9
the Starr^ stood over the place where the king, whom they sought, was borne;
and entering into the house, they found the Child with MARYE his mother.

In this case I will first consider the great noueltye, and admiration it
caused in the Sages,

O blessed king, Colloquie.
seeing that already thou beginnest to triumph over the World, captiuating
the Understandings of the Wise for the service of thy faith, captiuate also
mine very forcibly, that I may triumph over the World, contemning for thy
Love, all that therein is.

Secondly, they found the Child with MARYE his mother. The which were
likewise spoken of the Shepheardes; to signifye, that regularly JESUS is not
found without his mother, nor his mother without JESUS: for whosoever is a
true Lover of JESUS, is immediately devoted to his mother: and whosoever is
devoted to his mother, obtains the Love, and amitye of JESUS: and seeing both
are so united together, I am to advance myself in the Love, and service of
them both: for the love of the one, confirms, and perfecteth me in the Love
of the other.

Thirdly, Messiah promised to the Jews, and the Savior of the World: and
caused in them such an exceeding interior Joy, that it replenished their
whole Soul: for if the sight of the material Star caused in them so great
Joy, Apoc. 2.28 and 22.16.
what Joy would arize in them to behold JESUS the star of the morning, and
Lord of all Stars? O how full of Content were they to behold this divine
star? that being proportionally fullfilled in them which was spoken by the
Prophet David: Psalm. 16.15
I shallbe filled when thy shall appear glory.

O glory of the Father, Colloquie.
bright-shining star of the morning, illuminate me with thy light: fill me
with be holding thee: recreate me with thy splendor, and replenish me with
good things by thy celestial influence. Happy are they that find thee, though
it be in a manger; for the baseness of the place, obscureth not the
greatenesse of thy glory: it rather tempereth the Immensitye of thy splendor,
that men may contemplate thee with more taste.

The third Point.
THe Sages prostrating themselves on the ground adored the Child, Matt. 2.11
and opening their treasures they offered to him gifts; gold, frank^ncense,
and mirrhe.

Three especial things the Sages observed here in service of the Child; all
which were prophesied by the royal Prophet David. Psalm. 71.9
The first was, David beginning here to be fullfilled which says: Psa. 71.9
Those of Ethyopia shallbe prostrate before him, and those who before were his
Enemies shall kiss the Earth in token of subjection.

The second was to adore him, Latria, acknowledging with a lively Faith, that
that Child was their true God, and Creator, who was borne for the redemption
of the whole world. And in this Faith they spoke unto him, and gave him
thanks for the favor he had done them, in having come to redeem them, and
especially in having drawn them with his Star to acknowledge him. And there
they offered themselves to be his perpetual Vassalls, with a determination to
serve him for ever, fullfilling that of the Prophet: Psa. 71.11
All the kings of the Earth shall adore him, and all nations shall serve him.

O king of kings, and Lord of Lords, Colloquie.
I rejoice to see thee, so reverenced, and adored by these kings, and Sages of
the Earth. O that all others would reverence, and adore thee like they. Do, o
Lord, Isa. 45.24 Psalm. 85.9.
that that may be presently fullfilled, which thou spakest by thy Prophets,
that all nations should bow their knees before thee: let all people whom thou
have made come prostrate to adore thee, and glorifye thy holy name. Amen.

The third thing that the Sages did, Prophets, Psalm. 71.10 Isa. 60.6.
that the kings of Arabia, and of Saba should offer him gifts, and presents of
Incense, mirrhe, and gold with praises of our Lord.

Then will I ponder how pleasing to the Child JESUS was the offering of these
men, Luc. 21.2 3.
because of the good will wherewith she did offer them; how much more was
he'pleased with these kings, who with so great good will offered unto him,
like Abel, Genesis 4.4.
of the most precious that they had? O what thankefullnesse demonstrated he
unto them, not with exterior words, for he spoke not: but with the interior
words of Inspirations, communicating unto them great, and celestial gifts!
And here I may piously consider that in return of these three gifts, he
gave them other three, largely augmenting in them the gold of Wisdom, and
Charity: and the Incense of Prayer, and Devotion; and granting unto them the
mirrhe of Incorruption, preserving them from falling into greiuous Sins, with
perseverance in Love.

In imitation of these holy kings I am to prostrate myself before the Child
JESUS, Joan. 4.24
and to adore him, as he will be adored in spirit, and in truth: and to open
the treasures of my heart, not in the presence of men to be pleasing unto
them: but in the presence of God, only to give him contentment, and to offer
unto him the burning, and shining gold of Charity, and Love toward God, and
toward my neighbors: the most odoriferous Incense of Prayer with high
elevated Affections of Devotion: and the most selected mirrhe of perfect
mortification of myself, exercizing virtuous works, without opening my
treasures in such manner, that the Thieves of Pride, and Vaine-glorye may rob
me of them. And particularly every exterior work that I shall do, should
carry these three gifts for Companions, doing it for Love, with Prayer, and
Devotion, and with necessary Mortification, that it may be done well, and
perfectly, relying upon the Liberallity of this our Lord, who will also reward
this my offering, retourning me in exchange great augmentation of these
gifts: Eccles. 31.27. Proverb. 22.29.
seeing hereupon the holy Spirit says: that, he that is swifte, and diligent
in his works, shall have no infirmitye, and shall obtain favor with kings.

Besides this, three vows: that of Chastitye with the mirrhe of mortification
of the flesh; that of Pouertye with the Gold of all the temporal things,
that are in the world, desiring to give him them all, if they were mine: and
the vow of Obedience denying myself, and melting molike Incense, in the fire
of Divine Love, to give myself wholely to God.

Go to then, o my Soul, offer thy Vows, Colloquie.
and Presents to our Lord, beholding him, not like David, as he is dreadefull,
and terrible, Psalm. 75.13
as he takes away the spirit, and Life from the Princes, and kings of the
Earth, but as he is an amiable Child, giving to these kings a divine Spirit,
by taking away their worldely spirit, O king of Heaven, accept the Vows, and
Gifts that I have offered thee, taking from me my own Spirit, that beguileth
me, and giving me thy spirit, that reuiueth me.

The fourth Point.
THen I am to consider the sweet Conference between the blessed VIRGIN, and
these kings, they making relation unto her of the star, which they had seen
in the East, and of what had passed in Jerusalem, pondering how they offered
themselves to her service, how full of admiration they were to behold the
resplendent Sanctitye of our LADY, and to see the pouertye of the place where
she was. And albeit S. Joseph was not present at their first entrance, that
the Sages might understand that the Child had no father on earth: yet a while
after he might come, and they might discourse with him of the same things. O
how full of Content might the VIRGIN be to hear them? and how might she keep
them in her memory, to meditate upon them by herself? How thankful might
she be to the Sages for the travel they had undertaken, in coming to adore
her Son? and what divine things, might she recounte unto them, to confirm
them in their faith? 3 Reg. 10. 1. etc.
O Queen of Saba, that in person of these kings thy Children, come anewe
with gifts to behold the true king Solomon, how full of admiration wast thou,
contemplating the infinite wisdom that shined in his poor house, and in his
poor Company? o with what an affection might thou say beholding the
blessed VIRGIN, and S. Joseph: Blessed, o Lord, are thy Servants, that stand
ever before thee, hearing, and learning thy infinite wisdom!

O Sovereign VIRGIN, Colloquie.
more wise then the Queen of Saba, who like a mistress did on this day
teach the Sages the wisdom of Heaven, which the World attaineth not unto;
teach me the way how to serve thy Son, as these new Disciples of his, and
thine did serve him.

Finally, I will consider how the Sages being doubtful, whither they should
return to Horod, or no, because of their word that they had given him, and
desiring to know the will of God, with this care they lay down to sleep: And
in their sleep they received an answer, Matt. 2.12.
from our Lord, that they should not return to Herod, and so they went back
another way into their Country. Herod: but also to free them from the
vexations they should have had by that cruel Tyrant, if they had returned
unto him. Whereby I may see how happy I shallbe, if I rely upon God, seeing
his Providence will not fail me in Afflictions, but will cut of Perils,
before I fall into them.

The Kings having heard this Commandment did presently fulfill it, Isaias:
Isa. 32.17.
all is ordained for our righteousness, and abundant peace. O how full of
Contentment returned these kings on their way, and how well did they think
their Labor, and Travel employed! for the things of God, although they be
painful in the beginnings, they have always good ends. And therefore it is
great Wisdom to begin by that Labor, whose end shallbe temporal, and
eternal repose, rejoicing in God world without end. Amen.

The XXIIII. Meditation. Of the Purification of the B. VIRGIN: and of the
Presentation of the Child in the Temple.
The first Point.
THe old Law commanded, Leui. 12 2 Luc. 2.12.
that a woman having conceived by a man, if she brought forth a male child,
she should remain forty days retired in her house, as unclean: at the end
whereof, she should go to the Temple to be purified, offering for her Sin a
Lamb, The heroical virtues of the B. Virgin.
and a Turtle: and if she were poor, a pair of Turtles, or Pigeons, desiring
the preiste to pray unto God for her. This Law the B. VIRGIN accomplished with
the exercize of admirable Virtues: especially she exercized six, like the six
leaves of the whitest Lillye, for the which the speech of the celestial
spouse is very fitting unto her, Cantic. 2.2.
As the Lillye among Thorns, so is my beloved among the Daughters.

The first Virtue was, second Virtue was, great Love to puritye, of
Purification, that her beloved might say of her: Thou art all fair my beloved,
Cantic. 4.7.
and there is no spot in thee. The third Virtue was, Heroical Obedience, for
albeit she knew that she was not obliged to keep this law, for that she had
not conceived by the work of man, yet notwithstanding as her Son fullfilled
the Law of Circumcision, so she would entirely fulfill this Law, to conform
herself with other women, and to observe the common Laws of all, without
having exemption, privilege, nor dispensation, and without using therein
Ambages, or Interpretations, even in that wherein, she might lawfully have used
them. And so the forty days being fully ended, with great puntuallitye, and
readiness, she set forward on her way to Jerusalem, with rare modestye, and
Alacritye, rejoicing with her Son whom she bare in her arms, by whose
example she learned this manner of Obedience.

The fourth Virtue was rare Humillitye, Isaias) is like a cloth stained with
menstrueous blood. Isa. 64.6.
The fifth Virtue was, great Love to Pouertye the sister of Humillitye: for
though with the gold that these kings gave her, she was able peradventure to
buy a Lamb, and to offer it, as rich, and noble Women used to do; yet she
would be treated like a poor woman, and offer the Sacrifize that was assigned
to the poor, which was a pair of turtles, or two young pigeons.

The sixth was the great Devotion, six leaves, contains other six little
sprigs with their buttons like gold: so the blessed VIRGIN to these six
Virtues, conjoined diverse Affections of an intention purely, and directly for
the glory of God, inkindled with the fire of Charity, and resplendent with
the gold of caelestiall Wisdom.

O most sacred VIRGIN, Colloquie.
I rejoice to behold thee so rich in Virtues, and so careful, and diligent
in exercizing them; Cant. 2.2 Ex D. Ber. sermon. in Cant.
now I perceive how exceeding true it is, that thou art as a Lilly among
Thorns, for in comparison of thee, we are blacked, and besmeared with the
thorns of our Sins, and thou art a most white, and pure Lilly with the six
leaves of these sovereign Virtues. Well may we see, o sovereign Queen, that
thou did always contemplate this king laid in his manger, and in thy
lap, seeing thy Spirit like spikenard gave it accustomed odor to imitate
him, Cant. 1.11
sending out the most sweet odor of Puritye, Humillitye, and Obedience,
inkindled with the fire of Charity: obtain for me, o blessed LADY, that I
may behold him, and thee with such a spirit, as may send forth the like odor.
Amen.

The second Point.
THe Law likewise commanded that all the first borne of the Hebrews should
be offered to God as holy, Exodus 13.2.
in acknowledgement of the favor he did them, in bringing them out of Egypt,
killing in a night all the first borne of the Egiptians. And for the
accomplishment of this Law, our blessed LADY the VIRGIN carried her Son to
the Temple to offer him to the eternal Father.

Here I am to consider first the Spirit, Behold here, o eternal Father, thy
only begotten Son as he is God, and my only first borne as he is man, he that
was represented by all the first borne that hitherto have been offered unto
thee, and whose offering thou so much have desired. I offer him with all my
Heart in thanksgiving, for having given him me, for I have nothing more
precious to offer unto thee: thine he is, take him unto thee, in whom he
shallbe better employed then in me. I likewise offer him unto thee in the
odor of sweetness for the salvation, and redemption of the whole world.
Receive, o my God, this offering more precious then that of Abel, more sweet
then that of Noe, more holy then that of Abraham, and more excellent then all
those that Moses ordained: and by this I beseech thee to pardon all mortal
men, and to admit them into thy grace, and freindship. O how well pleased
might the eternal Father be with this oblation, as well for the devotion of the
person that offered it, as for the Sanctitye of the offering that was presented
him!

Secondly, Behold here (might he say) o eternal Father, thy only begotten
Son, who was made man to obey thee, and comes into the Temple to honor
thee; here I present myself before thy majesty, and I offer myself to thy
service, and to the accomplishment of thy Will. Psalm. 36.77.51.
And for that neither the Death of so many first borne as perished in Egypt,
nor the offering of the first borne of Israel has been acceptable unto thee,
for the salvation of men, I offer myself to dye for them, that my Death, and
the sacrifize of my blood may appease thy wrath, and deliver thy people from
the servitude of sin. In this sort was fullfilled that speech of S. Paul.
Qui dilexit nos, Ephesians. 5.2
and tradidit semetipsum hostiam, and oblationem Deo in odorem suauitatis. Who
loved us, and delivered himself for us, an oblation, and host to God in an
odor of sweetness. And it is to be believed, that this offering happened in
the morning at such time as in the temple was offered the sacrifize of the
Lamb, Exodus 29.39. Number. 28.4.
called the morning Lamb, that there might be a correspondence between the
figure, and the figured. O how sweet was this offering to the eternal Father,
and how content remained he therewith, as one that was desirous thereof, for
that the offerings of all the other firstborn were of no value, but as they
were representations of this!

Thirdly, I am to imagine, Christ made this offering for all men, yet he made
it likewise particularly for me, holding me present in his memory, and
Heart. And with this consideration in the Temple of my Soul, I will present
myself in spirit before the eternal Father, and in company of the blessed
VIRGIN, and of the Child himself, I will offer him unto him in Thanksgiving,
for having given him to me for my Redeemer, and master, beseeching him to
accept this offering, and for it to reconcile me to himself, and to make me
partaker of his gifts.

O sovereign Father with all the affection of my Heart, I offer unto thee thy
only begotten Son, Colloquie.
and though it being I, that do offer him, I deserve to be rejected, yet the
offering being such as it is, I hope to be admitted, receive it, o Lord, in an
odor of sweetness, and for it grant me remission of my Sins, that with
a pure Heart I may appear in thy presence in the Temple of thy glory. Amen.

The third Point.
THe same Law likewise commanded that these firstborn should be redeemed
for five sicles, Exodus 13.13. Leuitic. 27.6.
and so the blessed VIRGIN redeemed her Son, paying them to the Priest, who
took them, and returned her Son unto her. Upon this passage I am to
consider, who makes this sale of the Child; who it is that buyeth him; with
what price; and for whom; and what benefits arize thereof.

First, and Bountye, which is so far from repenting to have given us, what he
once gave us, that he ratifieth the Donation, inuenting new respects to give
us what he has given us. She that buyeth, five sicles.

O eternal Father, Colloquie.
how cheap do thou sell a thing that is so precious? why do thou equal
this firstborne in price with the rest? if the rest were redeemed for five
sicles, this was to be redeemed for many millions, for he is infinitely more
worth then all the rest. But I now perceive, o Lord, that this is to advise me,
that although the name of this ransom, sounds sale, and price, yet he is
given us freely, and of mere grace, that I may incessantly thank thee for
this new grace, for the which may thou be glorified, and praised by all thy
Creatures world without end. Amen.

I may also consider the Spirit that is included in the price of these five
sicles, by the which is signified the price wherewith is bought the most
precious gold of divine Wisdom, which is Christ; Apoc. 3.17 Isa. 55.1.
in such sort as it may be bought. This price is the mortification of the five
senses, and the acts of the five Virtues which dispose us to obtain Grace,
and the perfection thereof: that is to say: Lively faith, Fear of God, Dolor
for Sins, Confidence in Gods mercy, and an effectual Resolution to obey
God, and wholely to accomplish his holy will.

Therefore, Colloquie.
o my Soul, if thou desire to have Christ to be thine, consider that he is
not bought with gold, nor silver, but with these five sicles of the Spirit,
offer them to the eternal Father, and he will give him unto thee.

Fourthly,

O sweet JESUS, Colloquie.
how willingly do thou suffer thyselfe to be sold, and redeemed, to undo
by thy sale, that which I by sinning did with my Soul, and to redeem it with
thy ransom, that it might be perpetually thine? and yet thy Love stops not
here, for thou art ready to be sold again by a false Disciple, and bought
by thy enemies to take from thee thy life, making an end of our redemption
with thy Death. Blessed be thy immense Charity that is never satisfied, nor
wearied in doing us good. O my Soul rejoice, that the blessed VIRGIN has
bought her Son for thee; be glad that JESUS is already thine, seeing his
Father has given him thee for five sicles. O good JESUS thou art mine by this
new buying, but I yeilde myself to be thine, Cant. 2.16
and with great Confidence will say: My beloved to me, and I to him: be it
so, o Lord, that thou leave not me, nor I never leave thee. Amen.

The XXV. Meditation. Of what happened in the Presentation, Luc. 2.25
with Simeon, and Anna the Prophetess.
The first Point.
IN those days there was a man in Jerusalem named Simeon, and this man was
just, and religious, expecting the consolation of Israel, and the holy Ghost
was in him, and he had received an answer from the holy Ghost, that he
should not see death, unless he saw first the Christ of our Lord.

Upon this point I will consider first, Christ newly borne, raised up two
Prophets that might know him, and manifest him, as he made Zacharias, and
Elizabeth Prophets to manifest him before he was borne: to this end he laid
his hand upon Simeon, preparing him for his office with those admirable
Virtues recounted by the Evangelist: saying first, Eccl. 7.19
Nihil negligit, despises nothing, by making small accoumpt thereof. Secondly,
that he had great hope, Christ for the salvation of his people. thirdly he
joined thereunto fervent, and continual prayers, earnestly requiring this
coming, and that he might be worthy to enjoy it. In this manner he spent his
life, and with these Virtues he made himself worthy to be the habitation of
the holy spirit. From whence I will collect that great puritye, and Sanctitye
of life give a man great confidence to ask, and desire great things at Gods
hands; Exodus 33.18. Cant. 1.6.
like Moses when he said unto God: Show me thy glory, and discover thy face
unto me. And like the Spouse in the Canticles: Tell me, o thou whom my Soul
loves, where thou feedest thy flock, and where thou reposest at noone day.
And like this holy old man who desired to behold the Messiah with his eyes,
and obtained it: for (as S. Bernard says, Sermon. 32. in Cant.
Great faith meriteth great things, and the farther thou stretchest thy
foot of Confidence into the benefits of our Lord, the greater thou shall
obtain of his liberal hand.

Secondly, Christ before his Death: that we might understand, what a
happiness it is, to know how to treat with the holy Ghost, and to have him
within us withfullnesse of grace. For he himself (as S. Paul says)
requesteth in us, and for us, Romans 8.
with gronings unspeakable, giving us assurances, that the prayer which
proceeds from him shallbe heard, and dispatched in convenient time, albeit
the accomplishment thereof be somewhat delayed; as it happened to holy Simeon:
Daniel. 10.2.
for God will have us to be unwearied with hoping, and in this manner to
dispose ourselves to receive what we hope for.

Thirdly, I will ponder, Christ in this life with the eye of Contemplation,
Matt. 5.8 Exodus 33.20. D. Aug. in Soliloq. c. 1
fullfilling herein unto them, that promise which says: Blessed are the
clean of Heart, for they shall see God. O eternal God, which saidest, No man
can see me, and live, Moriar vt te videam, videam vt hic moriar. May I die to
behold thee, and may I behold thee that I may die, may I behold thee in this
life by contemplation, that I may die to myself with perfect mortification:
and may I die this happy death, that I may afterward behold thee in thy
sovereign Glory. Amen.

The Second Point.
THe same day that the blessed VIRGIN carried her Son to the Temple, Luc. 2.27
holy Simeon inspired, and moved by the holy Ghost went likewise thither, and
seeing them enter, he knew by the light of Heaven that that Child was Christ:
and taking him in his arms he blessed God, and said: Now thou do dismiss
thy Servant, o Lord, according to thy word in peace, because mine eyes have
seen thy Salvation, etc.

Here I will consider first the Fidellitye, Christ, and he gives him leave to
take him in his arms, to embrace, and kiss him, and very lovingly to unite
him to himself, for as the Apostle said: Ephesians. 3.20
God is powerful to do all things more abundantly then we desire, or
understand: wherewith I am to animate myself earnestly to serve this our
Lord, who is large in promising, but much more liberal in accomplishing what
he promises, if there be faith in him that receives it. But applying this,
to what now passes, I will consider, that as when as the blessed VIRGIN entered
into the Temple, albeit there where there present many persons of all estates,
and Conditions, as learned men, Preistes, noble men, and Plebeyans: only to
Simeon God opened his eyes with his celestial light, that he might know him
in reward of his good life, and of the Spirit wherewith he came to the Temple:
the rest making no difference between that Child, and others, because
exteriourly he differed not from them: so likewise now among many that come
unto the Church, there are but few that know with celestial light the
presence of JESUS in the blessed Sacrament, and adore him with Devotion,
meriting to receive him in their hearts, and with joy to be partakers of his
gifts. For albeit our Savior Christ desires to give himself to be known of
all men, yet few dispose themselves like Simeon, that he may accomplish his
desire in them.

O my Soul come in Spirit to the Temple where JESUS is, that thou may enjoy
his happy sight, Colloquie.
and may embrace him with the arms of his sweet Love.

Secondly, that he received with the beholding, and touching of that holy babe,
and the great fulness that his Soul received, acknowledging himself well
rewarded for all the Afflictions passed in the long life that he had lived. And
as it seemed unto him that he had no more to desire, nor no more to see in this
life, having seen the Savior, he converted all that was in him to glorifye
God, and to praise him for this favor, protesting that now he should dye in
peace, whenever it was Gods pleasure.

O my Soul, Colloquie.
seek the eminent knowledge of JESUS, with the which thou shall esteem all
that is created as dung, Phil. 3, 8.
that thou may gain Christ in whom thou shals have whatsoever thou can
desire. If thou beholdest him with a lively faith, what more will thou
behold? If thou embracest him with strict Charity, what more would thou
possess? And if he be thine, what can be wanting unto thee? Grant me, o good
JESUS, by the merits of this Saint, some raye of that light which thou gave
him on this day, that I may know thee, and love thee, as he knew, and loved
thee, for over, and ever, Amen.

From this example of holy Simeon, I am to collect two things very proffitable
to attain to a good Death; first, that devout holy men experiment in this
life the accomplishment of the divine promises, as is that hundredth times as
much as they left for Christ, to be heard in their prayers, to be protected by
the divine providence in their necessities, and dangers; and with this
experience they recover great hope, that God will accomplish unto them the
promises of the life to come: and animated with this hope they desire Death to
enjoy them, saying with David: In peace I will sleep, Psalm. 4.10.
and repose, for thou, o Lord, have singularly confirmed me in hope. second is,
that those holy men who have arrived by Contemplation to see Christ, and his
greatenesses, and have tasted the sweetness of eternal things, are forthwith
weary of temporal, as of things vile, and unworthy of their veiwe: and so they
hold life in torment, and Death in desire, saying with S. Paul: Phil. 1 23
I desire to be dissolved, and to be with Christ, to behold him, and to enjoy
him for ever. Therefore, o my Soul, if the peace, and quietness wherein the
Saints, and holy men dye, be pleasing unto thee, imitate the fervor, and
spirit wherein they live, for a fervent life is the cause of a quiet Death.

Finally, Luc. 2.33
and to hear the meruailes that were spoken of him: for (as S. Luke the
Evangelist reports) she, and S. Joseph were meruailing to hear these things,
and glorified the eternal Father, for the knowledge that thereof he gave unto
men.

The third Point.
THe blessed VIRGIN being in the midst of this joy, Simeon blessing her,
Luc. 2.34
said unto her with a prophetical Spirit: Behold this Child is set unto the
ruin, and unto the resurrection of many in Israel, and for a sign which
shallbe contradicted; and thine own Soul shall a sword pearce, that out of
many Hearts cogitations may be revealed.

Concerning this prophecye, first, the dessignes of God in alaying the
Contentments of the VIRGIN; for that when as she was most joyful of the honor
that was done unto her Son, he would discover unto her the Afflictions that
the Child was to suffer, and the sword of sorrow that for his sake should
pierce her Soul, that forthwith she might begin to bear the peircing of that
sword, and might taste the bitterness of his passion.

O most wise, Colloquie.
and most loving God, how much thou likest to give unto thy elected these
mixtures of Consolations, and disconsolations! sometimes thou exaltest them
unto heaven, Ps. 106.26
and again thou abasest them unto the depths: sometimes thou woundest their
heart with the wounds of Love, and sometimes with the sword of dolor;
demonstrating in the one, and in the other the profundity of thy wisdom, and
the sweetness of thy Charity: which seeing thou have so dessigned, behold
me here prepared for all: pierce my Soul with this sword as thou will, so
that I may be accounted in the number of thy elected. Amen.

Secondly, I will ponder two memorable things, Simeon prophesied of the Child:
the first, that he was set for the resurrection, and falling of many: for that
many for his cause should raise themselves from Sin to a high degree of
Sanctitye; and others, for that they would not make their proffit of his
coming, Isa. 8.14. and 15.
should come to fall into the depth of iniquitye, of the which they themselves
are in the fault; for Christ our Lord for his part desires to be a
resurrection unto all, and not a stone of offense unto any. The second is, that
he should be a new prodigious, and admirable sign, but yet a sign which his
enemies should contradict, resisting his Doctrine, calumniating his miracles,
and persecuting his life, even unto the nailing him to a Cross, Isa. 11.10
where he should be to the elected a sign of life, but to the reprobate of
Damnation, by whose power should be discovered the fidellitye, and loyaltye of
the Disciples, which was covered in their Hearts.

Pondering these two things which continue even to this day, I am to be
astonished at the judgments of God in this case, and to be compassionate for
the perdition of such a multitude of Infidells, and evil Christians, procuring
to have my Soul peirced with the sword of Dolor, as that of the blessed
VIRGIN was peirced, and withal beseeching this our Lord, that his coming be
not to my fall, but to my resurrection, and that it may be to me a sign of
life, in whom I may believe, and hope, and whom I may love, and imitate in
being one of his Disciples, whom he calls by the Prophet Isaias, a sign,
and a prodigye, Isa. 8.18.
endeavoring that my Words, and Actions may be admirable like his. And if
hereupon it shall happen that many do contradict, and persecute me, I am to
rejoice thereat, taking it for an assurance that I am much favored by God,
seeing he makes me so like unto his Son.

The fourth Point.
AT this time also the holy Spirit was pleased to manifest the Child to
another holy woman, Luc. 2.36
as he manifested him to a holy man, choosing to this end an ancient widow
whose name was Anne, who spent her life in fasting, and prayer, serving God in
the Temple day, and night. And by Inspiration of the holy Spirit she went unto
the Temple when the Child entered, and knowing by the light of Heaven that he
was the Messiah, she brake sorth into the praises of God, and into speaking
meruailes of the Child to all that expected the redemption of Israel.

Herein we may contemplate the several ways, that God has to cherish,
Simeon before he saw the Savior, he promised that he should see him, to
kindle the desire that he had to see him, and to entertain him with the
promise; but unto Anne we know not that he made any such promise, but that he
suddenly inspired her to go see Christ our Lord, with whose sight he
comforted her, and rewarded the good, and long services that in fourscore, and
four years she had done him.

Secondly, six virtues of this holy widow, whereby she made herself worthy
of this favor, that is, Chastitye, continual Prayer, Fasting, Observation of
Gods law, Devotion to such things as belonged to the divine worship, with
Perseverance in all for many years. In these virtues I am to endeavor to
imitate this holy woman, if I desire to obtain that, which by them she
obtained.

O king of glory, Colloquie.
give me these six wings of the Seraphines that serve thee in the temple of
thy Church, that I may fly with them in thy service, until I arrive to enjoy
thee in the Temple of thy glory world without end. Amen.

The XXVI. Meditation, wherein is set down a form of Prayer, applying the
interior faculties of the Soul to the contemplation of the mysteries, that
have been meditated.
IN the eleventh. of the Introduction of this book, I made mention of a form
of Prayer, by application of the Senses upon the mysteries of our faith; and
it is a form rather of Contemplation, then of meditation: for (as there it is
said in the tenth.) Meditation runs from one thing to another, seeking out
bidden verities, as hitherto has been done: but Contemplation is a simple
beholding of the Truth without varietye of Discourse, with great affections
of Admiration, and Love: and as regularly it is obtained after meditation, so
after we have meditated these mysteries of our Savior Christ, it shall not be
amiss to run over each of them again with this manner of affectuous
Contemplation, which we call Application of the faculties: for as the
exterior faculties do very breifely without the windings of discourses
perceive their objects, and are delighted, and pleased in them: so in this
Contemplation, the interior senses of the Soul (which are her own interior
faculties with the variety of their Acts) without new discourses,
presupposing those which have been done at other times, per ceiue these
Verities, and collect from thence marvelous affections of Devotion, our Lord
preventing them with his especial grace, without the which we shall err in
entering into this manner of Contemplation, as in the place before cited has
been said. Allbeit we for our part, may somewhat aid ourselves in this
manner that follows.

The first Point.
THe first point shallbe to behold with the interior eye of the Soul,
Bethlehem, or in the Temple of Jerusalem, and what they do, with the
circumstances which are the object of the Sight, collecting from them
Affections of Admiration, and Love, of Joy, or Compassion, or Imitation: and
if from these, there happen to proceed any new ponderations, and meditations
(as our Lord uses to communicate in these cases) I am to admit them,
detaining myself in them all, the time that the light shall continue that was
given me.

The practice is this; beholding God-man laid in a Stable, with Beasts, I
will shrink up my shoulders with admiration, and astonishment of so profounde
Humillitye to be resplendent in a Lord of so great majesty. Beholding him
made a tender Babe to make himself more amiable (because Babes ordinarily are
amiable) I will melt myself in the Love of so precious, and beautiful a Babe,
wantonning with him, as with my elder brother, the heir of my father, and so
much mine, that he is borne for me, and for my benefit. Beholding the Heart of
the Child burning in Love, and in Desire of my Salvation, shedding tears of
Sorrow for my Sins, and offering himself for them to the eternal Father, I
will join my Heart unto his, that he may fasten unto it that Love, and that
Sorrow, entering into Discourse with him, that he may join me unto himself.
So likewise beholding his Virtues, his Pouertye, Humillitye, Meekness, and
Patience, I am to collect them to my own use, as one that gathers a nosegay
of mirrhe, to wear before his breast, and to join it to his Heart, saying
unto him with great tenderness: Cano. 1.12
My beloved shallbe to me as a bundle of myrrh, I will always have him in my
eye, that I may never loose the sight of him, nor never forget him. The like
may be done, contemplating our blessed LADY the VIRGIN, and Mother, with
affections of admiration; contemplating with what Modestye, Devotion, and
Reverence she stands before the Child, with a Desire to imitate her: and
beholding what compassion she has of the Tears of the Child, with a spitit
to accompanye her; and to be compassionate with her. Beholding likewise S.
Joseph, or holy Simeon, and the fervor, and Spirit resplendent in them, I will
admire at the gifts that God has given them, with a desire to imitate them in
all that I ought, or am able according to my ability.

The Second Point.
THe second Point is, unto my Heart. Wherein it is to be considered, that not
only in this point, but for any other form whatsoever of mental, or vocal
Prayer, that (as was pointed at in the third. of the Introduction of this
book) being placed before God, and contemplating these mysteries, it is good
for a while to stay with reverence, as one that attends to hear what is
said, or to receive the alms that is usually given him, placing himself as
the Woman of Chanaan said, Matt. 15.27
like a whelpe that stands at the table, fixing his eyes upon those that
eat, hoping they will cast him some small morsel of bread. Psa. 122.2
Or as the Prophet David says, like the good Servant that has his eyes fixed
upon the hands of his Lord, attending what he commands him, as did the
Prophet Abacuch when he said: Abac. 2.1
I will stand upon my watch, and fix ^^y step upon the munition: and I will
behold, to see what may be said to me, and what I may answer to him that
rebukes me. Which is to say: Seated in my Contemplation, I will hearken what
God inspireth into me, and what he speaks within my heart, either
reprehending, and correcting me for the evil that I have committed; or
comforting, and exhorting me to the good that I ought to do: or giving me some
interior answer to what I desire, as the holy Spirit did the like in prayer
to S. Simeon. And having continued a while in this silence, if I feel not some
Inspiration of our Lord, I am not to stand Idle, but to provoke him to speak
unto me, I speaking unto him, and saying with Samuel: 1 Reg. 3.9 Cant. 2.14.
Speak Lord for thy Servant hears. Or as he himself said to the Spouse:
Let thy Voice sound in my ears, for thy Voice is very sweet unto me.

O eternal God that saidest by thy Prophet, Colloquie.
I will lead her into the wilderness, and will speak unto her heart, Ose. 2.14.
cause in my Spirit an interior solitude of wandering Cogitations, that thou
only may speak unto me with thy Inspirations, and that I may hear, and
fulfill what therein thou commaundest me.

Then putting myself in the presence of the Child JESUS, I will with the ear
of my Soul hearken unto the words which he speaks to his eternal Father,
and unto the amorous colloquies he holds with him upon the business of our
Salvation rejoicing to hear them, and making my proffit of them: I will also
hearken unto the exterior Lamentations that he makes, and will learn to
lament my sins: I will hear what this Child would say unto me, if he
should speak to me there where he was, how lovingly he would reprehende my
Pride, and Vanitye, and Curiositye in attire: how he would exhort me to make
myself a child, and to present, and offer myself to the service of his
eternal Father. All these words I am to receive, and to hear, beseeching him
to inspire them into my spirit with a Determination to fulfill them. I will
likewise endeavor to hear what the blessed VIRGIN said, and what the holy
Spirit said to Simeon, and what Simeon himself said when he saw his desire
accomplished, I learning by those words to speak such other words unto God.

The third Point.
THe third point is, Genesis 27.27.
who might say, as Isaac said of his Son Jacob: The savor of my Son is as
the savor of a plentiful feilde which our Lord has blessed. Cant. 1.3
as the Spouse that said: we will run after thee, in the odor of thy
ointments. For the Poverty of Christ, his Humillitye, and Meekness do cast
from them a fragrancye that vanquisheth the heart, and carries it after him
to join it unto him. S. 2 Cor. 2.15.
Paul says of the Just, that they are the good odor of Christ: and
contrarily what an evil odor both to God, and to men is Pride, and
Disobedience, Immodestye, and every other vice, pondering how far this evil
odor was, from that holy place, where the Child, and his mother was, and how
far it ought to be from my Soul, not to give any disguste to whom I owe so
much duty.

O sweet Child, whose Vestements, Colloquie.
which are thy works, are like a feilde of odoriferous flowers: clothe me with
them, that I may smell well to thy eternal Father, that for thee, he may give
me the benediction, that for them thou did merit, may my Soul resent the
fragrancye of thy divine odours, that it may run after thee, imitating thy
Virtues, until it arrive to enjoy the reward of them. Amen.

The fourth Point.
THe fourth point is with the interior Taste, David says: Psa. 33.9.
Taste ye and see that our Lord is sweet. O how it pleased the eternal
Father, to behold the Virtues of his Son! and what pleasure had the Son to
give full content to the Father! O what a sweetness felt this blessed Child
to see himself poor, contemned, and laid in a manger among beasts! how
sweet unto him were the tears that he shed! and how pleasing was it to him
absolutely to fulfill the will of his Father! much more sauorye without
comparison then the milk that he sucked from the breasts of his mother. And in
imitation of him, I will endeavor deeply to resent this sweetness that God
puts in Contempts, and Afflictions; in Pouertye, and Tears, sweetened with
the example of this B. Child. And with this Affection, I will provoke in my
Soul, a great hunger to taste of these things, and to savor the pleasing
tastes of the Spirit, that the sweetness of the flesh may be made vnsauorye
unto me. With this affection I will contemplate the sweetness that holy
Simeon felt at the presence of the Child, which was so great, that it lothed
him to see, and taste any thing of this life, and sweetened unto him even
death itself.

O eternal God, Colloquie. Ps. 30.20
how great is the multitude of sweetness which thou have hidden for those
that fear thee? but how much gerater shall it be to those that love thee? give
me some part thereof, o Lord, to prove, that I may with a good will renounce
the pleasures of the earth, and take pleasure only in those of Heaven. Amen

Contrarily I may ponder how much bitterness lies hidden in Vice, and in the
Soul that follows her own will, and yeildeth to her own passions: and
making reflection upon what passes with myself, when I sin, I shall taste
this bitterness that I feel in myself, and shall presently abhor it, and
spit it up, with a desire never more to taste of it, remembering that of the
Prophet Hieremias: Iere. 2.19
Thy own malice shall reprove thee, and thy own Sin shall reprehend thee:
know thou, and see that it is an evil, and bitter, thing for thee, to have
abandoned thy Lord God.

The fifth Point.
THe fifth point is, Mary Magdalen humbly begging remission of them. And then
with greater Confidence to beg leave of him to touch his hands, to kiss
them, and to play with them, beseeching him to give me his benediction: or like
old holy Simeon, I will take him in my arms, and embrace him with great
Love, beseeching him to unite me to himself, not permitting me to be separated
from him And if I could attain to the perfection of the Spouse that said:
Cant. 1.1
Let him kiss me with the kiss of his mouth. I might aspire to the desire to
touch that divine face, and to unite myself to his Deity, with the union of
perfect Love, satiating myself with only seeing him, and loving him. O what
sweetness is felt in this spiritual touching! Cant. 5.4
with the which as the same spouse said, all her bowels were moved, and
mollified, desiring to admit therein her beloved.

I am likewise to touch the hardenesse of the Childs bed, the rigor of the
cold that he suffered, the straightness of those mantles wherein he was
wrapped, and swadled: and to apply myself to desire, that for our Lords sake
my touching may touch always rough, and hard things, avoiding soft, and
dainety things which he so much abhorred.

This meditation should be concluded with a Colloquye to Christ JESUS our Lord,
beseeching him to purifye, and clear the senses of my Soul, that I may
understand him, and love him, according to his will, desiring to reform, and
renew my Senses (as S. Romans 12.2.
Paul says) to prove, and approve effectually what the good, acceptable, and
perfect will of God is, to his honor, and glory world without end.

Amen.

Another manner of applying in Prayer the interior Senses, with the acts of
several Vrrtues.
Among those Virtues that perfect our Understanding, D. Bonau. in Itinerario
me^tis ad Deu^ c. 4.
and Will, which are the spiritual Senses of the Soul, those five are most
excellent, which are correspondent to the five senses of the body, with whose
acts is practiced a form of Prayer very profitable, exercizing them in this
form about the mysteries that have been spoken of. first part, saying to the
Child JESUS: Domine, Luc. 17.5.
adauge mihi fidem: O Lord increase faith in me, and so quicken it, that I
may live before thee, as if thou were still present in my eyes. Psa. 56.8.
is ready to obey thee, command what thou will, and give me what thou
commaundest me, that I may obey thee according to thy will. Colloquie. Romans
15.13
O God of hope replenish me with all Joy, and peace in believing, that I may
abound in Hope, and in all Virtues, with the fulness of the holy Ghost.
Amen.

The Taste, Abac. 3.18
Ego autem in Domino gaudebo, and exul: abo in Deo IESV meo. I will rejoice in
our Lord, and willbe glad in God, my JESUS, and my Savior.

The Touching, is perfect Charity, which joyneth herself to her beloved, and
embraces him with her two arms, which are, the Love of God, 1 Cor. 6.17.
Cano. 8.6.
and of her Neighbor, and of all things that may please him; making it my
pleasure, that my Spirit may be united with his: and that his Heart may be as
a Seal imprinted in mine.

O beloved of my Soul, Colloquie.
seeing thou commaundest me to put thee as a Seal upon my Heart, and upon my
arm, that my Affections, and Actions may be like unto thine; conioyne thee so
unto me, that I may be united unto thee world without end.

Amen.

The 27. Meditation. Matt. 2.
Of the flying into Egypt.
The first Point.
FIrst, I am to consider what great persecution was raised against our Savior
Christ, being but new borne: the causes thereof: and the means that he chose
to defend himself. Pondering first, Herod instigated by the Devil, and by his
occasion the Jews to petsecute Christ the king new borne, with a desire to
deprive him of his life, albeit for different ends. Herod as a Tirant, fearing
that he would have taken from him his temporal kingdom. The Jews as
Flatterers to please their earthely king. The Devil as Prince of this World,
fearing least this miraculous Child should do him some great Hurt. But the
eternal Father ordained this to much higher ends, willing that his Son
should from his Infancye walk in the way of Persecutions, and afflictions,
Psa. 87.16
that beginning to be fullfilled which Simeon had prophesied, Luc. 2.34
that he should be a sign which all should contradict, to give us to
understand, that his coming was contrary to the Intentions of the World,
which abhors not, nor persecuteth those that are of it faction, but those
which are contrary unto it: And that we may see imprinted in this example the
State of the Primitive Church, and of the righteous Souls, which conceiving
Christ within themselves, and desiring to manifest him by their works, are to
be persecuted by the Dragon of Hell, who (as S. Apoc. 12.17
John says in his Apocalips) desires in them to kill the Spirit of Christ,
that it may not grow up in their Hearts with the exercizes of notable
Virtues. And this may serve me for an advise, and Consolation, when I shall see
myself persecuted for Virtues sake, remembering what our Savior Christ said
to his Disciples: Joan. 15.20.
The Servant is not greater then his maiester: if they have persecuted me, you
also they will persecute. Neither is it reason that I should be exempted from
that universal rule mentioned by the Apostle. 2 Timothy 3.12.
All those that will live godly in Christ JESUS shall suffer persecution, the
Devil provoking it by himself, and by his ministers the Worldelings.

Secondly, Christ being able to free himself from this persecution by many
very easy means, as either by killing Herod, or by making himself invisible,
yet he would not, but took this means, of flying, an argument of weakness,
and miserye: and this he did principally for two causes, the first, because as
to be borne in the World, he left the Commodities that he might have had in
the City of Nazareth, so also he would leave them thoroughout all his
infancye, going far of from his kindred, and parentage. And for this cause now
that he would fly, though he might have gonne into the Country of the three
Sages, where he should have been known, and adored: he would not, but went
into Egypt among Strangers, and Enemies, to have occasion to suffer more,
teaching me by this example to fly from that which is pleasing to the flesh;
and from being known, and reverenced by men: delighting to conceal, and hide
myself until God be pleased to manifest me.

The second cause of his flying into Egypt was, by the way to do good to that
Idolatrous nation abandoned by God: that beginning to be fullfilled which was
prophesied: Behold our Lord will ascend upon a light Cloud, Isa. 19.1.
and will enter into Egypt, and the idols of Egypt shall be moved at his
presence. For our Lord Christ entering into Egypt clothed with the light cloud
of his Humanitye, in the arms of the resplendent Cloud his mother, began to
tread under his feet those Idols which the World adoreth: to wit; Riches,
Honors, and Delicacyes, embracing there Pouertye, Contempt, and Affliction. And
with this example he laid the foundation of that perfection which afterward
shone brightly in Egypt, and that which he planted thoroughout the whole
World, traveling thoroughout it in the light Cloud of his primitive Church,
and of the Congregation of his Apostles, and Disciples, and unto this day he
cease not to plant it.

O most sweet JESUS, Colloquie.
who in the light cloud of the blessed Sacrament of the Altar entrest daily
into thy faithefull; enter into this dark Egypt of my Heart, and throw down
those Idols of earthly affections which it adoreth, that from henceforth I may
only love what thou love, and abhor what thou abhorrest. Amen,

Likewise by this flight of our Savior Christ into Egypt, Herod, is
represented how the Primitive Church flying the persecution of the Jews
should go to the Gentiles carrying with it the Faith, Apoc. 12.6.
and Law of Christ. And genetally, if one man persecute him with his Sins,
he is wont to fly, and to seek out another that will receive him: and
therefore if Christ have been borne in my Soul, I am to endeavor not to
persecute him with my passions, and Luke-warmnesse, Apoc, 3.11.
least he forsake me, and go to another, that shall receive my Crown.

The second Point.
THe Angel of our Lord appeared in sleep to Joseph, saying: Arize, and take
the Child, Matt. 2.13.
and his mother, and flee into Egypt. and be there until I shall tell thee:
for it will come to pass that Herod will seek the Child to destroy him.

Upon this revelation I am to ponder who imposes this Obedience, who
intimates it, upon whom it is imposed, and with what words.

He that principally imposes this Commandment is the eternal Father,
Providence that he has of his only begotten Son: for allbeit he had
determined that he should dye by men, yet because that hour was not yet come,
he had a care to defend him; in sign that he has the like care of the rest of
his adoptiue Children, for the Love that he bears to this his natural Son.
Luc. 10.16
He that hears you, hears me. And for this cause likewise he said by
Malachias the Prophet: Mala. 2.7
S. Joseph, and not to the VIRGIN, because Joseph was head of that familye,
and Gods will was, that the VIRGIN should obey S. Joseph in all that he said,
he had heard of the Angel, and should suffer herself to be governed by him.
And so she did: for as she was humble, and obedient, she stood not upon this
that the advice was not given to her, but to her Husband: neither did she
vainly boaste that God, or his Angels should speak unto her; like the other
Marye who said: Number. 12.1
Has our Lord spoken by Moses only, has he not spoken to us aso in like
manner. Wherein I am to learn this manner of Humillitye, and Obedience of our
blessed LADY, desiring to be governed by others, and that greater account
should be made of others then of me, holding it for a great happiness to
know the Will of God, and to fulfill it, whither I know it by revelation
from God, or from his Angels, or by the speech, and ordination of men. For
albeit the first seems more glorious, yet in the second more humillitye is
exercized, subjecting our judgment, and Will, not only to God, but to man also
for Gods sake. And so the blessed VIRGIN was no less resplendent in obeying S.
Joseph, then S. Joseph was in obeying the Angel, and then the Angel was in
obeying God.

O eternal God, Colloquie. 1 Pet. 2.13
grant me that I may subject myself to every humane Creature for thy Lone,
obeying what thou commaundest me by men, as thou in heaven art obeyed by
Angels, fullfilling thy will upon Earth with that devotion that it is
fullfilled in Heaven. Amen.

The third Point.
THen will I consider the Words wherewith the Angel declared the
Commandment of our Lord, the which were grave, breife, imperious, and with
Circumstances very convenient to make proof of the Obedience of that Saint,
to whom they were delivered. For in this sort God uses to command somewhat
to men that are perfect, to exercize them that they may make demonstration of
their Obedience: as another Angel used the like words in the obedience which
he intimated to Abraham, to depart out of his own Country, Genesis 121 and 22.2.
and to sacrifize his Son Isaac. And for this cause he enters not using
circumloquutions, or preambles (which the World commonly uses) not
requesting, but commanding: Arize, says he, take the Child, and his mother,
and flee into Egypt, and be there until I shall tell thee, etc.

In these Words we are to ponder the Circumstances that make difficult this
Ordination, and declare the value of the Obedience.

First, The manner of imposing obedience upon the perfect. 1 Reg. 3.3 etc.
it was intimated by night, S. Joseph, Samuel calling him three, or four times
in the night, and making him arize out of the bed wherein he slept, to exercize
him in Obedience, and in the abnegation of his own will.

Secondly, Herod, and to get away with less noise, and disturbance: figuring
what I ought to do when God commands me to fly from the world, and from
Sin, abandoning all temporal things that may hinder me, contenting myself
to carry with me God only. But if I carry the Child JESUS, and his mother,
what shall be wanting unto me?

O most sweet JESUS, Colloquie.
to fly with thee, is no Affliction; to forsake all, thou remaining with me,
is no torment: for having thee, wheresoever, I shall live contented, and in
every place shallbe rich. O my Soul take the Son, and his mother, and put
thyselfe under their protection, serving them very truly, for where they two
are, there is no Solitariness, and when they accompanye thee, there is no
dread of peril.

Thirdly, Egypt a Country of barbarous People, and enemies to the Hebrews:
for it is the will of God, that his elect (especially such as are Religious
persons) should dwell where he pleases, and not where they thorough their own
vain liking desire to dwell, persuading themselves that wheresoever God shall
place them, they shallbe secure, contented, and proffited, albeit it seem to
be a place full of trouble, and peril: and contrarily, where they desire to
be, they shall perhaps be with great danger, albeit it seems to them to be
a place very secure: for neither the place, nor the corner, gives true
securitye to the Soul, but only the protection of God, and with his
protection, I shallbe secure in Egypt for my obedience unto him, without which
I shall perish in Egypt thorough my own self will. Psalm. 83.6.
And therefore the Prophet David says that happy is the man whose help is
from God, who has disposed his ascensions in virtue in the place where he put
him, in this valley of Tears: which is to say: He disposed himself to grow
up, not in the place where he list to put himself, but where he was put by the
disposition of God that aided him thereunto.

Fourthly, Egypt, saying unto him, be there until I shall tell thee. Judith 8^
13
For it is not the pleasure of God, as holy Judith said, that we should
assign the time how long such things shall continue as he disposes of
especially in matter of afflictions, and disconsolations, and in offices, and
employments that he imposes upon us, but his will is that we should leave this
care unto him, resigning ourselves to be where he pleases, and as long time as
he pleases, be it little, or much: for God knows much better what is fitting
for us, then we ourselves: and he greatly desires that we should rely upon
his providence, and Government: for in saying: Be there until I shall
otherwise advise thee, he gives manifestly to understand, that he will have a
care to advise him in fit time. And what can be more certain, and assured,
then for me to be without care in matters concerning myself, when God, and his
Angels take charge of them?

O most careful God, Colloquie. 1 Pet. 5.7
why should not I cast all my Care upon thee, when as I know thou have so
great a care over me?

Fifthly, For it will come to pass, that Herod will seek the Child to
destroy him. Wherein he confirms the care that he has over those that are
his, by cutting of Dangers before they happen, and inspiring them with a
means to free themselves from them. True it is, that some other times our Lord
imposes some commandment on his Servants, without giving them a reason of
what he commands, as he did to Abraham in the cases before rehearsed, that
they may learn to obey him, not for reason, nor for their own commoditye, but
merely, for that he commands it. For as Faith relyeth not principally upon
reason, but upon the revelation of God, yet Gods Revelation presupposed, reason
helps to believe with more sweetness, and to fortifye our Faith the more:
so likewise perfect Obedience, is not principally to rely upon more reason,
then Gods Commandment, and his Will: yet this principal motive presupposed,
our Lord gives sometimes a reason of what he commands, as he gave to S.
Joseph, that he may be obeyed with more sweetness, and if I cannot attain to
understand the reason, yet I am to subject my judgment thereunto, as this holy
man did, as forthwith we shall see. From these Considerations I am to collect,
if I desire to be perfect, to make demonstration thereof, by having such a
disposition, that my Superiors, and Confessors may command me whatsoever they
shall judge convenient, and in what manner they shall please, Phile. 2^
without suspicion of failing in whatsoever they impose upon me; as S. Paul
said to Philemon: Trusting in thy Obedience I have written to thee, requiring
thee to receive Onesimus, knowing that thou will do ahoue that also which I
do say.

The fourth Point.
Joseph no sooner heard this Commandment, but he arose, and took the Child,
and his mother by night, and retired into Egypt. Four degrees of perfect
Obedience.
Wherein I am to ponder the most perfect Obedience of S. Joseph, to imitate it:
for he had those four degrees of Perfection which this Virtue can comprehend.

First, or at least, if he must needs fly, that it might not be to Egypt, but
to Arabia, or Samaria, yet he made no such replye, but subjected his judgment,
and silently obeyed, adoring Gods ordination without any questioning, or making
show of curiositye, in desiring to know more, then what the Angel had
delivered him, liberally fullfilling that Counsel of the Wiseman which says:
Eccl. 3.22.
Search not to deeply into things beyond thy receche, but meditate always
upon what our Lord God commands thee, and be not to curious in many of his
Works.

Secondly, Abraham; who though he departed from his Country, and kindred to
obey God, yet he carried with him a great multitude of Servants, with much
riches, and temporal goods.

Thirdly, in the execution he was very puntuall:

Fourthly, I will ponder with what Joy, Commodities, which yet they felt not
much, thorough the greatenesse of their interior alacritye, which relied upon
two things: First, in that it was the will of our Lord God, which they held
for their greatest consolation: Secondly, in that they carried with them JESUS,
whose Company was sufficient to comfort them in any solitariness, or
abandoning whatsoever: without diuerting themselves, to regard, or to procure
any other refreshing, which Travelers use to seek after.

O omnipotent God, Colloquie.
that gave to these thy beloved Saints such Obedience, by their merits, I
beseech thee, to assist me, that I may obey thee with subjection of my
judgment, with promptness of Will, with readiness in execution, and with
alacritye of Heart, only to fulfill thy Will, relying upon thy providence,
that it will have a care of me, if in this manner I obey thee.

The fifth Point.
FIfthly, I am to consider how they remained in Egypt, until the Death of the
Tyrant Herod; which was five, or seven years, pondering the special things
that happened in this time.

As first, two causes aforesaid.

From whence proceeded the great Quietness that they there had; neither
desired the Death of Herod, nor were afflicted with the delay of their
return, but remitted all to Gods providence. 2 Pet. 2.8
as S. Peter said of Lot, when he was in Sodom, that in sight, and hearing he
was just, dwelling with them who from day to day vexed the just Soul with
unjust works. So it is likely, that the sacred VIRGIN, and S. Joseph were
vexed in Spirit for the Sins of that People, yet always in the midst of
them, they preserved their puritye, and Sanctitye, shining like Lights of
Heaven in the midst of that wicked nation. And it is to be believed, that the
Sanctitye, Modestye, and celestial conversation of our blessed LADY the
VIRGIN, and of S. Joseph, mollified the hearts of that barbarous people, and
caused in them admiration, and respect, and some by their example were
converted to God, and came to favor them with alms, and with gifts, which
they being poor accepted for their sustenance.

O happy he, Colloquie.
that might be present in this banishment, to accompanye, and serve the Child,
and the mother. Aid me, o my God, with thy Grace, that in my Exile I may live
with alacritye, conforming myself unto thy will, and giving good example to
such as live with me, that many by my means, may serve thee with perfection.
Amen.

The XXVIII. Meditation. Of the murder of the holy Innocents: and of the
return from Egypt.
The first Point.
FIrst, I am to consider how king Herod fearing, least that king whom the
Sages had spoken of, should deprive him of his kingdom: and perceiving that he
was deluded by them, Matt. 2.16.
he cruelly commanded to be murdered all the men Children that were in
Bethlehem, and in all the borders thereof, from two year old, and under.

Wherein, first to be considered what an abominable Vice is Ambition, and the
Desire of reigning, and commanding, from whence ensued such horrible
mischeifes, the chief of all which, was to desire to take away the life of
Christ, to usurp his kingdom, and to reign by himself. As also how proper
it is to Ambitious men to be suspicious, and timorous, suspecting least others
should deprive them of their greatenesse, and fearing where there is no need
of fear, as the Tyrant Herod was afraid without cause: for our Lord Christ
came not to take away temporal kingdoms, but to give celestial.

Secondly, Christ had being in Egypt: seeing from thence the murder of the holy
Innocents for his sake: for it is to be believed, that the sword which wounded
the body of each one of them, peirced his Soul with Dolor of Compassion,
thorough the exceeding love wherewith he loved them, suffering so many
martirdomes in his Spirit, as they altogether suffered in body.

O most glorious king of Martyrs, Colloquie.
who on this day conquerest in them, and suffer with them, have compassion
on my weakness, and aid me with thy grace, vanquishing in me all whatsoever
is contrary unto thee.

Thirdly, Christ used toward them, albeit with the cost of the life of their
body, which is of less worth then that of the Soul. And for this reason, our
Savior Christ rejoiced at the glorious Death of his martyrs, by the which
they became partakers of so glorious, and eternal a life: Job 9.23.
that being fullfilled here, which holy Job says of God, that he laugheth at
the pains of the innocent, because be is recreated with the good that comes
unto them thereby. I would, Colloquie.
o my God, that I might suffer for thy sake, that my pains might be thy
Laughter, and mirthe, catching me with death like these Children, before
malice change my Heart, Sap. 4.11
and Deceit alter my Soul, for I rather desire to dye, then to live to offend
thee.

The Second Point.
ANd when Herod was dead, Matt. 2.19.
behold an Angel of our Lord appeared in sleep to Joseph in Egypt, saying:
Arize, and take the Child, and his mother, and go into the land of Israel,
for they are dead that sought the life of the Child.

Here is first to be considered, Herod seeking to take away the life of
Christ, d^ed without compassing his intent, and dyed a disastrous death both
of body, and Soul, for the Justice of God, though it dissembleth for a time,
chastizeth in the end; and though the punishment of the wicked be deferred,
yet it comes at last, and when men least think, then Death seazeth upon
them, when as they pay for all their wickedness together: what proffit had
Herod by his Ambition, and Crueltye, and extreme care to preserve his
kingdom? for he lost all in one day, and with all lost his Soul, bewailing
this remediless loss, as the rest of the Damned do bewail it, who say: What
has our Pride auailed us? Sap. 5.8.
and the boasting of our Riches what has it profited us? all is passed like a
Shadow, and now in our wickedness we are consumed, paying the penaltye that
therefore we deserved.

Secondly, S. Joseph, and to free him from his exile, commanding him to
return to his Country. O how confirmed was he hereby in his confidence in
God? and how contented was he to see the care he had of them? from whence I
will collect, how securely I may be careless of the success of my own
affairs, casting my cares in the hands of God, Ps. 30.16.
in the which are my lots, and my times, and my prosperities, and adversities,
he taking it to his charge, to dispose them as shallbe most convenient for my
good.

O Father, Colloquie.
most careful of thy Children, I cast all my Cares upon thee, because thou art
so careful of me. One only desire I have to serve thee, that thou may
desire to remedy me.

Thirdly, I will ponder, Take the Child, and his mother: to teach us, that
the most glorious name of our B. LADY is to be the mother of God: by this name
the Angel calls her, and the Evangelists, and by this name we ought to call
her, reuerencing the greatenesse of that name, and rejoicing therein.

O mother of God, Colloquie.
be thou happy in this name, and make us the worthy Children of him that
holds thee for his mother.

The third Point.
Joseph obeying the Commandment of the Angel, Matt. 2.19.
departed toward Israel, and fearing to go into Judea, he was warned in his
sleep to go unto Nazareth, that it might be fullfilled which was said by the
Prophets, that Christ shallbe called a Nazarite.

Here is first to be considered the grief of all the people of that Cittye,

Secondly, I will ponder, S. Joseph in all his doubts had recourse to the
remedy of Prayer, always tourning himself unto God, and how ready God was
to hear him, and to free him from his doubts, I collecting from hence desiers
to have recourse likewise to God in all mine with Prayer, and Confidence. For
if I truly desire to be assured of Gods holy will, God will give me light for
to know it.

Thirdly, Nazarite, which he took of the Cittye where he was conceived, and
brought up, and it is as much to say, as holy, or flourishing, signifying by
this name that he was to be excellently holy, and the holy of holyes,
flourishing in all kind of flowers of admirable virtues, and wholely dedicated
to God, without having any other employment in this mortal life more then in
things belonging to his divine service; giving us an example of being
spiritual Nazarites resplendent in virtue in imitation of him.

O most sweet JESUS with all my Heart, Colloquie. Number. 6.3.
I desire to imitate thee, to observe the laws of the spiritual Nazarites,
seperating myself from whatsoever is created, that may make me druncke with
disordinate Love, and not touching any dead thing that may defile my Soul,
nor admitting any razour upon my Head, that may cut of the high thoughts, and
affections of my Spirit, preserving them all entirely for thy Service. O most
florinshing, and most holy Nazarite, aid me to compass my intention, seeing
without thy aid, I can neither begin, nor attain the desired end thereof.

The XXIX. Meditation. Of the coming of our Savior Christ to the Temple of
Jerusalem, and of his remaining there among the Doctors.
The first Point.
FIrst, Luc. 2.42
I am to consider the Custom of S. Joseph, and of the blessed VIRGIN with her
Son, to go up every year to the Temple of Jerusalem, to celebrate the
Pasche of the Lamb, and with what spirit they went up all three: S. Joseph
went up with the spirit of Obedience, for that the Law obliged men to go up
three times a year to the Temple of Jerusalem, especially to celebrate the
principal Pasche of the Lamb. Exodus 23.14. Deuteronomy. 16.16.
The blessed VIRGIN (albeit this Law obliged not Women) went with S. Joseph in
a spirit of Devotion to celebrate that feast, albeit they had a Custom to
make these iourneys, yet they did them not only for Customs sake, and a little
more, or less, but every time with a new Spirit, and an interior feeling, as
if that time had been the first. And herein I am to imitate these Saints,
endeavoring to observe the good Customs of the Church, and to make a Custom
of all things that are virtues; and yet so, that I do them not only for
Custom, or because others do the like, but with that spirit which they
require. Here is to be noted, that S. Joseph is called the father of Christ,
because he was held for his Father.

The Second Point.
SEcondly, I am to consider, Luc. 2.43.
how the Child JESUS being twelve year old, having gonne up to the Temple of
Jerusalem with his Parents, when they returned to Nazareth, he remained in
the Temple, and his Parents knew it not: pondering some causes that he had so
to do. First, he remained in the Temple, to signifye how willingly (so far
forth as lay in him) he was always in the house of his celestial Father,
employing himself there in things belonging to his service, much better then
the Child Samuel. And this testimonye he gave at twelve years old, when
other men begin to have more perfect use of reason, to instruct us, how much it
imports to affectionate ourselves to these exercizes of Virtue from our
tender youth, according to that of the Prophet Hieremias: Three. 3.27
It is good for a man when he bears the yoke from his youth.

Secondly, with divine Prudence he would not ask leave of his Parents to
remain alone in the Temple, that he might take away occasion of seeming
disobedient, if they denying him, he had not obeyed them; and for that if they
should have remained with him, it might have been an impediment to execute
freely what he pretended for the glory of his heavenly Father: and therefore he
determined to leave them, and say nothing, teaching us by this example two
things of very much importance. First, Secondly, Deuteronomy. 33.9.
He that said to his Father, and to his mother, I know you not, ank to his
brethren, I know you not these kept thy word, and observed thy covenant.
Otherwise our Savior Christ will say unto me, Matt. 10 37. Colloquie.
He that loves Father, or mother more then me, is not worthy of me.

O most sweet Child I am confounded, to see how I am tied to flesh, and
blood, omitting to do the will of thy heavenly Father, for fear of
displeasing my carnal Parents, or freindes. Give me, o Lord, Act. 5.29 Ephesians.
4.30
a manlike heart, to leave them all for thy love, choosing rather to obey God,
then men, and to contristate the humane Spirit, rather then the Divine.

The third Point.
THirdly, I am to consider how our Lord Christ with that zeal which he had of
the salvation of Souls, would then make some demonstration of the wisdom, and
grace wherewith he was replenished, discovering somewhat thereof to these
Doctors of the Law: the which he did with admirable Modestye, Humillitye,
Discretion, and zeal of the Love of God, manifesting these Virtues in a manner
accommodated to his age. Modestye in his Countenance, and in the Grauitye of
his words, and gestures, the which was so great, that it moved the Doctors to
admit him to dispute with them. Humillitye, in that being able to be master
of all, he entered among them as a Disciple, demanding, and hearing as one that
would learn. Discretion, in aunswering meruailously to whatsoever they
demanded him, in such sort that they all admired his prudence. Zeal, in that
he ordained all this, not for vain ostentation of his own Wisdom, but for
the glory of God, and good of Souls: and especially to confound the proud
Learned men that were there, and to illuminate learned men that were humble,
and to open their eyes, that they might know that he was already about the
work of their redemption.

O good JESUS, Colloquie.
a Child in years, but a man in VVisdome: a Lamb in meekness, but a
Shepherd in Discretion, I rejoice to see thee play the Shepherd with this
greater flock, giving them the pasture of eternal Life, fullfilling that
which is written; a little Child shall feed them: Isa. 11.6.
O that I had been present to hear thy Questions, and to enjoy thy admirable
aunswers! repeat them, o Lord, to my heart, that I may enjoy the fruit
thereof.

From this consideration I am likewise to collect a great desire, to imitate
these four virtues of our Savior Christ, confounding myself in his presence
for the want I have of them: especially to see my own little modestye, and
humillitye: and that in Words, and gestures I would make demonstration of more
knowledge then I have; and that being ignorant, I disdain to learn what I
know not, and presume to teach others what I have not learned.

The fourth Point.
FOurthly, is to be considered what this most blessed Child might do those
three days, that he was in the Temple without his Parents; pondering,
temporal matters he made but small reckoning. It is likewise certain, S. John
testified of him that of the Psalm: The zeal of thy house has eaten me,
Joan. 2.1^
although at that time he dissembled it. Out of all this I will collect
Affections, and Resolutions of Imitation in that, wherein I ought to imitate
him, and to be compassionate of his Pouertye, and solitariness, albeit he made
small reckoning of his earthly Parents, being in the house of his celestial
Father.

The XXX. Meditation. Of what the blessed VIRGIN did, when she saw she had
lost her Son, until she found him.
The first Point.
Saint Joseph, Luc. 2.4^ etc.
and the blessed VIRGIN having traveled a days journey from Jerusalem, on
their way to Nazareth, each thinking that the child had been with the other
(for they went in several Companyes) at night in their Inn they missed the
Child, and seeking him among their kinssolke, and acquaintance they found him
not. Wherein I am to ponder the Intention of God, in willing to afflict these
Saints without any fault of theirs, and upon the occasion of a good Work
which they did to honor him, and in a thing which might most of all greiue
them, which was the loss of such a Child. All which he plotted to exercize
them in Patience, Humillitye, and feruorous Diligence, and in other Virtues
that were resplendent in the blessed VIRGIN, and in S. Joseph in this case for
our example.

Their Patience was resplendent in that they were not troubled,

Their Humillitye,

Their Diligence, Christ would have been with any of his kinsfolk, he would
soonest have been with his mother.

To these three things was added the fourth of fervent, and long Prayer. not so
soon to deprive her of the care of her Son, but to look after him
wheresoever he was, and not long to defer the restoring him again.

O Sovereign VIRGIN thou art entered into a perilous Sea, Colloquie.
there is no remedy for thee but to pray: the loss of thy beloved has been
to thee a bitter, and tempestuous Sea: the waves of Sorrow have entered into
thy Heart, and afflicted it with many Cares, the Darkness of night has
stopped thy passage, and thou art as is were overwhelmed in the depth of
Disconsolation; thou find no ease upon Earth, and therefore with the cables
of prayer thou do presently cast forth the Anchor of thy hope into Heaven,
hoping for remedy from thence, and thy hope shall not be deceived: for the
Heavenly Pilot, who is thy Father, knows not how to love, and to abandon, nor
forsakes he for ever those that hope in him.

With this Success, and the cause thereof, The absence of God in the Soul
I am to lift up my Spirit to consider the mysterye that it signifies:
Poudering, how our Lord God many times absenteth, and hides himself from men,
they not knowing, nor perceiving it, according to that of holy Job: If he come
to me, Job 9.14. and 21.
I shall not see him, and if he depart from me I shall not understand, all
though I shall be simple, the self same my Soul shall be ignorant of. And this
ignorance uses to last all day, until it be discovered at night, as in this
case it happened to our blessed LADY the VIRGIN, and to S. Joseph; and it
happens diverse ways.

First, man not knowing it: and this ignorance uses sometimes to last the
whole day of this life, until the night of Death, when man thinking he has
God, finds himself without him: whereupon says the Wise Man: Pro. 16.25
There is a way that seems right unto a man, and the end thereof leads
unto Death. And this Absence is most terrible, because after it, follows the
eternal; and therefore I am to beseech our Lord not to absent himself from
me in this manner, and to say unto him with David: Psalm. 18.13 and 24.7.
Cleanse me, o Lord, from my hidden Sins, and call not to mind my Ignorances.

Other times it happens thorough a secret Pride, and Vaineglorye,

Sometimes again it happens thorough the secret Providence of our Lord God,
Omissions, albeit I know them not, saying with the royal Prophet David: Ps.
118.67 75.
Before I was humbled, I sinned; and thou in thy Truth did humble me,
because justly for my Sins I merited this Humilliation. But yet all this
notwithstanding, I am to believe that when I want the grace of Devotion, and
the favorable visitations of God, whither it be thorough my fault, or no, that
all happens by the disposing of Gods Providence, for my greater good, Ps.
118.71.
according to that of the Prophet David: It is good for me, that thou have
humbled me, that I may learn thy Iustifications.

In all these Cases, I am to exercize those four Virtues which were
resplendent in the blessed VIRGIN, and in S. Joseph, laying deep root in
Humillitye, arming myself with Patience, animating myself to seek God with
Diligence, and soliciting him with fervent Prayers: for it is written, Ask,
and it shall be given you, Luc. 11.9
seek, and you shall find.

O sweet JESUS that spakest generally to all: Colloquie.
Whosoever seeks, shall find, grant me such fervor in asking thy sight,
that I may obtain it, and aid me to seek thee in such sort, that I may
find thee for ever, and ever. Amen.

The second Point.
THe next day in the morning S. Joseph, Luc. 2.45.
and the blessed VIRGIN returned to Jerusalem, to seek the Child JESUS, and
the third day entering into the Temple, they found him sitting in the mids of
the Doctors, hearing them, and asking them: at the which they meruailed
greatly.

Upon this point I am often to consider the Time, and Place where the blessed
VIRGIN found the Child: the Company, and business wherein he was employed:
and the Joy that she had when she same him: collecting out of all this the
Spirit included therein.

First, Passion to the Resurrection, wherein he appeared unto her lively, and
glorious. And the mysterye hereof is to signifye unto us, that when the Soul
loses God, and the grace of Devotion, it finds him not presently: rather he
uses to hide himself for some time, either to chastize it for having lost
him, if it were in fault: or to exercize it in Patience, and Humillitye: and
that with this delay, it care, and Diligence to seek him may increase, and
that it may be made worthy to find him more speedily, and with more abundance
of grace. And this is signified by the number of three days, to encourage our
Hope that we be not dismayed, by thinking that our remedy shallbe long
deferred, according to that saying of the Just in Affliction: Osea 6. mystice.
After two days he will revive us, and the third day he will raize us up
again, and we shall live in this presence.

Secondly, Christ is not found in flesh, and blood, nor among the Pamperings,
and Vanities of the World, but within the Catholic Church, and within the
living Temple of our Heart, making it a House of Prayer, and exercizing it in
exercizes of Sanctitye. For hereupon it is said in the book of Canticles,
Cant. 3.1
that the Spouse found not her beloved, which is God, in the bed, and
quietneste of the pampering of the flesh; nor in the streets, and places of
the traffic of the world, but in the renunciation of all this: leaving the
comfort of the Creatures to find out the Creator. Therefore, o my Soul, look
where thou seek God, if thou have a desire to find him; for as holy Job
says: Job 28.13
He is not found in the Land of those that live sweetly at their ease.

Thirdly, Cant. 3.3.4.
and that I might understand, that our Savior Christ is found among the
Doctors of the Church, who by their teaching, and Direction are a means to
find him: and that they might understand that Christ is in the mids of them,
hearing what they speak, and teach, to chastize them if they speak evil,
and likewise to aid them to speak well, if thorough their fault he be not
diuerted.

Fourthly, Tob. 10.4
and as Anna the mother of Tobias who bewailed the absence of her Son with
remediless tears, when she saw him, wept for pure joy: so it is to be
believed that her joy was in as full measure, as her pain, that being
fullfilled of the Prophet David: Ps. 93.19.
According to the multitude of my dolours in my Heart, thy Consolations have
gladded my Soul.

O Sovereign VIRGIN, Colloquie.
I rejoice at the joy that thou had at this hour at the sight of thy Son.
Pro. 13.12
Hope deferred afflicted thy Soul: but the fullfilling of thy desire was unto
thee a tree of Life, finding him that is the tree of Life unto all. Obtain for
me, most blessed VIRGIN, that I may so seek him, that I may sinde him, that I
may enjoy the life that proceeds from that tree. Amen.

But withal I will ponder the modestye wherewith the blessed VIRGIN
accompanied this Joy: for albeit she saw her Son in the mids of the
Doctors with the admiration, and astonishment of all, yet she used not such
gestures, and behavior as other women use to do, boasting to have such.
Children: but wondering to see him there, she reverenced what she saw, whereby
she teaches us to conjoine together Modestye, and Alacritye, according to the
saying of S. Phil. 4.4.
Paul: Rejoice in our Lord always, again I say rejoice; let your modestye be
known to all men; our Lord is nigh. As if he should say: So rejoice that you
loose not modestye, for our Lord is near you, and beholds you, and in his
presence there ought to be no immodest Joy.

The third Point.
THe blessed VIRGIN seeing her Son, A form of Prayer mixed with an amorous
complaining unto God.
said unto him with an amorous complaining: Son, why have thou so done to
us? behold thy Father, and I, sorrowing did seek thee. All these words are
full of mystery, and therefore it shall not be amiss to consider well each
one by itself.

First, Fili, cur fecisti nobis sic? Son, why have thou so done to us?
Whereby her intention was not to ask, or demand of him the cause of what he
had done, for this had been an excusable curiositye: but only to declare the
grief of her Heart: and therefore holy men use this manner of speaking to our
Lord when they are afflicted, and it is a manner of Prayer, wherein quietly
they ask a remedy of their Affliction, For on the one side they attribute
their Affliction to his divine Providence, who ordained, or permitted it for
their good: and on the other side they confess that to him it belongs to
remedy, and prevent it. In this manner I may pray, saying sometimes to our
Lord with Job: Why have thou set me contrary to thee, Job 7.20.
and I am become burdenous to myself? why do thou not take away my Sin,
and why do thou not take away mine Iniquitye? Why hidest thou thy face? Job
13.24.
and think me thine Enemy? Other sometimes, Ps. 21.1. etc. Matt. 27.46.
Luc. 2.48
I may say with our Savior Christ himself nailed on the Cross, My God, my
God, why have thou forsaken me? neither was it without a mystery, that the
blessed VIRGIN said not, Son, Son, why have thou done so to me? but to
us? for it is the Propertye of holy People, when they suffer any necessitye
that is common to many, not to complain of their own hurt only, nor to ask
remedy for themselves alone, but to greiue for the hurt of all, and to ask
remedy for all: for Charity seeks not only it own good, but the good of
many, saying with the royal Prophet: Ps. 43.24.
Why turnest thou away thy face from us, and forgettest our Pouertye, and our
tribulation? But in these plaintes we are to endeavor not to loose our Love,
and Confidence in God; and therefore we are to join therewithal, some word
to discover this, as the blessed VIRGIN used this Word, Son; and our Savior
Christ upon the Cross this word, My God, my God, which are words of
Confidence, and Love.

Secondly, I am to ponder that word, Pater tuus, and ego. Thy Father and I:
wherein is resplendent the Humillitye of the blessed VIRGIN, not only in naming
S. Joseph before herself, for the respect she had of him; but also in calling
him before all, the Father of Christ, whereby they might imagine that he was
conceived by the work of man; which was to her own Humilliation; but the
sacred VIRGIN being most humble, more esteemed her Husbands honor then her
own, in giving him so honorable a name, teaching us by her example how to
honor our neighbors, though it be to the impairing of ourselves.

Thirdly, I am to ponder that Word, Dolentes quaerebamus te, Sorrowing did
seek thee. Wherein we are advised to seek God with Sorrow proceeding from
Love, such as was the Sorrow of the blessed VIRGIN: for true Love causes all
these effects; to wit, Sorrow, Psa. 41.4. Sap. 1.1.
and Tears for the absence of it beloved: Puritye of intention in seeking him
with Sinceritye, not for it own interest, or sensible Pleasure, but to be
joined unto him: Diligence in all the means, and exercizes ordained to find
him with perseverance in them, until it compass it intent, according to that
of the Prophet David: Seek our Lord, and be confirmed in him, Ps. 104.9.
seek always his face. And to that of the Prophet Isaias: If you seek our
Lord, seek him, Isa. 21.12
that is: seek him in truth, as such a Lord deserves to be sought, and you
shall find him; for he has said: You shall seek me, Ier. 29.13
and you shall find me, when you seek me with all your Heart. And if I find
him not it is because I fail in some of these things, and therefore making a
reflection upon them, I will consider which of them it is, to amend myself,
and to procure it.

Finally I am to ponder the breuitye, Si^; why haste thou so done? wherein is
confirmed the care of our blessed LADY to keep her Tongue, and to measure her
words; as at other times has been pondered: but at this time somewhat more
especially. For that she declared how she had mortified, and restrained the
violence of speaking, which in such cases issues from the heart.

The fourth Point.
TO this Question of the VIRGIN, Luc. 2.49
our Savior Christ answered: What is it that you sought me? did you not
know that I must be about those things that are my Fathers?

This answer was no less grave, and admirable, then any of those which this
our Lord made to the Demaundes of the Doctors: and therefore it is to be
pondered, as given by the Infinite Wisdom of God. And first, Quid est, quod me
quaerebatis? What is it that you sought me? or for what cause? which word at
first veiwe seems dry, harshe, sharp, and reprehensiue, as if he should
have said: wherefore sought you me with such sorrow, seeing I being what I am
could not be lost? And this he said, that it might be understood, that he was
more then man: and that the blessed VIRGIN might make Demonstration of her
Heroycall Patience, and Humillitye, silently suffering this distasteful
answer, and reuerencing it with great reverence, Ex D. Ioa. Clim. gradu. 4.
and Love. And by the way our Lord Christ teaches us, that such as govern
Religious Persons that are desirous of perfection, they are sometimes to
exercize them with sharp aunswers, and with reprehending them, when there is
no cause, to discover what Humillitye, and Patience they have, and to make
proffit thereof: for to be silent when I am reprehended for a fault it is not
much, seeing my own Conscience also reprehendeth me: but to be silent when my
Conscience excuses me, is a token of an Heroycall Virtue.

Secondly, Did you not know that I must be about those things that are my
Fathers? As if he had said, seeing you know me, and know who I am, you
likewise know that I am to be about those things that pertain to the honor
of my heavenly Father, for I have no Father on Earth. Wherein our Lord Christ
tought us, that his whole business, and employment was wholely to attend to
the service of his celestial Father, without diuerting to any other thing,
confirming that which afterward he said, that he descended from Heaven not to
do his own will, Ioa. 6.38.
but the will of him that sent him: and that he must work the works of him
that sent him, Joan. 9.4.
whiles it was day. In imitation of this our Lord, I am to endeavor that my
whole employment be not in the things of this world, nor of flesh, nor of
self Love, but in the things which are of God, and for God, confounding
myself to see how far I have lived from observing this advise, employing
myself wholely in my own business, and careless of Gods.

O good JESUS, Colloquie
seeing thou wast so steadfastly set about the things that were thy Fathers,
that thou heldest it for a rule, that such as knew thee, should find thee
employed therein: Aid me, I beseech thee, that I may never find myself
without them, employing myself in Loving and accomplishing them. It is just, o
Lord, that my Memory, Understanding, and Will, my Senses, and all that I am
should be employed always in thee, and in that which concerns thy Honor,
seeing thou always employest thyselfe to my proffit.

The fifth Point.
FIfthly, I will consider how having said thus, without more replying, the
Child returned with his mother, and with S. Joseph to Nazareth. of all that
had passed those three days, and that the Child made relation thereof unto
her. And she (as S. Luc. 2.51.
Luke said) preserved, and kept all these things in her Heart, recording
them, ruminating, and pondering them to her great consolation, and proffit.
From whence I will learn to recollect in my Memory whatsoever God shall
teach me, to make my proffit thereof. For otherwise that of the Prophet will
happen unto me, Aggaei 1.6
that eating much, I shall always be weak; and gathering together great
riches, I shall always be poor, because I cast them into a broken sack.

Finally, I will ponder how wary, Christ, nor his gifts, taking my advise from
what has happened before times.

O most sacred VIRGIN, Colloquie
I rejoice at thy joy when thou foundest thy Son, and at thy gladness to
have him always in thy Company; aid me, that I may never loose him, nor
never depart from him, until with thee I enjoy him in his eternal glory.
Amen.

The XXXI. Meditation. Of the life that our Savior Christ led in Nazareth,
until he was thirty years old.
The first point.
I Am first to consider how our Savior Christ all this time (according to S.
Luc. 2.52
Luke) Proficiebat sapientia, aetate, and gratia apud Deum, and homines. As he
grew in age, so also he increased in Wisdom, and Grace before God, and before
men. first to ponder, how although our Lord Christ from the first instant of
his Conception, was so full of immense Wisdom, and Sanctitye that he could not
increase therein, yet he increased in the exercizes thereof, giving daily
greater demonstrations of Knowledge, and Virtue, of Wisdom, and Sanctitye:
like the Sun, which though in itself it increases not, yet the light that
proceeds from it, when it rizeth in the morning, goes always increasing
until it be midday. This our Lord disposed of, to teach us by his example,
what a desire he has that his Children should daily increase, and proffit in
Virtue. For between the Sons of the terrestrial Adam, and those of the
celestial Adam, Genesis 8.21
there is this difference; that they from their youth upward, are inclined to
evil, and as they increase in years, they increase in Vices: that of the
Prophet David being fullfilled in them, Ps. 73.23.
The pride of those that abhor thee, does always increase. But these (as the
Prophet Hieremye says) from their youth vpwardes carrye the yoke of Gods
law, Thren. 3.27.
and exalt themselves above themselves: for as they increase in years, they
increase in Virtues, exalting daily their Spirit above themselves, and above
what they before had, that forgetting things passed they may extend themselves
to other things that are greater, Phil. 3.13
until they arrive to perfection. This so singular a favor our Savior Christ
did to his blessed Mother, and to his forerunner S. John as has been said:
and this he has done to other notable Saints, who from their infancye began
to serve God, and proceeded forward like the Light of the morning, Pro. 4.18.
increasing until perfect day.

But particularizing this more amply, Christ said: Luc. 9.62
No man putting his hand to the plough, and looking back, is apt for the
kingllome of God: and then consequently he must be apt for Hell. And therefore
I am to tremble at turning back in this manner, taking warning, as our Lord
Christ counseled, by Lots wife, Luc. 17.32.
who turning back to look upon Sodom, from whence she had departed, was
turned into a statue of salt, and into a markestone to terrifye those that
prosecute not the way of Virtue. Others there are that begin with fervent
zeal, and in steed of increasing therein, they decrease, either omitting some
virtuous exercizes, or the feruencye of zeal wherewith they did them. And
these, albeit they be just, yet they are in great danger of destruction,
Apoc. 2.4.
like that Bishop whom our Savior Christ praised for his good Life, but yet
he said he had a few things against him, for that he had left his first
Charity, that is, that fervor of Charity which he used to have. D. Bern.
epist. 91.
And then he adds: Be mindful therefore from whence thou art fallen, and
do penance, and do the first works: but if not; I will come to take an
account of thee, D. Greg. l. 1. in 1. Reg. 2. D. Aug. ser. 15. de verbis Apost.
and alij.
and will deprive thee of the Dignitye thou have: as if he should say: take
heed, for to loose thy fervor, is to fall from high to low: which if thou
repairest not, thou deseruest not to be in so high a place as I have placed
thee. There be others that begin, and go forward slowely, without desire of
increasing, or passing farther, and these albeit outwardly they seem not to
empaire, yet inwardly they turn back ordinarily, and will altogether shrink:
for (as the holy Fathers say) in the way to Heaven there is no stopping, but
either to go forward, or turn back.

Finally there are others, who as soon as they begin, with the aid of our
Lord (as the Prophet David says) resolve in their heart to go forward ever
increasing, Psa. 83.6.
so long as they live in this valley of tears: and the celestial Lawgiver
helping them with his copious benediction, they fulfill their resolutions
ascending from Virtue to Virtue, until they see the God of Gods in Sion. And
these are the true imitatours of Christ JESUS, whom it is reason that I should
imitate, confounding myself at those many times that I have turned back in
the way of Virtue, or that I have fallen from the first feruencye that I began
with, or that I have walked on in a lukewarm life, as if I had been tired:
encouraging myself from hence forward greatly to increase in zeal, saying to
our Savior Christ: Colloquie.
O Sun of Justice, Illustrate, and Inflame my Soul in such sort, that her
paths may be like the light of the morning, Pro. 4.18.
which gooth on, and increases till it be perfect day. O Sovereign Lawgiver,
give me thy copious benediction, that as thou desire, I may increase in
virtue, and Sanctitye, ascending from one degree to another, until I clearly
behold thee in thy celestial Sion, world without end. Amen.

The Second Point.
SEcondly, The manner of increasing in Virtues. Luc. 2.52
I am to consider before what Persons, and in what things our Lord Christ
increased, in the manner aforesaid.

First, the Evangelist S. Luke says, he increased before God, and before men,
teaching us by his example to avoid two vicious extremes. The one is, of
zealous indiscrete Persons, who presume to increase before God only, making no
accoumpt of men, nor of their edification, or disedification, or scandal not
remembering that he that loves God, ought likewise to love his neighbor: and
that he so ought to seek his own proffit, that it be not to the hurt of
others, Romans 15.19.
attending (as S. Paul says) to the edification of all. Another extreme is
of Hipocrites, such as feign zeal, who lay all their care in increasing before
men, doing whatsoever may help them to increase in Opinion of Sanctitye before
them, without attending to the true augmentation, Psa. 83.6.
which the Prophet David calls Augmentation in the Heart. But Christ our
Lord by his example teaches us, to embrace both, not permitting the one to
prejudice the other, preposing first, the increasing before God with true
increasing in his eyes: and secondly increasing before men, doing likewise (as
S. Romans 12.17. 2 Cor. 8.21.
Paul says) that which is good before them, not that they may honor, or
praise us, but that they may glorifye God, and may be edified, and proffited.
And if doing what for my part I ought to do, some thorough their own fault
be disedifyed, or scandalized, yet for all this I will not cease to increase
before God, and before those that are wise, and holy, and deserve the name of
men.

Secondly, S. Luke says, that Christ our Lord increased in wisdom, and
grace: for in these two things true augmentation ought to consist.

First in Wisdom, Coloss. 4.2.3.
and in the Acts proceeding from her, which are Meditation, and Contemplation
of celestial things: Prudence, and discretion in Actions, and Affairs: the
Estimation of all things in that degree which they merit, much esteeming
eternal things, and temporal things but little: and consequently so
speaking thereof, that our Words may be salted with this wisdom. Secondly, we
are to increase in grace, and in the Acts of Virtues that make us gracious,
and holy before God, and amiable before men: in the which our Savior Christ
did exercize himself at this time: such are the heroycall Acts of the Love of
God, of the fervent zeal of his glory, and of the salvation of Souls: a
vehement dolor for the offenses done against God, and for the Souls that
perish, and continual Prayer that they may not perish. Herein he was so
gracious, and pleasing to God, that (as he himself says by the Prophet
Isaias) his Spirit reioiced in him. Isa. 42.1
Besides this he edified men with rare examples of Modestye, Humillitye,
Patience, Meekness, and Subjection; for the which he was pleasing to those
Persons with whom he conuersed. For (as the same Prophet Isaias says) his
conversation was neither sad, Isa. 42.1. Matt. 12.19.
nor harshe, nor turbulent, nor offensive, nor distastefull to others.

O most sweet JESUS, Colloquie.
seeing thou art full of VVisdome, and Grace, and that from thy fulness the
Just receive augmentation both in the one, and in the other; replenish me
abundantly with both, and aid me daily to increase in them.

Lastly, to animate myself I will ponder, two examples of her Son: for
contemplating them, she also in imitation of him increased in wisdom, and
grace before God, and before men; our Savior Christ reioicing to behold the
holy emulation that his mother had of him.

O most blessed mother, Colloquie.
aid me with thy intercession, that I may increase as thou encreasedst,
imitating him whom thou did imitate.

The third Point.
THirdly, I will consider how in all this time our Savior Christ (as the same
Evangelist says) was subject to his mother, Luc. 2.52.
and S. Joseph, obeying them in all that they commanded him.

Here I am to ponder, who it is that obeys, and subjecteth himself, and to
whom, in what things, O vile Worm, Iosue 10.12.13.
why do not thou subject thyselfe to man for God, seeing God subiecteth
himself to man for thee? If God obeys the voice of a man, why do not thou
wretched man obey the voice of God? O Sun of Justice, that mouedst thyselfe,
and stayedst at the voice of these two men, to whom for my Love thou did
subject thyselfe, grant me that I may subject myself to those whom thou have
left me in thy place, delighting to deny my own will, to accomplish theirs.

Then will I ponder the things wherein he obeyed, Christ with great
Humillitye, and Punctuallitye, with marvelous promptness, and alacritye, and
with all that perfection that perfect Obedience requires: the which equally
embraces great, and little; easy, and difficult, honorable, and contemptible.
For seeing that God himself humbled himself to be obedient in things that
were so base, all things in is estimation are very high, and esteems nothing
base in the house of God, if he commands it: for if God commands, it is
sufficient to make honorable the execution thereof, as S. Raphael held it for
an high honor to serve Tobias in things very base, Tob. 5.15. and 20.
because God commanded it. From whence I will collect that the excellencye of
spiritual Life consists not so much in doing works of themselves very
glorious, such as are: to preach, to govern, to teach; as in doing those
works that God commands, though of themselves they be base, but yet after
an excellent manner: that is; with much Love of God, with a pure Intention of
his glory, with great promptness, and alacritye of Heart, and with a
fervent desire in all these things to please him. And in this sense it is that
the Wise Man says; Eccl. 33.23.
that we should endeavor to excel in all our works, doing them in such sort
that in the eyes of God they may be very excellent. And so Christ our Lord, as
touching the manner of working with a spirit of Sanctitye, was no less
excellent in the work of sawing, then in the work of preaching, or doing some
miracle. And our blessed LADY the VIRGIN showed no less the excellencye of
her Sanctitye when she spun, then when she served her Son, or suffered any
thing for his sake. And herein I am to imitate our Savior Christ, and his
blessed mother, if by the shortest way I would attain to greatest perfection.

The fourth Point.
FOurthly, I will consider how Christ our Lord until he was thirty years
old, exercized, the trade of a Carpenter: as may be collected from the speech
of those of his own Country, according to the report of S. Mark the
Evangelist: Is not this the Carpenter, Mar. 6.3.
the Son of MARY? Here I will ponder the causes that our Savior Christ had
to choose this trade of Life, and to continue it even till after the Death of
S. Joseph (if it be true that he dyed before Christ had attained to thirty
years of age.) first was, to avoid Idleness, and to give us an example of
laboring, and being ever employed: Eccl. 33.29.
for Idleness (as the Wise Man says) is the Original of all mischeife.
second was, of his own free will to subject himself to the malediction that
God imposed upon Adam, Genesis 3.19
when he said unto him: In the sweat of thy browe thou shall eat thy bread.
And therefore all this time, he gained his meat with the labor of his hands:
from whence S. Paul, Act. 20.34.
and other Saints took example of laboring, to eat of their own labors.
third was, to exercize Humillitye, employing himself in a vile, and
contemptible Occupation; for Christ our Lord in the iugdement of the World,
and of his own Countryemen, did not use this occupation of his own will (as
some noble, and wise Gentlemen use to learn some mechanicke Trade for their
pleasure) but of mere necessitye, and to get his meat; and so he was then
treated by Gentlemen, and those of the principal sort, as at this day such
mechanicke Artificers are treated. Out of all this, I will collect Affections
of Admiration, and Imitation, pondering as well the Spirit wherewith our Savior
Christ exercized this office, laboring with the body, and praying with the
Heart, to imitate him when I shall labor in any bodily works: as did those
valiant Soldiers the Machabees, 2 Match. 15.26.27
of whom the Scripture says, that they fought with their hands, and prayed
with their Hearts, and therefore obtained a glorious Victory. For (as S.
Augustine said in a Tractate that he wrotte hereof to certain monks) it
stands well together, De opere Monach.
when the hand labors, and the Heart, and the Tongue prays.

The fifth Point.
FIfthly, I will consider how our Savior Christ containing in himself the
treasures of the Wisdom, and knowledge of God, and all the graces, and gifts,
and Power to do miracles that before has been recounted, yet during all this
time of thirty years, he would give a rare example, of Humillitye: covering
all this with extraordinary silence, without either preaching, or teaching, or
coming to the Disputations, and Assemblyes of the Learned, nor to the
Schools, and Universities; as is collected from what the Jews said of him,
Joan. 7.15
How does this man know letters, whereas he has not learned? From whence it
aroze, that some of his Countryemen held him in their Opinion for an Idiot.
And therefore when they saw that he began to preach, S. Mark notes that
they would have laid hands upon him, saying: Quoniam in furorem versus est.
Mar. 3.21.
That he was become mad, or frantike, or possessed with some Devil, not being
able to believe that such words, and works could proceed from a man whom
they had always known exercize the base trade of a Carpenter.

By this so rare an example, I may learn silently to cover my gifts, and
talents, when there is no need to publish them for the glory of God. As also
not lightly to believe myself, in seeking before my time to manifest my own
things to honor myself, delighting rather not to be known, or to be held
for an ignorant fool, if God shall so permit it. And finally to lay deep
root in Humillitye, and Silence, seeing thorough all this my Redeemer was
willing to pass, who having great care of the salvation of Souls, repressed
this desire, keeping silence for so long a time: for though he might have
preached at five, and twenty years, or before, yet he would not: for by this
example of mortification, and Silence he preached, and taught us the secure way
of Humillitye. D. Greg. homil. 2. in Ezech. 1.
And withal he advises us, that none should begin to be a Preacher, or
master, till he come to perfect age, wherein he may have learned in silence
what he ought to manifest by words, laying deep roots of Humillitye in
secret, before he adventure to manifest himself in public. And it is not
without a mystery, this his keeping Silence thirty years, to preach only
three years, which was but the tenth of thirty: that we might understand how
much more time we ought to give to the exercizes of Humillitye for our own
proffit, then to those exercizes that are directed to the commoditye of others,
that without hurting ourselves we may do good unto others.

O Sovereign master, Colloquie.
whose silence preaches unto me no less then thy word, I confess my Pride
to be so great, that being ignorant, I would be held to be wise, and that
thorough Vanitye, I would make manifest that little wisdom that I have: teach
me, o Lord, to walk in the way of Humillitye, following thy footesteps, that
humbling myself with thee, I may reign with thee world without end.

AMEN.
The end of the second Part.
LAVS DEO, ET DEIPARA. VIRGINI.
A TABLE OF THE MEDITATIONS OF THIS SECOND PART.
THe Introduction of the perfect Imitation of our Savior Christ, which is the
end of these Meditations, page 1. The fundamental Meditation, of the infinite
excellency of the Celestial king Christ JESUS our Lord, and of the Vocation
that he makes, inuiting all men to follow him. page 6. The first Meditation.
Of the decree made by the most holy TRINITY, that the second parson of the
deity should become man for the Redemption of mankind, lost by the sin of
Adam. p. 14 The ij. Meditat. Of GODS infinite Charity resplendent in this
mystery of the Incarnation, and of the great benifits that we receive thereby.
page 24. The iij. Meditat. Of the decree that GOD made to be borne of a woman;
and of the election of our B. LADY to be his mother: and of the singular graces
that therefore he granted her, in the instant of her Conception. 30 The iiij.
Meditat. Of the life of our B. LADY until the Incarnation; wherein is treated
of her Nativity, of her Presentation in the Temple: and her Betrothing to S.
Joseph. 42 The v. Meditat. Of the time that GOD chose to annunciate, and
execute the mystery of the Incarnation. page 58 The vi. Meditat. Of the
coming of the Angel S. Gabriel, to annunciate to the VIRGIN the mystery of
the Incarnation: and of the manner how he saluted her, and removed her Fear.
66 The vij. Meditat. Of the manner how the Angel annunciated, and declared to
the B. VIRGIN the mystery of the Incarnation. 80 The viij. Meditat. Of the
final answer given by the VIRGIN to the Angel, consenting to his Embassage.
89 The ix. Meditat. Of the execution of the Incarnation, and of some
Circumstances thereof, as concerning the body of our Lord Christ. 100 The x.
Meditat. Of the excellencies of the most holy soul of our Savior Christ, and
of the Heroical Acts of Virtue, that he exercised in the first instant of
the Incarnation. 108 The xi. Meditat. Of the journey which the eternal word
Incarnate made in his mothers womb, to the house of Zacharias, to sancttfie
his forerunner S. John the Baptist. 117 The xij. Meditat. Of what happened in
the blessed VIRGINS Visitation of S. Elizabeth. 123 The xiij. Meditat. Of the
birth of S. John the forerunner of our Savior Christ. 143 The xiiij. Meditat.
Of what happened when S. Joseph would have forsaken the VIRGIN seeing her with
child: and of the revelation made unto him by the Angel concerning this
mystery. 149 The xv. Meditat. Of the expectation of our B. LADIES delivery;
and of the preparation for the birth of our Savior Christ. 159 The xvi.
Meditat. Of the journey of our blessed LADY the VIRGIN from Nazareth to
Bethlehem. 166 The xvij. Meditat. Of the birth of our Savior Christ in a
stable in Bethlehem. 173 The xviij. Meditation. Of the joy of the Angels at
the Natiuitye of the Son of GOD, and of the news which they told to the
Shepheardes. p. 182. The xix. Meditat. Of the going of the Shepherds to
Bethlehem, and what there happened unto them, and all the rest unto the
Circumcision. p. 190. The xx. Meditation. Of the Circumcision of our Savior on
the eigth day. 195 The xxi. Meditat. Of the imposing upon our Savior the name
of JESUS. 201 The xxij. Meditat. Of the coming of the three kings of the east
to adore the child: and of their entrance into Jerusalem. 210 The xxiij.
Meditat. Of the departure of the Sages from Jerusalem, and their entrance into
the Inn at Bethlehem, and what happened there. p. 220. The xxiiij. Meditat. Of
the Purification of the B. VIRGIN: and of the Presentation of the child in the
Temple. 230 The xxv. Meditat. Of what happened in the Presentation, with
Simeon, and Anna Prophetess. p. 238. The xxvi. Meditat. Wherein is set down
a form of prayer, applying the interior faculties of the soul to the
contemplation of the mysteries, that have been meditated. 247 Another manner
of applying in Prayer the interior senses, with the acts of several Virtues.
p. 256. The xxvij. Meditation. Of the flying into Egypt. p. 258. The xxviij.
Meditat. Of the murder of the holy Innocents: and of the return from Egypt.
p. 271. The xxix. Meditat. Of the coming of our Savior Christ to the Temple
of Jerusalem, and of his remaining there among the Doctors. 276 The xxx.
Meditat. Of what the B. VIRGIN did, when she saw she had lost her Son,
until she found him. 281 The xxxi. Meditat. Of the life that our Savior
Christ led in Nazareth, until he was thirty years old. 294
A TABLE OF THE PRINCIPAL MATTERS CONTAINED IN THIS SECOND PART.
ABsence of God from the soul of diverse sorts and for diverse causes. page 283.
Aduent, how we must prepare our selves unto the same. 164. Affections of
devotion wine of the vessels of Gods wine-sellars. 2. Angels, with what
speedines they do their messages. 66. 67. Though of small importance. 143.
Aue Mary is declared word for word. 70. 125. 126. Benifits of God toward us
from whence they proceed. 131. Charity that God showed men in the mystery of
the Incarnation. 25. 26. ours toward God has three estates. 3. Christ, see
JESUS. Circumcision of Christ. 195. our spiritual Circumcision. 199. Grace of
God, how great good it is to find grace with God. 78. Handmaid of God, what an
honor it is, and what excellent spirit was included in these words of the B.
VIRGIN. 92. Hearing spiritual of the soul. 249. Humility finds grace
before God. 78. It is the evening of exaltation if it be well taken. 152 It is
to be exercised in base offices. 303. in matters of learning. 304. JESUS. The
excellencies of this name and the offices that it signifies. 201. 202. The
mysteries of his Incarnation and life till thirty years of age, ar declared
in this second part by order. Of his Imitation. 1. He is a king, eternal, most
worthy, and that inuiteth us to follow him. 6. Illustrations, see Inspirations.
Incarnation. The decree of it. 14. The divine excellencies that do shine in
the same. 21. The infinite charity of God therein. 25. why God would be
incarnate in the womb of a woman. 30. 31. 105. The time that he took to
declare and execute it. 58. How it was annunciated. 66. The forming of the
body, and the properties thereof. 100. 104. The excellencies of Christ his
soul. 108. The heroical acts of virtue this soul did exercise in the first
instant of the Incarnation. 111. Inconstancy in goodness how prejudicial it
is. 296. Innocents martyrdom. 271. Inspirations ambassadors of God. 68. the
seed of grace. 86. they move to woork spedilie. 120. Intention, the purity
thereof in woorks is to be procured. 302. John Baptist his natiuitye and
excellencies. 143. S. Joseph, his great holiues and virtues. 149. The virtues
he discovered seeing our LADY with child. 153. and when he was commanded to
fly into Egypt. 263. 267. Joy spiritual to be joined with modesty. 288. the
conditions it must have. 130. Life Active and Contemplative joined in our B.
LADY. 50. Love of carnal parents how to be moderated. 279. Magnificat declared
at large. 128. Mary mother of God, her predestination and election. 30. 31. Her
conception. 37. Her nativity and name. 42. Devotion to her a sign of
predestination. 43. Her presentation in the Temple. 46. Her vow of Virginity.
52. Of her love toward this virtue. 82. Of her Betrothing to S. Joseph. 54.
The virtues she discovered in the Annunciation. 75. In visiting S. Elizabeth.
121. In the Cantiele Magnificat. 128. and when her spouse would have left her.
154. in her Purification. 230. when she had lost her son. 282 She was the
instrument of the first justification that our Savior wrought. 119. Mercy of
God how it showed it self in the Incarnation. 15. Mortification is a spiritual
circumcision. 199. Offices base and abject to be exercised by us. 303. Parents
carnal must be left when the glory of God so requires. 278. how regardlesse
we must be of them to imitate Christ. 278. Patience in reprehensions. 292.
Peace which the Angels did announce in the natiuitye of Christ. 187. Prayer,
the manner thereof by applying the interior senses. 247. by pawsing a while
with Reverence to hear what God says. 250. by manner of a loving complaint to
God. 288. Preacher must not preach until he be of mature age and well
grounded in humility. 305. 306. Presence of God in diverse sorts. 73. Profit
spiritual how we must grow in virtues. 290. it must be before God and men.
298. Providence of God toward the just afflicted. 156. toward such as be
persecuted. 261. 273. Purity of heart the end of the vocation and election of
the faithful. 36. Purposes good ought to be fullfilled, and the damage if they
be not. 162. Senses, the manner of praying by them. 247 Silence how to be kept.
83. Sin the grieuousnes thereof by that which our Savior felt in the instant
of his Incarnation. 113. Sloth in seeking Christ, and the punishment thereof.
211. Speech how to be used discreetly. 83. Spirit good takes away
disordinate fear. 77. chastizeth the incredulous, and favors such as beliue
when they ought. 87. the effects of it when it inwardly visteth us. 125.
Tongue how it must be governed. 83. Touching spiritual what, and how
performed. 255. Tribulations how God by them proves his elect. 151.
Visitations of God interior why they be wanting many times. 283. The
properties and effects of them. 125. Will good how precious a thing it is.
188.
FINIS.

